Examen de ingenios. THE EXAMINATION of men's Wits. In whicch, by discovering
the variety of natures, is showed for what profession each one is apt, and how
far he shall profit therein.

By John Huarte. Translated out of the Spanish tongue by M. Camillo Camiili.
Englished out of his Italian, by R. C. Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Jslip, for Richard Watkins. 1594.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR FRANCIS GODOLPHIN KNIGHT, ONE OF THE DEPVTIE
LIEVTENANTS OF CORNWAILE.
GOod Sir, your Bookereturneth unto you clad in a Cornish gabardine, which if
it become him not well, the fault is not in the stuff, but in the botching
Tailor, who never bound Prentice to the occupation, and working only for his
passe-time, could hardly observe the precise rules of measure: but such as it
is, yours it is, and yours is the workman, entirely addicted to reverence you
for your virtues, to love you for your kindness, and so more ready in desire,
than able in power to testify the same, do with my dewest remembrance take
leave, resting

At your disposition, R. C.

TO THE MAJESTY of Don Philip, our Sovereign.
TO the end that Artificers may attain the perfection requisite for the use of
the commonwealth, me-thinketh (Cathotholike royal Majesty) a law should be
enacted, that no carpenter should exercercise himself in any work which
appertained to the occupation of an husbandman, nor a tailor to that of an
architect, and that the Aduocat should not minister Physic, nor the Physician
play the Aduocat, but ecah one exercise only that art to which he bears a
natural inclination, and let pass the residue. For considering how base and
narrowly bounded a man's wit is for one thing and no more, I have always held
it for a matter certain, That no man can be perfectly seen in two arts,
without failing in one of them: now to the end he may not err in choosing that
which fitteth best with his own nature, there should be deputed in the
commonwealth, men of great wisdom and knowledge, who might discover each ones
wit in his tender age, and cause him perforce to study that science which is
agreeable for him, not permitting him to make his own choice: whence this good
would ensue to your states and signiories; that in them should reside the
rarest artificers of the world, and their works should be of the greatest
perfection, for naught else than because they united art with nature. The like
would I that the universities of our kingdoms did put in practice, for seeing
they allow not that a scholar should pass to another faculty, unless he
perfectly understand the Latin tongue, they should have also examiners, to
try whether he who purposes to study Logic, Philosophy, Divinity, or the
Laws, have such a wit as is requisite for every of these sciences, for
otherwise, besides the damage that such a one shall work afterward to the
Commonwealth, by using an art wherein he is not skilled, it is a grief to see
that a man should take pains, and beat his brains about a matter wherein he
cannot reap any advantage. For that at this day such a diligence is not used,
those who had not a wit fit for Divinity, have destroyed the Christian
religion. So do those who are untoward for Physic, shorten many a man's
days: neither possesses the Legal Science that perfection which it might
receive, because it is not made known, to what reasonable power the use and
interpretation of the laws appertains. All the ancient Philosophers found by
experience, that where nature does not dispose a man to knowledge, it falls
out a superfluous labor to toil in the rules of art. But none has clearly
and distinctly delivered what that nature is which makes a man able for one
science, and incapable of another, nor how many differences of vvittes there
are found in mankind, nor what Arts or Sciences do answer each in particular,
nor by what tokens this may be known, which is the thing that most imports.

These four points (though they seem impossible) contain the matter whereof
I am to entreat, besides many others appurtenant to the purpose of this
doctrine, with intention that curious parents may have an art and manner to
discover the wit of their children, and may vveet how to set each of them in
hand with that science vvherin he shall principally profit. And this is an
advise which Galen says was given his father, namely that he should set him
to study Physic, because for that science he had a singular wit. By which
your majesty shall understand how much it imports the commonwealth, that
there be established in the same a choice, and examination of wits for the
sciences, seeing from the study which Galen bestovved in Physic, there ensued
so great good to the diseased of his time, and he left so many remedies in
vvriting for the posterity. Even as Baldus (a notable man in profession of the
laws) when he studied and practiced Physic, if he had passed further
therein, would have proved but an ordinary Physician, as he was not better,
for that he vvanted the difference of wit requisite for this science, but the
laws should have lost one of the greatest helps that might be found amongst
men for expounding them.

When I therefore purposed to reduce this new manner of Philosophy to art, and
to prove the same in some wits, I remembered my self of your Majesty, as the
best known, and one, at whom the whole world wondereth, beholding a Prince
ofso great knowledge and wisdom, of whom here we cannot conveniently
entreat, the last chapter save one is your convenient place, where your
Majesty shall see the purport of your own wit, and the art and learning
wherewith you would have benefited your commonwealth if you had been a
private person, as by nature you are our king and sovereign.

The second Proeme to the Reader.
WHen Plato would teach any doctrine grave, subtle, and divided from the
vulgar opinion, he made choice amongst his scholars of such as he reputed best
witted, and to those only he imparted his mind, knowing by experience, that to
teach delicat matters to persons of base understanding, was loss of time,
loss of pains, and loss of learning. The second thing which he did after this
choice made, was to prevent them with certain presuppositions, clear and
true, which should not be wide from his conclusion: for the speeches and
sentences which unlooked for are delivered against that which the vulgar
believes, at the beginning serve for naught else, (such prevention not being
made) than to put in a confusion him that listeneth, and to breed such a
loathing in men's minds, as it causes them to loose their good affection, and
to abhor and detest this doctrine. This manner of proceeding would I, that I
might observe with thee, (curious Reader) if means could be used, that I might
first treat with thee, and discover between thee and me the disposition of
thy wit. For if it be such as is requisite for this doctrine, and estranged
from the ordinary capacities, I would in secret tell thee such new and
special conceits, as thou would never have thought could fall within the
compass of a man's imagination But inasmuch as this will not be, and this work
must issue in public for all sorts, I could not but set thy brains somewhat
a work: for if thy wit be of the common and vulgar alloy, I know right well
thou art already persuaded, that the number of the sciences, and their
perfection, has been accomplished many days ago. And heereto thou art moved
by a vain reason, that they having found out no more what to ad, it is a
token, that now there is in nothing, any more novelties. Now if by hap thou art
possessed of such an opinion, go no further, nor read thou any longer on, for
thou will be much agreeued, to see how miserable a difference of wit possesses
thee. But if thou be discreet, well compounded, and sufferent, I will deliver
unto thee 3 conclusions very true, albeit for their novelty they are worthy
of great marvel.

The first is, that of many differences of wit, which are in mankind, one only
with pre-eminence can fall to thy lot, if already, nature, as very mighty, at
such time as she framed it for thee, did not bestow all her endeavor, in
uniting two only, or three, or (in that she could not effect the same) left
thee a dolt, and deprived of them all.

The second, that to every difference of wit there answers in pre-eminence,
but one only science, and no more of that condition. So as if thou divine not
to choose that which answers thy natural ability, thou shall be very remiss
in the rest, though thou ply them night and day.

The third, that after thou have known which the science is, that most
answers thy wit, there rests yet (that thou may not be deceived) another
greater difficulty, which is, whether thine ability be more appliable to the
practick than the theorick, for these 2 parts (be it what science it will) are
so opposite betwixt themselves, and require wits so different, that they may be
placed one against the other, as if they were contraries. Hard are these
sentences, but yet they have greater difficulty and hardness, vz. that we
cannot appeal from them, nor pretend that we have received wrong. For God
being the author of nature, and seeing that she gave not to each man more than
one difference of wit, (as I have said before) through the opposition or
difficulty which combreth us in uniting them, he applied himself to her, and
of the Sciences which are distributed amongst men by grace, it is a miracle, if
in an eminent degree, he give more than one. But there are (says S. Paul)
divisions of graces, and the same spirit; there are divisions of ministeries,
and the same Lord; there are divisions of operations, but the same God, who
works all things in all persons. To every one is given the ministry of the
spirit for profit: and to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to
another that of knowledge, after the same spirit, to another faith, in the same
spirit, and to another the grace of healing, in the same spirit, to another the
working of virtues, to another prophecieng, and the description of spirits, to
others the variety of toungs, to another the interpretation of words: but one
self spirit, which divides to every one as him pleases, works all these
things.

This bestowing of sciences (I doubt not) God uses, having regard to the wit
and natural disposition of every person. For the Talents which he distributed,
in S. Matthew, the same Evangelist says, that he gave them unto every one
according to his proper virtue.

And to think that these supernatural Sciences require not some dispositions
in the subject, before they be infused, is an error very great: for when God
formed Adam and Eve, it is certain that before he filled them with wisdom,
he instrumentalized their brain in such sort, as they might receive it with
ease, and serve as a commodious instrument, therewith to be able to discourse,
and to form reasons. And therefore the divine scripture says; God gave them
an heart to think, and filled them with the discipline of understanding, and
that according to the difference of which every one partaketh, one science is
infused, and not another, or more or less of each of them, is a thing which
may be understood by this example of our first parents, for God filling them
both with wisdom, it is a verifyed conclusion, that he infused the lesser
portion into her, for which reason the Divines say, that the devil took
hardiness to beguile her, and durst not tempt the man, as fearing his much
wisdom The reason hereof (as hereafter we will prove) is, that the natural
composition which the woman had in her brain, is not capable of much wit, nor
much wisdom. In the Angelical substances, we shall find also the like count
and reason: for God, to give an angel more degrees of glory and higher gifts,
first gives him a more delicat nature; and if you enquire of the Divines
whereto this delicat nature serves, they answer, that the Angel who has the
deepest understanding, and the best nature, with most facility conuerteth
himself unto God, and uses his gift with the more efficacy; and that the
like betideth in men. Hence we clearly infer, that there being an election
of wit for sciences supernatural, and that, not whatsoever difference of
ability, is their commodious instrument, humane learning (with more reason)
requires the same, because it is to be learned by men, with the force of their
wit.

To be able then to distinguish and discern these natural differences of man's
wit, and to apply to each by art, that science wherein he may profit, is the
intention of this my work. If I bring the same to end (as I have purposed) we
will yield the glory to God, seeing from his hand proceeds whatsoever is
good and certain: and if not, thou know well (discreet Reader) that it is
impossible both to devise an art, and to reduce the same to perfection. For so
long and large are humane sciences, that a man's life suffices not to find them
out, and to give them that perfection which is requisite.

The first inuenter performs very much, if he discover some notable
principles, to the end that such as come after, may with this seed take an
occasion to amplify the art, and to bring it into that estimation and account
which is due thereunto. Aristotle alluding hereunto, says: that the errors of
those who first began to handle matters of Philosophy, are to be held in great
reverence, for it proouing a matter so difficult, to devise new things, and so
easy to ad unto that which has been already spoken and treated of; the
defects of the first deserve not (by this reason) to be much reproved, neither
he who adds ought, meriteth any great commendation. I confess that this my
work cannot be excused from some errors, seeing the matter is so delicat, and
no way fore-opened to entreat thereof. But if the same be in a matter where the
understanding has place to think, in this case I pray thee (witty Reader)
that before thou give sentence thou read over the whole work, and assure thy
self what the difference of thine own wit is, and if in the work thou find
ought which in thine opinion is not well said, consider well of the reasons
which sway the most against it, and if thou can not resolve, then turn to
read the eleventh chapter, for in that shall thou find the answer which they
may receive.

The Examination or Trial of men's wits and dispositions.
CHAP. I.
He proves by an example, that if a Child have not the disposition and
ability, which is requisite for that science whereunto he will addict himself,
it is a superfluous labor to be instructed therein by good schoolemaisters, to
have store of books, and continually to study it.

THe opinion of Cicero was good, who, 1. Book of Offices.
that his son Mark might prove such a one in that kind of learning, which
himself had made choice of, as he desired; judged, that it sufficed to send
him to a place of study, so renowned and famous in the world, as that of
Athens, and to give him Cratippus for his schoolemaister, who was the greatest
Philosopher of those days, bringing him up in a city so populous, where,
through the great concourse of people which thither assembled, he should of
necessity have many examples and profitings of strangers, fit to teach him by
experience those things which appertained to the knowledge that himself was to
learn. But, notwithstanding all this diligence, and much more besides, which
(as a good father) he used, providing him books, and writing some unto him of
his own head; the Historians report, that he proved but a Cods-head, with
little eloquence, and less philosophy, (a matter usual amongst men, that the
son abies the much wisdom of the father.) Verily Cicero greatly beguiled
himself, imagining that albeit his son were not issued out of natures hands,
with that wit and ability which is requisite for eloquence and philosophy,
yet by means of the good industry of such a teacher, and the many books, and
examples of Athens, together with the young man's continual endeavor, and
process of time, the defects of his understanding would be amended: but we
see, that finally he deceived himself, neither do I marvel thereat, for he
had many examples to this purpose, which encouraged him to believe, that the
same might also befall in the person of his son.

For the same Cicero reports in his book of Destiny, that Zenocrates had a
wit very untoward for the study of Book of Destiny.
Natural and Moral philosophy, of whom Plato said, That he had a scholar,
who stood in need of a spur; and yet notwithstanding, through the good
industry of such a master, and the continual travel of Zenocrates himself,
he became a very great Philosopher. And he writes the like also of Cleantes,
who was so doltish and void of understanding, that no teacher would receive him
into his school; whereat the young man agreeued and ashamed, endured so great
toil in studying, that he came afterward to be called a second Hercules for
wisdom. No less untoward for matters of eloquence, seemed the wit of
Demosthenes, of whom it is said, that when he was now grown big, he could not
yet speak plain, but laboring and applying the art, by hearing of good
teachers, he proved the best Orator of the world: and specially (as Cicero
recounts) he could not pronounce the letter, R, for that he did somewhat
sta^mer, and yet by practice he grew to articulat it so well, as if he had
never had that way any defect. Hence took that proverb his original, which
says, That man's wit in matters of science, is like a plaier at dice, for if
any one prove unlucky in throwing his chance, by artificial practice he
comes to amend his evil fortune. But none of these examples produced by
Cicero, remains without a convenient answer in my doctrine: for (as we will
hereafter prove) there is in yongmen a certain dulnes, which argues a greater
wit in another age, than if the same had been sharp from their childhood: nay
it is a judgment that they will prove lowtish men, when they begin very soon
to discourse and be quick of conceit. Wherefore, if Cicero had known the true
tokens by which wits are in their first age to be discovered, he would have
held it a good sign, that Demosthenes was rude and slow of speech, and that
Zenocrates had need of a spur whilst he learned. I take not from a good
instructor art, and industry, their virtue and force, to manure wits, as well
rude as pliant: but that which I will say, is, that if a young man have not of
himself an understanding capable of precepts and rules, which properly belong
to the art he would learn, and to none other, that the diligence *Dialoge of
knowledge. By the only understanding of Socrates, may this comparison be
verefied, for he taught by demands, and handled the matter so, that the
scholar himself attained to knowledge, without his telling him the same.
used by Cicero with his son, was as vain as that which any other parent
shall use with his son, will be in the like. Those who have read Plato shall
easily know, that this doctrine is true, who reports that Socrates was the
son (as he also reported himself) of a midwife, and that as his mother
(albeit she were much praised in the art) could not make a woman to be
delivered, that before her coming to her was not with child; so he (performing
the like office as his mother) could not make his scholars bring forth any
science, if of themselves they had not their understanding conceived therewith.
He was of opinion, that sciences were (as it were) natural to those men only,
who had their wits appliable thereunto; and that in such it befell, as we see
by experience in those who have forgotten somewhat which they first knew, who
if we put them in mind but of one word, gather from that all the residue.

Masters (for ought that I can gather) have none other office with their
scholars, than to bring learning to their remembrance, for if they have a
fruitful wit, they make them with this only to bring forth woonderful
conceits, otherwise they do but afflict themselves, and those whom they
instruct, nor ever obtain their desires. And (at least if I were a teacher)
before I received any scholar into my Man's Wisdom, is not Remembrance:
wherefore we have here above spoken against Plato, for that he held this
opinion.
school, I would grow to many trials and experiments with him, until I might
discover the quality of his wit, and if I found it by nature directed to that
science whereof I made profession, I would willingly receive him, for it breeds
a great contentment in the teacher, to instruct one of good to wardlinesse: and
if not, I would counsel him to study that science, which were most agreeable
with his wit. But if I saw, that he had no disposition or capacity for any
sort of learning, I would friendly and with gentle words tell him; Brother, you
have no means to prove a man of that profession which you have undertaken, take
care not to loose your time and your labor, and provide you some other trade
of living, which requires not so great an ability as appertains to
learning. Hereof is seen very plain experience, for we behold a great number
of scholars enter the course of whatsoever science, and (be the teacher very
good or very bad) finally every day some prove of great skill, some of mean,
and some in their whole course, have done naught else than leese their time,
spend their goods, and beat their brains without any manner of profit.

I wot nere whence this effect may spring, they all hearing one self teacher,
and with equal diligence and care, and perhaps the dull take more pain than
the witty, and this difficulty grows the greater, by seeing that those who
are untoward for one science, are very apt to another, and the toward in one
sort of learning, passing to another sort, can understand nothing. But my self
am at least a good witness in this truth; for there were three companions of
us, who entered together to study the Latin tongue, and one of us learned the
same with great facility, the rest could never make any commendable
composition; but all passing on to Logic, one of those who could not learn
Grammar, proved in that art a principal Aegle, and the other two, in the
whole, never learned one ready point; then all three coming to hear
Astrology, it was a matter worthy of consideration, that he who could no
skill of Latin or Logic, in few days knew more in Astrology than his
master that taught them, and the rest could never learn it. I then maruelling
hereat, began forth with to make discourses, and play the Philosopher hereon,
and so I found that every science required a special and particular wit, which
reaued from that, was little worth in other sorts of learning. And if this be
true (as verily it is, and we will so prove it hereafter) he that at this day
should enter into the schools of our times, making proof and assay of the
scholars wits, how many would he change from one science to another, and how
many would he send into the fields for dolts and unable to learn? and how many
would he call back of those, who for want of ability are occupied in base
exercises, and yet their wits were by nature created only for learning? but
since this cannot be brought about nor remedied, it behooues to stay no
longer hereon, but to pass forward.

It cannot be denied, but that (as I have said) there are wits found capable of
one science, which are untoward for another: and therefore it behooues, before
the child be set to study, to discover the manner of his wit, and to see what
science agrees with his capacity, and then to provide that he may apply the
same. But it is necessary also to consider, that this which has been said,
suffices not to make a man prove sufficiently learned, but we must have
regard of other conditions no less requisite than is this of towardliness. For
Hippocrates says, that man's wit holds the like proportion with knowledge, as
the earth does with seed, which though of her self she be fruitful and fat,
yet it behooues to mannure her, and use aduisement to what sort of seed her
natural disposition enclineth; for every sort of earth cannot without
distinction, produce every sort of seed. Some better brings forth Wheat than
Barley, and some Barley better than Wheat; and of Wheats some bring a
plentiful increase of good Lammas Wheat, and cannot away with the Basest sort.

Neither does the good husbandman content himself to make this only
distinction, but after he has manured the earth in due season, he looks for
convenient time to sow it, for it cannot be done at all times of the year, and
after that the grain is sprung up, he cleanses and weedeth it, that it may
increase and grow, giving the fruit which of the seed is expected. After this
sort, it is necessary that the science being known, which best fitteth with
the person, he begin to study from his first age, for this (says Aristotle)
is the most pliant of all others to learning. Moreover, man's life is very
short, and the arts long and toilsome, for which it behooues that there be time
sufficient to know them, and space to exercise them, and therewith to profit
the common wealth. Childrens memory (says Aristotle) is a table without any
picture, because it was but a little while since they were borne, and so they
receive any thing whatsoever with facility; and not as the memory of old men,
which full of those many things they have seen in the long course of their
life, is not capable of more: and therefore Plato says, that in the presence
of youth, we should recount honest tales and actions, which may incite them to
virtuous doings, for what they learn In the second age called youth, a man
makes an union of all the differences of wit, in such as they may be united,
for that this age is more temperat than all the rest: wherefore it is unfitting
to let it pass without learning of knowledge, whereby a man may live.
in that age, abides still in their minds, and not (as Galen says) that then
it behooues to learn the arts, when our nature has accrued all the forces that
she can have; which point is void of reason if you admit no distinction. He
that is to learn the Latin tongue or any other language, ought to do it in
his childhood, for if he tarry till the body be hardened, and take the
perfection that it ought to have, he shall never reap available profit. In
his second age, namely boys state, it is requisite that he travail in the art
of Syllogismes, for then the understanding begins to display his forces, which
has the same proportion with Logic, as shackles have with the feet of mules
not yet trained, who going some days therewith, take afterward a certain
grace in their pace: so our understanding shackled with the rules and precepts
of Logic, takes afterward a graceful kind of discoursing and arguing in
sciences and disputations. Then follows youth, in which all the sciences
appertaining to the understanding may be learned, for that has a ripened
knowledge.

True it is, that Aristotle excepteth natural Philosophy, saying, a young man
is not of fit disposition for this kind of doctrine, wherein it seems he has
reason, for that it is a science of deeper consideration and wisdom than any
other.

Now the age thus known, in which sciences are to be learned, it behooues to
search out a commodious place for the same, where nothing else save learning
may be handled, and such are the Universities: but the youth must forgo his
fathers house, for the dandling of the mother, brethren, kindred, and friends
which are not of his profession, do greatly hinder his profiting. This is
plainly seen in the scholars who are native of the cities and places where
Universities are seated, none of which (save by great miracle) ever become
learned. And this may easily be remedied, by changing of Universities, and the
native of one city going to study in another. This faring, that a man takes
from his own country to make himself of worth and discretion, is of so
great importance, that there is no master in the world who can teach him
more, and especially, when a man sees himself (sometimes) abandoned of the
favor and delights of his country. Depart out of thy land (said God to
Abraham) and sever thy self from amidst thy kindred and thy fathers house, and
come to the place where I will show thee, in which thou shall make thy name
great, and I will give thee my blessing. The like says God to all men, who
desire to prove of value and wisdom: for albeit he can bless them in their
native country, yet he will, that men dispose themselves by this mean which
he has ordained, and that wisdom be not attained by them with idleness. All
this is meant with a foregoing presupposall, that a man have a good wit and be
apt, for otherwise, He that goes a beast to Rome, returns a beast again.
Little auailes it, that a dullard go to learn in the famous places of study,
where there is no chair of understanding, nor wisdom, nor a man to teach it.

The third point of diligence is, to seek out a master who has a direction
and method in teaching, whose doctrine is sound and firm, not sophistical nor
of vain considerations: for all that the scholar does, whilst he is a
learning, is to credit all that which his master propounds unto him, for he
has no sound judgment or discretion to discern or separat falsehood from
truth, albeit this is a chauncefull case, and not placed in the choice of such
as learn, that the scholars come in due time to study, and that the
Universities have good or unfit instructers; as it befell certain Physicians,
of whom Galen reports, that having convinced them by many reasons and
experiments, and showed them, that the practice which they used was false and
prejudicial to men's health; the tears fell from their eyes, and in his
presence they began to curse their hard hap, in lighting on such bad masters
as bare sway during the time that they were learners. True it is, that there
are found some scholars of so ripe wit, as they straightwaies look into the
condition of the teachers, and the learning which he teaches, and if it be
vicious, they know how to confute the same, and to give allowance to such as
deliver soundly; these at the years end teach their master much more than
their master taught them; for doubting and demanding wittily, they make him
to understand and answer things so exquisit, as he himself never knew nor
should have known, if the scholar with the felicity of his wit, had not
brought them to his mind: but those who can do this, are one or two at the
most, and the dullards are infinite, through which, it would do well (seeing
this choice and Examination of Wits for every science is not had) that the
Universities always made provision of good teachers, endued with sound
learning, and a clear discerning wit, to the end they may not instruct the
ignorant in errors and false propositions.

The fourth diligence requisite to be used, is to study every science with
order, beginning at his principles, and passing through the midst to the end,
without having matter that may presuppose another thing before. For which
cause, I have always held it an error, to hear many lessons of diverse
matters, and to carry them all home fardled up together. By this means there
is made a mass of things in the understanding, which afterward, when they
come to practice, a man knows not how to turn to use the precepts of his art,
nor to assign them a place convenient: and it is much better to bestow labor
in every matter by it self, and with that natural order which it holds in his
composition, for in the self manner as it is learned, so is it also preserved
in the memory. And more in particular, it is necessary that they do this, who
of their own nature have a confused wit: and this may easily be remedied by
hearing one matter by it self, and that being ended, to enter into the next
following, till the whole art be achieved. Galen well understanding of how
great importance it was to study matters with order and conceit, wrote a book
to teach the manner that was to be held in reading his works, to the end that
the Physician might not be tangled in confusion. Others add hereunto, that the
scholar, whilst he learneth, have but one book which may plainly contain
the points of his learning, and that he attend to study that only and no more,
least he grow into a garboile and confusion, and herein they are warranted by
great reason.

The last thing which makes a man prove of rare learning, is to consume much
time at his book, and to expect, that knowledge have his due digestion, and
take deep root; for as the body is not maintained by the much which we eat
and drink in one day, but by that which the stomach digesteth and turns: so
our understanding is not filled by the much which we read in little time, but
by that which by little and little it proceeds to conceive and chew upon. Our
wit day by day disposes it self better and better, and comes (by process of
time) to light on things which before it could neither understand nor conceive.
Understanding has his beginning, his increase, his standing, and his
declining, as has a man, and other creatures and plants; it begins in boys
age, has his increase in youth, his standing in middle or man's age, and in old
age it begins to decline. Who so therefore would know at what time his
understanding enioieth all the forces which it may partake, let him weet, that
it is from the age of thirty and three until fifty, little more or less,
within which compass we may best give credit to grave authors, if in the
discourse of their life, they have held contrary opinions; and he that will
write books, let him do it about this age, and not before nor after, if he
mean not to unsay again, or change opinion.

But man's age has not in all people a like measure and reason; for in some,
childhood ends in twelve years, in some at fourteen, some have sixteen, and
some eighteen; such lives very long, because their youth arriues to little
less than forty years, and their ripe or firm age to threescore, and they
have afterward twenty years of old age, wherethrough their life amounts to
fourscore, and this is the term of those who are very strong. The first
sort, who finish their childhood at twelve years, are very short lived, and
begin speedily to discourse, their beard soon sprowteth out, and their wit
lasts but a small time, these at thirty five years begin to decline, and at
forty and eight, finish their life.

Of all the conditions above specified, there is not any The principal of all
these, is Nature, for if she be in them who apply their mind to Art, they may
pierce through all the other things above specified. So Baldus betook himself
to the study of the Laws, when he was wel-aged, wherethrough some said unto
him in a scoff: Thou come too late, O Baldus, and wilt prove a good
advocate in the other world: but because he had a capacity conformable for the
laws, he proved learned in a short season.
one which is not very necessary, profitable, and helpful in practice for a
young man to receive notice of, but to have a good and answerable nature to the
science which he pretends to study, is the matter which most makes for the
purpose: for with this, we have seen, that diverse men have begun to study,
after their youth was expired, and were instructed by bad teachers, with evil
order, and in their own birth-places, and yet for all that have proved great
clearks. But if the wit fail (says Hippocrates) all other diligences are
lost. But there is no man who has better verefied this, than the good Marcus
Cicero, who through grief of seeing his son such a doo-nought, with whom
none of the means could prevail, that he had procured to breed him wisdom,
said in the end after this sort: What else is it, after the manner of the
Giants, to fight with the gods, than to resist against nature? as if he should
have said. What thing is there, which better resembles the battle, which the
giants undertook against the gods, than that a man who wants capacity,
should set himself to study? for as the giants never overcame the gods, but
were still vanquished by them: so whatsoever scholar will labor to overcome
his own untoward nature, shall rest vanquished by her. For which cause, the
same Cicero counsels us, that we should not use force against our nature,
nor endeavor to become Orators, if she assent not, for we shall undergo labor
in vain.

CHAP. II.
That Nature is that which makes a man of ability to learn.

IT is an opinion very common and Nature gives ability, Art facility, Use
sufficiency.
ordinary amongst the ancient Philosophers, to say, That Nature is she who
makes a man of ability to learn, and that art with her precepts and rules
gives a facility thereunto, but then use and experience, which he reapes of
particular things, makes him mighty in working. Yet none of them ever showed
in particular, what thing this nature was, nor in what rank of causes it ought
to be placed: only they affirmed, that this, wanting in him who learned, art,
experience, teachers, books, and travail are of none avail. The ignorant
Above all things Nature is necessary, for if she gainsay, al other drifts are
attempted in vain.
vulgar seeing a man of great wit and readiness, straightwaies assign God to
be the author thereof, and look no further, but hold every other imagination
that goes beyond this, for vanity: but natural Philosophers despise this
manner of talking, for put case that the same be godly, and contain therein
religion and truth, yet it grows from not knowing the order and disposition
which God placed amongst natural things that day when they were created, and
so cover their ignorance with a kind of warrantise, and in sort, that none may
reprehend or gainsay the same, they affirm that all befalls as God will, and
that nothing succeeds, which springs not from his divine pleasure. But though
this be never so apparent a truth, yet are they worthy of reproof: because,
as not every kind of demand (says Aristotle) is to be made after one
fashion, so not every answer (though true) is to be given.

Whilst a natural Philosopher reasoned with a Grammarian, there came to them
an inquisitiue Gardener, and asked what the cause might be, that he cherishing
the earth so charilie, in deluing, turning, dunging, and watering it, yet the
same never well brought forth the herbage which he sowed therein; whereas the
herbs which she bred of her self, she caused to increase with great
facility. The Grammarian answered, This grew from the divine providence, and
was so ordained through the good government of the world: at which answer, the
natural Philosopher laughed, seeing he reduced this to God, because he knew
not the discourse of natural causes, nor in what sort they proceeded to their
effects. The Grammarian perceiving the other laugh, asked whether he mocked
him, or whereat else he laughed? The Philosopher answered that he laughed not at
him, but at the master who taught him so ill, for the knowledge and solution
of things which spring from the divine providence (as are the works
supernatural) appertain to the Metaphisicks (whom we now term Divines:) but
this question propounded by the Gardener, In all Knowledges, we must understand
how far their jurisdiction exte^deth, and what questions apperteine unto them.
is natural, and appertains to the jurisdiction of the natural
Philosophers, because there are certain ordered and manifest causes, from
which this effect may spring. And thus the natural Philosopher answered,
saying, that the earth is conditioned like a stepmother, who very carefully
brings up her own children which she breeds her self, but takes away the
sustenance from those which appertain to her husband, and so we see that her
own children are fat and fresh, and her stepchildren weak and ill colored.
The herbs which the earth brings forth of her self, are borne of her proper
bowels, and those which the Gardener makes to grow by force, are the daughters
of another mother, wherethrough she takes from them the virtue and nourishment,
by which they ought to increase, that she may give it to the herbs which are
borne of her self.

Hippocrates likewise reports, that he going to visit the great Philosopher
Democritus, he told him the follies which the vulgar speak of Physic,
namely, that seeing themselves recovered from sickness, they would say, it was
God who healed them, and that if his will were not, little had the good
diligence of the Physician auailed. This is so ancient a manner of talk, and
the natural Philosophers have so often refuted it, that the seeking to take
the same away, were superfluous, neither is it convenient: for the vulgar, who
know not the particular causes of any effect, answers better and with more
truth, as touching the universal cause, which is God, than to say some other
unfitting thing. But I have often gone about to consider the reason and the
cause whence it may grow, that the vulgar sort is so great a friend to impute
all things to God, and to reaue them from nature, and do so abhor the natural
means: and I know not whether I have been able to find it out. The vulgar (at
least) gives hereby to understand, that forasmuch as they know not what effects
they ought to attribute to God immediately, and what to Nature, they speak
after this manner. Besides that, men are for the most part impatient, and
desirous to accomplish speedily what they covet. But because the natural means
are of such prolixitie, and work with length of time, they possess not the
patience to stand marking thereof, and knowing that God is omnipotent, and in a
moment of time performs whatsoever him pleases (whereof they find many
examples) they would that he should give the^ health, as he did to the sick of
the palsy; and wisdom, as to Solomon; riches, as to Job; and that he should
deliver them from their enemy, as he did David.

The second cause is, for that men are arrogant, and vain conceited, many of
whom, desire secretly in their hearts, that God would bestow upon them some
particular graces, which should not befall after the common use (as is, that
the sun arises upon the good and bad, and that the rain falls upon all in
general) for benefits are so much the more highly prized, as they are the more
rare. And for this cause we have seen many men to feign miracles in houses
and places of devotion, for straightwaies, the people flocks unto them, and
holds them in great reverence, as persons of whom God makes a special
account: and if they be poor, they favor them with large alms, and so some
sin upon interest.

The third reason is, that men have a liking to be well at their ease, whereas
natural causes are disposed with such order and conceit, that to obtain their
effects, it behooues to bestow labor. Wherefore they would have God demean
himself toward them, after his omnipotency, and that (without sweating) they
might come to the wellhead of their desires. I leave aside the malice of
those, who require miracles at Gods hand, thereby to tempt his almightinesse,
and to prove whether he be able to do it: and othersome, who to be revenged
after their hearts desire, call for fire from heaven, and such other cruel
chastisements.

The last cause is, for that many of the vulgar are reliligiously given, and
hold dear, that God may be honored The Lord working therewithal, and
confirming with his word followed by signs.
and magnified, which is much sooner brought about by way of miracles than by
natural effects, but the common sort of men know not, that works above nature
and wonderful, are done by God, to show those who know it not, that he is
omnipotent, and that he serves himself of them, as an argument to prove his
doctrine, and that this necessity once ceasing, he never does it more. This
may well be perceived, considering that God does no longer those unwonted
things of the new testament: and the reason is, for that on his behalf, he
has performed all necessary diligence, that men might not pretend ignorance.
And to think that he will begin anew to do the like miracles, and by them once
again to prove his doctrine, in raising the dead, restoring sight to the
blind, and healing the lame and sick of the palsy, is an error very great;
for once God taught men what is behooffull, and proved the same by miracles,
but returns not to do it any more. God speaks once (says Job) and turns not
to a second repliall. Job. 33.


The token whereon I ground my judgment, when I would discover whether a man
have a wit appropriat to Natural Philosophy, is, to see whether he be
addicted to reduce all matters to miracle, without distinction; and
contrariwise, such as hold not themselves contented, until they know the
particular cause of every effect, leave no occasion to mistrust the goodness
of their wit. These do well know, that there are effects which must be reduced
to God immediately, (as miracles) and others to nature, (and such are those,
which have their ordinary causes, from whence they accustom to spring) but
speaking both of the one manner and the other, we always place God for author:
for when Aristotle said, that God and nature did nothing in vain, he meant
not, that nature was an universal cause, endowed with a jurisdiction severed
from God, but that she was a name of the order and concent, which God has
bestowed in the frame of the world, to the end that the necessary effects
might follow, for the preservation thereof. For in the same manner, it is
usually said that the King, and Civil Reason, do no man wrong. In which kind
of speech, no man conceiueth that this name Reason, signifies a Prince which
possesses a several jurisdiction from that of the king; but a term, which by
his signification, embraces all the royal laws, and constitutions ordained by
the same king, for the preservation of his common wealth in peace. And as the
king has his special cases reserved to himself, which cannot be decided by
the law, for that they are unusual and weighty: in like manner God left
miraculous effects reserved for himself, neither gave allowance unto natural
causes, that they might produce them. But here we must note, that he who should
know them The ignorance of natural Philosophy, is cause that miracles are
imputed where they ought not.
for such, and difference them from natural works, behooues to be a great
natural Philosopher, and to understand the ordinary causes that every effect
may hold, and yet all this suffices not, unless the Catholic church ratify
them to be such. And as the Doctors labor and study in reading this civil
Reason, preserving the whole in their memory, that they may know and
understand what the kings will was, in the determination of such a case: so we
natural Philosophers (as doctors in this faculty) bestow all our study in
knowing the discourse and order, which God placed that day when he created the
world, so to contemplat and understand in what sort, and upon what cause, he
would that things should succeed. And as it were a matter worthy laughter, that
a doctor should allege in his writings (though approved) that the king
commands a case should be thus determined, without showing the Law and Reason,
through which it was so decided: so natural Philosophers laugh at such as say,
This is Gods doing; without assigning the order and discourse of the particular
causes whence they may spring. And as the king will give them no ear, when they
require him to break some just law, or to rule some case besides the order of
justice, which he has commanded to be observed: so God will not hearken when
any man demands of him miracles and works besides natural order, without
cause why. For albeit the king every day abrogates and establishes new laws,
and changes judicial order (as well through the variation of times, as for
that it is the judgment of a frail man, and cannot at one only time, attain
to perfect right and justice) notwithstanding the natural order of the
universe, which we call nature, from that day wherein God created the world,
unto this, has had no need of adioining or reauing any one jot, because he
framed the same with such providence and wisdom, that to require this order
might not be observed, were to say, that his works were imperfect.

To return then to that sentence so often used by natural Philosophers, that
Nature makes able; we must understand that there are Wits, and there are
Abilities, which God bestows upon men besides natural order, as was the
wisdom of the Apostles, who being simple and of base account, were
miraculously enlightened and replenished with knowledge and learning. Of this
sort of ability and wisdom, it cannot be verefied, that nature makes able;
for this is a work, which is to be imputed immediately unto God, and not unto
nature: The like is to be understood of the wisdom of the prophets, and of
all those to whom God granted some grace infused. Another sort of ability is
found in men, which springs of their being begotten, with that order and
consent of causes which are established by God to this end: and of this sort it
may be said with truth; Nature makes able. For (as we will prove in the last
chapter of this work) there is to be found such an order and consent in
natural things, that if the fathers in time of procreation, have regard to
observe the same, all their children shall prove wise, and none otherwise. But
the whilst, this signification of nature is very universal and confused, and
the understanding contents not it self, nor staieth, until it conceive the
particular discourse, and the latest cause, and so it behooues to search out
another signification of this name Nature, which may be more agreeable to our
purpose.

Aristotle and other natural Philosophers, descend into more particularities,
and call Nature, whatsoever substantial form, which gives the being to any
thing, and is the original of all the working thereof; in which signification,
our reasonable soul may reasonably be termed nature, for from her we receive
our formal being, which we have of being men, and the self same is the
beginning of whatsoever we do and work. But all souls being of equal
perfection (as well that of the wiser, as that of the foolish) it cannot be
affirmed, that nature in this signification, is that which makes a man able,
for if this were true, all men should have a like measure of wit and wisdom:
and therefore the same Aristotle found out another signification of nature,
which is the cause, that a man is able or unable; saying, that the temperature
of the four first qualities, (hot, cold, moist, and dry) is to be called
nature, for from this issue all the habilities of man, all his virtues and
vices, and this great variety of wits which we behold. And this is clearly
proved by considering the age of a man when he is wisest, who in his childhood
is no more than a brute beast, and uses none other powers than those of anger
and concupiscence; but coming to youth, there begins to shoot out in him a
marvelous wit, and we see that it lasts till time certain, and no longer,
for old age growing (...) goes every day loosing his wit, until it come to be
(...) decayed.

The variety of wits, it is a matter certain that it springs not from the
reasonable soul, for that is one self in all ages, without having received in
his forces and sub^^^unce any alteration: but man has in every age a diverse
temperature, and a contrary disposition, by Hippocrates used improper terms,
when he said, the soul of man is produced until his death.
means whereof, the soul does other works in childhood, other in youth, and
other in old age. Whence we draw an evident argument, that one self soul,
doing contrary works in one self body, for that it partakes in every age a
contrary temperature, when of young men, the one is able, and the other unapt,
this grows for that the one of them enioi^^ (...) temperature from the other.
And this (for that it is the beginning of all the works of the reasonable
soul) was by the Physicians and the Philosophers, termed Nature; of which
signification, this sentence is properly verefied, that Nature makes able.

For confirmation of this doctrine, Galen writ a book, wherein he proves,
That the manners of the soul, follow the temperature of the body, in which it
keeps residence, and that by reason of the heat, the coldness, the moisture,
and the drouth, of the territory where men inhabit, of the meats which they
feed on, of the waters which they drink, and of the air which they breath:
some are blockish, and some wise: some of worth, and some base: some cruel,
and some merciful: many straight brested, and many large: part liars, and part
true speakers: sundry traitors, and sundry faithful: somewhere unquiet, and
somewhere stayed: there double, here single: one pinching, another liberal:
this man shamefast, that shameless: such hard, and such light of belief. And
to prove this, he cites many places of Hippocrates, Plato, and Aristotle, who
affirm, that the difference of nations, as well in composition of the body, as
in conditions of the soul, springs from the variety of this temperature:
and experience it self evidently shows this, how far are different Greeks
from Tartarians: Frenchmen from Spaniards: Indians from Dutch: and Aethiopians
from English. And this may be seen, not only in countries so far distant, but
if we consider the provinces that enuiron all Spain, we may depart the virtues
and vices which we have recounted, amongst the inhabitants, giving each one his
peculiar vice and virtue; and if we consider the wit and manners of the
Catalonians, Valentians, Mercians, Granatines, Andaluzians, Estremenians,
Portugals, Gallesians, Asturians, Montagneses, Biscanes, Nauarrists,
Arragonois, and of the kingdom of Castile, who sees not and knows not, how
far these are different amongst themselves, not only in shape of countenance,
and in feature of body, but even in the virtues and vices of the soul? Which
all grows, for that every of these provinces has his particular and different
temperature. And this variety of manners is known, not only in countries so
far off, but in places also that are not more than a little league in
distance, it cannot be credited what ods there is found in the wits of the
inhabitants. Finally, all that which Galen writes in this his book, is the
groundplot of this my Treatise, albeit he declares not in particular, the
differences of the habilities which are in men, neither as touching the
sciences which every one requires in particular. Notwithstanding, he
understood In every city the wisest and eldest persons should look into and
judge of the natural quickness of children, and so give notice, that each one
might learn an art agreeable to his nature.
that it was necessary to depart the sciences amongst young men, and to give
each one that which to his natural ability was requisite, in as much as he
said, That well ordered common wealths, ought to have men of great wisdom and
knowledge, who might in their tender age, discover each ones wit and natural
sharpness, to the end they might be set to learn that art which was
agreeable, and not leave it to their own election.

CHAP. III.
What part of the body ought to be well tempered, that a young man may have
ability.

Man's body has so many varieties of parts and powers (applied each to his end)
that it shall not stray from our purpose, but rather grows a matter of
necessity, to know first, what member was ordained by nature for the
principal instrument, to the end man might become wise and advised. For it is
a thing apparent, that we discourse not with our foot, nor walk on our head,
nor see with our nostrils, nor hear with our eyes, but that every of these
parts has his use and particular disposition, for the work which it is to
accomplish.

Before Hippocrates and Plato came into the world, it held for a general
conceit amongst the natural Philosophers, that the heart was the principal
part where the reasonable faculty made his residence, and the instrument
wherewith the soul wrought the works of wisdom, of diligence, of memory,
and of understanding. And therefore the heart and the things seated therabouts
have great feeling, but for all that are not partakers of knowledge: but of all
these things the brain is causer.
For which cause, the divine scripture (applying it self to the ordinary
speech of those times) in many places, calls the heart the sovereign part of a
man. But these two grave Philosophers coming into the world, gave evidence
that this opinion was false, and proved by many reasons and experiments, that
the brain is the principal seat of the reasonable soul, and so they all gave
hands to this opinion, save only Aristotle, who (with a purpose of crossing
Plato in all points) turned to revive the former opinion, and with topicall
places to make it probable: with which of these opinions the truth swaieth,
time serves not now to discuss. For there is none of these Philosophers that
doubts, but that the brain is the instrument ordained by nature, to the end
that man might become wise and skillful, it suffices only to declare with what
conditions this part ought to be endewed, so as we may affirm, that it is duly
instrumentalized, and that a young man in this behalf may possess a good wit
and ability.

Four conditions the brain ought to enjoy, to the end the reasonable soul
may therewith commodiously perform the works which appertain to
understanding and wisdom. The first, good composition; the second, that his
parts be well united; the third, that the heat exceed not the cold, nor the
moist the dry; the fourth, that his substance be made of parts subtle and
very delicate.

In the good composition, are contained other four things: the first is, good
figure: the second, quantity sufficient: the third, that in the brain the
four ventricles be distinct and severed, each duly bestowed in his seat and
place; the fourth, that the capablenesse of these be neither greater nor less
than is convenient for their workings.

Galen collects the good figure of the brain, by an outward consideration,
namely the form and disposition of the head, which he says, ought to be such,
as it should be, if taking a perfect round ball of wax, and pressing it
together somewhat on the sides, there will remain (after that manner) the
forehead and the nape with a little bunchinesse. Hence it follows that the man
who has his forehead very plain, and his nodocke flat, has not his brain so
figured, as is requisite for wit and ability. The quantity of the brain,
which the soul needs to discourse and consider, is a matter that breeds
fear, for amongst all the brute beasts, there is none found to have so much
brain as a man, in sort, as if we join those of two the greatest oxen
together, they will not equal that of one only man, be he never so little.
And that whereto behooues more consideration, is, that amongst brute beasts,
those who approach nearest to man's wisdom and discretion (as the ape, the fox,
and the dog,) have a greater quantity of brain than the other, though bigger
bodied than they. For which cause, Galen said, that a little head in any man is
ever faulty, because that it wants brain; notwithstanding, I avouch that if
his having a great head, proceeds from abundance of matter, and ill tempered,
at such time as the same was shaped by nature, it is an evil token, for the
same consists all of bones and flesh, and contains a small quantity of brain,
as it befalls in very big orenges, which opened, are found scarce of juice, and
hard of rind. Nothing offends the reasonable soul so much, There are two
sorts of fat men, the one full of flesh, bones, and blood: the other
replenished with fat, and these are very witty.
as to make his abode in a body surcharged with bones, fat, and flesh. For
which cause Plato said, that wise men's heads are ordinarily weak, and upon any
occasion are easily annoied, and the reason is, for that nature made them of an
empty skull, with intention not to offend the wit, by compassing it with much
matter. And this doctrine of Plato is so true, that albeit the stomach abides
so far distant from the brain, yet the same works it offense, when it is
replenished with fat and flesh. For confirmation hereof, Galen alleges a
proverb which says, A gross belly makes a gross understanding, and that
this proceeds from nothing else, than that the brain and the stomach are
united and chained together with certain sinews, by way of which they
interchangeably communicate their damages. And contrariwise, when the stomach
is dry and shrunk, it affoords great aid to the wit, as we see in the
hungerstarued, and such as are driven to their shifts, on which doctrine (it
may be) Persius founded himself, when he said, That the belly is that which
quickens up the wit. But the thing most pertinent to be noted for this purpose,
is, that if the other parts of the body be fat and fleshie, and therethrough a
man grows over gross, Aristotle says, It makes him to leese his wit. For
which cause, I am of opinion, that if a man have a great head, albeit the same
proceed for that he is endued with a very able nature, and that he is furnished
with a quantity of well tempered matter, yet he shall not be owner of so good
a wit, as if the same held a meaner size.

Aristotle is of a contrary opinion, whilst he enquires for what cause a man
is the wisest of all living creatures; to which doubt he answers, That you
shall find no creature which has so little a head as man, respecting withal
the greatness of his body: but herein he swarued from reason, for if he had
opened some man's head, and viewed the quantity of his brain, he should have
found, that two horses together had not so much brain as that one man. That
which I have gathered by experience is, that in little men it is best that the
head incline somewhat to greatness; and in those who are big bodied, it
proves best that they be little: and the reason is, for that after this sort,
there is found a measurable quantity, with which the reasonable soul may well
perform his working.

Besides this, there are needful the four ventricles in the brain, to the end
the reasonable soul may discourse and Philosophize: one must be placed on the
right side of the brain, the second on the left, the third in the middle of
these, and the fourth in the part behind the brain. Whereunto these ventricles
serve, and their large or narrow capablenesse for the reasonable soul, all
shall be told by us a little hereafter, when we shall entreat of the
diversities of men's wits.

But it suffices not, that the brain possess good figure, sufficient
quantity, and the number of ventricles, by us forementioned, with their
capablenesse, great or little, but it behooues also that his parts holds a
certain kind of continuednesse, and that they be not divided. For which cause,
we have seen in hurts of the head, that some men have lost their memory, some
their understanding, and others their imagination: and put case, that after
they have recovered their health, the brain reunited it self again, yet
this notwithstanding, the natural union was not made, which the brain before
possessed.

The third condition of the fourth principal, was, that the brain should be
tempered with measurable heat, and without excess of the other qualities,
which disposition, we said heretofore that it is called good nature; for it is
that which principally makes a man able, and the contrary unable.

But the fourth, (namely that the brain have his substance or composition of
subtle and delicate parts) Galen says, is the most important of all the rest.
For when he would give a token of the good disposition of the brain, he
affirms, that a subtle wit, shows that the brain is framed of subtle and
very delicat parts, and if the understanding be dull, it gives evidence of a
gross substance, but he makes no mention of the temperature. These conditions
the brain ought to be endewed withal, to the end the reasonable soul may
therethrough shape his reasons and syllogismes. But here encounters us a
difficulty very great, and this is, that if we open the head of any beast, we
shall find his brain composed with the same form and manner, as a man's,
without that any of the fore-reported conditions will be failing. Whence we
gather that the brute beasts have also the use of Prudence and reason, by means
of the composition of their brain, or else that our reasonable soul serves
not it self of this member, for the use of his operations; which may not be
avouched. To this doubt, Galen answers in this manner: Amongst the kinds of
beasts, it is doubted, whether that which is termed unreasonable, be altogether
void of reason, or not. For albeit the same want that which consists in voice
(which is named speech) yet that which is conceived in the soul, and termed
discourse, of this it may be, that all sorts of beasts are partakers, albeit
the same is bestowed more sparingly upon some, and more largely on other some.
But verily, how far man in the way of reason outgoeth all the rest, there is
none who makes question. By these words, Galen gives us to understand (albeit
with some fearfulness) that brute beasts do partake reason, one more, and
another less, and in their mind do frame some syllogisines and discourses,
though they cannot utter them by way of speech. And then the difference
between them and man consists in being more reasonable, and in using
Prudence with greater perfection.

The same Galen proves also by many reasons and experiments, that Asses (being
of all brute beasts the bluntest) do ariue with their wit to the most curious
and nice points, which were devised by Plato and Aristotle, and there on he
collects saying. I am therefore so far from praising the ancient Philosophers,
in that they have found out some ample matter and of rare invention, (as when
they say, We must hold that there is self, and diverse: one, and not one: not
only in number, but also in kind:) as I dare boldly affirm, that even the very
Asses (who notwithstanding seem most blockish of all beasts) have this from
nature.

This self same meant Aristotle, when he enquired the cause, Why man amongst
all living creatures is wisest: and in another place he turns to doubt, For
what cause man is the most unjust of all living creatures: in which he gives us
to understand the self same which Galen said, That the difference which is
found between man and brute beast, is the self same which is found between a
fool and a wise man; which is naught else than in respect of the more and the
less. This (truly) is not to be doubted, that brute beasts enjoy memory and
imagination, and another power which resembles understanding, as the Ape is
very like a man, and that his soul takes use of the composition of the brain,
it is a matter apparent: which being good, and such as is behooffull, performs
his works very well, and with much prudence, and if the brain be ill
instrumentalized, it executes the same untowardly. For which cause we see that
there be asses, which in their knowledge are properly such: and others again
are found so quick conceipted and malicious, that they pass the property of
their kind. And amongst horses are found many iadishnesses, and good qualities,
and some there are more trainable than the rest: all which grows from having
their brain well or ill instrumentalized. The reason and solution of this
doubt, shall be placed in the chapter which follows, for there we return to
reason anew of this matter.

There are in the body some other parts, from whose temperature, as well the
wit as the brain depend; of which we will reason in the last chapter of this
work. But besides these and the brain, there is found in the body another
substance, whose service the reasonable soul uses in his operations, and so
requires the three last qualities which we have assigned to the brain, that
is, quantity sufficient, delicate substance, and good temperature. These are
the vital spirits, and arteriall blood, which go wandering through the whole
body, and remain evermore united to the imagination, following his
contemplation. The office of this spiritual substance is, to stir up the
powers of man, and to give them force and vigor that they may be able to
work. This shall evidently be known to be their manner, if we take
consideration of the motions, of the imaginations, and of that which after
succeeds in working. For if a man begin to imagine upon any injury that has
been proffered him, the blood of the arteries runs suddenly to the heart, and
stirs up the wrathful part, and gives the same heat and forces for revenge.

If a man stand contemplating any fair woman, or stay in giving and receiving
by that imagination touching the venerious act, these vital spirits run
forthwith to the genitall members, and raise them to the performance. The like
befalls when we remember any delicat and sauourie meat, which once called to
mind, they straight abandon the rest of the body, and fly to the stomach and
replenish the mouth with water. And this their motion is so swift, that if a
woman with child long for any meat whatsoever, and still retain the same in
her imagination, we see by experience, that she loses her burden if speedily
it be not yielded unto her. The natural reason of this, is, because these
vital spirits, before the woman conceived this longing, made abode in the
belly, helping her there to retain the creature, and through this new
imagination of eating, they hie to the stomach to raise the appetite, and in
this space, if the belly have no strong retentiue, it cannot sustain the same,
and so by this means she leeseth her burden.

Galen understanding this condition of the vital spirits, counsaileth
Physicians that they give not sick folk to eat, when their humors are raw and
upon digestion, for when they first feel the meat in the stomach, they
straightwaies abandon the work about which before they were occupied, and come
thereunto to help it. The like benefit and aid, the brain receives of these
vital spirits, when the reasonable soul is about to contemplat, understand,
imagine, or perform actions of memory, without which it cannot work. And
like as the gross substance of the brain and his evil temperature brings the
wit to confusion: so the vital spirits, and the arteriall blood (not being
delicat and of good temperature) hinder in a man his discourse and use of
reason. Wherefore Plato said, That the supplenesse and good temperature of the
heart, makes the wit sharp and quicke-sighted. Having proved before that the
brain and not the heart, is the principal seat of the reasonable soul. And
the reason is, because these vital spirits are engendered in the heart, and
partake of that substance and that temperature, which rested in that which
formed them. Of this arteriall blood, Aristotle meant when he said, That those
men are well compounded who have their blood hot, delicat, and pure; for they
are also of good bodily forces, and of a wit well disposed. These vital
spirits are by the Physicians termed Nature, for they are the principal
instrument with which the reasonable soul performs his works, and of these
also may that sentence be verefied, Nature makes able.

CHAP. IIII.
It is proved that the soul vegetative, sensitive, and reasonable, have
knowledge without that any thing be taught them, if so be that they possess
that convenient temperature, which is requisite for their operation.

THe temperature of the four first qualities) which we heretofore termed
Nature) has so great force, to cause that (of plants, brute beasts, and man)
each one set himself to perform those works which are properto his kind,
that they ariue to that utmost bound of perfection which may be attained,
suddenly and without any others teaching them; the plants know how to form
roots under ground, and by way of them to draw nourishment to retain it, to
digest it, and to drive forth the excrements: and the brute beasts likewise so
soon as they are borne, know that which is agreeable to their nature, and fly
the things which are naughty and noisome. And that which makes them most to
marvel who are not seen in natural Philosophy, is, that a man having his
brain well tempered, and of that disposition which is requisite for this or
that science, suddenly and without having ever learned it of any, he speaks
and utters such exquisit matters, as could hardly win credit. Vulgar
Philosophers, seeing the marvelous works which brute beasts perform, affirm
it holds no cause of marvel, because they do it by natural instinct, in as
much as nature shows and teaches each in his kind what he is to do. And in
this they say very well, for we have already alleged and proved, that nature
is nothing else than this temperature of the four first qualities, and that
this is the schoolemaister who teaches the souls in what sort they are to
work: but they term instinct of nature a certain mass of things, which
rise from the noddocke upward, neither could they ever expound or give us to
understand, what it is. The grave Philosophers (as Hippocrates, Plato and
Aristotle) attribute all these marvelous works to heat, cold, moisture, and
drouth, and this they affirm of the first principle, and pass no farther. And
if you ask who has taught the brute beasts to do these works, (which breed
us such marvel) and men to discourse with reason; Hippocrates answers, It is
the natures of them all without any teacher: as if he should say, The faculties
or the temperature of which they consist, are al given them without being
taught by any other. Which is clearly discerned, if they pass on to consider
the works of the soul vegetative, and of all the rest which govern man, who
if it have a quantity of man's seed, well digested and seasoned with good
temperature, makes a body so seemly and duly instrumentalized, that all the
caruers in the world cannot shape the like.

For which cause Galen woondring to see a frame so marvelous, the number of
his several parts, the seating, the figure, and the use of each one by it
self, grew to conclude, it was not possible that the vegetative soul, nor the
temperature, could fashion a workmanship so singular, but that the author
thereof was God, or some other most wise understanding. But this manner of
speech is already by us heretofore refuted: for it beseemes not natural
Philosophers to reduce the effects immediately to God, and so to slip over the
assigning of the second reasons, and especially in this case, where we see by
experience, that if man's seed consist of an evil substance, and enjoy not a
temperature convenient, the vegetative soul runs into a thousand disorders:
for if the same be cold and moist more than is requisite, Hippocrates says,
that the men prove Eunuchs, or Hermofrodites; and if it be very hot and
dry, Aristotle says, that it makes them curle-pated, crooke-legged, and flat
nosed as are the Aethiopians, and if it be moist, the same Galen says, that
they grow long and lithie: and if it be dry, low of stature. All this is a
great defect in mankind, and for such works we find little cause to give nature
any commendation, or to hold her for advised; and if God were the author
hereof, none of these qualities could divert him. Only the first men which the
world possessed, Plato affirms were made by God, but the rest were borne
answerable to the discourse of the second causes, which if they be well
ordered, the vegetative soul does well perform his operations: and if they
concur not in sort convenient, it produces a thousand dammageable effects.

What the good order of nature for this effect must be, is, that the vegetative
soul have an endowment of a good temperature, or else, let Galen and all the
Philosophers in the world answer me, what the cause is that the vegetative
soul possesses such skill and power in the first age of man to shape his
body, and to increase and nourish the same, and when old age grows on, can
yield the same no longer. For if an old man leese but a tooth, he is past
remedy of recovering another, but if a child cast them all, we see that
natures return to renew them again. Is it then possible that a soul which
has done naught else in all the course of life, than to receive food, retain
the same, digest it, and expel the excrements, new begetting the parts which
fail, should towords the end of life forget this, and want ability to do the
same any longer? Galen (for certain) will answer, that this skill and
ability of the vegetative soul in youth, springs from his possessing much
natural heat and moisture, and that in age the same wants skill and power to
perform it, by means of the coldness and dryness, to which a body of those
years is subject. The knowledge of the sensitive soul, takes his dependence
also from the temperature of the brain, for if the same be such as his
operations require that it should be, it can perform with due perfection;
otherwise, the same must also err no less than the soul vegetative. The
manner which Galen held to behold and discern by eysight the wisdom of the
sensitive soul, was to take a young kid, but newly kidded, which set on the
ground, begins to go (as if it had been told and taught that his legs were made
to that purpose) and after that, he shakes from his back the superfluous
moisture which he brought with him from his mothers belly, and lifting up the
one foot, scrapes behind his ear; and setting before him sundry platters with
wine, water, vinegre, oil, and milk, after he has smelt them all, he fed
only on that of milk. Which being beheld by diverse Philosophers there
present, they all with one voice cried out, That Hippocrates had great reason
to say, that souls were skillful without the instruction of any teacher. But
Galen held not himself contented with this one proof, for two months after he
caused the same kid, being very hungry, to be brought into the field, where
smelling at many herbs, he did eat only those, whereon goats accustomably feed.

But if Galen, as he set himself to contemplat the demeanure of this kid, had
done the like with three or four together, he should have seen some gone
better than other some, shrug themselves better, scratch better, and perform
better all the other actions which we have recounted. And if Galen had reared
two colts, bred of one horse and mare, he should have seen the one to pace
with more grace than the other, and to gallop and stop better, and show more
fidelity. And if he had taken an ayrie of Faulcons, and manned them, he should
have found the first good of wing, the second good of prey, and the third
ravening and ill conditioned. The like shall we find in hounds, who being
whelps of the same litter, the one for perfection of hunting, will seem to
want but speech, and the other have no more inclination thereunto, than if he
had been engendered by a heardmans bandog.

All this cannot be reduced to those vain instincts of nature; which the
Philosophers feign. For if you ask for what cause one dog has more instinct
than another, both coming of one kind, and whelps of one sire, I cannot
conjecture what they may answer, save to fly back to their old leaning post,
saying, That God has taught the one better than the other, and given him a
more natural instinct. And if we demand the reason, why this good hound,
being yet but a whelpe, is a perfect hunter, and growing in age, has no such
sufficiency: and contrariwise, another being young cannot hunt at all, and
waxing old, is wily and ready; I know not what they can yield in reply. My
self atleast would say, that the towardly hunting of one dog more than an
other, grows from the better temperature of his brain: and again, that his
well hunting whilst he is young, and his decay in age, is occasioned by means
that in one age he partakes the temperature which is requisite to the qualities
of hunting, and in the other not. Whence we infer, that since the temperature
of the four first qualities is the reason and cause, for which one brute beast
better performs the works of his kind than another, that this temperature is
the schoolemaister which teaches the sensitive soul what it is to do.

And if Galen had considered the demeanure and voiages of the Ant, and noted
his prudence, his mercy, his Go to the Ant, O sluggard, and consider his way
and learn wisdom: who having no guide nor master, prouides himself the
summer of food, and in the time of harvest furnishes himself of meat.
justice, and his government, he would have taken astonishment to see a beast
so little endewed with so great sagenesse, without the help of any master or
teacher to instruct him. But the temperature which the ant has in his brain,
being known, and how aptly it is appropriated to wisdom, (as hereafter shall
be shown) this woonderment will cease, and we shall conceive, that brute
beasts with the temperature of their brain, and the fantasmes which enter
thereinto by the five senses, make such discourses, and partake those
abilities, which A Faulconer affirmed to me with an oath, that he had a redye
Faulcon for hawking, which grew bussardly, for remedy whereof, he gave her a
botton di fuoto in the head, and she amended.
we do so note in them. And amongst beasts of one kind, he which is most
schooleable and skillful, is such, because he has his brain better tempered,
and if through any occasion or infirmity, the temperature of his brain incur
alteration, he will suddenly leese his skill and ability, as men also do.

But now we are to treat of a difficulty touching the reasonable soul, which
is, in what sort he has this natural instinct for the operations of his kind,
(namely Sapience, and Prudence) and how on the sudden, by means of his good
temperature, a man can be skilled in the sciences, without the instruction of
any other: seeing experience tells us, that if they be not gotten by
learning, no man is at his birth endewed with them.

Between Plato and Aristotle, there is a weighty question, as touching the
verefieng the reason or cause from whence the wisdom of man may spring. One
says, That the reasonable soul is more ancient than the body, for that
before such time as Nature endowed the same with these instruments, it made
abode in heaven, in the company of God, whence it issued full of science and
sapience: but when it entered to form this matter, through the evil
temperature which it found therein, it forewent the whole, until by process
of time, this ill temperature grew to amendment, and there succeeded another in
steed thereof, with which (as more appliable to the sciences it had lost) it
grew by little and little to call that to remembrance which before it had
forgotten. This opinion is false, and I much marvel that Plato being so great a
Philosopher, could not render the Plato took out of the holy Scripture the
best sentences which are to be found in his works, in respect whereof he was
called Divine.
reason of man's wisdom, considering that brute beasts have their prudencies
and natural habilities, without that their soul departs from their body, or
sties up to heaven to learn them. In which regard he cannot go blameless,
especially having red in Genesis (whereto he gave so great credit) that God
instrumentalized the body of Adam, before he created his soul. The selfsame
befalls also now, save that it is nature who begets the body, and in the last
disposing thereof, God creates the soul in the same body, without that it be
sundred therefrom any time or moment.

Aristotle took another course, affirming that every doctrine, and every
discipline, comes from a foregoing knowledge, as if he would say, all that
which men know and learn, springs from that they have heard the same, seen
it, smelt it, tasted it, or felt it. For there can grow no notice in the
understanding, which has not first taken passage by some of the five senses.
For which cause he said, that these powers issue out of the hands of nature, as
a plain table in which is no manner of painting, which opinion is also false as
well as that of Plato. But that we may the better prove and make the same
apparent, it behooues first to agree with the vulgar Philosophers, that in man's
body there rests but one soul, and that the same is reasonable, which is the
original of whatsoever we do or effect: albeit there are opinions, and there
want not, who against this defend, that in company of the reasonable soul,
there are associated some two or three more. Plato attributes three souls unto
man.


This then standing thus in the works which the reasonable soul performs, as
it is vegetative, we have already proved that the same knows how to shape
man, and to give him the figure which he is to keep, and knows likewise how
to receive nourishment, to retain it, to digest it, and to expel the
excrements, and if any part of the body do fail, she knows how to supply the
same a new, and yield it that composition agreeable to the use which it is to
hold. And in the works of the sensitive and motive, the child so soon as it is
borne, knows to suck, and fashion his lips to draw forth the milk, and this
so redily, as not the wisest man can do the like. And herewithall, it assures
the qualities which are incident to the preservation of his nature, shuns that
which is noisome and dammageable thereunto, knows to weep and laugh, without
being taught by any. And if this be not so, let the vulgar Philosophers tell me
awhile, who has taught the children to do these Hippocrates answered better,
saying: That nature is learned, though she have not learned to do well.
things, or by what sense they have learned it. Well I know they will answer,
That God has given them this natural instinct as to the brute beasts, wherein
they say not ill, if the natural instinct be the self same with the
temperature.

The proper operations of the reasonable soul, namely, to understand, to
imagine and to perform actions of memory, a man cannot do them forthwith so
soon as he is borne, for the temperature of infancy serves very unfitly
therefore, and is merely appropriat to the vegetative and sensitive, as that
of old age is appropriat to the reasonable soul, and contrary to the
vegetative and sensitive. And if as the temperature which serves for prudence,
is gotten in the brain by little and little, so the same could all be joined
together at one instant, man should on the sudden have better skill to
discourse and play the Philosopher, than if he had attained the same in the
schools.

But because nature cannot perform this save by process of time, a man grows
to gather wisdom by little and little, and that this is the reason and cause
thereof, is manifestly proved, if we consider, that a man after he has been
very wise, grows by little and little into folly, for that he daily goes (till
his decrepit age) accrewing a contrary temperature. I for mine own part am of
opinion, The seed and menstruall blood which are two material principles of
which we be formed, are hot and moist, through which temperature children are
so unskilled.
that if nature, as she has made man of seed hot and moist (and this is the
temperature which directs the vegetative, and the sensitive, what they are to
effectuat) so she had made him of seed cold and dry, even after his birth, he
should straight-waies have been able to discourse and reason, and not have
attended to suck, in as much as this is the temperature agreeable to these
operations. But for that we find by experience, that if the brain have the
temperature requisite for natural sciences, he has no need of a master to
teach him, it falls out necessary that we mark one thing, which is, that if a
man fall into any disease, by which his brain upon a sudden changes his
temperature (as are madness, melancholy, and frenzy) it happens, that at one
instant he leeseth, if he were wise, all his knowledge, and vtters a thousand
follies; and if he were a fool, he accrues more wit and ability than he had
before.

I can speak of a rude country fellow, who becoming frantike, made a very
eloquent discourse in my presence, recommending his well doing to the
bystanders, When the brain is placed hot in the first degree, it makes a man
eloquent, and furnishes him with store of matter to deliver, for which cause
the silent are always cold of brain, and great talkers hot
and that they should take care of his wife and children (if it pleased God to
call him away in that sickness) with so many flowers of Rhethorike, and such
apt choice of words, as if Cicero had spoken in the presence of the Senate:
whereat the beholders maruelling, asked me whence so great eloquence and
wisdom might grow, in a man who in his health time could scantly speak? and
I remember I made answer, That the art of Oratorie was a science, which springs
from a certain point or degree of heat, and that this country fellow, before
sound, had by means of this infirmity attained thereunto.

I can also speak of another frantike person, who for the space of more than
eight days, never uttered word which I found not to carry his just quantity,
and mostly he made couplements of verses very well composed, This frenzy was
occasioned by abundance of cholar which took hold in the substance of the
brain, which humor has great congruence with Poetry, for which cause Horace
said, That if summer did not make euacuation of choler, no Poet should pass
before him.
whereat the by standers wondering to here a man speak in verse, who in his
health had never so much skill; I said, It sildome fell out, that he who was a
poet in his health time, should be so also in his sickness. For the
temperature of the brain, by which when a man is whole, he becomes a Poet,
in sickness alters and brings forth contrary operations. I remember that
the wife of this frantike fellow, and a sister of his, named Margaret,
reproved him, because he spoke ill of the saints, whereat the patient growing
impatient said to his wife these words: I renounce God for the love of you; and
S. Marie for the love of Margaret; and S. Peter for the love of John of Olmedo;
and so he ran through a beadroll of many saints, whose names had consonance with
the other bystanders there present.

But this is nothing, and a matter of small importance in respect of the
notable speeches, uttered by a Page of one of the great ones of this real me,
whilst he was mad, who in his health was reputed a youth of slender capacity,
but falling into this infirmity, he delivered such rare conceits,
resemblances, and answers, to such as asked him, and devised so excellent
manners of governing a kingdom (of which he imagined himself to be
sovereign) that for great wonder people flocked to see him and hear him, and
his very master scarcely ever departed from his beds head, praying God that he
might never be cured. Which afterward plainly appeared, for being recovered,
his Physician (who had healed him) came to take leave of his lord, with a mind
to receive some good reward, if of nothing else, yet at least in good words;
but he encountered this greeting: I promise you master doctor, that I was never
more aggreeued at any ill success, than to see this my page recovered, for it
was not behooffull that he should change so wise folly, for an understanding so
simple as is this, which in his health he enioieth. Methinks that of one, who
to fore was wise and well advised, you have made him a fool again, which is
the greatest misery that may light upon any man. The poor Physician seeing
how little thankfully his cure was accepted, went to take leave of the page,
who amongst many other words that passed between them, told him this: Master
doctor, I kiss your hands for so great a benefit bestowed on me, in restoring
mine understanding, but I assure you on my faith, that in some sort, it
displeases me to have been cured. For whilst I rested in my folly, I led my
life in the deepest discourses of the world, and imagined my self to great a
lord, as there reigned no king on the earth, who was not my vassal, and were
this a jest or a lie, what imported that, This page was not yet perfectly
cured.
whilst I conceived thereof so great a contentment, as if it had been true? I
rest now in far worse case, finding my self in troth to be but a poor page,
and to morrow I must begin again to serve one, who whilst I was in mine
infirmity, I would have disdayned for my footman.

It skils not much, whether the Philosophers admit all this, and believe that
it may be so or not; but what if I should prove by very true stories, that
ignorant men strooken with this infirmity, have spoken Latin, which they
never learned in their health; and that a frantic woman told all persons who
came to visit her, their virtues and vices, and sometimes reported matters with
that assurance, which they use to give who speak by conjectures and tokens:
and for this cause, none almost durst come in to visit her, fearing to hear
of those true tales which she would deliver? and (which is more to be marvelled
at) when a barber came to let her blood, Friend (quoth she) have regard what
you do, for you have but few days to live, and your wife shall marry such a
man: and this, though spoken by chance, fell out so true, as it took effect
before half a year came to an end.

Me thinks I hear them who fly natural Philosophy, to say that this is a
foul leasing, and that (put case it were true) the devil as he is wise and
crafty by Gods sufferance, entered into this woman's body, and into the rest of
those frantike persons, whom I have mentioned, and caused them to utter those
strange matters, and yet even to confess this, they are very loath; for the
devil foreknoweth not what is to come, because he has no prophetical spirit.
They hold it a very sufficient argument to avouch, This is false, because I
cannot conceive how He speaks to one asleep who teaches wisdom to a fool.
it may be so: as if difficult and quaint matters were subject to blunt wits,
and came within the reach of their capacities. I pretend not hereby to take
those to task who have defect of understanding, for that were a bootlesse
labor, but to make Aristotle himself confess, that men endowed with the
temperature requisite for such operations, may conceive many things without
having received thereof any particular perseverance, or learned the same at the
hands of any other Sundry also, because this heat is a neighbor to the seat of
the mind, are wrapped in the infirmity of sottishness, or are heated by some
furious instinct, whence grew the Sibils and Bacchants, and all those, who men
think are egged on by some divine inspiration, whereas this takes his
original, not from any disease, but from a natural distemperature. Marcus a
citizen of Siracusa, was excellentest poet after he lost his understanding, and
those in whom this abated heat approaches least to mediocritie, are (verily)
altogether melancholic, but thereby much the wiser. In these words Aristotle
clearly confesses, that when the brain is excessiuely heated, many thereby
attain the knowledge of things to come, (as were the Sibils) which Aristotle
says, grows not by reason of any disease, The Sibils admitted by the
catholic church, had this natural disposition that Aristotle speaks of, and
besides a prophetical spirit which God powered into the^, for natural wit
sufficed not for so high a point, werethe same never so perfect.
but through the inequality of the natural heat, and that this is the very
reason and cause thereof, he proves apparently by an example; alleging that
Mark a citizen of Siracuse, was a Poet in most excellency at such time as
through excessive heat of the brain he fell besides himself, and when he
returned to a more moderat temperature, he lost his versifying, but yet
remained more wise and advised. In so much that Aristotle not only admits the
temperature of the brain, for the principal occasion of these extrauagant
successes, but also reprooues them who hold the same for a divine revelation,
and no natural cause.

The first who termed these marvelous matters by the name of diuinesse, was
Hippocrates, and that if any such point of diuinesse be found in the disease,
that it When the diseased divine thus, it is a token that the reasonable soul
is now awearie of the body, and so none such recover.
manifests also a providence. Upon which sentence, he charge Physicians
that if the diseased utter any such divine matters, they may thereby know in
what case she rests, and prognosticate what will become of him. But that which
in this behalf drives me to most wonder, is, that demanding of Plato how it
may come to pass, that of two sons begotten by one father, one has the
skill of versifying, without any other teaching, and the other, toiling in the
art of poetry, can never beget so much as one verse? he answers, That he who
was borne a Poet, is possessed, and the other not. In which behalf, Aristotle
had good cause to find fault with him, for that he might have reduced this to
the temperature, as else where he did.

The frantike persons speaking of Latin, without that he ever learned the same
in his health time, shows the consonance which the Latin tongue holds with the
reasonable soul, and (as we will prove hereafter) there is to be found a
particular wit, appliable to the invention of languages, and Latin words, and
the phrases of speech in that tongue are so fitting with the ear, that the
reasonable soul possessing the necessary temperature for the invention of
some delicat language, suddenly encounters with this. And that two deuisers of
languages may shape the like words (having the like wit and ability) it is
very manifest, presupposing that when God created Adam, and set all things
before him, to the end he might bestow on each his several name, whereby it
should be called, he had likewise at that instant molded another man with the
same perfection and supernatural grace; now I demand, if God had placed the
same things before this other man, that he might also set them names whereby
they should be called, of what manner those names should have been? for mine
own part, I make no doubt, but he would have given these things, those very
names which Adam did: and the reason is very apparent, for both carried one
self eye to the nature of each thing, which of it self was no more but one.
After this manner might the frantike person light upon the Latin tongue, and
speak the same without ever having learned it in his health, for the natural
temperature of his brain, conceiving alteration, through the infirmity it
might (for a space) become like his, who first invented the Latin tongue, and
feign the like words, but yet not with that concert and continued finenesse,
for this would give toke^ that the devil moved that tongue, as the church
teaches her exorcists. This self (says Aristotle) befell some children, who
at their birth-time spoke some words very plainly, and afterward kept silence,
and he finds fault with the vulgar Philosophers of his time, who for that they
knew not the natural cause of this effect, imputed it to the devil.

The cause why children speak so soon as they are borne, and after forthwith
turn to hold their peace, Aristotle could never find out though he went much
about it, but yet it could never sink into his brain, that it was a devise of
the devils, nor an effect above nature, as the vulgar Philosophers held
opinion; who seeing themselves hedged in with the curious and nice points of
natural Philosophy, make them believe who know little, that God or the devil
are authors of the prodigious and strange effects, of whose natural cause they
have no knowledge and understanding.

Children which are engendered of seed cold and dry, (as are those begotten in
old age) some few days and months after their birth, begin to discourse and
philosophise; for the temperature cold and dry, (as we will hereafter prove)
is most appropriat to the operations of the reasonable soul, and that which
process of time, and many days and months should bring about, is supplied by
the present temperature of the brain, which for many causes anticipateth what
it was to effect. Other children there are (says Aristotle) who as soon as
they are borne, begin to speak, and afterward hold their peace until they
attain the ordinary and convenient age of speaking: which effect flows from
the same original and cause that we recounted of the page, and of those
furious and frantike persons, and of him who spoke Latin on a sudden without
having learned it in his health. And that children whilst they make abode in
their mothers belly, and so soon as they are borne, may undergo these
infirmities, is a matter past denial. But whence that divining of the
frantic woman proceeded, I can better make Cicero to conceive, than these
natural Philosophers, for he describing the nature of man, said in this
manner: The creature foresightfull, Those who have been crazed, and are called
mela^cholike, have their mind endewed with a certain spice of prophesying and
divining.
searchfull, apt for many matters, sharp conceited, mindful, replenished with
reason and counsel, whom we call by the name of Man. And in particular he
affirms that there is found a certain nature in some men, which in
foreknowing things to come, exceeds other men's, and his words are these: For
there is found a certain force and nature, which foretells things to come, the
force and nature of which, is not by reason to be unfolded. The error of the
natural Philosophers consists, in not considering (as Plato did) that man
was made to the likeness of God, and that he is a partaker of his divine
providence, and that the power of discerning all the three differences of time,
(memory for the passed, conceiving for the present, and imagination and
understanding for those that are to come.) And as there are men superior to
others in remembering things past, and others in knowing the present, so there
are also many, who partake a more natural ability for imagining of what
shall come to pass. One of the greatest arguments which forced Cicero to
think, that the reasonable soul is incorruptible, was to see the certainty
with which the diseased tell things to come, and especially when they are near
their end. But the difference which rests between a prophetical spirit and
this natural wit, is, that that which God speaks by the mouth of his prophets,
is infallible, for it is the express word of God: but that which man
prognosticateth by the power of his imagination holds no such certainty.

Those who say, that the discovering of their virtues and vices by the frantike
woman, to the persons who came to visit her, was a trick of the devils
playing; let them know, that God bestows on men a certain supernatural
grace, to attain and conceive which are the works of God, and which of the
devil: the which saint Paul places amongst the divine gifts, and calls it,
The imparting of spirits. Whereby we may discern whether it be the devil or
some good angel that intermedleth with us. For many times the devil sets to
beguile us under the cloak of a good angel, and we have need of this grace and
supernatural gift, to know him, and difference him from the good. From this
gift they are farthest sundered, who have not a wit capable of natural
Philosophy: for this science, and that supernatural infused by God, fall
under one self ability, to weet, the understanding atleast; if it be true,
that God in bestowing his graces, do apply himself to the natural good of
every one, as I have before rehearsed.

Jacob lying at the point of death, (at which time the reasonable soul is most
at liberty, to see what is to come) all his twelve children entered to visit
him, and he to each of them in particular, recited their virtues and vices, and
prophesied what should befall, as touching them and their posterity. Certain
it is, that he did all this inspired by God, but if the divine scripture, and
our faith, had not ascertained us hereof, how would these natural Philosophers
have known this to be the work of God: and that the virtues and vices which
the frantike woman told to such as came to visit her, were discovered by the
power of the devil, whilst this case in part resembles that of Jacob?

They reckon that the nature of the reasonable soul, is far different from
that of the devil, and that the powers thereof (understanding, imagination,
and memory,) are of another very diverse kind, and herein they be deceived. For
if a reasonable soul inform a well instrumentalized body (as was that of
Adam) his knowledge comes little behind that of the subtillest devil, and
without the body he partakes as perfect qualities as the other. And if the
devils foresee things to come, coniecturing and discoursing by certain tokens,
the same also may a reasonable man do when he is about to be freed from his
body, or when he is endowed with that difference of temperature, which makes a
man capable of this providence. For it is a matter as difficult for the
understanding to conceive how the devil can know these hidden things, as to
impute the same to the reasonable soul. It will not fall in these men's heads,
that in natural things there may be found out certain signs, by means of which
they may attain to the knowledge of matters to come. And I affirm, there are
certain tokens to be found, which bring us to the notise of things passed and
present, and to forecast what is to follow, yea and to conjecture some secrets
of the heaven, Therefore we see that his things invisible are understood by the
creatures of the world, by means of the things which have been created.
Whosoever shall have power to accomplish this, shall attain thereunto, and the
other shall be such as Homer spoke of, The ignorant understands the things
passed, but not the things to come. But the wise and discreet is the Ape of
God, for he immitates him in many matters, and albeit he cannot accomplish them
with so great perfection, yet he carries some resemblance unto him, by
following him.

CHAP. V.
It is proved that from the three qualities, hot, moist, and dry, proceed all
the differences of men's wits.

THe reasonable soul making abode in the body, it is impossible that the same
can perform contrary and different operations, if for each of them it use not
a particular instrument. This is plainly seen in the power of the soul, which
performs diverse operations in the outward senses, for every one has his
particular composition: the eyes have one, the ears another, the smelling
another, and the feeling another; and if it were not so, there should be no
more but one sort of operations, and that should all be seeing, tasting, or
feeling, for the instrument determines and rules the power for one action, and
for no more.

By this so plain and manifest a matter, which passes through the outward
senses, we may gather what that is in the inward. With this self power of the
soul, we understand, imagine, and remember. But if it be true, that every
work requires a particular instrument, it behooves of necessity, that within
the brain there be one instrument for the understanding, one for the
imagination, and another different from them for the memory: for if all the
brain were instrumentalized after one self manner, either the whole should be
memory, or the whole understanding, or the whole imagination. But we see that
these are very different operations, and therefore it is of force that there be
also a variety in the instruments. But if we open by skill, and make an
anotomie of the brain, we shall find the whole compounded after one manner, of
one kind of substance, and alike, without parts of other kinds, or a different
sort; only there appear four little hollownesses, who (if we well mark
them) have all one self composition and figure, without any thing coming
between which may breed a difference.

What the use and profit of these may be, and whereto they serve in the head,
is not easily decideable: for Galen and the Anotomists, as well new as ancient,
have labored to find out the truth, but none of them has precisely nor in
particular, expressed whereto the right ventricle serves, nor the left, nor
that which is placed in the midst of these two, nor the fourth, whose seat in
the brain keeps the hinder part of the head. They affirm, only (though with
some doubt) that these four concauities, are the shops where the vital
spirits are digested, and converted into animals, so to give sense and motion
to all the parts of the body. In which operation, Galen said once, that the
middle ventricle was the principal, and in another place he vnsayes it again,
affirming that the hindermost is of greatest efficacy and valor.

But this doctrine is not true, nor founded on good natural Philosophy, for
in all man's body, there are not two so contrary operations, nor that so much
hinder one another, as are discoursing, and digestion of nourishment: and the
reason is, because contemplation requires quiet, rest, and a cleerenesse in
the animal spirits; and digestion is performed with great stirring and
travail, and from this action rise up many vapors, which trouble and darken
the animal spirits, so as by means of them, the reasonable soul cannot
discern the figures. And nature was not so unadvised, as in one self place to
conioine two actions which are performed with so great repugnancie. But Plato
highly commends the wisdom and knowledge of him who shaped us, for that he
severed the liver from the brain by so great a distance, to the end, that by
the rumbling there made, whilst the nourishments are mingled, and by the
obscurenesse and darkness occasioned through the vapors in the animal
spirits, the reasonable soul might not be troubled in his discourses and
considerations. But though Plato had not touched this point of Philosophy, we
see hourly by experience, that because the liver and the stomach are so far
from the brain, presently upon meat, and some space thereafter, there is no man
that can give himself to study.

The truth of this matter is, that the fourth ventricle has the office of
digesting and altering the vital spirits, and to convert them into animal, for
that end which we have before remembered. And therefore nature has severed the
same by so great a distance from the other three, and made that brain sundred
apart, and so far off (as appears) to the end, that by his operation, he
hinder not the contemplation of the rest. The three ventricles placed in the
forepart, I doubt not, but that nature made them to none other end than to
discourse and philosophise. Which is apparently proved, for that in great
studyings and contemplations, always that part of the head finds it self
agreeued, which answers these three concauities. The force of this argument
is to be known, by consideration, that when the other powers are weary of
performing their works, the instruments are always agreeued, whose service
they used; as in our much looking, the eyes are pained; and with much going,
the souls of the feet wax sore.

Now the difficulty consists, to know in which of these ventricles the
understanding is placed, in which the memory, and in which the imagination,
for they are so united and nere neighboured, that neither by the last argument,
nor by any other notice, they can be distinguished or discerned. Then
considering that the understanding cannot work without the memory be present,
Aristotle in his third book of the soul.
representing unto the same the figures and fantasies agreeable thereunto, it
behooves that the understanding part busy it self in beholding the
fantasmes, and that the memory cannot do it, if the imagination do not
accompany the same (as we have already heretofore declared) we shall easily
understand, that all the powers are united in every several ventricle, and
that the understanding is not solely in the one, nor the memory solely in the
other, nor the imagination in the third, as the vulgar Philosophers have
imagined, but that this union of powers is accustomably made in man's body, in
as much as the one cannot work without the aid of the other, as appears in
the four natural abilities, digestive, retentiue, attractiue, and expulsive,
where, because each one stands in need of all the residue, nature disposed to
unite them in one self place, and made them not divided or sundered.

But if this be true, then to what end made nature those three ventricles, and
joined together the three reasonable powers in every of them, seeing that one
alone sufficed to understand and to perform the actions of memory? To this
may be answered, that there rises a like difficulty, in skanning whence it
comes that nature made two eyes, and two ears, since in each of them is
placed the whole power of sight and hearing, and we can see, having but one
eye? Whereto may be said, that the powers ordained for the perfection of a
creature, how much the greater number they carry, so much the better assured
is that their perfection, for upon some occasion, one or two may fail, and
therefore it serves well to the purpose, that there remain some others of the
same kind, which may be applied to use.

In an infirmity which the Physicians term Resolution, or Palsy of the
middle side, the operation is ordinarily lost of that ventricle which is
strooken on that side, and if the other two remained not sound, and without
endammageance, a man should thereby become witles, and void of reason And yet
for all this, by wanting that only ventricle, there is a great abatement
discerned in his operations, as well in those of the understanding, as of the
imaginatiue, and memory, as they shall also find in the loss of one sight, who
were wont to behold with two; whereby we clearly comprize, that in every
ventricle are all the three powers, since by the annoiance of any one, all
the three are weakened. Seeing then all the three ventricles are of one self
composition, and that there rests not amongst them any variety of parts, we
may not leave to take the first qualities for an instrument, and to make so
many general differences of wits, as they are in number. For to think that
the reasonable soul being in the body, can work without some bodily
instrument to assist her, is against all natural Philosophy. But of the four
qualities, heat, cold, moisture, and drouth: all Physicians leave out cold, as
unprofitable to any operation of the reasonable soul, wherethrough it is seen
by experience in the other habilities, that if the same mount above heat, all
the powers of man do badly perform their operations, neither can the stomach
digest his meat, nor the cods yield fruitful seed, nor the muscles move the
body, nor the brain discourse. For which cause, Galen said, Coldness is
apparently noisome to all the offices of the soul; as if he should say, Cold
is the ruin of all the operations of the soul, only it serves in the body to
temper the natural heat, and to procure that it burn not overmuch: and yet
Aristotle is of a contrary opinion, where he affirms, it is a matter
certain, that that blood carries most forcible efficacy, which is thickest
and hottest, but the coldest and thinnest has a more accomplished force to
perceive and understand; as if he would say, the thick and hot blood makes
great bodily forces, but the pure and cold is cause that man possesses great
understanding. Whereby we plainly see, that from coldness springs the
greatest difference of wit that is in any man, namely in the understanding.

Aristotle moreover mooues a doubt, and that is, why men who inhabit very hot
countries (as Egypt) are more witty and advised than those who are borne in
cold regions. Which doubt he resolves in this manner: That the excessive heat
of the country fretteth and consumes the natural heat of the brain, and so
leaves it cold, whereby man grows to be full of reasonableness. And that
contrariwise, the much cold of the air, fortifieth the much natural heat of
the brain, and yields it not place to resolve. For which cause (says he) such
as are very hot brained, cannot discourse nor philosophise, but are giddie
headed, and not settled in any one opinion. To which opinion it seems that
Galen leans, saying that the cause why a man is unstable, and changes
opinion at every moment, is, for that he has a hot brain: and contrariewise,
his being stable and firm, springs from the coldness of his brain. But the
truth is, that from this heat there grows not any difference of wit, neither
did Aristotle mean that the cold blood, by his predominance, did better the
understanding, but that which is less hot. True it is, that man's
variableness springs from his partaking of much heat, which lifts up the
figures that are in the brain, and makes them to boil, by which operation,
there are represented to the soul many images of things, which inuit him to
their contemplation, and the soul to possess them all, leaves one and takes
another. Contrariwise it befalls in coldness, which for that it imprints
inwardly these figures, and suffers them not to rise, makes a man firm in one
opinion, and it proves so, because none other presents it self to call the
same away. Coldness has this quality, that it not only hinders the motions
of bodily things, but also makes that the figures and shapes which the
Philosophers call spiritual, be immovable in the brain. And this firmness
seems rather a negligence, than a difference of ability. Alike true it is,
that there is found another diversity of firmness, which proceeds from
possessing an understanding well compacted together, and not from the coldness
of the brain. So there remain drouth, moisture, and heat for the service of
the reasonable faculty. But no Philosopher as yet wist to give to every
difference of wit determinatly that which was his. Heraclitus said, A dry
brightness makes a most wise mind: by which sentence he gives us to
understand, that dryness is the cause why a man becoms very wise, but he
declares not in what kind of knowledge.

The self same meant Plato, when he said, that the soul descended into the
body endowed with great wisdom, and through the much moisture which it there
found, grew to become dull and untoward. But this wearing away in the course of
age, and purchasing dryness, the soul grew to discover the knowledge which he
tofore enjoyed. Amongst brute beasts, says Aristotle, those are wisest whose
temperature is most inclined to cold and dry, as are the ants and bees, who
for wisdom, concur with those men that partake most of reason. Moreover, no
brute beast is found of more moisture, or less wit than a hog, wherethrough
the Poet Pindare, to Horace, to say that Ulysses became not a fool, figured
him, that he was not turned into a hog.
gibe at the people of Beotia, and to handle them as fools, said thus:

Th'vntoward folk which now is named Beotia, were once called Hogs. Moreover,
blood through his much moisture, says Galen, makes men simple. And for such,
the same Galen recounts that the Commicks ieasted at Hippocrates children,
saying of them, That they had much natural heat, which is a substance moist
and very vaporous. This is ordinarily incident to the children of wise men, and
hereafter I will make report of the cause whence it grows. Amongst the four
humors which we enjoy, there is none so cold and dry as that of melancholy,
and whatsoever notable men for learning, have lived in the world (says
Aristotle) they were all melancholic. Finally, all agree in this point, that
dryness makes a man very wise, but they express not to which of the
reasonable powers it affoordeth greatest help; only Esaias the Prophet calls it
by his right name, where he says, That travail gives understanding: for
sadness and affliction not only diminishes and co^sumeth the moisture of the
brain, but also dries up the bones, with which quality, the understanding
grows more sharp and sightfull. Whereof we may gather an example very
manifest by taking into consideration many men, who cast into poverty and
affliction, have therethrough uttered and written sentences worth the
maruelling at, and afterward rising to better fortune, to eat and drink well,
would never once open their mouths. For a delicious life, contentment, and good
success, and to see that all things fall out after our liking, looseneth and
makes the brain moist. And this is it which Hippocrates said, Mirth looseneth
the heart, as if he would have said, That the same enlarges and gives it heat
and grosenesse.

And the same may easily be proved another way, for if sadness and affliction
dry up and consume the flesh, and for that reason, man gains more
understanding, it falls out a matter certain, that his contrary, namely The heart
of wise men is where there is sadness, and the heart of fools where there is
mirth.
mirth, will make the brain moist, and diminish the understanding. Such as
have purchased this manner of wit, are suddenly inclined to pastimes, to
music, and to pleasant conuersations, and fly the contrary, which at other
times gave them a relish and contentment. Now by this, the vulgar sort may
conceive whence it grows, that a wise and virtuous man attaining to some great
dignity (whereas at first he was but poor and base) suddenly changes his
manners, and his fashion of speech: and the reason is, because he has gotten a
new temperature, moist and full of vapors, whence it follows that the figures
are cancelled which tofore he had in his brain, and his understanding dulled.

From moisture, it is hard to know what difference of wit may spring, since
it is so far contrary to the reasonable faculty. At least (after Galens
opinion) all the humors of our body, which hold overmuch moisture, make a man
blockish and foolish, for which cause he said, The readiness of mind and
wisdom grows from the humor of choler: the humor of melancholy is author
of firmness and constancy; blood, of simplicity and dullness; the
flegmaticke complexion avails nothing to the polishing of man's. In so much
that blood with his moistures, and the phlegm, cause an impairing of the
reasonable faculty.

But this is understood of the faculties or reasonable wits, which are
discoursiue and active, and not of the passive, as is the memory, which
depends as well on the moist, as the understanding does on the dry. And we
call memory a reasonable power, because without it, the understanding and the
imaginatiue are of no valor. It Wherethrough Cicero defining the nature of
wit, places memory in his definition: Docilitie and Memory, which as it were
by one name are termed wit.
ministers matter and figures to them all, whereupon they may syllogise
conformably to that which Aristotle says, It behooues that the understander go
beholding the fantasmes; and the office of the memory is, to preserve these
fantasmes, to the end that the understanding may contemplat them, and if this
be lost, it is impossible that the powers can work; and that the office of
memory is none other, than to preserve the figures of things, without that it
appertains thereto to devise them. Galen expresses in these words, Memory
(verily) lays up and preserves in it self, the things known by the sense,
and by the mind, and is therein as it were their storehouse and receiving place,
and not their inuenter. And if this be the use thereof, it falls out apparent,
that the same depends on moisture; for this makes the brain pliant, and the
figure is imprinted by way of strayning. To prove this, we have an evident
argument in boys age, in which any one shall better conne by heart, than in any
other time of life, and then does the brain partake greatest moisture. Whence
Aristotle moves this doubt, Why in old age we have better wit, and in young
age we learn more readily? as if he should say, What is the cause, that when
we are old we have much understanding, and when we are young we learn with
more towardliness? Whereto he answers, That the memory of old men is full
of so many figures of things which they have seen and heard in the long course
of their life, that when they would bestow more therein, it is not capable
thereof, for it has no void place where to receive it. But the memory of
young folk, when they are newly borne, is full of plaits, and for this cause
they receive readily whatsoever is told or taught them. And he makes this
playner, by comparing the memory of the morning with that of the evening,
saying, That in the morning we learn best, because at that time our memory is
empty, and at the evening illy, because then it is full of those things which
we encountered during the day. To this Problem Aristotle wist not how to
answer, and the reason is very plain, for if the spices and figures which are
in the memory, had a body and quantity to occupy the place: it would seem
that this were a fitting answer; but being undivided and spiritual, they cannot
fill nor empty any place where they abide; yea we see by experience, that by
how much more the memory is exercised every day receiving new figures, so much
the more capable it becomes. The answer of this Problem is very evident
after my doctrine, and the same imports, that old men partake much
understanding, because they have great dryness, and fail of memory, for that
they have little moisture, and by this means the substance of the brain
hardneth, and so cannot receive the impression of the figures, as hard wax with
difficulty admits the figure of the seal, and the soft with easiness. The
contrary befalls in children, who through the much moisture wherewith the brain
is endowed, fail in understanding, and through the great supplenesse of their
brain, abound in memory: wherein, by reason of the moisture, the shapes and
figures that come from without, make a great, easy, deep, and well formed
impression.

That the memory is better the morning than the evening, cannot be denied, but
this springs not from the occasion alleged by Aristotle, but the sleep of
the night passed has made the brain moist, and fortifyed the same, and by the
waking of the whole day, it is dried and hardened. For which cause, Hippocrates
affirms those who have great thirst at night, shall do well to drink, for
sleep makes the flesh moist, and fortifieth all the powers which govern man.
And that sleep so does, Aristotle himself confesses.

By this doctrine is perfectly seen that the understanding and memory, are
powers opposite and contrary, in sort, that the man who has a great memory,
shall find a defect in his understanding, and he who has a great understanding
cannot enjoy a good memory: for it is impossible that the brain should of his
own nature, be at one self time dry and moist. On this maxim, Aristotle
grounded himself, to prove, that memory is a power different from
remembrance, and he frames his argument in this manner: Those who have much
remembrance, are men of great understanding, and those who possess a great
memory, find want of understanding; so then memory and remembrance are
contrary powers. The former proposition, after my doctrine is false; for those
who have much remembrance, are of little understanding, and have great
imaginations, as soon hereafter I will prove: but the second proposition is
very true, albet Aristotle knew not the cause, whereon was founded the enmity
which the understanding has with the memory.

From heat, which is the third quality, grows the imaginatiue, for there is
no other reasonable power in the brain, nor any other quality to which it may
be assigned besides that, the sciences which appertain to the imaginatiue, are
those, which such utter as dote in their sickness, and not of those which
appertain to the understanding, or to the memory. And frenzy, peevishness,
and melancholy, being hot passions of the brain, it yields a great argument,
to prove that imagination consists in heat. One thing breeds me a difficulty
herein, and that is, that the imagination carries a contrariety to the
understanding, as also to the memory, and the reason hereof is not to be
gotten by experience, for in the brain may very well be united much heat and
much dryness; and so likewise, much heat and much moisture, to a large
quantity: and for this cause, a man may have a great understanding and a great
imagination, and much memory with much imagination: and verily, it is a
miracle to find a man of great imagination, who has a good understanding, and
a sound memory. And the cause thereof behooues to be, for that the
understanding requires that the brain be made of parts very subtle and
delicat, as we have proved heretofore out of Galen, and much heat frets and
consumes what is delicat, and leaves behind the parts gross and earthly. For
the like reason, a good imagination cannot be united with much memory; for
excessive heat resolves the Any distemperature whatsoever, cannot any long
time endure alone.
moisture of the brain, and leaves it hard and dry, by means whereof it
cannot easily receive the figures. In sort that in man there are no more but
three general differences of wits, for there are no more but three qualities
whence they may grow. But under these three universal differences, there are
contained many other particulars, by means of degrees of access which heat,
moisture and dryness may have.

Notwithstanding there springs a difference in wits from every degree of these
three qualities, for the dry, the hot, and the moist, may exceed in so high a
degree, that it may altogether disturb the animal power, conformable to that
sentence of Galen, Every excessive distemperature resolves the forces; and so
it is. For albeit dryness give help to the understanding, yet it may be that
the same shall consume his operations. Which Galen and the ancient Philosophers
would not admit, but affirm, that if old men's brains grew not cold, they
should never decay, though they became dry in the fourth degree. But they have
no reason for this, as we will prove in the imaginatiue: for albeit his
operations be performed with heat, yet if it pass the third degree, forthwith
the same begins to resolve, and the like does the memory through overmuch
moisture.

How many differences of wits grow by means of the superabounding of each of
these three qualities, cannot for this present be particularly recited, except
tofore we recount all the operations and actions of the understanding, the
imagination, and the memory. But the whilst we are to know that the
principal works of the understanding are three: the first, to discourse; the
second, to distinguish; and the third, to choose. Hence comes it that they place
also three differences in the understanding: into three other is the memory
divided: one receives with ease, and suddenly forgets; another is slow to
receive, but a long time retains; and the last receives with ease, and is
very slow to forget.

The imagination contains many more differences, for he has three, no less
than the understanding and memory, and from each degree arises three other.
Of these we will more distinctly discourse hereafter, when we shall assign to
each, the science which answers it in particular.

But he that will consider three other differences of wit, shall find that
there are habilities in those who study, some which have a disposition for the
clear and easy contemplations of the art which they learn, but if you set
them about matters obscure and very difficult, it will prove a lost labor for
the teacher to shape them a figure thereof by fit examples, or that they frame
themselves the like by their own imagination, for they want the capacity.

In this degree are all the bad scholars of whatsoever faculty, who being
demanded touching the easy points of their art, answer to the purpose, but
coming to matters of more curiousness, they will tell you a hundred follies.
Other wits advance themselves one degree higher, for they are pliant and easy
in learning things, and they can imprint in themselves all the rules and
considerations of art, plain, obscure, easy, and difficult; but as for
doctrine, argument, doubting, answering, and distinguishing, they are all
matters, wherewith they may in no wise be combred. These need to learn
sciences at the hands of good teachers, well skilled in knowledge, and to have
plenty of books, and to study them hard, for so much the less shall their
knowledge be, as they forbear to read and take pains. Of these may be
verefied that so famous sentence of Aristotle, Our understanding is like a
plain table, wherein nothing Of these differences of wits, Aristotle said in
this manner: He verily is best, who understands every thing by himself: and
he also is good, who obeith him that says well.
is pourtraied. For whatsoever they are to know and attain, it behooues that
first they hear the same of some other, and are barren of all invention
themselves. In the third degree, nature makes some wits so perfect, that they
stand not in need of teachers to instruct them, nor to direct in what sort they
are to philosophise, for out of one consideration, endicted to them by their
schoolmaister, they will gather a hundred, and without that ought be bestowed
unto them, they fill their wit with science and knowledge. Those wits beguiled
Plato, and made him to say, That our knowledge is a certain spice of
remembrance, when he heard them speak and say that which never fell into
consideration with other men.

To such, it is allowable that they write books, and The invention of arts,
and the making of books (says Galen) is performed with the understanding and
with the memory, or with the imaginatiue: but he thatwrites for that he has
many things in his mind, cannot ad any new invention.
to others not: for the order and concert which is to be held, to the end that
sciences may daily receive increase and greater perfection, is to join the new
invention of our selves, who live now, with that which the auntients left
written in their books. For dealing after this manner, each in his time, shall
add an increase to the arts, and men who are yet unborn, shall enjoy the
invention and travail of such as lived before. As for such who want invention,
the common wealth should not consent that they make books, nor suffer them to
be printed, because they do naught else save heap up matters already
delivered, and sentences of grave authors, returning to repeat the self
things, stealing one from hence, and taking another from thence; and there is
no man, but after such a fashion may make a book.

Wits full of invention, are by the Tuscanes called goatish, This difference of
wits is very dangerous for Divinity, where the understanding ought to abide
bound to that which the Catholic church does resolve.
for the likeness which they have with a goat, in their demeanure and
proceeding. These never take pleasure in the plains, but ever delight to walk
alone through dangerous and high places, and to appproch near steep down-fals,
for they will not follow any beaten path, nor go in company. A property like
this, is found in the reasonable soul when it possesses a brain well
instrumentalized and tempered, for it never rests settled in any
contemplation, but fares forth with unquiet, seeking to know and understand
new matters. Of such a soul is verefied the saying of Hippocrates, The going
of the soul is the thought of men. For there are some, who never pass out of
one contemplation, and think not that the whole world can discover another
such. These have the property of a beast, who never forsakes the beaten path,
nor cares to walk through desert and unhaunted places, but only in the high
market way, and with a guide before him. Both these diversities of wits, are
ordinary amongst professors of learning. Some others there are of high
searching capacities, and estranged from the common course of opinions, they
judge and entreat of matters with a particular fashion, they are frank in
delivering their opinion, and tie not themselves to that of any other. Some
sorts are close, moist, and very quiet, distrusting themselves, and relying
upon the judgment of some grave man whom they follow, whose sayings and
sentences, they repute as sciences and demonstrations, and al things
contrarying the same they reckon vanity and leasings.

These two differences of wits are very profitable if This difference of wits
senteth very well for Divinity, where it behooves to ensue the divine
authority, declared by the holy Councels and sacred Doctors.
they be united; for as amongst a great drove of cattle, the heardsmen
accustom to mingle some dozen of goats to lead them and make them trot apace,
to enjoy new pastures, that they may not suffer scarcity; so also it behooves,
that in humane learning, there be some goatlike wits, who may discover to the
cattle like understandings, through secrets of nature, and deliver unto them
contemplations not heard of, wherein they may exercise themselves, for after
this manner, arts take increase, and men daily know more and more.

CHAP. VI.
Certain doubts and arguments are propounded against the doctrine of the last
chapter, and their answer.

ONe of the causes for which the wisdom of Socrates has been so famous till
this day, is, for that after he was adjudged by the oracle of Apollo, to be the
wisest man of the world, he said thus: I know this only, that I know nothing at
all: which sentence, al those that have seen and read, passed it over as
spoken by Socrates, for that he was a man of great humbleness, a despiser of
worldly things, and one to whom, in respect of divine matters, all else seemed
of no valor. But they verily are beguiled, for none of the ancient
Philosophers possessed the virtue of humility, nor knew what thing it was,
until God came into the world and taught the same.

The meaning of Socrates was, to give to understand how little certainty is
contained in humane sciences, and how unsettled and fearful the understanding
of a Philosopher is in that which he knows, seeing by experience, that all is
full of doubts and arguments, and that we can yield assent to nothing, without
fearing that it may be contrary. For it was said, The thoughts of men are
doubtful, and our foreseeings uncertain. And he who will attain the true
knowledge of things, it behooues that he rest settled and quiet without fear or
doubt of being deceived, and the Philosopher who is not thus wise grounded, may
with much truth affirm that he knows nothing.

This same consideration had Galen, when he said, Science is a convenient and
firm notice, which never departs from reason; therefore thou shall not find
it amongst the Philosophers, especially when they consider the nature of
things: but verily much less in matters of Physic, nay rather (to speak all
in one word) it never makes his full arrival where men are.

Hereby it seems that the true notice of things fails to come this way, and
to man arriueth only a certain opinion, which makes him to walk uncertain,
and with fear whether the matter which he affirms be so or no. But that
which Galen notes more particularly, touching this, is, that Philosophy and
Physic, are the most uncertain of all those wherewith men are to deal. And
if this be true, what shall we say touching the Philosophy whereof we now
entreat, where with the understanding, we make an anotomie of a matter so
obscure and difficult, as are the powers and faculties of the reasonable soul?
In which point are offered so many doubts and arguments, that there remains no
clear doctrine upon which we may rely.

One of which, and the principal, is, that we have made the Understanding an
isntrumental power, as the Imagination, and the Memory: and have given
dryness to the brain, as an instrument with which it may work; a thing far
repugnant to the doctrine of Aristotle and all his followers, who placing the
understanding severed from the bodily instrument, prove easily the
immortality of the reasonable soul, and that the same issuing out of the
body, endures for ever. Now the contrary opinion being disputable, the way
hereby is stopped up, so that this cannot be proved. Moreover, the reasons on
which Aristotle groundeth himself, to prove that the understanding is not an
isntrumental power, carry such efficacy, as other than that cannot be
concluded. For to this power appertains the knowing and understanding the
nature and being of whatsoever material things in the world, and if the same
should be conioined with any bodily thing, that self would hinder the
knowledge of the residue: as we see in the outward senses, that if the taste be
bitter, all the things which the tongue touches, partake the same savor; and
if the christalline humor be green or yellow, all that the eye sees, it
judges to be of the same color. The reason of this is, for that the thing
within breeds an impediment to that without.

Aristotle says moreover, That if the understanding were mingled with any
bodily instrument, it would retain some quality, for whatsoever unites it
self with heat or cold, it is of force that it partake of the same quality.
But to say that the understanding is hot, cold, moist, or dry, is to utter a
matter abominable to the ears of all natural Philosophers.

The second principal doubt is, that Aristotle and all the Peripateticks,
bring in two other powers besides the Understanding, the Imagination, and the
Memory: namely, Remembrance, and Common sense, grounding upon that rule, That
the powers are known by way of the actions. They said, That besides the
operations of the Understanding, the Imagination, and the Memory, there are
also two other different. So then the wit of man takes his original from five
powers, and not from three only, as we did prove.

We said also in the last chapter, after the opinion of Galen, that the memory
does none other work in the brain, save only to preserve the shapes and
figures of things, in such sort as a chest preserves and keeps apparel and
what so else is put thereinto. And if by such a comparison, we are to
understand the office of this power, it is requisite also to prove another
reasonable faculty, which may fetch out the figures from the memory, and
represent them to the understanding, even as it is necessary that there be one
to open the chest, and to take out what has been laid up therein.

Besides this, we said that the understanding and the memory are contrary
powers, and that the one chaceth away the other, for the one loves great
dryness, and the other much moisture, and a supplenesse of the brain. And if
this be true, wherefore said Aristotle and Plato, That men who have their flesh
tender, enjoy great understanding, seeing this supplenes is an effect of
moisture.

We said also, that for effecting that a memory may be good, it was necessary
the brain should be endowed with moisture, for the figures ought to be printed
therein by way of compression, and the same being hard, they cannot so easily
make a sign therein. True it is, that to receive figures with readiness, it
requires that the brain be pliant, but to preserve the shapes some long time,
all affirm that it is necessary the same be hard and dry, as it appears in
outward things, where the figure printed in a pliant substance, is easily
cancelled, but in the dry and hard, it never perishes. Wherethrough we see
many men who con by heart with great readiness, but forget again very
speedily. Of which, Galen rendering a reason, says that such through much
moisture, have the substance of their brain tender and not settled, for the
figure is soon cancelled, as if it were sealed in water. And contrariwise,
other learn by heart with difficulty, but what they have once learned, they
never forget again. Wherethrough it seems a matter impossible, that there
should be that difference of memory which we speak of, which should learn
with ease, and preserve a long time.

It is also hard to understand how it is possible that so many figures being
sealed together in the brain, the one should not cancel the other, for if in
a piece of softened wax, there be printed many seals of diverse figures, it falls
out certain, that some cancel other some, by the intermingling of these
figures.

And that which breeds no less difficulty, is, to know whence it
proceeds, that the memory by exercising it self, becomes the more easy
to receive figures, it being certain, that not only bodily exercise, but
spiritual much more, dries and soketh the flesh.

It is also hard to conceive, in what sort the imagination is contrary to the
understanding, if there be none other more urgent cause, than to say, That
excessive heat resolves the subtle parts of the brain, leaving an earthly
and gross remnant, seeing that Melancholy, is one of the grossest and
earthliest humors of our body. And Aristotle says, That the understanding
uses the service of none so much, as of that. And this difficulty is
increased, considering that melancholy is a gross humor, cold and dry; and
choler is of a delicat substance, and of temperature hot and dry, and yet for
all this, melancholy is more appropriat to the understanding than choler. Which
seems repugnant to reason, for this humor aideth the understanding with two
qualities, and gainsetteth it self only with one, which is heat. But
melancholy aydeth it with his dryness, and with none other, and opposes it
self by his cold, and by his gross substance, which is a thing that the
understanding most abhors. For which cause, Galen assigns more wit and
prudence to choler, than to mela^choly, saying thus; Readiness and Prudence,
spring from the humor of choler, and the melancholicke humor is author of
integrity and constancy.

Lastly, the cause may be demanded, whence it may grow, that toiling, and
continual contemplation of study makes many wise, in whom at the beginning,
the good nature of these qualities, which we speak of, was wanting: and so by
giving and receiving with the imagination, they come to make themselves capable
of many verities, which tofore they knew not, nor had the temperature which
thereto was requisite. For if they had possessed the same, so much labor should
not have been needful.

All these difficulties, and many other besides, are contrary to the doctrine
of the last chapter. For natural Philosophy has not so certain principles as
the Mathematical sciences, wherein, the Physician and the Philopher (if he be
also a Mathematician) may always make demonstration: but coming afterward to
the cure which is conformable to the art of Physic, he shall commit therein
many errors, and yet not always through his own fault (since in the
Mathematics he always followed a certainty) but through the little assurance
of the art, for which cause, Aristotle said, The Physician though he always
cure not, is not therefore a bad one, provided that he foreslow not to perform
any of those points which appertain to the art. But if he should commit any
error in the Mathematics, he would be void of excuse. For performing in this
science all the diligences which it requires, it is impossible that the truth
should not appear. In sort, that albeit we yield not a manifest demonstration
of this doctrine, yet the whole fault is not to be laid on our want of
capacity, neither may it straightwaies be recounted as false that we deliver.

To the first principal doubt, we answer, that if the understanding were
severed from the body, and had naught to do with heat, cold, moist, and dry,
nor with the other bodily qualities, it would follow that al men should partake
equal understanding, and that all should equally discourse. But we see by
experience, that one man understands and discourses better than another,
then this grows, for that the understanding is an isntrumental power, and
better disposed in one than in another, and not from any other occasion. For
all reasonable souls and their understandings (sundered from the body) are of
equal perfection and knowledge. Those who follow Aristotle's doctrine, seeing
by experience, that some discourse better than othersome, have found an excuse
in appearance, saying; That the discoursing of one better than another, is not
caused, for that the understanding is an isntrumental power, and that the
brain is better disposed in some than in othersome: but for that the
understanding (whilst the reasonable soul remains in the body) stands in
need of the fantasmes and figures which are in the imagination, and in the
memory. Through default whereof, the understanding falls to discourse illy, and
not through his own fault, nor for that it is joined with a matter badly
instrumentalized. But this answer is contrary to the doctrine of Aristotle
himself, who proves, that by how much the memory is the worse, by so much
the understanding is the better; and by how much the memory is bettered, by so
much the understanding is impaired; and the same we have heretofore proved as
touching the imagination, in confirmation of that which Aristotle demands,
What the cause is, that we waxing old, have so bad a memory, and so good an
understanding: and when we are young, it falls out contrary, that we possess a
great memory and small understanding. Hereof, in one thing we see the
experience, and Galen notes it, that when in a disease, the temperature and
good disposition of the brain is impaired, many times the operations of the
understanding are thereby lost, and yet those of the memory and the
imagination remain sound, which could not come to pass, if the understanding
enjoyed not a particular instrument for it self besides this which the other
powers do partake.

To this I know not what may be yielded in answer, unless it be by some
metaphysicall relation, compounded of action and power, which neither
themselves know what it means, nor is there any other man that understands
it. Nothing more endammageth man's knowledge than to confound the sciences: and
what belongs to the Metaphysics, to entreat thereof in natural Philosophy;
and matters of natural Philosophy in the Metaphysics.

The reasons whereupon Aristotle grounded himself are of small moment, for the
consequence follows not, to say that the understanding, because it must know
material things, should not therefore enjoy a bodily instrument: for the
bodily qualities which serve for the composition of the instrument, make no
alteration of the power; nor from them do the fantasmes arise, even as the
sensible, placed above the sense, causes not the self sense. This is plainly
seen in touching, for notwithstanding that the same is compounded of four
material qualities: and that the same has in it quantity, and hardness or
softness; for all this, the hand discerns whether a thing be hot or cold,
hard or soft, great or little. And if you ask in what sort the natural heat
which is in the hand, hinders not the touching that it may discern the heat
which is in the stoue; we answer, that the qualities which serve for the
composition of the instrument, do not alter the instrument it self, neither
from them do there issue any shapes whereby to know them. Even as it
appertains to the eye to know all figures and qualities of things, and yet we
see that the eye it self has his proper figure and quantity, and of the
humors and skins which go to his composition, some have colors, and some are
diaphane and trasparant, all which hinders not, but that we with our sight
may discern the figures and quantities of all the things which shall appear
before us: and the reason is, for that the humors, the skins, the figure, and
the quantity, serve for the composition of the eye, and such things cannot
alter the sightfull power, and therefore trouble not nor hinder the knowledge
of the outward figures. The like we affirm of the understanding, that his
proper instrument (though the same be material and joined with it) cannot
enlarge it, for from it issue no vnderstandable shapes, which have force to
alter it: and the reason is, For that the vnderstandable placed above the
understanding, causes not the understanding; and so it remains at liberty
to understand all the outward material things, without that it encounter
ought to hinder the same. The second reason wherein Aristotle grounded
himself, is of less importance than the former, for neither the
understanding, nor any other accident, can be qualiti-like, for of themselves,
they cannot be the subject of any quality. For which cause, it little skilleth
that the understanding possess the brain for an instrument together with the
temperature of the 4. first qualities, that therefore it may be called
qualitie-like, inasmuch as the brain and not the brain and not the
understanding, is the subject of the heat, the cold, the moist, and the dry.

To the third difficulty which the Peripateticks allege, saying, That by
making the understanding an instrume^tall power, we reaue one of those
principles, which serve to prove the immortality of the reasonable soul: we
answer, That there are other arguments of more soundness, whereby to prove
the same, whereof we will treat in the chapter following.

To the second argument, we answer that not every difference of operations
argues a diversity of powers: for (as we will prove hereafter) the
imaginatiue performs matter so strange, that if this maxim were true in sort
as the vulgar Philosophers had it, or admitting the interpretation which they
give it, there should be in the brain, ten or twelve powers more. But because
all these operations, are to be marshalled under one general reason, they
argue no more than one imaginatiue, which is afterward divided into many
particular differences, by the means of the sundry operations which it
performs: the composing of the shapes, in the presence or the absence of the
objects, not only argues not a diversity of the general powers (as are the
common sense, and the imaginatiue) but even not of the very particulars.

To the third argument we answer, that the memory is nothing else but a
tenderness of the brain, disposed with a certain kind of moisture, to
receive and preserve that, which the imaginatiue apprehends: with the like
proportion, that white or blew paper holds with him who writes: for as the
writer, writes in the paper the things which he would not forget, and after he
has written them, returns to read them; even so we ought to conceive, that
the imagination writes in the memory, the figures of the things known by the
five senses, and by the understanding, as also some others of his own framing:
and when it will remember ought (says Arist.) it returns to behold and
contemplat them. With this manner of comparison Plato served himself, when he
said that fearing the weak memory of old age, he hastened to make another of
paper (namely books) to the end his travails ought not to be lost, but that
he might have that which might represent them unto him, when he list to read
them. This self does the imaginatiue, of writing in the memory, and returning
to read it when it would remember the same. The first who uttered this point
was Aristotle, and the second Galen who said thus, Forasmuch as that part of
the soul, which imagines, whatsoever the same be, seems to be the self
that also remembers. And so verily it seems to be, for the things which we
imagine with long thinking, are well fixed in the memory, and that which we
handle with light consideration, also soon we forget the same again. And as
the writer, when he writes fair, the better assures it to be read: so it
befalles to the imaginatiue, that if it seal with force, the figure remains
well imprinted in the brain: otherwise it can skarsly be discerned. The like
also chances in old deeds, which being sound in part, and in part perished by
time, cannot well be read, unless we gather much by reason and conjecture. So
does the imaginatiue, when in the memory, some figures remain, and some are
perished, where Aristotle's error had his original, who for this cause
conceived that remembrance was a different power from the memory. Moreover, he
affirmed, that those who have great remembrance, are likewise of great
understanding, which is also false: for the imaginatiue, which is that that
makes the remembrance, is contrary to the understanding; in sort, that to
gather memory of things, and to remember them after they are known is a work
of the imagination: as to write and return to read it, is a work of the
Scriuener, and not of the paper. Whereby it falls out that the memory
remains a power passive, and not active: even as the blew and the white of
the paper, is none other than a commodity whereby to write.

To the fourth doubt may be answered, That it makes little to the purpose, as
touching the wit, whether the flesh be hard or tender, if the brain partake
not also the same quality, the which we see many times has a distinct
temperature from all the other parts of the body. But when they concur in one
self tenderness, it is an The smooth, white, and gross persons, have no
melancholicke humor.
evil token for the understanding, and no less for the imagination. And if we
consider the flesh of women and children, we shall find that in tenderness it
excee, death that of men, and this notwithstanding, commonly men have a better
wit than women: and the natural reason hereof is, For that the humors, which
make the flesh tender, are fleagme and blood, because they are both moist (as
we have above specified) and of them Galen said, That they make men simple and
dullards: and Amongst brute beasts, there is none which approaches nearer to
man's wisdom than the Olipha^t, and there is none of a flesh so rough and hard.
contrariwise, the humors which harden the flesh, are choler and melancholy:
and hence grow the prudence and sapience which are found in man. In sort, that
it is rather an ill token, to have the flesh tender, than dry and hard. And so
in men who have an equal temperature throughout their whole body, it is an
easy matter to gather the quality of their wit by the tenderness or hardness
of their flesh: For if it be hard and rough, it gives token either of a good
understanding or a good imagination; and if smooth and supple, of the contrary,
namely of good memory, and small understanding, and less imagination: and to
understand whether the brain have correspondence, it behooves to consider the
hair, which being big, black, rough, and thick, yields token of a good
imagination, or a good understanding: and if soft and smooth, they are a sign
of much memory and nothing else. But who so will distinguish and know, whether
the same be understanding, or imagination (when the hair is of this sort) it
must be considered of what form the child is in the act of laughter: for this
passion discovers much, of what quality he is in the imagination.

What the reason and cause of laughter should be, many Philosophers have
labored to conceive, and none of them has delivered ought that may well be
understood, but all agree that the blood is an humor, which provoke a man to
laugh, albeit none express with what quality this humor is indewed more than
the rest, why it should make a man addicted to laughter. The follies which are
committed with laughing, are less dangerous: but those which are done with
labor are more perilous: as if he should say, When the diseased become giddie
and doting do laugh, they rest in more safety, than if they were in toil and
anguish: for the former comes of blood, which is a most mild humor, and the
second of melancholy: but we grounding upon the doctrine, whereof we entreat,
shall easily understand all that, which in this case may be desired to be
known. The cause of laughter (in my judgment) is naught else, but an
approouing, which is made by the imagination, seeing or hearing somewhat done
or said, which accords very well: and this power remains in the brain,
when any of these things give it contentment, suddenly it moves the same, and
after it all the muscles of the body, and so, many times we do allow of witty
sayings, by bowing down of the head. When then the imagination is very good,
it contents not it self with every speech, but only with those which please
very well: and if they have some little correspondence, and nothing else, the
same receives thereby rather pain than gladness: Hence it grows that men
of great imagination, laugh very seldom, and the point most worthy of
noting, is, that ieasters, and natural counterfeiters never laugh at their own
meriments, nor at that which they hear others to utter: for they have an
imagination so delicat, that not even their own pleasanteries, can yield that
correspondence which they require.

Heereto may be added, that merimentes (besides that they must have a good
proportion, and be uttered to the purpose) must be new, and not to fore heard
or seen. And this is the property not only of the imagination, but also of
all the other powers which govern man: for which cause we see, that the
stomach when it has twice fed upon one kind of meat, straightwaies loatheth
the same: so does the sight one self shape and color; the hearing one
concordance, how good soever; and the understanding one self contemplation.
Hence also it proceeds, that the pleasant conceited man, laugheth not at the
ieastes which himself utters: for before he send them forth from his lips,
he knew what he would speak: Whence I conclude, that those who laugh much, are
all defective in their imagination, where-through whatsoever merriment and
pleasanterie, (how cold soever) with them carries a very good
correspondencie: And because the blood pertaketh much moisture (whereof we said
before, that it breeds damage to the imagination:) those who are very
sanguine, are also great laughers. Moisture holds this property, that
because the same is tender and gentle, it abateth the force of heat, and makes
that it burn not overmuch. For which cause, it partakes better agreement with
dryness, because it sharpneth his operations. Besides this, where there is
much moisture, it is a sign that the heat is remiss, seeing it cannot resolve
nor consume the same: and the imagination cannot perform his operations with a
heat so weak. Hence we gather also, that men of great understanding, are much
given to laughter, for that they have defect of imagination, as we read of that
great Philosopher Democritus, and many others whom my self have seen and
noted. Then by means of this laughter we shall know, if that which men or
boys have of flesh hard and tough, and of hair black, thick, hard, and
rough, betoken either the imagination, or the understanding. In sort, that
Aristotle in this doctrine, was somewhat out of the way.

To the fifth argument we answer, that there are two kinds of moisture in the
brain, one which grows of the air (when this element predominateth in the
mixture) and another of the water, with which the other elements are amassed.
If the brain be tender by the first moisture, the memory shall be very good:
easy to receive, and mighty to retain the figures for a long time. For the
moisture of the air, is very supple and full of fatness, on which the shapes
are tacked with sure holdfast, as we see in pictures, which are lymned in oil,
who being set against the sun and the water, receive thereby no damage at
all: and if we cast oil upon any writing, it will never be wiped out, but
marreth the same: and that which cannot be read, with oil is made legible, by
yielding thereto a brightness and transparence. But if the difference of the
brain, spring from the second kind of moisture, the argument frames very
well: For if it receive with facility, with the same readiness, it turns
again to cancel the figure, because the moisture of the water, has no
fatness, wherein the figures may fasten themselves. These two moistures are
known by the hair. For that which springs from the air makes them to prove
unctious and full of oil and fat: and the water makes them moist and very
supple.

To the sixth argument may be answered, that the figures of things are not
printed in the brain, as the figure of the seal is in wax, but they pearce
thereinto to remain there affixed, in sort as the sparrowes are attached to
birdlime, or the flies stick in honnie: For these figures are bodilesse, and
cannot be mingled nor corrupt one the other.

To the seventh difficulty we answer, that the figures amasse and mollify the
substance of the brain, in such sort, as wax grows soft by plying the same
between our fingers: besides that the vital spirits have virtue to make
tender and supple the hard and dry members, as the outward heat does the
iron. And that the vital spirits ascend to the brain, when any thing is
learned by heart, we have proved heretofore, And every bodily and spiritual
exercise, does not dry: yea the Physicians affirm, that the moderate
fatteneth.

To the eighth argument we answer, that there are two spices of melancholy: one
natural, which is the dross of the blood, whose temperature is cold and dry,
accompanied with a substance very gross, this serves not of any value for the
wit, but makes men blockish, sluggards, and grynnars, because they want
imagination. There is another sort which is called choler ad-ust, or atra bile,
of which Aristotle said, That it made men exceeding wise: whose temperature is
diverse, as that of vinegre. Sometimes it performs the effects of heat,
lightning the earth; and sometimes it cools, but always it is dry and of a
very delicat substance. Cicero confesses that he was slow witted, because he
was not melancholic adust, and he said true, for if he had been such, he
should not have possessed so rare a gift of eloquence. For the melancholicke
adust want memory, to which appertains the speaking with great preparation.
It has another quality which much aideth the understanding, namely, that it
is clear like the Agatstone, with which cleerenesse it gives light within to
the brain, and makes the same to discern well the figures. And of this
opinion was Heraclitus when he said, A dry cleerenesse makes a most wise
mind, with which cleerenesse, natural melancholy is not endowed, but his
black is deadly: and that the reasonable soul there within the brain,
stands in need of light to discern the figures and the shapes, we will prove
hereafter.

To the ninth argument we answer, that the prudence and readiness of the mind
which Galen speaks of, appertains to the imagination, whereby we know that
which is to come, whence Cicero said, Memory is of things passed, and Prudence
of those to come. The readiness of the mind is that, which commonly they call
a sharpness in imagining, and by other names, craftines, subtlety,
cauelling, wiliness: wherefore Cicero said, Prudence is a subtlety which with
a certain reason, can make choice of good things and of evil. This sort of
Prudence and readiness, men of great understanding do want, because they lack
imagination. For which reason we see by experience in great scholars in this
sort of learning, which appertains to the understanding, that taking them
from their books, they are not worth a rush to yield or receive in traffic
of worldly affairs. This spice of Prudence, Galen said very well, that it came
of choler, for Hippocrates recounting to Damagetus his friend, in what case he
found Democritus, when he went Note that men of great understanding, take no
care for attiring their body, but are ordinarily ill apparelled and slouenly,
and hereof we yield the reason in the 8. cha. and 14.
to visit him for curing him, writes that he lay in the field, under a plane
tree, bare legged, and without breeches, leaning against a stone with a book
in his hand, and compassed about with brute beasts, dead and dismembered.
Whereat Hippocrates maruailing, asked him whereto those beasts of that fashion
served, and he then answered, that he was about to search what humor it was,
which made a man to be headlong, crafty, ready, double, and cauillous, and
had found (by making an anotomie of those wild beasts) that choler was the
cause of so discommendable a property: and that to revenge himself of crafty
persons, he would handle them as he had done the fox, the serpent and the ape.
This manner of Prudence is not only odious to men, but also S. Paul says of
it, The wisdom of the flesh is enemy to God. The cause is assigned by Plato,
who affirms that knowledge which is removed from justice, ought rather to be
termed subtlety than prudence, as if he should have said: It is no reason
that a knowledge which is severed from justice, should be called wisdom, but
rather craft, or maliciousness. Of this, the devil evermore serves himself
to do men damage, and S. James said, that this wisdom came not from heaven,
but is earthly, beastly, and devilish.

There is found another spice of wisdom, conjoined with reason and
simplicity, and by this, men know the good and shun the evil: the which,
Galen affirms does appertain to the understanding, for this power is not
capable of maliciousness, doubleness, nor subtilty, nor has the skill how to
do naught, but is wholly upright, just, gentle, and plain. A man endowed with
this sort of wit, is called upright and simple, wherethrough when Demosthenes
went about to creep into the good liking of the judges in an oration which he
made against Eschines, he termed them upright and simple, in respect of the
simplicity of their duty: concerning which, Cicero says, Duty is simple,
and the only cause of all good things. For this sort of wisdom, the cold and
dry of melancholy is a serving instrument, but it behooves that the same be
composed of parts very subtle and delicat.

To the last doubt may be answered, that when a man sets himself to
contemplat some truth, which he would feign know, and cannot by and by find it
out, the same grows for that the brain wants his convenient temperature;
but when a man stands ravished in a contemplation, the natural heat that is
in the vital spirits, and the arteriall blood, run forthwith to the head, and
the temperature of the brain enhaunceth it self, until the same arrive to
the term behooffull. True it is, that much musing, to some does good, and to
some harm: for if the brain want but a little to arrive to that point of
convenient heat, it is requisite that he make but small stay in the
contemplation, and if it pass that point straightwaies the understanding is
driven into a garboile, by the over plentiful presence of the vital spirits,
and so he cannot attain to the notice of the truth. For which cause, we see
many men, who upon the sudden speak very well: but with aduisement are
nothing worth. Others have their understanding so base, either through too much
coldness, or too much drouth, that it is requisite the natural heat abide
along time in the head, to the end the temperature may lift it self up to the
degrees which are wanting, where-through they speak better upon deliberation
then on the sudden.

CHAP. VII.
It is showed, that though the reasonable soul have need of the temperature of
the four first qualities, as well for his abiding in the body, as also to
discourse and syllogize, Yet for all this, it follows not, that the same is
corruptible and mortal.

PLato held it for a matter very certain, that the reasonable soul is a
substance bodilesse, and spiritual: not subject to corruption or mortality,
as that of brute beasts: the which departing from the body, possesses another
better and more quiet life. But this is to be understood (says Plato) if a man
have led his life conformable to reason, for otherwise, it were better that the
soul had remained still in the body, there to suffer the torments, with which
God chastises the wicked. This conclusion is so notable and catholic, that
if he attained the knowledge thereof by the happiness of his wit, with a just
title he came to be called the divine Plato. But albeit the same is such as we
see, yet for all this, Galen could never bring within his conceit, that it was
true, but held it always doubtful, seeing a wise man through the heat of his
brain, to dote, and by applying cold medicines unto him, he comes to his
wits again. In respect whereof, he said he could wish that Plato were now
living, to the end he might ask him how it was possible that the reasonable
soul should be immortal, seeing it altered so easily with heat, with cold,
with moisture, and with drouth: and principally, considering that the same
departs from the body through overmuch heat, or when a man gives over himself
excessiuely to lasciviousness, or is forced to drink poison, and such other
bodily alterations, which accustomably bereave the life. For if it were
bodilesse and spiritual (as Plato affirms) heat, being a material quality,
could not make the same to leese his powers, nor set his operations in a
garboile.

These reasons, brought Galen into a confusion, and Galen dying, went to hell,
and saw by experience that material fire burned the souls, and could not
consume the^: this Physician had knowledge of that Evangelical doctrine, and
could not receive it.
made him wish that some Platonist would resolve him these doubts, and I
believe, that in his life time he met not with any, but after his death
experience showed him that which his understanding could not conceive. For it
is a thing certain, that the infallible certayntie of our immortal soul, is
not gathered from humane reasons, or from arguments which prove that it is
corruptible, for to the one and the other, an answer may easily be shaped, it
is only our faith which makes us certain and assured, that the same endures
for ever. But Galen had small reason, to intricate himself in arguments of so
slight consequence, for the works which seem to be performed by means of
some instrument, it cannot well be gathered in natural Philosophy, that it
proceeds from a defect in the principal agent, if they take not perfection.
That painter who portraieth well when he has a pensill requisite for his art,
falls not in blame, if with a bad pensill he draw ill favored shapes, and of
bad delineation: and it is no good argument to say, that the writer had an
imperfection in his hand, when through default of a well made pen, he is
forced to write with a stick. Galen considering the marvelous works which are
in the universe, and the wisdom and providence by which they were made and
ordained, concluded thereof, that in the world there was a God, though we
behold him not with our corporal eyes, of whom he uttered these words; God
was not made at any time, in as much as he is everlastingly unbegotten. And in
another place he says, That the frame and composition of man's body was not
made by the reasonable soul, nor by the natural heat, but by God, or by some
very wise understanding.

Out of which there may be framed an argument against Galen, and his false
consequence be overthrown, and it is thus: Thou have suspected that the
reasonable soul is corruptible, because if the brain be well tempered, it
fitteth well to discourse and philosophise, and if the same grow hot or cold
beyond due, it doteth, and utters a thousand follies; the same may be
inferred, considering the works which thou speak of, as touching God: for
if he make a man in places temperat (where the heat exceeds not the cold, nor
the moist the dry) he produces him very witty and discreet, and if the
country be intemperate, he breeds the^ all fools and doltish. For the same
Galen affirms that it is a miracle to find a wise man in Scythia, and in
Athens they are all borne Philosophers. To suspect then that God is
corruptible, because with one quality he performs these works well, and
with the contrary they prove ill, Galen himself would not confess, for as
much as he said before, that God was everlasting.

Plato held another way of more certainty, saying, That albeit God be
everlasting, almighty, and of infinite wisdom: yet he proceeds in his
works as a natural agent, and makes himself subject to the disposition of
the four first qualities: in sort, that to beget a man very wise, and like to
himself, it behooves that he provide a place the most temperate of the whole
world, where the heat of the air may not exceed the cold, nor the moist the
dry, and therefore he said, But God as desirous of war, and of wisdom,
having chosen a place which should produce men like unto himself, would that
the same should be first inhabited: And though God would shape a man of great
wisdom in Scithia, or in any other intemperate country, and did not herein
employ his omnipotency, he should of necessity yet prove a fool, through
the contrariety of the first qualities. But Plato would not have inferred (as
Galen did) that God was alterable and corruptible: for that the heat and
coldness would have brought an impediment to his work. The same may be
collected, when a reasonable soul, for that it is seated in a brain inflamed,
cannotvse his discretion and wisdom, and not to think that in respect
thereof, the same is subject to mortality and corruption. The departure out of
the body, and the not being able to support the great heat, nor the other
alterations which are wont to kill men, shows plainly that the same is an act
and substantial form of man's body, and that to abide therein, it requires
certain material dispositions, fitted to the being, which it has of the
soul, and that the instruments with which it must work, be well composed, and
well united, and of that temperature, which is requisite for his operations,
all which failing, it behooves of force, that it err in them, and depart from
the body.

The error of Galen consisted, in that he would verify by the principles of
natural Philosophy, whether the reasonable soul, issuing out of the body,
do forthwith die or not: this being a question, which appertains to another
superior science, and of more certain principles, in which we will prove,
that it is no good argument nor concludes well, that the soul of man is
corruptible, because the same dwells quietly in a body endowed with these
qualities, and departs when they do fail. Neither is this difficult to be
proved: for other spiritual substances, of greater perfection than the
reasonable soul do make choice of place, altered with material qualities, in
which it seems, they take abode with their content: and if there succeed any
contrary dispositions, forthwith they depart, because they cannot endure it:
for it is a thing certain, that there are to be found some dispositions in a
man's body, which the devil coueteth with so great egernesse, as to enjoy
the^, he enters into the man where they rested, wherethrough he becomes
possessed: but the same being corrupted and changed by contrary medicines,
and an alteration being wrought in these black, filthy, and stinking humors,
he naturally comes to depart. This is plainly discerned by experience: for if
there be in a house, great, dark, foul, putrified, melancholicke, and void of
dwellers to make abode therein, the devils soon take it up for their lodging:
but if the same be cleansed, the windows opened, and the sunne-beames admitted
to enter, by and by they get them packing, and specially if it be inhabited by
much company, and that there be meetings and pastimes, and playing on musical
instruments: how greatly harmony and good proportion offends the devil, is
apparently seen by the authority of the divine scripture, where we find
recounted, that David taking a Harp, and playing thereupon, straightwaies made
the devils run away, and depart out of Saul his body, And albeit this matter
have his spiritual understanding: yet I conceive thereby, that music
naturally molesteth the devil, where-through he cannot in any sort endure it.
The people of Israel knew before by experience, that the devil was enemy to
music: and because they had notice hereof, Saules servants spoke these
words: Behold, the evil spirit of the Lord tormenteth thee: let my Lord the
king therefore command, that thy servants, who wait in thy presence, search out
a man who can play on the citherne, to the end, that when the evil spirit of
the Lord takes thee, he may play with his hand, and thou thereby may receive
ease. In the self manner, as there are found out words and coniurations, which
make the devil to tremble; and not to hear them: he abandoneth the place
which he chose for his habitation. So Joseph recounteth that Solomon left in
writing, certain manners of coniuration, by which he not only chased away the
devil for the present, but he never had the hardiness to return again to
that body, from whence he was once so expelled, The same Solomon showed also a
root of so abominable savor in the devils nose, that if it were applied to
the nosthrils of the possessed, he would forthwith shake his ears and run
away. The devil is so slouinly, so malancholike, and so much an enemy to
things neat, cheerful, and clear, that when Christ entered into the region
of Genezaret, S. Matthew recounteth, how certain devils met him in dead
carcases, which they had caught out of their graves, crying, and saying, Jesus
thou son of David, what have thou to do with us, that thou art come before
hand to torment us? we pray thee that if thou be to drive us out of this place
where we are, thou will yet let us enter into that Heard of swine which is
yonder. For which reason, the holy Scripture terms them unclean spirits:
Whence we plainly discern, that not only the reasonable soul, requires such
dispositions in the body, that they may inform it, and be the beginning of all
his operations, but also has need to soiourne therein, as in a place befitting
his nature.

The devils then (being a substance of more perfection) abhor some bodily
qualities, and in the contrary take pleasure and contentment. In sort, that
this of Galen is no good argument, The reasonable soul through excess of
heat departs from the body, ergo it is corruptible, inasmuch as the devil does
the like (as we have said) and yet for all this is not mortal.

But that which to this purpose deserves most note, is, that the devil not
only coueteth places alterable with bodily qualities, to soiourne there at his
pleasure: but also when he will work any thing, which much imports him, he
serves himself with such bodily qualities, as are aidable to that effect. For
if I should demand now, wherein the devil grounded himself, when minding to
beguile Eve, he entered rather into a venomous serpent, than into a horse, a
bear, a woolfe, or any other beast, which were not of so ghastly shape? I wot
not what might be given in answer: well I know that Galen admits not the
sentences of Moses, nor of Christ our redeemer, because (says he) they both
speak without making demonstration: but I have always desired to learn from
some Catholic, the solution of this doubt, and none has yet satisfied me.

This is certain (as already we have proved) that burnt and inflamed choler,
is an humor which teaches the reasonable soul in what sort to practice
treasons and trecheries; and amongst brute beasts, there is But the serpent was
the wiliest beast of the earth, amongst all those whom God has made.
none which so much partaketh of this humor as the serpent, wherethrough more
than all the rest (says the scripture) he is crafty and guilefull. The
reasonable soul although it be the meanest of all the intelligences, partakes
yet the same nature with the devil and the angels. And in like manner: as
there it takes the service of venomous choler, to make a man wily and subtle:
so the devil (being entered into the body of this cruel beast) made himself
the more cunning and deceitful. This manner of Philosophising will not stick
much in the natural Philosophers stomachs, because the same carries some
appearance that it may be so: but that which will breed them more astonishment,
is, that when God would draw the world out of error, and easily teach them the
truth (a work contrary to that which the devil went about) he came in the
shape of a dove, and not of an eagle, nor a peacocke, nor of any other birds of
fairer figure: and the cause known, is this, that the dove partaketh much of
the humor which enclineth to uprightness, to plainness, to truth, and to
simplicity, and wants choler, the instrument of guile and maliciousnes.

None of these things are admitted by Galen, nor by the natural Philosophers:
for they cannot conceive, how the reasonable soul, and the devil (being
spiritual substances) can be altered by material qualities, as are heat,
coldness, moisture, and drouth. For if fire bring in heat to the wood, it is
because they both possess a body, and a quantity, whereof they are the
subject: the which fails in spiritual substances, and admit (as a thing yet
impossible) that bodily qualities, might alter a spiritual substance, what
eyes has the devil, or the reasonable soul, wherewith to see the colors and
shapes of things? or what smelling, to receive savors, or what hearing for
music? or what feeling, to rest offended with much heat, seeing that for all
these, bodily instruments are behooffull. And if the reasonable soul, being
severed from the body, remain agreeued, and receive anguish and sadness, it
is not possible that his nature should rest free from alteration, or not come
to corruption. These difficulties and arguments, perplexed Galen and the other
Philosophers of our times, but with me they conclude nothing. For when
Aristotle affirmed, that the chiefest property which substance had, was to be
subject to accidents: he restrained the same, neither to bodily nor to
spiritual: for the property of the general is equally partaked by the
special, and so he said, that the accidents of the body pass to the
substance of the reasonable soul, and those of the soul, to the body: on
which principle he grounded himself, to write all that which he uttered as
touching Phisnomy, especially, that the accidents by which the powers receive
alteration, are all spiritual, without body, and without quantity, or matter:
and so they grow to multiply in a moment, through their mean, and pass
through a glass window, without breaking the same, And two contrary
accidents, may be extended in one self subject, as much as possibly they can
be. In respect of which self quality, Galen terms them vndiuidable, and
the vulgar Philosophers intentionall: and the matter being in this sort, they
may be very well proportioned with the spiritual substance.

I cannot forgo to think that the reasonable soul, severed from the body, as
also the devil, has a power sightfull, smelling, hearing, and feeling. The
which (me seems) is easy to be proved: For if it be true, that their powers
be known by means of their actions, it is a thing certain, that the devil had
a smelling power, when he smelled that root, which Solomon commanded, should
be applied to the nosthrils of the possessed, And likewise that he had a
hearing power, seeing he heard the music which David made to Saul. To say
then, that the devil received these qualities by his understanding, it is a
matter not auouchable, in the doctrine of the vulgar Philosophers: For this
power is spiritual, and the objects of the five senses are material: and so it
behooves, to seek out some other powers in the reasonable soul, and in the
devil, to which they may carry proportion. And if not, put case that the
soul of the rich Glutton, had obtained at the hands of Abraham, that the
soul of Lazarus should return to the world, to preach to his brethren, and
persuade them that they should become honest men, to the end they might not
pass to that place of torments, where himself abode. I demand now, in what
manner the soul of Lazarus should have known to go to the city, and to those
men's houses, and if the same had met them by the way, in company with others,
whether it could have known them by sight, and been able to diuersifie them,
from those who came with them? and if those brethren of the rich glutton, had
inquired of the same who it was, and who had sent it: whether the same did
partake any power to hear their words? The same may be demanded of the devil
when he followed after Christ our redeemer, hearing him to preach, and seeing
the miracles which he did, and in that disputation which they had together in
the wilderness, with what ears the devil received the words, and the
answers which Christ gave unto him.

Verily, it betokens a want of understanding, to think that the devil, or the
reasonable soul (sundered from the body) cannot know the objects of the five
senses, albeit they want the bodily instruments. For by the same reason, I will
prove unto them, that the reasonable soul, severed from the body, cannot
understand, imagine, nor perform the actions of memory. For if whilst the
same abides in the body, it cannot see being deprived of eyes: neither can it
discourse or remember, if the brain be inflamed. To say then, that the
reasonable soul, severed from the body, cannot discourse, because it has no
brain, is a folly very great, the which is proved by the self history of
Abraham. Son remember, that thou have enjoyed good things in thy life time,
and Lazarus likewise evil, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
And besides all this, there is placed betwixt you and us, a great Chaos, in
sort that those who would pass from hence to you, cannot, nor from you to us.
And he said, I pray thee then O father, that thou will send to my fathers
house, for I have five brothers, that he may yield testimony unto them, so as
they come not also to this place of torments. Whence I conclude, that as these
two souls discoursed between themselves, and the rich glutton remembered, that
he had five brothers in his fathers house, and Abraham brought to his
remembrance, the delicious life which he had lived in the world, together with
Lazarus penance, and this without use of the brain: so also the souls can see
without bodily eyes, hear without ears, taste without a tongue, smell without
nosthrils, and touch without sinews and without flesh, and that much better
beyond comparison. The like may be understood of the devil, for he partaketh
the same nature with the reasonable soul.

All these doubts, the soul of the rich glutton will very well resolve: of
whom S. Luke recounteth, that being in hell, he lifted up his eyes, and beheld
Lazarus, who was in Abraham's bosom, and with a loud voice said: Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, send Lazarus, that he may dip the point of his
finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. Out of
the passed doctrine, and out of that which is there red, we gather, that the
fire of hell burns the souls, and is material as this of ours, and that the
same annoied the rich glutton and the other souls (by Gods ordinance) with his
heat, and that if Lazarus had carried to him a pitcher of fresh water, he
should have taken great refreshment thereof: and the reason is very plain,
for if that soul could not endure to abide in the body, through excessive
heat of the Fever, and when the same drank fresh water, the soul felt
refreshment, why may not we conceive the like, when the soul is united with
the flames of the fire infernal? The rich Gluttons lifting up of his eyes, his
thirsty tongue, and Lazarus finger, are all names of the powers of the soul,
that so the scriptures might express them. Those who walk not in this path,
and ground not themselves on natural philosophy, utter a thousand follies:
but yet hence it cannot be concluded, that if the reasonable soul partake
grief and sorrow (for that his nature is altered by contrary qualities)
therefore the same is corruptible or mortal: For ashes, though they be
compounded of the four elements, and of action and power: yet there is no
natural agent in the world, which can corrupt the^, or take from them, the
qualities that are agreeable to their nature. The natural temperature of
ashes, we all know to be cold and dry, but though we cast them never so much
into the fire, they will not leese their radical coldness which they enjoy:
and albeit they remain 100000. years in the water, it is impossible that
(being taken thence) they hold any natural moisture of their own: and yet for
all this, we cannot but grant that by fire they receive heat, and by water
moisture. But these two qualities are superficial in the ashes, and endure a
small time in the subject; for taken from the fire, forthwith they become cold,
and from the water, they abide not moist an hour.

But there is offered a doubt, in this discourse and reasoning of the rich
Glutton with Abraham, and that is, How the soul of Abraham was endowed with
better reason, than that of the rich man: it being alleged before, that all
reasonable souls (issued out of the body) are of equal perfection and
knowledge? whereto we may answer in one of these two manners. The first is,
that the Science and knowledge, which the soul purchases, whilst it
remains in the body, is not lost when a man dies, but rather grows more
perfect, for he is freed from some errors. The soul of Abraham, departed out
of this life, replenished with wisdom, and with many revelations, and secrets
which God communicated unto him, as his very friend: but that of the rich
glutton, it behooued that of necessity it should depart away ignorant: first,
by reason of his sin, which creates ignorance in a man: and next, for that
riches herein work a contrary effect unto poverty: this gives a man wit,
as hereafter we may well prove, and prosperity reaueth it away. There may
also another answer be given after our doctrine, and it is this, that the
matter of which these two souls disputed, was school divinity: For to know
whether abiding in hell, there were place for mercy, and whether Lazarus might
pass unto hell, and whether it were convenient to send a deceased person to
the world, who should give notice to the living, of the torments which the
damned there endured; are all schoole-points, whose decision appertains to
the understanding, as hereafter I will make proof, and amongst the first
qualities, there is none which so much garboileth this power, as excessive
heat, with which the rich Glutton was so tormented: But the soul of Abraham,
made his abode in a place most temperate, where it inioyed great delight and
refreshment: and therefore it bred no great wonder, that the same was better
able to dispute. I concluding then that the reasonable soul, and the devil,
in their operations, use the service of material qualities, and that by some
they rest agreeued, and by other some they receive contentment. And for this
reason, they covet to make abode in some places, and fly from some other, and
yet notwithstanding are not corruptible.

CHAP. VIII.
How there may be assigned to every difference of wit, his Science, which
shall be correspondent to him in particular: and that which is repugnant and
contrary, be abandoned.

ALl arts (says Cicero) are placed under certain universal principles,
which being learned with study and travail, finally we so grow to attain
unto them: but the art of poesy is in this so special, as if God or nature
make not a man a Poet: little auailes it, to deliver him the precepts and rules
of versifieng. For which cause he said thus, The studying and learning of other
matters consists in precepts and in arts: but a Poet takes the course of
nature it self, and is stirred up by the forces of the mind, and as it were
inflamed by a certain divine spirit. But herein Cicero swarued from reason:
for verily there is no Science or Art, devised in the commonwealth, which if a
man wanting capacity for himself to apply, he shall reap any profit
thereof; albeit he toil all the days of his life in the precepts and rules of
the same: But if he apply himself to that which is agreeable with his
natural ability, we see that he will learn in two days. The like we say of
Poesy without any difference, that if he who has any answerable nature,
give himself to make verses, he performs the same with great perfection, and
if otherwise, he shall never be good Poet.

This being so, it seems now high time, to learn by way of Art what
difference of Science, is answerable in particular, to what difference of wit:
to the end, that every one may understand with distinction (after he is
acquainted with his own nature) to what Art he has a natural disposition.
The Arts and Sciences which are gotten by the memory, are these following,
Latin, Grammar, or of whatsoever other language, the Theoricke of the laws,
Divinity positive, Cosmography, and Arithmeticke.

Those which appertain to the understanding, are School divinity, the
Theoricke of Physic, logic, natural and moral Philosophy, and the
practicke of the laws, which we term pleading. From a good imagination,
spring all the Arts and Sciences, which consist in figure, correspondence,
harmony, and proportion: such are Poetry, Eloquence, Music, and the skill
of preaching: the practice of Physic, the Mathematicals, Astrology, and the
governing of a Commonwealth, the art of Warfare, Paynting, drawing, writing,
reading, to be a man gracious, pleasant, neat, witty in managing, and and all
the engines and devises which artificers make: besides a certain special gift,
whereat the vulgar maruelleth, and that is, to endite diverse matters, unto
four, who write together, and yet all to be penned in good sort. Of all this,
we cannot make evident demonstration, nor prove every point by it self: For
it were an infinite piece of work, notwithstanding by making proof thereof in
three or four Sciences, the same reason will afterward prevail for the rest.

In the catalogue of Sciences, which we said appertained to the memory, we
placed the latin tongue, and such other, as all the nations in the world do
speak: the which no wise man will deny: for tongues were devised by men, that
they might communicate amongst themselves, and express one to another their
conceits, without that in them there lie hid any other mystery or natural
principles: for that the first deuisers agreed together, and after their best
liking, (as Aristotle says) framed the words, and gave to every each his
signification. From hence arose so great a number of words, and so many
manners of speech so far besides rule and reason, that if a man had not a good
memory, it were impossible to learn them with any other power. How little the
understanding and the imagination make for the purpose, to learn languages and
manners of speech, is easily proved by childhood, which being the age wherein
man most wants these two powers, yet (says Aristotle) children learn any
language more readily than elder men, though these are endowed with a better
discourse of reason. And without farther speech, experience plainly proves
this, for so much as we see, that if a Biscane of 30. or 40. years age, come
to dwell in Castilia, he will never learn this language: but if he be but a
boy, within two or three years you would think him born in Toledo. The same
befalles in the latin tongue, and in those of all the rest of the world: for
all languages hold one self consideration. Then if in the age when memory
chiefly reigns, and the understanding and the imagination least, languages
are better learned, than when there grows defect of memory, and an increase
of understanding, it falls out apparent that they are purchased by the
memory, and by none other power. Languages (says Aristotle) cannot be
gathered out by reason, nor consist in discourse or disputations, for which
cause, it is necessary to hear the word from another, and the signification
which it bears, and to keep the same in mind, and so he proves that if a
man be borne deaffe, it follows of necessity that he be also dumb, for he
cannot hear from another, the articulation of the names, nor the signification
which was given them by the first deviser.

That languages are at pleasure, and a conceit of men's brains, and naught else,
is plainly proved; for in them all, may the sciences be taught, and in each is
to be said and expressed, that which by the other is inferred. Therefore none of
the grave authors attended the learning of strange tongues, thereby to deliver
their conceits: but the Greeks wrote in Greek, the Romans in Latin, the
Hebrews in the Hebrew language, and the Moors in Arabique, and so do I in my
Spanish, because I know this better than any other The Romans as lords of the
world, finding it was necessary to have one common language, by which all
nations might have commerce together, and themselves be able to hear and
understand such as came to demand justice, and things appertayning to their
government, commanded that in all places of there empire their should schools
be kept, where the Latin tongue might be taught, and so this usage has
endured even to our time.

Schoole-diuinitie, it is a matter certain that it appertains to the
understanding, presupposing that the operations of this power, are to
distinguish, conclude, discourse, judge, and make choice; for nothing is done
in this faculty, which is not to doubt for inconveniences, to answer with
distinction, and against the answer to conclude that, which is gathered in good
consequence, and to return to replication, until the understanding find where
to settle. But the greatest proof which in this case may be made, is to give
to understand with how great difficulty the latin tongue is joined with
School divinity, and how ordinarily it falls not out, that one self man is
a good latinist, and a profound scholar: at which effect some curious heads,
who have lighted hereon, much maruelling procured to search out the cause from
whence the same might spring, and by their conceit, found that School
divinity, being written in an easy and common language, and the great
latinists, having accustomed their ear, to the well sounding and fine style of
Cicero: they cannot apply themselves to this other. But well should it fall out
for the latinists, if this were the cause: For, forcing their hearing by use,
they should meet with a remedy for this infirmity: but to speak truth, it
is rather an headache than an eare-sore. Such as are skillful in the latin
tongue, it is necessary that they have a great memory: for otherwise, they
can never become so perfect in a tongue which is not theirs: and because a
great and happy memory is as it were contrary to a great and high raised
understanding, in one subject, where the one is placed, the other is chased
away.

Hence remains it, that he who has not so deep, and lofty an understanding
(a power whereto appertains, to distinguish, conclude, discourse, judge, and
choose) cannot soon attain the skill of School divinity. Let him that will
not allow this reason for current payment, read S. Thomas, Scot, Durand, and
Caietane, who are the principal in this faculty, and in them he shall find
many excellent points, endited and written, in a style very easy and common.
And this proceeded from none other cause, than that these grave authors, had
from their childhood a feeble memory, for profiting in the latin tongue. But
coming to logic, metaphisicke, and School divinity, they reaped that great
fruit, which we see, because they had great understanding.

I can speak of a school divine (and many other can verify the same, that
knew and conuersed with him) who being a principal man in this faculty: not
only spoke not finely, nor with well shaped sentences, in imitation of Cicero,
but whilst he red in a chair, his scholars noted in him, that he had less
than a mean knowledge in the latin tongue: Therefore they councelled him (as
men ignorant of this doctrine) that he should secretly, steal some hour of
the day from School divinity, and employ the same in reading of Cicero. Who
knowing this counsel to proceed from his good friends, not only procured to
remedy it privily, but also publicly, after he had red the matter of the
trinity, and how the divine word might take flesh, he meant to hear a lecture
of the latin tongue, and it fell out a matter worthy consideration, that in
the long time while he did so, he not only learned nothing of new, but grew
welneere, to leese that little latin which he had before, and so at last was
driven to read in the vulgar. Pius the fourth, enquiring what divines were of
most special note at the council of Trent, he was told of a most singular
Spanish divine, whose solutions, answers, arguments, and distinctions, were
worthy of admiration: the Pope therefore, desirous to see and know so rare a
man: sent word unto him, that he should come to Rome, and render him account of
what was done in the Council. He came, and the Pope did him many favors,
amongst the rest, commanded him to be covered, and taking him by the hand, led
him walking to Castle S. Angelo, and speaking very good latin, showed him his
devise, touching certain fortifications, which he was then about to make the
Castle stronger, asking his opinion in some particulars: but he answered the
Pope so intricatly, for that he could not speak latin, that the Spanish
Ambassador, who at that time was Don Jews de Requesens, great Commander of
Castilia, was feign to step forth to grace him with his latin, and to turn
the Popes discourse into another matter. Finally, the Pope said to his
Chamberlains, it was not possible that this man had so much skill in divinity,
as they made report, seeing he had so little knowledge in the latin tongue.
But if as he proved him in this tongue, which is a work of memory, and in
platforming, and building, which belong to the imagination, so he had tried him
in a matter appertaining to the understanding, he would have uttered divine
considerations. In the Catalogue of Sciences, which appertain to the
imagination, we placed poetry amongst the first, and that not by chance nor for
want of consideration, but thereby to give notice, how far off, those who
have a special gift in poetry, are from understanding. For we shall find that
the self difficulty, which the latin tongue holds in uniting with School
divinity, is also found (yea and beyond comparison far greater) between
this faculty, and the art of versifiyng: and the same is so contrary to the
understanding, that by the self reason, for which man is likely to prove
singular therein, he may take his leave of all the other sciences, which
appertain to this power, and also to the latin tongue through the
contrariety, which a good imagination bears to a great memory.

For the first of these two, Aristotle found not the reason, but yet confirmed
mine opinion by experience, saying: Mark, a Citizen of Siracusa, was best
Poet, when he lost his understanding, and the cause is, for that the difference
of the imagination, to which Poetry belongs, is that which requires three
degrees of heat, and this quality so extended (as we have before expressed)
breeds an utter loss of the understanding, the which was observed by the same
Aristotle. For he affirms, that this Mark the Siracusane, growing to more
temperature, enjoyed a better understanding, but yet he attained not to
versifie so well, through default of heat, with which, this difference of the
imagination works. And this, Cicero wanted when going about to describe in
verse, the heroical actions of his consulship, and the happy birth of Rome,
in that she was governed by him: he said thus, O fortunatam natam me consule
Romam. For which cause, Iuuenall not conceiving, that to a man endowed with so
rare a wit, as Cicero, poetry was a matter repugnant, did Satirically nip him,
saying, If thou had rehearsed the Philippicks against Marck Antony,
answerable to the tune of so bad a verse, it should not have cost thy life.

But worse did Plato understand the same, when he said, that Poetry was no
humane Science, but a divine revelation. For if the Poets were not ravished
besides themselves, or full of God, they could not make nor utter any thing
worthy regard. And he proves it by a reason, auouching, that whilst a man
abides in his sound judgment, he cannot versifie. But Aristotle reprooueth
him, for affirming that the art of Poetry is not an ability of man, but a
revelation of God: And he admits, that a wise man, and who is free possessed
of his judgment, cannot be a poet: and the reason is, because where there
rests much understanding, it behooves of force, that there befall want of the
imagination, whereto appertains the Art of versifieng: which may the more
apparently be proved, knowing that Socrates after he had learned the art of
Poetry, for all his precepts and rules, could not make so much as one verse:
and yet notwithstanding, he was by the oracle of Apollo adjudged the wisest man
of the world.

I hold it then for certain, that the boy who will prove of a notable vain
for versifieng, and to whom, upon every slight consideration, consonances
offer themselves, shall ordinarily incur hazard not to learn well the Latin
tongue, Logic, Philosophy, Physic, Schoole-diuinitie, and the other arts
and sciences, which appertain to the understanding, and to the memory. For
which cause, we see by experience, that if we charge such a boy, to form a
nominative without book, he will not learn it in two or three days: but if
there be a leaf of paper written in verse, to be recited in any comedy, in
two turns, he fixes them in his memory. These loose themselves by reading
books of chivalry: Orlando, Boccace, Diana of Monte maggior, and such other
devises: for all these are works of the imagination. What shall we say then of
the harmony of the Organs, and of the singing men of the Chapel, whose wits
are most unprofitable for the latin tongue, and for all other Sciences, which
appertain to the understanding and to the memory? the like reason serves in
playing on instruments, and all sorts of music. By these three examples,
which we have yielded, of the Latin, of Schoole-diuinitie, and of Poetry, we
shall understand this doctrine to be true, and that we have duly made this
partition, albeit we make not the like mention in the other arts.

Writing also, discovers the imagination, and so we see, that few men of good
understanding, do write a fair hand, and to this purpose I have noted many
examples: and specially I have known a most learned Schoole-diuine, who
shaming at himself to see how bad a hand he wrote, durst not write a letter to
any man, nor to answer those which were sent to him: so as he determined with
himself, to get a Scriuener secretly to his house, who should teach him to
frame a reasonable letter that might pass, and having for many days taken
pains herein, it proved lost labor, and he reaped no profit thereby.
Wherefore, as tired out, he forsook the practice: and the teacher, who had
taken him in hand, grew astonished, to see a man so learned in his profession,
to be so untoward for writing. But my self, who rest well assured that writing
is a work of the imagination, held the same for a natural effect. And if any
man be desirous to see and note it, let him consider the Scholars, who get
their livings in the Universities, by copying out of writings in good form,
and he shall find, that they can little skill of Grammar, Logic, and
Philosophy, and if they study Physic or Divinity, they fish nothing near
the bottom. The boy then, who with his pen can trick a horse to the life, and
a man in good shape, and can make a good pair of it serves little to employ
him in any sort of learning, but will do best, to set him to some painter, who
by art may bring forward his nature.

To read well and with readiness, discovers also a certain spice of the
imagination, and if the same be very effectual, it booteth little to spend
much time at his book, but shall do better, to set him to get his living by
reading of processes. Here a thing note-worthy, offers it self, and that
is, that the difference of the imagination, which makes men eloquent and
pleasant, is contrary to that, which is behoofful for a man to read with
facility, where-through none, who is promptwitted, can learn to read without
stumbling, and putting too somewhat of his own head.

To play well at Primero, and to face and vie, and to hold and give over when
time serves, and by conjectures to know his adversaries game, and the skill of
discarding, are all works of the imagination. The like we say of playing at
Cent, and at Triumph, though not so far-forth as the Primero of Almaigne, and
the same, not only makes proof and demonstration of the difference of the
wit, but also discovers all the virtues and vices in a man. For at every
moment, there are offered occasions in this play, by which a man shall
discover, what he would do in matters of great importance, if opportunity
served.

Chesse-play, is one of the things, which best discovers the imagination: for
he that makes ten or twelve fair draughts one after another on the
Chesse-boord, gives an evil token of profiting in the Sciences which belong to
the understanding, and to the memory, unless it fall out, that he make an
union of two or three powers, as we have already noted. And if a very learned
Schoole-diuine (of mine acquaintance) had been skilled in this doctrine, he
should have got notice of a matter, which made him very doubtful. He used to
play often with a servant of his, and lighting mostly on the loss, told him,
much moved: Sirrah, how comes it to pass, that thou who can skill neither of
Latin, nor Logic, nor Divinity, though thou have studied it, yet beatest me
that am full of Scot and S. Thomas? Is it possible that thou should have a
better wit than I? verily I cannot believe it, except the devil reveal unto
thee what draughts thou should make: and the mystery was, that he had great
understanding, with which he attained the delicacies of Scot and Thomas, but
wanted that difference of imagination, which serves for Chesse-play, whereas
his servant, had an ill understanding, and a bad memory, but a good
imagination. The Scholars, who have their books well righted, and their
chamber well dressed, and clean kept, every thing in his due place and order,
have a certain difference of imagination, very contrary to the
understanding, and to the memory.

Such a like wit, have men who go neat, and handsomely apparelled, who look all
about their cape for a mote, and take dislike at any one wry plait of their
garment, this (assuredly) springs from their imagination. For if a man, that
had no skill in versifieng, nor towardliness thereunto, chance to fall in
love, suddenly (says Plato) he becomes a Poet, and very trim and handsome:
for love heateth and dries his brain, and these are qualities which quicken
the imagination: the like (as Iuuenal notes) anger does effect, which passion
heateth also the brain:

Anger makes verse, if nature but deny. Gracious talkers, and imitaters, and
such as can hold at bay, have a certain difference of imagination, very
contrary to the understanding, and to the memory. For which cause they never
prove learned in Grammar, Logic, Schoole-diuinitie, Physic, or the laws.
If then they be witty in managing, toward for every matter they take in hand,
ready in speech, and answering to the purpose: these are fit to serve in Courts
of justice, for sollicitors, atturnies, merchants, and factors to buy and sell,
bur not for learning. Herein the vulgar is much deceived seeing them so ready
at all hands, and them seems, that if such gave themselves to learning, they
would prove notable fellows: but in substance there is no wit more repugnant
to matters of learning, than these. Children that are slow of speech, have a
moistnes in their tongue and also in their brain, but that wearing away, in
process of time they become very eloquent, and great talkers, through the
great memory which they get when that moisture is tempered.

This we know by the things tofore rehearsed, befell that famous Orator
Demosthenes, of whom we said, that Cicero marvelled how being so blunt of
speech when he was a boy, growing greater he became so eloque^t. Children also,
who have a good voice, and warble in the throat, are most untoward for all
Sciences, and the reason is, for that they are cold and moist. The which two
qualities, being united, we said before, that they breed a damage in the
reasonable part. Scholars, who learn their lesson in such manner as their
master delivers it, and so recite the same, it shows a token of a good
memory, but the understanding shall abie the bargain. There are offered in
this doctrine, some problemes and doubts: the answer whereunto, will perhaps
yield more light, to conceive, that what we have propounded, does carry truth.
The first is, whence it grows that great Latinists are more arrogant and
presumptuous on their knowledge, than men very well skilled in that kind of
learning which appertains to the understanding? in sort, that the proverb,
to let us know what manner of fellow a Grammarian is, says; That a Grammarian
is arrogancy it self. The second is, whence it comes that the Latin
tongue, is so repugnant to the Spanish capacities, and so natural to the
French, Italian, Dutch, English, and other northernly nations, as we see in
their works, which by their good Latin phrase, straightwaies prove the
author to have been a stranger, and by the barbarousnesse and ill composition,
we know the same for a Spaniards. The third is, for what reason the things that
are spoken and written in the Latin tongue, sound better, carry a more
loftiness, and have greater delicacie, than any other language how good
soever? we having avouched before, that all languages, are naught else, but a
conceit at pleasure, of those who first devised them, without holding any
foundation in nature. The fourth doubt is, seeing all Sciences, which
appertain to the understanding, are written in Latin, how it can frame, that
such as want memory, may read and study them in those books, whilst the
Latin is (by this reason) so repugnant unto them.

To the first problem we answer, that to know whether a man have defect of
understanding, there falls out no token more certain, than to see him lofty,
big looked, presumptuous, desirous of honor, standing on terms, and full of
ceremonies: And the reason is, for that all these be works, of a difference of
the imagination, which requires no more but one degree of heat, wherewith the
much moisture (which is requisite for the memory) accords very sitly: for
it wants force to resolve the same. Contrariwise it is an infallible token,
that if a man be naturally lowly, despiser of himself, and his own matters,
and that not only he vanteth not, nor praises himself, but feels displeasure
at the comme^dations given him by others, and takes shame of places and
ceremonies pertaining to honor, such a one may well be pointed at for a man of
great understanding, but of small imagination and memory. I said naturally
lowly: for if he be so by cunning, this is no certain sign. Hence it comes,
that as the Grammarians are men of great memory, and make an union with this
difference of the imagination: so it is of force, that they fail in
understanding, and be such as the proverb paints them forth.

To the second problem may be answered, that Galen enquiring out the wit of
men by way of the temperarature of the region where they inhabit, says, that
those who make abode under the North, have all of the^ want of understanding:
but those who are seated between the North and the burned Zone, are of great
wisdom, Which situation, answers directly to our region. And verily so it
is: for Spain is not so cold as the places subjected to the Pole, nor so hot
as the burned Zone. The same sentence does Aristotle produce, demanding, for
what cause, such as inhabit very cold regions partake less understanding than
those who are born in the hotter, and in the answer he very homely handles
the Flemmish, Dutch, English, and French, saying that their wits are like those
of drunkards: for which cause they cannot search out, nor understand the nature
of things, and this is occasioned by the much moisture, wherewith their brain is
replenished, and the other parts of the body: the which is known by the
whiteness of the face, and the golden color of the hair, and by that it is a
miracle, to find a Dutchman bald: and above this they are generally great, and
of tall stature, through the much moisture, which breeds increase of flesh.
But in the Spaniards, we discern the quite contrary: they are somewhat brown,
they have black hair, of mean stature, and for the most part, we see them
bald, Which disposition (says Galen) grows, for that the brain is hot and
dry. And if this be true, it behooves of force, that they be endowed with a
bad memory, and a good understanding, but the Dutchmen possess a great
memory, and small understanding. For which cause, the one can no skill of
Latin, and the other easily learn the same. The reason which Aristotle
alleged, to prove the slender understanding of those who dwell under the
North, is, that the much cold of the country calls back the natural heat
inward, by counterposition, and suffers not the same to spread abroad: for
which cause, it partaketh much moisture, and much heat, and these unite a
great memory for the languages, and a good imagination; with which they make
clocks, bring the water to Toledo, devise engines, and works of rare skill,
which the Spaniards through defect of imagination cannot frame themselves unto:
But set them to Logic, to Philosophy, to Schoole-diuinitie, to Physic, or
to the Laws, and beyond comparison a Spanish wit, with his barbarous terms,
will deliver more rare points than a stranger. For if you take from them this
finenesse and quaint phrase of writing, there is nothing in them of rare
invention or exquisite choice.

For confirmation of this doctrine, Galen said that in Scithia, one only man
became a Philosopher: but in Athens there were many such: as if he should say,
that in Scithia, which is a Province under the North, it grew a miracle to see
a Philosopher, but in Athens they were all borne wise and skillful. But albeit
Philosophy and the other Sciences rehearsed by us, be repugnant to the
Northren people; yet they profit well in the Mathematicals, and in Astrology,
because they have a good imagination.

The answer of the third problem depends upon a question, much hammered
between Plato and Aristotle: the one says that there are proper names, which
by their nature carry signification of things, and that much wit is requisite
to devise them. And this opinion is favored by the divine scripture, which
affirms that Adam gave every of those things which God set before him, the
proper name that best was fitting for them. But Aristotle will not grant, that
in any tongue there can be found any name, or manner of speech, which can
signify ought of it own nature, for that all names are devised and shaped
after the conceit of men. Whence we see by experience, that wine has above 60.
names, and bread as many, in every language his, and of none we can avouch
that the same is natural and agreeable thereunto, for then all in the world
would use but that. But for all this, the sentence of Plato is truer: for put
case that the first deuisers fained the words at their pleasure and will, yet
was the same by a reasonable instinct, communicated with the ear, with the
nature of the thing, and with the good grace and well sounding of the
pronunciation, not making the words over short or long, nor enforcing an
unseemly framing of the mouth in time of utterance, settling the accent in his
convenient place, and observing the other conditions, which a tongue should
possess, to be fine, and not barbarous.

Of this self opinion with Plato, was a Spanish gentleman; who made it his
pastime to write books of chivalry, because he had a certain kind of
imagination, which entiseth men to faining and leasings. Of him it is reported,
that being to bring into his works a furious Giant, he went many days
devising a name, which might in all points be answerable to his fierceness:
neither could he light upon any, until playing one day at cards in his
friends house, he heard the owner of the house say, Ho sirrah, boy,
traquitantos, the Gentleman so soon as he Traquitantos signifies, Bring
hither tokens, or counters.
heard this name Traquitantos, suddenly he took the same for a word of full
sound in the ear, and without any longer looking arose, saying; gentlemen I
will play no more, for many days are past sithence I have gone seeking out a
name, which might fit well with a furious Giant, whom I bring into those
volumes which I now am making, and I could not find the same, until I came to
this house, where ever I receive all courtesy. The curiosity of this
gentleman in calling the Giant Traquitantos, had also those first men, who
devised the Latin tongue, in that they found out a language of so good sound
to the ear. Therefore we need not marvel that the things which are spoken and
written in Latin, do sound so well, and in other tongues so ill: for their
first inuenters were barbarous.

The last doubt I have been forced to allege, for satisfieng of diverse who
have stu^bled thereon, though the solution be very easy: for those who have
great understanding are not utterly deprived of memory, in as much as if they
wanted the same, it would fall out impossible that the understanding could
discourse or frame reasons; for this power is that which keeps in hand the
matter and the fantasies, whereon it behooves to use speculation. But for that
the same is weak of three degrees of perfection, whereto men may attain in
the Latin tongue (namely, to understand, to write, and to speak the same
perfitly) it can hardly pass the first without fault and stumbling.

CHAP. IX.
How it may be proved that the eloquence and finenesse of speech cannot find
place in men of great understanding.

ONe of the graces by which the vulgar is best persuaded, and thinks Cicero
says that the honor of man is to have wit, and of wit to be applied to
eloquence.
that a man has much knowledge and wisdom, is, to hear him speak with great
eloquence, to have a smooth tongue, plenty of sweet and pleasant words, and to
allege many examples fit for the purpose that is in hand: but this (verily)
springs from an union, which the memory makes with the imagination, in a
degree and measure of heat, that cannot resolve the moisture of the brain, and
serves to lift up the This is recounted by Plato in his dialogue of knowledge,
and in his banquet.
figures, and cause them to boil, where-through are discovered many conceits
and points to be uttered. In this union it is impossible that discourse may be
found; for we have already said and proved heretofore, that this power
greatly abhors heat, and moisture cannot support it. Which doctrine, if the
Athenians had known, they would not so much have marvelled to see so wise a
man as Socrates not to have the gift of utterance; of whom, those who
understood how great his knowledge was, said, that his words and his sentences,
were like a wodden chest knobby and nothing trimmed on the outside, but that in
opening the same, within it held liniamentes and portraitures of rare
admiration. In the same ignorance rest they, who attempting to render a reason
of Aristotle's bad style and obscurenes, said: That of set purpose, and because
he would that his works should carry authority, he wrote under riddles, and
with so slender ornament of words, and simple manner of deliverance. And if we
consider also the so harsh proceeding Cicero praising the eloquence of Plato,
said: That if Jupiter should have spoken Greek, he would have spoken as Plato
did.
of Plato, and the breefnesse with which he writes, the obscurity of his
reasons, and the ill placing of the parts of his tale, we shall find that
naught else save this, occasioned the same. For such also we find the works of
Hippocrates, the thefts which he commits of Nowns and Verbs, the ill
disposition of his sentences, and the weak foundation of his reasons, to
stuff out the empty places of his doctrine. What will you more? unless, that
when he would yield a very particular reckoning to his friend Damagetus, how
Artaxerxses king of Persia, had sent for him, promising him as much gold and
silver as he list himself, and to make him one of the great ones of his
kingdom: having plenty of answers to so many demands, he writ only thus; The
king of Persia has sent for me, not knowing that with me the respect of
wisdom is greater than that of gold, Farewell.

Which matter, if it had passed through the hands of any other man of good
imagination and memory, a whole leaf of paper would not have sufficed to set
it forth.

But who would have been so hardy to allege for the purpose of this doctrine,
the example of S. Paul, and to affirm, that he was a man of great
understanding and little memory, and that with these his forces, he could not
skill of toungs, nor deliver his mind in them polishedly and with
gracefulness, if himself had not so said; I reckon not my self to have done
less than the greatest Apostles, for though I be ignorant of speech, yet am I
not so in understanding: as if he should say; I confess that I have not the
gift of utterance, but for science and knowledge, none of the greatest Apostles
goes beyond me. Which difference of wit was so appropriat to the preaching of
the Gospel, that choice could not be made of a better, for, that a preacher
should be eloquent, and have great furniture of queint terms, is not a matter
convenient: for the force of the Orators of those days, appeared in making the
hearers repute things false for true; and what the vulgar held for good and
behooffull, they, using the precepts of their art, persuaded the contrary, and
maintained that it was better to be poor than rich, sick than whole, fond
than wise, and other points manifestly repugnant to the opinion of the vulgar.
For which cause the Hebrews termed them Geragnin, that is to say, Deceivers.
Of the same opinion was Cato the more, and held the abode of these in Rome for
very dangerous, in as much as the forces of the Roman empire, were grounded on
arms: and they began then to persuade that the Roman youth should abandon
those, and give themselves to this kind of wisdom; therefore (in brief) he
procured them to be banished out of Rome, forbidding them ever to return
again. If God then had sought out an eloquent preacher, who should have used
ornament of speech, and that he had entered into Athens or Rome, auouching that
in Jerusalem the Jews had crucified a man, who was very God, and that he died
of his own accord to redeem sinners, and rose again the third day, and
ascended into heaven, where he now sits; what would the hearers have
thought, save that these things were some of those follies and vanities which
the Orators were wont to persuade by the force of their art? For which cause,
S. Paul said: For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel, and
that not in wisdom of words, least the cross of Christ might prove in vain.
The wit of S. Paul was appropriat to this service, for he had a large
discourse to prove in the synagogues and amongst the Gentiles, That Jesus Christ
was the Messiah promised in the law, and that it was bootlesse to look for any
other: and herewithall he was of slender memory, and therefore he could not
skill to speak with ornament and sweet and well relished terms, and this was
that which was behooffull for preaching of the gospel. I will not maintain
(for all this) that S. Paul had not the gift of toungs, but that he could
speak all languages as he did his own, neither am I of opinion, that to
defend the name of Christ, the forces of his great understanding sufficed, if
there had not been joined therewithal the mean of grace, and a special aid
which God to that purpose bestowed upon him: it suffices me only to say That
supernatural gifts work better, when they light upon an apt disposition, than
if a man were of himself untoward and blockish. Hereto alludeth that doctrine
of S. Hierome, which is found in his proem upon Esaias and Hieremie; where asking
what the cause is, that it being one self holy ghost which spoke by the mouth
of Hieremie and of Esaias, one of them propounded the matters which he wrote with
so great elegancie, and Hieremie scarsely wist how to speak: to which doubt he
answers, that the holy ghost applies it self to the natural manner of
proceeding of each Prophet, without that his grace varrieth their nature, or
teaches the^ the language wherein they are to publish their prophecy.
Therefore we must understand, that Esaias was a noble gentleman brought up in
court, and in the city of Jerusalem, and for this cause, had ornament and
polishednesse of speech; But Jeremy was borne and reared in a village of
Jerusalem, called Anathochites, blunt and rude in behavior, as a country
person, and of such a style the holy ghost used the service in the prophecy
which he commanded unto him. The same may be said of S. Paul's Epistles, that
the holy Ghost dwelled in him, when he wrote them, to the end he might not
err, but the language and manner of speech was S. Paul's natural, applied to the
doctrine which he wrote; for the truth of Shool-diuinitie abhors many words.
But the practice of languages, and the ornament and polishment of speech may
very well be joined with positive divinity: for this faculty appertains to
the memory, and is naught else save a mass of words and catholic sentences,
taken out of the holy doctors, and the divine Scripture, and preserved in this
power, as the Grammarian does with the flowers of the Poets, Virgill, Horace,
Terence, and other Latin authors whom he reads: who meeting occasion to
rehearse them, he comes out straightwaies with a shred of Cicero, or
Quintilian, whereby he makes his hearers know what he is able to do.

Those that are endowed with this union of the imagination and of the memory,
and travail in gathering the fruit of whatsoever has been said or written in
their profession, and serve themselves therewith at convenient occasions, with
great ornament of words and gracious fashions of speech, for that so many
things are already found out in all the Sciences, it seems to them who know
not this doctrine, that they are of great profoundnesse; whereas in truth they
hold much of the Ass: for if you grow to try them in the fou^dations of that
which they allege and affirm, they then discover their wants. And the reason
is, because so great a flowing of speech cannot be united with the
understanding, whereto appertains to search out the bottom of the truth. Of
these the divine scripture said, Where there is plenty of words, there
reigns great scarsitie: as if he had said, that a man of many words
ordinarily wants understanding and wisdom.

Those who are endowed with this union of the imagination and memory, enter
with great courage to interpret the divine scripture, it seeming to them, that
because they understand well the Hebrew, Greek and Latin tongues, they have
the way made smooth to gather out the very spirit of the letter: but verily
they ruinate themselves; first, because the words of the divine text and his
manners of speech, have many other significations, besides those which Cicero
understood in Latin. And then because their understanding is defective, which
power verifieth whether a sense be Catholic or depraved: and this is it which
may make choice by the grace supernatural, of two or three senses, that are
gathered out of the letter, which is most true and catholic.

Beguilings (says Plato) never befall in things unlike and very different,
but when many things meet which carry near resemblance, For if we set before
a sharp sight, a little salt, sugar, meal, and lyme, all well pounded and
beaten to powder; and each one severally by it self: what should he do who
wanted taste, if with his eyes he should be set to discern every of these
powders from other without erring? saying; this is salt, this sugar, this
meal, and this lyme. For my part I believe he would be deceived through the
great resemblance, which these things have between themselves. But if there
were a heap of salt, one of sugar, one of corn, one of earth, and one of
stones, it is certain he would not be deceived in giving each of these heaps
his name, though his sight were dim, for each is of a diverse figure. The same
we see befalls every day in the senses and spirits, which the divines give
to the holy scripture, of which two or three being looked on, at first sight
they all carry a show to be Catholic, and to agree well with the letter, but
yet in truth are not so, neither the holy Ghost so meant. To choose the best
of these senses, and to refuse the bad, it is a thing assured that the divine
emploieth not his memory not his imagination, but his understanding. Wherefore
I avouch that the positive divine ought to confer with the Schoole-man, and
to enquire at his hands, that of these senses he may choose that which shall
appear to be soundest, unless he will be sent to the holy house. For this
cause do heretics so much abhor Schoole-diuinitie, and learn to banish it
out of the world: for by distinguishing, inferring, framing of reasons, and
judging, we attain to understand the truth, and to discover falsehood.

CHAP. X.
How it is proved that the Theoricke of Divinity appertains to the
understanding, and preaching (which is his practice) to the imagination.

IT is a problem often demanded, not only by folk learned and wise, but also
the vulgar will put in their oar, and every day bring in question, For what
cause a divine being a great man in the Schools, sharp in disputing, ready in
answering, and in writing and lecturing of rare learning; yet getting up into
the pulpit, cannot skill of preaching: and contrariwise if one prove a gallant
preacher, eloquent, gracious, and that draws the people after him; it seems a
miracle if he be deeply seen in Schoole-diuinitie. Wherefore they admit not
for a sound consequence: such a one is a great Schoole-diuine; therefore he will
prove a good preacher: and contrariwise they will not grant; he is a good
preacher, therefore he has skill in Schoole-diuinitie. For to reuerse the one
and other of these consequences, there may be alleged for each, more instances
than are hairs on our head.

No man hitherto has been able to answer this demand, save after the ordinary
guise, vz. to attribute the whole to God, and to the distribution of his
graces: and to my liking they do very well, in as much as they know not any
more particular occasion thereof. The answer of this doubt (in some sort) is
given by us in the foregoing chapter, but not so particularly as is requisite;
and it was, that School-diuinitie appertains to the understanding: but now we
affirm and will prove that preaching, and his practice, is a work of the
imagination. And as it falls out a difficult matter, to join in one self
brain a good understanding and much imagination: so likewise it will hardly
fall that one self man, be a great Schoole-diuine, and a famous preacher: and
that Schooldiuinitie is a work of the understanding, has tofore been proved
when we proved the repugnancie which it carried to the Latin tongue. For which
cause it shall not now be necessary to prove the same anew, only it shall
suffice to give to understand, that the grace and delightfulness which good
preachers have, whereby they draw their audience unto them, and hold them well
pleased, is altogether a work of the imagination, and part thereof of a good
memory, and to the end I may better expound my self, and cause it as it were
to be felt with the hand, it behooves first to presuppose that man is a living
creature, capable of reason, of company, and of civility, and to the end that
his nature might be the more abled by art, the ancient Philosophers devised
Logic to teach him how he might frame his reasons with those precepts and
rules, how he should define the nature of things, distinguish, divide,
conclude, argue, judge, and choose, without which works it grows impossible,
that the Artist can go forward: and that he might be companiable and civil; it
behooued him to speak, and to give other men to weet the conceits which he
framed in his mind. And for that he should not deliver them without disposition
and without order: they devised another art which they termed Rhethoricke,
which by his precepts and rules might beautify the speech with polished
words, with fine phrases, and with stirring affections and gracious colors.
But as Logic teaches not a man to discourse and to argue in one science
alone; but without difference in all alike: so also Rhethoricke instructs how
to speak, in Divinity, in Physic, in skill of the Laws and in all other
Sciences and conuersations, which men entermedled withal. In sort, that if we
will feign a perfect Logician, or an accomplished Orator, he cannot fall into
due consideration unless he be seen in all the Sciences, for they all
appertain to his jurisdiction, and in which soever of them, he may exercise
his rules without distinction: not as Physic which has his matter limited
whereof it must entreat: and so likewise natural Philosophy, and moral,
Metaphisick, Astrology, and the rest: and therefore Cicero said, The Orator
whersoeuer he abides, dwells in his own. And in another place he affirms,
in a perfect Orator is found all the knowledge of the Philosophers, and
therefore the same Cicero avouched, that there is no art more difficult than
that of a perfect Orator: and with more reason he might so have said, if he
had known with how great hardness all the Sciences are united in one particular
subject.

Anciently the doctors of the law were adorned with the name of Orator, for
the perfection of pleading required the notice and furniture of all the arts in
the world, for the laws do judge them all. Now to know the defense reserved
for every art by it self, it was necessary to have a particular knowledge of
them all; for which cause Cicero said, No man ought to be reputed in the number
of orators, who is not well seen in all the arts. But seeing it was impossible
to learn all Sciences: first, through the shortness of life, and then because
man's wit is so bounded, they let them pass, and of necessity held themselves
contented to give credit to the skillful in that art whereof they made
profession, and no farther.

After this manner of defending causes, straightwaies succeeded the evangelical
doctrine, which might have been persuaded by the art of oratorie, better than
all the Sciences of the world besides, for that the same is the most certain
and truest: but Christ our redeemer, charged S. Paul, that he should not preach
it with wisdom of words, to the end the Gentiles should not think it was a well
couched leasing, as are those which the orators use to persuade by the force
of their art. But when the faith had been received, many years after it was
allowed to preach with places of Rhetoric, and to use the service of eloquent
speech; for that then the inconvenience fell not in consideration, which was
extant when S. Paul preached. Yea we see that the preacher reapeth more fruit,
who has the conditions of a perfect orator, and is more haunted than he that
wants them: and the reason is very plain. For if the ancient orators gave
the people to understand things false for true (using those their precepts and
rules) more easily shall the christian auditorie be drawn, when by art they
are persuaded to that which already they understand and believe. Besides that
the holy Scripture (after a sort) is all things; and to yield the same a true
interpretation, it behooves to have all the Sciences conformable to that so
often said saw, He sent his damsels to call to the Castle. This fitteth not to be
remembered to the preachers of our time, nor to advise them that now they may do
it: for their particular study (besides the fruit which they pretend to bring
with their doctrine) is to seek out a good text, to whose purpose they may
apply many fine sentences taken out of the divine Scripture, the holy doctors,
poets, historians, physicians and lawyers, without forbearing any Science, and
speaking copiously with quietness and pleasant words; and with all these things
they go amplifying and stuffing their matter, an hour or two if need be, Of
this says Cicero the orators of his time made profession: The force of an
orator (says he) and the self art of well speaking, seems that it
undertakes and promises to speak with copiousnesse and ornament, of
whatsoever matter that shall be propounded. Then if we shall prove that the
graces and conditions which a perfect orator ought to have, do all appertain
to the imagination and to the memory; we shall also know that the divine, who
is endowed with them will be an excellent preacher: but being set to the
doctrrin of S. Thomas and Scotus can little skill thereof, for that the same is a
science belonging to the understanding, in which power, of necessity it
holds little force.

What the things be which appertain to the imagination, and by what signs they
are to be known, we have heretofore made mention: now we will return to a
replication of them, that they may the better be refreshed to the memory. All
that which may be termed good figure, good purpose and provision, comes from
the grace of the imagination, as are merry ieasts, resemblances, quips, and
comparisons.

The first thing which a perfect Orator is to go about (having matter under
hand) is to seek out arguments and convenient sentences, whereby he may dilate
and prove, and that not with all sorts of words, but with such as give a good
consonance to the ear: and therefore Cicero said: I take him for an Orator,
who can use in his discourses, words well tuning with the ear, and sentences
convenient for proof. And this (for certain) appertains to the imagination,
since therein is a consonance of well pleasing words, and a good direction in
the sentences.

The second grace which may not be wanting in a perfect Orator, is to possess
much invention, or much reading, for if he rest bound to dilate and confirm
any matter whatsoever, with many speeches and sentences applied to the purpose,
it behooves that he have a very swift imagination, and that the same supply
(as it were) the place of a braach, to hunt and bring the game to his hand, and
when he wants what to say, to devise somewhat as if it were material. For this
cause we said before, that heat was an instrument with which the imagination
works, for this quality lifts up the figures and makes them to boil.
Here is discovered all that which in them may be seen, and if there fell out
naught else to be considered, this imagination has force not only to compound
a figure possible with another, but does join also (after the order of nature)
those which are impossible, and of them grows to shape mountains of gold, and
calves that fly. In lieu of their own invention, orators may supply the same
with much reading, forasmuch as their imagination fails them: but in
conclusion whatsoever books teach, is bounded and limited; and the proper
invention is a good fountain which always yields forth new and fresh water.
For retaining the things which have been read, it is requisite to possess much
memory, and to recite them in the presence of the audience with readiness,
cannot be done without the same power. For which cause Cicero said, he shall
(in mine opinion) be an orator worthy of so important a name, who with
wisdom, with copiousnesse, and with ornament, can readily deliver every
matter that is worth the hearing. Heretofore we have said and proved that
wisdom appertains to the imagination, copiousnesse of words and sentences to
the memory, ornament and polishment to the imagination: to recite so many
things without faltring or stopping, for certain is achieved by the goodness
of the memory. To this purpose, Cicero avouched that the good orator ought to
rehearse by heart, and not by book. It falls not besides the matter to let
you understand that M. Antony of Lebrissa, through old age grew to such a decay
of memory, that he read his Rhetoric lecture to his scholars out of a
paper, and for that he was so excellent in his profession, and with good
proofs confirmed his points propounded, it passed for current; but that which
might no way be tolerated, was, that where he died suddenly of an apoplexy,
the University of Alcala recommended the making of his funeral oration to a
famous preacher, who invented and disposed what he had to say the best he
could: but time so pressed him, as it grew impossible for him to con the same
without book: Wherefore getting up into the pulpit with his paper in his hand,
he began to speak in this sort. That which this notable man used to do whilst
he read to his scholars, I am now also resouled to do in his imitation; for
his death was so sudden, and the commandment to me of making his funeral
fermon so late, as I had neither place nor time to study what I might say, nor
to con it by heart. Whatsoever I have been able to gather with the travel of
this night, I bring here written in this paper, and beseech your maisterships
that you will hear the same with patience, and pardon my slender memory.

This fashion of rehearsing with paper in the hand so highly displeased the
audience, as they did naught else than smile and murmr: Therefore very well
said Cicero, that it behooued to rehearse by heart and not by book. This
preacher verily was not endowed with any invention of his own, but was driven
to fetch the same out of his books; and to perform this, great study and much
memory were requisite. But those who borrow their conceits out of their own
brain, stand not in need of study, time, or memory: for they find all ready
at their fingers ends. Such will preach to one self audience all their life
long without reapeating any point touched in twenty years before; whereas
those that want invention, in two Len^s cull the flowers out of all the books
in a whole world, and ransacke to the bottom all the writings that can be
gotten; and at the third Lent must go and get themselves a new auditory, except
they will hear cast in their teeth, This is the same which you preached unto
us in the year before.

The third property that a good orator ought to have, is that he know how to
dispose his matter, placing every word and sentence in his fit room, in sort
that the whole may carry an answerable proportion, and one thing bring in
another: And to this purpose Cicero said, Disposition is an order and
distribution of things which shows what ought in what places to be bestowed;
which grace when it is not natural, accustomably breeds much cumber to the
preachers, For after they have found in their books many things to deliver, all
of them cannot skill to apply this provision readily to every point. This
property of ordering and distributing, is for certain a work of the
imagination, since (in effect) it is naught else, but figure and correspondence.

The fourth property wherewith good orators should be endowed, and the most
important of all, is action, wherewith they give a being and life to the things
which they speak, and with the same do move the hearers, and supple them to
believe how that is true which they go about to persuade. For which cause
Cicero said, Action is that which ought to be governed by the motion of the
body, by the gesture, by the countenance, and by the confirmation and variety
of the voice. As if he should say: action ought to be directed in making the
motions and gestures, which are requisite for the things that are spoken,
lifting up and falling with the voice, growing passionate, and suddenly turning
to appeasement; one while speaking fast, another-while leisurely, reproouing,
and cherishing, moving the body, sometimes to the one side, sometimes to the
other, plucking in the arms, and stretching them out, laughing and weeping:
and upon some occasions beating the hands together. This grace is so important
in preachers, that by the same alone (wanting both invention and disposition)
of matters of small value and ordinary, they make a sermon which fills the
audience with astonishment, for that they have this action, which otherwise is
termed spirit or pronunciation. Herein falls a thing worth the marking,
whereby is discovered how much this grace can prevail; and it is, that the
sermons which through the much action and much spirit do please much, when
they be set down in writing are nothing worth, nor will any wel-neer vouchsafe
their reading: and this grows because with the pen it is impossible to
pourtray those motions and those gestures, which in the pulpit so far wan men's
likings. Other sermons show very well in paper; but at their preaching no man
lists to give ear because that action is not given them, which is requisite
at every close. And therefore Plato said, that the style wherewith we speak,
is far different from that which we write well, where-through we see many men
who can speak very well, do yet endite but meanly, and others contrariwise,
endite very well, and discourse but harshly: all which is to be reduced to
action, and action (for certain) is a work of the imagination, for all that
which we have uttered thereof, makes figure, correspondence, and good
consonance.

The fifth grace, is to know how to assemble and allege good examples and
comparisons, which better contenteth the hearers humor than any thing else: For
by a fit example they easily understand the doctrine, and without the same it
soon slippeth out of their mind: whereon Aristotle propounded this question,
Whence it rises that men (in making speeches) are better pleased with examples
and fables than with conceits, as if he should say, For what occasion do such
as come to hear orators, make more reckoning of the examples and fables which
they allege, to prove the things that they strive to persuade, than of the
arguments and reasons which they frame? and to those he answers, That by
examples and fables men learn best, because it is a proof which appertains
to the sense, but arguments and reasons hold not the like reason, for that they
are a work whereto is requisite much understanding. And for this cause Christ
our redeemer in his sermons used so many parables and comparisons, because by
them he gave to understand many divine secrets. This point of devising fables
and comparisons, it is a thing certain that the same is performed by the
imagination, for it is figure, and denotes good correspondence and similitude.

The sixth property of a good orator, is, to have a ready tongue of his
own, and not affected, choice words, and many gracious sorts of utterance: of
which graces we have entreated oftentimes heretofore, proouing that the one
part of them appertains to the imagination, and the other to a good memory.

The seventh property of a good orator, is that which Cicero speaks of:
furnished with voice, with action, and with comeliness, the voice full and
ringing, pleasing to the hearers, not harsh, not hoarse, nor sharp: and
although it be true that this springs from the temperature of the breast and
the throat, and not from the imagination: yet sure it is that from the same
temperature from which a good imagination grows, namely heat, a good voice
also fetches his original, and to know this, imports much for our purpose:
For the Schoolediuines in that they are of a cold and dry complexion, cannot
have their voice a good instrument: and this is a great defect in a pulpit.

This same Aristotle also proves, alleging the example of old men, by reason
of their coldness and dryness. To have a full and clear voice, much heat is
requisite to enlarge the passages, and measurable moisture which may supple and
soften them. And also Aristotle demands why al who by nature are hot, are
also big voiced? For which cause we see the contrary in women and Eunuchs, who
through the much coldness of their complexion (says Galen) have their throat
and voice very delicat, in sort, that when we hear a good voice, we can
straightwaies say, it comes of much heat and moisture in the breast: which two
qualities, if they pass so far as the brain, make the understanding to decay,
and the memory and imagination to increase, which are the two powers whereof
the good preacher serves himself to content his auditorie.

The eighth property of a good orator (says Cicero) is to have tongue at will,
ready, and well exercised, which grace cannot befall men of great
understanding, for that it may be ready, it behooves the same to partake much
heat, and mean drouth. And this cannot light in the melancholicke, either
natural, or by adustion. Aristotle proves it, by asking this question,
Whence comes it, that such as have an impediment in their speech, are reputed
to be of complexion melancholicke? To which problem he answers very
untowardly, saying, That the melancholicke have a great imagination, and that
the tongue cannot have to utter so fast as the imagination conceiueth,
wherethrough they stammer and stumble: which yet proceeds from naught else,
save that the melancholic have ever their mouth full of froath and spittle,
through which disposition their tongue is moist and slipper, which thing may
evidently be discerned, considering the often spitting of such. This self
reason did Aristotle render, when he demanded, Whence it grows that some are
so slow tounged? and he answers, That such have their tongue very cold and
moist, which two qualities breed an impediment therein, and make it subject to
the palsy; and so you see his conceit of the imagination cannot follow: for
this he yields a profitable remedy, vz. to drink a little wine, or at first
to hallow somewhat loud, before they speak in the presence of their audience,
for thereby the tongue gets heat, and dries.

But Aristotle says further, that not to speak plain, may grow from having
the tongue very hot, and very dry, and voucheth the example of choleric
persons, who growing in choler, cannot speak, and when they are void of
passion and choler, they are very eloquent: the contrary betideth to the
flegmaticke, who being quiet, cannot talk, and when they are angered utter
speeches of great eloquence. The reason of this is very manifest, for although
it is true, that heat aideth the imagination, and the tongue also, yet the same
may also breed them damage: first, for that they want supply of replies and
witty sentences, as also because the tongue cannot pronounce plainly, through
overmuch dryness; wherethrough we see, that after a man has drunk a little
water, he speaks better.

The choleric (being quiet) deliver very well, for they then retain that
point of heat which is requisite for the tongue, and the good imagination; but in
anger, the heat grows beyond due, and turns the imagination topsie turuie.
The flegmaticke vnincensed, have their brain very cold and moist, and
therefore are set a ground what to say, and their tongue is over slipper through
too much moisture; but when they are set on fire and in choler, the heat
forthwith gets up, and so lifts up the imagination; by which means there
comes to their mind much what to deliver, and the tongue gives no hinderance
for that it is heated: these have no great vain in versifieng, for that they
are cold of brain, who yet (once angered) do then make verses best, and with
most facility, against such as have stirred them, and to this purpose Iuuenal
said:

Anger makes verse, if nature but deny, Through the defect of tongue, men of
great understanding cannot be good orators or preachers, and specially for that
action requires a speech sometimes high, and sometimes low, and those who are
slow tounged, cannot pronounce but with loud voice, and in a manner crying out,
and this is one of the things which soonest cloieth the hearers: whereon
Aristotle moves this doubt, Whence it springs, that men of slow tongue
cannot speak soft. To which problem he answers very well, saying, that
fastened to the tongue which is the roof of the mouth, by reason of much
moisture, is better loosened with a force, than if you put thereto but little
might, as if one would lift up a lance, taking the same by the point, he shall
sooner raise it at one push and with a force, then taking it up by little and
little.

Me seems, I have sufficiently proved that the good natural qualities which
a perfect Orator ought to have, spring for the most part from a good
imagination, and some from the memory. And if it be true that the good
preachers of our time content their audience, because they have these gifts; it
follows very well, that whosoever is a great preacher can small skill of
Schoole-diuinitie, and a great scholar will hardly away with preaching,
through the contrariety, which the understanding carries to the imagination
and to the memory. Well knew Aristotle by experience, that although the
orator learned Natural and Moral Philosophy, Physic, Metaphisicke, the
Laws, the Mathematicals, Astrology, and all the arts and sciences;
notwithstanding he was seen of all these, but in the flowers and choice
sentences, without pearcing to the root of the reason and occasion of any of
them: But he thought that this not knowing the Divinity, nor the cause of
things which is termed Propter quid, grew, for that they bent not themselves
thereunto, and therefore propounded this demand. Why do we imagine that a
Philosopher is different from an orator? To which problem he answers, that
the Philosopher places all his study in knowing the reason and cause of
every effect, and the orator in knowing the effect and no farther. And verily
it proceeds from naught else, than for that natural Philosophy appertains
to the understanding, which power the orators do want; and therefore in
Philosophy they can pearce no farther than into the upper skin of things. This
self difference there is between the Schoole-diuine and the positive, that the
one knows the cause of whatsoever imports his faculty; and the other the
propositions which are verefied, and no more. The case then standing thus, it
falls out a dangerous matter that the preacher enjoys an office and
authority to instruct Christian people in the truth, and that their auditorie
is bound to believe them, and yet they want that power, through which the
truth is dug up from the root, we may say of them (without lying) those
words of Christ our redeemer, Let them go, they are blind, and do guide the
blind; and if the blind guide the blind, both fall into the ditch. It is a
thing in tolerable to behold with how great audacity such set themselves to
preach, who cannot one jot of Schoole-diuinitie, nor have any natural
ability to learn the same.

Of such S. Paul greatly co^plaineth; saying, But the end of the commandment
is charity from a pure heart and good conscience, and faith unfeigned* from
which (verily) some straying, have turned aside to vain babbling: who would be
doctors in the Law and yet understand not the things which they speak, nor
which they avouch.

Besides this we have proved tofore, that those who have much imagination, are
choleric, subtle, malignant, and cauillers, and always inclined to evil,
which they can compass with much readiness and craft. Touching the orators
of his time, Aristotle propounds this demand, why we use to call an orator
crafty, and give not this name to a musician, nor to a comical poet? And more
would this difficulty have grown, if Aristotle had understood that music and
the stage appertain to the imagination. To which problem he answers, That
Musitions and stage-plaiers shoot at none other Butte, than to delight the
hearers; but the orator goes about to purchase somewhat for himself, and
therefore it behooves him to use rules and readiness, to the end the hearers
may not smell out his fetch and bent.

Such properties as these be had those false preachers, of whom S. Paul spoke,
writing to the Corinthians, But I fear that as the serpent beguiled Eve with
his subtletie; so their senses are led astraie: for these false Apostles are
guilefull workmen, who transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and
this is no wonder, for Satan transformed himself into an Angel of light, and
therefore it is no great matter for his ministers to transform themselves as
ministers of justice, whose end shall be their work: as if he should say; I
have great fear (my brethren) that as the serpent beguiled Eve with his
subtletie and malice, so they also intricate their judgment and perseverance:
for these false Apostles are like pottage made of a fox. Preachers who speak
vnderwiles, represent very perfectly a kind of holiness, seem the Apostles
of Jesus Christ, and yet are disciples of the devil, who can skill so well to
represent an Angel of light, that there needs not a supernatural gift to
discover what he is: and since the master can play his part so well, it is not
strange that they also who have learned his doctrine practice the semblable,
whose end shall be none other than their works. All these properties are well
known to appertain to the imagination, and that Aristotle said very well, that
orators are subtle and ready, because they are ever in hand to get somewhat
for themselves.

Such as possess a forcible imagination we said before, that they are of
complexion very hot, and from this quality spring three principal vices in a
man; Pride, Gluttony, and Lechery: for which cause the Apostle said, Such
served not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their belly.

And that these three evil inclinations spring from heat, and the contrary
virtues from cold: Aristotle proves, saying thus: and therefore it holds the
same force to shape conditions, for heat and cold (more than any thing else
which is in the body) do season manners, and therefore printeth and works in
us the qualities of manners: as if he should say, from heat and cold spring all
the conditions of man: for these two qualities do more alter our nature than
any other: For which cause men of great imagination are ordinarily bad and
vicious: for they abandon themselves to be guided by their natural inclination,
and have wit and ability to do lewdly. For which cause the same Aristotle
asks, Whence it grows, that a man being so much instructed, is yet the most
unjust of all living creatures? to which problem he makes answer that man
has much wit, and a great imagination, and for this he finds many ways to
do ill, and (as by his nature he coueteth delights, and to be superior to all
and of great happiness) it is of force that he offend: for these things cannot
be achieved, but by doing wrong to many: but Aristotle wist not how to frame
this problem, nor to yield a fitting answer.

Better might he have enquired for what cause the worst people are commonly of
greatest wit, and amongst those, such as are best furnished with ability,
commit the lewdest prancks: whereas of dew, a good wit and sufficiency should
rather incline a man to virtue and godliness than to vices and misdoing. The
answer heereto is, for that those who partake much heat, are men of great
imagination, and the same quality which makes them witty, traineth them to
be naughty and vicious. But when the understanding ouerruleth, it ordinarily
inclines a man to virtue, because this power is founded on cold and dry: From
which two qualities, bud many virtues, as are Continency, Humility,
Temperance, and from heat the contrary. And if Aristotle had known this point
of Philosophy, he should have been able to answer this problem which says,
Whence may it proceed that that sort of men who^ we call craftsmen of Bacchus
or stage* plaiers, are for the most part ill conditioned? as if he should say:
for what cause are such as gain their living on the stage, In keepers and
Butchers, and those whose service is used about feasts and banquets to order
the cates, ordinarily naught and vicious? To which problem he answers,
saying; that such by being occupied in these belly cheer offices, leave
themselves no leisure to study, and therefore pass over their life in
incontinencie. And heereto is poverty also aiding, which accustomably brings
with it many evils: but (verily) this is not the reason; but playing on the
stage and ordering of feasts springs from the difference of the imagination,
which inuiteth a man to this manner of life. And because this difference of
imagination consists in heat, all of them have very good stomachs and
great appetite to eat and drink. These although they gave themselves to
learning, should thereby reap little fruit; and had they been never so
wealthy, yet would they (howsoever) have cast their affection to these
services, were they even baser than they are: for the wit and ability draws
every one to that art, which answers it in proportion.

For this cause Aristotle demanded what the reason was, why there are men who
more willingly addict themselves to the profession of which they have made
choice, (though somwhiles unworthy) than to the more honorable? As for example,
to berather a iugler, a stage-plaier, or a trumpeter, than an Astrologer or an
Orator? To which problem he answers very well, saying; that a man soon
discerns to what art he is disposed, and inclined of his own nature, because
he has somewhat within that teaches him, and nature can do so much with her
pricks, that albeit the art and office be unseemly for the calling of the
learner, yet he cleaves unto that and not to others of greater estimation. But
sithence we have put by this manner of wits from the function of preaching, and
that we are bound to give and bestow upon every difference of ability that
sort of learning, which is answerable thereto in particular: we must likewise
determine what sort of wit he ought to be endowed withal, unto whose charge the
function of preaching is to be committed, which is the thing that most
imports the christian commonwealth: For we must conceive that albeit we have
proved heertofore, that it is a matter repugnant in nature to find a great wit
accompanied with much imagination and memory. Notwithstanding this rule
holds not so universally in all arts, but that it admits his exceptions
and sometimes comes short.

In the last chapter of this work save one, we will prove at full, that if
nature be possessed of her due force, and have no impediment cast athwart to
stop her, she makes so perfect a difference of wit, as the same unites in one
self subject a great understanding, with much imagination and memory, as if
they were not contrary, nor held any natural opposition.

This should be a fitting ability, and convenient for the function of
preaching, if there could be found many subjects to be endowed therewith; but
(as we will show in the place alleged) they are so few, that of 100000. whom I
have measured, I can meet but with one of the size. Therefore it behooves to
seek out another more familiar difference of wit, though not so far stepped in
perfection as the former. We must then weet, that between the Physicians and
Philosophers rises a great diversity in opinions, for resolving the
temperature and the quality of vinegar, of choler adust, and of ashes;
inasmuch as these things sometimes work the effect of heat, and sometimes of
cold; and thereon they divided themselves into diverse sects: but the truth is,
that all these things which suffer adstiuon, and are consumed and burned by the
fire, have a variable temperature. The greater part of the subject is cold and
dry, but there are also other parts entermingled, so subtle and delicate, and
of such feruencie and heat, that albeit they contain little in quantity, yet
they carry more efficacy in working than all the rest of the subject.

So we see that vinegar and melancholy through adustion open and leaven the
earth by means of the heat, and close it not though the more part of these
humors be cold. Hence is gathered that the melancholicke by adustion,
accompany great understanding with much imagination; but they are all weak of
memory, for the much adustion much also dries and hardneth the brain. These
are good preachers, or (at least) the best that may be found, saving those
perfect ones of whom we spoke: for although memory fail them, they enjoy of
themselves such invention that the very imagination serves them in stead of
memory and remembrance; and ministers unto them figures and sentences to
deliver, without that they stand in need of ought besides. Which these cannot
bring about who have conned bosom sermons, and swaruing from that bias are
straight set a ground, without having the furniture of any second means, to
bring themselves aflote again. And that melancholy by adustion has this
variety of temperature, namely; cold and dry, for the understanding, and heat
for the imagination, Aristotle declares in these words, Melancholic men are
variable and unequal: for the force of choler adust is variable and unequal;
as if the same might be greatly both hot and cold, and as if he had said,
Melancholic men by adustion are variable and unequal in their complexion: for
that choler adust is very unequal, inasmuch as sometimes it is exceeding hot,
and sometimes cold beyond measure.

The signs by which men of this temperature may be known, are very manifest:
they have the color of their countenance a dark green, or sallow, their
eyes very fiery; of whom it was said, he is a man that has blood in his eyes,
their hair black and bald, their flesh lean, rough and hairie, their vains
big, they are of very good conversation, and affable, but letcherous, proud,
stately, blasphemers, wily, double, injurious, friends of ill doing, and
desirous of revenge: this is to be understood when melancholy is kindled, but
if it be cooled, forthwith there grow in them the contrary virtues, chastity,
humility, fear and reverence of God, charity, mercy, and great
acknowledgme^t of their sins, with sighings and tears, for which cause they
live in continual war and strife, without ever enjoying ease or rest.
Sometimes vice prevails in them, sometimes virtue, but with all these defects,
they are wittiest, and most able for the function of preaching, and for all
matters of wisdom which befall in the world; for they have an understanding to
know the truth, and a great imagination to be able to persuade the same.

Wherethrough, we see that which God did when he would fashion a man in his
mothers womb, to the end that he might be able to discover to the world, the
coming of his son, and have the way to prove and persaude, That Christ was
the Messiah and promised in the law. For making him of great understanding, and
of much imagination, it fell out of necessity (keeping the natural order)
that he should also make him choleric and adust. And that this is true, may
easily be understood by him, who considers the great fire and fury, with
which Paul.
he persecuted the church, the grief conceived by the synagogues, when they
saw him converted, as they who had forgone a man of high importance, and of
whom the contrary party had made a gainful purchase. It is also known by
the tokens of the reasonable choler, with which he spoke and answered the
deputy, Consuls, and the Judges who had arrested him: defending his own person
and the name of Christ, with so great a^t and readiness, as he convinced them
all: yet he had an imperfection in his tongue, and was not very prompt of
speech, which Aristotle affirms to be a property of the melancholicke by
adustion. The vices whereto he confessed himself to be subject before his
conversion, show him to have been of this temperature: he was a blasphemer, a
wrong doer, and a persecutor: all which springs from abundance of heat. But
the most evident sign which showed that he was choleric adust, is gathered
from that battle which himself confesses he had within himself, betwixt
his part superior and inferior, saying; I see another law in my members
striving against the law of my mind, which leads me into the bondage of
sin. And this self contention have we proved (by the mind of Aristotle) to
be in the melancholicke by adustion.

True it is that some expound (very well) that this battle grows from the
disorder which original sin made between the spirit and the flesh; albeit
being such and so great, I believe also that it springs from the choler adust,
which he had in his natural constitution: for the royal prophet David
participated equally of original sin, and yet complained not so much as did S.
Paul; but says, that he found the inferior portion accorded with his reason,
when he would rejoice with God: My heart (says he) and my flesh ioyed in the
living God, and (as we will touch in the last chapter save one) David possessed
the best temperature that nature could frame: and hereof we will make proof
by the opinion of all the Philosophers, that the same ordinarily enclineth a
man to be virtuous without any great gainstriuing of the flesh. The wits then
which are to be sorted out for preachers, are first those who unite a great
understanding with much imagination and memory, whose signs shall be expressed
in the last chapter save one. Where such want, there succeed in their room
the melancholicke by adustion. Those unite a great understanding with much
imagination, but suffer defect of memory; wherthrough, they are not stored
with copy of words, nor can preach with full store in presence of the people.

In the third rank succeed men of great understanding, but defective in their
imagination and memory. These shall have but a bad grace in preaching; yet
will preach sound doctrine. The last whom I would not charge with preaching at
all, are such as unite much memory with much imagination, and have defect of
understanding. These draw the auditorie after them, and hold them in suspense
and well pleased: but when they least misdoubt it, they fetch a turn to the
holy house: for by way of their sweet discourses and blessings, they beguile
the innocent.

CHAP. XI.
That the Theoricke of the laws appertains to the memory, and pleading and
judging (which are their practice) to the understanding, and the governing of a
commonwealth to the imagination.

IN the Spanish tongue, it is not void of a mystery, that this word (Lettered)
being a common term for all men of letters or learning, as well Divines, as
Lawyers, Physicians, Logicians, Philosophers, Orators, Mathematicians, and
Astrologers, yet in saying that such a one is learned, we all understand it by
common sense, that he makes profession of the laws, as if this were their
proper and peculiar title, and not of the residue.

The answer of this doubt, though it be easy, yet to yield the same such as
is requisite, it behooves first to be acquainted what law is, and whereunto
they are bound, who set themselves to study that profession, that afterward
they may imploie the same to use, when they are judges or pleaders. The law
(who so well considers thereof) is naught else, but a reasonable will of the
law maker, by which he declares, in what sort he will that the cases which
happen daily in the common wealth, be decided, for preserving the subjects in
peace, and directing them in what sort they are to live, and what things they
are to refrain.

I said, a reasonable will, because it suffices not, that the king or emperor
(who are the efficient cause of the laws) declaring his will in what sort
soever, does thereby make it a law, for if the same be not just, and grounded
upon reason, it cannot be called a law, neither is it: even as he cannot be
termed a man who wants a reasonable soul. Therefore it is a matter
established by common accord, that kings enact their laws with assent of men
very wise and of sound judgment, to the end they may be right, just, and good,
and that the subjects may receive them with good will, and be the more bound to
observe and obey them. The material cause of the law is, that it consist of
such cases as accustomably befall in the common wealth, according to the order
of nature, and not of things impossible or such as betide very sildome. The
final cause is, to order the life of man and to direct him what he is to do,
and what to forbear, to the end that being conformed to reason, the common
wealth may be preserved in peace. For this cause we see that the laws are
written in plain words, not doubtful, nor obscure, nor of double
understanding, without ciphers, and without abbreuiations, and so easy and
manifest, that whosoever shall read them, may readily understand and retain
them in memory. And because no man should pretend ignorance, they are
publicly proclaimed, that whosoever afterward breaks them, may be chastised.

In respect therefore of the care and diligence which the good law makers use,
that their laws may be just and plain, they have given in charge to the
judges and pleaders, that in actions or judgments, none of them follow his
own sense, but suffer himself to be guided by the authority of the laws, as
if they should say, We command that no judge or aduocat, employ his conceit,
nor intermeddle in deciding, whether the law be just or unjust, nor yield it
any other sense than that that is contained in the text of the letter. So it
follows that the lawyers are to construe the text of the law, and to take
that sense which is gathered out of the construction thereof, and none other.

This doctrine thus presupposed, it falls out a matter very manifest, for
what reason the lawyers are termed lettered, and other men of learning not so,
for this name is derived from the word letter, which is to say, a man who is
not licenced to follow the capacity of his own understanding, but is enforced
to ensue the sense of the very letter. And for that the well practiced in this
profession have so construed it, they dare not deny or affirm any thing which
appertains to the determination of any case whatsoever, unless they have lying
before them some law which in express terms decideth the same. And if
sometimes they speak of their own head, interterlacing their conceit and
reason, without grounding upon some law, they do it with fear and
bashfulnesse, for which cause it is a much worn proverb, We blush when we
speak without law. Divines cannot call themselves lettered in this
signification, for in the holy scripture the letter kills, and the spirit
gives life; it is full of mysteries, replenished with figures and ciphers,
obscure, and not understood by all readers, the vowels and phrases of speech
hold a very different signification from that which the vulgar and
three-tounged men do know. Therefore whosoever shall set himself to construe
the letter, and take the sense which rises of that Grammatical construction,
shall fall into many errors.

The Physicians also have no letter whereto to submit themselves, for if
Hippocrates and Galen, and the other grave authors of this faculty, say and
affirm one thing, and that experience and reason approve the contrary, they
are not bound to follow them: for in Physic, experience bears more sway
than reason, and reason more than authority: but in the laws it betideth
quite contrary, for their authority and that which they determine, is of more
force and vigor than all the reasons that may be alleged to the contrary.
Which being so, we have the way laid open before us, to assign what wit is
requisite for the laws. For if a Lawyer have his understanding and imagination
tied to follow that which the law avouched, without adding or diminishing, it
falls out apparent, that this faculty appertains to the memory, and that
the thing wherein they must labor, is to know the number of the laws, and of
the rules which are in the text, and to call to remembrance each of them in
particular, and to rehearse at large his sentence and determination, to the end
that when occasion is ministered, we may know there is a law which gives
decision, and in what form and manner. Therefore to my seeming it is a better
difference of wit for a lawyer to have much memory and little understanding,
than much understanding and little memory. For if there fall out no occasion of
employing his wit and ability, and that he must have at his fingers ends so
great a number of laws as are extant, and so far different from the other;
with so many exceptions, limitations, and enlargements, it serves better to
know by heart what has been determined in the laws for every point which
shall come in question, than to discourse with the understanding in what sort
the same might have been determined: for the one of these is necessary, and
the other impertinent, since none other opinion than the very determination of
the law must bear the stroke.

So it falls out for certain, that the Theorick of the law appertains to
the memory and not to the understanding, nor to the imagination: for which
reason, and for that the laws are so positive, and that because the lawyers
have their understanding so tied to the will of the lawmakers, and cannot
entermingle their own resolution, save in case where they rest uncertain of
the determination of the law, when any client seeks their judgment, they
have authority and license to say, I will look for the case in my book: which
if the Physician should answer when he is asked a remedy for some disease, or
the Divine in cases of conscience; we would repute them for men, but simply
seen in the faculty whereof they make profession. And the reason hereof is,
that those sciences have certain universal principles and definitions, under
which the particular cases are contained; but in the law-facultie every law
contains a several particular case, without having any affinity with the
next, though they both be placed under one title. In respect whereof, it is
necessary to have a notice of all the laws, and to study each one in
particular, and distinctly to lay them up in memory. But here against Plato
notes a thing worthy of great consideration; and that is, how in his time a
learned man was held in suspicion that he knew many laws by heart, seeing by
experience that such were not so skillful judges and pleaders, as this their
vaunt seemed to pretend. Of which effect it appears he could not find out the
cause, seeing in a place so convenient he did not report the same; only he saw
by experience that Lawyers endowed with good memory, being set to defend a
cause, or to give a sentence, applied not their reasons so well as was
convenient.

The reason of this effect may easily be rendered in my doctrine, presupposing
that memory is contrary to the understanding, and that the true
interpretation of the laws, to amplify, restrain, and compound them, with
their contraries and oppositions, is done by distinguishing, concluding,
arguing, judging, and choosing: which works we have often said heretofore
belong to discourse, and the learned man possessing much memory cannot by
possibility enjoy them.

We have also noted heretofore that memory supplieth none other office in the
head than faithfully to preserve the figures and fantasies of things: but the
understanding and the imagination, are those which work therewithal.

And if a learned man have the whole art of memory, and yet want understanding
and imagination, he has no more sufficiency to judge or plead, than the very
Code or Digest, which co^passing within them all the laws and rules of reason,
for all that cannot write one letter. Moreover, albeit it be true that the law
ought to be such as we have mentioned in his definition; yet it falls out a
miracle to find things with all the perfections, which the understanding
attributes unto them: that the law be just and reasonable, and that it proceed
fully to all that which may happen, that it be written in plain terms, void
of doubt and oppositions, and that it receive not diverse constructions, we see
not always accomplished: for in conclusion, it was established by man's
counsel, and that is not of force sufficient to give order for all that may
betide: and this is daily seen by experience, for after a law has bin enacted
with great aduisement and counsel, the same (in short space) is abrogated
again; for when it is once published and put in practice, a thousand
inconveniences discover themselves: whereof (when it was persuaded) no man took
regard: and therefore kings and emperors are advised by the same laws, that
they shame not to amend and correct their laws: for, in a word, men they are,
and marvel there is none if they commit an error, so much the rather, for that
no law can comprehend in words and sentences all the circumstances of the case
which it decideth: for the craft of bad people is more wily to find holes than
that of good men to foresee how they are to be governed; and therefore it was
said, Neither the laws nor the resolutions of the Senate can be set down in
writing in such sort, that all the cases which severally chance may be
comprised therein; but it suffices to comprehend the things which fall out
oftenest: and if other cases succeed afterward, for which no law is enacted, it
decideth them in proper terms.

The law faculty is not so bare of rules and principles, but that if the judge
or pleader have a good discourse, to know how to apply them; they may find
their true determination and defense, and whence to gather the same. In sort
that if the cases be more in number than the laws, it behooves that in the
judge and in the pleader there be much discourse to make new laws, and that not
at all adventures: but such as reason (by his consonance) may receive them
without contradiction. This the lawyers of much memory cannot do: for if the
cases which the law thrusts into their mouth, be not squared and chewed to
their hands, they are to seek what to do. We are wont to resemble a lawyer,
who can rehearse many laws by heart, to a regrater or hosier that has many
paires of hosen ready made in his shop, who, to deliver you one that may fit
you, must make you to assay them all: and if none agree with the buiers
measure, he must send him away hoselesse. But a learned man of good
understanding, is like a good tailer, who has his sheeres in his hand, and his
piece a cloth on the table, and taking measure, cutteth his hosen after his
stature that demands them.

The sheeres of a good pleader is his sharp understanding, with which he takes
measure of the case, and apparelleth the same with that law which may decide
it: and if he find not a whole one that may determine it in express terms,
he makes one of many pieces, and therewith uses the best defense that he may.
The lawyers who are endowed with such a wit and ability, are not to be termed
lettered: for they construe not the letter, neither bind themselves to the
formal words of the law; but it seems they are lawmakers, or counselors at
law: of whom the laws themselves enquire and demand how they shall determine:
for if they have power and authority to interpret them, to reaue, to add, and
to gather out of them exceptions, and fallacies; and that they may correct and
amend them, it was not unfitly said, That they seem to be law makers.

Of this sort of knowledge it was spoken: by the knowledge of the laws it is
not meant to con their words by rote; but to take notice of their force and
power, as if he should say, Let no man think that to know the laws is to
bear in mind the formal words with which they are written; but to understand
how far their forces extend, and what the point is which they may decide: for
their reason is subject to many varieties, by means of the circumstances as
well of time as of person, of place, of manner, of matter, of cause, and of the
thing itself. All which breeds an alteration in the decision of the law, and
if the judge or pleader be not endowed with discourse, to gather out of the
law, or to take away or adioine that which the law self does not express in
words, he shall commit many errors in following the letter: for it has been
said that the words of the law are not to be taken after the Jewish manner,
that is, to consture only the letter, and so take the sense thereof.

On the things already alleged, we conclude that pleading is a work of
discourse, and that if the learned in the laws possess much memory, he
shall be untoward to judge or plead through the repugnancie of these two powers.
And this is the cause for which the learned of so ripe memory (whom Plato
mentions) could not defend well their clients causes, nor apply the laws.
But in this doctrine there presents it self a doubt, and that (in mine opinion)
not of the lightest: for if the discourse be that which puts the case in the
law, and which determines the same by distinguishing, limiting, amplifieng,
inferring, and answering the arguments of the contrary party, how is it
possible that the discourse may compass all this, if the memory set not down
all the laws before it? for (as we have above remembered) it is commanded that
no man in actions or judgments shall use his own sense, but leave himself to
be guided by the authority of the laws. Conformable heereunto, it behooves
first to know all the laws and rules of the law faculty, ere we can take hold
of that which makes to the purpose of our case. For albeit we have said that
the pleader (of good understanding) is lord of the laws: yet it is requisite
that all his reasons and arguments be grounded on the principles of this
faculty, without which they are of none effect or valor. And to be able to do
this it behooves to have much memory that may preserve and retain so great a
number of laws which are written in the books.

This argument proves it to be necessary, to the end a pleader may be
accomplished, that there be united in him a great discourse and much memory.
All which I confess, but that which I would say is, that since we cannot find
great discourse united with much memory, through the repugnancie which they
carry each to other, it is requisite that the pleader have much discourse, and
little memory, rather than much memory and little discourse: for to the default
of memory are found many remedies; as books, tables, alphabets, and other
things devised by men: but if discourse fail, there can nothing be found to
remedy the same.

Besides this, Aristotle faith, that men of great discourse though they have a
feeble memory, yet they have much remembrance, by which they retain a certain
diffuse notice of things, they have seen, heard, and read: whereupon
discoursing, they call them to memory And albeit they had not so many remedies
to present unto the understanding the whole body of the ciuilllaw: yet the
laws are grounded on so great reason, as Plato reports, that the ancients
termed the law, Wisdom and Reason. Therefore the judge or pleader, of great
discourse, though judging or counselling he have not the law before him; yet
seldom shall he commit an error: for he has with him the instrument, with
which the Emperors made the laws. Whence oftentimes it falls out that a
Judge of good wit, gives a sentence without knowing the decision of the law;
and afterward finds the same so ruled in his books: and the like we see
sometimes betideth the pleaders when they give their judgment in a case without
studying. The laws and rules of reason, whosoever well marketh them, are the
fountain and original, whence the pleaders gather their arguments and reasons
to prove what they undertake. And this work (for certain) is performed by
the discourse: which power if the pleader want, he shall never skill to shape
an argument though he have the whole civil law at his fingers ends. This we
see plainly to befall in such as study the art of oratorie, when the aptness
thereunto is failing: for though they learn by art the Topics of Cicero,
being the spring from which flow the arguments that may be invented to prove
every problem, both on the affirmative and the negative part: yet they cannot
thereout shape a reason. Again, there come others of great wit and towardnes;
who without looking in book or studying the Topics, make 1000 arguments
serving for the purpose, as occasion requires.

This self falls out in the lawyers of good memory, who will recite you a
whole text very perfectly, and yet of so great a multitude of laws, as are
comprised therein, cannot collect so much as one argument to prove their
intention. And contrariwise, others who have studied simply without books, and
without allowance, work miracles in pleading of causes. Hence we know how much
it imports the common wealth, that there may be such an election and
examination of wits for the sciences; inasmuch as some without art know and
understand what they are to effect: and others laden with precepts and rules,
for that they want a convenient towardliness for practice, commit a thousand
absurdities, which very ill beseem them. So then, if to judge and plead, be
effected by distinguishing, inferring, arguing, and choosing, it stands with
reason that whosoever sets himself to study the laws, enjoy a good
understanding, seeing that such actions appertain to this power, and not to the
memory or to the imagination. How we may find whether a child be endowed with
this difference of wit or no, it would do well to understand: but first it
behooves to lay down what are the qualities of discourse, and how many
differences it compriseth in it self, to the end we may likewise know with
distinction, to which of these the laws appertain: for the first, we must
weet, that albeit the understanding be the most noble power, and of greatest
dignity in man: yet there is none which is more easily led into error (as
touching the truth) than the understanding. This Aristotle attempted to prove
when he said, That the sense is ever true, but the understanding (for the most
Lib. 3. de Anima. ca. 3.
part) discourses badly; the which is plainly seen by experience: for if it
were not so amongst the Divines, the Physicians, the Philosophers, and the
Lawyers, there would not fall out so many weighty dissentions, so diverse
opinions, and so many judgments and conceits upon every point, seeing the
truth is never more than one. Whence it grows, that the senses hold so great
acertaintie in their objects, and the understanding is so easily beguiled in
his, may well be conceived if we consider that the objects of the five senses,
and the spices by which they are known, have their being, real, firm, and
stable by nature before they are known. But that truth which is to be
contemplated by the understanding, if it self do not frame and fashion the
same, it has no formal being of his own; but is wholly scattered and lose in
his materials, as a house conuerred into stones, earth, timber and tiles, with
which so many errors may be committed in building, as there shall men set
themselves to build with ill imagination.

The like befalls in the building which the understanding raises when it
frames a truth: for if the wit be not good, all the residue will work a
thousand follies with the self same principles. Hence springs it that amongst
men there are so sundry opinions touching one self matter: for every one
makes the composition and figure such as is his understanding.

From these errors and opinions are the five senses free: for neither the eyes
make the color, nor the taste the savors, nor the feeling the palpable
qualities; but the whole is made and compounded by nature before any of them
be acquainted with his object. Men because they carry not regard to this bad
operation of the understanding, take hardiness to deliver confidently their
own opinion, without knowing (in certainty) of what sort their wit is, and
whither it can a fashion a truth well or ill. And if we be not resolved
herein, let us ask some of these learned me^, who after they have set down in
writing, and confirmed their opinions with many arguments and reasons, and have
another time changed their opinions and conceit, when or how they can assure
themselves, that (now at last) they have hit the nail on the head? themselves
will not deny, but that they erred the first time, seeing they unsay what they
said tofore.

Secondly, I avouch that they ought to have the less confidence in their
understanding, because the power which once ill compoundeth the truth, whilst
his patron placed so much assurance in his arguments and reasons, should
therefore the sooner take suspect, that he may once again slide into error
whilst he works with the self same instrument of reason; and so much the
rather for that it has been seen by experience, that the first opinion has
borne most truth, and afterward he has relied upon a worse, and of less
probability. They hold it for a sufficient token, that the understanding
compoundeth well a truth, when they see it inamored of such a figure; and that
there are arguments and reasons which move it to conclude in that sort: and
verily they miss their cushion, for the same understanding carries the same
proportion to his false opinions, that the inferior powers have each with the
differences of their object: for if we demand of the Physicians, what meat is
best and most sauoury of all that men accustomably feed upon; I believe they
will answer, that for men who are distempered and of weak stomach, there is
none absolutely good or evil, but such as the stomach is that shall receive
it: for there are stomachs (says Galen) which better brook beef than hens
or cracknels, and othersome abhor eggs and milk: and others again have a
longing after them, and in the manner of using meats: some like roast, and some
boild: and in roast, some love to have the blood run in the dish, and some to
have it brown and burned, And (which is more worthy of consideration) that
meat which this day is fauourly eaten, and with good appetite, to morrow will
be lothed, and a far worse longed for in his room. All this is understood
when the stomach is good and sound: but if it fall into a certain infirmity,
which the Physicians call Pica, or Malacia, then arise longings after things,
which man's nature abhors: so as they eat earth, coals, and lime, with
greater appetite than hens or trouts. If we pass on to the faculty
generatiue, we shall find as many appetites and varieties* for some men love a
foul woman, and abhor a fair: others cast better liking to a fool than her
that is wise: a fat wench is fulsome, and a lean has their liking, silks and
brave attire offend some men's fancies, who leese themselves after one that
totters in her rags. This is understood when the genitall parts are in their
soundness: but if they fall into their infirmity of stomach, which is termed
Malacia; they covet detestable beastliness. The same befalls in the faculty
sensitive: for of the palpable qualities hard and soft, rough and smooth, hot
and cold, moist and dry, there is none of them which can content every ones
feeling: for there are men who take better rest on a hard bed than a soft, and
other some better on a soft than a hard. All this variety of strange tastes and
appetites, is found in the compositions, framed by the understanding: for if we
assemble 100 men of learning and propound a particular question, each of them
delivers a several judgment, and discourses thereof in different manner.
One self argument to one seems a sophistical reason, to another probable;
and some you shall meet with, to whose capacity it concludes as if it were a
demonstration. And this is not only true in diverse understandings, but we see
also by experience that one self reason concludes to one self understanding,
at one time thus-wise, and at another time otherwise: so much that every day
men vary in opinion; some by process of time purging their understanding,
know the default of reason, which first swaied them, and others leesing the
good temperature of their brain, abhor the truth, and give allowance to a
leasing. But if the brain fall into the infirmity, which is termed Malacia,
then we shall see strange judgments and compositions, arguments false and weak
to prove more forcibly than such as carry strength and truth; to good
arguments, an answer shaped, and to bad a condesce^ding: from the premises,
whence a right conclusion may be collected, they gather a wrong, and by strange
arguments, and fond reasons, they prove their bad imaginations. This, grave
and learned men duly aduising, labor to deliver their opinion, concealing the
reasons whereon they ground: for men persuade themselves, that so far man's
authority avails, as the reason is of force on which he builds, and the
arguments resting so indifferent for co^cluding through the diversity of
understandings, every man gives a judgment of the reason conformably to the
wit which he possesses for which cause it is reputed greater gravity to say,
This is mine opinion, for certain reasons which move me so to think; than to
display the arguments whereon he relieth. But if they be enforced to render a
reason of their opinion, they ouerslip not any argument, how slight so ever:
for that which they least valued, with some concludes and works more effect,
than the most urgent. Wherein the great misery of our understanding is
discovered, which compoundeth, and divides, argues, and reasons, and at
last (when it is grown to a conclusion) is void of proof or light, which may
make it discern whether his opinion be true or no.

This self uncertainty have the divines in matters which appertain not to
the faith: for after they have argued at full, they cannot then assure
themselves of any infallible proof or evident success that may discover,
which reasons carried greatest weight, and soeuerie divine casts how he may
best ground himself, and answer with most appearance to the adverse parties
arguments, his own reputation saved, and this is all wherabouts he must bestow
his endeavor. But the charge of a Physician, and a General in the field, after
he has well discoursed and refuted the grounds of the contrary party, is to
mark the success, which if it be good he shall be held for discreet; if had,
allmen will know that he relied upon guilefull reasons.

In matters of faith propounded by the Church there can be fall none error: for
God, best weeling how uncertain Take heed you receive no hurt for leaving out
the Pope.
men's reasons are, and with how great facilltie they run headlong to be
deceived, consents not that matters so high and of so weighty importance,
should rest upon our only determination: but when two or three are gathered
together (...) his name, with the solemnity of the Church, he forthwith (...)
into the midst of them, as president of the action and to gives allowance to
that which they say well and reaueth their errors, and of himself reuealeth
that to whose notice by humane forces we cannot attain. The proof then: which
the reasons formed in matters of faith must receive, is to advise well whether
they prove or infer: the same, which the Catholic church says and
declares: for if they collect ought to the contrary there (without doubt) they
are faulty: but in other questions i where the understanding has liberty of
(...), there has not yet any manner bin devised to know what reasons conclude,
nor when the understanding does well compound a truth: only we rely upon the
good consonance which they make, and that is in argument which may (...) better
appearance and likelier proof of truth, than the (...) themselves.

Physicians, and such as command in martial affairs, have success and
experience for proof of their reasons. For if (...) captains prove by many
reasons; that it is best to join battle, and so many (in the other side)
defend the contrary, that which succcedeth, will confirm the one opinion, and
convince the other. And if two Physicians dispute whether the patient shall die
or live, after he is cured or deceassed, it will appear whose reason was best.
But for all this, the success is yet no sufficient proof, for whereas an
effect has many causes, it may very well betide happily for one cause, and yet
the reasons (perhaps) were grounded on a contrary. Aristotle moreover
affirms, that to know what reasons conclude, it is good to ensue the common
opinion; for if many wisemen say and affirm one self thing, and all conclude
with the same reasons, it is a sign (though topicall) that they are
conclusiue, and that they compound well the truth. But who so takes this into
due consideration, shall find it a proof subject also unto beguiling, for in
the forces of the understanding, weight is of more pre-eminence than number:
for it fares not in this, as in bodily forces, that when many loine together
to lift up a weight, they prevail much, and when few, but little: but to
attain to the notice of a truth deeply hidden, one high understanding is of
more value, than 100000 which are not comparable thereunto; and the reason is,
because the understandings help not each other, neither of many make one, as
it falls out in bodily powers. Therefore well said the wise man, Have many
peacemakers, but take one of a thousand to be thy cou^sellor; as if he should
say, Keep for thy self many friends who may defend thee when thou shall be
driven to come to hand-strokes, but to ask counsel, choose only one amongst a
thousand. Which sentence was also expressed by Heraelilus, who said, One with
me is worth a thousand. In contentions and causes, every learned man be
thinks how he may best ground himself on reason, but after he has well
reuolued every thing, there is no art which can make him know with assurance
whether his understanding have made that composition which in justice is
requisite; for if one pleader prove with law in hand, that reason stands on
the demandants side, and another by way also of the law, proves the like for
the defendant, what remedy shall we devise, to know which of the two pleaders
has formed his reasons best? The sentence of the Judge makes no demonstration
of true justice, neither can the same be termed a success, for his sentence
(also) is but an opinion, and he does none other than cleave to one of the two
pleaders: and to increase the number of learned men in one self opinion, is no
argument to persuade that what they resolve upon is therefore true, for we have
already affirmed and proved, that many weak capacities (though they join in
one to discover some dark conceived truth) shall never ariue to the power and
force of some one alone if the same be an understanding of high reach. And that
the sentence of the Judge makes no demonstration is plainly seen, in that at
another higher seat of justice they reuerse the same and give a diverse
judgment, and (which is woorst) it may so fall, that the inferior judge, was
of an abler capacity than the superior, and his opinion more conformable unto
reason. And that the sentence of the superior judge, is not a sufficient
proof of justice neither, it is a matter very manifest, for in the same
actions, and from the same judges, without adding or reauing any one jot, we
see daily contrary sentences to issue. And he that once is deceived by placing
confidence in his own reasons, falls duly into suspect, that he may be
deceived of new. Wherethrough we should the less rely upon his opinion. For
he that is once naught (says the wiseman) chase him from thee. Pleaders,
seeing the great variety of understandings which possess the judges, and that
each of them is affectionat to the reason which best squareth with his wit, and
that sometime they take satisfaction at one argument, and sometimes assent to
the contrary, they thereupon boldly thrust themselves forth to defend every
cause in controversy, both on the part affirmative and the negative; and this
so much the rather, because they see by experience, that in the one manner and
the other, they have a sentence in their favor, and so that coms very rightly
to be verefied, which wisdom said, The thoughts of mortal men are timorous,
and their foresights uncertain. The remedy then which we have against this,
seeing the reasons of the lawyer fail in proof and experience, shall be, to
make choice of men of great understanding, who may be judges and pleaders; For
the reasons and arguments of such (says Aristotle) are no less certain and
firm, than experience it self. And by making this choice, it seems that the
common wealth rests assured that her officers shall administer justice. But
if they give them all scope, to enter without making trial of their wit, as the
use is at this day, the inconveniences (which we have noted) will evermore
befall.

By what signs it may be known, that he who shall study the laws, has the
difference of wit requisite to this faculty, heretofore (after a sort) we have
expressed, but yet, to renew it to the memory, and to prove the same more at
large, we must know, that the child who being set to read, soon learneth to
know his letters, and can pronounce every one with facility, according as they
be placed in the A B C, gives token that he shall be endowed with much memory,
for such a work as this (for certain) is not performed by the understanding,
nor by the imagination but it appertains unto the office of the memory, to
preserve the figures of things, and to report the natures of each, when
occasion so requires, and where much memory dwells, we have proved before,
that default of understanding also reigns.

To write also with speed, and a fair hand, we said that it bewraid an
imagination, wherethrough the child who in few days will frame his hand, and
write his lines right, and his letters even and with good form and figure,
yields sign of mean understanding, for this work is performed by the
imagination, and these two powers encounter in that contrariety which we have
already spoken of and noted.

And if being set to Grammar he learn the same with little labor, and in
short time make good Latins, and write fine epistles, with the well ruled
closes of Cicero, he shall never be good judge nor pleader, for it is a sign
that he has much memory, and (save by great miracle) he will be of slender
discourse. But if such a one wax obstinat in plodding at the laws, and spend
much time in the schools, he will prove a famous reader, and shall have a
stint of many hearers, for the latin tongue is very gracious in chaires, and
to read with great show, there are requisite many allegations, and to fardell up
in every law, whatsoever has been written touching the same; and to this
purpose, memory is of more necessity than discourse. And albeit it is true,
that in the chair he be to distinguish, infer, angue, judge and choose, to
gather the true sense of the law; yet in the end he puts the case as best
likes himsellfe, he mooues doubts, makes objections, and gives sentence
after his own will without that any gainsaie him; for which a mean discourse
is sufficient. But when one pleader speaks for the plaintiff, and another for
the defendant, and a third lawyer supplieth the judges place; this is a true
controversy, and men cannot speak so adrandom as when they skirmish without
an adversary. And if the child profit slenderly in Grammar, we may thereby
gather, that he has a good discourse, I say we may so conjecture, because it
follows not of necessity, that whosoever cannot learn Latin, has
therefore straight ways a good discourse, seeing we have proved tofore, that
children of good imagination never greatly profit in the Latin tongue; but
that which may best discover this, is Logic: for this science carries the
same proportion with the understanding, as the touchstone with gold. Where
through it falled out certain, that if he who takes lesson in the area, begin
not within a month or two to discourse and to cast doubts; and if there come
not in his head arguments and answers in the matter which is treated of, he is
void of discourse; but if the prove towardly in his sei^ne^; it is an
infallible argument that he is endued with a good understanding for the laws,
and so he may forth with addict himself to study them without longer tarying.
Albeit would hold it better done, first to run through the arts, because
Logic, in respect of the understanding, is naught else than those shockles
which we (...) on the legs of an untrained Mule, which going with them in any
days, takes a steddie and seemlie place. Such a march does the understanding
make in his disputations, when it first binds the same with the rules and
precepts or Logic; but if this child, whom we go thus wise (...), reap no
profit in the Latin tongue, neither can come away with Logic as were
requisite, it behooves to try whether he possess a good imagination, ere we
take him from the laws; for herein is lapped up a very great secret, and it is
good that the commonwealth be done to ware thereof, and it is, that there are
some lawyers, who getting up into the chair, work miracles in interpreting the
texts, and others in pleading: but if you put the staff of justice into their
hands, they have no more ability to govern, than as if the laws had never been enacted to any such end. And contrariwise, some other there are who with
three misunderstood laws, which they have learned at all adventures; being
placed in any government, there cannot more be desired at any man's hands than
they will perform. At which effect, some curious wits take wonder, because
they sinck not into the depth of the cause, from whence it may grow. And the
reason is, that government appertains to the imagination, and not to the
understanding nor the memory. And that this is so, the matter may very
manifestly be proved, considering that the commonwealth is to be compounded
with order and concert, with every thing in his due place, which all put
together makes good figure and correspondence. And this (sundry times
heretofore) we have proved to be a work of the imagination: and it shall
prove naught else to place a great lawyer to be a governor, than to make a
deaf man a Judge in music; but this is ordinarily to be understood, and not
as an universal rule: for we have already proved it is possible that nature
can unite great understanding with much imagination: so shall there follow no
repugnancie to be a good pleader and a famous governor: and we heretofore
discovered, that nature being endowed with all the forces which she may
possess, and with matter well seasoned, will make a man of great memory, and
of great understanding, and of much imagination; who studying the laws, will
prove a famous reader, a great pleader, and no less governor, but nature
makes so few such, as this cannot pass for a general rule.

CHAP. XII.
How it may be proved, that of Theoricall Physic, part appertains to the
memory, and part to the understanding, and the practicke to the imagination.

WHat time the Arabian Physic flourished, there was a Physician very famous,
as well in reading, as in writing, arguing, distinguishing, answering, and
concluding; who, men would think in respect of his profound knowledge, were
able to revive the dead, and to heal any disease whatsoever, and yet the
contrary came to pass: for he never took any patient in cure, who
miscarried not under his hands. Whereat greatly shaming, and quite out of
countenance, he went and made himself a friar, complaining on his evil
fortune, and notable to conceive the cause how he came so to miss. And because
the freshest examples afford surest proof, and do most sway the understanding,
it was held by many grave Physicians, that John Argentier, a physician of our
time, far surpassed Galen in reducing the art of physic to a better method:
and yet for all this it is reported of him, that he was so unfortunate in
practice, as no patient of his country durst take physic at his hands,
fearing some dismal success. Hereat it seems the vulgar have good reason to
marvel, seeing by experience (not only in those rehearsed by us: but also in
many others with whom men have daily to deal) that if the Physician be a great
clearke: for the same reason he is unfit to minister.

Of this effect Aristotle procured to render a reason, but could not find it
out. He thought that the cause why the reasonable Physicians of his time failed
in curing, grew for that such men had only a general notice, and knew not
every particular complexion, contrary to the Empiricks, whose principal study
bent it self to know the properties of eueriy several person, and let pass
the general; but he was void of reason, for both the one and the other
exercised themselves about particular cures, and endeavored (so much as in them
lay) to know each ones nature singly by it self. The difficulty then
consists in nothing else than to know, for what cause so well learned
physicians, though they exercise themselves all their life long in curing; yet
never grow skillful in practice, and yet other simple souls with three or
four rules, learned very soon: and the scholars can more skill of
ministering than they.

The true answer of this doubt holds no little difficulty, seeing that
Aristotle could not find it out, nor render (at least in some sort) any part
thereof. But grounding on the principles of our doctrine, we will deliver the
same: for we must know that the perfection of a physician consists in two
things, no less necessary to attain the end of his art, than two legs are
to go without halting. The first is, to weet by way of method, the precepts and
rules of curing men in general, without descending to particulars. The second,
to be long time exercised in practice, and to have visited many patients: for
men are not so different each from other, but that in diverse things they agree;
neither so conjoined, but that there rest in them particularities of such
condition, as they can neither be delivered by speech, nor written, nor taught,
nor so collected, as that they may be reduced into art: but to know them, is
only granted to him, who has often seen and had them in handling. Which may
easily be conceived, considering that man's face, being composed of so small a
number of parts, as are two eyes, a nose, two cheeks, a mouth, and a forehead,
nature shapeth yet therein so many compositions and combinations, as if you
assemble together 100000 men, each one has a countenance so different from
other, and proper to himself, that it falls out a miracle, to find two who
do altogether resemble. The like betideth in the four elements, and in the 4
first qualities, hot, cold, moist, and dry, by the harmony of which, the life
and health of man is compounded: and of so slender a number of parts, nature
makes so many proportions, that if a 100000 men be begotten, each of them comes
to the world with a health so peculier and proper to himself, that if God
should on the sudden miraculously change their proportion of these first
qualities, they would all become sick, except some two or three, that by great
disposition had the like consonance and proportion. Whence two conclusions are
necessarily inferred. The first is, that every man who falls sick, ought
to be cured conformable to his particular proportion; in sort, that if the
physician restore him not to his first consonance of humors, he cannot
recover. The second that to perform this as it ought, is requisite the
physician have first seen and dealt with the patient sundry times in his
health, by feeling his pulse, perusing his state, and what manner countenance
and complexion he is of, to the end that when he shall fall sick, he may judge
how far he is from his health, and in ministering unto him, may know to what
point he is to restore him. For the first, (namely to weet and understand the
Theorick and composition of the art) says Galen, it is necessary to be
endowed with great discourse and much memory: for the one part of physic
consists in reason, and the other in experience and history. To the first is
understanding requisite, and to the other memory, and it resting a matter of
so great difficulty, to unite these two powers in a large degree; it follows
of force that the physician become unapt for the Theorick. Where-through we
behold many Physicians, learned in the Greek and Latin tongue, and great
Anotomists and Simplicists (all works of the memory) who brought to arguing or
disputations, or to find out the cause of any effect that appertains to the
understanding, can small skill thereof.

The contrary befalls in others, who show great wit and sufficiency in the
Logic and Philosophy of this art: but being set to the Latin and Greek
tongue, touching simples and anotomies, can do little, because memory in them
is wanting: for this cause Galen said very well, That it is no marvel, if
among so great a multitude of men, who practice the exercise and study of the
art of Physic and Philosophy, so few are found to profit therein, and
yielding the reason, he says, It requires a great toil to find out a wit
requisite for this Science; or a master who can teach the same with
perfection, or can study it with diligence and attention. But with all these
reasons Galen goes groping, for he could not hit the cause whence it comes to
pass, that few persons profit in Physic. Yet in saying it was a great labor
to find out a wit requisite for this science, he spoke truth; albeit he did not
so far-forth specify the same, as we will; namely, for that it is so difficult
a matter to unite a great understanding with much memory, no man attaineth to
the depth of Theoricall physic. And for that there is found a repugnancie
between the understanding and the imagination (whereunto we will now prove,
that practice and the skill to cure with certainty appertains) it is a
miracle to find out a Physician, who is both a great Theorist, and withal a
great practitioner, or contrariwise a great practitioner, and very well seen
in Theorick. And that the imagination, and not the understanding is the power,
whereof the physician is to serve himself, in knowing and curing the diseases of
particular persons, may easily be proved.

First of all presupposing the doctrine of Aristotle, who affirms, That the
understanding cannot know particulars; neither distinguish the one from the
other, nor discern the time and place, and other particularities which make
men different each from other: and that every one is to be cured after a diverse
manner; and the reason is (as the vulgar Philosophers avouch) for that the
understanding is a spiritall power, and cannot be altered by the particulars
which are replenished with matter. And for this cause Aristotle said, That the
sense is of particulars, and the understanding of universals.

If then medicines are to work in particulars, and not in universals (which
are unbegotten, and incorruptible) the understanding falls out to be a power
impertinent for curing. Now the difficulty consists in discerning why men of
great understanding, cannot possess good outward senses for the particulars,
they being powers so repugnant; And the reason is very plain, and this is it,
that the outward senses cannot well perform their operations, unless they be
assisted with a good imagination, and this we are to prove by the opinion of
Aristotle, who going about to express what the imagination was, says it is a
motion caused by the outward sense, in sort as the color, which multiplieth by
the thing colored, does alter the eye. And so it fares that this self
color, which is in the christallin humor, passes farther into the
imagination, and makes therein the same figure which was in the eye. And if you
dema^d of which of these two kinds the notice of the particular is made, all
philosophers avouch (and that very truly) that the second figure is it which
alters the imagination, and by them both is the notice caused, conformable to
that so common speech, From the object, and from the power the notice
springs. But from the first which is in the christallin humor, and from the
sightfull power, grows no notice, if the imagination be not attentive
thereunto, which the physicians do plainly prove, saying, That if they lance
or sear the flesh of a diseased person, who for all that feels no pain, it
shows a token that his imagination is distracted into some profound
contemplation: whence we see also by experience in the sound, that if they be
raught into some imagination, they see not the things before them, nor hear
though they be called, nor taste meat sauorie or unsavory, though they have it
in their mouth. Wherefore it is a thing certain, that not the understanding or
outward senses, but the imagination, is that which makes the judgment, and
takes notice of particular things.

It follows then, that the physician, who is well seen in Theoricke, for that
he is endowed with great understanding, or great memory, must of force prove a
bad practitioner, as having defect in his imagination. And contrariwise, he
that proves a good practitioner, must of force be a bad Theorist: for much
imagination cannot be united with much understanding and much memory. And this
is the cause for which so few are thoroughly seen in physic, or commit but
small errors in curing: for, not to halt in the work, it behooves to know the
art, and to possess a good imagination, for putting the same in practice, and
we have proved that these two cannot stick together.

The Physician never goes to know and cure a disease, but that secretly to
himself he frames a Syllogism in Darij, though he be never so well
experienced, and the proof of his first proportion belongs to the
understanding, and of the second to the imagination: for which cause, the great
Theorists do ordinarily err in the minor, and the great practitioners in the
mayor: as if we should speak after this manner, Every fever which springs
from cold and moist humors, ought to be cured with medicines hot and dry.
(Taking the tokening of the cause) this fever which the man endures, depends
on humors cold and moist: therefore the same is to be cured with medicines hot
and dry. The understanding will sufficiently prove the truth of the mayor,
because it is an universal, saying; That cold and moist require for their
temperature hot and dry: for every quality is abated by his contrary. But
coming to prove the minor, there the understanding is of no value: for that
the same is particular and of another jurisdiction whose notice appertains to
the imagination, borowing the proper and particular tokens of the disease, from
the five outward senses.

And if the tokening is to be taken from the fever, or from his cause, the
understanding cannot reach thereunto: only it teaches the tokening is to be
taken from that which shows greatest peril; but which of those tokenings is
greatest, is only known to the imagination, by counting the damages which the
fever produces, with those of the Syntomes of the evil, and the cause and the
small or much force of the power. To attain this notice, the imagination
possesses certain unutterable properties, with which the same cleereth matters
that cannot be expressed nor conceived, neither is there found any art to teach
them. Where-through, we see a physician enter to visit a patient, and by means
of his sight, his hearing, his smelling, and his feeling, he knows things
which seem impossible. In sort that if we demand of the same physician, how he
could come by so ready a knowledge, himself cannot tell the reason: for it is
a grace which springs from the fruitfulness of the imagination, which by
another name is termed a readiness of capacity, which by common signs, and
by uncertain conjectures, and of small importance, in the twinkling of an eye
knows 1000 differences of things, wherein the force of curing and
prognosticating with Solertia.
certainty consists.

This spice of promptness, men of great understanding do want, for that it is
a part of the imagination: for which cause, having the tokens before their eyes
(which give them notice how the disease fares) it works no manner alteration
in their senses, for that they want imagination. A physician once asked me in
great secrecy, what the cause was, that he having studied with much curiosity
all the rules and considerations of the art prognosticatiue; and being therein
thoroughly instructed, yet could never hit the truth in any prognostication
which he made. To whom (I remember) I yielded this answer that the art of
Physic is learned with one power, and put in execution with another. This man
had a very good understanding, but wanted imagination: but in this doctrine
there arises a difficulty very great, and that is, how physicians of great
imagination, can learn the art of physic, seeing they want that of
understanding: and if it be true that such were better than those who were well
learned, to what end serves it to spend time in the schools? to this may be
answered, that first to know the art of physic is a matter very important:
for in two or three years, a man may learn all that which the ancients have bin
getting in two or three thousand. And if a man should heerin ascertain himself
by experience, it were requisite that he lived some thousands of years, and in
experimenting of medicines, he should kill an infinite number of persons before
he could attain to the knowledge of their qualities: from whence we are freed,
by reading the books of reasonable experienced physicians, who give
aduertisment of that in writing, which they found out in the whole course of
their lives; to the end that the physicians of these days may minister some
receipts with assurance, and take heed of other-some as venomous.

Besides this, we are to weet that the common and vulgar points of al arts are
very plain and easy to learn, and yet the most important of the whole work.
And contrariwise, the most curious and subtle, are the most obscure, and of
least necessity for curing. And men of great imagination, are not altogether
deprived of understanding, nor of memory. Wher-through, by having these two
powers in some measure they are able to learn the most necessary points of
Physic: for that they are plainest, and with the good imagination which they
have, can better look into the disease and the cause thereof, than the
cunningest doctors. Besides that the imagination is it which finds out the
occasion of the remedy that ought to be applied, in which grace the greatest
part of practice consists: for which cause Galen said, that the proper name
of a physician, was The finder out of occasion.

Now to be able to know the place, the time, and the occasion, for certain, is
a work of the imagination, since it touches figure and correspondence; but
the difficulty consists in knowing (amongst so many differences as there are
of the imagination) to which of them the practice of Physic appertains, for
it is certain, that they all agree not in one self particular reason, which
contemplation has given me much more toil and labor of spirit than all the
residue: and yet for all that, I cannot as yet yield the same a fitting name,
unless it spring from a less degree of heat which partaketh that difference
of imagination, wherewith verses and songs are endited. Neither do I rely
altogether on this, for the reason whereon I ground my self, is, that such as
I have marked to be good practitioners, do all piddle somewhat in the art of
versifieng, and raise not up their contemplation very high, and their verses
are not of any rare excellency, which may also betide, for that their heat
exceeds that term which is requisite for poetry: and if it so come to pass
for this reason, the heat ought to hold such quality, as it somewhat dry the
substance of the brain, and yet much resolve not the natural heat, albeit (if
the same pass further) it breeds no evil difference of the wit for
Physic, for it unites the understanding to the imagination by adustion. But
the imagination is not so good for curing, as this which I seek, which
inuiteth a man to be a witch, superstitious, a magician, a deceiuer, a
palmister, a fortune teller, and a calker: for the diseases of men are so
hidden, and deliver their motions with so great secrecy, that it behooves
always to go calking what the matter is.

This difference of imagination may hardly be found in Spain, for tofore we
have proved that the inhabitants of this region want memory and imagination,
and have good discourse: neither yet the imagination of such as dwell toward
the North, is of avail in Physic, for it is very slow and slack, only the
same is towardly to make clocks, pictures, poppets, and other ribaldries which
are impertinent for man's service.

Egypt alone is the region which ingendereth in his inhabitants this
difference of imagination, wherthrough the Historiens never make an end of
telling, how great enchaunters the Egyptians are, and how ready for obtaining
things, and finding remedies to their necessities. Joseph to exaggerat the
wisdom of Solomon, said in this manner, So great was the knowledge and
wisdom which Solomon received of God, that he outpassed all the ancients, and
even the very Egyptians, who were reputed the wisest of all others. And Plato
also said, that the Egyptians exceeded all the men of the world in skill how
to get their living; which ability appertains to the imagination. And that
this is true, may plainly appear, for that all the sciences belonging to the
imagination, were first devised in Egypt, as the Mathematics, Astrology,
Arithmeticke, Perspectiue, Iudiciarie, and the rest. But the argument which
most ouer-ruleth me in this behalf, is, that when Francis of Valois king of
France, was molested by a long infirmity, and saw that the Physicians of his
household and court, could yield him no remedy, he would say every time when his
fever increased, It was not possible that any Christian Physician could cure
him, neither at their hands did he ever hope for recovery: wherethrough one
time agreeued to see himself thus vexed with this fever, he dispatched a post
into Spain, praieng the emperor Charles the fifth, that he would send him a
Jew Physician, the best of his court, touching whom he had understood, that he
was able to yield him remedy for his sickness, if by art it might be
effected. At this request the Spaniards made much game, and all of them
concluded it was an humorous conceit of a man, whose brains were turmoiled with
the fever. But for all this, the Emperor gave commandment that such a
Physician should be sought out, if any there were, though to find him they
should be driven to send out of his dominions; and when none could be met
withal, he sent a Physician newly made a Christian, supposing that he might
serve to satisfy the kings humor. But the Physician being arrived in France,
and brought to the kings presence; there passed between them a gracious
discourse, in which it appeared that the Physician was a Christian: and
therefore the king would receive no physic at his hands. The king with
opinion which he had conceived of the physician, that he was an Hebrew, by way
of passing the time, asked him whether he were not as yet weary in looking for
the Messiah promised in the law? The physician answered; Sir I expect not any
Messiah promised in the Jews law. You are very wise in that (replied the
king): for the tokens which were delivered in the divine scripture, whereby to
know his coming, are all fulfilled many days ago. This number of days
(reioyned the physician) we Christians do well reckon: for there are now
finished 1542 years, that he came and conuersed in the world 33 years; in the
end of which he died on the cross, and the third day rose again, and
afterward ascended into heaven, where he now remains. Why then quoth the
king you are a Christian? yea Sir, by the grace of God, I am a Christian (quoth
the physician) then (answered the king) return you home to your own dwelling in
good time: for in mine own house and court I have Christian physicians very
excellent, and I held you for a Jew, who (in mine opinion) are those that have
best natural ability to cure my disease. After this manner he licenced him
without once suffering him to feel his pulse, or see his state, or telling him
one word of his grief. And forthwith he sent to Constantinople for a Jew, who
healed him with the only milk of a she Ass.

This imagination of king Francis (as I think) was very true, and I have so
conceived it to be, for that in the great hot distemperatures of the brain, I
have proved tofore, how the imagination finds out that, which (the party
being sound) could never have done. And because it shall not seem that I have
spoken in jest, and without relying herein upon a material ground, you shall
understand that the varieties of men, as well in the compositions of the body,
as of the wit and conditions of the soul, spring from their inhabiting
countries of different temperature, from drinking diverse waters, and from not
using all of them one kind of food. Wherein Plato said, Some through variable
winds and heats, are amongst themselves diverse in manners and kinds: others
through the waters and food which spring of the earth, who not only in their
bodies, but in their minds also, can skill to do things better and worse, as
if he should say, some men are different from others, either by reason of the
contrary air, or through drinking several waters, or for that they feed not
all upon one kind of meat, and this difference is discerned not only in the
countenance and demeanure of the body, but also in the wit of the soul.

If I then shall now prove, that the people of Israel dwelt many years in
Egypt, and that departing from thence, they did eat and drink waters and
meats, which are appropriat to make this difference of imagination, I shall then
yield a demonstration for the opinion of the king of France, and by consequence
we shall understand what wits of men are in Spain to be made choice of, for
studieng the art of Physic. As touching the first, we must know, that Abraham
asking tokens whereby to be assured that he or his descendents should possess
the land of promise, the text says, that whilst he slept, God made him answer
saying, Know that thy seed shall be a stranger in a country not his own, and
they shall make them underlings in bondage, and afflict them for 400 years,
notwithstanding I will judge that nation whom they serve, and after this, they
shall depart from thence with great substance; which Prophecy was
accomplished: albeit God for certain respects, added thereunto 30 years more,
for which cause the scripture says, But the abode of the children of Israel
in Egypt was 430 years, which being finished, that very day the whole army
of the Lord departed out of the land of Egypt. But although this text say
manifestly, that the people of Israel abode in Egypt 400 years, a gloss
declares, that thief years were the whole time which Israel went on
pilgrimage, until he possessed his own country. In as much as he remained in
Egypt but 210 yeates, which declaration agrees not well with that which S.
Stephen the Prothomartyr made, in his discourse to the Jews, namely that the
people of Israel was 430 years in the bondage of Egypt.

And albeit the abode of 210 years suffised, that the qualities of Egypt
might take hold in the people of Israel, yet the time whiles they lived
abroad, was no lost season, in respect of that which appertains to the wit,
for those who live in bondage, in misery, in affliction, and in strange
countries, engender much choler adust, because they want liberty of speech,
and of revenging their injuries: and this humor, when the same is grown dry,
becomes the instrument of subtlety, of craft, and of malice: whence we see
by experience, that if a man rake hell for bad manners and conditions, he cannot
find worse than in a slave, whose imagination always occupies itself in
devising how to procure damage to his master, and freedom to himself.
Moreover the land which the people of Israel walked through, was not much
estranged nor different from the qualities of Egypt: for in respect of the
misery thereof, God promised Abraham to give him another, much more abundant
and fruitful. And this is a matter greatly verefied, as well in good natural
Philosophy, as in experience, that barraine and beggarly regions, not fat, nor
plentiful of fruit, engender men of very sharp wit. And contrariwise abundant
and fertile soils, bring forth persons big limmed, courageous, and of great
bodily forces, but very slow of wit.

Touching Greece, the Historiens never make an end to recount, how appropriat
that region is to breed men of great ability, and particularly Galen
avouches, that it is held a miracle for a man to find a fool in Athens. And
we must note that this was a city the most miserable, and most barren of all
the rest in Greece. Whence we collect, that through the qualities of Egypt, and
of the Provinces where the Hebrew people lived, they grew very quick of
capacity. But it behooves likewise to understand for what cause the
temperature of Egypt produces this difference of imagination. And this will
fall out a plain matter when you are done to ware, that in this region, the
sun yields a fervent heat: and therefore the inhabitants have their brain
dried, and choler adust, the instrument of wiliness and aptness: In which
sense, Aristotle demands why the men of Aethiopia and Egypt, have their feet
crooked, and are commonly curlpated and flat nosed? to which problem he
answers, that the much heat of the country rosteth the substance of these
members, and wrieth them, as it draws together a piece of leather set by the
fire; and for the same cause, their hair curleth, and themselves also are
wily. And that such as inhabit hot countries, are wiser than those who are born
in cold regions, we have already proved by the opinion of Aristotle: who
demands whence it grows, that men are wiser in hot climats than in cold? But
he wist not to answer this problem, nor make distinction of wisdom: for we
have proved heretofore, that in man there rest two sorts of wisdom; one
whereof Plato said, Knowledge which is severed from Justice, ought rather to be
termed craft than wisdom: another there is found accompanied with justice and
simplicity, without doubleness, and without wiles; and this is properly called
Wisdom: for it goes always guided by justice and duty. They who inhabit
very hot countries, are wise in the first kind of wisdom, and such are those
of Egypt.

Now let us see when the people of Israel was departed out of Egypt, and come
into the desert, what meat they did eat, what water they drank, and of what
temperature the air was where they travailed? that we may know whether upon
this occasion, the wit with which they issued out of bondage, took exchange; or
whether the same were more confirmed in them? Forty years (says the text)
God maintaind this people with Manna, a meat so delicat and sauoury, as any
might be, that ever men tasted in the world. In sort that Moses seeing the
delicacie and goodness thereof, commanded his brother Aaron to fill a vessel,
and place the same in the Arc of confederacy, to the end the descendents of
this people, when they were settled in the land of promise, might see the bread
with which God had fed their fathers, whiles they lived in the wilderness, and
how bad payment they yielded him in exchange of such cherishments. And to the
end that we who have notseen this meat, may know of what manner the same was: it
will do well that we describe the Manna which nature makes; and so adioining
thereunto the conceit of a great delicacie, we may wholly imagine his goodness.
The material cause of which Manna is engendered, is a very delicat vapor,
which the sun, with the force of his heat, draws up from the earth; the
which taking stay aloft, is concocted and made perfect: and then the cold of
the night coming on, it congealeth, and through his waightinesse, turns to
fall upon the trees and stones, where men gather the same, and preserve it in
vessels to serve for food. It is called Deawy, and Airy honny, through the
resemblance which it bears to the deaw, and for that it is made in the air.
His color is white, his savor sweet as honny: his figure like that of
Coriander, which signs the holy Scripture places also in the Manna, which the
people of Israel did eat: and therefore I carry an imagination, that both were
semblable in nature. But if that which God created were of more delicat
substance, so much the better shall we confirm our opinion. But I am ever of
opinion that God applied himself to natural means, when with them he could
perform what he meant; and where nature wanted, his omnipotency supplied.
This I say, because to give them Manna to eat in the desert (besides that which
heerby he would signify) me seems was founded in the self disposition of
the earth, which (even at this day) produces the best Manna in the world:
through which Galen affirms, that on Mount Libanus (which is not far distant
from this place) there is great and very choice abundance: in sort, that the
country people are wont to sing in their pastimes, That Jupiter raineth honny
in that region. And though it be true, that God miraculously created that Manna
in such quantity, at such time, and on special days: yet it may be that it
partaked the same nature with ours, as had also the water which Moses drew
forth of the rock; and the fire which Elias with his word caused to rain from
heaven; all of them natural things, though miraculously brought to pass.

The Manna described by the holy Scripture, it says was as deaw, and as the
seed of Coriander, white, and in taste like honny, which conditions are also in
the Manna produced by nature. The temperature of this meat, the Physicians say,
is hot, and consisting of subtle and very delicat parts, which composition
the Manna eaten by the Jews, should also seem to have: whereon (complaining of
his tenderness) they said in this manner, Our soul has a fulsomnesse at this
slight meat; as if they should say, that they could no longer endure nor brook
so light a meat in their stomach: and the Philosophy of this was, that their
stomachs had been made strong by onions, chibals, and leeks; and coming to eat
a meat of so small resistance, it wholly with them turned into choler. And for
this cause, Galen gave the charge that men endowed with much natural heat,
should forbear to eat honny or other light meats: for they would turn to
corruption, and in steed of digestion, would partch up like soot.

The like hereof befell to the Hebrews, as touching Manna, which with them
wholly turned into choler adust, and therefore they were altogether dry and
thin: for this meat had no corpulencie to fatten them. Our soul (said they) is
dry, and our eyes see nothing but Manna. The water which they drank after
this meat, was such as they would desire; and if they could not find any such,
God showed to Moses a wood of so divine virtue, that dipping the same in gross
and salt waters, it made them to become delicat and of good savor: and when
they had no sort of water at all, Moses took the rod, with which he had parted
the red Sea, and striking therewith the rocks, there issued springs of waters
so delicat and sauourie, as their taste could desire. In sort, that S. Paul
says, The rock followed them, as if he should say, The water of the rock
seconded their taste, issuing delicat, sweet, and sauourie. And they had
accustomed their stomachs before, to drink waters thick and brinish: for in
Egypt (says Galen) they boiled them ere they could serve for drink, for that
they were naughty and corrupt, so as afterward drinking waters so delicat, it
could not fall out otherwise, but that they should turn into choler, for that
they found small resistance. Water requires the same qualities, to digest well
in our stomach (says Galen) and not to corrupt, that the meat has whereon we
accustomably feed. If the stomach be strong, it behooves to give the same
strong meat, which may answer in proportion: if the same be weak and delicat,
such also the meat ought to be. The like regard is to be held as touching the
water: where-through we see by experience, that if a man use to drink gross
water; he never quenches his thirst with the purer: neither feels it in his
stomach. Rather the same increases his thirst: for the excessive heat of the
stomach burns and resolves it so soon as it is received, because therein is
no resistance.

The air which they enjoyed in the desert, we may also say, that it was
subtle and delicat: for iournieng over mountains, and through uninhabited
places, they had the same always fresh, cleansed, and without any corruption:
for they never made long stay in any one place. So did it always carry a
temperature: for by day a cloud was set before the sun, which suffered him
not to scorch over vehemently; and by night, a pillar of fire which moderated
the same. And to enjoy an air of this manner (Aristotle affirms) does much
quicken the wit. We may consider then that the men of this folk must needs
have a seed very delicat and adust, eating such meat as Manna was, and
drinking the waters before specified, and breathing and enjoying an air so
cleansed and pleasant, as also that the Hebrew women bred flowers very subtle
and delicat.

Again, let us call to mind, that which Aristotle said, that the flowers being
subtle and delicat, the child who is bred of them, shall be a man of great
capacity. How much it imports, that for begetting children of great
sufficiency, the fathers do feed on delicat meats, we will prove at large in
the last chapter of this work. And because all the Hebrews did eat of one
self so spiritual and delicat meat, and drank of one self water, all their
children and posterity proved sharp and great of wit in matters appertaining
to this world.

Now then, when the people of Israel came into the land of promise, with so
great a wit as we have expressed, there befell unto them afterward so many
trauails, dearths, siedges of enemies, subiections, bondages, and ill
intreatings: that though they had not brought from Egypt and the wilderness,
that temperature, hot, dry, and adust before specified: they would yet have
made it so by this dismal life: for continual sadness and toil, unites the
vital spirits, and the arteriall blood, in the brain, in the liver, and in the
heart: and there staying one above another, they grow to dryness and adustion.
Where-through, often times they procure the fever, and their ordinary is to make
melancholy by adustio^, whereof they (in manner) do all partake even to this
day, in respect of that (which Hippocrates says) Fear and sadness continuing
a long time, signifies melancholy. This choler adust (we said before) to be
the instrument of promptness, craftiness, sharpness, subtlety, and
maliciousness. And this is applied to the conjectures of Physic, and by the
same a man gets notice of the diseases, their causes and remedies. Wherefore
king Francis understood this marvelous well, and it was no lightness of the
brain, or invention of the devil, which he uttered. But through his great
fever, lasting so many days, and with the sadness to find himself sick and
without remedy, his brain grew dry, and his imagination rose to such a point,
of which we made proof tofore, that if it have the temperature behooffull, a
man will on a sudden deliver that which he never learned. But there presents it
self a dufficultie very great against all these things rehearsed by us, and
that is, that if the children or nephews of those who were in Egypt, and
enjoyed the Manna, the waters, and the subtle air of the wilderness, had been
made choice of for physicians, it might seem, that king Francis opinion were
in some part probable, for the reasons by us reported. But that their
posterity should preserve till our days those dispositions of the Manna, the
water, the air, the afflictions, and the trauails, which their ancestors
endured in the prison of Babylon, it is a matter hard to be conceived: for if
in 430 years, during which the people of Israel lived in Egypt, and 40 in the
desert, their seed could purchase those dispositions of ability, better, and
with more facility could they leese it again in 2000 years, whilst they have
been absent. And specially sithence their coming into Spain, a region so
contrary to Egypt, and where they have fed upon different meats, and druncke
waters of nothing so good temperature and substance as those other.

This is agreeable to the nature of man, and whatsoother living creature and
plant, which forthwith partaketh the conditions of the earth where they live,
and leese those which they brought with the^ from elsewhere. And whatsoever
instance they can allege, the like will betide it within few days beyond all
gainsaying.

Hippocrates recounteth of a certain sort of men, who to be different from the
vulgar, chose for a token of their nobility, to have their head like a
sugar-loafe. And to shape this figure by art, when the child was born, the
mid-wiues took care to bind their heads with sweaths, and bands, until they
were fashioned to the form. And this artificialnesse grew to such force, as it
was converted into nature: for in process of time, all the children that were
born of nobility, had their head sharp from their mothers womb. So from
thenceforth, the art and diligence of the mid-wiues heerin, became superfluous.
But so soon as they left nature to her liberty, and her own ordering, without
oppressing her any longer with art, she turned by little and little to recover
again the figure which she had before.

In like sort might it befall the children of Israel, who notwithstanding the
region of Egypt, the Manna, the delicat waters, and their sorrowfulness,
wrought those dispositions of wit in that seed: yet those reasons and respects
surceasing, and other contrary growing on, it is certain that by little and
little the qualities of the Manna would have worn away, and other far different
therefrom have grown on, conformable to the country where they inhabited, to
the meats which they fed upon, to the waters which they drank, and to the air
which they breathed. This doubt in natural philosophy holds little
difficulty: for there are some accidents to be found, which are brought in at
a moment, and afterward endure for ever in the subject, without possibility of
corrupting. Others there are, which wast as much time in undoing, as they
occupied in engrafting, and some more, some less, according to the action of
the agent, and the disposition of the patient. For example of the first, we
must know, That a certain man through a great fear wher-into he was driven,
rested so transformed and changed in color, that he seemed dead; and the same
lasted not only during all the time of his own life, but also the children
which he begat had the same color: without that he could find any remedy to
take it away. Conformable heerunto, it may be, that in 430 years, whilst the
people of Israel led their lives in Egypt, 40 in the wilderness, and 60 in
the bondage of Babylon there needed more than 3000 years, that this seed of
Abraham should take a full loss of their disposition of wit, occasioned by
this Manna, seeing to reform the bad color, settled upon a sudden through
fear, more than 100 years were requisite. But because the truth of this
doctrine may be understood from the root, it behooves to resolve two doubts
which serve to the purpose, and as yet I have not cleared. The first is, whence
it comes, that meats, by how much the more delicat and sauoury they are, as
hens, and partridge; so much the sooner the stomach does abhor and loathe
them? and contrariwise, we see that a man eats beef all the year long
without receiving any annoiance thereby, and if he eat hens flesh but three
or four days together, the fifth he cannot abide the savor thereof; but that
it will turn his stomach vpside-downe. The second is, whence it comes, that
bread of wheat, and flesh of mutton, not being of substance so good and
sauoury, as hen and partridge; yet the stomach never loatheth them, though we
feed thereon all our lives long? But wanting bread we cannot eat other meats,
neither do they content us.

He that can shape an answer to these two doubts, shall easily understand for
what cause the descendents of the people of Israel, have not yet lost the
dispositions and accidents which Manna brought into that seed: neither will the
promptness of wit, and subtletie whereof they then possessed themselves, so
soon take an end. Two certain and very true principles there are in natural
philosophy, on which the answer and resolution of these doubts depends. The
first is, That al powers, (whatsoever) which govern man, are naked and deprived
of the conditions and qualities which rest in their object, to the end that
they may know and give judgment of all the differences. The eyes partake this
property, who being to receive into themselves all figures and colors, it was
of necessity, utterly to deprive them of figures and colors. For if they were
pale, as in those who are overcome with the yellow iandize, all things whereon
they looked would appear to them of the same color. So the tongue, which is
the instrument of taste, ought to be void of all savors: and if the same be
sweet or bitter, we know by experience, that whatsoever we eat or drink has
the like taste. And the same may be avouched of hearing, of smelling, and of
feeling. The second principle is, that all things created, naturally covet
their preservation, and labor to endure for ever, and that the being which God
and nature have given them, may never take end: notwithstanding that afterward
they are to possess a better nature. By this principle, all natural things
endowed with knowledge and sense, abhor and fly from that which alters and
corrupts their natural composition.

The stomach is naked and deprived of the substance and qualities of all meats
in the world, as the eye is of colors and figures, and when we eat ought,
though the stomach overcome it, yet the meat turns against the stomach, for
that the same is of a contrary principle, and alters and corrupts his
temperature and substance, for no agent is of such force, but that in doing, it
also suffers. Meats that are very delicat and pleasing do much alter the
stomach; first, because it digesteth and embraces them with great appetit and
liking, and then, through their being so subtle and void of excrements, they
pierce into the substance of the stomach, from whence they cannot depart
again: the stomach then feeling that this meat alters his nature, and
takes away the proportion which he carries to other meats, grows to abhor
the same, and if he must needs feed thereon, it behooves to use many sallets
and seasonings, thereby to beguile him.

All this, Manna had even from the beginning, for though the same were a meat
of such delicasie and pleasing relish, yet in the end, the people of Israel
found it fulsome, and therefore said, Our soul loatheth this over light meat.
A complaint far unworthy of a people so specially favored by God, who had
pretended a remedy in that behalf, which was, that Manna had those relishes
and tastes which well agreed with them, to the end they might eat thereof. Thou
sentest them bread from heaven, which had in it all pleasingnesse; for which
cause many amongst them fed thereon with good appetite, for they had their
bones, their sinews, and their flesh, so imbewed with Manna and his qualities,
that by means of the resemblance from each to other, they longed after nothing
else. The like befalls in bread of wheat, and weathers flesh, whereon we
accustomably feed.

Gross meats and of good substance, as beef, have much excrements, and the
stomach receives them not with such desire, as those that are delicat and of
good relish, and therefore is longer ere the same take alteration by them.
Hence comes it, that to corrupt the alteration which Manna made in one day,
it behooves to feed a whole month upon contrary meats. And (after this
reckoning) to deface the qualities that Manna brought into the seed in the
space of 40 years, there need 4000 and upward. And if any man will not
herewith rest satisfied, let us say, that as God brought out of Egypt the 12
tribes of Israel, so he had taken then 12 male, and 12 female Moors of
Aethiopia, and had placed them in our country, in how many years think we,
would these Moors and their posterity, linger to leave their native color,
not mixing themselves the while with white persons? to me it seems a long
space of years would be requisite. For though 200 years have passed over our
heads, since the first Egyptians came out of Egypt into Spain, yet their
posterity have not forlorn that their delicacie of wit and promptness, nor
yet that roasted color which their ancestors brought with them from Egypt.
Such is the force of man's seed when it receives thereinto any well rooted
quality. And as in Spain the Moors communicate the color of their elders, by
means of their seed, though they be out of Aethiopia, so also the people of
Israel coming from thence, may communicate to their descendents their
sharpness of wit, without remaining in Egypt, or eating Manna: for to be
ignorant or wise, is as well an accident in man, as to be black or white. True
it is, that they are not now so quick and prompt, as they were a thousand
years since: for from the time that they left to eat Manna, their posterity
have ever lessened hitherto, because they used contrary meats, and inhabited
countries different from Egypt: neither drank waters of such delicacie as in
the wilderness. As also by mingling with those who descended from the Gentiles,
who wanted this difference of wit: but that which cannot be denied them, is,
that as yet they have not lost it altogether.

CHAP. XIII.
By what means it may be showed, to what difference of ability the art of
warfare appertains, and by what signs the man may be known, who is endowed
with this manner of wit.

WHat is the cause (says Aristotle) that seeing Fortitude is not the greatest
of all virtues, but Justice and Prudence are greater than it: yet the
commonwealth, and in a manner all men with a common consent do make greater
account, and within themselves, do more honor a valiant man than either the
just or wise; though placed in never so high callings or offices. To this
problem Aristotle answers, saying; there is no king in the world who does
not either make war, or maintain war against some other: and for so much as the
valiant procure them glory and empire, take revenge on their enemies, and
preserve their estate, they yield chiefest honor, not to the principal
virtue, which is Justice, but to that by which they reap most profit and
advantage. For if they did not in this wise entreat the valiant, how were it
possible, that kings should find captains and soldiers, who would willingly
ieopard their lives to defend their goods and estates?

Of the Asiaticans it is recounted, that there was a people inhabiting a part
thereof, who bare themselves very courageously; and being asked why they had
neither king nor law: they made answer, that laws made men cowards, and seeing
it was necessary to undergo the hazard of the wars, for depriving another of
his estate, they made choice to fight for their own behoof, and themselves to
reap the benefit of the victory. But this was an answer rather of barbarous
men than reasonable people, who well know, that without a king, without a
commonwealth, and without laws, it is impossible to preserve men in peace.
That which Aristotle said, serves very well to the purpose, though there be a
better answer to be framed, namely, That when Rome honored her captains with
those triumphs and solemnities, she did not only reward the courage of the
triumpher, but also the justice with which he maintained his army in peace and
concord, the wisdom with which he performed his enterprises, and their
temperancy used in abstaining from wine, women, and meat, which trouble the
judgment, and turn counsels into error. Yea wisdom is more highly to be
regarded and rewarded in a general, than courage and manliness: for as
Vegetius well said, Few over courageous captains bring their enterprises to
luckie pass. Which grows for that wisdom is more necessary in war, than
courage in bickering: but Vegetius could never attain to the notice what manner
of wisdom this is: neither could plot down, with what difference of wit he
ought to be endowed, who takes charge in war. Neither do I ought marvel
thereat: for the manner of philosophy whereon this depends, was not then
devised. True it is, that to verefie this point, answers not our first
intent, which purporteth to make choice of apt wits for learning. But martial
affairs are so dangerous, and of so deep counsel: and it falls out a matter
so important for a king to know well unto whom he credit his power and state,
that we shall perform no less thanks worthy a part of service to the common
wealth, to teach this difference of wit and his signs, than in the other which
we have already described. For which cause we must note, that Malitia and
Militia, vz. martial matters, and malice, have as it were one self name, and
likewise one self definition. For changing a into i, of malitia you make
militia, and of militia, malitia, with great facility. What the nature and
property of malice is, Cicero teaches, saying, Malice is a way of hurting,
crafty, and full of guile. In war (likewise) nothing falls so much into
consideration, as how to offend the enemy, and defend ourselves from his
entrappings. Therefore the best property whereof a General can be possessed,
is to be malicious with his enemy, and never to construe any his demeanures to
a good sense, but to the worst that may be, and to stand on his guard.

Believe not (says Ecclesiasticus) thine enemy, with his lips he sweetneth,
and in his heart he betraieth thee, to make thee fall into the dike: he weepeth
with his cies, and if he light upon a fit occasion, he will not be satisfied
with thy blood. Hereof we find a manifest example in the holy scripture; for
the people of Israel being besieged in Bethulia, and straightned with hunger
and thirst, that famous lady Judith, issued out with a resolution to kill
Holofernes, and going toward the army of the Assirians, she was taken by the
sentinels and guards, and being asked whether she was bound, made answer with
a twofold mind; I am a daughter of the Hebrews, whom you hold besieged, and
fly onto you, for I have learned that they shall fall into your hands, and
that you shall evil entreat them, because they would not yield themselves to
your mercy: therefore I determined to fly unto Holofernes, and to discover
unto him the secrets of this obstinat people, showing him how he may enter
without the loss of any one soldier.

So Judith being brought to Holofernes presence, threw her self down to the
ground, and with closed hands began to worship him and utter words full of
deceit, the most craftily that might be, in sort that Holofernes and all his
counsel, verily believed she said nothing but truth: but she not forgetful
what in heart she had purposed, found a convenient occasion, and chopped off
his head.

Contrary hereunto are the conditions of a friend, and therefore it behooves
ever to yield him credit, wherethrough Holofernes should have done better to
believe Achior, seeing he was his friend, and on zeal that he should not leave
the siege with dishonor, said unto him, Sir, first inform your self whether
this people have sinned against God, for if it be so, himself will deliver
them into your hands, without that you shall need to conquer them; but if he
hold them in grace, know for certain, that he will defend them, and we shall
not be able to vanquish them. Holofernes conceived displeasure at this
advertisement, as a man confident, lascivious and a wine bibber, which three
things turn topsie turuie that counsel which is requisite for the art of war.
For which cause Plato said, he liked very well of a law which the Carthagineans
had, by which they commanded, that the General whilst he had charge of the
army, should drink no wine, for this licour (as Aristotle affirms) makes a
man of wit be quite burned up with choler (as Holofernes showed in those so
furious words which he spoke to Achior.)

Now that wit which is requisite for ambushes and stratagems, as well to prepare
them as to perceive them, and to find out such remedy as appertains, Cicero
describes, drawing his disce^t from this nown versutia, which he says is
derived from this verb versor: for those who are winding, crafty, double, and
cauillers, upon a sudden contriue their wiles, and employ their conceit with
facility: and so the same Cicero exemplified it, saying; Chrisippus a man
doubtless winding and crafty. I call those winding whose mind is suddenly
winded about. This property to attain suddenly the means is solertia
(quickness) and appertains to the imagination: for the powers which consist
in heat perform speedily their work. And for this cause men of great
understanding are little worth for the war, for this power is very slow in his
operation and a friend of uprightness, of plainness, of simplicity and
mercy: all which is wont to breed much damage in war. These are good to
treat with friends, with whom the wisdom of the imagination is not needful;
but only the rightfulnesse and singleness of the understanding, which
admits no doubleness, nor does any wrong: therefore with the enemy it
booteth nothing, for he always studieth to offend with wiles, and such wit is
requisite wherewith to counter-gard our selves. And so Christ our redeemer
advised his disciples, saying; Behold I send you as sheep amongst woolfes: be
you therefore wise as serpents, and simple as dooues. With our enemies we must
practice wisdom, and with our friends plainness and simplicity.

Now if the captain be not to give credit to his enemy, but is always to
misdoubt that he will go beyond him, it is necessary that he hold a difference
of imagination, forecastfull, wary, and which can skill to discern the wiles
which come veiled with any couerture: for the self power which finds them out
can only devise the remedies which are behooffull in that behalf: that seems
to be another difference of the imagination which deuiseth the engines and
warlike instruments, whereby invincible fortresses are won, which pitcheth the
camp and marshalleth every squadron in his due place, and which knows the
occasions of joining and retiring; which plotteth treaties, consortments and
capitulations with the enemy: for all which the understanding is impertinent
as are the ears to see withal. And therefore I nothing doubt, but that the
art of war appertains to the imagination, for all whatsoever a good captain
is to perform imports consonance, figure and correspondence.

Now the difficulty rests to set down with what difference of the imagination
in particular, war is to be managed. And in this I cannot resolve with
certainty, because the knowing thereof is very nice: yet I conjecture that it
requires a degree more of heat than the practice of physic, and that it
allay choler but not utterly quench it.

This is very manifest: for those captains who are full of promptness and
subtletie, are not very courageous, nor desirous of bickering, neither covet
to come to handystrokes; but by stratagems and fetches, without aduenturing a
broken pate, do bring their purposes to pass. Which property, better pleased
Vegetius than any other. Good captains (says he) not by open war, in which the
peril is common, but by secret practices, ever assay with the safety of their
own soldiers, to cut their enemies in pieces, or at least to make them
afraid. The fruit of this manner of wit, the Romain Senate very wisely looked
into: for though they had many famous captains, who achieved sundry wars,
yet returning to Rome to receive the triumph and glory due to their
enterprise, so great were the plaints which the parents made for their
children, the children for the parents, the wives for their husbands, and
brothers for brethren, that through the sorrow for them who perished in the
wars, they could take little pleasure in the sports and pastimes. Wherefore
the Senate took a resolution, not to seek out so courageous captains, wholly
desirous to come to hand strokes: but men somewhat timorous, and very ready, as
Q. Fabius, of whom it is written, that it was a wonder to see him offer a
pitched battle in the open field, and specially when he was far from Rome,
whereby in ill successes he could not readily be relieved, and he did nought-els
but give way to the enemy, and devise stratagems and wiles, with which he
exploited great enterprises, and obtained many victories, without the loss of
any one soldier. He was received into Rome with great joy of all men: for if
he carried forth 100000 soldiers, he returned with as many, unless some
perhaps miscarried by sickness. The shout which the people gave at his return
was (as Ennius reports) of this tenor:

One man by lingering, only us releeu'd, As if they had said, This man with
giving way to our enemies, has made us lords of the world, and brought back
our soldiers to their houses in safety. Some captains have since that time
endeavored to imitate him: but because they wanted his wit and readiness, they
sundry times let slip many fit occasions of fighting, whence greater damages
and inconveniences arose, than if they had speedily joined battle. We may
also take example of that famous Carthaginian captain, of whom Plutarch writes
these words, Anniball after he had attained this so great a victory, commanded
that many Italian prisoners should freely be set at liberty without ransom,
to the end the fame of his courtesy and pardoning might be dispersed among the
people; albeit of disposition he were very wide from this virtue: for of his
own nature he was fell and unmerciful, and in such sort was trained up from
the tender years of his youth, that he never learned laws or civil conditions,
but wars, slaughters, and betrayings of the enemy. Where through he grew to be a
captain very cruel, and malicious in beguiling men, and always devising how
he might entrap his enemy. And when he saw he could not prevail by open war,
he sought to get the upper hand by policies, as was plainly seen in this deed
of arms by us rehearsed, and by the battle which he fought against
Sempronius, near the river Trebia. The tokens to know a man that is possessed
of this difference of wit, are very strange and well worthy of contemplation.
VVher-through Plato says, that the man who is very wise (in this sort of
ability which we trace out) cannot be courageous nor well conditioned: for
Aristotle says, That wisdom consists in cold, and stomach and manliness in
heat. Therefore these two qualities being repugnant and contrary, it is
impossible that a man be very full of hardiness, and also of wisdom
therewithal. For which cause it is necessary that choler be burned, and
become choler adust, to the end that a man may prove wise: but where this
spice of melancholy is found, inasmuch as the same is cold, fear and
cowardice are straightwaies entertained. In sort, that craft and readiness
require heat, for that the same is a work of the imagination, but not in such
degree as courage, where-through they repugne each to other in extension. But
heerin befalls a matter worth the noting, that of the four moral virtues,
Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, and Temperance; the two first require a wit and
good temperature, to the end that they may be put in practice: for if a Judge
be not endowed with understanding, to make himself capable of the point of
justice, little auails it that he carry a good will to render every man his
due. Since this his good meaning may wander out of the way, and wrong the true
proprietarie. The like is to be understood of wisdom: for if the only will
sufficed to set things in good order, then in no work good or evil, should any
error be committed. There is no thief whatsoever, who seeks not to rob in
such manner as he may not be espied, and there is no captain, who desires not
to be owner of so much wisdom, as may serve to vanquish his enemy. But a
thief that is not his craftsmaister in filching, soon falls to be
discovered; and the captain that wants imagination, ere long is overcome.
Fortitude, and Temperance are two virtues, which men carry in their fist,
though they want a natural disposition: for if a man be disposed to set little
of his life, and show hardiness, he may well do it: but if he be courageous of
his own natural disposition, Aristotle and Plato affirm very truly, it is
not possible that he can be wise though he would. In sort, that by this reason,
there grows no repugnancie to unite the wisdom of the mind with courage:
for a wise and skilful man, has the understanding to hazard his honor in
respect of his soul, and his life in respect of his honor, and his goods in
respect of his life, and so he does. Hence it comes, that gentlemen for that
they are so much honored, are so courageous; and there is none who will endure
more hardness in the wars, for that they are brought up in so many pleasures,
to the end they may not be termed ribalds. Heeron is that byword grounded, God
keep me from a Gent. by day, and a thief by night; for the one, because he is
seen, and the other that he may not be known, do fight with double resolution:
on this self reason, is the religion of Malta grounded, who knowing how much
it imports nobility, to be a man of valor, have a firm law, that all those
of their order shall be issued from gentilitie, both on the fathers side and the
mothers: for so each of them must in the combat show himself worth two of a
baser progeny. But if a gentleman had the charge given him, to encamp an army,
and the order whereby he should put the enemy in rout, if he had not a wit
appropriat heerunto, he would commit and utter a thousand disorders: for
wisdom lies not in men's disposition. But if there were reco^mended unto him
the guard of a gate: they might soundly sleep on his eyes, although by nature
he were a baggage. The sentence of Plato is to be construed, when a wise man
follows his own natural inclination, and does not correct the same by
reason. And in that sort it is true, that a very wise man cannot of his
natural disposition be courageous: for choler adust (which makes him wise)
makes him also says Hippocrates timorous and fearful. The second property,
wherewith a man possessed of this difference of wit cannot be endowed, is to be
pleasant and of quaint behavior: for with his imagination he frames many
plots, and weeteth that whatsoever error or negligence, are the way to cast
away an army, wher-through he ever carries an eye to the maine chance. But
people of little worth, call carfulness a toil, chastisment cruelty, and
mercy softness; suffering and dissembling of lewd parts a good disposition.
And this verily springs, because men are sots, who pierce not into the true
value of things, nor in what sort they ought to be managed: but the wise and
skillful cannot hold patience, nor bear to see matters ill handled, though
they nothing appertain unto themselves, and therefore live a small while, and
with much trouble of spirit. Whence Solomon said, I gave also my mind to
understand wisdom, doctrine, errors, and folly; and found that in these also,
there is weariness and affliction of spirit: for into much wisdom enters
much displeasure, and who so attaineth Science, gets sorrow. In which words
it seems that Solomon gave us to understand, that he lived better contented
being ignorant, than after he had received wisdom. And so verily it came to
pass: for the ignorant live most careless; inasmuch as nothing gives them
pain nor vexation, and they little reck who have a better capcase than
themselves. The vulgar accustometh to call such the Angels of heaven: for they
see how they take nothing at heart; neither find fault with any thing ill done,
but let all pass: but if they considered the wisdom and condition of the
Angels, they should see it were a word that carried evil consonance, and a
case for the inquisition house: for from the day when we receive the use of
reason, until that of our death, they do naught else save reprove us for all
our evil doings, and advise us to that which we ought to do. And if as they
speak to us in their spiritual language, by moving our imagination, so they
should deliver us their opinion inmaterial words, we would hold them
importunate and unmannerly brought up. And he that believes not this, let him
mark that the Angel (of whom S Matthew makes mention) S. John Baptist was an
angel in his office.
seemed such a one to Herod, and to the wife of his brother Philp, seeing
(because they would not hear his fault-findings) they fair and well chopped
off his head. Better were it, that these men, who by the vulgar are fondly
termed Angels of heaven, were called Asses of the earth: for amongst brute
beasts (says Galen) there is none more blunt, or of less wit than the Ass:
although in memory he out reach all the rest. He refuses no burden, he goes
whither he is driven without any gainstriuing, he winceth not, he biteth not,
he is not fugitive, not iadish conditioned; if he be labored with a cudgel,
he sets not by it, he is wholly made to the wel-liking and service of him
that is to use him: these self properties do those men partake, whom the
vulgar term Angels of heaven; which sport-making, springs in them, for that
they are blockheads and void of imagination, and have their wrathful power
very remiss, which tokeneth a great defect in a man, and argues that he is
ill compounded.

There was never Angel nor man in the world, better conditioned than Christ our
redeemer, and he entering one day into the temple, belabored welfauoredly those
whom he found there selling of merchandise: and this he did because the
irascible is the chastise geuer, and sword of reason, and the man who
reprooueth not things ill done, either shows himself but a fool, or is
deprived of the wrathful power. In sort, that it falls out a miracle to see a
wise man of that gentleness or conditions, which are best liking to lewd men's
fancies: wherethrough such as set down in writing the actions of Julius Caesar,
marvelled to see how his soldiers could support a man so rough and severe, and
this grew in him, because he lighted upon a wit requisite for the wars. The
third property of those who are endowed with this difference of witis, to be
recklesse touching the attiring of their person, and in a manner all of them are
slouinly, homely, with their hosen hanging about their heels, full of wrinckles,
their cap sitting upon the one side, with some threedbare gabberdine on their
back, and never long to change suits.

This property, Lucius Florus recounteth, had that famous captain Viriatus, by
nation a Portuguise, of whom (exaggerating his great humility) he says and
affirms, that he despised so much all ornament of his person, as there was no
private soldier in his army, that went worse apparelled than himself. And
verily this was no virtue, neither did he the same artificially, but it is a
natural effect of those, who are possessed with that difference of imagination
after which we enquire.

This rechlesnesse in Julius Caesar, greatly deceived Cicero: for being asked
(after the battle) the cause which moved him to follow the party of Pompey;
he answered (as Macrobius recounteth) His girding deceived me: as if he had
said, It was my beholding of Julius Caesar to be a man somewhat slouinly, and
who never wore his girdle handsomely, whom his soldiers in scoff called,
Loosecoat. But this should have moved and made him to know, that he was
endowed with a wit requisite to the counsel of war Rightly did Silla hit the
nail on the head, who (as Suetonius Tranquillus reports) seeing the
rechlesnesse of Julius Caesar in his apparrelling himself when he was a boy,
advertised the Romans, saying; take heed of this ill girded young fellow. The
Historians busy themselves much, in recounting how carelessly Hanniball bare
him touching his apparel, and how little he reaked to go neat and handsome. To
grow in great dislike at motes on the cape, to take much care that his
stockings sit clean, and his cloak handsome, without plaits, appertains to a
difference of the imagination of very base alloy, and gainsaith the
understanding, and that imagination which the war requires. The fourth sign
is to have a bald head, and the reason heerof may soon be learned: for this
difference of imagination, resideth in the forepart of the head, as do all the
rest, and excessive heat burns the skin of the head, and closes the poares,
through which the hair is to pass. Besides that the matter whereof the hair
is engendered (as the physicians avouch) are those excreme^ts which the brain
expels in time of his nourishing, and by the great fire that there is, they
are consumed and burned up, and so the matter fails whereof they may breed.
And if Julius Caesar had been seen in this point of philosophy, he would not so
much have shamed at his baldhead, as that to cover the same, he caused the
hinder part of his hair which should hang down on his neck to be featly
turned toward his forehead. And Suetonius makes mention, that nothing so much
contented him, as when the Senate enacted that he might wear a laurel garland
on his head, and that on none other ground than because thereby he might cover
his baldness. Another sort of baldness grows from having the hair hard and
earthly, and of a gross composition, but that betokens a man void of
understanding, imagination and memory. The fifth sign, whereby those are known
who have this difference of imagination is, that such are spare in words and
full of sentences, and the reason imports because the brain being hard, it
follows of necessity, that they suffer a defect in memory, to which copy
of words appertains. To find much what to say, springs from a conjunction,
which the memory makes with the imagination, in his first degree of heat.
Such as have this conioyning of both powers, are ordinarily great liers, and
never want words and tales, though you stand harkening unto them a whole day
together.

The sixth property of those who have this difference of imagination is, to be
honest, and to take great dislike at filthy and baudie talk: and therefore
Cicero says, that men very reasonable, do imitate the honesty of nature, who
has hidden the unseemly and shameful parts, which she made to provide for the
necessity of mankind and not to adorn it, and she consents not to fasten the
eyes on these, nor that the ears should once hear them named. This we might
well attribut to the imagination, and say that the same rests offended at the
evil representation of these parts, but in the last chapter we rendered a
reason of this effect, and reduced the same to the understanding, and we
adjudged him defective in this power, who took not offense at such
dishonestie. And because to the difference of imagination appurtenant to the
art military, there is joined this discourse, therefore are good captains very
honest. Wherthrough, in the history of Julius Caesar, we find an action of the
greatest honesty that might be, and that is, whilst they murdered him with
daggers in the Senat-house, he (perceiving it was impossible to escape death)
gave himself to fall to the ground, and so fitted his imperial robe about
him, that after his death they found him couched with great honesty, with his
legs and other parts covered, that might any way offend the sight.

The seventh property, and of greatest importance, is that the General have
good fortune and be luckie, by which sign we shall perfectly find, that he is
seized of the wit and ability behooffull for the art martial, for in
substance and truth, there is nothing which ordinarily makes men unfortunate,
and that their enterprises do not always take success after their desire,
save that they are deprived of wisdom, and lay not hold on the convenient
means for achieuing their exploits. For that Julius Caesar showed such wisdom
in the affairs which he managed, he bare away the bell (in respect of
fortunatenesse) from all other captains of the world, so as in perils of
importance, he encouraged his soldiers, saying; Fear not, for you have
Caesar's good fortune to fight on your party.

The Stoics held opinion, that as there was a first cause, everlasting,
almighty, and of infinite wisdom, known by the order and concert of his
marvelous works; so also there was another unwise and vnconcerted, whose
works proved without order, without reason, and void of discretion: for with
an affection no way reasonable, it gives and reaueth from men riches,
dignity, and honor. This they termed Fortune, seeing her a friend to men who
perform their business by hap hasard, without forecasting, without wisdom,
and without submitting themselves to the government of reason. They pourtraied
her (the better to make her manners and malice known) in form of a woman, a
royal scepter in her hand, her eyes veiled, her feet upon a round ball,
accompanied with persons sottish and void of all trade of living. By painting
her like a woman, they noted her great lightness and little discretion; by her
royal scepter, they acknowledged her sovereignty over riches and honor; her
veiled eyes, gave to understand the ill fashion which she held in distributing
her gifts; her feet standing on the round ball, betokened the small firmness
in the favors which she imparted, for she snatcheth them away with the like
facility that she reaches them forth, without keeping steadfastness in ought
whatsoever: but the worst part they found in her, was that she favors the
wicked, and persecuteth the virtuous; loves the foolish, and abhors the
wise; abaseth the noble, and aduanceth the base: what is foul pleases her,
and what is fair works her annoiance. Many men, placing confidence in these
properties, because they know their own good fortune, take hardiness to
undertake fond and headlong enterprises, which yet prosper with them very
luckily, and yet other men, very wise and advised, dare not adventure to
execute those enterprises, which they have begun with great discretion, finding
by experience that such find worst success. How great a friend Fortune shows
her self to bad people, Aristotle makes known by this problem, Whence
grows it, that riches (for the most part) are possessed rather by the wicked
than by men of worth? Whereto he shapeth answer, Perhaps because Fortune being
blind cannot know nor make choice of what is best. But this is an answer
unworthy of so great a philosopher: for it is not Fortune that bestows wealth
on men, and though it were, yet he yields no reason, why she always
cherishes the bad, and abandoneth the good. The true solution of this demand
is, that the lewd sort are very witty, and have a gallant imagination, to
beguile in buying and selling, and can profit in bargaining, and employing
their stock where occasion of gain is offered. But honest men want this
imagination: many of whom have endeavored to imitate these bad fellows, and by
trafficquing and trucking, within few days have lost their principal.

This, Christ our redeemer pointed at, considering the sufficiency of that
steward, whom his master called to account, who reserving a good portion of
the goods to his own behoof, salued up all his reckonings, and got his
quietus est. Which wisdom (though it were faulty) yet God commended saying;
The children of this world are more wise in their kind, than the children of
light: for these ordinarily enjoy a good understanding, with which power they
place their affection on their law, and have want of imagination, whereto the
knowledge how to live in this world appertains; wherethrough many are morally
good, because they lack the wit how to be naught. This manner of answering is
more easy and apparent. The natural philosophers, because they could not
reach so far, devised so fond and ill iointed a cause, as lady Fortune, to
whose power they might impute good and bad successes, and not to the
unskillfulness and little knowledge of men.

Four sorts of people there are in every commonwealth, if a man list to
mark them. For some men are wise, and seem not so; others seem so, and are
not; others, neither are, nor seem; and some both are, and seem so. Some men
there are silent, slow in speech, staid in answering, not curious nor copious
of words: yet they retain hidden within them, a natural power appertaining to
the imagination, whereby they know the fit time and occasion to bring their
purpose to pass, and how they are therein to demean themselves without
communicating or imparting their mind to any other. These by the vulgar are
called happy and luckie, them seeming that with little knowledge, and less
wit, every thing falls into their lap.

Others, contrariwise are of much eloquence in words and discourse, great
co^uersers, men that take upon them to govern the whole world, who go about
hunting how with small expense they may reap great gains, and therein (after
the vulgars conceit) no man in judgment can step an acc beyond them, and yet,
coming to the effect, all falls to the ground between their hands. These
cry out upon fortune, and call her blind buzzard, and jade, for the matters
which they disseigne and work with much wisdom, she suffers not to take
good effect: but if there were a Fortune who might plead her own defense, she
would tell them, Your selves are the buzzards, the sots, and the doo-noughts,
whom you speak of, that being unskillful, hold yourselues wise, and using
unfit means, would yet reap good successes. This sort of people have a kind of
imagination which decketh up and sets forth their words and reasons, and
makes them seem to be what in deed they are not. Whereon I conclude, that the
General who is endowed with a wit requisite for the art military, and does
duly forecast what he is to exploit, shall be fortunate and happy, otherwise
it is lost labor to look that he ever prevail to victory, unless God do
fight for him, as he did for the armies of Israel, and yet withal, they chose
the wisest and skilfullest amongst them to be commanders, for we must not
leave all upon Gods hands, neither yet may a man wholly affie on his own wit and
sufficiency, but it will do best to join both together; for there is no other
Fortune, save God and a man's own good endeavor.

He who first devised Chesse-play, made a model of the art military,
representing therein all the occurrents and contemplations of war, without
leaving any one behind: and as in this game Fortune bears no stroke, neither
can the plaier who beats the adverse party be termed fortunat, nor he who is
beaten unfortunate. So the captain that overcomes ought to be called wise, and
the vanquished, ignorant; and not the one happy, or the other unhappy. The
first thing which he ordained in this play was, that when the king is mated,
the contrary party is vanquisher, thereby to let us understand, that the
chief force of an army, consists in a good commander to govern and direct
the same: and for proof hereof, he lotted as many chief men to the one side
as to the other, to the end that whosoever lost, might be ascertained, it so
fell out through default of his own knowledge, and not of fortune. And this is
more apparently seen, if we consider, that a skillful plaier will spare half
his men to the other party, and yet for all that get the game. And this was it
which Vegetius noted, that often few soldiers and weak, vanquish many and
valiant, if they be governed by a general who can skill in ambushes and
stratagems. He ordained also that the pawnes might not turn back, thereby to
advise the commander that he duly forecast all chances, ere he send forth his
soldiers to the service, because if any mischaunce alight, it behooues rather
that they be cut in pieces where they were placed, than to turn their backs,
for the soldier is not to know, when time serves to fly or to fight save by
direction of his captain, and therefore so long as his life lasts, he is to
keep his place, under pain of becoming infamous. Hereunto he adioined
another law, that the pawn which had made seven draughts without being taken,
should be made a queen, and might make any draught at pleasure, and be placed
next the king, as one set at liberty; and endowed with nobility; whereby he
gave us to understand, how in the war it imports greatly for making the
souldior valiant, to proclaim advantages, free camps, and preferments, for
such as shall have done any special piece of service. And principally, that the
honor and profit pass to their posterity: for then they will exploir with
greater courage, and gallantnesse. For which cause Aristotle affirms that a
man makes more reake to be chief of his lineage, than of his own proper life.
This Saul well perceived when he caused to be proclaimed in the army, Whosoever
shall strike that man (meaning kill the Giant Golias) shall be made rich by the
king, and shall have his daughter to wife, and his house shall be enfranchised in
Israel from all manner tribute. Conformable unto this proclamation, there was a
court in Spain, which ordained, that whatsoever soldier, by his good usage,
deserved to receive for his pay 500 Soldi (this was the greatest stipend
allowed in the wars) should himself and his posterity, be discharged for
ever from all taxes and services. The Moors (as they are great plaiers at
chesse) have in their plays set seven degrees in imitation of the 7 draughts,
which the pawn must make to be a queen, and so they enlarge the play from one
to the second, and from the second to the third, until they arrive to seven,
answerable to the proof that the soldier shall give of himself: and if she
be so gallant as to enlarge his pay to the seventh, they yield him the same:
and for this cause they are termed Septerniers, or Seuenstears. These have
large liberties and exemptions, as in Spain those gentlemen who are called
Hidalgos. The reason hereof, in natural philosophy is very plain: for there
is no faculty of all those that govern man, which will willingly work,
unless there be some interest to move the same: which Aristotle proves in the
generatiue power, and the self reason swaieth in the residue. The object of
the wrathful faculty (as we have above specified) is honor and advantage:
and if this cease, straightwaies courage and stomach decay: by all this may be
conceived the great signification which it carries to make that pawn a
queen, who has made seven draughts without taking: for whatsoever the
greatest nobility in the world, that has been or shall be, has sprung and
shall spring from pawns, and private men, who by the valor of their person have
done such exploits, as they deserved for themselves and their posterity, the
title of gentlemen, knights, noblemen, earls, marquesses, dukes and kings. True
it is, that some are so ignorant and void of consideration as they will not
grant, that their nobility had a beginning; but that the same is everlasting,
and grown into their blood, not by the grace of some particular king, but by
the supernatural and divine reason. To the bent of this purpose (though we
shall thereby somewhat lengthen our matter) I cannot but recount a very witty
discourse, which passed between our Lord the Prince Don Carlos, and the doctor
Suares of Toledo, who was judge of the Court in Alcala of Heuates. Prince:
Doctor what think you of this people? Doctor. Very well (my Lord) for here is
the best air, and the best soil of any place in Spain. P. For such the
physicians made choice of to recover my health: have you seen the University?
D. No my L. P. See it then: for it is very special; and where they tell me the
Sciences are very learnedly red. D. Verily, for a college and particular
study, it carries great fame, and should be such in effect, as your highness
speaks of. P. Where did you study? D. In Salamanca, my lord. P. And did you
proceed doctor in Salamanca? D. My lord, no. P. That me seems was evil done
to study in one University, and take degree in another. D. May it please your
highness, that the charges of taking degrees in Salamanca, are excessive; and
therefore we poor men fly the same, and get us to some other University,
knowing that we receive our sufficiency and learning, not from the degree, but
from our study and pains, albeit my parents were not so poor, but if them
listed might have borne the charge of my proceeding in Salamanca: but your
highness well knows, that the doctors of this University have the like
franchises, as the gentlemen of Spain, and to us who are such by nature, this
exemption does harm, at least to our posterity. P. Which of the kings mine
ancestors gave this nobility to your lineage? D. None. And to this end your
highness must understand, there are two sorts of gentlemen in Spain; some of
blood, and some by privilege. Those in blood (as my self) have not received
their nobility at the kings hand, but those by privilege have. P. This matter
is very hard for me to conceive, and I would gladly that you expressed it in
plainer terms: for if my blood royal, reckoning from my self to my father;
and from him to my grandfather; and so by order from each to other comes to
finish in Pelagius: to whom by the death of the king Don Rodericke, the
kingdom was given, before which time he was not king, if we reckon up after
this sort your pedigree, shall we not come at last to end in one who was no
gentleman? D. This discourse cannot be denied, for all things have had a
beginning. P. I ask you then, from whence that first man had his nobility,
who gave beginning to your nobility? he could not enfranchise himself, nor
pluck out his own neck from the yoke of tributes and services, which before
time he paid to the kings my predecessors: for this were a kind of theft, and
a preferring himself by force with the kings patrimony, and it sounds not
with reason, that gentlemen of blood should have so bad an original as this:
therefore it falls out plain, that the king gave him freedom, and yielded him
the grace of that nobility. Now tell me from whom he had it. D. Your highness
concludes very well, and it is true, that there is no true nobility save of
the kings grant: but we term those noble of blood, of whose original there is
no memory, neither is it specified by writing, when the same began, nor what
king yielded them this favor. And this obscurenes is received in the
commonwealth, for more honorable than distinctly to know the contrary. The
commonwealth also makes gentlemen: for when a man grows valorous, of great
virtue, and rich: it dares not to challenge such a one, as seeming thereby to
do him wrong, and that it is fit a man of that worth do live in all franchize.
This reputation passing to the children, and to the nephews, grows to
nobility, and so they get a pretense against the king. These are not therefore
gentlemen, because they receive 500 Soldi of pay; but when the contrary cannot
be proved, they pass for such. That Spaniard, who devised this name of a
gentleman, Hisiodalgos, gave very well to understand this doctrine which we
have set down: for by his opinion, men have two kinds of birth: the one
natural, in which all are equal, the other spiritual. When a man performs
any heroical enterprise, or any virtue or extraordinary work, then is he newborn, and procures for himself other new parents, and leeseth that being
which he had tofore. Yesterday he was called the son of Peter, and nephew of
Sanchius, and now he is named the son of his own actions. Hence had that
Castilian proverb his original which says, Every man is the son of his own
works. And because the good and virtuous works, are in the holy scripture
termed somewhat, and in the Spanish tongue it signifies algo, and vices and
sins nothing, which in the Spanish is termed nada. This Spaniard compou^ded
this word hijo dalgo thereof, which imports naught else, but that such a one is
descended of him, who performed some notorious and virtuous action: for which
he deserved to be rewarded by the king or commonwealth, together with all his
posterity for ever. The law of the Partita says, that hiio dalgo, signifies
the son of goods: But if we understand the same of temporal goods, the
reason was not good; for there are infinite gentlemen poor, and infinite rich
men, who are no gentlemen: but if he mean the son of goods; that is to say
of good qualities, it carries the same sense which we before expressed.

Of the second birth which men ought to have besides their natural, there is
affoorded us a natural example in the scripture, where Christ our redeemer
reprehendeth Nichodemus, because he (being a doctor of the law) wist not yet,
it was necessary that a man should be borne of new, thereby to obtain a better
being, and more honorable parents than his natural: for which cause, all the
time that a man performs no heroical enterprise, in this sense he is called
hiio de nada, to weet the son of nothing; although by his ancestors he bear
the name of hiio dalgo, that is the son of somewhat; or a gentleman. To the
purpose of this doctrine, I will recite unto you a discourse which passed
between a very honorable Captain, and a Caualiero, who stood much on the
pantophles of his gentilitie. Whereby shall be discovered in what the honor of
this second birth consists. This captain then falling in company with a
knot of Caualieros, and discoursing of the largess and liberty, which
soldiers enjoy in Italy, in a certain demand, which one of them made him, he
gave him the you, because he was native of that place, and the son of mean
parents, born in a village of some few houses: but the captain (agreeued
thereat) answered saying; Signore your signory shall understand, that soldiers
who have enjoyed the liberty of Italy, cannot content themselves to make abode
in Spain, because of the many laws which are here enacted against such as set
hand to their sword.

The other Caualieros, hearing him use the term of Signoria, could not
forbear laughter. The Caualiero blushing hereat, used these words, Your
Mercedi may weet, that in Italy, to say Signoria, imports so much as in Spain
to say mercede, and this Signor Capitano, being accustomed to the use and manner
of that country, gives the term of Signoria, where he should do that of
mercede. Hereto the captain answered, saying; let not your Signory hold me to
be a man so simple, but that I know when I am in Italy, to apply my self to
the language of Italy, and in Spain, to that of Spain: but he that in Spain
talking with me, may give me the you, it behooves at least that he have a
Signory in Spain; and yet so I can scarce take it well, the Caualiero somewhat
affro^ted made reply, saying; why Signor Capitano are you not native in such a
place, and son to such a man? And know you not again who I am, and what mine
ancestors have been? Signore (answered the captain) I know right-well, that
your Signory is a good Caualiero, and such have been your elders: but I and my
right arm (which now I acknowledge for my father) are better than you and all
your lineage. This captain meant to allude to the second birth, when he said I
and my right arm, which now I acknowledge to be my father; and that not
unduly: for with his right arm, and with his sword he had performed such
actions, as the valor of his person was equal to the nobility of that
Caualiero. For the most part, the laws and nature (says Plato) are contrary:
for a man sometimes issues out of natures hands, with a mind very wise,
excellent, noble, frank, and with a wit apt to command a whole world: yet
because his hap was to be borne in the house of Amiclas, a base peasant; by the
laws he remains deprived of that honor and liberty, wherein nature placed
him. And contrariwise we see others, whose wit and fashions were ordained to be
slaves; and yet for that they were borne in noble houses, they come by force of
the laws to be great Lords. But one thing has been noted many ages ago, which
is worthy of consideration, that those who are born in villages and thatched
houses, prove more sufficient men, and of greater towardness for the Sciences
and arms, than such as have great Cities for their birthplace. Yet is the
vulgar so subject to ignorance, as they gather a consequence to the contrary,
from birth in mean places: hereof the sacred scripture affoordeth as an
example, where it is read, that the people of Israel much wondering at the
great works of our savior Christ, said; is it possible, that out of Nazareth
can come ought that is good? But to return to the wit of this captain, of who^
we have discoursed; he ought to be endowed with much understanding, and with
the difference of imagination, which is requisite for the art of war. Where
through, in this treatise we deliver much doctrine, whence we may gather wherein
the valor of men consists, that they may reap estimation in the
commonwealth.

Six things (me seems) a man ought to have, to the end he may be termed
honorable, and which of them soever want, his being is thereby impaired: but
yet all of them are not placed in one self degree, nor partake a like value,
or the self qualities.

The first and principal, is the valor of a man's own person, as touching his
wisdom, justice, mind, and courage. This makes riches and birthright, from
hence grow honorable titles; from this beginning all the nobility in the
world fetches his original. And if any be settled in a contrary opinion, let
him go to the great houses in Spain, and he shall find that they all derive
their original from particular men, who by the valor of their persons,
attained to that, which now by their successions is possessed.

The second thing which honors a man, next to the valor of his person is
substance, without which we find not, that any man carries estimation in the
commonwealth.

The third is, the nobility and antiquity of his ancestors, to be well born,
and of honorable blood, is a thing very precious: but yet retains in it
self a great defect: for by it self alone, it yields a slender avail,
as well in regard of the gentleman himself, as of others who stand in need
thereof: for a man can neither eat nor drink the same, nor apparel himself
therewithal, nor give nor bestow the same: but it makes a man to live as
dying, by depriving him of the remedies, which he might otherwise procure to
supply his necessities; but let him unite the same with riches, and by no
degree of honor it can be counteruailed. Some are wont to resemble nobility,
to a cipher in numbering, which of it self bears no value, but united with
another number, multiplieth the same.

The fourth point which makes a man to be of account, is to have some dignity
or honorable office; and contrariwise nothing so much abaseth a man, as to get
his living by some handy-craft.

The fifth thing which honors a man, is to be called by a good surname, and
a gracious christian name, which may deliver a pleasing consonance to the ear,
and not to be termed pasty, or pestell, as some that I know. We read in the
general history of Spain, that there came two Ambassadors out of France,
unto king Alfonse the ninth, to demand one of his daughters in marriage for
their sovereign king Philip: one of which ladies was very fair, and named
Vrraca, the other nothing so gracious, and called Blanch. They both coming in
presence of the Ambassadors, all men held it as a matter resolved, that the
choice would light upon Vrraca, as the elder, and fairer, and better adorned:
but the Ambassadors, enquiring each of their names, took offense at the name
of Vrraca, and made choice of the lady Blanch: saying, that her name would be
better received in France than the other.

The sixth thing which honors a man, is the seemly ornament of his person,
and his going well apparelled, and attended with many waiters. The good
descent of the Spanish nobility, is of such as through the valor of their
person, and through their honorable enterprises achieved, grew in the wars to
the pay of 500 Soldi. The original whereof our late writers cannot verify: for
if they find not their matter laid down in writing, and expressed to their
hands by others, they are unable to supply the same, with any invention of
their own. The difference which Aristotle places betwixt memory and
remembrance is, that if the memory have lost any of those things which at
first it knew, it cannot call the same to mind, without new learning thereof:
but remembrance enioieth this special grace, that if it forget ought, by
stopping a while to discourse thereupon, it turns to find out that which was
before lost. Which may be the Court that speaks in favor of good soldiers,
we find at this day recorded neither in books, nor in the memory of men, but
there are left as relics these words, hijo dalgo, in those that receive 500
Soldi of pay, after the Court of Spain, and their known wages. By making
discourse, and arguing whereon, it will fall out an easy matter to find out
their associats. Antony of Lebrissa giving the signification of this verb,
vendico, cas: says the same signifies, to draw unto it that which is due for
pay, or by reason, as we say now a days by a new phrase of speech, to take pay
from the king. And it is a thing so used in Castilia the old, to say such a one
has well impaied his travail, when he is well paid, that amongst the
ciuiller sort, there is no manner of speech more ordinary.

From this signification, the word vindicare fetched his original, namely,
when any one would stir at the wrong offered him by another: for injury
metaphorically is termed debt. After this sort when we now say, such a one is
hiio dalgo, de vengar quincentos sueldos, that is, a gentleman of the pay of
500 Soldi, we mean that he is descended from a soldier so valiant, as for his
prowess he deserved to receive so large a pay, as is that of 500 Soldi. Who
by the court of Spain was (with all his posterity) enfranchised from paying
any tallages or services to the king. This known pay, is naught else save the
entrance which such a soldier made into the number of those, whose stipend
was 500 Soldi: for then were registered in the kings book, the name of the
soldier, the country where he was born, and who were his parents, and
progenitors: for the more certainty to him who received this benefit and
stipend. Even as at this day we read in the book of Bezerro, which is kept at
Salamanca, where are found written, the beginning of welneere all the Spanish
nobility. The semblable diligence used Saul, when David slew Golias: for
forthwith he sent Abner his captain, to take information of what stock the young
man was descended. Anciently they termed Solaro, the house of the villain,
as well as of the gentleman.

But since we have stepped aside into this digression, it behooves to make
return to our purpose from whence we parted, and to know whence it grows,
that in play at chesse, which we termed a counterfeit of war, a man shameth
more to loose, than at any other game, albeit the same turn him to no damage,
neither is the play for money: and whence it may spring that the lookers on see
more draughts than the plaiers themselves, though they are less seen in the
play? and that which most imports is, that some gamsters play best fasting,
and some better after meat. The first doubt holds like difficulty, for we
have avouched, that in war and in chesse play fortune has naught to do,
neither may we be allowed to say, Who would ever have thought this? but all is
ignorance and carelessness in him that leeseth, and wisdom and cunning in him
that gets. And when a man is over come in matters of wit and sufficiency,
and is cut off from all allegations of excuse or pretense, other than his own
ignorance, it follows a matter of necessity that he wax ashamed: for man is
reasonable, and a friend to his reputation, and cannot brook that in the works
of this power, any other should step a foot before him. For which cause
Aristotle demands what the reason may be, why the ancients consented not
that special rewards should be assigned to those, who surpassed the rest in
the Sciences, and yet ordained some for the best leaper, runner, thrower of the
bar, and wrestler? To which he frames answer, That in wrestling and bodily
contentions, it is tolerated that there be Judges assigned, who shall censure
how far one man exceeds another, to the end they may justly yield prize to
the vanquisher, it falling out a matter of no difficulty for the eye to
discern who leapeth most ground, or runs with greatest swiftness: but in
matters of science it proves very hard to try by the understanding, which
exceeds other, for that it is a thing appertaining to the spirit, and of much
queintnesse; and if the judge list to give the prize maliciously, all men
cannot look thereunto, for it is a judgment much estranged from the sense of
the beholders. Besides this answer, Aristotle gives another which is better,
saying, That men make no great recke to be overcome in throwing, wrestling,
running, and leaping, for that they are graces wherein the very brute beasts
outpasse us. But that which we cannot endure with patience, is, to have another
adjudged more wise and advised than our selves, wherethrough they grow in
hatred with the judges, and seek to be revenged of them, thinking that of
malice they went about to shame the^. Therefore to shun these inco^ueniences,
they would not yield consent, that in works appertaining to the reasonable
part, men should be allowed either judges or rewards. Whence is gathered, that
the Universities do ill who assign judges and rewards of the first, second,
and third degree, in licencing those that prove best at the examinations.

For besides that the inconveniences alleged by Aristotle do betide, it is
repugnant to the doctrine of the gospel, that men grow into contention who
should be chief. And that this is true, we see manifestly, for that the
disciples of our savior Christ, coming one day from a certain voyage, treated
amongst themselves, who should be the greatest, and being now arrived at their
lodging, their master asked them whereof they had reasoned upon the way? but
they (though somewhat blunt) well understood how this question was not
allowable, wherthrough the text says, that they durst not tell him, but
because from God nothing can be concealed, he spoke unto them in this manner, If
any will be chief amongst you, he shall be the last of all, and servant to the
rest. The Pharisees were abhorred by Christ our redeemer, because they loved
the highest seats at feasts, and the principal chaires in the Sinagogues. The
chief reason whereon they rely, who bestow degrees after this manner, is, that
when scholars know each of them shall be rewarded according to the trial which
they shall give of themselves, they will skantly afford themselves time from
their study, to sleep or eat. Which would cease, were there not a reward for
him that takes pains, or chastisment for him that addicteth himself to
loosnesse and loitering. But this is a slender reason, and so only in
appearance, and presupposes a great falsehood, which is, that knowledge may be
gotten by continual plodding at the book, and by hearing of good masters,
and never leesing a lesson. And they mark not, that if a scholar want the wit
and ability requisite for the learning which he applies, it falls out a lost
labor, to beat his head day and night at his books. And the error is such,
that if differences of wits, so far distant as these, do enter into
competencie, the one through his quick capacity, without studying or poaring
in books, gets learning in a trice, and the other, for that he is
block-headed and dull, after he has toiled all his life long, can small skill
in the matter.

Now the Judges come, as men to give the first price to him, who was enabled by
nature, and took no travel, and the last to him who was born void of
capacity, yet never gave over studying; as if the one had gotten learning by
turning over his books, and the other lost the same through his own
sluggishnesse. And it fares as if they ordained prices for two horses, of
which the one had his legs sound and nimble, and the other halted down right.
If the Universities did admit to the study of the Sciences, none but such as
had a wit capable thereof, and were all equal, it should seem a thing well
done to ordain reward and punishment: for whosoever knew most, it would thereby
appear that he pained himself most, and who knew least, had given himself
more to his ease.

To the second doubt we answer, that as the eyes stand in need of light, and
cleernesse, to see figures and colors, so the imagination has need of light
in the brain, to see the fantasies which are in the memory. This cleernesse,
the sun gives not, nor any lamp or candle, but the vitalspirits which are
bred in the heart, and dispersed throughout the body. Herewithall it is
requisite to know that fear gathers all the vitallspirits to the heart, and
leaves the brain darcke, and all the other parts of the body cold. Whereupon
Aristotle makes this demand, Whence comes it, that who so fears, his
voice, his hands, and his nether lip do tremble? whereto he answers, that
through this fear, the natural heat hieth to the heart, and leaves all the
residue of the body acold, and the cold (as is before touched) by Galens mind,
hinders all the powers and faculties of the soul, and suffers not them to
work.

Hence begins the answer of this second doubt, and it is, that those who
play at Chesse, conceive fear to loose, because the game stands upon terms
of reputation and disgrace, and for that Fortune has no stroke therein, so the
vital spirits assembling to the heart, the imagination is foreslowed by the
cold, and the fantasms in the dark, for which two reasons, he who plaieth
cannot bring his purpose to effect. But the lookers on, in as much as this no
way imports them, neither stand in fear of loosing through want of skill, do
behold more draughts, for that their imagination retains his heat, and his
figures are enlightened by the light of the vital spirits. True it is, that
much light reaueth also the light of the imagination, and it befalls what
time the player waxes ashamed and out of countenance to see his adversary
beat him; then through this aggreeuednes, the natural heat increases, and
enlighteneth more than is requisite, of all which he that stands by is deuoid.
From hence issues an effect very usual in the world, that what time a man
endeuoreth to make the best muster of himself, and his learning and
sufficiency most known, it proves worst with him: with others again the
contrary betideth, who being brought to their trial, make a great show, and
passed out of the lists, appear of little worth, and of all this, the reason
is very manifest, for he whose head is filled with much natural heat, if you
appoint him to do an exercise of learning or disputation, within four and
twenty hours after, a part of that excessive heat which he has, flies to the
heart, and so the brain remains temperat, and in this disposition (as we will
prove in the chapter ensuing) many points worth the utterance, present
themselves to a man's remembrance. But he who is very wise and endowed with a
great understanding, being brought to trial, by means of fear, cannot retain
the natural heat in his head, whereon through default of light, he finds not
in his memory what to deliver.

If this fell into their consideration, who take upon them to control the
Generals of armies, blaming their actions, and the order which they set down in
the field, they should discern how great a difference rests between the
giving a looking on the fight out at a window, or the breaking of a lance
therein, and the fear to leese an army whose charge their sovereign has
committed to their hands.

No less damage does fear procure the Physician in curing, for his practice
(as we have proved heretofore) appertains to the imagination, which rests
more annoied by cold than any other power, for that his operation consists in
heat. Whence we see by experience, that Physicians can sooner cure the vulgar
sort, than Princes and great personages. A counselor at law one day asked me
(knowing that I handled this matter) what the cause might be, that in the
affairs where he was well paid, many cases and points of learning came to his
memory, but with such as yielded not to his travel what was due, it seemed
that all his knowledge was shrunk out of his brain: whom I answered, that
matters of interest appertained to the wrathful faculty which makes his
residence in the heart, and if the same receive not contentment, it does not
willingly send forth the vital spirits, by whose light, the figures which rest
in the memory may be discerned. But when that finds satisfaction, it
cheerfully affoordeth natural heat. VVherthrough the reasonable soul
obtains sufficient cleernesse to see whatsoever is written in the head. This
defect do men of great understanding partake, who are pinching, and rely much
on their interest and in such is the property of that counselor best
discerned. But who so falls into due consideration hereof, shall observe it
to be an action of Justice, that he who labors in another man's vineyard be
well paid his wages.

The like reason is current for the physicians, to whom (when they are well
hired) many remedies present them selves: otherwise, the art (as well in them as
the lawyer) slippeth out of their fingers. But here a matter very important is
to be noted, namely; that the good imaginanation of the physician, discovers
on a sudden what is necessary to be done. And if he take leisure and farther
consideration, a thousand inconveniences come into his fancy, which hold him
in suspense, and this-while the occasion of the remedy passes away. Therefore
it is never good, to advise the physician to consider well what he has in
hand, but that he forthwith execute what first he purposed. For we have proved
heretofore, that much speculation makes the natural heat to avoid out of the
head, and again the same may increase so far forth, as to turmoile the
imagination. But the physician in whom it is slack, shall not do amiss to
use long contemplation: for the heat advancing it self up to the brain, shall
come to attain that point, which to this power is behooffull.

The third doubt in the matters already rehearsed, has his answer very
manifest: for the difference of the imagination, with which we play at chesse,
requires a certain point of heat, to see the draughts, and he that plaieth
well fasting, has then the degree of heat requisite thereunto. But through the
heat of the meat, the same exceeds that point which was necessary, and so he
plaieth worse. The contrary befalls to such as play well after meals, for
the heat rising up together with the meat and the wine, arriueth to the point,
which wanted whiles he was fasting. It is therefore needful to amend a place
in Plato, who says, that nature has with great wisdom disioyned the liver
from the brain, to the end the meat with his vapors, should not trouble the
contemplation of the reasonable soul. But here if he mean those operations
which appertain to the understanding, he speaks very well, but it can take no
place in any of the differences of the imagination. Which is seen by
experience in feasts and banquets: for when the guests are come to mid meal,
they begin to tell pleasant tales, merriments, and similitudes; where at the
beginning, none had a word to say; but at the end of the feast, their tongue
fails them, for the heat is passed beyond the bound, requisite for the
imagination. Such as need to eat and drink a little, to the end the
imagination may lift up it self, are melancholicke by adustion: for such have
their brain like hot lime, which taken up into yourhand, is cold and dry in
feeling: but if you bath the same in any liquor, you cannot endure the heat
which grows thereof.

We must also correct that law of the Carthagineans, which Plato alleges,
whereby they forbad their Captains to drink wine, when they went to their
wars, and likewise their governors, during the year of their office. And
albeit Plato held the same for a very just law, and never makes an end of
commending the same; yet it behooves to make a distinction: we have alleged
heretofore, that the work of judging appertains to discourse, and that this
power abhors heat, and therefore receives much damage by wine: but to
govern a commonwealth, (which is a distinct matter from taking into your hand
a process, and giving sentence thereupon) belongs to the imagination, and
that requires heat. And the governor not arriving to the point, which is
requisite, may well drink a little wine, so to attain the same. The like may
be said touching the general of an army, whose counsel partaketh also with
the imagination. And if the natural heat be by any hot thing to be advanced,
none performs it so well as wine; but it is requisite, that the same be
temperatly taken, for there is no nourishment which so gives and reaueth a
man's wit, as this liquor. Wherefore it behooves the General, to know the
manner of his imagination, whether the same be of those which need meat and
drink to supply the heat that wants, or to abide fasting: for in this only,
consists how to manage his affairs well or evil.

CHAP. XIIII.
How we may know to what difference of ability the office of a king
appertains, and what signs he ought to have, who enjoys this manner of wit.

WHen Solomon was chosen king and head of so great and numberfull a people, as
that of Israel; the text says, that for governing and ruling them, he craved
wisdom from heaven, and nothing besides. Which demand so much pleased God, as
in reward of having asked so well, he made him the wisest king of the world,
and not so contented, he gave him great riches and glory, evermore holding his
request in better price. Whence is manifestly gathered, that the greatest
wisdom and knowledge which may possibly be in the world, is that foundation,
upon which the office of a king relieth. Which conclusion is so certain and
true, as it were but lost labor to spend time in the proof thereof. Only it
behooves to show to what difference of wit the art of being a king, and such a
one as is requisite for the commonwealth, appertains: and to unfold the
tokens, whereby the man may be known who is endowed with this wit and ability.
VVherethrough it is certain, that as the office of a king exceeds all the
arts in the world; so the same requires a perfection of wit in the largest
measure that nature can devise. What the same is we have not as yet defined:
for we have been occupied in distributing to the other arts, their differences
and manners. But since we now have the same in handling, it must be understood
that of nine temperatures, which are in mankind, one only (says Galen) makes
a man so surpassing wise, as by nature he can be. VVherin the first qualities
are in such weight and measure, that the heat exceeds not the cold, nor the
moist the dry; but are found in such equality and conformity, as if really
they were not contraries, nor had any natural opposition. Whence resulteth an
instrument so appliable to the operations of the reasonasoule, that man comes
to possess a perfect memory of things passed, and a great imagination to see
what is to come, and a great understanding, to distinguish, infer, argue,
judge, and make choice. The other differences of wit (by us recounted) have not
any one amongst them of sound perfection: for if a man possess great
understanding, he cannot (by means of much dryness) comprise the sciences
which appertain to the imagination and the memory; and if he be of great
imagination, by reason of much heat, he remains insufficient for the sciences
of the understanding and the memory, and if he enjoy a great memory, we have
to fore expressed how unable those of much memory (through their excessive
moisture) do prove for all the other sciences. Only this difference of wit,
which we now are a searching is that, which answers all the arts in
proportion. How much damage the unableness of adjoining the rest, breeds to
any one knowledge, Plato notes, saying; That the perfection of each in
particular, depends on the notice and knowledge of them all in general.

No sort of knowledge is found so distinctly and severed from another, but that
the skill in the one much aideth to the others perfection. But how shall we do,
if having sought for this difference of wit with great diligence in all Spain,
I can find but one such? Whereby I (No doubt your own king.)
conceive, that Galen said very well, That out of Greece, nature not so much
as in a dream, makes any man temperat, or with a wit requisite for the
sciences. And the same Galen alleges the reason hereof, saying; That Greece
is the most temperat region of the world. Where the heat of the air exceeds
not the cold, nor the moist the dry. Which temperature, makes men very wise
and able for all the Sciences, as appears, considering the great number of
famous me^, who thence have issued, as Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates,
Galen, Theophrastus, Demosthenes, Homer, Thales Milesius, Diogenes Cynicus,
Solon, and infinite other wise men mentioned in histories, whose works we find
replenished with all sciences. Not as the writers of other provinces, who if
they treat of physic, or any other science, it proves a miracle, for them to
allege any other sort of science in their aid or favor. All of them are
beggarly and without furniture, as wanting a wit capable of all the arts. But
which we may most marvel at in Greece is, that whereas the wit of women is
found so repugnant unto learning (as hereafter we will prove) yet there have
been so many she Greeks, so specially seen in the sciences, as they have grown
into competencie with the sufficientest men: as namely Leontia, a most wise
woman, who wrote against Theophrastus, the greatest Philosopher of his time,
reproouing him for many errors in philosophy. But if we look into other
Provinces of the world, hardly shall we find sprung up any one wit that was
notable. Which grows for that they inhabit places distempered, where men
become brutish, slow of capacity, and ill conditioned.

For this cause Aristotle moves a doubt, saying; What means it, that those
who inhabit a country, either over cold, or over hot, are fierce and fell in
countenance and conditions, To which problem he answers very well, saying;
that a good temperature, not only makes a good grace in the body, but also
aideth the wit and ability. And as the excesses of heat and cold do hinder
nature, that she cannot shape a man in good figure; So (also for the like
reason) the harmonle of the soul is turned topsie turuie, and the wit proves
slow and dull.

This the Greeks well wist, inasmuch as they termed all the nations of the
world Barbarians, considering their slender sufficiency and little knowledge.
Whence we see, that of so many that are borne and study out of Greece, if
they be Philosophers, none of them arriueth to the perfection of Plato, and
Aristotle: if Physicians, to Hippocrates and Galen: if orators, to Demostbenes:
if Poets, to Homer: and so in the residue of the sciences parts, the Greeks
have ever held the foremost rank beyond al contradiction. At least the problem
of Aristotle is very well verified in the Greeks: for verily they are the men
of most sufficiency and loftiest capacity in the world: were it not that they
live in disgrace, oppressed by force of arms in bondage, and all hardly
entreated, by the coming of the Turks, who bannished all learning, and caused
the University of Athens, to pass unto Paris in France, where at this day the
same continues. And (thus through want of manurance) so many gallant wits (as
we have before reported) are utterly perished. In the other regions out of
Greece, though schools and exercise of learning are planted, yet no man has
proved in them of any rare excellency.

The Physician holds he has waded very far, if with his wit he can attain to
that which Hippocrates and Galen delivered, and the natural Philosopher
reckons him self so full of knowledge, as he can be capable of no more, if
he once grow to the understanding of Aristotle. But this notwithstanding, it
goes not for an universal rule, that all such as have Greece for their
birthplace, must of force be temperate and wise, and all the residue
distemperat and ignorant: for the same Galen recounteth of Anacharsis, who was
born in Scythia, that he carried the reputation of a rare wit amongst the
Grecians, though himself a Barbarian. A Philosopher, borne in Athens, falling
in contention with him, said unto him; get thee hence thou Barbarian. Then
Anacharsis answered, My country is to me a shame, and so art thou to thine:
for Scythia, being a region so distemperat, and where so many ignorant persons
live, my self am grown to knowledge, and thou being borne in Athens, a place of
wit and wisdom, were never other than an Ass. In sort, that we need not
utterly despair in regard of the temperature: neither think it a case of
impossibility, to meet herewithall out of Greece, and especially in Spain, a
region not very distemperat: for as I have found one of these differences in
Spain, so it may well be, that there are many others not yet come to
knowledge, and which I have not been able to find out. It shall do well
therefore, to entreat of the tokens, by which a temperat man may be discerned,
to the end where such a one is, he may not be hidden.

Many signs have the Physicians laid down to discover this difference of wit,
but the most principal, and which afford best notice, are these following.

The first (says Galen) is to have his hair abourne, a color between white
and red; and that passing from age to age, they ever become more golden. And
the reason is very clear: for the material cause whereof they hair
consists, the Physicians say, is a gross vapor, which arises from the
digestion, that the brain makes at the time of his nourishment; and look what
color is of the member, such also is that of his excrements. If the brain in
his composition partake much of fleagme, the hair in growth is white, if much
choler, saffron colored: but if these two humors rest equally mingled, the
brain becomes temperat, hot, cold, moist, and dry; and the hair abourne,
partaking both the extremes. True it is Hippocrates says, that this color in
men, who live under the North, as are the English, Flemmish, and Almains
springs, for that their witness is parched up with much cold, and not for
the reason by us alleged. Wherefore in this token it behooves to be well
advised: otherwise we may soon slip into error.

The second token which a man, who shall be endowed with this difference of wit,
must have, is, says Galen, to be well shaped, of good countenance, of seemly
grace, and cheerful: in sort, that the sight may take delight to behold him,
as a figure of rare perfection. And the reason is very plain: for if nature
have much force, and a seed well seasoned, she always forms of things
possible, the best and most perfect in his kind: but being purueied of forces,
mostly she places her study in fashioning the brain, for that amongst all
other parts of the body, the same is the principal seat of the reasonable
soul: whence we see many men to be great and foul, and yet of an excellent wit.

The quantity of body, which a temperat man ought to have (says Galen) is not
resolutely determined by nature, for he may be long, short, and of mean
stature, conformable to the quantity of the temperat seed, which it had when
it was shaped. But as touching that which appertains to the wit in temperat
persons, a mean stature is better than either a great or little. And if we must
lean to either of the extremes, it is better to incline to the little than to
the great: for the bones and superfluous flesh (as we have proved heretofore,
by the opinion of Plato and Aristotle) bring great damage to the wit.
Agreeable hereunto, the natural Philosophers are wont to demand, whence it
proceeds, that men of small stature, are ordinarily more wise, than those of
long stature. And for proof hereof, they cite Homer, who says that Ulysses
was very wise, and little of body; and contrariwise Ajax very foolish, and in
stature tall. To this question they make very simple answer, saying, that the
reasonable soul gathered into a narrow room, has thereby more force to work
conformably to that old saw, Virtue is of more force united than dispersed: and
contrariwise making abode in a body long and large, it wants sufficient
virtue to move and animat the same. But this is not the reason thereof: for we
should rather say, that long men have much moisture in their composition, which
extends out their flesh, and ableth the same to that increase which the
natural heat does ever procure. The contrary betideth in little bodies: for
through their much dryness, the flesh cannot take his course, nor the natural
heat enlarge or stretch it out, and therefore they remain of short stature.
And we have ea^st proved that amongst the first qualities, none brings so
great damage to the operations of the reasonable soul, as much moisture, and
that none so far quickneth the understanding, as dryness.

The third sign (says Galen) by which a temperat man may be known, is, that
he be virtuous and of good conditions: for if he be lewd and vicious, Plato
affirms it grows for that in man there is some distemperat quality, which
urges him to offend: and if such a one will practice that which is agreeable
to virtue, is behooves, that first he renounce his own natural inclination.
But whosoever is absolutely temperat, stands not in need of any such
diligence, for the inferior powers require nothing at his hands, that is
contrary to reason. Therefore Galen says, that to a man who is possessed of
this temperature, we need prescribe no diet what he shall eat and drink: for
he never exceeds the quantity and measure which physic would assign him.
And Galen contenteth not himself to term them most temperat: but moreover
avouches, that it is not necessary to moderat their other passions of the
soul: for his anger, his sadness, his pleasure, and his mirth, are always
measured by reason. Whence it follows, that they are evermore healthful and
never diseased, and this is the fourth figure.

But herein Galen swarueth from reason: for it is impossible to frame a man,
that shall be perfect in all his powers, as the body is temperat, and that his
wrathful and concupiscentiall power, get not the sovereignty over reason, and
incite him to sin. For it is not fitting to suffer any man (how temperat
soever) to follow always his own natural inclination without gainsetting and
correcting him by reason. This is easily understood, considering the
temperature which the brain ought to have, to the end the same may be made a
convenient instrument for the reasonable faculty: and that which the heart
should hold, to the end the wrathful power may covet glory, empire, victory,
and sovereignty over all: and that which the liver ought to have for
disgesting the meats, and that which ought to rest in the colds, to be able to
preserve mankind, and to increase the same. Of the brain, we have said sundry
times tofore, that it should retain moisture, for memory; dryness, for
discourse; and heat, for the imagination. But for all this, his natural
temperature is cold and moist; and by reason of the more or less of these two
qualities, sometimes we term it hot, and sometimes cold; now moist, then dry:
but the cold and moist grow to predominat. The liver, wherein the faculty of
concupiscence resideth, has for his natural temperature, heat and moisture to
predominate; and from this it never alters, so long as a man lives. And if
sometimes we say it is cold, it grows, for that the same has not all the
degrees of heat requisite to his own operations. As touching the heart, which
is the instrument of the wrathful faculty, Galen affirms it of his own
nature to be so hot, as if (while a creature lives) we put our finger into his
hollownesse, it will grow impossible to hold the same there one moment without
burning. And albeit sometime we term it cold; yet we may not conceive, that the
same does predominate: for this is a case impossible, but that the same
consists not in such degree of heat, as to his operations is behooffull.

In the cods, where the other part of the concupiscible makes abode: the like
reason takes place, for the predomination of his natural temperature, is hot
and dry. And if sometimes we say, that a man's cods are cold, we must not
absolutely so understand the same: neither to predomination: but that the degree
of heat, requisite for the generatiue virtue is wanting. Hereon we plainly
infer, that if a man be well compounded and instrumentalized, it behooves of
force, that he have excessive heat in his heart: for otherwise the wrathful
faculty would grow very remiss; and if the liver be not exceeding hot, it
cannot digest the meat, nor make blood for nourishment: and if the cods have
not more heat than cold, a man will prove impotent, and without power of
begetting. Wherefore these two members (being of such force as we have said) it
follows of necessity, that the brain take alteration through much heat,
which is one of the qualities that most paineth reason; and which is worst, the
will being free, inciteth and inclines it self to condescend to the appetites
of the lower portion.

By this reckoning it appears, that nature cannot fashion such a man as may
be perfect in all his powers, nor produce him inclined to virtue. How repugnant
it is unto the nature of man, that he become inclined to virtue, is easily
proved, considering the composition of the first man, which though the most
perfect that ever mankind enjoyed saving that of Christ our redeemer, and
shaped by the hands of so great an artificer: yet if God had not infused into
him a supernatural quality, which might keep down his inferior part; it was
impossible (abiding in the principles of his own nature) that he should not be
inclined to evil. And that God made Adam of a perfect power to wrath and
concupiscence, is well to be understood, in that he said and commanded him,
Increase and multiply, and to replenish the earth. It is certain that he gave
them an able power for procreation, and made them not of a cold complexion,
inasmuch as he commanded him that he should people the earth with men; which
work cannot be accomplished without abundance of heat. And no less heat did
he bestow upon the faculty nutritive: with which he was to restore his
consumed substance, and renew another in lieu thereof. Seeing that he said to
the man and the woman, Behold, I have given you every herb, that brings
forth seed upon the earth, and whatsoever trees have seed of their kind, to the
end they may serve you for food: for if God had given them a stomach and
liver, cold and of little heat, for certain they could not have digested their
meat, nor preserve themselves 900 years alive in the world. He fortified also
the heart, and gave the same a wrathful faculty, which might yield him apt to
be a king and lord, and to command the whole world, and said unto them, Do you
subdue the earth, and command over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the
air, and all the beasts that move on the face of the earth. But if he had not
given them much heat, they had not partaken so much viuacitie, nor authority
of sovereignty, of commandment, of glory, of majesty, and of honor.

How much it endamageth a prince, to have his wrathful power remiss, cannot
sufficiently be expressed: for through this only cause it befalls, that he is
not feared nor obeyed, nor reverenced by his subjects. After having fortified
the wrathful and concupiscible powers, giving unto the forementioned members
so much heat, he passed to the faculty reasonable, and shaped for the same a
brain cold and moist, in such degree, and of a substance so delicat, that the
soul might with the same discourse, and philosophize, and use his infused
knowledge. For we have already avouched, and heretofore proved, that God to
bestow a supernatural knowledge upon men, First orders their wit, and makes
them capable, by way of the natural dispositions delivered by his hand, that
they may receive the same: for which cause, the text of the holy scripture
affirms, that he gave them a heart to conceive, and replenished them with the
discipline of understanding. The wrathful and concupiscentiall powers, being
then so mighty through great heat, and the reasonable so weak and remiss to
resist, God made provision of a supernatural quality, and this is termed by
the Divines Original Justice, by which they come to repress the brunts of the
inferior portion, and the part reasonable remains superior, and inclined to
virtue. But when our first parents offended, they lost this quality, and the
irascible and concupiscible remained in their nature, and superior to reason,
in respect of the strength of the three members that we spoke of, and man
rested ready even from his youth, unto evil.

Adam was created in the age of youth, which (after the Physicians) is the most
temperat of all the residue, and from that age forth, he was inclined to
euilnes, saving that little time, whilst he preserved himself in grace by
original justice. From this doctrine we gather in good natural Philosophy,
that if a man be to perform any action of virtue to the gainsaieng of the
flesh, it is impossible that he can put the same in execution, without outward
aid of grace; for the qualities with which the inferior power works, are of
greater efficacy. I said, with gainsaying of the flesh, because there are many
virtues in man, which grow for that he has his powers of wrath and
concupiscence feeble, as chastity in a cold person, but this is rather an
impotencie of operation, than a virtue: for which cause, had not the catholic
church taught us, that without the special aid of God, we could not have
overcome our own nature, Philosophy natural would so have learned us,
namely, that grace comfort our will. That then which Galen would have said,
was, that a temperat man exceeds in virtue all others who want this good
temperature, for the same is less provoked by the inferior part.

The fifth property which those of this temperature possess, is to be very
long lived, for they are strong to resist the causes and occasions which
engender diseases; and this was that which the royal prophet David meant, The
days of our age in themselves are seventy years, but if in the potentates
there be eighty or more, it is their pain and sorrow: as if he should say,
The number of years which men ordinarily do live, arrive unto seventy, and if
potentates reach unto eighty, those once passed, they are dead on their feet.
He terms those men potentates, who are of this temperature, for more than
any other they resist the causes which abridge the life. Galen lays down the
last token, saying, that they are very wise, of great memory for things
passed, of great imagination to foresee those to come, and of great
understanding to find out the truth of all matters. They are not malicious, not
wily, not cauillers, for these spring from a temperature that is vicious Such a
wit as this assuredly, was not framed by nature to addict it self unto the
study of the Latin tongue, Logic, Philosophy, Physic, Divinity, or the
Laws: for put case he might easily attain these sciences, yet none of them
can fully replenish his capacity; only the office of a king is in proportion
answerable thereunto, and in ruling and governing ought the same solely to be
employed. This shall easily be seen if you run over the tokens and properties
of a temperat man, which we have laid down, by taking into consideration, how
fitly each of them squareth with the royal scepter, and how impertinent they
show for the other arts and sciences.

That a king be fair and gracious, is one of the things which most inuiteth
his subjects to love him and wish him well; For the object of love (says
Plato) is beauty and a seemly proportion: and if a king be hardly favored,
and badly shaped, it is impossible that his subjects can bear him affection,
rather they reake it a shame, that a man imperfect and void of the gifts of
nature, should have sway and commandment over them. To be virtuous and of
good conditions, easily may we gather how greatly it imports; for he who
ought to order the lives of his subjects, and deliver unto them rules and laws
to live conformably to reason, it is requisite that he perform the same also in
his own person: for as the king is, such are the great, the mean, and the
inferior persons.

Moreover, by this means he shall make his commandments the more authentical,
and with the better title may chastise such as do not observe them. To enjoy a
perfection in all the powers which govern man, namely; the generatiue,
nutritive, wrathful and reasonable, is more necessary in a king, than any
artiste whatsoeeuer. For (as Plato delivers) in a well ordered commonwealth,
there should be appointed certain surueiours who might with skill look into
the qualities of such persons as are to be married, and give to him a wife
answerable unto him in proportion, and to every wife a convenient husband.
Through this diligence, the principal end of matrimony should not become
vain; for we see by experience, that a woman who could not conceive of her
first husband, marrying another, straghtwaies bears children; and many men
have no children by their first wife, taking another, speedily come to be
fathers.

Now this skill (says Plato) is principally behooffull in the marriage of
kings: for it being a matter of such importance, for the peace and quiet of the
kingdom, that the Prince have lawful children to succeed in the estate, it
may so fall, that the king marrying at all adventures, shall take a barraine
woman to wife, with whom he shall be combred all days of his life, without hope
of issue. And if he decease without heirs of his body, straightwaies it must
be decided by civil wars, who shall command next after him. But Hippocrates
says, this art is necessary for men that are distemperat, and not for those
who partake this perfect temperature by us described. These need no special
choice in their wife, nor to search out which may answer them in proportion:
for whom soever they marry withal (says Galen) forthwith they beget issue, but
this is understood, when the wife is sound, and of the age wherein women by
order of nature, may conceive and bring forth: in sort, that fruitfulness is
more requisite in a king than in any artist whatsoever, for the reasons tofore
alleged.

The nutritive power (says Galen) if the same be gluttonous, greedy, and
bibbing, it springs, for that the liver and stomach want the temperature
which is requisite for their operations: and for this cause men become riotous
and short lived. But if these members possess their due temperature and
composition, the self Galen affirms, that they covet no greater quantity of
meat and drink than is convenient for preservation of life. Which property is
of so great importance for a king, that God holds that land for blessed, to
whose lot such a Prince befalls. Blessed is the land (says he in
Ecclesiasticus) whose king is noble, and whose princes feed in due times, for
their refreshment, and not for riotousnesse. Of the wrathful faculty if the
same be extended or remiss, it is a token (says Galen) that the heart is ill
composed, and partaketh not that temperature, which is requisite for his
operations. From which two extremes, a king ought to be farther distant, than
any other artist. For to join wrathfulnesse with much power makes smally for
the subjects avail. And as illy fitteth it for a king to have his wrathful
power remiss: for if he slightly slip over bad parts and attempts in his
kingdom, he grows out of awe and reverence amongst his subjects; whence
great damages and very difficult to be remedied, do accustomably arise in
the commonwealth. But the man who is temperat, grows displeased upon good
ground, and can pacify himself as is requisite: which property is as
necessary to be settled in a king, as any of those which we have before
remembered. How much it imports that the faculty reasonable, the imagination,
the memory, and the understanding, be of greater perfection in a king than in
any other, is easily to be proved: for the other arts and sciences (as it
seems) may be obtained and put in practice by the force of man's wit: but to
govern a kingdom, and to preserve the same in peace and concord, not only
requires, that the king be endowed with a natural wisdom to execute the same:
but it is also necessary, that God particularly assist him with his
understanding, and aid him in governing: whence it was well noted in the
scripture, The heart of the king is in the hand of God. To live also many
years, and to enjoy continual health, is a property more convenient for a
good king than for any other artisan. For his industry and travel, breeds an
universal good to all: and if he fail to hold out in healthfulnesse, the
commonwealth falls to ruin.

All this doctrine here laid down by us, will be evidently confirmed, if we
can find in any history, that at any time there was any king chosen, in whom
any of those tokens and conditions by us recited, were not wanting. And truth
has this as peculier to her nature, that she never lacks arguments, whereby
to be confirmed.

The divine scripture recounteth, that God falling in dislike with Saul, for
that he had spared Amalecks life; commanded Samuel that he should go to
Bethleem, and anoint for king of Israel, one of the eight sons of Iesse. Now
the holy man, presuming that God had a liking to Eliab, for that he was tall of
stature; demanded of him, Is this man, here in the presence of my Lord, his
Christ? to which question he was answered in this manner, Take not regard to his
countenance, nor to the tallness of his stature, for I have refused him. I
judge not man by his look: for man sees the things outwardly apparent, but
the Lord discerns the heart; As if God should say, Mark not (O Samuel) the
high stature of Eliab, nor that manly countenance which thou beholdest: for I
have tried that in Saul. You men judge by the outward signs, but I cast mine
eye upon the judgment and wisdom, wherewith a people is to be governed.

Samuel mistrusting his own skill in choosing, passed on farther in the charge
which was commanded him; asking still of God, upon every one, which of them he
should anoint for king: and because God held himself contented with none of
them, he said unto Iesse; have thou yet no more sons but those who stand
before us? Who answered, saying; That he had yet one more, who kept his beasts,
but he was of little growth: him seeming, that therefore he was not sufficient
to weeld the royal scepter. But Samuel now wisted, that a great stature was no
sure token, caused him to be sent for. And it is a point worth the noting, that
the holy Scripture, before it expressed how he was anointed king, said in this
manner; But he was abourne haired, and of a fair countenance, and a visage well
shaped, arise and anoint him, for this is he. In sort, that David had the two
first tokens, of those which we recounted, abourne haired, handsome shaped, and
of a mean stature. To be virtuous and well conditioned, which is the third
sign easily we may conceive, that he was therwithall endowed, seeing that God
said, I have found a man after my heart: for albeit he sinned sundry times, yet
for all that, he lost not the name and habit of virtue. Even as one by habit
vicious, though he perform some good morrall works, does not therefore leese
the name of lewd and vicious. That he led all the course of his life in health,
it should seem may be proved; because in his whole history, mention is made
of his sickness but once (and this is a natural disposition, of all such as are
long lived.) Now because his natural heat was resolved, and that he could not
take heat in his bed; to remedy this, they couched a very fair lady by his
side, who might foster him with heat. And herethrough he lived so many years,
that the text says, he deceased in a good age, full of days, of riches, and
of glory: as if it should say, David died in a good old age, full of days, of
riches, and of glory: having endured so many trauails in the wars, and
undergone great penance for his transgressions And this grew, for that he was
temperat, and of a good complexion: for he refused the occasions, which
accustomably breed infirmity, and shortning of man's life. His great wisdom
and knowledge was noted by that servant of Saul when he said; My lord, I know a
cunning musition, the son of Iesse, born in Bethleem, courageous in fight, wise
in discourse, and of seemly countenance. By which tokens (above specified) it
is manifest, that David was a temperat man, and to such is the royal scepter
belonging: for his wit is of the best mould that nature could fashion. But
there presents it self a very great difficulty against this doctrine,
namely; seeing God knew all the wits and abilities of Israel: and likewise
wist, that temperat men are seized of the wisdom and knowledge requisite to the
calling of a king: for what cause in the first election that he made, he sought
not out a man of this sort? Nay the text avouches, that Saul was so tall of
stature, as he passed all the residue of Israel, by the head and shoulders, And
this sign is not only an evil token of wit in natural Philosophy, but even
God himself (as we have proved) reproved Samuel, because (moved by the high
growth of Eliab) he thereupon would have made him king. But this doubt
declares that to be true, which Galen said, that out of Greece, we shall not
(so much as in a dream) find out a temperat man, Seeing in a people so large
(as that of Israel) God could not find one to A weak reason, rather God chose
Saul as a carnal man sit for the Jews obstinat asking, and David as a
spiritual man, the instrument of his mercy.
choose for a king: but it behooued him to tarry, till David was grown up, and
the whiles made choice of Saul. For the text says, that he was the best of
Israel: but verily it seemed he had more good nature than wisdom, and that was
not sufficient to rule and govern. Teach me (says the Psalm) goodness,
discipline, and knowledge. And this the royal Prophet David spoke, seeing that
it avails not for a king to be good and virtuous, unless he join wisdom
and knowldge there withal. By this example of king David, it seems we have
sufficiently approved our opinion.

But there was also another king borne in Israel, of whom it was said, Where is
he that is borne king of the Jews? And if we can prove, that he was abourne
haired, towardly, of mean bigness, virtuous, healthful, and of great wisdom
and knowledge, it will be no way damageable to this our doctrine. The
Evangelists busied not themselves, to report the disposition of Christ our
redeemer: for it served not to the purpose of that which they handled, but is a
matter which may easily be understood, supposing that for a man to be temperat,
as is requisite, compriseth all the perfection, wherewith naturally he can be
edowed. And seeing that the holy spirit-compounded and instrumentalized him, it
is certain that as touching the material cause, of which he formed him, the
distemperature of Nazareth could not resist him, nor make him err in his
work, as do the other natural agents: but he performed what him best pleased:
for he wanted neither force, knowledge, nor will, to frame a man most perfect,
and without any defect. And that so much the rather, for that his coming (as
himself affirmed) was to endure travels for man's sake, and to teach him the
truth. And this temperature (as we have before proved) is the best natural
instrument that can be found for these two things. Wherethrough I hold that
relation for true, which Publius Lcntulus, Viceconsul, wrote from Jerusalem
unto the Roman Senate And I hold it untrue, because the phrase utterly differs
from the Latin tongue as spectosus valde inter filios bominum.
after this manner.

There has been seen in our time, a man who yet lives, of great virtue,
called Jesus Christ, who by the Gentiles, is termed the prophet of truth, and
his disciples say, that he is the son of God. He raises the deceased, and
heals the diseased, is a man of mean and proportionable stature, and of very
fair countenance, his look carries such a majesty, as those who behold him,
are enforced both to love and fear him. He has his hair colored like a nut
full ripe, reaching down to his ears, and from his ears to his shoulders;
they are of wax color, but more bright: he has in the middle of his
forehead, a lock, after the manner of Nazareth. His forehead is plain, but very
pleasing: his face void of spot or wrinckle, accompanied with a moderat color:
his nosthrils and mouth, cannot by any with reason be reproved: his beard
thick, and resembling his hair; not long, but forked: his countenance very
gracious and grave: his eyes graceful and clear; and when he rebukes, he
daunteth; and when he admonishes, he pleases: he makes himself to be
beloved, and is cheerful with gravity: he has never been seen to laugh, but
to weep diverse times: his hands and arms are very fair: in his conversation
he contenteth very greatly, but is seldom in company: but being in company, is
very modest: in his countenance and port, he is the seemliest man that may be
imagined. In this relation, are contained three or four tokens of a temperat
person.

The first that he had, his hair and beard of the color of a nut fully ripe,
which to him that considers it well appears to be a brown abourne; which
color, God commanded they heifer should have, which was to be sacrificed as a
figure of Christ: and when he entered into (Unwritten V^rities.)
heaven with that triumph and majesty, which was requisite for such a Prince:
some Angels who had not been informed of his incarnation, said; Who is this
that comes from Edon, with his garments died in Bozra? as if they had said,
Who is he that comes from the red Land, with his garment stained in the same
die, in respect of his hair and his red beard, and of the blood with which he
was tainted? The same letter also reports him to be the fairest man that ever
was seen, and this is the second token of a temperat person, and so was it
prophesied by the holy scripture as a sign whereby to know him. Of fair shape
above all the children of men. And in another place he says, His eyes are
fairer than the wine, and his teeth whiter than milk. Which beauty and good
disposition of body, imported much to effect that all men should bear him
affection, and that there might be nothing in him worthy to be abhorred. For
which cause, the letter delivers, that all men were enforced to love him. It
recites also that he was mean of personage, and that not because the holy
Ghost wanted matter to make him greater, if so it had seemed good: but (as we
tofore have proved by the opinion of Plato and Aristotle) because when the
reasonable soul is burdened with much bones and flesh, the same incurreth
great damage in his wit.

The third sign, namely; to be virtuous and well conditioned, is likewise
expressed in this letter, and the Jews themselves with all their false
witnesses, could not prove the contrary, nor reply when he demanded of them,
Which of you can reprove me of sin? And Joseph (through the faithfulness
which he owed to his history) affirmed of him that he partaked of another
nature above man, in respect of his goodness and wisdom. Only long life could
not be verefied of Christ our redeemer, because they put him to death being
young; where as if they had permitted him to finish his natural course, the
same would have reached to 80 years and upwards. For he who could abide in a
wilderness 40 days, and 40 nights without meat or drink, and not be sick
nor dead therwithall, could better have defended himself from other lighter
things, which had power to breed alteration or offense. Howbeit this action was
reputed miraculous, and a matter which could not light within the compass of
nature.

These two examples of kings, which we have alleged, suffices to make
understood, that the scepter royal, is due to men that are temperate; and that
such are endowed with the wit and wisdom requisite for that office. But there
was also another man, made by the proper hands of God, to the end he should be
king and Lord of all things created, and he made him fair, virtuous, sound, of
long life, and very wise. And to prove this, shall not beamisse for our
purpose. Plato holds it for a matter impossible, that God or nature, can make
a man temperat in a country distemperat: wherethrough he affirms that God,
to create a man of great wisdom and temperature, sought out a place where the
heat of the air should not exceed the cold, nor the moist the dry. And the
divine scripture, whence he borrowed this sentence, says not, that God created
Adam in the earthly paradise, which was that most temperat place whereof he
speaks; but that after he had shaped him, there he placed him. Then our Lord
God (says he) took man, and set him in the Paradise of pleasure, to the end
he might there work and take it in charge. For the power of God being infinite,
and his knowledge beyond measure, when he had a will to give him all the
natural perfection that might be in mankind; we must think that neither the
piece of earth of which he was framed, nor the distemperature of the soil of
Damascus where he was created, could so gainsay him, but that he made him
temperat. The opinion of Plato, of Aristotle, and of Galen, take place in the
works of nature: and even she also, can sometimes (even in distemperat regions)
engender a person that shall be temperat. But that Adam had his hair and his
beard abourne, which is the first token of a temperat man, manifestly
appears. For in respect of this so notorious sign, he had that name Adam,
which is to say (as S. Hierom interprets it) a red man. That he was fair and
well fashioned, which is the second token, cannot in him be denied: for when God
created him, the text says; God saw all things which he had made, and they
were very good. Then it falls out certain, that he issued not from the
hands of God, foul and ill shaped: for the works of God are perfect. And so
much the more for that the trees (as the text says) were fair to behold. Then
what may we think of Adam, whom God created to this principal end, that he
might be Lord and president of the world? That he was virtuous, wise, and well
conditioned, (which are the third and sixth signs) is gathered out of these
words, Let us make a man after our own image and likeness: for by the ancient
Philosophers, the foundation on which the resemblance that man has with God is
grounded, are virtue and wisdom. Therefore Plato avouches, that one of the
greatest contentments which God receives in heaven, is to see a virtuous and
wise man, praised and magnified upon earth: for such a one is his lively
purtraiture. And contrariwise, he grows displeased, when ignorant and vicious
persons are held in estimation and honor: which springs from the unlikeness
between God and them. That he lived healthful and a long space (which are the
fourth and fifth tokens) is nothing difficult to prove, inasmuch as his days
were 930 years. Where through I may now conclude, that the man who is abourn
haired, (And such a one if you mistake not, is your king Philip.)
fair, of mean stature, virtuous, healthful, and long lived, must
necessarily be very wise, and endowed with a wit requisite for the scepter
royal.

We have also (as by the way) disclosed, in what sort great understanding may
be united with much imagination, and much memory, albeit this may also come to
pass, and yet the man not be temperat. But nature shapeth so few after this
model, that I could never find (Your king and your self.)
but two amongst all the wits that I have tried: but how it can come to pass,
that great understanding may unite with much imagination and much memory, in a
man not temperat, is a thing which easily may be conceived, if you presuppose
the opinion of some Physicians, who affirm that the imagination resideth in
the forepart of the brain, the memory in the hinder part, and the
understanding in that of the middle. And the like may be said in our
imagination, but it is a work of great labor, that the brain, being (when
nature creates the same) of the bigness of a grain of pepper, it should make
one ventricle of seed very hot, another very moist, and the middle most of
very dry: but in fine this is no impossible case.

CHAP. XV.
In what manner Parents may beget wise children, and of a wit fit for learning.

IT falls out a matter worthy of marvel, that nature being such as we all
know her, wise, witty, and of great art, judgment, and force, and mankind a
work of so special regard, yet for one whom she makes skillful and wise,
she produces infinite deprived of wit. Of which effect my self searching the
reason and natural causes, have found (in my judgment) that parents apply not
themselves to the act of generation with that order and concert which is by
nature established: neither know the conditions which ought to be observed, to
the end their children may prove of wisdom and judgment. For by the same
reason, for which in any temperat or distemperat region, a man should be borne
very witty (having always regard to the self order of causes) there will
100000 prove of slender capacity: now if by art we may procure a remedy for
this, we shall have brought to the commonwealth the greatest benefit that she
can receive. But the knot of this matter consists, in that we cannot entreat
hereof with terms so seemly and modest, as to the natural shamefastness of
man is requisite: and if for this reason I should forbear to note any part or
contemplation that is necessary, for certain the whole matter would be
marred, in sort that diverse grave Philosophers hold opinion, how wise men
ordinarily beget foolish children, because in the act of copulation, for
honesties sake, they abstain from certain diligences which are of importance,
that the son may partake of his fathers wisdom. Some ancient Philosophers
have labored to search out the natural reason of this natural shame, which
the eyes conceive when the instruments of generation are set before them; and
why the ears take offense to hear them named: and they marvel to see, that
nature has framed those parts with such diligence and carfulness, and for an
end of such importance, as the immortalizing of mankind, and yet the wiser a
man is, the more he grows in dislike to behold or hear them spoken of. Shame
and honesty (says Aristotle) is the proper passion of the understanding, and
who so rests not offended at those terms and actions of generation, gives a
sure token of his wanting that power, as if we should say, that he is blockish,
who putting his hand into the fire, does not feel the same to burn. By this
token, Cato the elder discovered, that Manilius (a noble man) was deprived of
understanding, because it was told him, that the other kissed his wife in
presence of his daughter; for which cause he displaced him out of the Senate,
and Manilius could never obtain at his hands to be restored.

Out of this contemplation, Aristotle frames a problem, demanding whence it
grew, that men who desire to satisfy their venerous lusts, do yet greatly
shame to confess it, and yet coveting to live, to eat, or to perform any other
such action, they stagger not to acknowledge it? to which problem he shapeth a
very untoward answer, saying; Perhaps it comes, because the couetings of
diverse things are necessary, and some of them kill if they be not accomplished,
but the lust of venerous acts, flows from excess, and is token of abundance.
But in effect this problem is false, and the answer none other: for a man not
only shameth to manifest the desire he carries to company with a woman, but
also to eat, to drink, and to sleep, and if a will take him to send forth
any excrement, he dares not say it or do it, but with cumber and
shamefastness, and so gets him to some secret place out of sight. Yea, we find
men so shamefast, as though they have a great will to make water, yet cannot do
it if any look upon them, whereas if we leave them alone, straight-waies the
urine takes his issue. And these are the appetites to send forth the
superfluous things of the body, which if they were not effected, men should
die, and that much sooner than with forbearing meat or drink. And if there be
any (says Hippocrates) who speaks or actuateth this in the presence of
another, he is not master of his sound judgment. Galen affirms, that the
seed holds the semblable proportion with the seed-vessels, as the urine does
with the bladder, for as much urine annoieth the bladder, so much seed
endammageth the seed vessels. And the opinion which Aristotle held, in denieng
that man and woman incur no infirmity or death by retaining of seed, is
contrary to the judgment of all Physicians, and especially of Galen, who
says and avouches, that many women remaining widows in their youth, have
therthrough lost their sense, motion, breathing, and finally their life. And
the self Aristotle reckons up many diseases whereunto contine^t persons are
subject in that behalf. The true answer of this problem cannot be yielded in
natural Philosophy, because it is not marshalled under her jurisdiction; for
it behooves to pass to an higher, namely Metaphisicke, wherein Aristotle
says, that the reasonable soul is the lowest of all the intelligences, and
for that it partaketh of the same general nature with the Angels, it shameth
to behold it self placed in a body which has fellowship with brute beasts:
wherethrough the divine scripture notes it as a mystery, that the first man
being naked, was not ashamed, but so soon as he saw himself to be so,
forthwith he got a covering. At which time he knew that through his own fault,
he had lost immortality, and that his body was become subject to alteration and
corruption, and those instruments and parts given him for that of necessity he
must die, and leave an other in his room, and that to preserve himself in
life, that small space which rested, it behooued him to eat and drink, and to
expel those noisome and corrupt excrements. And principally he shamed, seeing
that the Angels, with whom he had competence, were immortal and stood not in
need of eating, drinking, or sleeping: An high speculation.
for preservation of their life: neither had the instruments of generation, but
were created all at once, without matter, and without fear of corrupting. Of
all these points were the eyes and the ears naturally done to ware.
Wherethrough, the reasonable soul grows, displeased and ashamed, that these
things given man to make him mortal and corruptible, are thus brought to his
memory. And that this is a well fitting answer we Note here a sign which
shows the immortality of the soul.
evidently perceive: for God to content the soul after the universal
judgment, and to bestow upon him entire glory, will cause that his body shall
partake the properties of an Angel, bestowing thereupon subtlenesse,
lightness, immortality, and brightness: for which reason, he shall not stand
in need to eat or drink as the brute beasts. And when men shall thus-wise dwell
in heaven, they will not shame to behold themselves clothed with flesh, even as
Christ our redeemer, and his mother, nothing shamed thereat. But it will breed
an accidental glory, to see that the use of those parts, which were wont to
offend the hearing and the eyes, is now surceased. I therefore making due
reckoning of this natural modesty of the ear, have endeavored to salve the
hard and rough terms of this matter, and to fetch certain, not ill pleasing
biasses of speech, and where I cannot thoroughly perform it, the honest reader
shall afford me pardon. For to reduce to a perfect manner, the art which must
be observed, to the end men may prove of rare capacities, is one of the things
most requisite for the commonwealth. Besides that, by the same reason they shall
prove virtuous, prompt, sound, and long lived.

I have thought good to sever the matter of this chapter, into four principal
parts, that thereby I may make plain what shall be delivered; and that the
reader may not rest in confusion. The first is, to show the natural qualities
and temperature which man and woman ought to possess, to the end they may use
generation. The second, what diligence the parents ought to employ, that their
children may be male and not female. The third, how they may become wise and
not fools. The fourth, how they are to be dealt withal after their birth, for
preservation of their wit.

To come then to the first point we have already alleged, that Plato lays
down, how in a well ordered commonwealth, there ought to be assigned certain
surueiors of marriages, who by art might skill, to look into the qualities of
the persons that are to be married, and to give each one the wife which
answers him in proportion, and to every wife her convenient husband. In which
matter, Hippocrates and Galen began to take some pains, and prescribed certain
precepts and rules, to know what woman is fruitful, and who can bear no
children; and what man is unable for generation, and who able and likely to
beget issue. But touching all this, they uttered very little, and that not
with such distinction as was behooffull, at least for the purpose which I have
in hand. Therefore it falls out necessary, to begin the art even from his
principles, and briefly to give the same his due order and concert, that we so
may make plain and apparent, from what union of parents, wise children issue;
and from what, fools and do-noughts: To which end it behooves first to know a
particular point of Philosophy, which although in regard of the practices of
the art, it be very manifest and true, yet the vulgar make little reake
thereof. And from the notice of this, depends all that, which as touching this
first point is to be delivered: and that is, that man (though it seem otherwise
in the composition which we see) is different from This is no chapter for maids
to read in sight of others.
a woman in naught else (says Galen) than only in having his genitall members
without his body. For if we make anotomie of a woman, we shall find that she
has within her two stones, two vessels for seed; and her belly of the same
frame as a man's member, without that any one part is therein wanting. And this
is so very true, that if when nature has finished to form a man in all
perfection, she would convert him into a woman, there needs naught else to be
done, save only to turn his instruments of generation inwards. And if she have
shaped a woman, and would make a man of her, by taking forth her belly and her
cods, it would quickly be performed. This has chanced many times in nature,
as well whiles the creature has been in the mothers womb, as after the same was
borne, whereof the histories are full; but some have held them only for fables,
because this is mentioned in the Poets, yet the thing carries mere truth: for
diverse times nature has made a female child, and she has so remained in her
mothers belly for the space of one or two months: and afterward, plenty of
heat growing in the genitall members, upon some occasion they have issued
forth, and she become a male. To whom this transformation has befallen in the
mothers womb, is afterward plainly discovered, by certain motions which they
retain, unfitting for the masculin sex, being altogether womanish, and their
voice shrill and sweet. And such persons are inclined to perform women's
actions, and fall ordinarily into uncouth offenses. Contrariwise, nature has
sundry times made a male with his genetories outward, and cold growing on,
they have turned in ward, and it became female. This is known after she is
borne, for she retains a mannish fashion, as well in her words, as in all her
motions and workings. This may seem difficult to be proved, but considering
that which many authentical historians affirm, it is a matter not hard to be
credited. And that women have been turned into men, after they were borne, the
very vulgar do not much marvel to hear spoke of: for besides that which
sundry our elders have laid down for truth, It befell in Spain but few
years since, and that whereof we find experience, is not to be called in
question or argument. What then the cause may be, that the genitall members are
engendered within or without, and the creature becomes male or female, will
fall out a plain case, if we once know that heat extends and enlarges all
things, and cold retains and closes them up. Wherthrough, it is a conclusion
of all Philosophers and Physicians, that if the seed be cold and moist, a woman
is begotten, and not a man; and if the same be hot and dry, a man is begotten
and not a woman. Whence we apparently gather, that there is no man, who in
respect of a woman, may be termed cold; nor woman hot, in respect of a man.

Aristotle says, it is necessary for a woman to be cold and moist, that she
may be likewise fruitful: for if she were not so, it would fall out
impossible, that her monthly course should flow, or she have milk to preserve
the child nine months, in her belly, and two years after it is borne, but that
the same would soon wast and consume.

All Philosophers and Physicians avouch, that the belly holds the same
proportion with man's seed, that the earth does with corn, and with any other
grain. And we see, that if the earth want coldness and moisture, the
husbandman dares not sow therein, neither will the seed prosper. But of soils,
those are most fruitful and fertile in rendering fruit, which partake most of
cold and moist, As we see by experience in the regions toward the North, As
England, Flanders, and Almaine, whose abundance of all fruits, works
astonishment in such as know not the reason thereof. And in such countries as
these, no married woman was ever childlesse; neither You are much mistaken.
can they there tell, what barrenness means, but are all fruitful, and
breed children through their abundance of coldness and moisture. But though it
is true that the woman should be cold and moist for conception, Yet she may
abound so much therein, that it may choke the seed; even as we see excess of
rain spoileth the corn, which cannot ripen in overmuch coldness. Whereon we
must conceive, that these two qualities ought to keep a certain
measurablenesse, which when they exceed, or reach not unto, the fruitfulness
is spoiled. Hippocrates holds that woman for fruitful, whose womb is
tempered in such sort, as the heat exceeds not the cold, nor the moist the
dry. VVherethrough he says, that those women who have their belly cold,
cannot conceive, no more than such as are very moist, or very cold and dry.
But so, for the same reason that a woman and her genitall parts should be
temperat; it were impossible that she could conceive, or be a woman. For if the
seed, of which she was first formed, had been temperat, the genitall members
would have issued forth, and she have been a man. So should a beard grow on her
chin, and her flowers surcease, and she become as perfect a man, as nature
could produce. Likewise the womb in a woman cannot be predominatly hot: For if
the seed whereof she was engendered had been of that temperature, she should
have been born a man, and not a woman. This is past all exception, that the
qualities which yield a woman fruitful, are cold and moisture: for the nature
of man, stands in need of much nourishment, that he may be able to use
procreation, and continue his kind. Wherethrough we see, that amongst all the
females of brute beasts, none have their monthly courses as a woman. Therefore
it was requisite to make her altogether cold and moist, and that in such a
degree, as that she might breed much phlegmatic blood, and not be able to wast
or consume the same. I said flegmaticke blood, because this is serviceable to
the breeding of milk; by which Hippocrates and Galen avouch, the creature is
relieved, all the time it remains in the mothers belly. Now if the same
should be temperat, it would produce much blood, unfit for the engendring of
milk, and would wholly resolve, as it does in a temperat man, and so nothing
be left for nourishing the babe. Therefore I hold it for certain, and verily it
is impossibie that a woman can be temperat or hot; but they are all cold and
moist. And if this be not so, let the Philosopher or Physician tell me for what
cause all women are beardlesse, and have their sickness whiles they are
healthful, and for what cause the seed of which she was formed, being temperat
or hot, she was borne a woman, and not a man? Howbeit, though it be true that
they are alcold and moist: yet it follows not, that they are all in one
degree of coldness and moisture. For some are in the first, some in the
second, and some in the third; and in each of these they may conceive, if a man
answer them in proportion of heat, as shall hereafter be expressed. By what
tokens we may know these three degrees of coldness and moisture in a woman,
and likewise weet who is in the first, who is in the second, and who in the
third: there is no Philosopher or Physician, that as yet has unfolded. But
considering the effects, which these qualities do work in women, we may part
them, by reason of their being extended, and so we shall easily get notice
hereof. The first, by the wit and ability of the woman. The second, by her
manners and conditions. The third, by her voice big or small. The fourth, by her
flesh, much, or little. The fifth, by her color. The sixth by her hair. The
seventh, by her fairness or foulness. As touching the first, we may know,
that though it be true (as tofore we have proved) that the wit and ability of
a woman, follows the temperature of the brain, and of none other member: yet
her womb and cods, are of so great force and vigor, to alter the whole body,
that if these be hot and dry, or cold and moist, or of whatsoever other
temperature, the other parts (says Galen) will be of the same tenor: but the
member which most partaketh the alterations of the belly, all Physicians say,
is the brain, though they have not set down the reason whereon they ground this
correspondencie. True it is Galen proves by experience, that by speying a
Sow, she becomes fair and fat, and her flesh very sauory: and if she have
her cods, she tastes little better than dogs flesh. VVherby we conceive, that
the belly and the cods carry great efficacy, to communicate their temperature
to all the other parts of the body; especially to the brain, for that the same
is cold and moist like themselves. Between which (through the resemblance) the
passage is easy.

Now if we conclude, that cold and moist, are the qualities which work an
impairement in the reasonable part, and that his contraries; namely hot and
dry, give the same perfection and encreasement, we shall find that the woman
who shows much wit and sufficiency, partaketh of cold and moist in the first
degree; and if she be very simple, it yields a sign that she is in the
third, the partaking between which two extremes, argues the second degree;
for to think that a woman can be hot and dry, or endowed with a wit and
ability conformable to these two qualities, is a very great error; because if
the seed of which she was formed, had been hot and dry in their domination, she
should have been born a man, and not a woman. But in that it was could and
moist, she was born a woman and not a man. The truth of this doctrine may
clearly be discerned, if you consider the wit of the first woman, who lived in
the world: for God having fashioned her with his own hands, and that very
accomplished, and perfect in her sex, it is a conclusion infallibly true, that
she was possessed of much less knowledge than Adam: which the devil well
weeting, got him to tempt her, and durst not fall in disputation with the man,
fearing his great wit and wisdom. Now to say, that Eve for her offense, was
reft that knowledge which she wanted, cannot be avouched, for as yet she had
not offended.

So then this defect of wit in the first woman grew, for that she was by God
created cold and moist: which temperature, is necessary to make a woman
fruitful, and apt for childbirth, but enemy to knowledge: and if he had made
her temperat like Adam, she should have been very wise, but nothing fruitful,
nor subject to her monthly courses, save by some supernatural means. On this
nature S. Paul grounded himself, when he said, Let a woman learn in silence,
with all subjection: neither would he allow the woman to teach, or govern the
man, but to keep silence. But this is true, when a woman has not a spirit or
greater grace, than her own natural disposition: but if she obtain any gift
from above, she may well teach and speak, for we know that the people of
Israel, being oppressed and besieged by the Assirians; Judith (a very wise
woman) sent for the Priests of the Cabeits and Carmits, and reproved them
saying, How can it be endured, that Osias should say, if within five days
there come no succor, he will yield the people of Israel to the Assirians? see
you not, that these words rather provoke God to wrath, than to mercy? how may
it be, that men should point out a limited time for the mercy of God, and in
their mind assign a day, at which he must succor and deliver them? And in the
conclusion of this reproof, she told them in what sort they might please God,
and obtain their demand. And no less, Elbora (a woman of no less wisdom)
taught the people of Israel, how they should render thanks unto God, for the
great victories which she had attained against their enemies. But whilst a
woman abides in her natural disposition, all sorts of learning and wisdom,
carries a kind of repugnancie to her wit. And for this cause, the Catholic
Church, upon great reason has forbidden, that no woman do preach, confess, or
instruct: for their sex admits neither wisdom nor discipline.

It is discovered also by the manners of a woman, and by her condition, in what
degree of cold and moist her temperature consists: for if with a sharp wit,
she be froward, cursed, and wayward, she is in the first degree of cold and
moist: it being true (as we have proved tofore) that an ill condition, evermore
accompanies a good imagination. She who partaketh this degree of cold and
moist, suffers nothing to escape her hands; notes all things, finds fault
with all things, and so is insupportable. Such are accustomably of amiable
conversation, and fear not to look men in the face, nor hold him ill
mannered, who makes love unto them. But on the other side, to be a woman of
good conditions, and to be agreeued at nothing, to laugh upon every small
occasion, to let things pass as they come, and to sleep soundly, descrieth the
third degree of cold and moist: for much pleasantness of conceit, is
ordinarily accompanied with little wit. She who partaketh of these two
extremes, stands in the second degree. A voice, hoarse, big, and sharp (says
Galen) is a token of much heat and drouth, and we have also proved it
heretofore, by the opinion of Aristotle, wherthrough we may gain this notice,
that if a woman have a voice like a man, she is cold and moist in the first
degree, and if very delicat, in the third. And partaking betwixt both the
extremes, she shall have the natural voice of a woman, and be in the second
degree.

How much the voice depends on the temperature of the cods, shall shortly
hereafter be proved, where we entreat of the tokens appertaining to a man.
Much flesh also in women, is a sign of much cold and moist: for to be fat and
big (say the Physicians) grows in living creatures, from this occasion. And
contrariwise, to be lean and dry, is a token of little coldness and moisture.
To be meanly fleshed, that is, neither overmuch, nor very little; gives
evidence that a woman holds her self in the second degree of cold and moist.
Their pleasantness and courtesies, shows the degrees of these two qualities:
much moisture makes their flesh supple, and little, rough and hard. The mean
is the commendablest part: The color also of the face, and of the other parts
of the body, discovers the extended or remiss degrees, of these two
qualities. When the woman is very white, it boadeth (says Galen) much cold
and moist: and contrariwise, she that is swart and brown, is in the first
degree thereof; of which two extremes, is framed the second degree of white and
well colored.

To have much hair, and a little show of a beard, is an evident sign, to know
the first degree of cold and moist: for all Physicians affirm, that the hair
and beard are engendered of heat and dryness: and if they be black it greatly
purporteth the same. A contrary temperature is betokened, when a woman is
without hair. Now she whose complexion consists in the second degree of cold
and moist, has some hair; but the same reddish and golden. Foulness
moreover, and fairness help us to judge the degrees of cold and moist in
women. It is a miracle to see a woman of the first degree very fair: for the
seed whereof she was formed being dry, hinders that she cannot be fairly
countenanced. It behooves that clay be seasoned with convenient moisture, to
the end vessels may be well framed, and serve to use. But when that same is
hard and dry, the vessel is soul and vnhandsom.

Aristotle farther avouches, that overmuch cold and moist, makes women by
nature foul: for if the seed be cold and very moist, it can take no good
figure, because the same stands not together, as we see, that of over soft
clay, ill shaped vessels are fashioned. In the second degree of cold and moist,
women prove very fair: for they were formed of a substance well seasoned,
and pleasant to nature: which token, of it self alone affords an evident
argument, that the woman is fruitful: for it is certain that nature could do
it, and we may judge, that she gave her a temperature and composition, fit for
bearing of children. Wherethrough she answers in proportion (welneer) to al
men, and all men do desire to have her.

In man, there is no power which has tokens or signs, to descry the
goodness, or malice of his object. The stomach knows the meat by way of
taste, of smelling, and of sight, wherethrough the divine scripture says That
Eve fixed her eyes on the tree forbidden, and her seemed that it was sweet in
taste. The faculty of generation, holds for a token of fruitfulness, a
woman's beauty; and if she be foul, it abhors her, conceiving by this
sign, that nature erred, and gave her not a fit temperature, for bearing of
children.

By what signs we may know, in what degree of hot and dry, every man rests.
1.
A Man has not his temperature so limited as a woman, for he may be hot and
dry (which temperature Aristotle and Galen held, was that which best agreed
with his sex) as also hot and moist and temperat; but cold and moist, and cold
and dry, they would not admit whilst a man was sound and without impairment:
for as you shall find no woman hot and dry, nor hot and moist, or temperat; so
shall you find no man cold and moist, nor cold and dry, in comparison of
women, unless in case as I shall now express. A man hot and dry, and hot and
moist, and temperat, holds the same degrees in his temperature, as does a
woman in cold and moist: and so it behooves to have certain tokens, whereby to
discern what man is in what degree, that we may assign him a wife answerable
unto him in proportion. We must therefore weet, that from the same principles,
of which we gathered understanding what woman is hot and dry, and in what
degree, from the self we must also make use to understand what man is hot and
dry, and in what degree: and because we said, that from the wit and manners of
a man we conjecture the temperature of his cods, it is requisite that we take
notice of a notable point, mentioned by Galen, namely, that to make us
understand the great virtue which a man's cods possess, to give firmness and
temperature to all the parts of the body, he affirms that they are of more
importance than the heart: and he rendereth a reason, saying, that this member
is the beginning of life, and naught else, but the cods are the beginning of
living soundly and without infirmities. How much it endammageth a man to be
deprived of those parts (though so small) there need not many reasons to
prove, seeing we see by experience, that forth with the hair and the beard
pill away, and the big and shrill voice becomes small, and herewithall a man
leeseth his forces and natural heat, and rests in far worse and more
miserable condition than if he had been a woman. But the matter most worth the
noting is, that if a man before his gelding had much wit and ability, so
soon as his stones be cut away, he grows to leese the same, so far forth as
if he had received some notable damage in his very brain. And this is a
manifest token, that the cods give and reaue the temperature from all the other
parts of the body, and he that will not yield credit hereunto, let him consider
(as my self have done oftentimes) that of 1000 such capons who addict
themselves to their book, none attaineth to any perfection, and even in
music (which is their ordinary profession) we manifestly see how blockish
they are, which springs because music is a work of the imagination, and
this power requires much heat, whereas they are cold and moist. So it falls
out a matter certain, that from the wit and ability we may gather the
temperature of the cods: for which cause, the man who shows himself prompt
in the works of the imagination, should be hot and dry in the third degree.
And if a man be of no great reach, it tokeneth, that with his heat much
moisture is united, which always endammageth the reasonable part, and this is
the more confirmed if he be good of memory. The ordinary conditions of men
hot and dry in the third degree, are courage, pride, liberality, audacitie,
and cheerfulness, with a good grace and pleasantness, and in matter of women
such a one has no bridle nor ho. The hot and moist are merry, given to
laughter, lovers of pastime, fair conditioned, very courteous, shamefast, and
not much addicted to women.

The voice and speech much discovers the temperature of the cods. That which
is big and somewhat sharp, gives token that a man is hot and dry in the third
degree: and if the same be pleasant, amiable, and very delicat, it purporteth
little heat and much moisture, as appears in the gelded. A man who has moist
united with heat, will have the same high, but pleasant and shrill. Who so is
hot and dry in the third degree, is slender, hard and rough fleshed; the same
composed of sinews and arteries, and his veins big: contrariwise, to have much
flesh, smooth and tender, is show of much moisture: by means whereof, it
extends and enlarges out the natural heat. The color of the skin, if the
same be brown, burned, blackish green, and like ashes, yields sign that a
man is in the third degree of hot and dry: but if the flesh appears white,
and well colored, it argues little heat and much moisture. The hair and
beard are a mark also not to be ouerslipped: for these two approach very near
to the temperature of the cods. And if the hair be very black and big, and
specially from the ribs down to the navel, it delivers an infallible token
that the cods partake much of hot and dry: and if there grow some hair also
upon the shoulders, the same is so much the more confirmed. But when the hair
and beard are of chesse-nut color, soft, delicat, and thin: it infers not
so great plenty of heat and dryness in the cods.

Men very hot and dry, are never fair, save by miracle, but rather
hard-fauored, and ill shaped: for the heat and dryness (as Aristotle affirms
of the Ethiopians) wrieth the proportion of the face, and so they become
disfigured. Contrariwise, to be seemly and gracious, proves a measurable hot
and moist: for which cause, the matter yielded it self obedient whereto nature
would employ it. Whence it is manifest, that much beauty in a man, is no token
of much heat. Touching the signs of a temperat man, we have sufficiently
discoursed in the chapter foregoing, and therefore it shall not be needful to
reply the same again. It suffices only to note that as the Physicians place
in every degree of heat, three degrees of extention, so also in a temperat man,
we are to set down the largeness and amplenesse of three other. And he who
stands in the third, next to cold and moist, shall be reputed cold and moist:
for when a degree passes the mean, it resembles the other, and that this is
true, we manifestly find: for the signs which Galen delivers us to know a man
cold and moist, are the self same of the temperat man, but somewhat more
remiss: so is he wise, of good conditions, and virtuous, he has his voice
clear and sweet, is white skinned, of flesh good and supple, and without
hair, and if it have any, the same is little and yellow; such are very well
favored and fair of countinaunce, but Galen affirms that their seed is
moist, and unfit for generation: these are no great friends to women, nor women
unto them.

What women ought to marry with what man, that they may have children.
. 2.
TO a woman who bears not children when she is married, Hippocrates
commands that two points of diligence be used, to know whether it be her
defect, or that it grow because the seed of her husband is unable for
generation. The first is to make her suffumigations with incense, or Storax,
with a garment close wrapped about her, which may hang down on the ground, in
sort that no vapor or fume may issue out, and if within a while after she
feel the savor of the incense in her mouth, it yields a certain token,
that the barrenness comes not through her defect, in as much as the same
found the passages of the belly open, wherethrough it pierced up to the
nosthrils and the mouth.

The second is, to take a garlic head clean pilled, and put the same into the
belly, what time the woman goes to sleep, and if the next day she feel in
her mouth the sent of the garlic, she is of her self fruitful without any
default.

But albeit these two proofs perform the effect which Hippocrates speaks of,
namely, that the vapor pierce from the inner part up to the mouth, yet the
same argues not an absolute barrenness in the husband, nor an entire
fruitfulness in the wife, but an unapt corrispondence of both, wherethrough
she proves as barren for him, as he for her: which we see to fall out in daily
experience, for the man taking another wife begets children, and (which
increases the marvel, in such as are not seen in that point of natural
Philosophy) is, that if these two separat each from other upon pretense of
impotencie, and so he take another wife, and she another husband, it has been
found, that both have had children. And this grows, because there are some
men whose generatiue faculty is unable, and not alterable for one woman, and
yet for another is apt and begets issue. Even as we see by experience in the
stomach, that to one kind of meat a man has great appetite, and to another
(though better) it is as dead. What the correspondence should be, which the man
and wife ought to bear each to other, to the end they may bring forth
children, is expressed by Hippocrates in these words, If the hot answer not the
cold, and the dry the moist, with measure and equality, there can be no
generation: as if he should say, that if there unite not in the woman's womb
two seeds, the one hot, and the other cold, and the one moist and the other
dry, extended in equal degree, they cannot beget children For a work so
marvelous as is the shaping of a man, stands in need of a temperature, where
the hot may not exceed the cold, nor the moist the dry. For if a man's seed be
hot, and the woman's seed hot likewise, there will no engendring succeed. This
doctrine thus presupposed, Let us now fit by way of example, a woman cold and
moist in the first degree, whose signs we said were, to be wily, ill
conditioned, shrill voiced, spare fleshed, and black and green colored,
hairie and evil favored, she shall easily conceive by a man, that is
ignorant, of good conditions, who has a well sounding and sweet voice, much,
white, and supple flesh, little hair, and well colored, and fair of
countenance. She may also be given for wife to a temperat man, whose seed
(following the opinion of Galen) we said was most fruitful and answerable to
whatsoever woman: Provided that she be sound and of age convenient; but yet
with all their incidents, it is very difficult for her to conceive child: and
being conceived (says Hippocrates) within two months the same miscarieth: for
she wants blood, wherewith to maintain her self and the babe, during the 9
months. Howbeit this will find an easy remedy, if the woman do bath her self
before she company with her husband, and the baigne must consist of water
fresh and warm: the which (by Hippocrates) righteth her temperature to a good
sort. For it looseneth and moistneth her flesh, even as the earth ought to be
alike disposed, that the grain may therein fasten it self, and gather root.

Moreover, it works a farther effect: for it increases the appetite to meat;
it restrains resolution, and causes a greater quantity of natural heat:
wherthrough plenty of flegmaticke blood is increased: by which the little
creature, may those nine months have sustenance. The tokens of a woman cold and
moist in the third deree, are to be dull witted, well conditioned, to have a
very delicat voice, much flesh, and the same soft and white, to want hair and
down, and not to be over fair. Such a one, should be wedded to a man hot and
dry in the third degree: for his seed is of such fury and feruency, as it
behooves the same to fall into a place very cold and moist, that it may take
hold and root. This man is of the quality of Cresses, which will not grow save
in the water, and if he partaked less hot and dry, his sowing in so cold a
belly were naught else, than to cast grain into a poole.

Hippocrates gives counsel that a woman of this sort, should first lessen her
self, and lay aside her flesh and her fat before she marry, but then she need
not to take to husband a man so hot and dry: for such a temperature would not
serve, nor she conceive. A woman cold and moist in the second degree, retains
a mean in all the tokens which I have specified, save only in beauty, which
she enjoys in an high degree. Which yields an evident sign, that she will
be fruitful, and bear children, and prove gracious and cheerful. She
answers in proportion wel-neer to all men.

First to the hot and dry in the second degree, and next to the temperat, and
lastly to the hot and moist. From all these unions and conioynings of men and
women, which we have here laid down, may issue wise children, but from the
first are the most ordinary. For put case that the seed of a man incline to
cold and moist; yet the continual dryness of the mother, and the giving her
so little meat, corrects and amendeth the defect of the father. For that this
manner of philosophizing never heretofore came to light, it was not possible
that all the natural Philosophers could shape an answer to this problem,
which asks, Whence proceeds it, that many fools have begotten wise
children? Whereto they answer, that sottish persons apply themselves
affectionatly to the carnal act, and are not carried away to any other
contemplation. But contrarily, men very wise, even in the copulation go
imagining upon matters nothing pertinent to that they have in hand, and
therethrough, weaken the seed, and make their children defective, as well in the
powers reasonall, as in the natural. In the other conioynings it is requisite,
to take heed that the woman be cleansed, and dried by a ripe age, and marry not
over young: for hence it comes, that children prove simple and of little wit.
The seed of young parents is very moist: for it is but a whiles since they were
borne, and if a man be formed of a matter endowed with excessive moisture, it
follows of force, that he prove dull of capacity.

What diligence ought to be used, that children male, and not female may be
borne.
. 3.
THose parents who seek the comfort of having wise children, and such as are
toward for learning, must endeavor that they may be borne male: for the
female, through the cold and moist of their sex, cannot be endowed with any
profound judgment. Only we see, that they talk with some appearance of
knowledge, in slight and easy matters, with terms ordinary, and long studied,
but being set to learning, they reach no farther than to some smacke of the
Latin tongue, and this only through the help of memory. For which dullness,
themselves are not in blame, but that cold and moist, which made them women,
and these self qualities (we have proved heretofore) gainsay the wit and
ability. Solomon considering how great scarcity there was of wise men, and
that no woman came to the world with a wit apt for knowledge, said in this
manner, I found one man amongst 1000; but I have not found one woman amongst the
whole rout. As if he should say, that of 1000 men, he had found one wise; but
throughout the race of women, he could never light upon one that had judgment.
Therefore we are to shun this sex, and to procure that the child be borne male:
for in such only rests a wit capable of learning. It behooves therefore first
to take into consideration, what instruments were ordained by nature in man's
body to this effect, and what order of causes is to be observed, that we may
obtain the end which we seek for. We must then understand, that amongst many
excrements and humors which reside in a man's body: nature (says Galen) uses
only the service of one, to work that mankind may be preserved. This is a
certain excreme^t, which is termed whey, or wheyish blood, whose engendring is
wrought in the liver, and in the veins, at such time as the four humors,
blood, fleagme, choler and melancholy, do take the form and substance which
they ought to have.

Of such a licour as this, does nature serve her self, to resolve the meat,
and to work, that the same may pass through the veins and through the strait
passages, carrying nourishment to all the parts of the body. This work being
finished, the same nature provides the veins; whose office is naught else, but
to draw unto them this whey, and to send it through their passages to the
bladder, and from thence out of the body: and this to free man from the
offense, which an excreme^t might breed him. But she, aduising that he had
certain qualities convenient for generation, provided two veins, which should
carry part thereof to the cods and vessels of seed, together with some small
quantity of blood, whereby such seed might be formed, as was requisite for
mankind. Wherethrough she planted one vein in the reins on the right side,
which ends in the right cod, and of the same is the right seed vessel
framed; and another on the left side, which likewise takes his issue at the
left cod, and of that is shaped the left seed vessel.

The requisite qualities of this excrement, that the same may be a convenient
matter for engendring of seed, are (says Galen) a certain tartness and
biting which grows, for that the same is salt, wherethrough it stirs up
the seed vessels, and moves the creature to procure generation, and not to
abandon this thought. And therefore persons very lecherous, are by the Latinists
termed Salaces, that is to say, men who have much saltness in their seed.

Next to this, nature did another thing worthy of great consideration, namely,
that to the right side of the reins, and to the right cod, she gave much heat
and dryness; and to the left side of the reins, and to the left cod, much
cold and moisture: wherthrough, the seed which labors in the right cod,
issues out hot and dry, and that of the left cod, cold and moist. What nature
pretended by this variety of temperature, as well in the reins as in the cods,
and seed vessels, is very manifest, we knowing by histories very true, that at
the beginning of the world, and many years after, a woman brought forth two
children at a birth, whereof the one was born male, the other female; the end
whereof tended, that for every man, there should be a wife, that mankind might
take the speedier increase. She provided then, that the right side of the
reins, should yield matter hot and dry to the right cod, and that the same
with his heat and dryness should make the seed hot and dry for generation of
the male. And the contrary she ordained for the forming of a woman, that the
left side of the reins, should send forth seed could and moist to the left cod,
and that the same with his coldness and moisture, should make the seed cold
and moist, whence it ensued of force, that a female must be engendered. But
after that the earth was replenished with people, it seems that this order
and concert of nature was broken off, and this double childbearing surceased,
and which is worst, for one man that is begotten, 6 or 7 women are born to the
world, ordinarily. Whence we comprizce, that either nature is grown weary, or
some error is thwarted in the mids, which bears her from working as she
would. What the same is, a little hereafter we will express, when we may lay
down the conditions, which are to be observed, to the end a male child (without
missing) may be borne. I say then, that if parents will attain the end of
their desire in this behalf, they are to observe 6 points. One of which is, to
eat meats hot and dry. The second, to procure that they make good digestion in
the stomach. The third, to use much exercise. The fourth, not to apply
themselves unto the act of generation, until their seed be well ripened and
seasoned. The fifth, to company with the wife four or five days before her
natural course is to run. The sixth, to procure, that the seed fall in the
right side of the womb, which being observed (as we shall prescribe) it will
grow impossible, that a female should be engendered. As touching the first
condition, we must weet, that albeit a good stomach do parboile and alter the
meat, and spoil the same of his former quality, yet it does never utterly
deprive it self of them: for if we eat lettice (whose quality is cold and
moist) the blood engendered thereof, shall be cold and moist, the whey cold and
moist, and the seed cold and moist. And if we eat honny (whose quality is hot
and dry) the blood which we breed, shall be hot and dry, the whey hot and dry,
and the seed hot and dry: for it is impossible (as Galen avouches) that the
humors should not retain the substances and the qualities, which the meat
had, before such time as it was eaten. Then it being true, that the male sex
consists in this, that the seed be hot and dry at the time of his forming,
for certain it behooves parents to use meats hot and dry, that they may
engender a male child. I grant well, how in this kind of begetting, there
befalls a great peril: for the seed being hot and dry, we have often
heretofore affirmed, it follows of force, that there be borne a man,
malicious, wily, cauilling, and addicted to many vices and evils, and such
persons as these (unless they be straightly curbed) bring great danger to the
common wealth. Therefore it were better, that they should not be gotten at all:
but for all this there will not want parents, who will say, Let me have a boy,
and let him be a these and spare not, for the iniquity of a man is more
allowable, than the well-doing of a woman. Howbeit this may find an easy
remedy, by using temperat meats, which shall partake but meanly of hot and
dry, or by way of preparation, seasoning the same with some spice. Such (says
Galen) are Hens, Partridges, Turtles, Doves, Thrushes, Blackbirds, and
Goats, which (by Hippocrates) must be eaten roasted, to heat and dry the seed.

The bread with which the same is eaten, should be white, of the finest meal,
seasoned with Salt and Annis seed: for the brown is cold and moist (as we will
prove hereafter) and very dammageable to the wit. Let the drink be White
wine, watered in such proportion, as the stomach may allow thereof: and the
water with which it is tempered, should be very fresh and pure.

The second diligence which we spoke of, is, to eat these meats in so moderat
quantity, as the stomach may overcome them: for albeit the meat be hot and
dry of his proper nature, yet the same becomes cold and moist, if the
natural heat cannot digest it: Therefore though the parents eat honny, and
drink VVhite-wine, these meats, by this means will turn to cold seed, and a
female child be brought forth. For this occasion, the greater part of great and
rich personages, are afflicted by having more daughters than meaner folk: for
they eat and drink that which their stomach cannot digest: and albeit their
meat be hot and dry, sauced with Sugar, Spices, and Honny: yet through their
great quantity, then wax raw, and cannot be digested. But the rawnesse which
most endammageth generation, is that of Wine: for this licour, in being so
vaporous and subtle, occasioneth, that the other meats together therewith
pass to the seed vessels raw, and that the seed falsely provoke a man, ere it
be digested and seasoned.

VVhereon, Plato commends a law, enacted in the Carthaginean Commonwealth,
which forbad the married couple, that they should not taste of any Wine that
day, when they meant to perform the rightes of the marriage bed, as well ware,
that this liquor always bred much hurt and damage to the child's bodily
health, and might yield occasion that he should prove vicious and of ill
conditions. Notwithstanding, if the same be moderatly taken, so good seed is
not engendered of any meat (for the end which we seek after) as of white wine:
and especially, to give wit and ability, which is that whereto we pretend. The 3
diligence which we spoke of, was, to use exercise somewhat more than meanly: for
this fretteth and consumes the excessive moisture of the seed, and heateth and
dries the same. By this means a man becomes most fruitful and able for
generation: and contrariwise to give our selves to our ease, and not to
exercise the body, is one of the things which breeds most coldness and
moisture in the seed. Therefore rich and dainty persons, are less charged with
children, than the poor who take pains. Whence Hippocrates recounteth, that
the principal persons of Scythia were very effeminat, womanish, delicious,
and inclined to do women's services; as to sweep, to rub, and to bake: and by
this means were impotent for generation. And if they begot any male child, he
proved either an Eunuch, or an Hermaphrodite. Whereat, they shaming, and
greatly agreeued, determined to make sacrifices to their God, and to offer him
many gifts; beseeching him not to entreat them after that manner, but to yield
the^ some remedy for the defect, seeing it lay in his power so to do. But
Hippocrates laughed them to scorn, saying, That none effect betideth, which
seems not miraculous and divine, if after that sort they fall into
consideration thereof: for reducing which soever of them to his natural
causes, at last we come to end in God, by whose virtue all the agents of the
world do work. But there are some effects, which must be imputed to God
immediately, (as are those which come besides the order of nature) and others by
the way of means, reckoning first as a mean, the causes which are ordained to
that end. The country which the Scythians inhabited (says Hippocrates) is
seated under the North, a region moist and cold beyond measure, where, through
abundance of clouds, it seems a miracle if you see the sun. The rich men sit
ever on horseback, neuervse any exercise, eat and drink more than their
natural heat can consume; all which things make the seed cold and moist. And
for this cause they beget many females: and if any male were borne, they
proved of the condition which we have specified. Know you (said Hippocrates to
them) that the remedy hereof consists, not in sacrifising to God, neither in
doing ought like that; but it behooves withal, that you walk on foot, eat
little, and drink less, and not so wholly betake your selves to your
pleasures. And that you may the more plainly discern it, look upon the poor
people of this country, and your very slaves, who not only make no sacrifices
to your God, neither offer him gifts (as wanting the means) but even blaspheme
his blessed name, and speak injuriously of him, because he has placed them in
such estate. And yet (though so lewd and sacrilegious) they are very able for
procreation, and the most part of their children, prove males, and strong; not
cocknies, not Eunuchs, not Hermafrodites, as do those of yours. And the cause
is, for that they eat little, and use much exercise, neither keep themselves
alwais on horsback, like their masters. By which occasion, they make their seed
hot and dry, and therthrough engender males and not females. This point of
Philosophy was not understood by Pharao, nor by his council seeing that he
said in this manner; Come, let us keep them down with oppression, that they
may not multiply, nor join with our enemy, if war be raised against us. And
the remedy which he used, to hinder that the people of Israel should not
increase so fast, or at least that so many male children might not be borne
(which he most feared) was to keep them under with much toil of body, and to
cause them for to eat leeks, garlic, and onions, which remedy took but a
bad effect, as the holy scripture expresses: for the harder he held them
oppressed, the more did they increase and multiply. Yet he making reckoning,
that this was the surest way he could follow, doubled this their affliction of
body. Which prevailed so little, as if to quench a great fire, he should throw
thereinto much oil or grease: but if he or any of his counselors, had been
seen in this point of natural Philosophy, he should have given them barley
bread, lettice, melons, cucu^bers, and citrons to eat, and have kept them well
fed and well filled with drink, and not have suffered them to take any pain.
For by this means, their seed would have become cold and moist, and thereof more
women than men bin begotten; and in short time their life have been abridged.
But feeding them with much flesh boiled with garlic, with leeks, and with
onions, and tasking them to work so hard, he caused their seed to wax hot and
dry, by which two qualities, they were the more incited to procreation, and
euerbred issue male. For confirmation of this verity, Aristotle propounds a
problem, which says, What is the cause, that those who labor much, and such
as are subject to the fever Ecticke, suffer many pollutions in their sleep?
whereto (verily) he wist not to shape an answer: for he tells many things,
but none of them hit the truth. The right reason hereof is, that the toil of
the body, and the Ecticke fever, do heat and dry the seed; and these two
qualities, make the same tart and pricking; and for that in sleep all the
natural powers are fortified, this betideth which the problem speaks of.
How fruitful and pricking the hot and dry seed is, Galen notes in these
words. The same is most fruitful, and soon inciteth the creature to
copulation, and is lecherous and prone to lust, The fourth condition was, not
to accompany in the act of generation, until the seed were settled, concocted
and duly seasoned: for though the three former diligences have gone before,
yet we cannot thereby know whether it have attained that perfection which it
ought to have. Principally it behooves, for 7 or 8 days before, to use the
meats which we have prescribed, to the end the cods may have time to consume in
their nourishment, the seed which all that time was engendered of the other
meats, and that this which we thus go describing may succeed.

The like diligence is to be used touching man's seed, that the same may be
fruitful and apt for issue, as the gardeners do with the seeds which they
will preserve: for they attend till they ripen, and cleanse, and wax dry: for
if they pluck them from the stalk, before they are deeply seasoned, and
arrived to the point which is requisite, though they lie in the ground a whole
year, they will not grow at all. For this reason I have noted, that in places
where much carnal copulation is used, there is less store of children, than
where people are more inclined to continency. And common harlots never
conceive, because they stay not till the seed be digested and ripened.

It behooves therefore to abide for some days, that the seed may settle,
concoct, and ripen, and be duly seasoned: for by this means, is hot and dry,
and the good substance which it had lost, the better recovered. But how shall
we know the seed to be such, as is requisite it should be, seeing the matter is
of so great importance? This may easily be known, if certain days have passed
since the man companied with his wife, and by his continual incitement, and
great desire of copulation; all which springs, for that the seed is grown
fruitful and apt for procreation. The fifth condition was, that a man should
meddle with his wife in the carnal act, six or seven days before she have her
natural course: for that the child straightwaies stands in need of much food
to nourish it. And the reason hereof is, that the hot and dry of his
temperature, spends and consumes not only the good blood of the mother, but
also the excrements. VVherethrough Hippocrates said, that the woman conceived
of a male, is well colored and fair. Which grows, because the infant,
through his much heat, consumes all those excrements, which are wont to
disfigure the face, leaving the same as a washed cloth. And for that this is
true, it is behoofull, that the infant be supplied with blood for his
nourishment. And this experience manifests, for it is a miracle that a male
child should be engendered save upon the last days of the month. The contrary
befalls, when a woman goes with a female: for through the much cold and
moist of her sex, she eats little, and yields store of excrements,
wherethrough the woman conceived of a girl, is ill favored, and full of
spots, and a thousand sluttishnesses stick unto her; and at the time of her
delivery, she must tarry so many more days to purge her self, than if she
had brought a man child to the word. On the natural reason whereof, God
grounded himself, when he commanded Moses, that the woman, who brought forth a
male, should remain in her bed a week, and not enter into the temple until 33
days were expired. And if she were delivered of a female, she should be
unclean for the space of two weeks, and not enter into the temple, until
after 66 days, in sort, that when the birth is of a female, the time is
doubled. Which so falls out, because in the nine months (during which the
child remained in the mothers womb) through the much cold and moist of her
temperature, she doubly increased excrements, and the same of very malignant
substance and quality, which a male infant would not have done. Therefore
Hippocrates holds it a matter very perilous, to stop the purgation of a
woman, who is delivered of a wench.

All this is spoken to the purpose, that we must well advise our selves of the
last day of the month, to the end the seed may find sufficient nourishment,
wherewith to relieve itself. For if the act of procreation be committed so
soon as the purgation is finished, it will not take hold through defect of
blood. Whereon it behooves the parents be done to understand, that if both
seeds join not together at one self time, (namely that of the woman and of
the man) Galen says there will ensue no conception, although the seed of the
man be never so apt for procreation. And hereof we shall render the reason to
another purpose. This is very certain, that all the diligences by us
prescribed, must also be performed on the woman's behoof, otherwise, her seed
(evil employed) will mar the conception. Therefore it is requisite they attend
each to other, so as at one self instant, both their seeds may join together.

This, at the first coming, imports very much, for the right cod, and his
seed vessel (as Galen affirms) is first stirred up, and yields his seed
before the left, and if the generation take not effect at the first coming, it
is a great hap hazard, but that at the second a female shall be begotten. These
two seeds are known, first by the heat and coldness, then by the quantity of
being much or little, and finally by the issuing forth speedily or slowly. The
seed of the right cod, comes forth boiling, and so hot, as it burns the
woman's belly, is not much in quantity, and passes out in have: Contrariwise,
the seed of the left, takes his way more temperat, is much in quantity: and
for that the same is cold and gross, spends longer space in coming forth.
The last consideration was, to procure that both the seeds of the husband and
the wife, fall into the right side of the womb: for in that place (says
Hippocrates) are males engendered, and females in the left. Galen alleges the
reason hereof, saying; that the right side of the womb is very hot, through
the neighborhood which it holds with the liver, with the right side of the
raines, and with the right seed vessel: which members, we have affirmed and
approved to be very hot. And seeing all the reason of working, that the issue
may become male, consists in procuring, that at the time of conception it
partake much heat, it falls out certain, that it greatly imports to bestow
the seed in this place. Which the woman shall easily accomplish, by resting on
her right side, when the act of generation is ended, with her head down and her
heels up: but it behooves her to keep her bed a day or two, for the womb does
not straightwaies embrace the seeed, but after some hours space.

The signs whereby a woman may know, whether she be with child or no, are
manifest and plain to every ones understanding: for if when she arises upon
her feet, the seed fall to the ground, it is certain (says Galen) that she
has not conceived, albeit herein one point requires consideration, that all the seed is not fruitful or apt for issue: for the one part thereof is very
waterish, whose office serves to make thin the principal seed, to the end it
may fare through the narrow passages, and this is that which nature sends
forth, and it rests, when she has conceived, with the part apt for issue. It
is known by that it is like water, and of like quantity. That a woman rise up
straightwaies on her feet, so soon as the act of generation has passed, is a
matter very perilous. Therefore Aristotle compels that she beforehand make
euacuation of the excrements, and of her urine, to the end she may have no
cause to rise. The second token whereby we may know the same, is, that the next
day following, the woman will feel her belly empty, especially about the
navel. Which grows, for that the womb, when it desires to conceive,
becomes very large and stretched out: for verily it suffers the like
swelling up and stiffnesse, as does a man's member, and when it fares
thus-wise, the same occupies much room. But at the point when it conceiueth
(says Hippoorates) suddenly the same draws together, and makes as it were a
purse to draw the seed unto it, and will not suffer it to go out, and by this
means leaves many empty places, the which women do declare, saying; that
they have no tripes left in their belly, as if they were suddenly become lean.
Moreover, forthwith they abhor carnal copulation, and their husbands
kindness, for the belly has now got what it sought; but the most certain
token (says Hippocrates) is, when their natural course fails, and their
breasts grow, and when they fall in loathing with mear.

What diligence is to be used, that children may prove witty and wise.
. 4.
IF we do not first know the cause, whence it proceeds, that a man of great
wit and sufficiency is begotten, it is impossible that the same may be reduced
to art: for through conioyning and ordering his principles and causes, we grow
to attain this end, and by none other means. The Astrologers hold; that
because the child is borne under such an influence of the stars, he comes
to be discreet, witty, of good or ill manners, fortunat, and of those other
conditions and properties, which we see and consider every day in men. Which
being admitted for true, it would follow a matter of impossibility, to frame
the same to any art: for it should be wholly a case of fortune, and no way
placed in men's election. The natural Philosophers, as Hippocrates, Plato,
Aristotle, and Galen, hold, that a man receives the conditions of his soul,
at the time of his forming, and not of his birth: for then the stars do
superficially alter the child, giving him heat, coldness, moisture, and
drouth; but not his substance, wherein the whole life relieth, as do the four
elements, fire, air, earth, and water, who not only yield to the party
composed, heat, cold, moisture, and dryness, but also the substance which may
maintain and preserve the same qualities, during all the course of life.
Wherethrough, that which most imports in the engendring of children, is, to
procure that the elements whereof they are compounded, may partake the
qualities, which are requisite for the wit. For these according to the weight
and measure, by which they enter into the composition, must always so endure
in the mixture, and not the alterations of heaven. What these elements are, and
in what sort they enter into the woman's womb, to form the creature, Galen
declares and affirms them to be the same which compound all other natural
things: but that the earth comes lurking in the accustomed meats which we
eat, as are flesh, bread, fish, and fruits; the water in the liquors which we
drink, The air and fire (he says) are mingled by order of nature, and enter
into the body by way of the pulse and of respiration. Of these four elements,
mingled and digested by our natural heat, are made the two necessary
principles of the infants generation, to weet the seed, and the monthly course.
But that whereof we must make greatest reckoning for the end which we enquire
after, are the accustomable meats whereon we feed: for these shut up the four
elements in themselves, and from these the seed fetches more corpulencie and
quality, than from the water which we drink, or the fire and air which we
breath in. Whence Galen says that the parents who would beget wise children,
should read three books which he wrote, of the faculty of the alements: for
there they should find, with what kinds of meat they may effect the same. And
he made no mention of the water, nor of the other elements, as materials, and
of like moment. But herein he swarued from reason: for the water alters the
body much more than the air, and much less than the sound meats whereon we
feed, And as touching that which concerns the engendring of the seed, it
carries as great importance as all the other elements together. The reason is
(as Galen himself affirms) because the cods draw from the veins (for their
nourishment) the wheyish part of the blood, and the greatest part of this whey,
which the veins receive, partaketh of the water which we drink. And that the
water works more alteration in the body, than the air, Aristotle proves,
where he demands, what the cause is, that by changing of waters, we breed so
great an alteration in our health, whereas if we breath a contrary air, we
perceive it not. And to this he answers, that water yields nourishment to
the body, and so does not the air. But he had little reason to answer after
this manner: for the air also (by Hippocrates opinion) gives nourishment and
substance, as well as the water. Wher-through Aristotle devised a better answer,
saying; that no place nor country has his peculiar air; for that which is now
in Flanders, when the North wind blows, passes within two or three days
into Affricke, and that in Affricke, by the South is carried into the North;
and that which this day is in Jerusalem, the East wind drives into the West
Indies. The which cannot betide in the waters: for they do not all issue out of
the same soil, wher-through every people has his particular water comfortable
to the Mine of the earth where it springs, and whence it runs. And if a
man be used to drink one kind of water, in tasting another, he alters more
than by meat or air. In sort, that the parents who have a will to beget very
wise children, must drink waters, delicat, fresh, and of good temperature;
otherwise they shall commit error in their procreation. Aristotle says, that
at the time of generation, we must take heed of the South-west wind: for the
same is gross, and moistneth the seed, so as a female and not a male is
begotten. But the west wind he highly commends, and aduanceth it with names
and titles very honorable. He calls the same temperat, fatter of the earth,
and says; that it comes from the Elisian fields. But albeit it be true that
it greatly imports, to breath an air very delicat, and of good temperature,
and to drink such waters; yet it stands much more upon to use fine meats
appliable to the temperature of the wit: for of these is engendered the blood
and the seed, and of the seed the creature. And if the meat be delicat and of
good temperature, such is the blood made; and of such blood, such seed; and of
such seed, such brain. Now, this member being temperat, and compounded of a
substance subtle and delicat, Galen says, that the wit will be like thereunto:
for our reasonable soul, though the same be incorruptible, yet goes always
united with the dispositions of the brain, which being not such as it is
requisite they should be, for discoursing and philosophizing, a man says and
does 1000 things, which are very unfitting. The meats then which the parents
are to feed on, that they may engender children of great understanding (which
is the ordinary wit for Spain) are, first, White bread made of the finest
meal, and seasoned with salt: this is cold and dry, and of parts very subtle
and delicat. There is another sort made (says Galen) of reddish grain, which
though it nourish much, and make men big limmed, and of great bodily forces;
yet for that the same is moist and of gross parts, it breeds a loss in the
understanding. I said, seasoned with salt, because none of all the aliments
which a man uses, bettereth so much the understanding, as does this mineral.
It is cold, and of more dryness than any other thing; and if I remember well
the sentence of Heraclitus, he said after this manner, A dry brightness, a
wisest mind. Then seeing that salt is so dry, and so appropriat to the wit,
the scripture had good reason to term it by the name of Prudence and Sapience.
Partridges and Francolini have a like substance, and the self temperature with
bread of white meal, and Kid, and Muskadel wine. And if parents use these
meats (as we have above specified) they shall breed children of great
understanding. And if they would have a child of great memory, let them eight
or nine days before they betake themselves to the act of generation, eat
Trouts, Salmons, Lampries, and Eeles, by which meat, they shall make their seed
very moist and clammie.

These two qualities (as I have said before) make the memory easy to receive,
and very fast to preserve the figures a long time. By Pigions, Goats,
Garlic, Onions, Leekes, Rapes, Pepper, Vinegar, White Wind, Honny, and al
other sorts of spices, the seed is made hot and dry, and of parts very
subtle and delicat. The child who is engendered of such meat, shall be of great
imagination, but not of like understanding, by means of the much heat, and he
shall want memory through his abundance of dryness. These are wont to be
very prejudicial to the common wealth: for the heat enclineth them to many
vices and evils, and gives them a wit and mind, to put the same in execution:
howbeit if we do keep them under, the commonwealth shall receive more service
by these men's imagination, than by the understanding and memory of the others.
Hens, capons, veale, weathers of Spain, are all meats of moderat substance;
for they are neither delicat nor gross. I said weathers of Spain: for Galen,
without making any distinction, says, that their flesh is of a gross and
noisome substance, which straieth from reason: for put case that in Italy,
(where he wrote) it be the worst of all others; yet in this our country,
through the goodness of the pastures, we may reckon the same among the meats
of moderat substance. The children who are begotten on such food, shall have a
reasonable discourse, a reasonable memory, and a reasonable imagination.
VVherethrough they will not be very profoundly seen in the Sciences, nor devise
ought of new.

Of these we have said heretofore, that they are pleasant conceited, and apt,
in whom may be imprinted all the rules and considerations of art, clear,
obscure, easy, and difficult: but doctrine, argument, answering, doubting, and
distinguishing, are matters wherewith their brains can in no sort endure to be
cloied. Cowes flesh, Manzo, bread of red grain, cheese, olives, vinegar, and
water alone, will breed a gross seed, and of faulty temperature, the son
engendered upon these, shall have strength like a bull: but withal, be furious
and of a beastly wit. Hence it proceeds, that amongst vpland people, it is a
miracle to find one quick of capacity, or towardly for learning: they are all
borne dull and rude; for that they are begotten on meats of gross and evil
substance. The contrary hereof befalls in Citizens, whose children we find
to be endowed with more wit and sufficiency. But if the parents carry in
very deed, a will to beget a son, prompt, wise, and of good conditions, let
them, six or seven days before their companying, feed on Goats milk; for this
aliment (by the opinion of all physicians) is the best, and most delicat that
any man can use; provided that they be sound, and that it answer them in
proportion. But Galen says, it behooves to eat the same with honny, without
which it is dangerous, and easily corrupts. The reason hereof is, for that
the milk, has no more but three elements in his composition, cheese, whey,
and butter. The cheese answers the earth; the whey, the water; and the butter
the air. The fire, which mingleth the other elements, and preserves them
being mingled, issuing out of the teats, is exhaled, for that it is very
subtle: but adjoining thereunto a little honny, which is hot and dry, in lieu
of fire, the milk will so partake of all the 4 elements. Which being mingled,
and concocted by the operation of our natural heat, make a seed very delicat,
and of good temperature. The son thus engendered, shall at leastwise possess
a great discourse; and not be deprived of memory and imagination. In that
Aristotle wanted this doctrine, he came short to answer a problem, which
himself propounded, demanding what the cause is, that the young ones of brute
beasts, carry with them (for the most part) the properties and conditions of
their sires and dammes. And the children of men and women not so? And we find
this by experience to be true: for of wise parents, are borne foolish children;
and of foolish parents, children very wise; of virtuous parents, lewd children;
and of vicious parents, virtuous children; of hard favored parents, fair
children: and of fair parents, foul children: of white parents, brown
children: and of brown parents, white and well colored children. And amongst
children of one self father and mother, one proves simple, and another
witty: one foul, and another fair: one of good conditions, and another of
bad: one virtuous, and another vicious. Whereas if a mare of a good harrage,
be covered with a horse of the like, the colt which is foaled, resembles them
as well in shape and color, as in their properties. To this problem, Aristotle
shaped a very untowardly answer, saying, that a man is carried away with many
imaginations, during the carnal act: and hence it proceeds that the children
prove so diverse. But brute beasts, because in time of procreation they are not
so distraughted, neither possess so forcible an imagination as man does, make
always their young ones after one self sort, and like to themselves. This
answer has ever hitherto gone for current amongst the vulgar philosophers: and
for confirmation hereof, they allege the history of Jacob, which recounteth,
that he having placed certain rods, at the watering places of the beasts, the
lambs were yeaned party colored. But little auailes it them to handfast holy
matters: for this history recounteth a miraculous action, which God performed,
therein to hide some sacrament. And the answer made by Aristotle, sauoreth of
great simplicity. And who so will not yield me credit, let him (at this day)
cause some shepherds to try this experiment, and they shall find it to be no
natural matter. It is also reported in these our parts, that a lady was
delivered of a son, more brown than was due, because a black visage, which
was pictured, fell into her imagination. Which I hold for a jest: and if
perhaps it be true that she brought such a one to the world, I say that the
father who begat him, had the like color to that figure. And because it may be
the better known, how fromshapen this philosophy is, which Aristotle brings
in, together with those that follow him, it is requisite we hold it for a thing
certain, that the work of generation appertains to the vegetative soul,
and not to the sensitive, or reasonable: for a horse engenders without the
reasonall, and a plant without the sensitive. And if we do but mark a tree
laden with fruit, we shall find on the same a greater variety, than in the
children of any man. One apple will be green, another red; one little, another
great; one round, another ill shaped: one sound, another rotten: one sweet, and
another bitter. And if we compare the fruit of this year with that of the
last, the one will be very different and contrary to the other: which cannot be
attributed to the variety of the imagination, seeing the plants do want this
power. The error of Aristotle, is very manifest in his own doctrine: for he
says, that the seed of the man, and not of the woman, is that which makes the
generation: and in the carnal act, the man does naught else, but scatter his
seed without form or figure, as the husbandman sows his corn in the earth.
And as the grain of corn does not by and by take root, nor forms a stalk
and leaves, until some days been expired: so (says Galen) the creature is
not formed al so soon as the man's seed falls into the woman's womb: but
affirms that thirty or forty days are requisite, ere the same can be
accomplished. And if this be so, what avails it that the father go imagining
of diverse things in the carnal act, when as the forming begins not until
some days after? especially, when the forming is not made by the soul of the
father or the mother, but by a third thing which is found in the seed it self.
And the same being only vegetative, and no more, is not capable of the
imagination, but follows only the motions of the temperature, and does
nothing else. After my mind, to say that men's children are borne of so diverse
figures, through the variable imaginations of the parents, is none other, than
to avouch, that of grains, some grow big, and some little, because the
husbandman (when he sowed them) was distraught into sundry imaginations. Upon
this so unsound opinion of Aristotle, some curious heads argue, that the
children of the adulterous wife resemble her husband, though they be none of
his. And the reason which leads them, is manifest: for during the carnal
act, the adulterers settle their imagination upon the husband, with fear least
he come and take them napping. And for the same consideration, they conclude
that the husbands children resemble the adulterer though they be not his,
because the adulterous wife, during the copulation with her husband, always
busieth her self in contemplation of the figure of her lover. And those who
say, that the other woman brought forth a black son, because she held her
imagination fixed on the picture of a black man, must also grant this, which
by these queint brains is inferred: for the whole carries one self reason,
and is in my conceit a starcke leasing, and very mockery, though it be
grounded on the opinion of Aristotle. Hippocrates answered this problem
better, when he said, that the Scythians are all alike conditioned, and shaped
in visage, and rendereth the reason of this resemblance to be, for that they
all fed of one self meat, and drank of one self water, went apparrelled
after one self manner, and kept one self order in all things. For the same
cause, the brute beasts engender young ones after their particular resemblance,
because they always use the same food, and have there-through an uniform
seed. But contrariwise man, because he eats diverse meats, every day makes
a different seed as well in substance, as in temperature. The which the natural
Philosophers do approve, in answering to a problem, that says, What is the
cause, that the excrementes of brute beasts have not so unpleasant a verdure,
as those of mankind? And they affirm, that brute beasts use always the self
meats, and much exercise there withal: but a man eats so much meat, and of
so diverse substance, as he cannot come away with them, and so they grow to
corrupt. Man's seed, and that of beasts, hold one self reason and
consideration, for that they are both of them excrements of a third concoction.
As touching the variety of meats which man uses, it cannot be denied, but
must be granted, that of every aliment there is made a different and
particular seed. Where it falls out apparent, that the day, on which a man
eats beef or bloudings he makes a gross seed, and of bad temperature; and
therefore, the son begotten thereof, shall be disfigured, foolish, black, and
ill conditioned. And if he eat the carcas of a capon, or of a hen, his seed
shall be white, delicat, and of good temperature. VVherthrough the son so
engendered, shall be fair, wise, and very gentle conditioned. From hence I
collect, that there is no child born, who partaketh not of the qualities and
temperature of that meat, which his parents fed upon a day before he was
begotten. And if any would know of what meat he was formed, let him but
consider, with what meat his stomach has most familiarity, (and without all
doubt) that it was. Moreover, the natural philosophers demand what the cause
is, that the children of the wisest men, do ordinarily prove blockish and void
of capacity? To which problem they answer very fondly, saying; that wise men
are very honest and shamefast, and therefore in companying with their wives,
do abstain from some diligences, necessary for effecting that the child
prove of that perfection which is requisite. And they confirm this, by
example of such parents, as are foolish and ignorant, who, because they employ
all their force and diligence at the time of generation, their children do all
prove wise and witty; but this answer tokeneth they are slenderly seen in
natural Philosophy. True it is, that for rendering an answer convenient, it
behooves first to presuppose and prove certain points; one of which
purporteth, that the reasonable faculty, is contrary to the wrathful and the
concupiscible, in sort, that if a man be very wise, he cannot beverie
courageous, of much bodily forces, a great feeder, nor very able for
procreation: for the natural dispositions, which are requisite, to the end the
reasonable soul may perform his operations, carry a contrariety to those,
which are necessary for the wrathful and the concupiscible. Aristotle says,
(and it is true) that hardiness and natural courage consist in heat: and
Prudence and Sapience in cold and dry. Whence we see by plain experience,
that the valientest persons are void of reason, spare of speech, impatient to
be ieasted withal, and very soon ashamed; for remedy whereof, they
straightwaies set hand on their sword, as not weeting what other answer to
make. But men endowed with wit have many reasons and quick answers and
quippes, with which they entertain the time, that they may not come to blows.
Of such a manner of wit, Salust notes that Cicero was, telling him, that he
had much tongue, and feet very light: wherein he had reason, for so great a
wisdom, in matters of arms, could not end but in cowardice. And hence took
a certain nipping proverb his original, which says; He is as valiant as
Cicero, and as wise as Hector. Namely, when we will note a man to be a buzzard,
and a cow-babie. No less does the natural faculty gainsay the understanding,
for if a man possess great bodily forces, he cannot enjoy a good wit; and the
reason is, for that the force of the arms and the legs, springs from having
a brain hard and earthly, and though it be true, that by reason of the cold
and dry of the earth, he might partake a good understanding, yet in that it
has his composition of a gross substance, it ruinateth and endammageth the
same. For through his coldness the courage and hardiness are quenched:
wherethrough, we have seen some men of great forces to be very cowardes. The
contrariety which the vegetative soul has with the reasonable, is most
manifest of all others, for his operations, namely; to nourish, and engender,
are better performed with heat and moisture, than with the contrary qualities,
Which experience clearly manifests, considering how powerful the same is in
the age of childhood, and how weak and remiss in old age. Again, in boys
estate the reasonable soul cannot use his operations; whereas in old age,
which is utterly void of heat and moisture, it performs them with great
effect. In sort, that by how much the more a man is enabled for procreation,
and for digestion of food, so much he leeseth of his reasonable faculty. To
this alludeth that which Plato affirms, that there is no humor in a man,
which so much disturbeth the reasonable faculty, as abundance of seed, only
(says he) the same yields help to the art of versifieng. Which we behold to
be confirmed by daily experience: for when a man begins to entreat of
amorous matters, suddenly he becomes a Poet, And if before he were greasy
and loutish, forthwith he takes it at heart, to have a wrinckle in his pumpe,
or a mote on his cape. And the reason is, because these works appertain to
the imagination, which increases and lifts it self up from this point,
through the much heat, accasioned in him by this amorous passion. And that love
is an hot alteration, shows apparently, through the courage and hardiness,
which it planteth in the lover, from whom the same also reaueth all desire of
meat, and will not suffer him to sleep. If the commonwealth bare an eye to
these tokens, she would bannish from public studies, lusty scholars, and
great fighters, inamoured persons, Poets, and those who are very neat and
curious in their apparel: for they are not furnished with wit or ability for
any sort of study. Out of this rule, Aristotle excepteth the melancholicke by
adustion, whose seed (though fruitful) reaueth not the capacity. Finally,
all the faculties which govern man, if they be very powerful, set the
reasonable soul in a garboile. Hence it proceeds, that if a man be very wise,
he proves a coward, of small strength of body, a spare feeder, and not very
able for procreation. And this is occasioned by the qualities which make him
wise, namely; coldness and dryness. And these self, weaken the other powers,
as appears in old men, who (besides their counsel and wisdom) are good for
nothing else. This doctrine thus presupposed, Galen holds opinion, that to the
end the engendring of whatsoever creature may take his perfect effect, two
seeds are necessary, one, which must be the agent and former; and another which
must serve for nourishment; for a matter so delicat as generation, cannot
straightwais overcome a meat so gross, as is the blood, until the effect be
greater. And that the seed is the right aliment of the seed members,
Hippocrates, Plato, and Galen do all accord: for by their opinion, if the
blood be not converted into seed, it is impossible, that the sinews, the veins,
and the arteries can be maintained. Wherthrough Galen affirmed, the difference
between the veins and the cods to be, that the cods do speedily make much
seed, and the veins a little, and in long space of time: In sort, that nature
provided for the same, an alime^t so like, which with light alteration, and
without making any excreme^ts, might maintain the other seed. And this could
not be effected, if the nourishment thereof had bin made of the blood. The self
provision (says Galen) was made by nature, in the engendring of mankind, as in
the forming of a chick, and such other birds, as come of eggs. In which we see
there are two substances, one of the white, and another of the yolke, of one of
which, the chicke is made, and by the other maintained all the time whiles the
forming endures. For the same reason are two seeds necessary in the
generation of the man, one, of which the creature may be made, and the other by
which it may be maintained whilst the forming endures. But Hippocrates
mentions one thing worthy of great consideration, namely; that it is not
resolved by nature, which of the two seeds shall be the agent and formour, and
which shall serve for aliment. For many times, the seed of the woman is of
greater efficacy than that of the man, and when this betideth, she makes the
generation, and that of the husband serves for aliment. Otherwhiles, that of
the husband is more mighty, and that of the wife does naught else than nourish.
This doctrine was not considered by Aristotle, who could not understand, whereto
the woman's seed served, and therefore uttered a thousand follies, and that the
same was but a little water, without virtue, or force for generation. Which
being granted, it would follow impossible, that a woman should ever covet the
conversation of man, or consent thereunto, but would shun the carnal act, as
being herself so honest, and the work so unclean and filthy; wherethrough,
in short space mankind would decay, and the world rest deprived of the fairest
creature, that ever nature formed. To this purpose Aristotle demands, what
the cause is, that fleshly copulation should be an action of the greatest
pleasure, that nature ever ordained for the solace of living things. To which
problem he answers, that nature having so desirously procured the
perpetuity of mankind, did therefore place so great a delight in this work,
to the end, that they being moved by such interest, might gladly apply
themselves to the act of generation; and if these incitements were wanting, no
woman or man would condescend to the bands of marriage, inasmuch as the woman
should reap none other benefit, than to bear a burden in her belly the space
of nine months, with so great travail and sorrows, and at the time of her
childbirth, to undergo the hazard of forgoing her life. So would it be
necessary, that the commonwealth should through fear enforce women to
marry, to the end mankind might not come to nothing. But because nature does
her things with pleasing, she gave to a woman, all the instruments necessary
for making a seed, inciting, and apt for issue, whereby she might desire a man,
and take pleasure in his conversation. But if it were of that quality which
Aristotle expresses, she would rather fly and abhor him, than ever love
him. This self Galen proves, alleging an example of the brute beasts,
wherethrough he says, that if a Sow be speyed, she never desires the Boar,
nor will consent that he approach unto her.

The like we do evidently see in a woman, whose temperature partaketh more of
coldness than is requisite: for if we tell her that she must be married, there
is no word which sounds worse in her ear. And the like befalls to a cold
man, for he wants the fruitful seed. Moreover, if a woman's seed were of that
manner which Aristotle mentions, it could be no proper aliment: for to attain
the last qualities of actual nutriment, a total seed is necessary, whereby it
may be nourished. Wherthrough, if the same come not to be concocted and
semblable, it cannot perform this point: for woman's seed wants the
instruments and places, as are the stomach, the liver, and the cods, where it
may be concocted. Therefore nature provided, that in the engendring of a
creature, two seeds should concur; which being mingled, the mightier should
make the forming and the other serve for nourishment. And this is seen
evidently so to be: for if a blackamore beget a white woman with child, and a
white man a negro woman, of both these unions, will be borne a creature,
partaking of either quality. Out of this doctrine I gather that to be true,
which many authentical histories affirm, that a dog carnally companying with a
woman, made her to conceive; and the like did a bear with another woman, whom
he found alone in the fields. And likewise, an ape had two young ones by
another. We read also of one, who walking for recreation along a rivers side,
a fish came out of the water, and begat her with child. The matter herein of
most difficulty for the vulgar to conceive, is, how it may be, that these women
should bring forth perfect men, and partakers of the use of reason, seeing the
parents who engendered them, were brute beasts. To this I answer, that the seed
of every of these women, was the agent and former of the creature, as the
greaterin force, whence it figured the same, with his accidents of man's shape.
The seed of the brute beast (as not equal in strength) served for aliment, and
for nothing else. And that the seed of these unreasonable beasts, might yield
nourishment to man's seed, is a matter easy to be conceived. For if any of
these women had eaten a piece of bears flesh, or of a dog, boiled or roasted,
she should have received nourishment thereout, though not so good as if she had
eaten mutton or partridges. The like befalls to man's seed, that his true
nourishment (in the forming of the creature) is another man's seed, but if this
be wanting, the seed of some brute beast may supply the room: but a thing
which these histories specify, is, that children borne of such copulations
give token in their manners and conditions, that their engendring was not
natural.

Out of the things already rehearsed (though we have somewhat lingered by the
way therein) we may now gather the answer to that principal problem, vz:
that wise men's children, are wel-neere always formed of their mothers seed:
for that of the fathers (for the reasons already alleged) is not fruitful
for generation, and in engendring, serves only for aliment. And the man who is
shaped of the woman's seed, cannot be witty, nor partake ability through the
much cold and moist of that sex. Whence it becomes manifest, that when the
child proves discreet and prompt, the same yields an infallible token, that
he was formed of his fathers seed. And if he show blockish and untoward, we
infer, that he was formed of the seed of his mother. And hereto did the
wiseman allude, when he said, The wise son rejoices the father, but a
foolish child is a grief to his mother. It may also come to pass upon some
occasion, that the seed of a woman may be the agent and form-giuer, and that of
the woman, serve for nourishment, but the son so begotten will prove of
slender capacity: for put case, that cold and dry be two qualities, whereof
the understanding has need: yet it behooves, that they hold a certain
quantity and measure, which once exceeded, they do rather hurt than good.
Even as we see men very aged, that by occasion of overmuch cold and dry, we
find them become children a new, and utter many follies. Let us then
presuppose, that to some old man, there yet remain ten years of life, with
convenient cold and dry to discourse, in such sort, as these being expired, he
shall then grow a babe again.

If of such a ones seed a son be engendered, he shall till ten years age, make
show of great sufficiency: for that til then, he enjoys the convenient cold
and drouth of his father; but at eleven years old, he will suddenly quail
away, for that he has out-passed the point, which to these two qualities was
behooffull. Which we see confirmed by daily experience in children begotten in
old age, who in their childhood are very advised, and afterward in man's
state, prove very dullards, and short of life. And this grows, because they
were made of a seed cold and dry, which had already out run the one half of
his race. And if the father be wise in the works of the imagination, and by
means of his much heat and dryness, take to wife a woman cold and moist in the
third degree, the son born of such an accouplement, shall be most untoward, if
he be formed of his fathers seed, for that he made abode in a belly so cold and
moist, and was maintained by a blood so distemperat. The contrary betideth,
when the father is untoward, whose seed has ordinarily heat and excessive
moisture. The son so engendered, shall be dull til 15 years of age, for that he
drew part of his fathers superfluous moisture. But the course of that age once
spent, it gives firmness, in as much as the foolish man's seed, is more
temperat and less moist. It aideth likewise the wit, to continue nine months
space in a belly of so little coldness and moisture, as is that of a woman
cold and moist in the first degree, where it endured hunger and want. All this
ordinarily befalls, for the reasons by us specified: but there is found a
certain sort of men, whose genitories are endowed with such force and vigor,
as they utterly spoil the aliments of their good qualities, and convert them
into their evil and gross substance. Therefore all the children whom they
beget, (though they have eaten delicat meats) shall prove rude and dullards.
Others contrariwise, using gross meats, and of evil temperature, are so
mighty in ouercomming them, that though they eat or porcke, yet they make
children of very delicat wit. Whence it proves certain, that there are
linages of foolish men, and races of wise men: and others, who of ordinary are
borne blunt, and void of judgment.

Some doubts are encountered, by those who seek to pearce into the bottom of
this matter, whose answer (in the doctrine forepassed) is very easy. The first
is, whence it springs, that bastard children accustomably resemble their
fathers, and of a 100 lawful, 90 bear the figure and conditions of the
mother. The second, why bastard children prove ordinarily deliver, courageous,
and very advised. The third, what the cause is, that if a common strumpet
conceive, she never loses her burden, though she take venomous drenches to
destroy the same, or be let much blood, whereas if a married woman be with
child by her husband upon every light occasion, the same miscarrieth. To the
first, Plato answers, saying, that no man is naught of his own proper and
agreeable will, unless he be first incited by the vitiousnesse of his
temperature. And he gives us an example in lecherous men; who, for that they
are stored with plentiful and fruitful seed, suffer great illusions, and
many combers; and therefore (molested by that passion) to drive the same from
them, do marry wives. Of such Galen says, that they have the instruments of
generation very hot and dry: and for this cause breed seed very pricking and
apt for procreation. A man then, who goes seeking a woman not his own, is
replenished with this fruitful, digested, and well seasoned seed, Whence it
follows of force, that he make the generation: for where both are equal, the
man's seed carries the greatest efficacy; and if the son be shaped of the seed
of such a father, it ensues of necessity that he resemble him. The contrary
betideth in lawful children; who, for that married men have their wives ever
couched by their sides, never take regard to ripen the seed, or to make it apt
for procreation, but rather (upon every light enticement) yield the same from
them, using great violence and stirring; whereas women, abiding quiet, during
the carnal act, their seed vessels yield not their seed, save when it is well
concoct and seasoned. Therefore married women do always make the engendring,
and their husbands seed serves for aliment. But sometimes it comes to pass,
that both the seeds are matched in equal perfection, and cumbat in such sort,
as both the one and the other take effect in the forming, and so is a child
shaped, who resembles neither father nor mother. Another time it seems that
they agree upon the matter, and part the likeness between them: the seed of
the father makes the nosthrils and the eyes; and that of the mother, the mouth
and the forehead. And which carries most marvel, it has so fallen out, that
the son has taken one ear of his father, and another of his mother, and so
the like in his eyes. But if the fathers seed do altogether prevail, the
child retains his nature and his conditions: and when the seed of the mother
swaieth most, the like reason takes effect. Therefore, the father who
coueteth, that his child may be made of his own seed, ought to withdraw
himself for some days from his wife, and stay till all his seed be concocted
and ripened; and then it will fall out certain that the forming shall proceed
from him, and the wifes seed shall serve for nourishment. The second doubt (by
means of that we have said already) bears little difficulty: for bastard
children are ordinarily made of seed hot and dry: and from this temperature
(as we have oftentimes proved heretofore) spring courage, bravery, and a good
imagination, whereto this wisdom of the world appertains. And because the
seed is digested and well seasoned, nature effects what she likes best, and
pourtraieth those children as with a pensill. To the third doubt may be
answered, that the conceiving of lewd women, is most commonly wrought by the
man's seed: and because the same is dry, and very apt for issue, it fasteneth
it self in the woman with very strong roots; but the child breeding of
married women, being wrought by their own seed, occasioneth, that the creature
easily vnlooseth, because the same was moist and watery, or as Hippocrates
says, full of mustinesse.

What diligences are to be used, for preserving the childrens wit after they
are formed.
. 5.
THe matter whereof man is compounded, proves a thing so alterable, and so
subject to corruption, that at the instant when he begins to be shaped, he
like wise begins to be untwined, and to alter, and therein can find no
remedy. For it was said, so soon as we are born, we fail to be. Wherthrough
nature provided, that in man's body, there should be 4 natural faculties,
attractiue, rete^tiue, concoctiue, and expulsive. The which concocting and
altering the aliments which we eat, return to repair the substance that was
lost, each succeeding in his place. By this we understand, that it little
avails to have engendered a child of delicat seed, if we make no reckoning of
the meats, which afterward we feed upon. For the creation being finished,
there remains not for the creature, any part of the substance whereof it was
first composed. True it is, that the first seed, if the same be well concocted
and seasoned, possesses such force, that digesting and altering the meats, it
makes them (though they be bad and gross) to turn to his good temperature
and substance, but we may so far forth use contrary meats, as the creature
shall loose those good qualities, which it received from the seed whereof it was
made: therefore Plato said, that one of the things which most brought man's wit,
and his manners to ruin, was his evil bringing up in diet. For which cause he
counseled that we should give unto children, meats and drinks, delicat, and of
good temperature, to the end, that when they grow big, they may know how to
abandon the evil, and to embrace the good. The reason hereof is very clear.
For if at the bginning the brain was made of delicat seed, and that this
member goes every day impairing and consuming, and must be repaired with the
meats which we eat, it is certain, if these being gross and of evil
temperature, that using them many days together, the brain will become of the
same nature. Therefore it suffices not, that the child be borne of good seed,
but also it behooves that the meat which he eats, after he is formed and
borne, be endowed with the same qualities. What these be, it carries no great
difficulty to manifest, if you presuppose, that the Greeks were the most
discreet men of the world, and that, enquiring after aliments and food, to make
their children witty and wise, they found the best and most appropriat. For if
the subtle and delicate wit, consist in causing that the brain be compounded
of parts subtle, and of good temperature, that meat which above all others
partaketh these two qualities, shall be the same which it behooves us to use,
for obteining our end. Galen, and all the Greek Physicians, say that Goats
milk boiled with honny, is the best meat which any man can eat: for besides
that it has a moderate substance, therein the heat exceeds not the cold, nor
the moist the dry. Therefore we said (some few leaves past) that the parents,
whose will earnestly leads them, to have a child, wise, prompt, and of good
conditions, must eat much Goats milk boiled with honny, 7 or 8 days before
the copulationut-Balbeit this aliment is so good (as Galen speaks of) yet it
falls out a matter of importance for the wit, that the meat consist of
moderate substance, and of subtle parts. For how much the finer the matter
becomes in the nourishment of the brain, so much the more is the wit
sharpened. For which cause; the Greeks drewout of the milk, cheese and whey
(which are the two gross aliments of his composition) and left the butter,
which in nature resembles the air. This they gave in food to their children,
mingled with honny, with intention to make them witty and wise. And that this
is the truth, is plainly seen by that which Homer recounteth. Besides this
meat, children did eat cracknels, of white bread, of very delicat water, with
honny and a little salt: but in steed of vinegar (for that the same is very
noisome and dammageable to the understanding) they shall add thereunto, butter
of Goats-milke, whose temperature and substance, is appropriat for the wit. But
in this regiment grows an inconvenience very great, namely; that children
using so delicat meats, shall not possess sufficient strength to resist the
injuries of the air: neither can defend themselves from other occasions, which
are wont to breed maladies. So by making the^ become wise, they will fall out
to be vnhealthful, and live a small time. This difficulty demands, in what
sort children may be brought up, witty and wise, and yet the matter so handled,
as it may no way gainsay their healthfulnes. Which shall easily be effected,
if the parents dare to put in practice, some rules and precepts which I will
prescribe. And because deinty people are deceived in bringing up their
children, and they treat still of this matter: I will first assign them the
cause why their children, though they have Schoolemaisters and tutors, and
themselves take such pains at their book, yet they come away so meanly with
the sciences, as also in what sort they may remedy this, without that they
abridge their life, or hazard their health. Eight things (says Hippocrates)
make man's flesh moist and fat. The 1 to be merry, and to live at hearts ease;
the 2 to sleep much: the 3 to lie in a soft bed: the 4 to fare well: the
fifth, to be well apparelled and furnished: the sixth, to ride always on
horseback: the seventh, to have our will: the eighth to be occupied in plays
and pastimes, and in things which yield contentment and pleasure. All which is
a verity so manifest, as if Hippocrates had not affirmed it, none durst deny
the same. Only we may doubt, whether delicious people do always observe this
manner of life; but if it be true that they do so, we may well conclude, that
their seed is very moist, and that the children which they beget, will of
necessity ouer-abound in superfluous moisture, which it behooves first to be
consumed: for this quality sends to ruin the operations of the reasonable
soul: And moreover the Physicians say, that it makes them to live a short
space and unhealthful. By this it should seem, that a good wit, and a sound
bodily health require one self quality, Namely drouth; wherethrough, the
precepts and rules which we are to lay down for making children wise, will
serve likewise to yield them much health, and long life. It behooves them, (so
soon as a child is borne of delicious parents) inasmuch as their constitution
consists of more cold and moist than is convenient for childhood, to wash him
with salt hot water; which (by the opinion of all physicians) soketh up and
dries the flesh, and gives soundness to the sinews, and makes the child
strong and manly, and (by consuming the overmuch moisture of his brain)
enableth him with wit, and freeth-him from many deadly infirmities.
Contrariwise, the bath being of water fresh and hot, in that the same
moisteneth the flesh (says Hippocrates) it breeds five annoiances; Namely,
effeminating of the flesh, weakness of sinews, dullness of spirits, fluxes of
blood, and baseness of stomach. But if the child issue out of his mothers
belly with excessive dryness, it is requisite to wash the same with hot fresh
water. Therefore Hippocrates said, children are to be washed a long time with
hot water, to the end they may receive the less annoiance by the crampe, and
that they may grow and be well colored: but (for certain) this must be
understood of those who come forth dry out of their mothers belly; in whom it
behooves to amend their evil temperature, by applying unto them contrary
qualities. The Almains (says Galen) have a custom, to wash their children in
a river, so soon as they are born; them seeming, that as the iron which comes
burning hot out of the forge, is made the stronger, if it be dipped in cold
water: so when the hot child is taken out of the mothers womb, it yields him
of greater force and vigor, if he be washed in fresh water. This thing is
condemned by Galen for a beastly practice, and that with great reason: for put
case, that by this way, the skin is hardened and closed, and not easy to be
altered by the injuries of the air, yet will it rest offended by the
excrements which are engendered in the body, for that the same is not of force,
nor open so as they may be exhaled and pass forth. But the best and safest
remedy is, to wash the children, who have superfluous moisture, with hot salt
water: for their excessive moisture consuming, they are the nearer to health,
and the way through the skin, being stopped in them, they cannot receive
annoiance by any occasion. Neither are the inward excrements therefore so shut
up, that there are not ways left open for them, where they may come out. And
nature is so forcible, that if they have taken from her a common way, she will
seek out another to serve her turn. And when all others fail, she can skill
to make new ways, wherethrough to send out what does her damage. Wherefore
of two extremes, it is more available for health, to have a skin hard and
somewhat close, than thin and open.

The second thing requisite to be performed when the child shall be born, is, that
we make him acquainted with the winds, and with change of air, and not keep
him still locked up in a chamber: for else it will become weak, womanish,
peevish, of feeble strength, and within three or four days, give up the
ghost. Nothing (says Hippocrates) so much weakeneth the flesh, as to abide
still in warm places, and to keep our selves from heat and cold. Neither is
there a better remedy for healthful living, than to accustom our body to al
winds, hot, cold, moist, and dry. Wherethrough Aristotle enquireth, what the
cause is, that such as live in the Galleys are more healthy, and better
colored, than those who inhabit a plashy soil. And this difficulty grows
greater, considering the hard life which they lead, sleeping in their clothes,
in the open air, against the sun, in the cold, and the water, and faring
withal so coursly. The like may be demanded, as touching shepherds, who of
all other men enjoy the soundest health, and it springs, because they have
made a league with all the several qualities of the air, and their nature
dismaieth at nothing. Contrariwise, we plainly see, that if a man give himself
to live deliciously, and to beware that the sun, the cold, the evening, nor the
wind offend him, within 3 days he shall be dispatched with a post letter to
another world. Therefore it may well be said, he that loves his life in this
world, shall leese it: for there is no man that can preserve himself from the
alteration of the air; therefore it is better to accustom himself to every
thing, to the end a man may live careless, and not in suspe^ce.

The error of the vulgar consists, in thinking that the babe is borne so
tender and delicat, as he cannot endure to issue forth of the mothers womb
(where it was so warm) into a region of the air so cold, without receiving
much damage. And verily they are deceived: for those of Almaine (a region so
cold) used to dip their children so hot in the river: and though this were a
beastly act, yet the same did them no hurt, nor deaths harm.

The third point convenient to be accomplished, is, to seek out a young nuise
of temperature hot and dry: or (after our doctrine) cold and moist in the
first degree; enured to hardness and want, to lie on the bare ground, to eat
little, and to go poorly clad, in wet, drouth and heat; such a one will yield a
firm milk, as acquainted with the alterations of the air; and the child
being brought up by her, for some good space, will grow to possess a great
firmness. And if she be discreet and advised, the same will also be of much
avail for his wit: for the milk of such a one, is very clean, hot, and
dry: with which two qualities, the much cold and moist will be corrected,
which the infant brought from his mothers womb. How greatly it imports for
the strength of the creature, that it suck a milk well exercised, is
apparently proved in horses, who being foaled by mares, toiled in plowing and
harrowing, prove great coursers, and will abide much hardness. And if the
dammes run up and down idly in the pastures after the first cariere, they are
not able to stand on their feet. The order then which should be held with the
nurse, is, to take her into house, some four or five months before the
childbirth, and to give her the same meats to eat, whereon the mother feeds,
that she may have time to consume the blood and bad humors, which she had
gathered by harmfull meats, that she used tofore, and to the end the child (so
soon as it is born) may suck the like milk unto that, which relieved it in
the mothers bellle, or made at least of the same meats.

The fourth is, not to accustom the child to sleep in a soft bed, nor to
keep him ouerwarme apparrelled: or give him too much mear. For these three
things (says Hippocrates) scarsen and dry up the flesh, and their contraries,
fatten and enlarge the same. And in so doing, the child shall grow of great
wit, and of long life, by reason of this dryness: and by the contraries, he
will prove fair, fat, full of blood, and bockish; which habit, Hippocrates
called Wrastler-like, and holds it for very perilous. With this self
receipt and order of life, was the wisest man brought up, that ever the world
had; To weet our savior Christ, in that he was man, saving (for that he was
born out of Nazareth) perhaps his mother had no salt water at hand, where with
she might wash him but this was a custom of the Jews, and of all Asia besides;
brought in by some skillful Physicians, for the good of infants, wherethrough
the Prophet says, And when thou were borne, at thy birth day thy nauill string
was not cut off: neither were thou for thy healths sake washed in water, nor
seasoned with salt, nor wrapped in swathling clothes. But as touching the other
things, so soon as he was borne, he began to hold friendship with the cold,
and the other alterations of the air. His first bed was the earth, his
apparel course, as if he would observe Hippocrates receipt. A few days after
they went with him into Egypt, a place very hot, where he remained all the
time that Herod lived. His mother partaking the like humors, it is certain,
that she must yield him a milk well exercised, and acquainted with the
alterations of the air. The meat which they gave him, was the same which the
Greeks devised, to endow their children with wit and wisdom. This (I have said
heretofore) was the butterish part of the milk eaten with honny. Wherefore Esaias
says, He shall eat butter and honny, that he may know to eschew evil, and
choose the good. By which words is seen, how the Prophet gave us to understand,
that albeit he was very God, yet he ought also to be a perfect man: and to
attain natural wisdom, he must apply the semblable diligences, as do the
other sons of men. Howbeir this seems difficult to be conceived, and may be
also held a folly, to think that because Christ our redeemer, did eat butter
and honny being a child, he should therefore know how to eschew evil, and
make choice of good: when he was elder, God being (as he is) of infinite
wisdom, and having given him (as he was man) all the science infused, which
he could receive after his natural capacity. Therefore it is certain that he
knew full as much in his mothers womb, as when he was thirty three years
old, without eating either butter or honny, or borrowing the help of any
other natural remedies requisite for human wisdom. But for all this, it is
of great importance that the prophet assigned him that self meat, which the
Trojans and Greeks accustomably gave their children, to make them witty and
wise, and that he said, To the end he may know to shun evil and choose the
good. For understanding, that by means of these aliments, Christ our savior,
got (as he was man) more acquisit knowledge, than he should have possessed if
he had used other contrary meats; it behooves us to expound this particle,
(to the end) that we may know what he meant, when he spoke in those terms. We
must therefore presuppose, that in Christ our redeemer were two natures, as the
very truth is, and the faith so teaches us; one, divine, as he was God; and
another humane, compounded of a reasonable soul, and of an elimentall body,
so disposed and instrumentalized, as the other children of men. As concerning
his first nature, it behooves not to entreat of the wisdom of our savior
Christ: for it was infinite without increase or diminishment, and without
dependence upon ought else, save only in that he was God, and so he was as
wise in his mothers womb, as when he was 33 years of age, and so from
everlasting. But in that which appertains to his second nature, we are to
weet, that the soul of Christ, even from the instant when God created it, was
blessed, and glorious, even as now it is; and seeing it enjoyed God and his
wisdom, it is certain that in him was none ignorance: but he had so much
science infused, as his natural capacity would bear: but withal, it is
alike certain, that as the glory did not communicate it self unto all the
parts of the body, in respect of the redemption of mankind; no more did the
wisdom infused, communicate it self; For the brain was not disposed, nor
instrumentalized, with the qualities and substance, which are necessary, to the
end the soul may with such an instrument, discourse and philosophize: for if
you call to mind that which in the beginning of this work we delivered, the
graces gratis given, which God bestows upon men, do ordinarily require, that
the instrument with which they are to be exercised; and the subject whereinto
it is to be received, do partake the natural qualities, requisite for every
such gift. And the reason is, because that the reasonable soul, is an act of
the body, and works not without the service of his bodily instruments. The
brain of our redeemer Christ, whilst he was a babe, and lately born, had much
moisture: for in that age it was behooffull so to be, and a matter natural,
and therefore in that it was of such quality, his reasonable soul (naturally)
could not discourse nor philosophize with such an instrument. Wherthrough, the
science infused, passed not to the bodily memory, nor to the imagination, nor
the understanding, because these three are isntrumental powers (as tofore we
have proved) and enjoyed not that perfection, which they were to have; but
whilst the brain went drying, by means of time and age: the reasonable soul
went also manifesting every day more and more, the infused wisdom which it
had, and communicated the same to the bodily powers. Now, besides this
supernatural knowledge, he had also another, which is gathered of things that
they heard whilst they were children, of that which they saw, of that which
they smelled, of that which they tasted, and of that which they touched: and
this (for certain) our savior Christ attained as other men do. And even as
for discerning things perfectly, he stood in need of good eyes, and for hearing
of sounds, good ears: so also he stood in need of a good brain, to judge the
good and the evil. Whence it is manifest, that by eating those delicat meats,
his head was daily better instrumentalized, and attained more wisdom. In sort,
that if God had taken from him his science infused, thrice in the course of his
life (by seeing that which he had purchased) we shall find, that at ten years
he knew more than at five, at twenty, more than at ten, and at thirty three,
more than at twenty. And that this doctrine is true and catholic, the letter
of the Euangelicke text proves, saying; and Jesus increased in wisdom and
age, and grace, with God, and with men. Of many catholic senses which the
holy scripture may receive, I hold that ever better which takes the letter,
than that which reaueth the terms and words of their natural signification.
What the qualities are which the brain ought to have, and what the substance,
we have already reported, by the opinion of Heraclitus, That dryness makes
the wisest soul. And by Galens mind we proved, That when the brain is
compounded of a substance very delicat, it makes the wit to be subtle. Christ
our redeemer, went purchasing more dryness by his age: for from the day that
we are borne, until that of our death, we daily grow to a more dryness, and
leesing of flesh, and a greater knowledge. The subtle and delicat parts of his
brain, went correcting themselves, whilst he fed upon meats, which the Prophet
speaks of. For if every moment he had need of nourishment, and restoring the
substance which wasted away, and this must be performed with meats, and in
none other sort, it is certain, that if he had always fed on cowes beef, or
porcke, in few days he should have bred himself a brain gross and of evil
temperature: with which his reasonable soul could not have shunned evil, or
chosen good, save by miracle, and employing his divinity. But God leading him
by natural means, caused him to use those so delicat meats, by which the
brain being maintained, the same might be made an instrument, so well
supplied, as (even without using the divine or infused knowledge) he might
naturally have eschued evil, and chosen good, as do the other children of men.

FINIS.
A Table of all the chapters contained in this Book.
IT is proved by example, that if a child have not the disposition and
ability, which is requisite for that science whereunto he will addict himself,
it is a superfluous labor to be instructed therein by good schoolemaisters, to
have store of books, and continually to study it. fol. 1 2 That Nature is that
which makes a man of ability to learn. 13 3 What part of the body ought to be
well tempered, that a young man may have ability. 23 4 It is proved that the
soul vegetative, sensitive, and reasonable, have knowledge without that any
thing be taught them, if so be that they possess that convenient temperature,
which is requisite for their operation. 33 5 It is proved that from the three
qualities, hot, moist, and dry, proceed all the differences of men's wits. 51 6
Certain doubts and arguments are propounded against the doctrine of the last
chapter, and their answer. 69 7 It is showed, that though the reasonable soul
have need of the temperature of the four first qualities, as well for his
abiding in the body, as also to discourse and syllogize, Yet for all this, it
follows not, that the same is corruptible and mortal. 88 8 How there may be
assigned to every difference of wit, his Science, which shall be correspondent
to him in particular: and that which is repugnant and contrary, be abandoned.
102 9 How it may be proved that the eloquence and finenesse of speech cannot
find place in men of great understanding. 120 10 How it is proved that the
Theoricke of Diuinitic appertains to the understanding, and preaching (which
is his practice) to the imagination. 126 11 That the Theoricke of the laws
appertains to the memory, and pleading and judging (which are their
practice) to the understanding, and the governing of a commonwealth to the
imagination. 150 12 How it may be proved, that of Theoricall Physic, part
appertains to the memory, and part to the understanding, and the practicke
to the imagination. 173 13 By what means it may be showed, to what difference
of ability the art of warfare appertains, and by what signs the man may be
known, who is endowed with this manner of wit. 200 14 How we may know to what
difference of ability the office of a king appertains, and what signs he
ought to have, who enjoys this manner of wit. 238 15 In what manner Parents may
beget wise children, and of a wit fit for learning. 263. 1. By what signs we
may know, in what degree of hot and dry, every man rests. 278. 2. What
women ought to marry with what man, that they may have children. 282. 3. What
diligence ought to be used, that children male, and not female may be borne.
286. 4. What diligence is to be used, that children may prove witty and wise.
300. 5. What diligences are to be used, for preserving the childrens wit after
they are formed. 322.

FINIS.

