A SERMON preached at Paul's Cross the (...) February. Anno Dom. 1583.

By I. Hudson, Master of Art, of Oxon.

Through thy commandments I get understanding: therefore I hate all wicked
(...). Psalm. 119. Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold
at his Shop over against Saint Sepulchers Church. 1584

Heb. cap. 10. ver. 19. SEeing therefore brethren that by the blood of Jesus
we may be boulde to enter into the holy place.

By the new and living way which he has prepared for us through the veil that
is his flesh.

And seeing we have an high Priest which is ruler over the house of God.

Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our
hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water.

Let us keep or let us hold fast the profession of our hope without wavering
(for he is fai^hfull that promised).

And let us consider one an other to provoke unto love and to good works.

Not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves as the manner of
some is, but let us exhort one another and that so much the more because ye
see that the day draws near.


WHen Moses would exhort and stir up the people of Israel to all diligent
regard and accomplishment of their Deu. 4.
duty described in the law, after brief rehersall of the great woonders and
manifold benefices, wherewith the lord God had both strengthened their wavering
faith, and sustained their mortal lives in that their long and wandering
pilgrimage in the desert: he speaks as a most effectual collection to excite
them thereunto, puts down the continual presence of God, still ready to
hear and defend them: with the excellency and equity of those there enjoined
ordinances and laws, which should be their understanding, their wisdom, and
glory among al people. For what nation (says he) is so great unto who^ gods
come so near as the Lord our God is near unto us in all that we call unto him
for? Ver. 7.8.
And what Nation is so great that has ordinances and laws so righteous as is
all this law which I set before you this day. The same argument and reason
inferred then as most forcible, to work obedience in the hearts of those old
and stubborn people under the law, which had but a shadow of good things to
come, and was only a Schoolemaister unto Christ: ought much more to be
effectual among us in these days and times of grace, seeing the Lord comes
nearer unto us, then he di^ unto them, seeing we enjoy the truth, and body,
and substance of those their figurative shadows; and have precepts of doctrine
ordinances and laws, by so much both more honorable and more profitable and
higher then theires; as they have received a far more excellent name, and are
seals and co^firmations of better promises then they had. For to the^ God cam^
near in fire and lightning in storms and thunders, and most terrrible manner
on ye mountain, to declare his wrath against sin; But unto us in favor and
goodness, in reconciled love and bowels of mercy, freely pardoning and
remitting our sins: unto them he spoke by Angels, and prophets, and appeared
by the ministry of his servant, by whom he gave a law. But unto us by his
dearly beloved and only begotten son, by whom he has given grace, and
truth: Unto them (...) gave the covenant of bondage, of fear, and (...) for a
time; Unto us ye law of libert^ (...) ^doptio^, and eternal life for ever. So
tha^ ^he declaration of sin, and co^minatio^ of p^^^^hme^t to be inflicted by
ye law, were (...) such price, and reverence among the^: much more should the
promulgation of grace, and free remission of sins, be now acceptable unto us;
And if the ministration of condemnation as S. Paul says, figured in stone
were glorious, much more shall the ministration of righteousness, by faith in
Jesus Christ exceed in glory. And therefore seeing it is more directly said
and applied unto us Christians now, then it was ever to the Jews, that the
Lord comes so near unto no people as unto us; Neither is there any Nation
that has ordinances, and laws so righteous, so excellent and profitable, as
are all those wherein our Christian duty is limited and described unto us; It
is also requisite that we duly consider and regard the prerogative of this
our calling, unto whom God in mercy stooping as it were so low, does descend
and come near: and carefully observe those his righteous laws and precepts*
whereby we may approach and draw* ^eere in all obedience unto him again.
Both which we have here accordingl^ set down unto us, in the scope of this
present Scripture, containing a short abridgement and recapitulation, not only
of this present Epistle to the Hebrews, but even of all the whole Gospel it
self, and of all our Christian life and duty, as wherein the effect and
sum of all is contrived and knit up. Which although it contain matter more
copious and plentiful, then can exactly be discussed at one time; Yet for our
better and more orderly proceeding in so large a field and compass, may well
be divided into two general parts and branches. First a theoretical position
or doctrine of knowledge, respecting our belief and faith, as how near the
Lord in mercy by the reconciliation of his son comes down unto us; And
secondly an application of this doctrine or hortatorie illation to the
performaunce of all such duties as are answerable thereunto, and requisite to
the direction of our conversation and life. The first again contains
chiefly two things. First the abrogation of the Jewish Priesthood, of their
daily sacrifices and legal observations and rights: and secondly a
confirmation of our final atonement wrought with God, and redemption by the
blood of Jesus once offered for all upon the Alter of the Cross, whereby he
has made perfect for ever those that shall be saved; Both which because by
way of allution or collation, they are here set down and delivered in one. I
will also so proceed jointly to handle them in one, and not divide them in
discourse of my speech. In the second part again to be performed in our
behalf, whereby we shall approach and come near in obedience unto God, are
required specially three things, faith to enter and conduct us in the way,
hope to strengthen and uphold us to the end, and thirdly love and charity to
the comfort and encouragement both of our selves and other. Our faith must not
be naked or solitary, but clothed and accompanied with attendaunce of these
properties, a true heart and a good conscience, so as both ^ur bodies and
minds may be sprinkled and washed from all contagion of sin; our hope must
not be wavering and unconstant fitting and turning like our earthly
affections, after the variable nature of the object whereon they are placed, but
steadfast and immovable grounded on the faithful, and unchangeable promises
of almighty God. And our love must not be famed, idle or unfruitful in
pretense and outward show, but in all points such as is described to quench
all bitterness and discord, and to fructify and spring forth into all practice
and exercise of godliness and good works, whereuntoo for conclusion is
annexed a forcible motive the rather to induce us thereunto, for that the end
it self approaches, and the day draws near.

Touching the first part the Apostle after diverse infallible demonstrations
and proofs alleged to his purpose, throughout his whole Epistle and discourse
goeing before, after many objections answered, the adversaries refuted, and
the truth on each side clearly discussed; For an Epilogue or summarie
conclusion of all his former disputation and doctrine, infers this sure
collection pitched fast down for ever as an immovable rock of truth: That
the blood of Jesus abolishing all figures rites and ceremonies all shadows
and sacrifices of the Mosaicall Law; has taken away the pertition, the
covering, and veil wherein all Nations were wrapped and has made free passage
and entrance with boldness unto the throne and mercy seat of God, even unto
us and unto al as many as were far of separated by our sins and sitting in
darkness and in the shaddowe of death. Which high and heavenly mystery that
he might the better and more significantly express, as also that we should not
think those rites and ceremonies of the law to have been utterly vain and
fruitles, but lawful and profitable in their appointed time and use, and yt
yet now by the blood of Jesus shed upon the Cross, they have attained their
full and purposed perfection and scope, and lastly that there should seem
nothing to want in the body and fullness of the Gospel, which was so greatly
in price and honor in their shadows of the law; he fitly here applies them, as
figurative predictions to our Christian Religion, and furnishes out a most
lively description of our faith, with the spoils, with the titles and
prerogatives wherein they so greatly gloried, and wherewith their holies were
adorned. So that though their excellency were great and their preferment
singular above all Nations of the world, as unto whom the Adoption and the
couenance and the law, Romans 9.4.
and the glory and the promises then only apperteined: of who^ were the
fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all
blessed for ever more: Yet if it be compared whatsoever was then so glorious
under the yoke of Moses law, to this incomperable perfection of liberty and
prerogative of grace in the freedom of the Gospel: it must needs give place
and yield, as darkness to light, as shadows to the body, as figures to
truth, as weakness to perfection, and as disposing preparatiue means to their
final and prefixed consummation and end. They had a holy place made with
hands separated by pertition and shut up from the rest of the Temple; but
we have the highest heavens and celestial throne of grace, a tabernacle not
made with hands, which God and not man pight: into their sanctuary none
might enter but the Priests alone, 1. Pet. 2.9.
but we all without exception have free liberty and access and are made a
holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ. They were permitted to enter but once every year, we every day and
at all times without restraint or limitation. Their passage and way was made
with the blood of many slain offeringes of beasts; but ours by the
vndeficient and eternal blood of him that lives for ever the immaculate Lamb
of God: Their high Priest was mortal, compassed with infirmities and sins;
but ours is holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made
higher then the heavens. Their Priests were many still changing in succession
because they were men; Ours one and everlasting abiding for ever because he is
the son of God. Their entrance was by a bodily veil which made the
separation; but ours by the revived body of Christ which makes the attonemente
and reconciliation. And is therefore most aptlye called a veil or covering,
because as that their material veil hanging down, did shut up and cover the
secret place of the Sanctuary, from the sight of those that were without; so
the human body of Christ did hide his divine nature from the obstinate
carnal Jews, and all those that believed not in him; And as the veil again
being lifted up made entrance and passage into the holy place which before was
shut and closed; So Christ ascending up on high and lifting up the veil of
his flesh to the right hand of GOD, has opened the hidden treasures of his
mercy, grace, and favor which before through our sins, as a carnal veil
hanging down, were fast sealed up and closed from us. For as the children of
Israel could not behold the shining face of Moses when he had talked with
God on the Mount for the exceeding brightness thereof, but covered with a
veil where through they did behold him; So no man has seen GOD at any time
or can beeholde the face and presence of the deytye: Ioh. 1.18.
but so far as it is both veiled and revealed by the body and humayne flesh
of our Savior Christ: Jacob prophesing of Christ which should come of the
Tribe of Judah says. Genesis 49.18.
Lauabit in vin^ stolam suam. He shall wash his garmente in Wine, and his
mantle in the blood of the grape; Which Prophecy says Theodoret was truly
the^ fulfilled when our savior did shed for us his most precious blood upon
the Cross, which issuing abundantly out of his perced hands and side, did
even wash his body, which was as it were the Mantle (says he) and vesture,
the veil and covering of his deity and godhed. By which and other like
applications we may plainly see it verified which is spoken by S. Augustine,
That of all those holy men and Fathers which in time were before the nativity
of Christ, not only their words and speeches but even their whole lives,
their marriages, their children, their deeds and actions, were a prophecy of
these our times wherein the Church by faith in Christ is gathered of all
Nations. And as Jacob (says he) when he should be borne first put forth his
hand out of the womb, after followed the head, and then necessarily the rest
of the members and body, but so as the head excelled still both the hand that
went before and the body that came after, as from whom they both had their life
sense and vital powers, and which though not in time of appearing, yet in
order and dignity of nature and being, was first and before them both: So our
Lord Jesus Christ, before he appeared in the flesh, and came forth from the
womb of his secret and eternal Counsel, into the sight of the world a
mediator between God and man: reached out in the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets, and other his peculier people appointed for that purpose, a certain
part of his body or hand as a sign and manifest token of his birth
approaching. And so both they as the hand that appeared before, and we as the
body that follow after, do all cleave and are fastened unto one head, which
is Christ believing in him whom they so prefigured: And whatsoever was then
darkely hid and shadowed under the veil and covering unto them, is now fully
accomplished, made open and manifest unto us: And whatsoever special
privilege or prerogative, their Temple, their Priesthood, their veil and
sanctuary, with all their sacrifices and ceremonies brought to them by
tipicall signs and shadows for a season; the same with all addition and
supply of incomperable perfection and truth, is Jesus the son of GOD
unchangeable unto us for ever. He is that second Adam which slept as it were
in the Sepulcre for a time, until his spouse the Church were fashioned out of
his side; he is Abraham the Father of all faithful whose seed is as the
stars of heaven, and as the dust of the earth in number. He is that eternal
Priest for ever after ye order of Melchisedech the King of righteousness and
peace, without Father without Mother or kindred, having neither beginning of
days nor end of life. He is that patient Isaac which being borne against the
course of nature was content at the will of his father to be bound and
sacrified on the Alter of the Cross, and yet remains safe and sound. He is
that pitiful Joseph who was cruellye sold of his brethren, and yet after
manifold afflictions being advanced to the rule of the kingdom, was not
ashamed to confess them, to feed them in time of dearth, and in stead of
revenging ye injuries done unto him, to advance them to honor and great
riches in his kingdom. He is that valiant Joshua leading us into the land of
promise which Moses could not do. He is that strong and puissant Sampson who
by his death overthrows al his enemies. He is yt chosen David who in his
strength subdued fearce Goliath, that defied and oppressed the people of God,
and yet in his baseness and humility unjustly persecuted of his Enemies,
became A worm and no man, A very skorne of men and contempt of the people,
whose heart was as melting wax within his bowels, and his strength dried up as
a potsherd, whose hands and feet they pearsed, gave him viniger and gall to
drink, and cast lottes upon his garment, who became as a dead man out of
mind, and like a broken vessel; And yet after all these greeuaunces is settled
in his kingdom, and his throne established as the son for ever. He is that
wise and glorious Solomon, who rules his people with all tranquillity and
peace, who only was ordained to build an house and acceptable Temple unto
God, and unto whom they shall come from all parts of the earth to hear his
wisdom. He is that miraculous Rod of Aaron devouring the rods or Serpents of
the Sorcerers of Egypt, which by smiting the waters gave passage for his
people, through the Sea, and is always green and flourishing bearing leaves,
blossoms, and ripe fruits. He is that healthful brazen Serpent lift up upon
the Cross, to heal the stinges and wounds of the fiery Serpents. He is that
spreading Cherubines ouershadowing the Arc and mercy seat of God with his
wings. He is that stone which Daniell saw hewn out of the mountain without
hands of man, and filled the whole earth with the compass thereof. He is that
Ladder that Jacob saw reaching between heaven and earth, with Angels
ascending and descending, as by whom God in mercy comes down unto us on
earth, and we by faith ascend and draw near unto him in heaven. He is the
way, the truth, and the life. He is Alpha and Omega the first and the last,
the beginning and end of al, of whom, through whom, and for whom, are all
things, and besides him there is no Savior, who was, and is, and is to come,
the almighty for ever, the holy and true, who is made unto us of God, our
wisdom, our sanctification, our justification and redemption, who alone has
trodden the winepresse of Gods wrath, and washed our souls in the blood of his
Cross, who alone has broken the yoke of our burden and the staff of our
shoulder, and the rod of our oppressor as in the day of Madian. Who alone has
borne our rebukes in his bosom, and our infirmities in his body, and has
healed our wounds with his own stripes, who made himself an offering for sin
and gave his soul a redemtion for many, that by ye grace of god he might taste
of death for a^, and so reconcile both in one body unto God by his cross
slaying hatred thereby, and making peace both in heaven and in earth yt he might
abolish the hand writing yt was against us in ye law of commandments; that he
might take away the veil and pertition wall whereby we were separated and shut
of: and so gather together in one yt dispersed sons of God, unto whom he has
prepared, a new and living way into ye holy place of grace and forgiveness of
sins, by offering up himself, and shedding of his own most innocent and
precious blood. And thus is Christ become, the truth of all figures and the
body of all shadows, and the scoape and substance of all the Law and the
Prophets: who ending at John Baptist seemed visiblye to acknowledge the same
in the persons of Moses and Elias, when talking with Christ at his
transfiguration in the hearing of the Apostles Peter and John God the father
gave testimony thereto from heaven saying This is my dear son in whom I am
well pleased, hear him. Teaching thereby that both the legal rites and
oracles of the Prophets, had now accomplished their purpose and prefixed end
in Christ, whom only they as witnesses and messengers of truth, were thence
forth to preach and publish to the world. And therefore both praise and glory
and honor and majesty and power and might, R^uel. 5.9.10.12.13.
be ascribed unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever
more because he was killed and has redeemed us unto God by his blood, out of
every Nation and kindred and tongue and people of the earth: because he has
loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood, and has made us kings and
priests unto our God, and we shall reign with him for ever, and here in have
we liberty and boldness to enter in the holy place.

This is here called not simply a passage a mean or way into the holy place,
but a new way and a living way, a new way, not in respect of the time of
making, but for the most absolute perfection and unchangeable continuance
thereof; not as though there were a time when it was not, but because there
never shall be time wherein it shall not be. For although it were published and
revealed in the latter times, yet was it ordained before all times. It is
called new, not as lately ordained and prepared of God, but because it was new
and strange and scarcely known unto men; not as though there were another
way, into the holy place before it, but because there never shall be any
succeeding after it. So likewise it is called a living way, because it is
opposed to the old and dead way of the law: which by reason of the weakness
and imperfection thereof, is worn out and vanished; Because it surely leads
us to immortality and life, Because it is dedicated and prepared by the living
body of Christ, and not by the dead carcasses and offeringes in the law; and
because it admits none, that lie dead and sencel^sse in their sins, but
such as are quickened in Christ and are alive unto righteousness by the spirit
of God. Now then if the blood of Jesus (as here the holy Ghost taught us,)
be the new way, be the living way, be the only way into the holy place, into
the kingdom of heaven, which not we can prepare for our selves, but Christ
has prepared for us, through the veil of his own flesh: And therefore,
such a way, as admits neither succession, nor perfection, nor supplye, nor
myxture, nor fellowship of any other, what shall we think of those men, that
yet seek them by wandering paths of error and would rather return into Egypt
by the old Traditions of men, (...)
and deserts of their inventions, then enter into the Sanctuary into the holy
place of rest, by this new and living way here taught us, the blood of Jesus?
Or what other can we judge of those their Monastical vows and orders, of
their new found out fraternities, distinctions and degrees; of their wilful
and voluntary services, not required at their hands; of their daily and
propiciatorie sacrifices, available both for quick and dead; of their
preparatiue meritorious, satisfactory, redemptory, and supererogatory works; of
their merits of congruity, equality and condignitie; of their proper and
inherent iustifiing righteousness; of their ignorant prayers, and superstitious
inuocations, mediations intercessions of Saints, shrines, and Images, with
other like erroneous supplements of man's devising, set forth and still with
confidente asseuerance avouched, as the best and only way into the holy place
with out the which there is no entrance there is no passage? What I say can we
judge of them even by the direct rule and doctrine of this place, without
digression, but that they are merely derogatorie and injurious to the blood
of our Savior Jesus: And so consequently the way of sinners (wherein he is
blessed that has not walked) and that dark and slipperie way wherein they
stumble and fall backwarde and are broken, Esai, 28.13.
and are snared, and are taken as Esai says. For if an other way may be
found out after it into the holy place, then is not the blood of Jesus the
new way: it is not a living way if it fade or be decayed in his former
strength and nature, and now needs further supplye and aid, neither yet the
way into the holy place, if it do but help and enter us at the first, and
leave us to our own free will, to our own direction, or any other means,
before we attain the end. But they accuse our doctrine, because say they it
is new, and glory in their own devises as though they were very old, wherein
to answer breefely both ^auils, they craftily deal with us in deed,
according to that old practice of the subtle Gib^onites: who to make a league
with Joshua, took old s^ckes and old bottles for their journey, Joshua. 9.4.5.
and old torn raiment on their backs, and al their provision of bread and
victuals very old and dry, so faining themselves Ambassadors from far
Countries: In like sort, but to a contrary end, the Papists still hold out
and show unto us like Gorgons head to fray men with the sight, a pretext or
painted Image of hoare and uncontrollable antiquity, they will prescribe
against Joshua by possession of the land before him, they would seem to come
from far, they would be of the Aboregines without any beginning, or from the
beginning it self. And al things that they use and maintain amongst them, are
old they bear us in hand and very ancient. But as the deceitful Gibeonits
being tried out were not the men they seemed, but were neighbors and borderers
unto Joshua; So these have nothing less then the age and antiquity they would
challenge to themselves, as does plainly appear by relation of their own
histories, in the institution and ordinance of every several thing. And
therefore as Ieroboams wife though she muffled and disguised her face and
countenance, yet the Prophet could descerne her so soon as she began to
speak. 1. Reg, 14.6.
So though they muffle and disguise and new attire both themselves and their
errors with strange and unwonted garments, yet so soon as they come near
to speak and declare their message, they are found but the wife or darling of
an Idolatrous husband, seeking unrecoverable health, for their dying and
incurable child: they are found but false and subttile Gibeonits pretending
that they are not; and apples of Gomorha which as S. Augustine says seem
fair and beautiful to the eye, Aug. de Ciuit. dei l^b. 21 cap. 5.
but if you touch them with the finger they fall to dust and cinders. True it
is that Saint Basil says to Amphiloctius. Persuasiua sunt quodamodo vetera
dogmata velut an antiquitate canitie quadam reuerendum quiddam habentia. Cap.
29.
Old Religion and opinions are very apt to persuade men, as having in
antiquity somewhat to be reverenced for the graie hears thereof; But herein
again is required wisdom and as much wisdom in these our evil days as
had Solomon in finding out the doubted mother of the child. For truth many
times is accused of novelty, and error lies hid under the title of age: For
so the Gentiles, says Lactant. assaulted ye Christians faith with this
rampire. And Symachus the sworn Enemy to Christ as says Prudentius stood
much upon this reason. Pru. lib. 2.
And Cresconius against Saint Augustine was armed with this buckler. This
(says he) is ancient, our fathers received it of their fathers; True says
Saint Augustine Sed errantes ab errantibus. As the Jews receive by tradition
of their fathers, that the body of Christ was stolen out of the sepulcre, which
being false at the beginning, continuance of time cannot make it true. Our
way our religion and doctrine (say they) is very old and ancient and
therefore to be preferred, this cloak and color, and this their usurped
reason, had likewise the Gebeonites, the Jews, the Gentiles. Cresconius,
Symachus, Demetrius the Silver smith, the town ^larke of Ephesus, and generally
all infidels against the Christian faith: but most untruly avouched. But yours
say they is strange lately sprunge up, and new; So said the Athenians to
Saint Paul calling him a bringer of new Devils, Act. 17.18.
and may we not know what this new doctrine is whereof thou speak, yea it
is new say they, and therefore to be rejected: Their illation is false, and
their premesses either erroniously collected or maliciously perverted or both:
as does plainly appear even by this place; For first the entrance and
passage into the holy place by the blood of Jesus, which we only hold and
profess is here called a new way, but this way or doctrine is not to be
rejected. And therefore ye new way even our way is not to be rejected. The^ our
doctrine and religion we grant is new not after their scoffing and blasphemous
meaning: But according to sense of this present Scripture: Because it is the
clensing of our souls, by the unwasted blood of Jesus, which never waxes old
but is always fresh and flourishing; because thereby we are renewed into a
new man; and do become new creatures in Christ Jesus; And as a man in
traueling calls it a new way which he never went before, though the way it
self be of long continuance and known of old: Even so may this our way
and doctrine be well called new, not as though it were not before theirs which
they count so old and is not. But because that men through the mistie clouds
of their errors and abuses, neither so generally nor so perfectly did know,
or traced it before; And so it is new not by institution as lately devised and
found out, but by restoration, by publishing and promulgation Quo ad nos, as
now more fullye preached, better known and more commonly used and frequented
then before. So that all then is not to be believed which comes in the name
of old, nor all to be refused which is called and accounted new: And neither
is their antiquity or rather intrusion of error such as can prescribe against
the right, though intermitted title of truth; neither our objected nouelty such
as justly ought to hinder or prejudice the same. For it is known and it is
true that is ^aide by Tertull. Quodcunque aduersus ^eritatem sapit haeresis
est, Pr^scripe aduers haeret.
etiam vetus con^uetudo. Whatsoever favors against ^ruthe is heresy though
it be an old cu^tome. And as Ciprian says, Ad Pom. pei: contra Epi. Steph.
Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est, Ideoque re^icto errore sequamur
veritatem; Custom without truth is but auncientnes of error, and therefore
leaving error let us follow the truth. That so and by a new living way we may
enter with boldness into ye holy place. Many are the abuses they cover with
this cloak of age, to beguile unstable souls even in flat and express
terms defacing the blood of Christ. They say in their ceremonial describing
the properties of their Agnus Dei, Peccatum quodque malignum diluit vt sanguis
Christi. It washes away al evil sin as the blood of Christ. Of their daily
and unbloody sacrifice (as they term it) Peccatum frangit vt Christi sauguis
et angit. It breaks and greeueth sin as the blood of Christ: In their
inuocations and prayers they say: Tu per Thomae sanguine^, que^ pro te impe^dit,
Fac nos Christ sca^dere quo Thomas asce^dit.


And again, Tu per Thomae merita nostra nobis dimitte debita. By the blood of
Thomas, by the merits of Thomas, forgive us our debtes, make us to ascend where
Thomas is. Nicholae pontifex salutis nostrae opifex, O Bishop Nicolas the
worker of our salvation, Ablue cuncta rea mentis, mala, sanste Matheae, O S.
Matthew wash away the evils of a guilty mind. If here and in such like, too
many, too odious to be repeated, the blood of Jesus be not utterly cast aside
and other means brought in, as the new and living way to the holy place; If
this be not to build an Alter to an unknown God, to bestow their Corn and
their wine their silver and Gold upon Baalim, to carrye oil into Ashur and to
trust in the shadow of Egypt: If this be not to leave the Fountain of the
waters of life, and to seek them puddles and broken Cesternes of their own
inventions: If this be not like Mu^ Ponticus in deed to knibble and gnawe at
Christ his peculier glory, to extenuate the fruictes of his blessed passion.
To dry up and euacuate the streams of his sacred blood, and to set up Dagon
with the Ark of God I refer me to al indifferent censure, and to their own
books and Missals which affirm these things. And as for that way or by path
they so labor to establishe by their own deserts and meritorious deeds, they
stiflye and with such boldness mainetaine until this day, that in their late
Rhem. notes, they blushe not to use these words, Good works done in grace
after the first justification, Rhem. not. 2. Tim. 4. ver. 8.
be properly and truly meritorious, fully worthy of everlasting life, and
Heaven is the due stipende which GOD owes to the persons so working, and this
they call elsewhere merit of condignity. Then have they again an other way
to get and purchase this grace from God, by their Opera disponencia, their
preparatiue and disposing works, which they call merit of congruitie: whereby
first in reason and congruitie God must give them grace for their so working,
and then their works wrought in grace deserve eternal life, and do enter into
the holy place of worthiness or co^dignitie. For as says M. Stapleton the
co^trouersy reader of Doway Adoptati semeli^filios tu^c de nostro maeramur De
Iustif. lib. 10. c. 2.
Being once adopted into sons, we merit and deserve of our own. And so
perhaps the blood of our Savior Jesus, shall be admitted to help or enter us
at the first, or scarcely that, if you found the bottom of this their
doctrine. But the whole process and perfection of this most weighty matter of
our salvation is reserved for our selves, and rests in our own running, in
our own well doing, contrary to all sense and meaning of this particular
place, and infallible doctrine of the scripture in general. Such trappes and
snares have they laid in our way, and spread abroad their nets with coardes,
whereby they would destroy ye paths of our feet, and are utterly purposed to
overthrow our goinges, But the word of the Lord is true, and stands fast
for ever, we may be bold to enter into the holy place, not by any worthiness
in our selves, not by mediation, means or merits of any other, but only by
this new and living way, Act. 4.12.
the blood of Jesus, There is no name given us under Heaven wherein we may be
saved, but only in the name of Jesus. Heb. 13.8.
Christ Jesus yesterdaye and to day, and the same continues for ever. And
therefore let them call this our way and profession new, which leads us unto
life eternal and vaunt of theirs as old in a sent orepugnant and contrary
hereunto; that so both our glory may appea^e in the sound of their reproach,
and their madness be made manifest in the crown of their own pride.

Here to look back a little unto our selves, among many other our abuses,
wherein we are justly to be reproved, our great oversight in this point also,
is not unworthy to be taxed: who being so hardly kept and continued in this
new and living way that leads to the holy place are yet in all itching
curiosity so carried away and inclined to news and new things, and so
running and starting out, into every new devise that is pleasing to our
fences, that nothing can content us, except it be very new, nor the self
same delight us long after while when it waxes old or common. How strange
and vnwontedly new is our apparel both in matter and form, both in
substance and fashion, so that garments are not stored to the proportion of
men's bodies, (...) ^y the strange variety and newness of their apparel,
they tranceforme themselves like Proteus to appear in what form they lift?
How insatiable are our eyes to behold vanities, and gaze after new devises?
New buildings, new manners, new diet, new sportes, new fashions, which are
chiefelye sought out and looked for in every science and trade, and are only
now in price and estimation among us: And yet our ears more precise and
curious so as scarce any thing may content us, but that which we heard not or
we knew not either in matter or in form before; It must be new or else it is
tedious, it must be hot from the forge or else it is unsavory: If you bring
not new and unwonted matter, which is commonly looked for, at least you must
dip it in a new dye, and deliver it in a different manner, or else men's
ears are hedged with thorns it will not enter, it is no other then the
passage of a ship through the waves, or of a bird in the air which vanish in
their course and afterward are not once remembered or seen. But if we so
delight in new things at least let us reform our judgment herein. The thing
yt is has bin (says Solomon,) and there is no new thing under the sun. Eccl.
1.9. Esai. 41.9.
But behold says Esai speaking of this new way, of our redemption by the blood
of Jesus, Old things are come to pass and new things do I declare, and or
ever they come I tell you of them: If we so delight in new things let us
serve God says Saint Paul in newness of the spirit, not in the oldenesse of
the letter: Let us put of the old man with all the deceaueable lusts thereof,
and put on the new man which according to God is shapen in righteousness and
true holiness let us put on Christ in whom neither circumcision avails any
thing neither uncircumcision but a new creature: And so as those that look for
a new heaven and a new earth, let us walk worthy of yt vocation, whereunto we
are called in all newnes of life, by this new and living way into yt holy
place, which is the new Jerusalem and heavenly City of God. This is y^ new
and living way and blessed are they yt do walk in the same, this is the way
of righteousness and truth, which has neither end nor error, let us walk
therein with an upright heart and turn neither to the right hand nor to yt left,
this is the way of peace which the wicked cannot find, and the straight and
narrow way wherein the multitude delight not, this way is high for such as
contemn the world, and yet both low and easy and the humble shall walk
therein, this is the way of the commandment wherein it is required that we
run, now the Lord has set our hearts at liberty. And therefore let us purge
and cleanse it from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, let us deck
and adorn it, with flowers of good life and conversation, and with the spoils
and garlands (as I may say) of our conquered affections and lusts, and so
hold up our goeings steadfastly in this path that our footesteps slip not.

And although there be many causes in our selves to discourage and withhold us
from entrance thereinto being every way so let and pressed down with the
burden of our sins, although there are and will be many impediments in ye
world to stay and hinder us in our course; yet many more are our comforts
again, and more forcible are the causes that should embolden and excite us
thereunto seeing we have not only the things mentioned before, concerning the
sacrifice and offering of the blood of Jesus, for the expiation of our sins
and reconcilliation made with God: But moreover (according to the figures and
former shadows of the law, both a temple even the house and Church of God,
wherein our prayers shall be heard, our petitions granted, and we remain as
safe from the rage of the Enemy as was Noe in the arc from drowning in the
waters: And also an high Priest and mediator even the man Jesus Christ, which
rules and governs the same: And then if he be on our side, who can be
against us? If he have justified us, who shall condemn us? if he have chosen
us, who shall lay any thing to our charge? If he be our shepherd how can we
lack any thing? If he be our high Priest, how shall we not be accepted?
For the sweet smelling sacrifice that he has offered unto God the father for
us? And if he have given us liberty with boldness to enter, who shall abridge
the same to hold us back from the grace that is offered? Seeing he is the
high Priest and ruler over the house of God? Who for this cause having
offered up himself without spot to purge our conscience from dead works to
serve the living God, is set down at the right hand of Majesty in heavenly
places, far above al principalities and powers and might and domination and
every name that is named, both in this world and in the world to come: who is
appointed over all things the head of the Church which is his body and the
fullness of him that fills all in all things, in whom dwells all the
fullness of the godhead bodyly, and the hidden treasures of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, and to whom al power is given both in heaven and earth. That
in all things he might have the pre-eminence to be crowned with majesty and
honor, as an eternal high priest for ever, having sole and supreme authority
and rule over the house and Church of God, both in heaven triumphant and
militant here in earth. Which Church, which house, which family, and peculier
people of God, thus purchased with the blood of Christ, nourished with his
word, and sacraments, preserved sustained and directed by his grace and holy
spirit, wherein he has promised to abide and dwell as in his holy resting
place for ever whilst it is here militant (which concerns more pertinently
our present instruction,) and whilst we are here wandering and soiourning on the
earth: is not now to be sought for in the Region or land of Iewry as the Jews
would have it; nor driven only into Africa as the Donatistes imagined, nor
fastened unto Rome as the Papists maintain and hold it: But GOD having taken
down the partition wall, in the reconciled blood of his son, has chosen
for the seed of Abraham, all which have the faith of Abraham, and for the
family of Jacob, all that worship the Lord in spirit and truth, and for the
material Temple the hearts of faithful Christians. Revel. 21.12.
The Church and house of God is called a City having twelve gates opening
unto every corner of the world accepting all: refusing none, so that all the
world is now indifferentlye without exception or perticion, the Church and
Temple of the Lord. All Countries are Judea, all Cities are Jerusalem, all
houses all places all persons are the family and house of God, wherein Christ
governs and rules by faith in their hearts. This place would yield if time
did permit to speak thereof at lage; very large and ample matter both touching
the argument handled before, for the new Priesthood of Christ succeeding and
abolishing the old order of Aaron (whereby as in manner of Applcation, the
whole doctrine of this place is shadowed out unto us) most plainly prefigured
as S. Augustine says in the rejected priesthood of Ely and the established
priesthood of Samuel; Aug. lib. 7. de ciuit. dei cap. 1.
as also touching the whole rule and government of the church of God for ever,
to the composing of the greatest matters in controversy at these days. For if
there can be but one head of the body, and one husband of the spouse, and one
high priest a ruler over the house of God which is Christ: I see not what title
the Bishop of Rome can have herein, but as an usurper by intrusion upon the
prerogative of Christ, as had Absolon sometimes in David's kingdom, which
although it has bin more then sufficiently, and even ad nausem discussed
refuted and rejected, by invincible demonstrations and proofs: by disputing,
writing, preaching in this place and in all places and every where and every
way, to the tedious wearines of all indifferent ears: Yet want there not we
see new rescues and supplies to defend it: and such as would heal up if it
might be that deadly wound of the beast as S. John before has told us.
Among many other Doctor Stapleton of whom I spoke before in the preface to his
book of Controversies called Principioru^ fidei Doctrinalium demonstratio,
dedicated to Gregory the.13. Bishop of Rome, blusheth not to entitle him most
flatteringly and falsely Basim et fundamentum, Columnam et firmamentum totius
Orthodoxae Religionis. The ground work and foundation the pillar and strength
of all true Religion. Generalem et oecumenicum Patriarcham nostrum and
Principem, Our general and oecumenicall Patriarch and Prince. Omnium
Ecclesiarum caput, The head of all Churches. Verticem et Coripheum Apostolicae
Ecclesiae. The top or crown and ringleader of the Apostolic Church, Nay.
Coripheotatum et totius orbis magistrum, The supereminent and incomparable
ringleader, and master of the whole world. Piscatorem maximum. The greatest
fiisher. Confirmatorem fratrum. The strengthner of his brethren Patrem familias
et primo genitum pastorem gregis dominici. The father of the house and the
first borne shepherd of the Lords flock, and at last according to the highest
name and title given here to our Savior Christ himself Rectorem Domus Dei.
The ruler over the house of God. And, Supremum in terris numen. The highest
Godhead in earth. And all these with many more the like unsavory and
unchristian speeches, he counts not injurious or derogatorie unto Christ, if
they be smothed over with a little untempered mortar, and shadowed with a few fig
leaves of their own distinctions between Caput vitale and Ministeriale as he
says or fundamentum principale and ministrans as Turrianus imagines, which
both to reason, to nature, to the manner of speaking, and all sound Divinity
are most repugnant. And yet for all these so great and glorious tytles, most
peruercely collected out of the holy Scriptures, and more blasphemouslly
applied contrary to all sense and meaning of the Scriptures: Melchior Canus a
famous schoolema^ of theirs after he had labored to prove the primacie of Peter
above the rest of the Apostles, Lib. 6. de Eccl. Rom autorit.
wherein he washes an Ethiopian, and plougheth in the sands: confesses,
though not with a mind to confess the truth, but urged by the invincible
force of truth, that Romanum pontificem Petro succedere, non esse quidem in
sacris litteris reuelatum, sed aliunde constare. That the Bishop of Rome is
Peter's successor (whereupon depends the whole state and substance of their
supremasie) is not at all declared in holy Scripture but is proved by other
means, wherein, besides the irrecouerable foil he gives to that, their
ruinous and declining cause, he is flatlye against Stapleton who in the sixth
book and fifteenth Chapter of his forenamed Controversies, of purpose (though
indeed to little purpose) there undertakes to prove the same by Scripture.
But Canus would help it out again with a general rule and Maxim which must
help them at all assaies Lib. 7. De Aucto. Sanctorum where inueying against
Caieton who preferred reason and proof before authority, has these words.
Although perhaps of Philosophers you may well require a reason of their
philosophical positions or conclutions: in sacrarum tamen litterarum
intelligentia maioribus nostris debes etiam nulla ratione habita credere, et
quas sententias de lege de fide deque religione ab illis accepisti defendere:
Yet for the understanding of the Scriptures you must believe our forefathers,
even without all reason, and whatsoever opinions of the law, of faith and
religion, you have received from them to defend. Now the Minor must be added,
but you have received from your forefathers as a matter of faith and religion,
the Popes supremacy and rule over the house of God, and therefore even without
all reason as here, and besides all scripture, as before, you must maintain
and defend the same, wherein he pleads as well and deserves as much see of
the Jews and Turks for patronage and protection of their Talmied and Alcoran:
as he does of the Papists for defending the Popes supremacy and rule over
the house of God. To which and other their like absurdities (whereof I may
truly say as Saint Augustine did sometimes of the Manichees, Obsaena illorum
misteria in lucem protraxisse hoc erat vicisse. To bring their filthy secrets
and mysteries into light, was sufficient to refute and overthrow them) I
cannot more fitly and breefely return them answer then by their own speech
and place abused out of Saint Augustine by their own Gregory Martin in the
preface to his discovery Dulcissime vanos esse non peritos, sed perituros, nec
tam disertos in errore, quam desertos a veritate. That they are very
plausiblie vain not abounding in knowledge; but near unto destruction,
neither yet so elloquent in defense of their errors as utterly forsaken and
given up of truth. To conclude this first part. Seeing then our sacrifice and
offering is stain, the veil is taken up, the way is prepared and the holy
place is made open for us, and for us all without exception or restraint by the
blood of Jesus; and seeing we have him not any other our high Priest over the
house of God, who ruling all things by the word of his power, and feeling all
infirmities wherewith all our nature is touched, is both able and willing to
give grace and to help us in the time of need: we have liberty and boldness
to enter thereinto, and therefore to proceed to the second part, the duties and
things required on our behalf let us approach and draw near in all obedience
unto him unto his house and holy place again. For although Christ be the bread
of life yet he nourishes none but those that feed upon him: although he be
the sun of brightness spreading his beams of mercy over all, yet none enjoy
the light thereof but those that have clear and opened eyes to behold him. And
although he have prepared for us a way into the holy place, yet can we not
come thither if we walk not in the same according to his will. The Manna we
know was Angels food, and nourished many in the desert: but to them that did
not use it after the commandment of God, it became corrupt and putrified. The
Angel at Bethesda certain times came down, and by stirring ye water made it
healthful: yet many that dipped not in it went away criples; great companies
touched the hemme of Christ's garment, only the faithful woman drew virtue out
of him to heal her bloody flux. So God loved the world says, S. John that he
gave his only begotten son, that al in general, and yet not al perticulerly,
but al they that believe in him should not perrish but have everlasting life, as
many as received him as many as drew near unto him, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, to them he has given entrance, with boldness into ye
holy place. And therefore Accedamus, appropinquemus, let us come, let us draw
nere, ye way is prepared, let us walk in ye same, the veil and separation is
now taken away, let us boldly enter, even let us that were far of
separated by our sins, the children of wrath and wrapped in unbelief, being
all become as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as a stained and
poluted cloth, so that we all did fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the
wind have taken us away, yet because we are washed, because we are cleansed,
because we are sanctified by the sprinckeling of the blood of Jesus, by whom
we have atonement and forgiveness of sins: let us I say be bold to enter
and come near, it is we the sinners of the Gentiles that are here called, let
us harken unto his voice, it is we that dwell in the uttermost parts of the
earth and in the Isles of the sea yt are here exhorted, let us gird up our
loins and stre^gthe^ our feeble knees let us cast away euerything that
presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us looking always unto Jesus the Author
and finisher of our faith.

The greatest distance and separation that may be, is between good and evil
light and darkness, faith and infidelity, between God and the world: and
therefore the more we pluck, not the feet of our bodies, but the love of our
hearts, from the love of the world, which is mere hatred against God, the more
we avoid the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life,
which are as Saint John says, the predominant quallities of the world, the
more we eschew evil and do good, the more we cast away the works of
darkness and put upon us the Armor of light, the more we shake of
distrustfullnesse and lay hold on the sheilde of faith, the more we are made
partakers of the heavenly promises: the nearer we approach and come to the
holy place. For not simply to come near, but to come by the right way, and
for a right end, is required at our hands, otherwise ye Stribes and Pharisees,
and people of the Jews came many ways, and many times to our Savior Christ
himself, and yet had no entrance by his blood into the holy place for some
came then as many do now of curiosity to hear his new (as they thought)
and unwonted doctrine; some of hateful malice, to catch and entangle him in
his words: some with carnal minds to be fed with his laws and miracles:
The whole multitude of the Gorgesens drew nere unto him but it was to entreat
him to depart out of their coasts; the Herodians came near unto him, and
called him master, but their purpose was thereby, as it is of many now a days
when they speak faire^^ and bow lowest to enshare and entrap him* yea the
Devil himself would come nere unto Christ but it was to tempt him, and Judas
came unto him, but to deliver and betraie him; the rich young Lawyer came
running in great haste and would needs draw near to eternal life unto the
holy place; but as soon as he heard the way and means contrary to his
covetous mind, and carnal expectation he went away heavy and evil appaide,
he thought to have gotten more goods by Christ, he would lose or leave nothing
for Christ. The dissembling people in the 6 of Micheas, seemed very hot and
earnest to draw nere also, but they would do it not by exercising mercy and
judgment, and such other virtues enjoined the^ by the Prophet: But by a
voluntary service and new devised way of their own, By offering up the children
of their bodies, and the fruit of their womb, by thousands of Ramme^, and
rivers of oil. And therefore these all with other like because they drew near
unto God with their mouths, and honored him with their lips, their hearts
being far from him: because they had but a form and show of Godliness, but in
deed denied the power thereof, they wandered in deserts of error to their
destruction and found not the new and living way into the holy place of rest.
But seeing it remains that some must enter thereinto, and they to whom it
was first preached, entered not through their unbelief. Let us arise and draw
nere with boldness, not in place or by any bodily access, for God is every
where, we cannot go from his presence we cannot fly from his spirit, not as
they who worshipped they knew not what and whom they would, which they heard,
profited nothing because it was not coupled with faith: but even in assurance
of faith accompanied on each side with a true heart and an unspotted conscience.
That so being cleansed from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, we
may be vessels sanctified to honor, and meet for the use of the Lord.

For without faith it is impossible to please God. And, Whatsoever is not of
faith, Heb. 11.6.
is sin, by faith our hearts are purified. Romans 14.23.

Gal. 3, 11.

Romans 10.10.


By faith the just man lives: by faith in Jesus Christ, we are all the sons
of GOD. By faith with the heart we believe unto righteousness. By faith were
all those benefits obtained, reckoned up in the 16 chapter of this Epistle.
This is the strength whereby we stand, even our faith, 2. Cor. 1.24.

Romans 5.2.


and the feet (as it were) whereby we walk, and are brought in into the holy
place. This is the eye where with Abraham saw the day of Christ and
rejoiced: this is the hand wherewithal we lay hold on eternal life. This is
that indissoluble bond that joins us unto Christ, as the Prophet says,
Desponsabo te mihi fide, I will marry thee unto me by faith.

This is the medicine that heals all the diseased even faith in his name, ^.
Ioh. 5.4.
and this is the victory that overcomes the world eue^ our faith: ^sai. 7.9.

Mark. 9.^^3.

Math. 15.8.

Luke 7.30.


if you believe not says Esai, you shall not be established, if thou could
believe says Christ, all things are possible to him that believes, He that
believes in the son has everlasting life: be it unto thee according to thy
faith, go thy ways thy faith has made thee safe; briefly if we will enter
into the holy place prepared by the blood of Jesus we must hasten and draw
nere (...) In assurance of faith. Uerye copious and fruitful is the doctrine
that rises from this place, and many also are the practices of the adversary,
to impugn and beat down the same: the controversy of faith is the matter of
all he misliketh most: But that a man should persuade himself of salvation
and draw nere in assurance of faith according to the doctrine of this present
place: The carnal man perceauing not the things that are of God, accounts of
all other extreme presumption, the reason may appear for that being utterly
void of true faith himself, with all the fruit and comfort thereof, and making
his door and entrance into life, by the merit of his own works which he sees
in his guilty conscience to be spotted and imperfect, and such as cannot
stand upright in judgment to deliver him from wrath; he gathers a certain
conclusion of this his own uncertainty: that no man can be certain whether
he be justified freely by the mercy of God in Christ or no; only we may
comfort our selves with this cold and general belief that some shall be
saved, but whether we our selves be of that number or no we can have no
assurance. And so that which our Savior Christ reprooueth. Mat. 8.26.
O ye of little faith in respect that they doubted, that they wavered, that
they were not assured, that same do they allow for good and wholesome
doctrine, and that which made Peter to sink and cry for help because he did
not come unto Christ in assurance of faith but doubted, by the world they
swim safely, and bear them selves up from drowning. But the spirit of GOD
in contrary sort has taught us, that whosoever will enter into the holy
place, must draw near in assurance of faith: Now he that doubts, and is
uncertain of his salvation, has no assurance of faith: and therefore he
that doubts and is uncertain, cannot enter into the holy place. So then the
true and justifying faith, whereby we draw near to the Kingdom of Heaven, is
not tossed, as S. James says, with the wind, and carried like a wave of the
Sea, is not a watrishe or slipperie matter, as says Gregory Nazianzene,
Orat. de Pasch.
is not a wavering grant or general opinion acknowledging the new and living
way to life to be prepared for some through the blood of Jesus, which we see to
have been in the Devils, believing, trembling and confessing the same, but a
steadfast assurance and confidence application thereof unto our selves, that it
is prepared even for us, and that we are of those that are here exorted to
draw near in assurance of faith, whereby we may boldly say every one of us
with the Apostle Thomas unto Christ, My Lord and my God, and with David, The
Lord is my sheapheard, therefore shall I lack nothing. The Lord is my light
and salvation, whom then should I fear, And with Job, Though he should kill
me, yet would I put my trust in him, This is no presumption or pride, as
master Stapleton calls it, but a right and godly boldness to assure our
selves of that which was purchased with so great a ransom for us, De verb.
Dom. Se^^ 28.
Praesumere de gracia Christi, says S. Augustine, non est Arrogantia sed
Fides, To presume of the mercy and grace of Christ, is not pride but faith,
Ego quod ex me mihi deest, In cant. Ser. 61.
says Barnard, fidenter vsurpo ex visceribus domini quonia^ misericordia
affluunt nec desunt foramina per quae of fluunt, That which is wanting in my
self I do boldly usurp of the bowels of the Lord, because they abound in
mercy, neither want they issues whereby they distill and flow out unto me.
This is our sure foundation that is laid upon a Rock that standing like
Mount Sion, shall never be removed, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it, GOD is one and the same, with him is no variableness, neither
shadow of change, he is faithful that has promised, his gifts are without
repentance, whom he loves, he loves to ye end, and touching our selves, He
that believes in the son, says S. John; has the witness in himself: when
you believed, says S. Paul, you were sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1.13.
which is the earnest of our inheritance being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace says he with God, and therefore having boldness and entrance
with confidence which is by faith in him, let us not doubt but draw nere in
assurance of faith.

What then? do we therefore give men liberty to sin because of this
assurance of faith? do we thereby open a window to security and losenesse of
life? Do we destroy the doctrine of godly conversation and good works as they
falsely accuse us? No, in no case, but we much more establish and confirm the
same; not indeed to merit thereby salvation or to enter into the holy place of
worthiness, as do they, from which they are farthest off, when they so think
to approach and draw nere; but to show by our obedience the virtues of him
that called us out of darkness, into his marvelous light, and to testify unto
men, the soundness of this our faith which like a tree that is planted by the
water side will bring forth fruit in due season, The sure foundation of God
(says S. Paul) stands fast, ^. Tim. 2.9.
having this seal, the Lord knows who are his, and for a testimony unto us
that we may also know and be assured thereof he adds, Let every one that
calls on the name of Christ, depart from iniquity, In which sense he here
spreads out on each side two arms or branches of this fruitful tree of
faith, which if it be quick and flourishing, do necessarily spring out and
shadow again the root from whence they proceed and grow, even a true heart
and a good Conscience, whose effects are so to sanctify and season both our
souls and bodies in all exercises and duties answerable to our profession:
that if they abide in us, they shall make us neither idle nor unfruitful in
the word of the Lord. But if these do not direct us, if our hearts be not
sound in his light, if our hearts be not settled and inwardly affected to walk
in his laws, if our hearts be not sprinkled from an evil conscience
howsoever we pretend Religion and holiness in the sight of men, yet are we but
sounding brass and tinckling simbals, but clouds without rain, but trees
without fruit, twice dead and plucked up by ye roots, we cannot so draw nere
unto God, who searches the hearts and raines, who lighteneth things that are
hid in darkness, who is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth, for the birth is aunswerable to first conception, if the root be
corrupt, how can the fruit be wholesome? If the Spring be defiled, how can
the waters be clean? If the heart which is as it were the seat of the soul,
the fountain and first instrument of life, from whom all our actions and
affections do proceed, be stained with sin and wickedness, how can we
think our bare pretense of naked and idle faith is pleasing unto God? And
therefore says S. James, Cleanse your hearts you sinners, and purge your hands
you wavering minded men. Jam. 4.8. Jer. 4.14. Pro. 23.26 Pro. 4.23. Luke 6.45.
O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, says Jeremy, that thou may
be saved. My son (says Solomon) give me thy heart, let thine eyes delight in
my ways, and keep thine heart with all safety, for from it proceeds thy
life. A good man, says Christ, out of the good treasure of his heart brings
forth good things, but an evil man of the evil treasure of his heart
brings forth evil things. Ose. 10.2.
Their heart (says Ose) is divided, therefore shall they be found faulty. I
will walk, says David, in my house not with an outward show but with a true
and perfect heart, which is necessarilye required here in him that will draw
nere to the holy place. Many are the sorts and differences of hearts from
whence again proceeds that great diversity of manners amongst men, there
is a wise heart that considers all things soberly with judgment, and there
is a foolish heart which knows nothing but to commit iniquity: there is a
stony stubborn heart not moved to repentance, there is also a soft and
fleshly heart, soon pearsed and wounded with every check for sin, there is a
lose and faint heart, unstable in all his ways, and there is a firm and
constant, a true, an upright, a faithful heart, commended here unto us, whose
praise is not of men, but of God.

But among all other differences, whereof I cannot now particulerlye increate,
to come near unto our selves, what shall we say of the contrary hereof of
falsehood and flattery, of fained, double, hollow, and dissembling hearts, both
toward God and men, which do so swarm amongste us, and have so possessed and
enlarged the inner parts of Christians at these days, that nothing is more
common then to dissemble and deceive, and nothing more rare and dainty than a
true and faithful heart, whereby both Epicure, Atheus, and Machiauill, as it
seems, have found them secret harbor to work by fraud and policy, where
Christ should be interteyned in sincerity and truth, and although
Dissimulation be now spunne of so cunning and fine a threade that it is hard
to discern men asunder, yet let us use the tried and infallible mean set
down by our savior Christ, Look into men's actions, which as a mirroure
represent the image of their hearts. Esteem the tree by his fruit, confer
their works with their speeches, and their lives with their profession, and it
is easilye espied. For how do we bring forth thistles in stead of figs,
and thorns in steed of grapes, and the works of darkness, and yet would be
called the children of light, and the fruits of lies, of falshoode and deceit,
and yet will be counted the lovers of religion, and professors of truth: And
though we can say the Lord lives, yet will we swear to deceive, and though
we bend our faces and profession to wards the new and living way of Christ,
yet will we look back again with Lots wife to Sodom, and follow the steps
even the lusts and imaginations of old Adam; and though as the Ephesians
boasted of Diana and the Jews of their Temple, crying out the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, this is the Temple of the Lord, so we likewise
can triumph, the Gospel of Christ, the preaching of the word, the glad
tidings of salvation, and we have now the light and preaching of the word of
God: yet all this notwithstanding so dissonant are the lives, and the
proceedings in a great many of us so repugnant to our outward words and
profession; that it seems we are nothing less then those we should be, and
would so feign be counted, and are so far from drawing nere in a true and
upright heart. That we do but flatter with our lips and dissemble in our double
hearts. For was there ever more privy canckred and malicious hatred in heart,
and yet more cloaking flattery in tongue then now a days? was there ever
more close and crafty shifting and shuffling and preue^ting and circumuenting,
and undermining one of another? was there ever more deceit or fraud in
bargaining and contracts, wherein as every one exceeds in subtlety, so he is
counted the wise and most sufficient man: was there ever more lying, swearing
and forswearing for advantage, for gain and lucre? or has there been at any
time more truth and holiness professed, and less honesty and truth
performed, whereat the very adversaries not a little rejoice and take occasion of
blaspheming the truth, or shall we find among men more hypocrisy and double
dealing, with two faces under one hood, such as can blow hot and cold with one
breath, which have Jacobs slender voice, but Esaus rough hands: which can
hide a woluish heart under a simple sheeps clothing, as grave and as sage as
Cato in their countinaunce, but as tirannous as Nero in their deeds and
actions: as neatly pullished and cleansed on the outside, as the Pharisees pot
and platter, but inwardly most ougly and loathsome to behold then now a
days? It is not every where now put in practice which was sometime said by
one, Fr^ns, occuli, vultus per sepe mentiuntur, oration vero sepissime, The
looks, Cicer. ad Quintum fratrem.
the face and countinaunce of men do often dissemble and deceive: but their
words and speeches more often: Is it not plainly come to pass that
Lactantius cites out of Seneca, lib. 5. ca. 9.7. Vni se atque eide^ studio
omnes dedere and arti
Verba dare, vt caute possint pugnare, dolose
Blanditia certare, bonum simulare, verum sic
Insidias facere, vt si hosts sint omnibus o^nes.


Every one follows one and the same trade and art to deceive by fair
words, that he may closely and secretly supplant and overthrow, subtlelye to
strive with fawning speech and flattery, to make resemblaunce and show of
great integrity and holiness, and thereby to lay snares and trappes, as
Jeremy says, to catch men, as if every one had professed to be enemy to
other? And is it not a true complaint amongste us also that S. Jerome has to
Rusticus: Nunc sub cristianae religionis titulo iniusta excercent compendia,
and honor christiani nominis iniuniam magis facit quam patitur, quod pudet
dicere. Now under the color of Christian holiness and Religion, they use
unjust gains and dealings, and the honor of the Christian name does more
offer, then suffer injury which shameth me to speak. Son of man, says God,
to the Prophet Ezechiell, discribing most lively the manners of these our times,
Ezechi. ca. 33. ver. 30.31.32.
the children of my people talk of thee by the wales and in the doors of their
houses and speak one to another come I pray you and here what is the word
that comes from the Lord, they come unto thee as the people uses to come,
they sit before thee and they hear thy words but they will not do them, for
with their mouths they make iestes, and their heart goes after their
covetousness, and lo thou art unto them as a jesting song, of one that has a
pleasant voice and can sing well, for they here thy words but they do them
not, you men of London and inhabitants of this City, judge I pray you
vprightlie whether this be truly spoken of your selves or not? they come unto
thee and sit before thee but their heart goes after their covetousness, they
here thy words but they do them not, and is this to draw near with a true
hearts: Simon Magus would have bought the ^iftes of the holy ghost of Peter for
mouie, and therefore was accursed and perished with his money But what shall we
think of them in contrary sort, that being sealed by the spirit of God (as
they pretend) unto the day of redemption, yet fear not by lying perjury or
any evil practice by corrupt proceedinges, by fraudulent devises, and
unlawful contracts, to set to sale, themselves, their souls, and consciences,
their faith, their troth and honesty, and all other good graces and virtues of
the holy ghost, for money for gain and lucre where is any hope of advantage
offered? The hipocri^e and dissembling: Judas said the oy^tment powered upon
Christ's head; might well have been sold and given to the poor, and yet he
loved n^^ther Christ nor the poor, but his bags and silue^ plates more then
them both, and shall you not hear diverse use like speeches now, there are
many poor and needle people amongst us, it were well (...) to succor them:
they would be ^^uided for, ma^^e things are supers^uously bestowed which might
be well employed to their use, and yet like hipocrites will ^hey not bestow no
not of their sup^rfluity two mit^s in respect to relieve and succor the poor;
and is this to draw nere with a true heart? Let Saint James tell you; ^am.
2.15.16.
If a brother or a sister be destitu^e of daily food or raiment, and one of
you say unto them depart in peace God send you warmth and food to fill you,
and give them not those things that are needful to the body, what helps
it, pure Religion and undefiled before God is this; To visit the fatherles and
widows in their adversity and to keep your selves unspotted of the world.
It is not then an outward show or estimation amongst men; It is not a vain
semblance or feyned pretense of holiness swimming in the lips and
countenance, not fixed and settled in the heart that shall be accepted with
the Lord, that shall enter into the holy place: It is not to call him Lord.
Lord, and do not as he bids, but in that a good conscience as Saint
Peter says makes request unto GOD by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and
in that we purge our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God,
that we cast from us the cloakes of hypocrisy and deceit, and wa^king not
like the Gentiles in craftiness and vanity of mind, but approving our selves
to every man's conscience in the sight of God, and so draw nere as our Savior
says of Nathaniel like right Israelites in who^ is no guile, even with a true
heart sprinkled from an evil conscience. For this says Saint Paul is our
rejoicing, this is our glory, not the credit of the world but the testimony
of our own good conscience, which is as Solomon says Juge convivium a
continual feast. And therefore he says to Timothy and to us all in
Timothy. 1. Timo. 1^ 18.19.
Fight a good fight having faith and a good conscience, which some have put
away, and as concerning faith have made shipwreck. As if he had said their
hearts are not sprinckeled from an evil conscience, and therefore whatsoever
they pretend, they have loft and made shipwreck of faith also which can no
more continue out of a true heart and a good conscience: then trees can grow
without earth, or fishes live without the water. And as ye righteous is thus
hollie and confident as a lion, so yt wicked flies when no man pursues him.
By the accusing or excusing of a (...) or ^rubled conscience, which neither in
life nor death can be avoided, for a corrupt conscience is a continual
torment, it is the sin lying at the door of our hearts. ^a^ten. 4.7.^6
It is called of the Prophet Esaie a worm that never dies, a sea that always
rages without rest. Of Saint Paul, a fearing with a hot iron, and in this
present chapter, a fearful looking for Judgment, and violent fire, and
besides daily experience to be seen in many, was manifest in Caine for the
murder of his mother, in Antiochu^ for his wickedness done to Jerusalem, in
Judas and like traitors for his treason against his master, and in Nero with
many other, crying out in the insufferable torments of his evil conscience
Turpiter vixi turpius iam perio, filthilie have I lived, and now more filthilie
do I die, there is no peace to the wicked, the Lord has said it. But they
shall carry in their breasts from which they shall not fly both fear and
terror and tormenting furies, continually citing them before the tribunal
feate of Christ; All wickedness says Solomon is full of fear giving testimony
^fi^l^mnation against it self. Wis. 17.10.
So that a troubeled conscience always presume^h cruel things; And although
that some with vain pastimes of pleasure and delights of this world, can
lenifie and drive away, the sting of sin, the remembrance of Gods judgments,
and remorse of conscience for a time: not at all to the quenching but
increasing of their flames: Yet even their laughing as says Solomon is mingled
with sorrow, Pro. 14.13.
and their mirth does end in heaviness: Be glad (says he) oh thou young man in
thy youth, Eccl. 11.9 10.
and let thy heart be merry in thy young days, follow thou the ways of thine
own heart and the lust of thine own eyes: but be thou sure that god will bring
thee into judgment for all these things, although the bread of deceate be
sweet for a white, and thou wax f^tte and shining (as says Jeremy) with the
fruits of oppression and wrong: Yet even this night when they have taken away
thy soul, thy mouth shall be filled with grauel, thou shall carry nothing with
thee, neither shall thy pomp follow thee, thou shall vomit up again (as Job
says) the riches that thou have devoured, and God shall draw them out of thy
belly. Although the strong man for a season seem to keep all things in rest
and quiet yet shall the goodman of the house come at an hour when thou
think not, and give thee thy portion, if thou watch not with hipocrits; And
although as says the Prophet Amos discribing ye manners of the careless
wordlings, Amos. 6.3.4.5.6.
they put away the evil day far from them, and approach without fear to the
seat of iniquity: though they lie upon beds of Iuerie and eat the lambs
out of the flock, and the calves out of the stall, though they sing to the
sound of the violl and invent instruments of music like David, though they
drink wine in bottles and anoint themselves with the sweetest oyntementes,
though their excellency as Job says, mount up to the heavens, and their
heads reach unto the clouds, though all the sheaues of the field must bow
unto them, and the Sun and the Moon stoop down at their presence, yet
shall they fly away as a dream and pass as a vision of the night, yet shall
they be as dunge for ever, and the sin of their youth shall lie down with
them in the dust, yet shall they fly from the iron weapon and the bow of
steel shall strike them through, the Heavens shall declare their wrekednes,
and the earth shall take part against them. Lo this is the portion that the
wicked manne may look for and the heritage that he shall have at the hands
of GOD. Here is then a looking glass and mirror for us all to know and
discern our selves even the testimonye of our conscience, to try whether we
be in the faith and so in the right way to the holy place or not; Here is a
measure that reaches even unto you and to you all of what degree condition or
calling soever you be, there is no immunity: there is no exemption, and it is
not like Lesbiae regula to be made long or short to be wrested or applied
according to the quantitye or quallitye of the person, but every thing
uprightly to be squared by the leuel and due proportion theroff. Above all you
Magistrates and judges you men of higher place of authority and might upon
whose direction ye government, the rest of the inferior sort depends, look
not, way not, measure not your lives and happy estate by this outward pomp
and glory of the world which is but a flying shadow, and shall not follow you
to help in the day of wrath: But look into your selves and into your own
consciences enter into your chamber, common with your hearts without flattery:
and know for c^rtaintie, that who so runs on the race of sin without
remorse of conscience, shall be severely punished without compassion and there
is no respect of persons with God, his eyes behold the poor and his eyelids
tries the children of men, he has made the small, as w^l the great and cares
for both a like, he stands in the congregation of Princes he is a judge
among Gods and a God among Judges, He has says Iustine Martyr both (...) A
just eye and revenging eye. It is truly said of Seneca Quicquid a vobis minor
expauescit mayor hoc vobis dominus minatur, whatsoever the inferior does fear
at your hands, a greater Lord does threaten the same to you again, and
therefore it is good and wholesome counsel given by Agatho a Ruler, a Prince,
a Maiestrate must remember three things first (...) that he rules and
governs men, of the same nature and condition with himself, secondly that
he ^ule (...) according to equity ^o justice and law even with a good
con^ience, and thirdly (...) that ^ee shall not always bear rule and go^erne
but in the end give account of his ^^ewardship and stand or fall up the
wit^esse of his own conscience. A notable ^xample of which good conscience
re^uired in a magistrate we have described ^n the person of Job. Job.
29.12.13.14.15.16.17.
I delivered says he ^^e poor that cried and the fatherless and him that
had no helper, the blessing ^f him that was ready to perrish came upon me and
I caused the widows heart (...) rejoice: I put on justice and it coue^ed
(...), my judgment was as a roabe and a ^owne I was the eyes to the blind,
and ^^ete to the lame, I was a father to the ^^ore, and when I knew not the
cause I ^^ught it out diligently, I brake also the (...) of the unrighteous
man and pluck (...) pray out of his teeth. The like (...) we have set
down in the person of Samuel. I have walked says he before you from my
childehoode, 1. Sam. 12.2.3.
unto thi^ day, behold here I am, hear record o^ me, before the Lord and
before his anointed, whose ox have I taken or whos^ Ass have I taken, whom
have I hurt t^ whom have I done wrong, or of whos^ hand have I received any
bribe to blin^ mine eyes therewith. God grant tha^ they that sit in Samuels
place may in their lives keep the like good conscience an^ at their death make
the like confession with this of Samuel, Esai. 33.14.15.16.17.
and the^ as Esai says, Who shall dwell with the deuourin^ fire, who among us
shall dwell with the ^uerlasting burninges, that is with the glorious Majesty
of GOD? He tha^ walks in justice and speaks righteo^^ things, refusing
gain of oppression shaking his hands from taking of gift stopping his ears
from hearing of bloo^ and shutting his eyes from seeing evil, an^ so drawing
nere with a true hearts princ^ led from an evil conscience. He, sai^ the
Prophet, shall dwell an high, his d^fence shall be the munition of rocks, brea^
shall be given him, his waters shall be (...) and his eyes shall behoide the King
in (...) glory; And therefore says David keep innocence and do the thing
that is right, for that shall bring a man peace at the last. Here I might make
in just and necessary complaint for the decay of upright dealing and corruption
of men's consciences in every degree and ^rade, look into men's actions, turn
over and sifte their proceedings, con^^^^ what is done in every place as you
pass, in halls, in shops, in streates, in markets, in secret co^ferences, in
open meetings, in pleading places, in Judgment seats, in towns, ^n country,
even in this City, what shif^ing pollices and deceates, what subtle ^euises
and euasions to ouerreache good ^awes, what briberie, and abominable ^ains and
usury is usual to be seen; and ^ou shall find that of all things in price
and ^stimatio^ among men, there is nothing so ^ittle esteemed, so carelessly
regarded, and so ^arely to be found, as a true heart sprinck^ed from an evil
conscience. You shall see (...) verified that S. Ierom says to Chroma^us: In
mea patria plerisque deus venture est et (...) die in diem viuit^r et sa^ctior
ille qui ditior (...), in my country to the most me^ their God (...) their
belly, and they live secure and careless from day to day and he is the
holiest which is the richest man; you shall here many men complain of their
losses and mishaps by sea by land by death by falsehood and deceit, by buying
and setting and many other ways, but no man almost for the loss of a good
conscience, and yet if I might speak my conscience, there is greater loss and
shipwreck daily made that way then all the tears of our eyes can sufficiently
bewail, or the riches of this world recompense again: you shall see such
running and posting, such care and travel, and trouble night and day
sustained, such early rising, and late lying down, and eating bread of
carfulness, to heap up riches to p^rchase lands, to build fair houses, to
procure dignities and offices which were wont so have a charge of conscience.
imposed with their reasonable fee, but now most unreasonable fees still
growing and enhaun^ed, have put out and discharged all charge of conscience
annexed to the same, and every way shall you see men so to provide for the
pleasure, ease and welfare of this body, nothing touched or reclaimed with
remorse of a guilty consci^nce, as though you turned away his face^ud would not
see it, as though there were here an abiding City for ever. As ^eath were not
approaching, or the burning flames of hell were but an old wives ^able; So that
either we say with Medea Video meliora, probo, deteriora sequor, I see better
things and I allow well of them, but I follow according to my sensual
appetite that which is worse or with ye wicked described by Job Recede a nobis,
Job. 21.14 15.
go from us we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, who is the almighty,
that we should serve him, or what profit shall we have to pray unto him? or
with Sardanapalus, eat drink and be merry after death there is no pleasure, or
with the fleshly Epicure discribed by Gregory Nazian. (...) 'Giue me that is
present and let god alon with that that is to come, we utter thus much I say,
but how? not in our words and speeches, no, our hipocrisy is the greater, in
our double hearts, in our corrupt consciences, in our wicked lives in our deeds
and actions, which is a great deal worse, and sounds like the blood of
Abell more loud in the ears of God for vengaunce, then can our tongues
express, by words and ^iltables unto men. But let us not be deceived, God is
not mocked, whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap, if ye sow in the
flesh ye shall reap corruption, if ye sow wind, ye shall reap a storm, if
ye sow but words and weeds and chafe of hypocrisy and dissimulation, your
harvest will be thereafter of bitterness and worme-wood colors and shadows, and
empty apparitions cannot long continue, their blossom is but froth, and their
fruit as rottennes, they shall vanish with the wind and fall away as the smoke:
The Lord will not judge according to the outward appearaunce, he sees not as a
man sees, but he tries the hearts and reins, and all things are bare and
naked in his sight. The hipocrits hope says Job shall soon come to naught and
the joy of the wicked continues but a moment, his light shall soon be put out
and the spark of his fire shall not shine, the snare is laid for him in the
ground and a pitfall in the way the grinne shall take him by the heels and
the steps of his strength shall be restrained, Job. 18.5.7.9.10.16.
his root shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut
down and wither, And therefore if we mean to enter into the holy place with
boldness in assurance of faith, we must cost away all hypocrisy and
dissimulation, (...) falshoode and fained muffling of our faces, whereby we
semble to be that which we are not: and dissemble to be that which we are: and
so draw nere with a true and single heart sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and washed in our bodies with pure water, so as no uncleanness of sin remain
either in body or soul, whereby we should offend the majesty of God. We are
for the most part very precise and ouercuriously nice, in this point of
washing, purging clensing and adorning our houses, our bodies, our furniture
and apparel, and all things belonging to them both that is subject to our
senses: And yet is this nothing less, then to wash them with pure water which
is only the effect^ of the blood of Christ, that washes and restrains us
from sin that does defile us: yet hereby at least let us learn thus much,
that if the purging and clensing of sensible things be so much esteemed of us,
which are yet our selves defiled and unclean, how acceptable shall the washing
of our bodies and souls wi^h pure water of repentance, and holiness of life
be unto the (...) of gods spirit, which will behold n^ unclean thing, nor
rest in the soul that is subject to sin: and if to entertain our friend or
superior we take such care and pains to have all things clean, sweet^, and
pleasant, that nothing be offensive, how much more should we do this in our
selves in this Tabernacle, this house and temple of our bodies, to entertain so
noble a guest, so dear a friend, as the son of God is, Reu. 3.20.
who as S. John says, stands at the door of our hearts and knocks, if any
man hear his voice and open unto him, he will enter in and suppe with him.
But I pray God it fall not out with us as it did sometimes with Diogenes hosse
whether he was invited, who being himself a very unhandsome and uncivil man,
and yet having his house and all ornaments thereto belonging very fine and
curiously adorned, Diogenes seeking where to spit, and finding al^ corners so
neat and clean, and the man so homely and unhandsome, he spit on the good man
himself, saying that he was the fowlest, and therefore the meetest plac^ in
the house to receive such excrements. Let us not in like sort be curious in
other things, and negligent in our selves, let us not so deck and keep clean
our houses, and apparel, and all things belonging to the body: and abuse
the body it self to all uncleanness and filthiness of sin, which not only to
our shame but to our smart and punishment, we shall one day hear and feel.
For seeing that God has created and made, and our savior Christ has
redeemed, not with silver or gold, but with his own precious blood, not
only our souls but our bodies also, and have vouchsafed to call our parts
and members his members, and both body and soul shall live for ever and be
partakers of his glory, and seeing that our bodies are the Temples of the holy
ghost which dwells in us, 1. Cor. 6.
so that we are not now our own, but are dearly bought with price, it is
requisite that we also serve and glorify God both in soul and body which
are Gods: Yiedling neither the cogitations of our minds nor the actions of our
bodies to Idolatry and superstition, to iniquity and uncleanness: but that we
offer them up a living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto GOD: which is our
reasonable serving of GOD and the washing here required with pure water.

Now having thus laid hold on eternal life, by assurance of faith in a true
heart sprinkled from an evil conscience: The second step of christian
perfection, whereby we are strengthened and confirmed, to continue that good
race we have begun unto the end, is firm and constant hope. Let us hold fast
the profession of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful that promised,
which faith as it has his original, and springs from faith, so does it
nourish again and sustain the same to stand and go through, what opposition
or contradiction soever be found in the world, either of alluring flattery
or subtletie which might entise and beguile us: or of persecuting crueltye to
terrify and dismay us: for being builte, not on the sands, but on the Rock,
and having for foundation no other then the promise unchangeable, of almighty
GOD, who as he is of all power, so he is all truth, he is faithful and
cannot deny himself. There is no storms nor tempests that should remove us
from the steadfastness thereof so stablished on the truth and faithful
promises of GOD: but that we may boldlye persuade our selves that neither life
nor death, nor angels nor principalities nor powers nor things present nor
things to come nor height nor deapth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from this ankerholde of hope which is fixed and reposed on Christ
Jesus our Lord. For otherwise if we faint in our race, if we finish not our
tower, if we fight not manfully till the victory be obtained, if we waver
in our hope, or running after by paths do not hold on the straighte course
we have well entered: our forward attemptes and good beginninges are
frustrate and unprofitable, our harvest is withered in the grass, and we are
found like Ephrymites, and shrincking children, that turn their backs in the
day of battle, for not he that begins a course, but he that continues
the race obteyneth the Crown, the beginning of well doing cannot make a man
safe, but constante perseueraunce unto the end without wavering: Ye did run
well says S. Paul, ^l. 3.1.
Who did let you that you should not obey the truth. Ye did run well, so did
the Israelits when they came hastily out of Egypt: but they were soon let,
and turned back, they wauered in their hope; when they grudged and murmured
against Moses in the desert. Chore, Dathan, and Abiram, did run well till
through pride and disdain of the ordinance of God, they fell under color of
Religion to open scisme and rebellion, the worldling Demas, and the traitor
Judas, seemed to run well a while, so did Julian, so did Arrius, so did
Nestorius Nouatus, Pelagius, Paulus Samosatenus, with many the like, but
holding not fast the profession of their hope, they were turned from truth to
lies, and fell again to their own place: let us come near unto our selves,
and learn to beware by other men's harms, this doctrine apperteyneth greatly
unto us, God grant we be not faulty in the observation of it. Why do some of
us with the Isralites thus grudge and murmr against Moses, the Lords beloved
Magistrate, that has brought us out of Egypt, and so desire and practice to
return again into bondage? Why do some with Chore and his confederates
presumptuously rise up, against the decreede ordinance, telling Moses and
Aaron to their faces, that they take to much upon them, and that ye whole
multitude of the congregation, is as holy as they? Why do some with Demas
begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, forsaking the word of life and
loving and cleaving to this present world? Why do some frame and imagine so
many paradores and opinions, as new and as strange as themselves, never known
in the world before? Is it not for that having run well, they are nawe let and
turned from the truth? Is it not for that they do not hold fast the profession
of their hope without wavering? Tell me you Athenians you so desirous of
innouations and alterations, you that wag with every blast, and pursue every
fether that flies in the air do you not here of inconstancy, that it is a
great fault in all proceedings, but of al most hateful in religion and faith?
For it is written, a wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways, Jam.
1.6.7.
He is like a wave of the Sea tossed to and fro with the wind, and shall
receive nothing of the Lord. Do ye not know that to come unto the holy place we
must draw nere in assurance of faith, we must hold fast the profession of our
hope without wavering? God be merciful unto us and forgive us our sins: for
as in many other, so in this point also I fear me we provoke his heuie hand to
be stretched out upon us, what wandering and unsettled motions, what distempered
and discontented humors do trouble most men's heads now adays? our brains are
busied about Pithagoras numbers, and Platos Idea, and Aristotle's common wealth,
we build castles and towers in the air whose top shall reach to heaven. We
fall like Narcissus every one in love with his own shadow: we send with
Solomon great iourneies for Apes and Peacockes: we gaze with Thalis so long
upon the stars till we fall into the ditch that we saw not before our feet,
We see not at Damascus a strange Alter with Ahaz, 2. Reg. 16.10.11.
but we straight way get the pattern, and Vrias the Priest must make us the
like at home: and so as we have been long time in manners, in diet, and
apparel: and as we are by nature in body compounded of variety of humors,
and in soul inclined to diverse passions: so are we almost become in matters of
faith and conscience: fleeting, wavering, and unconstant, little at all
regarding what either godly antiquity or lawful authority has approved and
commended unto us, for either we will have our Onyons and Leekes again of
Egypt, or else we must have fresh cates, strange flesh of Quails, we cannot
brook one diet long the heavenly Manna now waxes loathsome, it can no more
content us. But let us take heed we be not deceived specie recti, that in
steed of wholesome herbs we shredde not bitter Coloquintida into the Pot,
that out of these Rose plants, as says Vinc. Lyr. there spring not Thorns
and Thistles, and when we have long served for fair Rachell: we be not
deceived with bleare eyed Lea.

It is the counsel of S. Paul: I say through grace that it is given unto me to
every man among you, Romans 12.3.
that no man presume to understand above that is meet, but that he understand
according to sobriety. S. Ier. says, Venena no^ da^tur nisi melle circu^lita:
and vitia non irrepunt nisi sub specie vmbraque virtutu^, Ierom. ad Athlet.
Poison is not given in cups, but anointed about with honey: and vices do
not creep upon us but under the show and shadow of virtues. Epi. 29. ad
leri.
S. Augustine says, Vni virtuti duo vitia opponi solent and quod aperte
contrarium est and quod specie similitudinis adumbratur. One virtue has to
opposite vices, both that which is openly seen to be contrary and that
which is shadowed with a show of likeness. And therefore he says again of
the Cirumcellions Arbitrantur se pro ecclesia dei facere quicquid inquieta
temeritate faciunt. They think they do it in behoufe of Gods Church,
whatsoever with tumultous rashness they go about; and of the Maniches,
Conantur authoritatem stabilissimam fundatissimae ecclesiae quasirationis
nomine and policitatione superare. It is a grave and pithy saying of Hilarious,
complaining of men's inconstancy in his time (God grant it be not verified in
these our days) Postqua^ scribendae and inouandae fidei vsus inoleuit, 2 Hill.
lib. ad 1 Constant.
and noua potius cepit co^dere qua^ accepta recolere nec veterata defendit nec
innouata firmauit, and facta est fides temporum potius quam evangeliorum, dum
and secundum annos scribitur and secundum confessionem baptismi non tenetur.
After that use had prevailed to write and innouate matters of faith, it neither
defended the old nor strengthened the new, and faith became rather agreeable
to the time then to the Gospel, whilst men writ according to the years but
hold not fast the confession of baptism, even the profession of their hope
without wavering, for he says, Periculosum est atque etiam miserabile, tot
nunc fides existere quot voluntates, tot nobis doctrinas esse, quot mores, and
tot causas blasphemiarum pullulare, quot vitia sunt: dum aut fides scribuntur
vt volumus aut ita vt volumus intelliguntur. It is dangerous and very
miserable that there are so many faiths as wills, and so many doctrines, as
manners of men, and thereby so many causes of blasphemy should spring up, as
there are private faults and vices in men whilst either we set down and pen
our faith as we will, or else expound and understand it as we lust and like off.

What then say some shall we not proceed and go forward in Christian exercise
of Religion, shall we not grow in knowledge and increase from faith to faith,
from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue as the word of God has taught
us? yes truly and that with much more care and diligence then hitherto we have
done for this is the only thing with all our travel and industry we seek to
be performed: But so as says Vinc. Lyr. Vt sit profectus fidei non permutatio,
That it be a growing and increasing of our faith, not an alteration or change:
that we proceed from faith to faith, So as the increase be still in the nature
of the same faith not into the accepta^ce of another faith, even as a child
grows to be a man, and yet is not changed but keeps still the same lineame^ts
parts and members of his body without adding or dimishing yt he had before. We
must proceed, but not from the assurance of faith wherein we are grounded, to
an empty fancy of our own devising, we may speak naue, but not noua, the
principles and doctrines of our profession, Fas est vt excurentur, lime^tur,
polia^tur, sed nefas est vt co^mutentur, detru^centur, mutulentur, It is lawful
to have the^ cleansed, filed and pullished, 2. Reg. 6.19.20.
but not to have the^ changed mangled or maimed. When the Aramites enquired for
the Prophet Elisha and of Elisha himself they knew him not, but were lead like
blind men into the midst of Samaria before they perceived where they were
become, Luke. 24.18.19.
and Cleophas reasoning with Christ and of Christ, yet neither saw nor
understood him, so sounding in his ears, and not absent as he thought, but
present before his eyes until he was ready to depart away from him: In like
sort we having in our ears and daily before our eyes the true religion and
assured profession of faith (god continue it to his glory and our comfort)
which we ought to hold fast as the Anchor of our soul without wavering, yet ca^
we not rest satisfied, but run about still seeking somewhat more then truth: and
will not acknowledge Christ to be present with us, til either he be ready to
go from us as from Cleophas, or we like blinded Aramites be lead we know not
whether. The best and wisest way is to beware betimes, and eue^ today if we
hear his voice, not to harden our hearts, not to te^pt god, least he come and
remove our candlestick, and the^ we be driven to confess with Jacob, That God
was in this place and we were not ware of it. And therefore says the wise man
be firm and immovable in the way of the Lord, Ge. 28.16.
trust in him abide in thy place: Stand to your faith says Saint Paul, and
acquire you like men, be not reeds, be not clouds, be not children, be not
shaken and carried about with every blast; but as ye have received Christ
Jesus the Lord, as ye have received him, not as you have conceived and framed
him to your selves, so walk not turning or tossed to and fro: but rooted and
built in him and stablished in the faith. And seeing that with a true heart and
a good conscience even in assurance of faith I may boldly exhort and testify
with S. Peter. 1. Pet. 5.12.
That this is the true grace of God wherein we now stand: what soever pretext or
cullor be objected to the contrary: yet let us hold fast the profession of our
hope without wavering.

And so for the third point. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love,
and unto good works, not forsaking the fellowship we have among our selves as
the manner of some is, wherein if we shall join to this our fault of wavering
inconstancy last spoken of before, that which comes nearest in affinity to
the nature thereof, the breach of concord and unity, it may seem both
convenient for our instruction and the scope of the place does aptly bear it:
which being directed to the advancement of love and charity commends unto
us, on the one side, the effect thereof good works, and on the other reproves
those, that puffed up with a vain conceited humor, of private excellency in
themselves, and forestalling their judgment in prejudice and contempt of
other, that like not the same diet they have seasoned for their own taste, by
division and separation and forsaking the communion of Saints, the society of
Christians, the fellowship and unity we should have among our selves, do
work the utter ruin and overthrow thereof. When God would confound their
proud attempt in building the Tower of Babel. Ge. 11.8.9.
He divided their language and so scattered them abroad into all places of the
earth; which thing the Devil seeing to the overthrow of his Kingdom
practices again on the contrary side by like confusion, scisme, and
scattering of the workmen to hinder and set back the building of Gods spiritual
house and temple. When king Cirus would pass over to conquer Scithia as says
Herodotus, coming to a great and broad river which hindered his iourneys,
his policy was this, to cut it and divide it into many arms and sluices,
and so made it passable for all his army, this policy is most ready and
common with the Devil also, who bringing his power of darkness, to invade and
ouerrun us, and finding his passage stopped by the flowing streams of love and
concord, has put in execution his wonted mean and practice to separate and
divide us into many parts and factions. For as truly says S. Aug. Concordes
nos scit et quod sic possidere non potest, He knows that being at concord
and unity together he cannot so possess us, Sermon. 16. de vti. ieiu.
He cannot now divide one true God among us, he can no more enforce false
Gods upon us, well he has yet another way, Sentie vitam nostra^ esse
charitate^ mortem dissentionem, He sees that love and charity is our life,
that discord and dissentio^, our destruction and death. And therefore Lites
immisit inter Christianos, He has sent strife and debate among Christians, And
because he cannot frame us to many Gods, he labors to multiply and
distract our opinions and sows tares of sects and errors in the Lords wheat.
Hereof co^plaineth Basil also, and we may iustlye with Basil. Tom. 4. Epist.
vlt.
Facti sumus vnusque apud seipsum tanquam arena non coniuncti inter nos sed
singuli per se diuisi: Charitas relicta est, and pugna inter nos versatur,
vniodata est, at odium accensum est, We are become like sands not joined
together, but every one divided by himself, Charity is rejected, and discord
reigns among us, peace and unity was commended unto us, but we have kindled
the fire of grudge and hatred. But who says that good father will grant me a
solitary place, a voice like a trumpet, the fountain of tears and pitiful
complaint of Jeremy, to break my heart with sorrows, and bewail the common
misery, Quia defecit charitas radix mandatorum dei, because charity is
decayed, the root of Gods commandments, and discord has prevailed, the
cancker and contagion of all true godliness. For the building cannot stand
whose joints and hands are loosed, the body cannot continue in health, where
the members are rent and torn asunder, the City must needs be desolate that
is dedeuided in it self, we cannot I say draw nere unto the holy place, we
cannot build the Lords Temple, we cannot be joined to Christ our head: if
we be not tied together with hands of love and charity, if we be not
compacted as members of one body, if we once forsake the fellowship that we
have among our selves, as the manner of some is. The Prophet David says,
Jerusalem (a figure of the church) is built as a city that is at unity in it
self. When the holy ghost came down in visible signs upon the Apostles, Act.
2.44.46.
They were all with one accord in one house. The whole multitude of them that
believed in the first times, had but one heart and one soul. Jud. 20.1.
It is said of all Israel, That they came together as it had been one man
with the same mind and intent, not with as many opinions as persons: The Jews
had but one kind of worshipping prescribed, and that only in one Temple, but
their rebellious preuarications were multiplied in that they would yet run
about to sacrifice upon every high hill* and under every green tree, and every
one do that which seemed good in his own eyes. It is said and set down for a
special and most singular blessing of almighty GOD, That the hand of the
Lord was in Judah, 2. Chro. 30.12.
so that he gave them one heart, to do the commandment o^ the King and of
the Rulers, according to the word of the Lord, would God this effect were
accordinglye wrought in us also, and his hand after this sort stretched out
still upon us. Wherefore if we will become a spiritual building unto God, if
we look for the promise of the holy ghost, if we will be of the number of
the faithful, if we will worship in spirit and truth, if we will have the
hand of the Lord upon us, and so in deed draw near to the holy place, we must
be at unity and concord within our selves, we must abide with one accord and
one mind in a house, we must have one heart to do the commandment of the
King and of the rulers, we must not leave the Temple to sacrifice upon every
high hill, and under every green tree, to follow every opinion that seems
good to our selves, we must not break the bonds of peace, and cast away the
cords of unity from us, and so forsake that fellowship we should have among
our selves as the manner of some is.

The wind Cecias has a quality contrary to other winds, to gather together
clouds into the air and so procures violent and vehement storms, and such
is also division and discord both in the Church and common wealth. It has
sometimes an usurped face or show of holiness of zeal and conscience, but the
sequel is pernicious and draws after it (whereof Pithagoras rule and precepte
might warn us to beware) a loathsome black tail of destruction or great
disturbance. And therefore may well be resembled to the river Hipanis which
about the head and first arising is sweet and wholesome, but afterward being
mingled with the spring Exanthus is so bitter and of so deadly a taste, that no
man may abide it: Example among many other may be the Church of Corinth who
beginning about matters of Ceremonies and policy proceeded first to division
and separation, 1. Cor. 1.12.
some holding of Paul, Romans 16.17.
some of Apollo, some of Cephas and some of Christ, and so to false doctrine
denying the resurrection: And therefore S. Paul forewarneth us. I beseech you
brethren mark them diligently which cause division and offenses among you,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have received, and avoid them. And
Dionisius Bishop of Alexandria told Nouatus. Eus. de vit. Constant. 2
That it was more grievous to break ye unity of the Church then to commit
idolatry, for this (says he) was punished but with the sword, but the other
with the opening gulf of the earth swallowing up the Authors and confederates
thereof, Et non dubitatur sceleratius esse commissum quod grauius erat
vindicatum: And there is no doubt but that was more heinosly committed, which
was more sharply and severely punished. Before the wall fell down commonly
some riftes appeared, and some of the stones fall out, before Jerusalem was
destroyed, the intestine and civil contentions of the seditious, more
grievously afflicted them within, then the rage of the Enemy assaulting them
without: before the Turks gat the East, the Empire was divided into twain,
and so gave entrance to ye enemies of Christ by division, which flourished in
strength and glory, when it was but one. And before this our native land and
country, was at any time subdued and ouerru^ by forre^ enemies, there were first
secret mutinies, practices, grudgings, mislikings, iarrs, diuisio^s, and
garboils among the domesticals here at home. God turn his face from our sins
and blot out our offenses in the blood of his son, and make us not a rebuke
unto the foolish, and such as go about with lies, that these rifts and
deuisions, these scismes and breaches, of established peace and order: while
every one will like or mislike, will censure and control whatsoever is not
aunswerable to ye level of his own conceit, while every one has a song,
has a vision, has a fancy, has a revelation, has an interpretation by
himself, forsaking the fellowship we should have among our selves, be not
causes of storms, be not bitter in the end, be not sharply punished, be not
either sad presages of imminente and further mischiefs, or speedy means to
hasten gods wrath and heavy hand against us. It was the earnest and unfeigned
prayer of Daniell in the like case, and it shall be our parts and duties so to
pour out our fervent prayers every one with Daniell: O Lord God to thee
belongs righteousness, Dan. 9.7.16.18.19.
to us open shame and confusion, I beseech thee O Lord let thine anger be
turned away from thy City Jerusalem, thine holy mountain: we do not present
our selves before thee, trusting in our own righteousness, but in thy great
and tender mercies: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and do it,
not for our sakes, but for thine own sake, O Lord my God. It shall be I say
both our wisdom and our safety, yt our duty, and the discharge of a good
conscience: thus to pray, thus to prepare and build an Arc with Noe, before
the flood come upon us, to return and repent in time with Niniuie, To offer up
the Calves and Bullockes of our lips, With Ose, Ose. 14.3.
To sprinckle the posts of our hearts with the blood of the pashal lamb, and
not to go out of our doors least the distroying Angel find us without, Exo.
12.7.22.23.
and so smite us with the Eg^ptians, to keep our selves in the foulde for
fear of the woolfe, and not forsake the fellowship that we have among our
selves as the manner of some is. It is the manner of some to turn with the
spiders breath, the sweet ioice of flowers into poison; to seek knots in
rushes where all things are plain and smooth: to stumble at every straw that
stops the course of their eger spirit: to break the bonds of peace, and
so to single and sever themselves by themselves: well we are here told it is no
new or strange thing, it is the manner of some, it has been, it will be, and
therefore we are not greatly to be moved therewith, it is the manner of some,
and therefore being thus armed, and forewarned thereof, we may the better
avoid, and withstand the like proceedings. But howsoever, it be ye manner and
oversight of some: yet according to that earnest obtestation of S. Pau^^ to the
Philippians and to us all in them: Phil. 2.1.2.3.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit if any compassion and mercy: let us be like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord and of one judgment, that nothing be
done through contention or vain glory: but that in meekenes of mind, every
one esteem another better then himself. And whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever a^e just and pure, whatsoever things are of good report, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things pertain to love, if there be any virtue, or if there be any
praise let us think on these things, and so consider one another to provoke
unto love and unto all good works, 1. Tim. 1.5.6.7.
For the end of the commandment is no other but love, that comes of a pure
heart, of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: from which while some have
erred, they have turned to vain iangling: they would be doctors of the law,
and yet understand not, what they speak nor whereof they affirm. S. Augustine
said of the Donatists and Cirumcellions In omnibus sacramentis mecum sola
charitate non mecum. Aug. in Psalm. 45.
In all the doctrine of the sacraments they agree with me, only in love and
charity they are not with me: Sed in his paucis in quibus non mecum, non
prosunt eis multum in quibus mecum: But in those few things in which they are
not with me, those many things do not profit them, wherein they are with
me. Wherefore above all things says Saint Peeter, Have fervent love among
your selves, for love shall cover the multitude of sins. Dearelye beloved
says Saint John. Let us love one another, for love comes of GOD, This is my
commandment says our Savior, that ye love together, even as I have loved
you: for love does not evil, therefore is love the fulfilling of the Law: 1.
Cor. 13 1.4.5.6.
But on the contrary though I speak with the tongues of men and of Angels and
yet have not love, I am even as sounding brass, or as a tinckling Cimball,
Love suffers long and is courteous, love enuieth not, is not puffed up,
boasts not her self, disdaineth not other, is not provoked to wrath,
thincketh no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. And
if love and charity did remain in us, these good effects and quallities
(which may well be sought and wished for but are rarely to be found) would also
abound among us. I might here say much, but I hasten to the end, the matter
is very large but the time I see is passed, Let us search and peruse the
whole volume of Gods book: How many examples, how many precepts, how many
threatenings, how many parables, contraries similitudes, figurative and plain
speches, how many prouocations and motives in all places and every where are
set down, to induce us to love and charity to unity and agreement, to peace
and concord one with an other. And on the other side let us behold our own
defects herein, the manifold strifes, the vain and frivolous contentions and
suites, the dispightfull practices, the extreme and rigorous dealing, the
implacable malice, envy, hatred, and hartburning that raineth among men,
sometimes smothering inwardly in rancour of heart, sometimes foming out, into
intemperate heat both of raging words and uncharitable deeds, every man in
self love and private regard of his own wealth and welfare, living and
looking to himself alone, and no man almost considering another to his
benefit and good, And we shall not choose but confess, that howsoever we
beat our brains, and spend our time and travel, about strifes and
questions, about intricate and hidden mysteries, about controversies and
complaints, yet that there is no point of Christian doctrine, more needful or
more profitable to be urged and enforced to be again and again reiterated
that it might take effect, then this. That we should be knit together in
unity of mind, and so consider one another to provoke unto love and to all
good works. I beseech you brethren says S. Paul by the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1.10.
That ye all speak one thing, that there be no dissension among you, but be
ye knit so together in one mind and in one judgment. We see how Turks, how
Jews, how thieves, will conspire and hold together, how beasts will agree
and every one love his like: how Papists can vaunt of unity to our reproach,
and Devils settle themselves together, seven Devils in a man, nay a whole
legion together in a man, and keep themselves at concord for preserving of
their kingdom, and shall not we that profess one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one doctrine, and name of Christ the author and God of peace: be
joined together in one, and so consider one another to the provoking and
winning one another unto love and unto good works. We see again the great
hurt and ruin that discord has procured to many flourishing countries, and
kingdoms and to the Church of God from time to time: we see the carping
adversaries still ready to take occasion to reproach and vpbraide the truth,
we see the days of this our life and pilgrimage to be short and evil, the
world it self declining and even at the vain, the Devil fearcely raging
because his time is short, the end of all things approaching, the sentence of
the Judge inevitable, and hell fire hard at hand prepared for evil doers,
and can we yet sleep secure and careless in our sins, shall we not watch
and make us ready for the coming of the Bridegroom with our loins girt and
our Lamps burning that we may enter in with him to the wedding, shall not
the due remembrance of these and such like motives, rouse us up from this
security and sencelesnes of sin, wherein we seem to be drown^d, shall it
not repress and quench in us all unnatural and unkind affections, which are
bent to the hurt of hinderance of our neighbor and stir us up in the bowels
of Christian compassion to be courteous, pitiful, and loving, to be merciful
and good one toward another, so as we may consider and exhort and provoke
one another unto love the band of perfection, and unto good works the fruits
of our Christian faith. Esse Christianum grande est says Saint Jerome, non
videri, Jero. ad pauli,
non vocari. To be a Christian and to perform those deeds and duties, those
good works and actions which Christianity requires, is a weighty matter, but
not so to seem, not so to be called. When the servants of King Ahazia being
sent to enquire at Belsabub for the recovery of his health, Returned with
message from Elias whom they met in the way, 2. Reg. 1.5.6.7.8.
assuring him that he should dye and not escape, the King demanded what
manner of man he was that told them these things, they answered an heyrie
man and girte about with leather, then said he straight, it is Elias the
Thesbit. In like sort such should also be our manners and proceedings, our
words, our works, and all our actions of life. Gal. 5.22.23.
In love, in joy, in peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekenes,
temperance and all other good works and fruits of the holy Ghost, that when
report of us or any of us is made unto the world, it may be straight avouched
that we are Christians having our fruit in h^lines, and the end eternal
life. For (...), says Iustine Martire, (...). The matter and business of our
serving of God and Religion, stands not in words but in works, It is a
rueled case of Christ. A good tree cannot bring forth badde fruit, and the
faith of a Christian is most aptlye resembled unto a tree, which being rooted
in the passion of Christ, and watered with his blood spreads out on each side
his branches. A true heart and a good conscience, waxes strong against all
storms, grows up and flourishes in hope, and so through the inward sap
and norishing juice of love, sends forth most sweet and seasonable fruits
good works, which are though not precedent causes, yet necessary effects and
signs of the goodness of the tree. But as Catterpillers sometimes and
blasting do frette and annoye the branches, that the sap cannot have his
course, and so the fruit fails which seemed fair to the eye, so rancour and
displeasure, division scisme and separation among men, being no less then
noisome winds and Catterpillers to our Christian faith, eat up and dry away
many times the sap or juice of love and charity, whereby the expected fruit
of good works, is withered in the branches. And therefore it is required
that we consider not every one himself alone, but every one another also to
provoke unto love and unto good works, that so we may bring forth fruit
in Christ and walk worthy of the Lord, who gave himself to redeem us from
all inniquitie, Tit. 2.14.
and to purge us a pecuculier people unto himself, zealous of all good works,
For if ye know says S. John that God is righteous, 1. Ioh. 2.29.

Ephesians. 2.10.


know ye also that he that does righteouslie is borne of him, we are the
workemanshippe of God created and ordained to good works which he has
prepared for us to walk in. If then we walk on in the stubbornness of our
own hearts in the lust and concupisence of the flesh, how far do we
degenerate from this perfection and end of our creation? We are called the
Lords harvest, if then we bring not forth good corn but tares of sin and
wickedness, what other can be looked for but to be gathered by the reapers
into bundles and cast into the fire? We are resembled to the ground, If
drinking in the rain and blessings of GOD that come so often upon us, Hebr,
6.8.8.
we bring not forth good herbs but thorns and briars, we are near unto
cursing whose end is to be burned, we are likened to a chosen vineyarde,
which the Lord has planted in a very frurtfull hill, Esai. 5, 1.2.4.5.
which he has hedged dressed and manured, has watered and cherished with all
his blessings, if now in stead of sweet grapes, of holiness and good
works, we bring forth fruit unto our selves, even bitter clusters and grapes
of gall, of wickedness and ungodly life, then is our judgment most seuearely
denounced, He will break down the wall of our vineyarde and lay it waste, so
that they that go by shall pluck of the grapes, and the wild bore out of the
wood shall root it up: and every tree and every branch that bears not
fruit in him shall be hewn down and cast into the fire, for the great day of
the Lord approaches, and who is able to abide his wrath. Let us not deceive
our selves in confidence of this life, in hope of long continuance and so seek
our death in the error of our life. Let us not sell the promised land of
rest, for the present stubble of Egypt: nor our Birthright of heavenly glory
with foolish and profane Esau, for the pottage of worldelye wealth and
pleasure, which if it fail not us, yet shall we shortelye fall and be
plucked away from it: Our life is but a pilgrimage, a shaddowe, a vapor, a
buble, a blast so short that David says it is but a spanne long, so weak and
uncertain that Homer truly said (...). The kind and generation of man is like
leaves of the tree, which growing green and flourishing, are even with a blast
of wind thrown down and withered. We have not here an abiding City for
ever, but must seek one to come, we must hence remove our tents, and pass
away like the grasshopper, we are but strangers and soiourners on the earth
as all our fathers were, we hold not our selves our bodies our souls in
feesimple much less our lands and goods: even he whose tenure is best, but
Ad voluntatem domini, To be displaced at his will, our Charter has an end and
the date thereof expireth a pace. And though a man live long and see not the
grave yet is there a time of departure, and a conclusion of al things assigned.
There is a day of changing, a day of visitation, a day of account, of
judgment, and retribution and that approaching. Let us take heed that it come
not on us unawares for as a thief shall it come on all them that dwell on the
face of the earth, Behold (says the Prophet Malachy) the day comes shortly
that shall burn like an oven, Mal. 4.1
and all the proud and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble and straw,
and the day that comes shall burn them up and leave them neither root nor
branch. The day of the Lord of Hosts, says Esai, is upon all the proud and
haughty, Esai. 3.16.
and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be brought low: upon all the Cedars
of Lybanon, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan, upon every high Tower, and upon
every strong wall, and upon all pleasant pictures, and the haughtiness of men
shall be brought low, and the loftiness of men shall be abased, and the Lord
only shall be exalted in that day, O consider this all ye that forget God,
least he pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you, God is a
righteous judge, strong and yet patient, Psalm. 7.12.13.14.
and God is provoked every day, but if a man will not turn, he will whet his
sword, he has bent his bow and made it ready, he has prepared for him the
instruments of death, He will wound the head of his enemies, and the hearie
scalpe of such a one as goes on still in his wickedness, The wicked shall be
turned into hell, and all the people that forget God, Neither silver nor gold,
Soph. 1.18
says Sophonie, shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath,
but they shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy. And therefore gather
your selves says he, gather you, O nation not worthy to be beloved, before
the decree come forth, Sop. 2.1.2.
and ye be as chafe that passes in a day, and before the fierce wrath of the
Lord come upon you, and before the day of the Lords anger come upon you, which
will come, says S. Peter, as a thief in the night, 2. Pet. 3.
in which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall
melt with heat, and the earth with all the works that are therein, shall be
burnt up. And then seeing al these things must pass and be dissolved, and that
the day draws nere, what manner persons ought we to be in godliness and holy
conversation, drawing nere in assured faith, in firm hope and unfeigned
charity to the holy place, exhorting, considering and provoking one another,
unto love and to al good works, so looking for and hasting to that coming of
the day of God, wherein he will give every man according to his works, Romans 2.
to them which by continuance in well doing seek glory and honor and
immortality, eternal life, but unto them that are contentious and disobay the
truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation
and anguish upon the soul of every man that does evil, and there is no
respect of persons with God.

The GOD of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ the
great sheapheard of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 12.
make us perfect in all good works to do his will, and write in our hearts
even with an iron pen and an adamant claw, a continual remembrance and
careful meditation of his ordinances and laws to do them, that as he
stoupeth down and comes near in all merciful goodness, and most liberal
blessings unto us, so may we approach and draw near in all dutiful
obedience and observation of his righteous precepts, unto him again, that we
may be pure and without blame until the day of Christ, Phil. 1.
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are in us by Jesus Christ
unto the glory and praise of God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
three in persons, one in substance, immortal, invisible, and only wise, To
whom be all honor, glory, power, dominion and praise now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

