A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S IN OXFORD, THE 17. DAY OF NOvember, 1602. in
defense of the Festivities of the Church of England, and namely that of her
Majesty's Coronation.

By JOHN HOVVSON DOCTOR OF Divinity, one of her Highness Chaplains, and
Vicechancellour of the University of Oxforde.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Fleet-streete at
the sign of the Turks head by John Barnes. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble, my very especial good Lord, THOMAS Baron of Buckhurst,
Lord high Treasurer of England, one of the LL. of her Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, and Chancellor
of the University Of Oxford.
RIght Honorable, the day now usually solemnized to the honor of God, and
memory of those blessings wherewith he has enriched this land in particular,
and his Church in general, by the godly and religious government of her
excellent Majesty, was with the first celebrated (as we take it,) in this her
most loyal and Christian University of Oxford, notwithout the example of
former times, wherein the like has been practiced to some of her Majesty's
predecessors, though with different ceremony in a different religion. Since
which time it having taken progress together with Gods manifold blessings, and
enlargement both in place and ceremonies, testifying the loyal hearts, and
duetifull loving affection of her subjects, both to her royal person, sincere
religion, and most blessed government, as also their hearty thankefulnes unto
God for them: it has been oppugned by the Preistes and Jesuits, the enemies
of her gracious peace and happy prosperity, whether with greater malice or
ignorance I cannot well determine. Wherefore being called to the celebration
of this most happy festiuity, by the nature of my office, which by your
Lordships appointment (though unworthily) I sustain: I thought it a part both
of my duty to God, and loyalty to my sovereign Mistres, to undergo the
defense of the festivities of our Church, which have their adversaries at home
among us, as of the celebration of the day of her most blessed inauguration
into this kingdom, which has found some maligners both at home and abroad,
and to dedicate the same to your Honor, as my chiefest Patron under her
Highness, not presuming to present her sacred Majesty with so mean and simple
a service, and so in all humility I take my leave. From Christ-church. Novem.
29. An. Dom. 1602.

Your Honors in all service, JOHN HOVVSON Vicecan. Oxon.

This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.
PSALM. 118.24.
THis Psalm is a Psalm of thanksgiving, which David song unto God, when he
was first invested into his kingdom, 2. King. 6.
and translated the Ark of the Lord from the house of Obed Edom, 2. King. 6.
with melody and music and great festivitie; in which he not only exhorts
all me^ in a generality to praise God, and in specialitie both Jews and
Gentiles, such as were after the spirit borne of the seed of Abraham, and
detested Idolatry as Abraham did: but actually brings in himself, ver. 17.
ver 17. ver. 24. ver. 26.
the people in this verse, and the Priests in the 26. verse, glorifying God for
these great blessings.

The king both privately alone, and publicly in the congregation, prepares
himself to this thanksgiving, acknowledging Gods justice in humbling him, his
mercy in preserving him in the days of Saul who sought his life, and his
bounty in investing him into his kingdom, saying, ver. 22. ver. 22.
The stone which the builders refused is now become the head stone in the
corner. I who was rejected by Saul and his princes, am now inaugurated into
the kingdom. Which though it be here an historical confession, Mat. 5. Act.
2.1. Pet. 2.
is notwithstanding a prophetical revelation of the kingdom of Christ. Matthew.
5. Act. 2.1. Pet. 2.

The people provoked by their kings example answer him, ver. 23.
This is the Lords doing and it is wonderful in our eyes. And exhort one
another to the celebration of that day in which God had wroughte that wonder in
investing and crowning him, against whom so many, so great men so long time had
conspired: saying: This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice
and be glad in it; and then do pray for the continuance and long life of their
prince and his prosperity, O domine da salutem, o domine da prosperitatem. O
Lord give health, give salvation, O Lord give prosperity unto our king.

Finally the Priests seeing this harmony and consent in the people, ver. 26.
bless them for it, wish them good luck, acknowledge that great light and
blessing to be given of God, and exhort them to that public ceremonial
service of God which was used in those times. ver. 27.
Bind your sacrifices with cords even to the horns of the altar.

These words which I have read unto you for my text, have bin heretofore
applied by the fathers of the church, sometimes to the celebration of the
Nativity, sometimes to the celebration of the resurrection of Christ; as well
they may be, this Psalm being figuratively and spiritually applied to him, as
appears by many places of scripture: but I am to take it this day literally
of the inthronising of David, being the day consecrated to the glory of God for
the inauguration of our blessed Sovereign into this kingdom. In which words I
observe the institution of a festival day, and therein, First the occasion of
the Institution, which are Gods blessings extraordinary, cowched under these
words: This is the day which the Lord has made. Secondly, the author of the
Institution: king David. Thirdly, the End or use of it; wherein I note an
external joy, Exaltemus, Let us rejoice: and an internal, Laetemur in ea, let
us be glad in it.

First for the Institution and occasion of it. 1. Part. Institution.
It is certain that al days were first made and created by God; he made the
first day, and the second, and the third and the seventh, and placed in the
firmament a great light, namely the sun, which by his presence or absence
without al respect distinguishes days from nights, and one day from another.
Nevertheless though God be the auctor of the^ al, yet he has put a
difference and distinction between them, and is said more especially to have
made one then another: more especially the Sabbath and holy day, then the
ordinary day appointed for labor: Propter opera privilegiat a quae fecit in
eis, for certain excellent and privileged works which he has done in it.

And this is noted by the wise son of Sirach Cap. 33. Who granting a
distinction of days, but demanding a reason of it, puts this question.
Eccles. 33.
Why does one day excel another seeing the light of the days of the year
(that is the life of them) comes of the sun. and he makes this answer: The
knowledge of the Lord has parted them a sunder, and he has disposed by them
the times and the solemn feasts: some of them he has put among the days to
number, and some of them has he chosen and sanctified, and exalted unto
feasts: that is, some are festival as the Passover, Pentecost, feast of
Tabernacles etc. and some are numerall, the first or second of this or that
month.

For God has dealt with days as with men: for me^ are al of the ground, and
Adam was created out of the earth, but the Lord has distinguished the^ by
great knowledge, and made their ways and reputations diverse: some of them
has he blessed and exalted, as kings and princes: and some of them he has
sanctified, and appropriated to himself, as Prophets and Priests: but some
he has cursed and brought low, and put them in mean estate, and place of
base calling.

Now the means which God uses in advancing some days before their fellows,
which are made of the same metal and substance with them, is some excellent
work, some admirable blessing performed in them, sometimes generally to al
mankind, sometimes specially to these or these nations. And according to the
generality or speciality, is the quantity of them: and according to the nature
and condition of the blessing or benefit, is the quality of them. For some are
such, Quae tota per vniver sum orbe^ frequentas ecclesia, which the whole
church throughout the whole world does frequent: some are used in this country,
in that kingdom. Some are festiuitates magnae, high festival days: and some
are called the lower feasts.

That general and admirable benefit which was done to al mankind by the
creation of man, and the whole world for ma^s sake, is offered perpetually to
the memory of al mankind by the institution of the Sabbath, which although the
heathen in truth scorned, Iuvenal Sa. 14.
as appears, Iuuenal: Sat. 14. Quidam sortiti metuentem Sabbata patrem etc.
yet the whole world ought now, and no doubt in the beginning even before Moses
law did observe it, being a part of the decalog, and consequenly in some sort
of the law of nature it self. And therefore that of Job 3.4. Job. 3.4.
Chrysostom.
Dies ille vertatur intenebras, non requirat eam Deus de super, St. Chrysostom
interprets. Let not God make an holy day of it. Non diem illam tanquam suam
vendicet dominus, let not the Lord account it as his day; and learned
interpreters upon that place observe, Antiquos patres in lege naturae, forte
etiam Iobum, Sabbatizasse: That the ancient fathers under the Law of nature
and peradventure Job himself, observed the Sabbath.

That general and admirable benefit of our redemption which was sufficient for
the whole world, but efficient to all the elect of God, as it ought so it has
been time out of mind celebrated in the feasts of the Conception, Nativity,
Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ by the whole Church
of God, dispersed far and near over the face of the earth, to the honor of
God with prayers and thankesgiving for the special benefits particularly called
to mind and acknowledged upon those solemn days. Wherefore Erasmus did not
only absurdly, Erasmus.
when he vilified those feasts, and falsely when he said Nullus veterum facit
vllam festi mentionem, No ancient writer makes mention of any feast, though
cunningly he season it with Quantum memini As far as I remember; but he did
amiss also in assigning the reason of the Institution of our Sunday or
Dominical day, saying, Diem dominicu^ probabili causa maiores nostros festum
esse voluisse, vt populus conveniret ad audiendum sermonem Evangelij That our
forefathers were willing to have the Lords day a feast for a probable or
reasonable cause, that the people might assemble together to hear the word of
the gospel preached. For that is not the only end, or chief end of the
Institution of the Lords day, much less of other feasts, seeing God is not
only or chiefly worshipped Evangelici sermonis auditu, by hearing the word
preached, sed latria cultu, in praising, and magnifying, and lauding God in the
memory of his manifold blessings. Seeing latria or the worship of God
consists especially in praying and thanksgiving, and is a virtue moral, and
not intellectual. Therefore to despise, (as many do,) or neglect (as most do)
cultum latria, and gad up and down to hear the word preached, as they call it,
is not only against the laws of this land, the statutes of our colleges, but
against the chief Institution of the Lords day.

Yet welfare the wisdom and discretion of our great grandfathers of blessed
memory, the saints of the primitive Church, who provided that upon the festival
days, the course of the Litargie, the Gospel, and Epistle, the Homile, or
Sermon should so be ordered, that all should rende to the memory of that
blessing, whereunto that day was sanctified, that so God might be blessed and
magnified for them.

Iuvenal.
Beloved Christians were any one of those excellent fathers alive, what think
you would he say, Quid diceret, aut quid non faceret, nay what would he not
do, if he should see the Synagogues of the Jews where Moses was read, more
frequented upon the three solemn feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the
Tabernacles, then the temple of Jerusalem whither by the law al ought at those
times to resort to offer up sacrifice unto God: If he should see Oratoria
turned into Auditoria, Churches into Schools, our people desiring rather to be
(...) knowers, then Seraphim, hot and zealous, crying with the Angels, holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of hoasts: our Sabbothes and Festivities not spent nor
any part of them, in cultu latriae, in the divine service of God, but in
hearing an exercise as some call it; where sometimes the hour is consumed,
Nihil dicendo in speaking never a wise word, sometimes aliud dicendo in
speaking from the day, from the season, from the text, and sometimes Male
dicendo, in speaking ill, and slaundring their private governors or public
magistrates.

But I proceed. Not only the forenamed feasts and such like which are called by
the Divines, Solennes, Solennes.
are instituted to the service of God, and occasioned by some extraordinary
blessing: but other feasts there are, which are called by Macrobius, Satur. 1.
ca 16. Imperativae: by Vlpian and other Civilians Extraordinariae: by certain
Canonists Repentinae, which are particular to diverse nations, Vlpian.
and celebrated to the memorial of Gods particular blessings bestowed on them.
Such are they wherein great Kings and Monarchs have either Lucis auspicia (as
the Civilians call them) the day of their birth; or Ortus imperij the beginning
of their Reign. The one is the solemnization of their Nativity: the other, the
inauguration into their kingdom: such a one is this here mentioned in my text,
instituted to the honor of God, for the great blessing that befell the Jews when
David first took possession of the kingdom: and such a one is this we
celebrate this day throughout our land, to give thanks to God for the happy
reign of our Sovereign Princess.

Finally, we may conclude of al Christian feasts whether general to the whole
Church, or particular to any nation, as Abulensis does of the feasts of the
Jews, Omnia festa quae Deus instituit observanda a Iudaeis, fiebant ad
recordationem beneficiorum eius, All feasts which God appointed the Jews to
observe were kept for a remembrance of his benefits, except only the feast of
Propitiation, Quod fiebat ad remissionem peccatorum, which was held for
remission of sins.

But here arises a doubt, whether Kings and Princes now, or David himself
heretofore did well and religiously to honor and glorify God for this blessing
of his inauguration, or any temporal happiness, seeing we must love and honor
God Propter seipsum, and quia sum bonus est, for himself and because he is
chiefly good, and not especially for those benefits he gives unto us.

For every temporal benefit is less then infinite, but his goodness is
infinite, therefore his goodness should rather cause us to love and honor him,
then his benefits: therefore though poor simple people may honor God for his
benefits received, and in hope to receive more, yet David being a Saint and a
Prophet, a man of great perfections, should have honored God propter Deum,
because he was God, and not because he possessed him of the kingdom.

The answer in this scarsitie of time must be brief: wherefore I say that a
man is bound to love and honor God in that degree in which he honoreth him,
that is, cultu latriae with divine worship, because he is his God not because
he is his benefactour: wherefore if it were possible, as it is not, that any man
or other creature could bestow all these benefits that God has vouchsafed us,
yet we ought not to honor him with divine worship with which we honor God nay
so to do were impious Idolatry: Again if it were possible, as it is not, that
God never had, nor ever could benefit or bless us, yet we were bound to honor
him cultu latria with divine worship: and there is no doubt David and other
princes honored God cultu latria with divine worship solum quia Deus est,
no^ propter beneficia accepta, only because he is God, not for the benefits
they have from him.

But because this latria divine worship is not totaliter determinata namely
to these or those ceremonies to these or those times: and men in this world
cannot bestow al times upon it, therefore cultus latria the divine worship or
honor is done unto God, Quia Deus est, because he is God: but upon this day or
that day, and in this or that manner, Quia benefactor, because he is our
benefactour. And thus much of the Occasion of the Institution of this feast,
namely some extraordinary blessing, noted in these words This is the day which
the Lord has made.

The second thing I observe in the Institution is the Author of this feast or
holydaie. 2. part.
This is the day which the Lord has made; which we are not to understand as
though God himself had instituted this festivitie; for these words note not
the Author, but the occasion of the Institution: Hugo Card.
the Lord who makes al days is said to make this specialiter, propter
privilegiata opera qua fecit in ea; Huge Card. specially, for the privileged
works which he did in that day, Glossa interlin. Lyra.
Propter salutem quam dedit populo and principi: Glossa interlin: for the
safety he gave to prince and people: Propter bonum quod in illa contigit:
Lyra. For the good which befell that day: but the Author of this institution
was David himself. God gave the occasion, David the institution.

But because there is a question made eue^ in these days, concerning the
authority of instituting holydaies both under the old and new Testament, both
among Jews and Christians, some affirming that in the old law all were
instituted by God himself, or by his commandment by Moses, and that to the
Mosaical law nothing might be added no not in ceremonies; and forasmuch as the
old feasts were abrogated by Christ, and no other instituted by him or his
Apostles, except peradventure the Lords day, therefore al are unlawful for want
of authority in the institution, or institutors of them: may it please you to
give me leave to deliver unto you, of necessity very briefly, who have been
the Authors of feasts and holydaies in both those times, to both those people.

First by the commandment of God himself by the mouth of Moses were
instituted in the old law, the Sabbath in remembrance of the creation of the
world: The Passover in remembrance of the deliveraunce of the first borne: The
Pentecost in remembrance of the law which was given: the feast of the sound of
trumpets, as some say for the deliverance of Isaac, but more probably propter
liberationem a servitute quae inter Israelitas fiebat, for the deliverance from
that servitude which was usual among the Israelites, every seve^th year. the
feast of Tabernacles, in remembrance that they lived in Tabernacles in the
desert: The feast of Propitiation for remission of sins. The feast of
unleavened bread Quod exierant de Aegypto in magno timore and celeritate, for
that they came out of Egypt in great fear and have: not having leisure to
leaven the lump.

These are al called festivitates regulares, regular, ordinaria, ordinatie,
consuetae usual, and were instituted and ordained by the commandment of God
himself. Others there were which were called voluntariae, instituted by the
will and commandment of the Magistrates upon some just and reasonable cause:
which though they had their institution from the will and pleasure of the
governor, are no part of will worship (...), (a word much mistaken among many)
being not co^tra legem Dei against the law of God, but secundum anologiam
legis, according to the analogy of the law, nor brought in at the pleasure of
private fancies without al authority.

Festum dedicationis.
Such a one was the feast of the dedication of the Temple called Festum
Encoeniorum, which was constituted in remembrance of the reedifying of the
Temple under Zorobabel: this is mentioned, Joan. 10. Facta sunt Encoenia, and
hyems erat, It was the feast of the Dedication, and it was winter, for it was
in December: and was celebrated by our Savior.

Such a one was the feast which was called Festum sortium, the feast of lots,
or Festum Mardochai, Festu^ Ma^dochaei. Hester. c. 9.
Mardochaeus his feast, when by the means of Hester and Mardochaeus the Jews
were delivered from the slaughter of Haman, and it is mentioned in the book of
Hester.

Such a one was the feast of Purification, Festu^ Purificationis.
when Judas and they that were with him purified the Temple which the Gentiles
before had polluted. Which feast the Hebrews call Cassen, of this in the 2.
Mat. 1. 2. Match. 1.


And finally such a one was Festumignis the feast of fire, Festu^ignis.
instituted by the Jews after they came from the captivity of Babylon, and
found the fire of the alter which lay hid in a pit or well 70. years and was
turned into thick and gross water, to be kindled again, and with the flame
thereof to consume the sacrifice upon the Alter, 2. Match. 1. 2. Match 1.


Moreover the Jews did not only add to the number of the feasts instituted by
Moses, but they augmented the solemnity of certain of those feasts which
Moses appointed. For whereas Dies Calendarum or Neomenia the first day of the
month or feast of new Moons, Neomeni^.
was appointed only for sacrifice unto God, Propter beneficium gubernationis,
and not mentioned in the 23. of Levit. Lev. 23.
where are named all the solemn festivities: yet the Jews out of their
devotion ad augmentandum cultum divinum for the increase of the service of God
did appoint that the Calends or Neomeniae should be Vacativae ab opere: not
only to offer sacrifice in, but in which they should abstain from al servile
labor, and so made it an holyday and great solemnity.

Psalm. 81.
To this solemnity it was brought in David's time: Ps. 81 Buccinate in Neomenia
tuba, insigni die solennitatis vestrae, Blow up the trumpet in the new moon:
etc. now no day was insignis, notable, except is were free from labor: for
then every other festiuitie had been more famous.

And it seems to have bin thus solemnly used in Elizeus his time, to whom
when the Shunamite woman went for her dead son, her husband said to her: Quam
ob causam vadis ad eum hodic, 4. Reg 4.
non sunt Calendae nec sabbathu^. 4. Reg. 4. Why do thou go unto him, this
day is neither the Cale^ds nor the Sabbath; which argues that they were freed
from labor, because her husband insinuated that she should go upon a day
when he might be at leisure from his buisines: making in that respect a
similitude between the Calends and Sabbath.

Augustine.
And it was observed till the time of S. Austine among the Jews, and so in all
probability till now: for S. Austine by way of reproof faith of the Jewish
women in his time Foeminae Hebraeoru^ melius nere^t, vel aliquid operis
facere^t, quam in Neomenijs suis impudice saltarent. The Hebrew women were
better spinne, or do any work, then immodestly dance in their new moons so
that this seems to be a true rule which the Divines putt Non licebat Iudaeis
diminuere festivitates quas Deus posuerat, licebat tame^ eas augmentare. The
Jews might not lessen those feasts which God had appointed them, yet
notwithstanding it was lawful for them to augment them.

Now for the new Testament, the Legislator himself Christ Jesus instituted no
holiday: for in his life time he did not abrogate the law of Moses, but
observed those feasts: neither did the Apostles until such time as the law of
Moses being dead, it might be buried honestly: for the Christian religion had
not so many ceremonies nor holidaies, neither was it convenient that it should,
in the cradle, as it had in the strength and full age of it: as also the people
of Israel in their infancy in the desert, though the ceremonial law were then
given, yet observed but little till they came to the land of promise, neither
then also, till that was in peace, and the people of Israel in the height of
their glory.

Nevertheles in the Apostles times, as appears in the new testament, the
Lords day our Sunday was instituted in remembrance of the resurrection of our
Savior Christ: and S. Austine ascribes most of the greater festivities to the
authority of the Apostles or general counsels: ad Ianuar: August ad Ianuar.
but Ambrose upon Luke names the Pe^tecost or Whitsunday to have bin observed
by S. Paul himself. Ambrose.
Apud Ephesios Paulus Pentecosten celebrat, relaxat animam, Pentecost. Pauli.
quia fidei cernebat ardore feruentes, Paul kept the Pentecost among the
Ephesians, and enlarged his heart, because he saw them fervent in the zeal of
faith. It is not probable that he kept the Jews Penticost among the heathen
converted to Christ.

St. Austine Ser. 130. de tempore, Augustine Ser. 130 de Temp. Parasceve. 1.
Cor. 5.
notes that St. Paul did insinuate the celebration of the Passion of our
Savior. 1. Cor. 5. saying Magister gentium docet propter crucem annua festa
constitui, epulemur inquit non in fermento veteri, The master of the Gentiles
teaches that annual feasts must be appointed for the passion, and says that
we must feast but not in the old leaven; and says he, adijciens causam
agendae, solennitatis, ait quoniam pascha nostrum pro nobis immolatus est
Christus, yielding a reason why we keep a solemnity, because our Passover
Christ has bin offered for us. And St. Origin who was not long from the
Apostles times, speaking against Celsus of holidaies, says Dies festos,
Origin. contra Celsum.
Dominicos, Parasceves, and Pe^tecostes vnusquisque fidelis celebrat, Every
faithful man celebrateth, holidaies, the feast of the Passion and Pentecost.

Augustine.
In the times of St Augustine, which are within the compass of the pure
primitive church these solemnities were multiplied, Aug. Ps. 72. Aug. 27.
tract. Super Joan.
and not only the feasts of the Apostles celebrated, but of many Martyrs, as
of St Cyprian, St. Laure^ce, and Sixtus the Martyr. upon the 72. Psalm. and the
27. tract super. Joan. and thus far nothing amiss, til the Calender being
overcharged with false and counterfeite popish saints, we reduced it to the
compass of our most ancient and Christian festiuities.

Al which festivities notwithstanding this reformation have found their
enemies, and oppugning arguments, as also this day which now we celebrate.

The former have two sorts of adversaries and those opposite and in
extremities, for some are profane in abrogating them, some superstitious in
the observation of the^.

Petrobusiani.
Of the former sort were those profane Petrobusiani of whom we read of in
St-Bernardes life, and our late Anabaptists, who hold that these holidaies are
(...), that no man has, nor ever had, since Moses auctority to institute them
in the old testament, nor in the new except the Apostles, who instituted, as
they say, the Sunday only, and affirm moreover that al festival days belong
to the ceremonial law of Moses, and therefore ought not to be among Christians,
seeing the ceremonies of the old law were fulfilled by Christ, and so
consequently abrogated: never considering that we use many ceremonials which
were in the law of Moses, and abrogated also, sed non ex vi legis Mosaicae, sed
ex ratione legis, but not by the virtue or force of Moses his law, but only in
regard of the reason thereof; and many feasts not in remembrance of the
blessings done to the Jews, but by Christ unto Christians.

The textes they allege are these. Coloss. 2.16. Col. 2.16.
Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in the part of an holyday: you
observe days and months, and years, I fear you least I have labored in
vain amongst you, Gal. 4.10. Gal. 4.10.
Alius iudicat inter diem and diem, alius iudicat omne^ diem, Rom 14.5. Romans
14.5.
Some judge betwixt day and day, and some call into judgment every day. But
the first and the last are referred to the feasts of the Jews, and the second
to the solemnities of the Gentiles, as appears by the natural course of those
texts and the exposition of the fathers upon those places.

But we have for the warrant of our holydaies, first exemplum legis Mosaicae,
the example of Moses his law, which is alleged by them that are learned for
one reason why our Savior Christ did institute none: then Rationem legis
Mosaicae, the reason of Moses his law, to wit, a remembrance of Gods
blessings. And thirdly, the practice and authority of Christ his Church, since
his coming, fourthly, the promise of Christ, Mat. 18.4.
If two or three he gathered together in my name I will be in the midst of
them, how much more if the whole congregation were assembled, which with an
army of prayers should enforce his mercy. And lastly, the counsel of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor 4.
Omnia decenter and ordine fiant, Everything must be done decently and in
order. But what order or ^ecencie would be found, if every man should serve
God at his own pleasure, at his own time, after his own manner.

They who are superstitious in observing of holydaies are of two sorts; for
either they observe superstitious feasts or observe the true feasts
superstitiously.

Papists.
Of the former sort are the Papists who observe the memory of so many fabulous
and ridiculous Saints, whose Legends are the scoff and scorn of the world.

Ebionites.
And also the old Ebionites, heretics who taught that Christians should
observe the feasts both of the old and new testament, Eusebius hist. eccle. lib
3. cap. 27. Greg. 11. epist. 3.
both the Sabbath and the Lords day also, as appears, Eusebius. hist. eccles.
lib. 3. cap. 27. Which error many would have reviued in Saint Gregory his
time, as appears, lib. 11. epist. 3. and they say that the Christians which
now live in Ethiopia observe them both.

Epiphan. haer. 30. Iraen. l. 1. ca. 26.
Now Saint Paul does so manifestly cross this opinion of the Ebionites that
they therefore refused his writings, and termed him an Apostata, as Eusebius
testifies in the same place, Epiphan. haer. 30. Iraen. li. 1. ca. 26.

Centuriatores.
And yet the Centuriatores Magdeburgenses do not lie, as the Jesuits falsely
charge them, when they say Apostolum Paulum indifferenter observasse Sabbatha
and dominicum, that the Apostle Paul did indifferently observe both the
Sabbath and the Lords day; for so he did a long time; for the Apostles are
noted in the first times after Christ, Iudaizare and Sabbatizare to be a Jew to
a Jew, and a Christian to a Gentile, to win both.

Saint Paul observed the Sabbath. Act. 13.
That Saint Paul observed the Sabbath appears in the 13. of the Acts, where
Paul and Barnabas are said to enter into the Sinagogue upon the Sabbath day.
In the same place they entreat the Gentiles that the next Sabbath they might
preach to them, Act. 16.
and Saint Paul disputed three Sabboths at Thessalonica. Act. 16.

Act. 20.
That he likewise observed the Lords day, appears Act. 20. where it is
said that the brethren came together, vno Sabbathorum, idest, die Dominica, ad
frangendum pane^ upon the first day of the Sabbath, that is, the Lords day, to
break bread: for in a few of the first years the Apostles observed certain
ceremonial laws of Moses because of the weak brethren among the Jews, as
things indifferent, and became Jews to the Jews to gain the Jews: but when
the obstinate Jews and false brethren required the observation of the law as
necessary to salvation, they resisted them earnestly, and stoutly defended the
doctrine of the abrogation of the law; and liberty of the Gospel: yea St. Paul
reprooved St. Peter at Antioche when he did Iudaizare in favor or fear of
the false brethren Gal. 2. Gal. 2.
and taught that the law was so far abrogated, that if any man were
circumcised, or observed other ceremonies of the law as necessary to salvation,
he could not be saved. Gal. 5. Gal. 5.


And this was the cause why the Ebionites called St. Paul an Apostata because
at the first he observed the ceremonies of the law, and afterward refused them
utterly, and preached against them.

They that observe the true feasts superstitiously are such as do Iudaizare,
which will see their neighbor perish before they will relieve him on the Sabbath
day: such was he even of this shire, who lately when his fathers ribs were
broken would not ride for a bone-setter on the Sabbath day: such a one was he
who in my memory went out from among us, and preached in a market town in this
shire, that it was a greater sin to do servile opus in Sabbathe and so to
violate it, then to do murder or commit adultery: because the commandment of
keeping the Sabbath belonges to the first table, and murder and adultery but
to the second.

But to speak briefly to the point (for I have far to go and little time to
spend.) The reason is of no force, but the positio^s be pestelent: for the
abstaining from labor which is but a ceremony, is de iure humano, not de iure
divino; and therefore the violating of this commandment in that point is not
so grievous a sin, though it pertain to the first table, as murder and
adultery, which is against Gods express law in the second table.

For may it please you in a word to understand that in the commandment of
keeping the Sabbath, there is somewhat moral, and somewhat ceremonial.



Exodus 35.
this also is ceased: we being not so Quia vmbra erant futurorum because they
were figures of things to come, and when the truth came the figures did vanish.

It is moral that some time should be allowed to the service of God, that we
might remember his benefits and magnify his holy name: to break this law
which is de iure diuino, that is, to dedicate no time to the service of God, is
worse then adultery, worse the^ murder, but to break the ceremonies of it,
which are de iure humano, is not so great a sin as murder or adultery which
are of the second table, and de iure divino, against the express law of God
himself.

Now I come to the enemies of this Solemnity which now we celebrate, of which
since a right reverend and learned brother of ours has written very
religiously, D. Holland
learnedly, and largely, I shall need to say the less; yet thus much briefly.
That Reynolds, Sanders, Stapleton and the rest of the rigide and salt humored
Papists take exception especially against two points in this Sole^nity: the
first is at the Institution, as if it were without auctority (for that it is
now among our solemnities we will not deny:) the second against the manner of
solemnizing it, as though we preferred it before the feasts of our Savior
Christ.

For the former, that the magistrate has had both auctority and practice of
instituting holidaies upon extraordinary occasions of Gods blessings, has bin
proved both by the examples under the Law, and under the Gospel.

That the Jews poterant quotidie instituere festiuitates quaru^ obseruatio
duraret singulis annis, vel fieret solum semel, Abulensi^
might daily institute holidaies the observation whereof might either continue
every year or only be held once, is Abulensis assertion. 1. Paral. cap. 16.
q. 14. That they appointed annual, you have heard before under Mardacheus,
Nehemias, Judas Machabaeus, that they augmented in ceremonies some year more
then other the feasts appointed in the law, 2: Esd: 8^
appears both in Esdras time when the feast of Tabernacles was so royally
solemnized that it is said Non feceru^t a diebus Joshua (filij Nun) talia filii
Israel vsque ad diem illum 2. Esa. 8. The children of Israel never did such
things, no not from the days of Joshua the son of Nun unto that day and
Josias celebrated such a Passover in the 18. year of his reign when he had
purged the Temple of the Idols, 4. Reg: 2^.
Quale non fuerat actum a temporibus Iudicum Israelit arum vsque ad Iosiam. 4.
Reg. 23. as had not been from the times of the Judges of Israel unto Josias.
That they appointed such as are called by the Civilians Repentina, instituted
for once upon a suddeine occasion, appears by David who while the Arc was in
his house faciebat omnes dies solennes propter honorem Arca, saltem ad
observationem ceremoniaru^, made every day a solemn day for the honor of the
arc, at the least concerning the observation of ceremonies. Abulens. and
solemnised the day of his inauguration into his kingdom in this Psalm.

That the Christian magistrate has at least as much authority in constituting
new festivities, and augmenting the old, as the Jews had, cannot with any
probability be denied. They not only appointed the feasts which concern our
redemption, but the memorials of the Apostles, and some holy Martyrs.
Constantine held a feast for joy of the settling of the Gospel and Christianity
in his time: Eusebius. lib. 1. de vita Co^stantini.
Other Emperors celebrated auspicia lucis, the day of their birth: other Ortum
imperij, the beginning of their reign: other festiuitates repentinas suddeine
feasts, upon joy for victory over Gods enemies, the Turks, and infidels. Al
which argue suficient auctority, both for the institution and augmentation of
this festivity.

Which although it had his original at the first from that of St. Paul. 1.
Tim. 2.
1. Tim. 2. where he exhorts supplications, prayers, thankesgivings,
intercessions, to be made for kings, and for all that are in auctority:
Especially seeing we had attained to that end proposed by the Apostle, namely
by reason of her Majesty's reign to have liberty to lead a peaceable and
quiet life in all godliness and honesty: Yet for as much as since that time it
has bin confirmed by the consent and approbation of the magistrate, and by
note in the Calender, and by special prayers appointed for it, I see no reason,
Caluino ^irc. l. 2. c. 18.
but an high measure of malice only, in Reynolds in his Caluine-T^^es to liken
it to the increase and progress of that Idolatry mentioned in the 14. of
Wisdom ver. 14.15.16. Where the father made an image for his dead son, and
worshipped it as a God, and ordained ceremonies and sacrafices, which grew to
a custom in process of time, and was made a law; except peradventure he
think that there is only a progress in sin and not in virtue, as in their
societies from slander to libelling: a progress in Idolatry, as in their
Churches from an Image to an Idol, from an Idol to al heathenish ceremonies and
superstitions, but no progress in true religion either inwardly from faith to
faith, and from grace to grace, or outwardly from less to more worship, from
fewer to more devour and religious ceremonies, which I have observed before to
have been the course of Gods Church, both in the old and new Testament.

To conclude this point. If the particular Church of England had auctority in
Queen Mary's days to appoint two solemn and Anniversarie Masses to be yearly
celebrated in St. Mary's, the one on the 18. of February being the Nativity
of Queen Marie, and the other on the first of October, on which she was
crowned, at which Masses the whole University should be present from the
beginning to the end, and there devoutly pray for the good estate of the King
and the Queen, and for the peace of this their graces Realm, and moreover
appointed two solemn processions upon the same days being matters of greater
solemnity then now we use in these our meetings: I doubt not to affirm that
the particular Church of England has also auctority sufficient to institute,
if so it please, the celebration of the Nativity, and inauguration of her
excellent Majesty, with public sermons, common prayers, and thankesgiving for
her godly and peaceable reign, and the unspeakable blessing received by her,
the chosen instrument of God for our good.

The other accusation is against the manner of solemnizing it, Saunders.
with ringing, and bonfires, and anthims, and sermons, and feastings, not only
solemnly, but solennissime most solemnly, as though it were preferred before
Easter and Christmas, the blessed memorials of our Savior Christ.

But may it please you to understand that one feast or holiday is said to be
more solemn or greater then another for many causes.

Because we abstain more from work in it, then in any other; in this sense
the Sabbath among the Jews, was more solemn then other feasts. Now forasmuch
as no man is forbidden bodily labor this day, which they are on Sundaies and
other great Festivities, therefore you see that in this respect it is inferior
to them.

because more ceremonies were used in it the^ in others: thus though the
Sabbath were absolutely the chief feast of the Jews, yet in this respect
without prejudice to the honor of the Sabbath, every feast among the Jews was
greater then the Sabbath, in as much as they had al more ceremonies belonging
to them by the law of Moses: to grant then that we had more ceremonies in the
divine service this day then on Christmas day, does not argue this sole^nitie
greater then it.

Because more assembled together for the celebratio^ of the feast: thus the
three feasts of Easter, Whit-suntide, and the Tabernacles, in which all the
people were bound to ascend up to offer sacrifice in the Temple of Jerusalem,
were counted greater then the Sabbath, and al other feasts. Now forasmuch as no
man is forced by law to this solemnity, and few solemnize it but the better
sort of the people, and masters of families, in this respect it is inferior
to the Sabbath and other our solemn feasts, to which al men with their
families by law are forced to resort.

Lastly one feast was more solemn then another, Because thus the celebration
of the Passover was most famous in the time of king Josias, who when he had
purged the land from al Idolatry, celebrated the Passover so magnificently,
that the like was not done, A diebus Iudicum qui iudicaverunt Israel. 4. Reg.
23. from the days of the Judges which judged Israel, and in this respect for
the joy and magnificence which is used in it, this day which now we celebrate
is a most solemn day, like the day mentioned in my text, the very end of the
institution of it being, exultare and latari in ea, to rejoice both inwardly
and outwardly in it, which is the last point I intend to speak of.

If this then be the end of the institution of this solemnity, laetari and
exultare in ea to rejoice and be glad in it, that is, gaudere in domino
vehementer, as S. Paul says, Phil. 4. Phil. 4.
to rejoice in the Lord greatly gaudere in domino non in dono, to rejoice in
the Lord, not in the gift: that is, Non propter donum finaliter, sedde dono
materialiter, not finally for the gift, but materially of the gift, and it be
done in the highest degree: both inwardly, delectatione voluntatis in bono
acquisito in the gladness of the mind for the good gotten in this great
blessing which we now remember: and outwardly, per redundationem in
exultatione, that is in extrasaltatione, quia ab anima in corpus salit, in
abundance of joy, when the delight of our soul does as it were leap forth into
our body, so that we do every one in particular protest with the Prophet
David, Psalm. 84.
Cor meum and caro mea exultaverunt in Deum vivu^, both my heart inwardly, and
my flesh outwardly have reioiced in the living God, and that in the highest
degree, with all readiness and alacrity, eve^ to dancing as David did when the
Arc was brought home, or to melodious music as in this Psalm in the day of
his inauguration; seeing it is a rule, Facientes ex gaudio faciu^t sicut
facientes exhabitu, those that do any thing in joy do it as if it were done
by habit, and facility: what prejudice I beseech you is this to our most
Christian solemnities, which are soleuniores in many other and greater
respects?

Psalm. 73.
Wherefore whosoever thou be Priest or Jesuit which say in thy heart, Quie
scere faciamus festivitates eorum a terra, as the wickedman in the Psalm, let
us take away their feasts and solemnities, from the face of the earth, either
by our treason on her Majesty's person, or invasion of her country, or by
libels and undermining sophismes, take heed what you do, Non est iocandum cum
dijs, It is ill jesting with Gods, Princes are the Gods of the earth, Gods
immediate lieuetenants, to whom he has imparted his name, and vouchsafed them
a great part of his external worship it is ill jesting with them: to scoff,
or to rail at them, to libell against the^ or their subjects, either for their
allegiance, or religious duties to God in their behalf, is against that
notable rule in the law of God, Exodus 22.
Principi populi non maledices, thou shalt not revile the prince of the
people. He that curses his Father or Mother, much more he that curses the
father of his cuntry, the Crows of the valleys will pluck out his eyes, his
flesh shall be food for the fowls of the air: God himself who has placed
the^ in his seat to govern the earth and the provinces of it, will defend them
with many guardes, even as the apple of an eye is defended: it is not flying
into foreign countries that can deliver you from your alleagiance, or from
punishment due for the violating of it. Coelum non hominem mutant qui trans
mare currunt, you may fly beyond the seas from the natural air of your native
country, but not from your selves, nor your natural alleagiance, no (as I may
say) from that natural, or rather supernatural vengeance which attends on
you: for God either puts a hook in your nostrels and brings you back
again the same way you went to suffer condign punishment for these lewd and
most unchristian practices; or you perish miserably like runagates and
vagabonds, or exiled malefactors in a foreign country.

But to pass over this sort of malicious cavillers (because I hope and verily
think that not any one ill affected does hear me this day, howsoever we be
slandred by our mothers children, that we swarm with Papists, that we fall
away daily in great multitudes, that our chief divines whom some note under
the name of Formalists, are ready to join both heart and hand with them, to
the incredible encouragement of all sorts of Romanistes, and to the dishonor
of her Majesty's government, the discredit of this Christian society, the
disparagement of their own judgments and discretion, who wound to the heart
that religion they pretend to defend: of which upon farther occasion surely we
will hereafter have further discourse. To pass over this and come to our
selves, let us embrace as we have begun the example of this people in the
inauguration of king David, and this good counsel of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.
Deum timete, Regem honorate, fear God, and honor the king; honor him in thy
heart, honor him with thy hands and substance, honor him with thy tongue:
practice no disloialtie, speak no disloialty, think no disloialty, no not in
thy least thought, in thy secret chamber; for besides that the fowls of the
air will bewraie it, and the clouds of thy discontented countenance discover
it, as I told you of late, there is ever a progress in sin, it never stands
still, it stands not at one stay, but passes secretly from evil thoughts to
ill words, and from ill words to foul actions, and then it is ripe and
calls for his punishment.

And surely God is very jealous of the honor of Princes, and least we should
in any sort despise them and be disobedient unto them, because we be all
made of one mould of the earth, as the days of the year of one sun in the
firmament, and therefore are all pares in esse naturae equal one to another in
nature, that there might be a difference in esse merali in civil being, God
honoreth Princes with his own name, so that they are called Gods, and Gods
anointed, and the sons of the most high: he calls them by his own name,
and furnishes them with divine and supernatural qualities.

1 Prove: 16:
For there is divinatio in labijs regis, divination in the lips of the king,
Prove. 16. so that they do often foresee, forespeake, 1: Sam. 10:
and foretell things to come, and it is noted in the first kings that ever God
instituted: for as soon as Samuel powered the viol of oil upon Saul he was
changed into another man, and the spirit of God falling upon him he did
prophecy among the Prophets: and as soon as David was anointed by Samuel
the scripture says, Directus est spiritus domini in David a die illa and
deinceps, 1. Sam: 16:
1. Sam. 16. The spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forwards:
and when Caiphas who was the high Priest sitting in the Consistory said,
Expedit quod vnus moriatur pro populo, It is expedient that one should die for
the people, he said not that of himself, says the text, sed cum erat po^tifex
ill us anni prophetavit, but in that he was the high Priest that year he did
prophecy.

Secondly, there is a certain depth in the heart of a king. 2 Prove. 25.
Which none can seek out, even higher then the heaven, and deeper then the
earth. Prove. 25.

Thirdly, they have gifts of healing incureable diseases, 3
which are miraculous and above nature, so that when Vespasian was seen to
perform such a cure, the people concluded he should be Emperor as Tacitus
notes. Tacitus.


Fourthly, 4
they have power absolute without limitation accountable only to God for their
actions.

Fifthly they have authority to bless their dutiful and loyal subjects, and
they are blessed: 5
and authority to curse their subjects disobedient, and they are cursed with
temporal curse, as I could prove both by reason and examples out of the
scriptures if the time would permit.

And as God is jealous of their honor, so much more of their safeties, and
therefore he sets a guarde of Angels about them. He keeps them as the apple
of his eye; Psalm. 17. He hides them under the shadow of his wings: he will not
have them touched, Touch not my anointed, Psalm. 105. Every touch with heart,
with hand, with tongue, is treason laesa maiestas, the majesty of the Prince
is wounded by it, and therefore David was sorry at the heart when he cut but the
lap of Saules garment. 1. Sam. 24.6.

Finally he revengeth their wrongs before his own; treasons against the^ before
blasphemies against himself propter bonum vniversi for the good of mankind;
and more severely then his own with temporal punishment.

If I should instaunce in these gifts and graces wherewithal God has
plentifully endowed her excellent majesty, and stand to amplify the wonderful
depth of the wisdom of her heart, evide^t to her Counsel in her most weighty
affairs, to her subjects generally in her divine speeches at every parliament,
to us in particular in her excellent orations beyond admiration and imitation:
or this gift of prophecy, as I may call it, whereby she has foreseen,
foretold, and, if I may so say, forespoken that which an ordinary wisdom
could not imagine: or her manifold blessings on well deserving subjects,
confirmed as it may seem, by God to them and their posterity, if they walk in
loialtie and true obedience: or the supernatural cures of weak diseased
people, amounting to the number of three or four hundred a year: or the
divine providence of God in defending her as the apple of his eye, from so many
treasons, conspiracies, rebellions at home and abroad; it might be thought by
some of the maligners of this festivity, that I stand more upon the praises of
my earthly mistres, then upon the honor and glory of my heavenly Lord and
Master.

Wherefore leaving these things to your particular co^sideratio^s, let us
conclude with that other part of St. Paul's counsel, with honoring praising and
magnifying God the auctor and preserver of this great blessing: and because no
ceremony was ever more acceptable to him then oblation and sacrifice, and
sacrificia legalia sacrifices of the Law be abrogated, let us offer to him our
spiritual sacrifice.

First our alms, the works of mercy and charity, which is the oblation of
our temporal substance; and St. Paul calls it Hostiam acceptam and placentem
Deo, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing unto God. Phil. 4.
Phil. 4.

Secondly the humbling and mortifying of our bodies, which is the oblation of
our corporal substance, Romans 12.
and St. Paul calls it. Romans 12. Hostiam vinentem, sa^ctam, Deo placentem, a
living sacrifice holy and pleasing unto God.

Thirdly our devotions in praising and magnifying God for this admirable
blessing; which is the oblation of our spiritual substance, Heb. 13.
and St. Paul calls it Heb. 13 (...) the sacrifice of praise, and interpretes
it, the fruit of their lips which confess his name: and Ose, Ose:
the calves of our lips, and our Prophet, Psalm. 26, Hostiam vociferationis,
and Lyra, hostiam iubilationis, that is, the sacrifice of thankesgiving and joy.

To conclude, as her excellent Majesty with the Prophet David in this Psalm.
cries out in remembrance of Gods benefits in his miraculous preserving her so
many years from so many dangers, Non moriar sed viuam I shall not die but live,
vt narre^ opera domini, that I may declare the works of the Lord.

As we with the Priests in this Psalm do benedicere populo ex domo dei,
bless the people of the house of God, celebrating his benignity saying, Deus
dominus, and illuxit nobis, God is our Lord, and has as this day illightened
us with the light of the Gospel, and as it is in the old translation, do
constituere diem solennem in condensis, so that the people of God come together
in densitate plebis, as Lyra calls it, in great abundance, and vsque ad cernua
altaris, so that the Church is filled even to the doors.

So let al good subjects join with this people in celebrating this day, and
sing Haec est dies quam fecit dominus, exultemus and latemur in ea, This is the
day which the Lord has made let us rejoice and be glad therein. O domine da
salutem, O domine da prosperitatem, O Lord send her salvation, O Lord send her
prosperity: Non moriatur sed vivat, let her not die but live, that she may
declare thy wondrous works to many generations: that we solemnizing many of
these days to the glory of thy name, and comfort and joy of our own hearts,
may after this triumphing, trivmph and rejoice with thee in body and soul in
thy everlasting kingdom: through Jesus Christ our Lord: to who^ with the
Father and the holy Ghost be all power honor and glory both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

