The troubled man's medicine very profitable to be read of al men wherein they
may learn pacyently to suffer all kinds of adversity made and written by
Wyllyam Hughe to a friend of his.

Renuit consolationem accipere anima mea: memor fui dei and delectatus sum.

Psalm. 76. Afflictis spiro.

Ihon^ Faukener unto the reader.
NOt long ago, it happened me to read this book, then not printed which was
writ ten and dedicate unto a friend of mine, as a thing whereby he might be
comforted in his adversities, that then chanced unto him. By the which he was
comforted, and had received no small consolation in his heuines, and troubles,
which thing did greatly rejoice us his friends, and therefore desired a copye
of the same book, for one that neded in like case, like consolation. Wherewith
also the par tie was wonderfully quieted in his mind, as it had been with a
medicine, geuinge a present re^edy and health unto the sick and ^^e body. Here
it was wisshed (...) al them that either did read (...) hear this book, that
it might (...) prynted, and do good unto ^any, as it had done already vn^^ a
few: which thing I took (...) on me and thus boldly have used it to be
printed. Trusting at the author thereof (whom I ^^ow not but by his friends
re^ion and mine) will not be diseased, saying that it was his ^^ndes desire. And
that many sides well learned and godly ^^nded, did not only allow it but also
greatly praised it. And ^^ther much commended the ^^ge^ce and study of them,
that honestlye and godly spend ^ir time. As for the Critical ^^sores which
do nothing them selfs that good is, b^^ carpe and reprehende other men's
doings, we pass little of, doubting not but all honest hearts will gentely
accept it. Thus fare well gentle reader, and give the thanks to god and the
auctor hereof.

Most gentle fre^d Vrbane, I do plainly perceive not so much by your letters,
as by the report of ^ther men, that ye be not merye, ^eyther of a quiet mind,
but ra^^er unquieted sad and pe^sife. ^n that fortune, which in her in
^^nstancie (as you say) only is ^^sta^t, does not according to her ^^de
tenure favor you, in yt the ^orld, which for the most part is ^ot theirs that
be of God, good (...) virtuous, does not as it has ^one, smile upon you. As al
thin^es among the^ which be trustye ^^d faithful friends are com^une, so
doutles be the very af^^ctions of the mind, the which ^^yng at the length is
well kno^en of me, not by hearing, but by proof, not by readyng, but by
experience!. For as your merry nes and prosperous state dydd^ make me merry, so
your aduer^^ fortune and sadness, causes m^ likewise to be sad. Wherefore it
shall be expedient and my pan^ to find some way or mean, wh^^ by this heuines
(wherewith bo^^ our minds as yet be egally o^cupied) may be set aside, or at
the least restreyned, To encrea^^ your substance with cattle, gold or silver,
my mind is good, b^^ my power is impote^t. To tea^^ you how, or by what meane^
these things may be procure^ I have not learned. But that medicine only, which
learned m^ have counted to a sick and s^rowefull heart most present, (...)
will endeavor, though peradventure not witly, yet friendly to m^nister. The
medicine is brotherly counsel and friendly communication, This (says Plutarche
writing to Apollonius) is to a sick mind the best physician. Words and
voices says Horace in his epystels do mytigate grefe, and put away the
greatest part of sorrow.

Surely I do think that likewise as the diseases of the body, as agues,
head ache, goutes, and such other, be healed by confections made of herbs,
and other things procedinge out of the Apothecaties shop. So the diseases of
the mind, be only cured with comfortable and unfeigned words, flowyng out of
a friendly and faithful heart. Isocrates in his Oration of peace says thus: I
would ye should chefely know, that where as many and sundry remedies be found
of the phisicions against the syckenes and maladies of the body, against the
disease of the mind there is none utterly, saving friendly words. Wherefore
Apollo counted chief, and of the phisicions in manner the god, in Ouide
complayneth grievously, that the disease of his mind, could be cured with no
herbs, and that the arts which did profytte every man, could not refrain
his troublouse affection.

I would wysh the muses were so favorable unto me, that I might gather such
herbs in their gardens, that would so well purge your mind of this said
heauynes, as it is not to be approved in any man that is partaker of reason,
but specially in a man of christ's religion. Howbeit (Alas so great is ye
blindness of our solisshe nature) we think those things which are not
lamentable to be lamented, and those which be not horrible in deed, greatly
to be feared. In this point I may compaire us to unwise children, which
vehemently fear them that use evil favored visours, thinking that they be
spirits, deuels, and enemies of their health, where as if they had the mytte
boldelye to pulle of the vysoures, they should se hydden under them gentle
countenaunces, and faces of their friends, kynsemen, or peradventure most
loving fathers. Or else we may be justly assembled unto ragynge Ajax, which in
his fury, and madness, used the hogs which god had prepared for his sustenance
and wholesome norishme^t, as though they had been his deadly enmies, and ordained
to his utter destruction.

What chyldishnes, or worsse than madness is it, to bewail, and not take in
good worth adversity mysfortune, or poverty, which happen to us not by
chance, but by the providence and will of our heavenly father. Which works
every thing for the best as saint Paul says to the Romans. 8. toward the^
that love him: which forms and fasshioneth us according to his own myl,
which makes us rich and pore, sick and whole, fortunate and miserable at his
pleasure. And all for our wealth, profytte, and vauntage. Least thou be
deceived, I would not have the to imitate the commune sort, ascribing worldely
myseries to the stars, fate and fortune, playing therein the part of the
dog, which byteth the stone that is hurled at him, not blamyng the hurler
thereof: but rather imytatynge the example of Dauyd, which blamed not Semei
raylynge at him outragiously, but imputed his dispytes unto the lord, of whom
he was thought to be sent, attributed them with thanks to god, of whom by the
testimony of scripture comes both death and life, riches and poverty, good
and evil. Ecclesia. 11. This witnesses the Psalmist saying: The lord does
auaunce and suppress, the lord makes the rich and eke the poor.

But thou will say peradventure: If we were certain that our misfortunes and
myseries were sent unto christen men by God, they were much more tolerable.
But when we se our cattle dye by styngynge of serpents, or by contagion,
from the which they might have been safe, if they had be diligently
observed. Or when we fall into diseases, whereof we might have been clear if
that unwholesome meats and diet, infected places or persons had been avoided: Or
when we be robbed or suffer other losses by neglyge^ce of our servants or
evil will of our neighbors. Or where we se that we might have been in good case
if this chance o: that chance had be escaped, if this thing or that thing
had not ben done. Finally when we se our selves, by such or like chances as
I have spoken of, comme to myserye, we think it rather to be imputed to evil
fortune, then to the hand of god, by the same mean seeking or workynge our
wealth. Truly who soever is of this opinion, in my judgment seems to be
ignoraunte that God is prouidente and careful for men. Also to lack the
knoweledge of his most holy and wholesome scryptures. Math. 10. writes that a
sparowe, which is a bird of small estimacion, can not fall to the ground,
without our heavenly father, neither a here of a man's head. And shall we
which be the sheep of his pasture, his people and his sons, whom he
regards a thousand times more then the sparowes, think that the loss of
those things, which we have enjoyed, be it riches, health, or any other
worldly thing, either the miss of them which we have desired, can chance
without his will and godly prouydence? Who is so folysh to think, that god
regarding the heeres of our heads, which be neither greatly profitable, nor
necessary, will contemn and neglecte things which pertayne to the susteining
and necessity of ye whole bodies? Who knows not that Jobs substance decayed
by diverse chau^ces, as by tempests and thonders, by thieves and robbers, his
friends destroyed by the falling of an house? which things to the infidele
should have seemed bare chance, and not inflicted by any godly power: yet in
deed as it is manifest in the history, these were nothing else but means or
instruments which the lord used to the perfourmaunce of his will. The holy
Job of all christen men much to be followed, after that he had lost all, and
brought in manner to extreme miserye, did not accuse his carpenters for buyldyng
of a ruynous house, neither he cried out of fortune as the unfaithful do, nor
yet found fault at his herdemen, in that they drove not his cattle
diligently into the safe stables: but considering the true cause of his
calamity and wretchidnes, said these words: Naked I came from my mothers
womb, and naked I shall go hence. The lord did give me wealth, and the lord
has taken it away. As it pleased the lord, so it is done, his name be
blessed. The blindness of the elder Toby happening by swalowes donge that fell
into his eyes as he lay slepinge, and the poverty which did succeed, seemed to
be ascribed only to chance. But the aungel declared at the last that god did
make him both blind and beggarly and that for a purpose.

Dauyd in his Psalms does evidently show that our calamities come none
otherwise, but by the will and permission of god: which tries us as the gold
is tried in the fyry furnace, being never the worse therefore, but better, and
purer. Thou says he, O lord have proved us, and (as silver is wont with fire)
have examined us: thou have brought us into snares, and laid tribulations upon
our backs. Thou have made men our enemies, and set them in our necks: we have
passed by fire and water. Hieremye in the. 3. of his lamentations confirms
this, pronouncynge such words: Who says that it should be done, the lord
not commaundynge? Do not good and evil proceed from the mouth of the highest?
The gentyles as blind as they were of this thing were not al together
ignoraunte. The Greake poet Hesiode, in the beginning of his work, asks
what is the cause that some me^ be vile, some noble, some rich, other some
poor? he makes answer him self, and says: The will of the ^nyghty god.
The which saying I word wisshe to be so well be^eued of Christen men, as it
was truly spoken of a blind ethnyke.

Seeing therefore that misfortunes, lack or loss of riches, health, and such
other, come not rashly, but by the prouydence of our Celestrall father: why
should we not take them well in worth, and after the example of Job, blessing
his name, give him thanks for them? specialy consideringe that adversities
chaunsynge to them which love the lord, be not tokens of his ire, neither
arguments yt he casts us of, but of a fatherly love rather, and friendly
care. Thou shalt perceive if thou read diligently the holy histories, that ye
more part of them, whom god has chosen to be of his little flock, have been
wretchyd (in the respect of the world) and miserable, tos^e and tormoyled
with manyfolde mysfortunes, distracte and unquieted with continual sorrows.

Let Hely the prophet be for an example, whom God loved so well, that he would
vouchsafe to communicate his counsel and mysteries unto him. What quietness I
pray you or wealth, what riches or surety had he, for all the frendeshyp that
was betwyxte God and him? Truly so much wealth, that he had never a house to
put his head in. Such plenty of meat and drink, that if the raven and the
angel had not fed him, he had perysshed ^w hunger. Such quietness that he
could not tell which way to turn him, nor whyther to flee from the
persecution of Achab, Baales preistes, and cruel Iesa bell. Such Joy in this
world that he desired often to dye, before he dyed. What should I speak of
Helise, Hieremy and Hieu, to be short of ye greatest part of gods prophets,
which were ever wrapped in woe, and deadly anguishe the world seldom or never
ministringe any cause of gladness, comfort, or solace. I will not speak of the
Apostels, which be sides that they were poor and beggerlye all the days of
their life, for gods word were troubled, threatened, mocked, scourged, and at
the last to the sight of men myserablye dyed. Our master Christ the son of
god would be an abiecte among the people, and subject to afflictions
innumerable, showing the^ by that his kingdom, neither the kyngedome of them
which be of his household, is in this world. He says to his apostels:
Because ye be not of the world, ye world does hate you. Ihon. 15. which
douteles loves, and chiefly favors them, that be her natural children, and
children of darkness, regardinge more this temporal life, then the life which
is promised to them which cieue wholly to the lord our god.

Scripture not dyssemblynge with us, but telling plainly whereto we shall
stick, teaches, that they which be of god shall as in the stead of a
recognisau^ce suffer afflictions, adversities and troubles, All they that will
line vertuouslye in Christ shall be afflicted. 2. Timoth. 3. Hieremye speaking
in the person of god, Hieremy, 25. says: In the city wherein my name is
invoke, I will begin to punysshe. As for you (meaning the wicked) shall be as
inuocentes and not touched: The time is, that judgment must begin at the
house of god. 1. Petri. 4. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that
we should follow his fotesteppes. 2. Oh that we might have seen that kind heart
of Christ, when he was punished, hanged and crucified, not for his own cause,
but for ours, how willingly he suffered, giving us an example, that we might
follow his fotesteps: doutlesse we should with much more courage and stomach for
our ownesakes, suffer troubles than we do. Lo we that live, be mortified for
christ, yt the life of christ may appear in our carnal bodies, 2. Cor. 4. If
any man says Christ will come after me, let him forsake him self, take his
cross on his back, and follow me. For otherwise he is not mete for me. Every
membre (doubt ye not) of Christ's body shall have ye cross, either of
poverty, or persecusio^, sickness, or imprisonment, injuries or sclaunders, or
of like things.

Happy is he that folowethe christ manfully, and fails not: for he at the
length shall be eased of his heuye burden: he at the length shall find
perpetual rest, and eternal quyetnes. We must be here not as inhabitours and
home dwellers, but as Paul says, as strangers. Not as strangers only but
after the mind of Job as paynefull soldiers, appointed of our captain
Christ, to fight against the devil, the world flesh and sin: In the
which fight, except we behave our selfs lawfully and strongly by the sentence
of scripture, we shall not be crowned. Let us therefore arm our selfs with ye
weapons prescribed of saint Paul to the Ephesians. 6. and of other places of
scripture to Christ's soldiers, and with a bold courage contemn the darts of
the devil and worldly miseries, endeuouryng to overthrow our minds, and
weaken our faith toward God: For ones our captain with a glorious victory
shall gloriouslye deliver us. In worldly wars there be and have been many of
stomach, not unlike to Jason, Hercules and Theseus, which couyt to enterprise
upon dangerous places, and perlous enemies, whereby they may have by their
manful conflyct, praise, or a gareland of baye bows, he nour or temporal
promocions. And shall we, whose reward shall be not a gareland made of grene
bows, that lightly wythereth, but with a crown of glory, that ever shall
flourish: not temporal preferreme^tes, which endure not but enheritaunce in
heaven, that shall be continual, be loath stoutly to withstand the world? It
chances often that the presence of a man's concubyne shall move him to contend
and fight fiersly with his aduersarye, little or nothing regarding his life, but
rather careful, lest with shame he take a foil in her presence which he
loves. And shall the presence of our spouse Christ, whose eyes continually
look on the hearts and minds, nothing move us? For him to have taken a foil
before his lover, had been no loss of body nor soul, but a little shaine, and
that not durable. But to take a foil of pouertye, miseryes, syckenesse,
losses, lack, or other mysfortunes, and not to keep our mind still above
them, with the contempt of their, assaults: besides that the presence of god
shall shame us, not the body, but the soul (except the grace of god after
erecte us) shall utterly perysshe. Look therefore that we fight meryly and
boldly, despise all misfortunes, that hurt or threaten hurt to our mortal
bodies.

But either I am deceived, or I here you saying: Sir it is quickly spoken, but
it is not so lightly done. It is hard, and by the sentence of philosophers
against nature, for men to be content with those things which hurt and make
for the damage of their bodies, and as you require with contempt to fight
against them, doutles it is very hard, and for our strength, and power, a
thing impossible. What than, shall we play the part of Demosthenes, cast
away our weapens and despair? No not so, but mystrusting our own power,
let us fly to god, as unto and holy anchor, and safe refuge, desiringe help
of him, which by promise made, shall aid, assist and defend us. Call on me
says be, in the day of trouble, and I shall deliver the. The lord is nigh to
al them that be of a troubled heart, and fear him. In thine infirmity,
despise not the lord, but pray unto him, and he shall! heal the. Eccl.; 8.
There is no dout therefore, but we shall have his help, if we faithfully call
for it. And in him that comfort (if the words of Paul be true) we shall be
able to do (...) things, and nothing shall be impossible for us being
faithful. Therefore let us say with Ezechias. 2. Parilipom. 32. Play we the
men, and comfort our selves for the lord is with us, our helper, and fights
for us. The lord (as he says in the third of the kings. 22) is our rock
and our strength, our savior and refuge, our buckeler, our auauncer, and the
horn of our health. Let us then not fear nor cease constantly to withstand
the cruel enforce me^tes of adversity, ever keeping our minds and faith
toward god, unwounded, harmed, or discoraged by them, thinkinge still that
they be sent of god, which works by infirmity strength, by ignominy glow,
by poverty perpetual riches, by death life, which does wound and heal, stry
keth and makes whole, as it is in ye Psalm. And for none other end, but as
they were sent to Job, and Toby, to exercise and prove us, that his glory
may appear in us, and that we may avoid the greater euyls, sin, thraldom,
to the devil, and hell.

The afflyctions (believe me) that we count evils, encombring our flesh, be
nothing in the respect of those euyls wherewith the ungodly be combred,
living in infidelity, and sin under the ire of god, under the Imperie of the
devil, being servants to iniquity, to whom says the lord is no peace,
whose minds and conscience (as Isai writes) be ever like to a fervent sea
that can not rest, whose floudes redounde to conculcacyon and mourning. 57.
That these greater I say and more heinous euyls may be avoided, these little
or rather not to be esteemed euyls at all be inflycted of god, also that we may
at the length after all our strife, myth our captain Christ ryallye
tryumphe.

If we would well considre for what purpose God has create us, we should bear
with afflictions and adverse fortune much more than we do. All things in this
world are made to serve man. The sheep to clothe him, the ox to feed him,
the horse to carye him, the herbs and trees, some to norish him, some to cure
him being diseased, some to delight him, the son and moan to give him light,
so in conclusion, all other things under heaven, in one of fice or other,
serve man: and as all these things were made to serve man, so man to serve God
in holiness and pureness of life, And to this end doutles, pouertye, with other
afflictions does much more conduce, then wealth or carnal quietness. In this
respect we ought to wysshe, and thank god for aduersite, rather then for
wealth. The one causes us to forget him the other to remember him: the one to
despise him, the other to call upon him, and worship him: the one proud keth co
incontine^cie and naughtynes, the other to temperancie and sobernes: the one
calls us to all kinds of vice, the other to virtue and pureness of life. what
I pray you made David and adulterer and cruel murderer? but wealth, and
quietness. Hieroboam brought to wealth and prosperous state, became a wicked and
a shameful Idolater. O perlous aboun dance of goods, and saturitie of meats
and quietness, which destroyed with so many souls those goodly cities Sodom,
and Gomor. Nothing else made O^i as proud, and by reason thereof to be stricken
with lepre, but the aforenamed.

What made the yongeman co uetous, and loath to follow christ when he was bydde,
but wordly wealth, which he than enjoyed? Ye se in the gospel how the men that
were bydde to the kings supper, could not come, worldly riches and business
keeping them back. They which came and filled up the places at ye feast, were
wretches, sick and lame beggars. Christ (...) by ^au^^ that by her welthynesse
and abundance of things, she forgot his ^^^tati^. What other thing brought
the rich giuecon to the oblyuton of God, of him self, and of his mortality,
to incontynencie, dronkennes, gluttony; and at the last to the place where is
mo^^nynge and knasshynge of teeth, but wealth, prosperity, and worldely
quietness. Thus ye se that the effects of riches and welthines, be nothing else
for ye most part, but murder, adultery, dronkennes, Idolatry ^ouetouse^ies,
g^^teony, contep^ of god, pride and inco^tinery. What Christ (...) man will not
fear (che^^y const^^^ing the ^^^gi^ttie of our nature, ^^^ch as it is written
in (...) our young age is ^ue^ (...) to the worst ^^^possesse much riches, or
to enjoy worldly welthinesse? Seeing yt they draw men so clean from God, so
far into vice and mischeife.

If we be sick in body, having our wits, we will not touch those meats
which we think may move or e^crease our disease though they be never so
dayntye or precyouse: and shall we not fear to walowe in worldly^ wealth,
which to our souls is so dangerous that nothing can be more pernycyous? We
read of some profane Philosophers, of the which sort was Bias, that gave
and cast away their goods, whereby they might more quietlye study for the
knowledge of things. Crates was glad of his ship wrakes poverty. Anaxagoras
of his impriso^ment. Plato of his exile fro the kings court, because their
minds were more quiet thereby and addicte to the study of phylosophye. And
shall we that be christen men think the lack or loss of worldly things to
be lamented, which be, or may, be the cause of quietness of conscience, and of
a mind more addicte to the serving of god, whereto we were created?

But you will say peradventure. What, sir, ye do speak as though men might not
both be welthy and virtuous. Know ye not ye saint Paul said, Phil. 4 That he
might suffer penury or lawefullye have abundance? Moreover that he will have
the rich men commanded. 1. Timo. 6. not to cast away their riches. neither
to cease honestly to procure them: but that they (...) trust in them. Have ye
not also learned by the old testament, that Abraham, Isaac, Joseph, with diverse
other had the world al will, and yet were godly, (...) (as far as we can
judge) be no (...) in the hand of God, where the souls of just men be.

In deed I do grant that men may laufully (so that the^^ do it not at the
impulsion of au^ rice or ambition, nor putting any trust in them) procure
riches and enjoy the same. I confess also that some men have been, be, and
shall be both welthy and vertuous^ else god forbid: but in my indgment, it is but
on^ ^neag^s many. It is a very (...) thing, and wonderful hard, yea so hard
yt Christ which (...) not ^^e, (...) Easy en it is for a (...) to ^^tre
through a nedles eye, tha^ for a rich man to enter in to the kingdom of
heaven. We must (says scripture) enter into ye kingdom of god by many
tribulacions, of the which how void ye welthy man is, at the least of such
as seem to be sent of god, who sees not? The way to heaven is strait, sharye,
and painful. Math. 7. The way of the welthy man lyghtlye is large, soft, and
pleasant.

I think yt saint James speaking these words. Ia. 5. which I will repete
anon, thought the more part of rych and welthy men to be children of the
world. and carnal. Go to you rich men (says he) weep and howl like dogs
in ye wretchidnes ye shall come upon you. Your riches be putrified, and your
precious garments cate^ of the mothes, your gold and silver is rustye, and
the ruste of it shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh
like as it were fire. (...) on have laid up wrath for your selfs, against
the last days. You have eaten and drouke upon the earth, and nourisshe^ your
hearts with pleasures. I dare say, having respect to the divine wisdom of
saint James, to the histories of old time, and to the rich men that be in
our time (whose lives commonly (...) a wise man apply to the rule of the
gospel, shall seem but a little to agree unto it) that saint James thought
that very few rychemen should escape, whom this saying shall not touch.
Saint Paul knowing the nature of welthe and riches, wylleth us having
noryshinent and where with we may be clothed, to be content: for they that will
be made rich, fall into tem^^tio^, into the share of the devil, into many
despres noysom and improfitable, which drown men in the sea of death and
perdition. 1. Timoth. 6.

Saying therefore it is a hard thing for the rich worldly quiet and welthy
men to be saved, and that but few of them as it should seem by ye premysses do
enter in to gods kingedome, me think we christians have no great cause to be
sorye, either for any temporal things lost, or to enuy^te those which we
have not yet possessed. But saying with the Psalm miste: It is good for me O
lord that thou haste humbled^ne, set naught by them, rather being as
Meremaydes, ^utifynge us with their ^a^^e (...) melodies, unto ye necks of
^one and per^ition. If Hereules had feared, least he should have b^^ cast away
with a shyrt made be woman's han^e, he would ueuer have woun shyrt (...) long
as he had lived. And shall not we fear (...) be ^^^pte in (...) welthe, which
in manner is (...) less dauth ^ermis for our souls, then was Deyau^^^ is shyrt
for H^rt^les body.

As we have partly ^o^^ydered the abundance of things and wealth, so we wit
poverty (...) so, and adverse fortune, whose works and ^ffe^tes (...) (...)
shall (...) clean com^aty (...) is saw before none (...), th^^ worldly
success (...) and (...) tha^ (...) th^^ devil and sin: so adverse fortune
reteynynge us commonly in honest behavior, and in the favor of god,
stops up the wyndowes and d^res which lead men to wickedness and gods
dyspleasure. It stops up ye wyndowes to adultery, to the contempt of god and
pride: finally in a manner to all those vices, where unto by wealth they were set
wide open. If ye list to have a prose, read for iptures, mark well the ^abe
of David's life, which so long as he was pore, ^oste with afflictions, troubles
with the persecutions of Paul, be (...) of^nery ^^de with dan^gers driven
(...) place to place, it was post to p^^es, ^ustcyninge hunger and (...)
having few or no fre^es, lodg^^g, nor substance, lived in the fear of god,
loving him, calling upon him nyhe and day, trustyng him, and vo^^ of all
vices. Hieroboam, so long as he was but a pore man, not yet auau^sed to his
kingdom, lived in the laws of god without reprehension. But upon what vices
these two stu^bled, after the came to wealth, ye hard before. Thus ye se how
the one lays blocks in the way that leads to heaven, the other in the
way that leads to fearful dammtion. Wherefore our loving ^^ther ever
correctyng ye children whom he loves. Pron. 1. gives adversity as the better
of these two for yt most part, to his ele^^ as a medicine to the^ which have
offended, left they fall again to them, which have not greayly trespassed
(howbeit every man is a sinner and deserves evil) as a medicine preservative,
least they should ^^yde. The which medicine, though it seem to us at the first
bitterer than any ga^^e, yet (...) we save it with the swetenes of his
commandments, and pleasant promises, we shall find it more delicious than
the honey comb. It is written, Proner. 3. My dear son, thou shall not neglecte
the correction of the Lord, neither thou shall be discoraged when thou act
reproved, whom the lord loves, he corrects, the child which he
receives, he scourges. If ye suffer chastisement, god does offer him self to
you, as unto his children. What child is there but his father chastith him? By
this scripture ye may se, that our adversities, and afflictions be not tokens
of gods I^e toward us, but of his good will and (...) Wherefore they ought not
to (...) courage, but rather encorage (...) not to make us sad, but men not
sorrowful, but Joyful: in th^^ he of his goodness will vouchsa^^ to take us as his
children, to s^^^ due our ^^eshe, to strengthen o^^ souls. By torubles, as
say^^ Paul says: he was strengthen ned. 2. Cor. 12. to vanquysh our enemies.
Whereby we shall be mete at ye left, to have with him the quietness which his
son I su christ with the effusion of his blood bought for us, where shall be
no death, no wayling, no w^^ rynes, no sycknes, no him ge^, (...) thyrst, no
chafynge, no corruption, no necessity, no sorrows.

Suffer we therefore wilingly and gladly the correction of our heavenly father
and afflictions eu^a as his only (...), whom he spared not, but permited to be
whypte and scourged, (...) abide hunger and cold, to be in worsse case for
lodgyng, than the foxes in the field, or the birds of the air, and at the
length (...) suffer most ignomyaous our death. Let us in all our afflictions
comfort our selves with the example of him, remembung that the dyscyple is
not above the master, nor the servant above his Lord: neither yet the
inferior members above these head. Our head is christ, (...) that he has
not abhor^ed afflictions, they may not be (...) any (...) ^ined of us.

I^^er^^yle that (...) little disdain them, that we have great pleasure, and
(...) We would be (...) tente, to handle the table, at the which Christ did
fytte, the garments or vestures he used, or other like relics, being as
consecrate with his holy touching: much better me think we ought to be
apaied, to handle afflictions, as relics which besides that they were often
hal^ wed by his most holy touching be also commanded to be fingered of us,
specially saying yt more ^^wardes, and merits come by the handeling of the^,
than by yt aforenamed. Do we not disdain the I say, but rather (as Paul will
le^h let us) glory i our troubles For trouble works patience, patience
works proof, proof w^^keth hope, which shall not confound us, Roma. 3.

I will not yet cease to speak more of the precepts of god as touching this
point: Some thou coming to the ser^uce of God, prepare thy self to
tentation, sustain the sustentations of ye Lord, and be joined unto him,
sustain, whereby at the last thy life may be increased. Ecclesi. 7. Thus ye se
that the children of god, be commanded still to bend them selfs to te^tation,
and adversity, which follows them none otherwise, than the shadow follows
the boby.

Now mark the end that is promised to our afflictions: If we bear the^ as
we ought to do truly I say unto you says christ to his friends, you shall
weep and lament, they which be of ye world shall joy: you shall be sorry, but
this sorrow of yours shall be turned into solace. Iobn^. 18. I do think that
the afflictions which we do ^uffce here, be nothing (...) comparison of the
glory we shall have in ye world to come. Romans (...) our excedyng tribulation
which is momentayn and light, prepares an excedyng, and an eternal wayght of
glory unto us, while we look not on ye things which are seen, but on the
things which are not seen: for things which are seen, are temporal, but
things which are not seen, a^^ eternal. 2. Cor. 4. although the earthly
house of this our habitatio^ (Paul means the body be ^^irupied, we know
that we shall have a buyldyng of god, (...) house not made with manner ha^^e,
but everlasting in he^ ^en. 2. Cor. 4. who heatinge the promises, is so ^^ony
hatred that he will not take in good word what so shall (...), be (...) never
so heinous, horrible, and perlous to his mortal members?

Few men will refuse to suffer for the space of a whole yet: the physycyans
tortures, now his veins to be cut, now paynefullye to be bathed, now to
eat most bitter pylles, otherwhile to fast, and to be punyshed many other
ways, that his body which is mortal, after these sorrows delivered of his
sickness, may joy for a time: much less a christen heart should stycke to
sustain troubles, mysfortune, and myseries, here for a while, that the soul
which is immortal, may after Joy for ever. With joys, not such as the
poet Pyndarus does attrybute unto happy souls, pypynge, playing, or
synging, pleasant gardens, gorgy^use houses and goodly spectacles, playenge
at dyse, tennysse, or tables, or other like: but such as neither ear has
herd (Paul wytnessynge) nor eye has seen. With such joys, as Faith takethe
not, Hope touches not, Charity apprebendeth not, they pass all desires and
wysshes: Gotten they may be, esteemed they can not be, Blessed is that man says
saint James. 1. which suffers tentation and trouble: for after his proof he
shall receive the crown which god has promised to them which love him. Every
castigation seems to have no pleasure but rather grefe, howbeit at the last
it shall give a quiet fruit of justice, to them which have been troubled by
it. Hebre. 12. Who I say, hearing these confortable promises, will not merrily
(...) with saint Paul, what thing in the world shall separate us from the love
of god? shall trouble or persecution? shall nakedness, or dangers? shall the
sword, or hunger? as who say none of all these, neither death nor life,
angels nor princes, things that be present, neither that be to come. Height
strength, nor depnes shall separate us from the love of god which is in Jesus
christ our lord. Roma. 8.

But to conclude, seeing that youertie, troubles, miseries, and afflictions, be
vanquysshers of ^yce, maynteyners of virtue: saying that they be appointed of
god our father to them that love him, and not as tyrannical torments, but as
fatherly corrections and friendly medicines. Also that god has promised to
those which patiently bear them, perpetual quietness, joy, and endeles
solace. Why should we not with thanks gyuynge be very glad of them? If we
be otherwise affected, let us not think the contrary, but we be disposen much
like unto them, which labor of feruente agues, whose true tayste taken from
them, by the reason of they? disease, can not away with such meats as be
most wholesome, and conducible to their health, but desire those which make
most against them, and for the increase of them sickness. Wherefore if we
chance so to feale our selves, cease we not to solicit the Lord with
prayers, that he will vouchsafe to take this spiritual ague from us, whereby we
may with judgment reiecte the sweet, but poy^ senfull baytes and daynties of
the devil, and the world. And taist those meats which be most wholesome, and
profitable for our souls.

IT is to be wo^dered fred Vrbane if these things ca^ not move christen men to
suffer adversities, and despise worldly success, as a very vain vanity,
seeing that the vnfatthfull gentiles, were moved to the same, with things of
much less importance. Some of the^ as Socrates and Diogeneg considering that
worldly wealth, could nothing less do, tha^ cause a quiet, and merry mind and
as a thing of no worthiness, neglected it, and as a thing of no price, set it
as naught. Whese consideration Plu^ tarche as it appears by this his
sumilitude, approves as not untrue. Likewise says he as a m^ going to the
sea, and first carried toward the great ship in a li^^ ele bote, there
begynnyge to us wit desires much to be at the greater vessel, supposing to
find ease therein, where he is worse troubled with the same grefe, tha^ he was
before. Even so a man be yng in a vile state, and pore case, and not well
content therewith, couiteth auauncement to higher condition, his goods also
and his substance to be increased. To ye which things if he chance to
attain, he shall be more unquieted, then he was before in his former misery.
If ye require examples, look to Alexander the great, king of Macedonie, which
possessyng in a manner all the kyngedoines, riches, and wealth in the world, for
all that was so ^itle quiet, that when he herd (...) wocritus disputinge of
many worlds, wepre bytterly, that he the better, but rather ^udrse: no ner
the quieter, but rather more unquiet. I was ones of all emperors, and rulers,
the tychest, subduinge valiantly Batbatous nations, and people innuinerable:
Yet these things so little made me quiet, that by the reason of them, with all
kinds of unquietness, my mind was troubled: How ambition and in satiable
desire of mo regio^, rule and imperies, did occuppe my mind paynefully, now
mad tagynge: and ire, provoked by bronkennesse, which by the reason of
abundance of goods I usually accustomed, punysshed me, and with violence
somtyine moved me to the murder of my friends. How unlawful lusts of the
body, now Envy vexed me. Other while the helly furies flyinge about my
conscience, (...) not sufferynge the memory of my murder, or other evil
factes, to be obliterate, so sore grieved me that I would now and than have
pearsed my heart with a sword, or have pyned my self to death, if I had not
ben let. Dues as a fool, I pryferred the state of Alexandre before the
condition of poor Diogenes, but then I judged like as did vuwise Mtdas, than I
knew not ye the ber tues of the mind only, caused true quietues, worldely
success, nothing profitinge, but greatly deminesshinge the same. What can be
more true than his oration? whom should it not moan if it were spoke of the
mouth of Alex ander (as he would speak it dout les if he might return to us)
to esteem the world according to this worthynes Me^ouer (...) may se by the
example of (...) memnon, how little quietness worldly wealth infers. He was
so much unquieted whis hight state, that he lamented his chance in that he was
king, and ruler over so many people. Laertes which to the sight of the
world, lived welthely and wenderous quiet, yet was not quiet in deed, as
witnesses Plutarche, On the otherside Mctrocles vile and beggetlye, in winter
covering his body with a tubbe for lack of house rowmthe, and in summer
taking up his ynnes in the poches of temples, farynge not so well as did the
dogs of ye cytis, yet was of so quyete a mind, (virtue being the author
thereof) that his quietness among w^ytrue shall be dadde in perpetual memory.
^ectus about to be burned (such was the virtue of his mind) was said
nothing to be unquieted at all.

Thus I say, some of the wise gentyles considering, and se^ng that true
quietness proceeds owe ly of virtue, estenied worldely^ w^lthe not of a steawe.
E^t we Christen men (such is our lack of true wisdom) which know or ought
to know, if we remember so much as I have spoken before, that there is no
quietness to them which be of God, but quyetues of mind, and consryence, that
is procuted only up virtue, pureness of life, and hope specyallye, Which (as
saint Paul says) comes of proof, proof of pacyence, pacyence of troubles,
and so consequentlye, that our quietness must ^ame by troubles, what (...) we
not a^ tempte, to obtain worldelye vanytyes? ^unnynge by sea and by land, by
rocks and fandes by Scylla and Syrtes by fyet and sword (as says the poet)
fearing no Ieopardies. nor casting any pe^^lles, like men out of out
wits, seeking fire in the sea, and requy^ynge water of the dry pomysh stone.
O blindenes, what I pray you have we gotten when we have procured riches or
worldly presecrementes, whose purchasing commonly is paynfull, the kepinge
full of besy fear, the use dangerous, the loss deadlye what I say have we
gottettranqiuilite of mynder no truly but access of unquietness: for ye more
that goods yrowe, the more gre weth care. Miserable says the poet is the
keeping of much money. In the which respect Hora tius Uulteurs desired his
friend after he had made him rich, to take his goods from him again: What
then? satisfyeng of thy appetite that thou had to worldly things? nothing
less. for as he which has the dropsy the more he drynketh the more he
thirsts, in like case the worldly man the more he has, the more he courteth.
Iucrease of virtues? no, rather an explosion of them all. What than? truly a
bait to al vice and mischefe. And if thou take not very good head, an
instrument to work thine own confusion.

O perlous and most pestilent harlot (I mean the world) which is
transfigured in pleasures, and abundance of riches of the earth, in
pleasures and voluptuousnes. And I call her not only an harlot, but the most
fylthy, and most durtye queen, whose face is foul, how rible, sharp bitter
andctuell. And in this most wherein all they be counted without forgive nes,
whom the deceyueth. And although her countenance, be so filthy, and so
wild, so ba^ barouse, and so cruel: yet many be snared by her, and when they
se all things in her body full of peril, full of death, full of mische^ yet she
is desired of theyin, ai^ counted a thing to be loved, and coupted.
Notwithstanding that she makes no man better, wiser, nor more teperate: no man
more favorable, gentle, nor prudente. Finally that she rhaungeth no angry
person, into a man meke of behaulour, neither teaches the voluptuous man
sobriety, nor the impudent shainefastnes, neither at any time by her is got
ten any kind of virtue, to the soul, No rather like Circe, whithe (as Homere
writes, chalinged by enchauntmentes Ulysses men into hogs, dogs and other
brute beasts, she makes of the^ which be virtuous, vieious: and of reasonable
men, beasts unreasonable. Whereunto may we impute the fault, that some which
have been meke and gentle, (as it thau^ceth often) by the reason of ire and
furiousnes be changed from men as though it were into raginge lyo^s? but to ye
enchaunting Circe the world. What makes them which have been modeste, sobre
and temperate (as we have examples to many) for their dronkennes and beastly
intemperancie, most like unto the unclean, and filthy hogs? the en
chauntynge Circe the world. What takes out wits from us, by the reason of
pride, and causes us shamefully to forget our selfs and out mortal state?
the enchauntynge Cyrce the world. To be short this same enchauntynge Circe the
world, chaugeth even the most part of them, which have to do with her wooryshe
ornaments (extept it be some spiritual Ulysses) into very brutisshe asses, if
ye have respect to heavenly wisdom. Horace considering her hoorisshe
charms, calls her riches, and ornaments matter of the great evil, and
counsels them, which be loath to be wicked, to hurl them into the sea.

Let us therefore not pass for the lack or loss of riches, or other worldly
things that be so perlous, but rather prepare our selves partly to follow the
counsel of Horace, thought he were an ethnicke: not in casting a way of our
goods, if we have them, but living as though we had them not. And gyuynge
them away, rather than our souls which god has dearly boughte should take
hurt by them. Remembrynge that christ says. Math. 5. It is better to go to
he a uen, having but one eye or one arm, than to the fire of hell with u^eyes
or two arms. It is better with poverty, and afflictions to be favored of
god, than with we lth and prosperity to have his displeasure. Let the children
of the world, and the devil (which is the prhree of the world) seek their
wealth, that is propre unto them, and let them enjoy it. Let us which be of
christ, seek and inquire for beauenly wealth which by gods promise shall be
peculiar to us. Let the Cretians, Epicures, Beotians, with such other beastly,
barbarous, and ca^nal people, pass for things that be pleasant for the
body, and perteyne to this present transite rye life. Let us which be or ought
to be spiritual, pass for things that perteyne to the spirit, and life to
comme. But I will return again to the gentiles, for I began to declare with
what things they were moved to the contempt of the world. There were other
of them, of the which forte I have named two or three before, whom she desie of
know ledge moved to dyspise worldelye things utterly, perceiving that it was
hard and uneath for them, having the use and abundance of tempo, all goods,
attently to apply their study. In this point who does not se them to be
commended above the more part of us Christans? which although our religion
requires minds more alienate from the world, and addict to the contemplacion
of spiritual things, yet our whole minds and strength, by wholly intent to
things that be vain, and earthlye: scarcelye beleuynge the saying of Christ,
No man can serve two masters, God and the world. Matthew. 6. Neither
regarding the saying of saint Paul. No man serving in the ways of God,
entangleth him self with worldelye besynes. 2. Timoth. 2 that is to say in my
Iugdement, is cheiflye and whooly given to ye purchasing and dysposynge of
carnal and earthye things, either yet the commandment, wherein god
requires our love with all our hearts, minds, and souls, not bestowing any
part of it of these temporal clouds, and vayue shadows. Math. 19. it is
ashame that the naked knoweledge of natural and vile things, should obtain of
the gentiles, which neither the knoweledge of heavenly things, neither the
ca^^ of our souls, the commandments nor promyses of god, can obtain of us,
that be Christen men. Other of the gentyle were, (in whose no^bre was
Aristedes,) moved with no hope of good things, ye should chance after this
life, even for very virtues sake only fansied not, but neglected worldly
welthe. Cheiflye seeing it for the most part chance to the worste, and
noughty selowes: to the best and most virtuous, miseries and troubles. The
thing is partly declared by the aunswers of poverty and riches in Aristotle's
problem. It was asked of riches, why he used to dwell with the worst, the
best as though they were disdayned. He answered, that his mind was ones to
have tarried ever with them that were good, but Jupiter enuieng this his
purpose, put out his eyes, and sense he lost his sight, it was euet his
chasice lyghtely to happen on the worst. It was also asked of poverty, why
she did still visit the good men, and pane by them that were wicked and
noughtie. She aun swered that good men could tell how to entreat her. (...)
ou shall read that such murderers as Tantalus. Ambitious, as Crcsus.
Couitous persons, as Crassus. Sycophantes, as Cyllicon, had of wealth great
aboundau^ce, On the other part such just and good men as Aristides, Tato,
Vticensis, Fabius Maximus, Anaxagoras, and Plato. were ever in great need and
troubles, indige^ cte, and afflictions. Truly though scripture does not
provoke me, yet charity partly moves me, to think that god had his elect
even among the gentiles, and ye he would have them afflicted, no other wise
than those which openly profess him. Many naughtyfeld was (says ye greek
poet Callims chus) be rich and welthy: the good miserable, and pore. But with
these things we must not be moved. The consideration of ye thing was
sufficient to set the mind of Aristi des at utter defia^ce we the world and his
ornaments. Yet we knowing by gods word, as by the 21. chapter of Job, by
ye. 30, Psalm by ye. 22. chapter of Hieremi that evil men do live welthly,
auaun ced, and comforted with all kinds of daynties, extolled as the Cedars of
Libanus, that al things do prospere with them, and they? sede after them. On
the otherside that goodmen be afflicted, punys shed, and vexed: yet had we ra
there be nombred among the welthy, and wicked, and to be Ims tatours of their
sect, tha^ among the godly, which by their patience, and forowes shall
penetrate the henens. We had rather with welthy Nabal and his temporal
pleasures, descend to the devil, than with poor Christ and his temporal
trouble, ascend into the kingdom of god his father. But it is said in
scripture. Prouer. 14. The extremity of Joy is occupied with mourning. Ones it
shall repent us fore, not without the Singing of Lisimachus song. King
Lysimachus by chance of wars, taken of the Scithians in his captivity, was
so sore pressed with thirst, that he was gladdr for a d^aughte of drink to
sell his kyngedome. Afterward remembryng for how short a pleasure he had
soldes thing most precious, cried out and wept, saying: Alas how mad was
I, to sell a noble imperie for the satisfienge of my affection, and grydy
belly. I fear it will be some of our chances at the last, which have the
world in such estimacion to sing like wise this sorrowful song. O we
^niserable and brayneles fools: which would for vain pleasures, and
transitoriewelth, less the toral kingdom of god, with the eternal pleasures,
which he has prepared for them, that love him and renounce the world. The
which world, alas, what is more vain? man, the best part of it is compared
of scripture to the flower of grass, the grass shall be whithered, and the
flower shall fall down. O happy souls, which in all your afflictions have been faithful and constante: to you the spring of the lord shall ever be
^^orisshinge and grene: Woe be unto thse false illusione of the world, baits of
perdition hooks of the devil, which ham so shamefully deceived us, and
seduced from the right pathe of the lord, into the by ways of confusion,
and brears of perpetual punishemente. Where our weeping shall never cease,
nor the turies of our conscience shall never wax old. At ye last fernde
Vrbane, seeing it is so that as welthe and riches causes unquietness of mind,
so adverse fortune, and poverty, to a Christian man's heart, infers deep
quyetnes. Seeing that as wealth stays and lets us from the contemplacion of
heaueniye and spiritual things, so adues sitie takes the stay and the l^^
away. Seeing that as the uature of worldelye success is to make us be nombred
among the vntuste, so is the nature of afflictions to end ice us to the number
of them that be good, godly an virtuous. Let us love poverty, and embrace
afflictions, as things most expedient and necessary for us. Let us fear and
beware of welthe, as a thing (except we have grace to use it) most deadlye,
deuillish, and dangerous.

But thou will ^^^per chance, sir if ye were in my case, your mind woldbe
trouble no less tha^ mine I have wife, and children, a family, which the law
of nature and honesty byndeth me to noutishe. I have neither money, nor other
goods to defend the^. Besides that my body has no such health, as is
necessary for a nedy and poor man. I am thaufed also a^ though these things
before were nothing, with sclaunders and in ruries. Whom I pray you wold^ not
these things discorage, and in manner make as a man desperate: It the case be
as thou say^, beware well, and take diligently heed, least the devil use the,
a^ he does his, and the children of damnation being in like anguyshe. Beware
he bring the not to dam nable mystruste: Neither let him lead the to any
dishonest crafts as theft, periurse, adultery, murder, deceit, or such like,
for the unlawful augmentynge of thy substance, so making that thing which
god has offered the, as a mean, whereby thou mighteste the rather approach
unto him a mean to perdition, and helly fire.

But if thou be in these miseries, remember ye they come not raze shely, but
even of ye Lord. There is no evil, says scripture, chaun seth to the or any
other in the city, which the lord has not wrought. Am. 3. Of the Lord I
say which as it is written in the third chapter of the Apocalipse chastises
all the children, that he loves: whereby he may with a fatherly affection
correct them. Whiles we be judged of the lord, we be corrected, lest we be
condemyned with them of this world. 1 Corin. 2. Remembrynge these thinhes,
let us in all our myseries comfort out hartest, and say unto our heavenly
father as did Crates to fortune after his ship wrake. Crates after he had
lost by ship. wrake all that he had: said this with a merry chere: Go to
fortune I know what thou meanest. I am sure thou do intend none there, but
call me to philosophyr go to I am well content to come thither as thou call
me. Even so say we to our heavenly father when we be afflicted: Go to most
bountiful father, I know what thou meanest, I know thou do none other, but
call me to repentance, Lo I come wyllyngly, thither as thou do call me.

Permytte not the devil, I say thine enemy to bring the being nedye and
poor, to des^eration. But fly from him ^yghtly to gods word, as to a
most strong fortress. For there by reading or hearing the promises of god,
thou shall be sufficiently armed against him. Read the syxte chapter of
Mathewe, where Christ him self pronounteth these words to them which be his
faithful: I say unto you, be not careful for your lives what you shall eat,
or what you shall drink: nor yet for your bodies, what you shall put on. Is
not the life more worth than neat? and the body more of va^ewe than raiment?
behold the ^oules of the ^yre, for they sow not, neither reap, nor yet carry
into their barnes, yet your heavenly father fedith them. Which of you (though
he took thought therefore) could put one cubu^ to his stature? Why care ye
than for raiment, consydre the ly^lye^ of the field, how they grow, they
labor not, neither spynne, and yet for all ye I say unto you, that even Salamon
in all his royalty was not arrayed like unto one of these. Wherefore if god so
cloth grass which is to day in ye field, and to morrow shall be cast into
furnace: shall he not much (...) do the same unto you, D ye of little faith?
Therefore take (...) thought saying: What shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, (...) wherewith shall we be clothed. After all these things seek the
gentyles. For your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all these
things. But rather seek first the kingdom of god and the ryghtuousnes thereof,
and all these shall be ministered unto you. Thus by promise made by the mouth of
Christ, wherein was never found disceyte, nor gyle, we shall lack nothing
(if we be faithful) that is necessary for us. I have been young (says the
prohet) and I have waxed old: yet I never saw the ^uste left, nor ^s sede
beggynge bread. Psalm. (...). Calte thy cogitations on the lord, and he shall
nourishe the. (...) 4. be you careful for no worldely thing, but with prayer
and obsecration, let your petitions (...) known of god. Philip. 4. He that
gives seed to the sower, shall give us both meat and drink. (...). Cor. 9.
Comfort we our selves therefore beleuynge these promises, and never
despairinge vttetly.

But because we believe those things the better, whereof we have proof, I will
bring examples whereby ye shall se that go^ both will and is able to perfourm so
much for his faithful, as he has promised. Daniell cast into ye lions den,
many a mile from all such friends as would ministre meat or drink to him,
ha^^ meat suddenly sent of god by the prophet Abacuck. Sampson almost lost for
thirst, after the conflict that he had with the Phili^ans, prayed to god and
found drink in an asses Jaws. Agar on the wilderness, dispairing of her o^^
life and her childs for lack (...) vittles, and with many a salt tealaieng
the child far from her lest her motherly eyes should sed dye, was fed of
god, and comforted beiond her expectacio^. The poor woman of Sarepta, lokyuge
to dye with her child, the day after the prophet came to her house, had her
oil, and meal so augmented, ye she lacked not till the time of plentye
returned. Therefore wha^ so ever any lack happens be it of corn, or such
other necessaries, despair we not, calling to ^eme^brau^ce this example, let
us think with out selfs yt god is able at al times to increase out corue,
^yenge in the barn, growyng in the fylde, being bread in the ^uen, yea or in
thy mouth, at his pleasure as well as he did ye oil or meal, of the woman of
Sa^epta: or the oil of the dettours wife by his prophet Helise. But (...) it
so chance that no hope be left of our temporal norysshmet, yet have (...) no
just cause to despair. Remembryng that scripture says, man does not only
live in bread, but in every word that proceeds from the mouth of god. The
omnipotent god did use at mour and weapons (yet not necessarily) as
instruments, by the which he did give to his people Israel many victories, yet
his power was only the chiefest an^ for of the same. So though he use meats
and drinks as means whereby he nourissheth us, yet the principal cause of our
sustentation is his virtue and godly power: and as he did often gy^ victories
to the Israelites, their hands and weapons not moved at all: So has he also
fed and ca^ do again his faithful, though worldly meat, and drink be not
utterly ministered. A better proftnedes not, than the example of (...) oyfes and
Hely, whom he sustained with his heavenly power, the spaee of fourtye daycs,
without the ministratio^ of any worldly fedynge, Therefore as Dauyd said: my
sword shall not save me, neither yet will I trust in my bow, So say we, our
meats and drynkes shall not save us, neither will we trust in worldly thin ges:
for the power of god susteyneth us, and in him will we trust by whom all
things do consiste. Col. 1. Which susteyneth all things with the word of his
power Heb. 1. which opens his hand, and fills every beast with his
blessinge. Psa. 145. whose hand being open all things are filled with
goodness, whose face turned away, all things are troubled, whose spirit
withdrawn, al thiu ges shall sail and be brought into dust. 103. Which saves
man and beast. 36. Which covers the heavens with clouds, prepares rain for
the ground, and brings forth grass in the mountains, which gives to
beasts their meat, and to the chyke^s of the ravens calling upon him. 36. in
him, to whom all these things be iustlye asscribed, do we live, move and be.
Act. 17. In whom, of whom, and by whom all things are, to whom be glory for
ever. Roma. 11.

If ye have respect to the before going examples, ye shall perceive yt the lord
after he has brought us even to the extremytye, as the Psalmyste says, can,
and will (if it be expediente) deliver us. Not only from hunger, and thyrste,
but from all other miseries, harms, and adversities, from persecution and
drowenynge, from fire and our enemies, from syckenesse, sclaunders and
death. Who delivered David so often unjustly persecuted from the bloudye
hands of Saul? The three children thruste into the whote furnace, from
burning? Noe from drowenynge, Lot from the vengeance that light on So dome
and Gomor, Danyel from the hungry mouths of the lio^s, the Israelites from the
Egiptians, their enemies from seruitute and intolerable bondage, Joseph from
sclaunders, Susanna from the cruel death the sclauderou^s Judges would have put
hyrto: Peter from his bands and Imprisonment. Who restored so many lepres to
clennes among the Jews, Peter's mother in law from her ague to health, so
many lame to their lymmes, so many blind to their sight, was it not the mighty
hand of god which is not yet abbrcuiate, neither weakened, but as strong as
ever it was. And though it please him to defer our delyueraunce, as it
chanced te Joseph and to Israel oppressed with the Egiptians, whereby his
glory may be more illustrate: yet let us think no other, but he has both
power and will, to help and save us from all miseries, what so ever they be,
if it stand with our souls health, and his glory. If it do not, he will not:
if he love us, if he will not, let us take in goodworth, and conform our
wills to his. Playenge the part of a wise pacient, which would be glad to
have his disease, and the cause thereof expelled by keeping a hard diete, and
receyuynge of bitter medycynes one month and no legar if it might be. But in
case his syckenes can not be healed, except he use those bitter medicines, and
hard diet an hole year. He will rather so do in hope of health afterward, than
by refusyng them, be sick all the days of his life. Even so if that our
souls can not be clear of such dyseases and botches, as shall displease the
eyes of God, except we use adversities so long as we live, asspitituall
medycynes ministered to us by god. Let us be well contented in hoope that we
shall after this life, which is but a pear, no rather a mynute of an hour in
comparyson of the time that is to comme, have health everlasting no more
(...) danger of any maladies.

Therefore in such prayers as we make in our afflyctio^s, let us follow the
example of David which in his most trouble said: If it please the lord, he
will delyue^ me: but if he say: Thou do not please me, I am redye and
willing. Follow we the example of our master Christ, which said in his
prayer that he made a little before his death: Father, if it be possible that I
may escape this passion, howebeit not as I will, but as thou will.

Let us behave our selves in our afflictions, as did ye three chyl dren
threatened of Nabugodonosor. The lord (say they) yt we worship can deliver us
from the fire, if it please him. But if it please him not, be it known to the
(D King) that we will not worship thy gods, neither thy Image made of
gold. Learue we also the lesson taught us in the lords prayer: D father, thy
will be fulfilled. And if our carnal affections, at any ryme will rise
against us, steered up of the flesh, and the devil, our enemies, vpbraydinge
us, and endeuourynge to shame us, with our afflictions, to make us blaspheme
god, as though he had forgot us, make we answer to them, as did Aristides to
his cou^ trymen, when they did vpbraide him with poverty: Cease to obsecte my
poverty and afflictions against me, which be vncomlye and unpleasant only for
them, unto whom they chauce against their wylles. I counting my self no better
than my master christ, am well content and pleased with them. Dr if the same
pricks and goydes of the devil (affections I mean) will at any time move us
to that thing which is not godly, nor honest, for vauntage or moneys sake,
for preferrement health of the body, or any other commodity, or comfort,
whereof we seem to have need: Let us make answer to them, as did Matreus
Curious to the Samnites, offering him money. Marcus, Curious was ones a man of
much nobility, riches and renown among ye Romans: howbeit, at ye legth as it
fortuned, he became a very poor man, in so much that his meat for the most
part was only rotes, cold herbs and wortes At chauced ye the embassad ours
of ye Samnites, than being at Rome, and hearing of his poverty, whom they had
known ones to be famous and welthy, came to his house to visit him, where
they foud him in a pore chamber, porely arrayed, and seething coals for his
dynner. They after much communication about to depart, gentilly offered to give
him money, ye which he refused disdainefully with these words: Keep your
money to your selfs you Samnites, for he that can be content with such
apparel, and such fare, has no need of it. Even so say we to our affections,
embassa dours of the devil, and the world Let the world keep his goods and
his prosperous things him self, for he that can be content to live as did
his master christ, has no need of them. But what need these profane
examples, se ynge that we have better in holy scripture. Let us answer them as
Job did his friends: Although the lord kill me, yet I will hope in him
still. Dr as the elder Tobie did answer them which did vpbrayde him with
his poverty and miserable blindness. We be the children of saints, and look
for an other life, which god shall give to all them that change not their
faith from him.

Though it please god so extremelye to punyssbe us, even to the end of our
life, as he did Lazarus, with hunger, cold, and lack of lodging, byles,
botches, and grievous sickness, yet be we not discoraged calling to remebrau^ce
this his promise: He that will persevere even to the end, shall be saved. I am
sure if Lazarus were here again, knowing so much as he knows, though a
hundredth times so many euyls should vex his body, as did ones, yet he would not
be grieved therewith. Let our strength be as Esai says in hope and silence. What
so ever chance, be we quiet and keep silence, even as our master did, being
as a sheep before the shearer, or led toward ye slaugh terhouse, wha^ the
Jews did buf fit him and spytte in his face. He yt commits him self to
god, says scripture, keeps silence, him that keeps silence both god so
beat, that he may amend him, so east him down ye he may raise him, so
slays him, that he may make him alive.

Let us therefore be chereful so king for the lord, which coming boutles shall
come and will not tarry. But what should I say will commee which has promised to
be with us still, even to the end of the world: which as scripture
witnesses, when al our friends, father and mother forsake us, he receives us,
neither will even leave us (for luche is his promise) fatherless and
motherles, but be with us continually in all our troubles, and at the last (as
he did Lazarus, with other of his sort,) clearelye deliver us. In the mean
space do we feed our selves merilye with hope. The proverb says (meaning of
worldly things) hope nortsheth outlawes: much more should the hope of christ's
pmises norish us For the hope of worldly things is fallible. But the hope of
gods promises ca^ not be deceived, neither shall it ever shame us. I have hoped
in ye (o lord) says David, and I shall never be co^fou^ded. More over let us
comfort our selves, consideringe that the man it self is the soul immortal.
The body is but a case after the mind of So trates, a house or a prison rather
as Paul names it, and that the man it self, is no beter for corporal
commodities, neither the worse for corporal incommd bities. But by the
judgment of holy Chrysostom, like as a horse is nothing the better for his
gol ^en bridle, silver sadle, precious trappinges, or other ornametes, but for
his swyftnes, payse, and strongnes: No more is our intetior man for riches
wealth, health of the body, liberty, or other like, but for the virtue of the
mind, and grace of god. Wherefore if we be never the better for riches let us
not fear poverty, nor for health, let us not fear syckenes, nor for good
name, let us not fear sclaunders, nor for liberty, let us not fear
bondage, nor for this commune life, let us not fear death. We be better
says Chrysostom, for the virtue of the mind, which is to think uprightly
of god and to live justly among men. At the other exterior things may be
plukte away from us, this can not, (...) not by the deuell, except we our
selves willingly consent.

The devil although he took from Job all his goods, whereby he might provoke
him to blaspheme God: His health, to slake the constancy of his mind; his
children, to make him speak evil of the godheade, yet could he never take
this from him. But in withdrawynge all worldelye things, he heaped up ye
great tyches of virtue, of the love and favor of god, through pactece. Job
was hurt of the devil, and of his afflictions, as one Pormetheus was of his
enemy. Prometheus was a man which had a great swellynge in his back,
peforming his person very much It chaunsed that his enemyfallyng out with him,
thrust a dagger into ye same deformed place: That done he departed thinking
none other, but that he had slain him. Nowbeit Prometheus had so little harm by
his wound, that where as his back could be cuted before with no phisike, or
surgery, than was made whole. So he received commodity, and health of him ye
intended his destruction and death. Likewise truly it chaun (...) to Job, if ye
thing be advisedly pondered.

Suffer me I pray ^o to speak this by the way, seeing that Job for all these
cruel torments of ye devil, for all these mysfortunes, and punishments was
ueuer (...), deal the worse, whrche had not yet received the law, neither,
the redemption of Christ, nor the grace of his resurrection, moch^ less we
weapened with all these thyuges, should with like evils be harmed. What were the
apostles worse for their hunger, thyrste, and nakedness? Lazarus for his
botches, poverty, and sickness. Joseph for his sclau^ders, Abel for ye cruel
death he suffered? Were they not more noble and crcelle^ for these amo^n men and
prepared they not for the^ selves throught these crowns of glory with god?
Therefore let us ever b^ merry in christ, and pass for no worlydly miseries,
for lack nor ^usse of goods, for sclaunders nor imprisonment, for syckenesse,
^danyshement, nor death. But if it chance that all our goods be taken from
us, let us say with ^^ob and without soro we: Naked we came out of our mothers
wombes, and naked we shall go hence. We be sclaundered, put we ^he saying of
the lord before our eyes: Cursed be you when men speak well by you: be you
glad and rejoice, when they reiecte your name. We be banyshed remember that we
have no dwelling place here, but look for one that is to come. We fall into
great syckenes, use the saying of the apostle, though this our exterior man
be corrupted, yet thinterior? is daily renewed. Thou art shi^t^ in prison, and
cruel death ha^geth over thy head, set before the Iohu^ beheaded, and so
greate^ prophets head given in rewa^^^ of pleasure, to a dau^sing wenshe. Thou
have notably offended and therefore in thy conscience thou art troubled with
the despair (...) gods mercy for the avoiding of this spiritual trouble,
thy (...) with thy self, that thy heau^^^^ fathrt does swetely expostulate
with the after this sort:

What now my decre thy^^^ why cease not thy spirit at (...) last to be
afflicted (...) why do^^ thou vnwis^y derogate from th^^ multiude of my
inercyes and wh^^ do thou think ye Iam and (...) la^is the tyrant. Danli
us, (...), or some cruel Srpth? D^elles of mercies the father and of all
consolation the god, 2. Cor. 1.
long sufferynge, and of much mercy. Art thou not taught by my ^o^ne Jesus to
call my thy father? Math. 6
Daue not I pormysed that I would be thy father by my prophet Die^ ^emye,
Diere. 1^.
and that thou should be my sonue? Why do thou not therefore ask me
forgeuenes well ^hopynge for pardon? Who is it of you although ye be evil
wh^-which myl not for give his son, for thinking his faults being suppliant
desirynge pardon and promysinge amendment (notwithstanding that he has
prou^^ed him to we an hu^dieth times) ^ think thou that I which air^ the
father of inetries, Epht. 3.
of who we all fatherlyn^sse m^heauen and earth is named? Which possess the
riches of goodness, patience, 20, (...)
and longanimite, not to be re^^^ to for^eue my chyldien truth^ repenting? Be
of good comfort (my child) be so good comfort^^ mistrusting not my mercy,
whie^ surpasses not only man's m^rcp^^ ^owe great so ever it be, but all mine
own wo^kes: Also indgement without mercy shall them feel, whose hearts be
oboutate, hardened and will not repent, wh^ the delight still in their sins,
and will never leave their wy^^ bednes, which contemn my me^des and trust me
not, from them in deed health must neades be far away. Ptal.
But as for the, ^^^pente, and the kyngedome of be^nen shall d^a me nyghe,
trust, and thy faith shall save ^he. I mo^^^ have all men to besaued, Mat. 9.
and (...) man to peryshse, 1. Eimo 2
my fashy^^ is ever to recreate, think pug^ (...) eperyshe utterly which is
abect. It is not my will (believe me) ^^at one of these my little ones ^e cast
away, Mat. 18.
whom I ever lo^ed so well, Ioh. 3.
that I wholde vouchsafe to give my only son for them. But thy trespassc she
great whrefore thou art not lyghtlye ^erswaded to trust in my merry? 1. ^ime.
1
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Math. 9.
^e came to call sinners, and not the fuste, and too save that which was
soste. I know that thou an offendour should offend, and as a transgressour,
I called the from thy mothers womb, yet for my names sake will I make my fu^ry
far of. Esa. 48.
Thy good works can be of no such perfection, that they may be able to save
the, nor, thy evil works (so that thou repent with a full purpose to renew,
(...).
thy life) came hutle the into the heily fire for I am, Esa. 43.
I am which put away thy iniquities for mine o wne sake, and thy sins will
not I remember I am (dear son) I am which put away thy sins for my self,
for my self, and will give my glory to none other. Suppose thy sins be as
red as s^arlette, Esa. 1.
they shall be made as white as snow, which I have scattered as clouds, and
as mist have dispersed the, turn^ to me (I say) for I have redeme^ the, I have
redeemed the, which have pity of all men, and for repentance wynke at men's
sins. Daps. 12
I would thou should know that I thy Lord am meke and gentle. Neither can I
turn my face from the, so that thou will return to me. ^ ^a. 20
It is communlye said, that if a man dimisse his wife, and the ^epartynge
mary^th an other husband, shall he return to her any more? shall not she be as
a polluted and a defiled woman? thou have committed for ^^ication with many
lovers, Diere. 3..
yet for all that am I ready to return to the, so that thou will return to
me. Such is my facilite, so gentle I am, such is my benignite, so great is my
mercy, which thy most loving brother and aduotate Christ, Esa.
that washed the from thy sins in his blood, 20. 8.
has purchased, continually prayenge for the. Have thou not herd how
merciful I showed my self to David, to the Ninevites and Athab, Do ^agoalen,
to the these the publican and other innumetable? why do thou not open the
eramples of them, as a table or glass wherein thou may well l^athe how
exorable I am, ho^redy I willing to forgive. sword^ der with thy self how
heynow fautes I have pardoned them, theft, adultery, mirrder, ^olatry, (...)
what not? (...).
B^ to therefore, be o^ good there, lift up thine ^yrs, mistrust me no le^ger,
turn to me a thou shall be saved, commend thy syyr^^ into my hands, Esa. ^^
and the prin^^ of this world shall have nothing to do we the, for by me the god
of truth thou art truly rebemed.

When so ever deadly despair shall trouble thy conscience, set this oration
before thine eyes! Which is nothing else in deed, but gods own word, written by
his most holy prophets, and apostles, finally ye art so tossed and troubled that
it should seem yt god had clean forg^t the. ^eade the. 49. of Esal, where thou
shall find these words ^io^ said (he means gods elect) the lord has left
me, and the lord has also forgot me. Can the another forgete her infant, and
not pitye the child she has hrought forth. But whether she can or no. I can
not a Sion forget the. A^ ^as how should he forgette them that believe in him?
with whom as it seems by his own words he suffers. What soreuer is done
to one of these little ones, wh^the belene in me, ye same is done unto me. Math.
25. Be that toutheth you, touches the very ball of mine eye. Zacha. 2. And
this should be no little co^solatio^ for the faithful, saying ye they have god
him self as companion, and partakes of their sorrows. for all our afflittio^s
and grefes of ye mind let us require remedies of gods word, which without fail
ca^ mitigate al^ynsnes, that orcupie the har^^ of them which believe in him.

Wherefore it is not bayne tha^ Christ says in the gospel, com^^ unto me all
ye that labor, an^ be looden, and I shall refres^^ you. Neither without a
caust, that Dauyd which had (...) experyence of the comfort teceyued of
gods wor^e, said th^^ Do we sweet be thy mordes (...) Lord to my Jaws? mort
del^tynge my tayste, than the honcombe. What so ever is written, it is written
for out learning, (...) by patience and comfort of scr^^tures, we may have
hope. Romans ^ By this you may gather ye ou^^ comfort is to be required of
scripture believe me, though the mo^^ heinous waves and tempeste^ of this see
the world, be raised by thretening drownyng to Peter ^^ippe, Yet if it be
fastened with ^anchor of gods word, well they may move it, but ouerwhelme it
they ca^ not. And among all other ^et us have in mind those scriptures wherein
we be ascerteyned that our bodies after this commune death shall rise again, won
^erfully glorifed by the same power that formed the^ first. Chose also wherein
the eternal felicity that shall be given to all the^, wh^the after the erample
of Christst, suffer adversities, and overcome the devil, the world with theirs
^s promised, for they shall aboun^auntly comfort the beleuynge people. Lo says
the lord (mentionyng the resurrection and reunynge of our bodies) I will put
breath into you, and you shall be quyckened, I will give you synnowes, and cover
you^ with flessh and skin, I will put into you a spirit, and you shall live
and know that I am ye lord. Eze. 37.

We look for Jesus christ our sau^^ our, which shall trans^igurate our vile
bodies, and co^ form them to his glorious body, by ye same virtue, wherewith he
is hable to subdue al things. Phi^. Doutles like as a grane of wheat so men in
ye gronud, is first putrified and brought as into a thing of noughtryet after
ye springs bpfresshly with a goodlier form, than he had before, So ma^s
body sown in the ground after this temporal life, is first corrupted (...) in
manner brought to nothing, yet at ye last, by his power, which did create al
things of nothing, i^ shall rise again with a form of much more
excellencye, then ever was ye first. Though this things be wonderful, yet
intredible it is not for he ye was able to make all the world with his creaturs
of nothing, must needs be able to make our bodies again of fresh of some
thing. for ye matter of ^ur bodies shall ever temayne in grass, worms, duste,
stones or some other form, even to the last ^ay. And than surely even as La
^arus and christ (whereof we be mem^res and therefore must needs at the ^ast rise
with him being our heave) ^as resuscitate from their slept, (so I may call this
corporal death) ^n like case shall the bodies of all men, some into the
resurrecti^ of tudgement, some of life.

But this word slept (fr^nd ^r^ane) brings me in remembrance of a quest to^
which you moved to ^e at our last being together, and or as much as I could
not tha^ for lack of opportunite connuen^ently give you an answer, by these
letters you shall know my mind, howbeit very brefly, for I purpose to defer
the reasoning of the matter to our ne^t metting. Your question was, whether
that the soul of man after this temorall death, slepeth, as does the body,
void both of pain an^ pleasure unto the day of judgment or no? I answer
that it is as much against the nature of the soul to sleep, as it is against
the nature of the son to be a dark body or of ye fire to be with out heat.
The soul of man being an heavenly spirit, is s^lyuelyke and constant, so
strong^ and vigilant a substance, that naturaly it can not but perpetually
persevere in operation for of his own nature it is a very op^ration and motion
it self, which never cease, but like as the son, which may so ever he is
moved, shyneth and inflammeth (whereof Phaeton as we read in the poets, had
a sufficient proffe) so the soul of man whether so ever it is brought lives
and moves continually. Yea and though the body (which of nature is gross and
drousy) be oppressed with stepe, yet the soul is still occupied in the
memory, in the intellection, or in other of the more excellent powers, as by
drcames every man mayese.

Much less can it slept, when it is clean delivered from the stug gys^he
body. Therefore as the body slepeth, so the soul can not for as much as it is
a substance accommodate to continual mouyng, and can not be weary.

Truly ye error of them is great which persuade them selfs, tha^ the soul
separate from hte body, shall sleep unto the last day, and this error is old
and was confuted by Drigen, and other of his time. Neither was it ever since
received into the church, unto such time as the Anabaptists a pestilent
kind of men, whose madness is execrable, brought it of late days into the
world^ again. But as all other of their opinions be perverse, abhorring from
the truth, and deuelysshe, so is this. Declarynge his patroues not to be
taught in Christ's scoole, but in Galens rather, which affyrmeth the death of
the soul, necessarylye to follow the death of the body.

But leuyng the vain fantasyes of the boting Anabaptists, let us give ear to
gods word. It is written Ecclesia. 12. The puste shall returue to his earth,
from whense it came, and the spirit to God, which gave it.

Where I hope he shall be so far from death and sleep, that he shall live,
delyted with Joys unspeakable. He that hears any words (says Christ) and
believes in him which sent me, has life everlasting, and he shall not comme
into condemnation, but he shall pass from death to life. John. 5. Mark that he
says not, from death to sleep, but from death to life. The parable in the.
16. of Luke does well improve their false opinion.

Where it is written, that Lazatus after his death, used Joy and gladness:
On the other part, that the rich gluttou was grieved and tormented.

If the souls of men should sleep as the Anabaptystes say^, neither should
any Joy have been attributed to Lazarus, nor to the glutton punysshement.

What will they say to these words which Christ spoke to the these: This
day thou shall be with me in paradyse. Will they make us believe that Paradyse
is a dormitorte or a place to slept in? In cast it be, a man would think
that christ is or was ones a stepe therein. for he says, thou shall be with me
in paradise. S^ Paul was tapt. 2. cor. 12. into paradyse, and there did hear
words which a man may not lawefully speak. These words he heard not with
the ears of his body, for it lay prostrate on the ground Actu. 9. But of the
soul, which part of Paul was rauysshed in ^o paradise, where he did hear
and se mysteries. Therefore I can not believe that paradyse is a sle^inge place,
seeing that Paul was so occupied there, in heryng of secrets. Moreover where
as saint Paul defired to dye, and to be with Christ, me think he should
rather have wisshed for the prorogatio^ of his life, it that the soul should
continually slept to the last day, for in this morld after a sort we have the
fruition of god, as though it were by a glass, as saint Paul him self
teaches. But after this life (if the opinions of the Anabaptists be true) we
shall have no fruition of god at all (ercepte it be through dreams) vuto the
day of judgment. Therefore faint Paul's wysshe (if we cre^^t these
antechristes) must needs seem to be soolyshe. The lord says that he is the
god of Abraham, the god of Isaac, the god of Jacob, not the god of the dead,
but of the (...) uynge. Betwyrte the dead and the Anabaptists slepers, I s^
no difference. If saul had been taught by anys of the old^ prophets, that
the souls of men should sleep, he would not have gone about so busely to have
ca^ sedvp Samuel. We read. 1. Pet. 1 that Christ went in spyrite, and
preached unto the spyrites which were in prison, and were disobebyente ones,
when the lenytis of God was looked for, in the days of Noe. Again in the
fourth of the same epistle, that the gospel was preached unto the dead. By
the which testymonye what is mente but thatthe souls of the dead, did scle
the virtue of christ's death. which they could not have bone in case they
had slepte, according to the Anabaptists dream.

Therefore I say believe not these false deceyuours, which endeavor not oncly
to pcrswade the slepc of souls, but also to euacuate the resurrcction of the
dead, and so to abolysshe an article of our faith, and to make our religion
vain. And hereafter when you shall readde or hear any such scriptures, as is
a part of the fourth chapyter of the first epistle to the Thessolonia^s
where is mencyned the sleep of the dead, asscribe it to the bodies, which in
deed shall sleep to the day of judgment, and than shall arise again (the
souls toy ned to them) and awake from they^ sleep undoubtedly. Therefore says
Job: I know that my redeme^ does live, and in the last day I shall rise from
the earth, and in my flesh shall se my sauyoure. Job. 19.

O that happy and merry last day, at the lest to the faithful, when christ
by his coucnaunte, shall grant unto them which shall overcome and keep his
works even to the end, that they may ascend and sit in seat with him, as he
has ascended and sytteth in throne with his father. Apo. 2. and. 3. where so
to we shall be turned into gladness, that no m^^ shall take frtome them. Then as
writes Esai, They which be redeemed shall return, and comme into Syon
praysyng the Lords, and eternal merynes shall be over their heads, they shall
obseyne myrthe and solace, sorrow and waylynge shall be utterly vanquished.
51. Than the Son shall no more give them light, nor the moon discuss the
dark nes for them: but the Lord our god shall be their light, anb comfort
continual. 60. Than dout ye not (be we only constant here in the love and
faith of god) we shall have for earthly powertye, heavenly riches: for hunger
and thirst, saturitie of the pleasant presene of god: for bondage, liberte:
for sickness, health for death, lie everlasting.

For this time friend Urbane I shall desire you to take this poor letter (how
so ever it be) in good worth, and hereafter if it shall please god to call me
to a more quiet living (as ye know I am yet compelled necessarily^ to besto we
in manner all my time and study in teaching of yon^^ scollets) I will write to
you more largely of this argument, and peradventure) God the auctor of all good
things gyuynge me grace) more learnedly. Thus fare you well, at Orforde the rd.
day of March.

FINIS.
Prynted at London in Aldersgate street by John^ Herford.

ANNO.

1546.

Gaudete in domino semper. Philip. 4. Tristicia seculi mortem operatut^ 2,
Corinth. 7.

A sweet consolation, and the second book of the troubled man's medicine, made
and pronounced by Wyllyam Hugh, to his frynd lying on his death bed.

Watch for ye know no day nor hour.

Math. 25. Certius est quod mors, quod mors incertius est nil. If ye list to
learn wyliyngly to dye
And that seems dredefull death to desire
Read this brief book, the doctrine thereof try
But death shall not be dredful, to the godly wise
To the right Worshypfull and his singular good lad^ and may stres lady Deny.
hyrhumble feruaunte wyllyam hughe, wysshethe health.
IF that happi^^ (right worshypfull and my s^^ gular good ^^-dy) may happ^^ to
the estate, a^^ condition of servants, amo^^ the happiest of them, I may
^^stly and worthyly place my self^^ whose hap it was to chau^^ on so
worshypfull, so gentle or^^ther gentleness it self) so benig^^ and virtuous a
maistres: wh^^ syngulare virtues if I should (...) about to erpresse or number,
as (...) should lightly find of mine oration a beginning, so I should hardly
find an end. But I knowing your nature (in this point more than womanlike
to be delyted in nothingtleste, than in hearing pour own praises, have appoyn
ted to set them out (notwithstanding that writers, in their epistles
deditatory for the most part be much in commending those, unto whom they
dedicate their ^okes as Timas the painter did the mourninge countenance of
Agamemnon king of Greece. Timas the noble painter at such time as Ephigenia
daughter of the said king, was killed and sacrificed to Diana (for otherwise
the false gods would not be placate, nor at one with the greeks, which has
offeded her not long before) was send for to describe every part of that
heup and lamentable tragedy, even as it was done, at the last when he came to
the descriptione of Agamemnon his face, it was so sorrowful, sad, and
mooreninglyke, that with all the cunninge he had, he could not in payntynge
represente the same. Therefore he courtinge the sace of the image with a vele,
left the sorowfulnes of it to the imagination of men. Likewise I for as much
as I can not, and more over for that I dare not (lest I should incur your
anger) plain lie speak of the good things, that god, nature, and fortune have
plenteously powerd upon you: I will cover them with the vele of silence, and
leave them to the judgment of those that know you. Specially consideringe
them not to be so obscure, that they neade my gross and vnlet ned style to
make them more notable or better known: for what need is it to hang a
garlande of grene yuie at the tauernes door, where the wine is good, wholesome,
and vendtble? I shall be well content that other men praise the form, obedience,
fruytfulnes, faithfulness, hastitie, benignite, facility, cumlynes, and pitye
to wards the pore (declaring them selves therein to be rethoritions) of their
maistrices when these their virtues be not opentye known, ne commended of
many. As for me as I should ^aue no thank for my labor ^n the ertollynge of
yours, so I should seem to play his part which endeuourethe to give ^yght
to the son, or rather that ^angethe some black thing betwy^t it and the
eyes of men darkennethe his light. wherefore I purpose not (though I shall
seem therefore in this epistle, scantly to perform my duty) to praise or
auaunce your ladyshype at all. Unles it be only in assirmtng that your
ladyshyppe is a wife not unworthy of hy^^ whom god the maker of al honest
marriages, has given you for your husoande. What commen dation is comprised
herein, judge they that know the goodly and gooly qualities, the authority,
and wyscdome: the virtues, and singular gifts, which god has moved him with
all. Not wythstandynge doutles that I in this behalf can scarsely withdraw or
restrain my pen, remembering that I have found your ladyshyppe (and that for
the love and good mind which you here toward good letters not in words but in
deeds, not in one or. ii. things, but in many most benificial: and to say the
truth, a mother in deed rather than a maystris.

Wherefore I have thought it my part by some mean to show an argument of my
honest heart toward you. And for as much as I could not do it otherwise, I
was bold to dedicate this little book unto your gentleness: which book for that
purpose I have written that men might learn to dye patiently, to leave the
world willyngly, and to go unto christ gladly. How necessary such a thing
is to be had among the people (albeit I would wish that one or other should
take the matter in hand, that can handel it more wyttely and learnedly than I
hane here done) they which have been at the point of death, or they that have
serchede the consciences of men, being about to dye, can best express. The
devil doutes, which at all times is busied, and erneslly occupied, in sekyng
the destruction of ma^s soul, in the day of death shows his diligence most:
no we bringgynge a man in love with the world and his commodities, provoking
him to hate death, and to resist as much as lies in him) the will of god,
now leadynge him to vispayre, to the mistrust of gods promises, and
impatiencie. Is it not needful than to have somthynge written and ready,
specially among the vuleat ned, whereby they may learn to despice death, to
contemn the morlde, to obey the will of god, wherhy they may be reduced from
murmuryng to patience, from ^ispayre and mystrust to a fyrme and constant
faith, in the promises of god? Whether this book shall perform so much or
no I can not tell. yet thus much I ^are say, that he which hearethe or redeth
it with a mind and put pose to learn the said things, shall not utterly lose
his labout. Cato vticensis readyng over the book of Plato called Phedone, a
little before he killed him self, ^therwith sufficiently instructed that ysoule
of man was unmortal, ^esptced death and dyed very will ^yngly. Much more a
christyane oratione (although it have not so much as a shadow of the
eloquence or gravity of Plate his book) grounded in holy scriptures and
smelling of wholesome and heavenly doctrine, should perswad^ the christen man
quietly, and gladly to dye. The occasion why I write this book declamation wi^^
is this. It happened me not long ago to visit my frynde, lyeng o^^ his death
bed, whom after my poor wit and learning, I exhyrted to dye christianlye.
Dis friends that than were present, in a while after instantly required me to
write the same exhortatione, even so as I pronounced it unto the sick.
Declaring that so it should most move the reders, hearers, and such as should
need like consolatione. I thinking no less with my self was content herein to
satisfye their requests. The thing written I determined to give to your
ladyshyppe, not for that I thought so sclender and simple a thing worthy of
your worship: but that I might as I said before she we some argument of a
thankful mind.

This I beseech your ladyshyp, how so ever it be, take in good worth, not
lokyng so much to the paruitie of the gift, as unto the mind of the gyuer
thereof. Thus fare your ladyshyppe well. At the court.

BY certain arguments, a m^ may easily con^^cture (derly beloved) that the
last sleep, which to a true christian of all slepes ought to be most
pleasant, by little and little crepith upon your mortal lyms, If my judgment
deceive me not, you or it be long to, shall walk the same way. Which for the
crimes of our first father Aoam, needs must be trodden of all his posterity. Of
all I say, the escape, or evasion of death (whrefore you ought the less to
be grieved (granted to no man. Regu^. 14.
All we says scripture shall dye, and as weak water, shall slide into the
ground, Dapien. 7.
like as there is one entrance for every man into this present life, so one
passage, and departure. Therefore we be monysshid of the prophette not to fear
the judgment of death, Dapien.
but rather to remember things that have happened before our time, anv those
which shall succeed. That is to ^aye, that none of our progeny^ours could
ever escape the dent of death, nether any of our po^teritie shall. We be
admonysshed that we be duste, and into ^uste we shall return, Genes. 3.
by the re^on of death, which for the faut and disobedience of ure first
^^rmed parente, with his inevitable darte, strykethe and deadly wounds all
men, Roman, 5.
he woundethe deadlye, not the wretchyd only, the nedye and miserable, but
the fortunate also, the welthye, and the noble, pen kyn^ts, rulars, and the
rycheste emperors, which in power, and dignite, riches, renoume, and gl^tye,
do excel, and in their tym^ rule the world according as they list. Not the
unlearned only, the rude and barbarous, but tho^^ also, which in learning, and
ma^ners be most instruct. Not the ourtrummyn, and careful captives, but also
the puissant conqu^rers them se^fes. Alexader a king most victoriouse, by whose
power and furiouse wars Asia with Europe was manfully subdued, no man being
able to resyst him, could find no weapon to conquer death. The notable
mysedome of Salamon, the deep lea^ nynge of Aristotle, nor of Galen, could by
any mean avoid death. The cups of Circe, nor the enchauntmentes of Medea,
could repel the violence of death. Cullye, his eloquence could not move him.
The riches of Crass us could not corrupt him. He favored ^ot the beauty of
fair Absalone, ^ether he spared the strenght of ^^ronge Sampson. Dne uyghte
says the poet tarieth for every body, and the way of death must ^ns be trodden
of al men. Like as all the ^iarres that come from the ^^st, though they be
never so ^oodly and bright, yet at the last ^ey go to the west and there
ar^^rdynge to the diueri^te of their ^ircles some ^owly, some spedely withdraw
them selfs, out of our ^yghtieuen so al men which come from the east, that is
to say their ^atiuite into the world, although they glyster and shine here for
a ^easen, yet at the last they must ^edes some rather, some later, ac^ordyng
to the duratione, which they have received of god, fall (...) the west of
death, depatte, and withdraw them selfs from the sight of men. Therefore the
wys^ man Simonides at such ty^^ as Pausanias a noble capitain desired to
learn some good and fruytfull lesson, bad him remember that he was mortal.
Therefore also Philyp the king of M^cedony wallowynge in worldely wealth and
prosperity, comma^^ded his chaumberlayne, that h^ should every day at his
vprism^ sadly repete these words. Remiberking Philip and forget not, that thou
art a man to mortalite subject. Esar. 45.
All flesh is grass, and every man is the flower of grass, the grass shall be
wythered, and the flower shall be dried away. The man (says Job) that is borne
(...) a woman, lives but a short ty^^ replenished with many miseries, ^adeth
as a flower, and is worn away vanisshying as a shadow. ^wherfore not without
a cause the life of man is compared of ^uciane to a buble in the water, ^of
Pindarus to the shadow of a dream, of Eschilus to the shadow of vain smoke.
Cruely if that death should chance but to a few, and to the vnluckest, we
should seem to have a just cause he ^uely (as I think you partly do) to take
death. But seeing that ^^e does as well knock at ye rich man's door as at the
poor: at the happy man's door, as at the unhappy: at the strong ma^s door as
at the weak: at the kings ^owers, as at the sheperdescotes, why should we
not take well in ^orthe a thing importynge such necessitic? Dowe unreasonable
is it for a man to take heuely his death, more than his birthe consideringe
that the one is appointed for man as well as the other, the one as commune as
the other, the one as necessary as the other, and of them both death is the
better? in being sorry to dye, we shall seem to lament in that our lotte is
mortal, and that we be not angels orequall with god. Which is a great
point of folysshnes, myxte with impyetye. If we be troubled with such as be
very calamities in deed, to have. ii. 02. iii. companions we count in a manner
a comfort sufficient: Much more we should be conforted as touching death,
seeing that we have not. ii. 02. iii. but all men of what estate or degree so
ever they be of, as companyons and partakers of the same. yea even the very
saints them selves, and those that were highlye favored of God. Moses which
was admitted to the secrets and misteryes of God, dyed. Dauyd whom God
pronounced to be a man after his hearts desire, dyed. Ihon the euangelyste
most tenderlye beloved of his master, died. Ihon baptiste than whom by the
sentence of Christ none greatter has tysen among the chyldern of men died,
and not saints only, but the dearelye beloved son of God. Christ being
both God and man, Esai. 54.
a lamb most innocente, and without spotte that he might pay our
taunsome, deliver us sinful wretches from thraldom, and pacyfye his fathers
wroth, was content to dye the most ignomiouse death of the crosse^. And
shall we sinners that were begotten in syn, borne in sin, and have lived in
syn, all the days of our lives, be agreued to put of these our v^le and synful
bodies? Christ when he was in the shape of god, and thought it no robbetye to
be egall with God, made him self or no reputacio^, taking upon him the shape
of a servant, and became like an other man, Phi. 3.
and in apparel was found as a man, humbled him self, and became obediente
unto death, that he might auaunce us to the kingdom of his father: and shall
we being but worms, duste, and clay, be loath to dye, whereby we may enjoy
the same advancement? Sisigambe the mother of Darius, king of Persia; for the
very love she bare toward Alexander for as much as he used her somewhat gently
in her captivity, was wonderouse wyllyng of her own accord by death to follow
him after his deceasse, ye even to hell: And shall we christians be sow to
follow Christ, which in raptiuite has reteynyd us well nor evil, but
brestinge utterly at his bands, has clearly delivered us? Sisigambe
vehemently desired to follow Alexander which was her enemy in deed more than
her frynde: and shall we be unwilling to follow Christ, which is our frinde
most faithful and assured? She desired to follow him which made her poor,
and shall not we covet to follow Christ, that has empouerysshed him self, to
make us rich? She was content to follow him that made her of a fre woman and a
queen a bond ha^dmayde, and shall we by our wills refuse to follow Christ
which has made us of vile slaves, and beggarly captives, fre men, and kings:
She would needs follow Alexander, although she could not tell where to find him,
ne in his presence how to be intreted, and shall we be loathe to follow Christ
whom we know certainly to be of the right hand of his father? where weshal be
sure (if we dye faithful) to find him and for ever to dwell with him with most
gentle entertainment? She would follow him that did not look, call, nor send
for her, and shall not we wyllyngly follow Christ, when his pleasure shall be to
call for us. Christ I sayour lord ^t our god, our life (as it is written) and
the length of our days calls us: and for asmoch as the days of men be
determinate (as Job says) of god: we may not asscribe our death to the
startes, Job. 14.
or destiny, but unto ye calling of god, in whom we live move and be: of whom
comes both death and life, Eccle. 7.
which has appointed our terms that we can not pass, with whom is the
number of our mouths, Math. 10.
without whom an hear can not fall on the ground from our heads: much less
the hole bodies. For he that works all things for him self, Droucr 10 Sapi.
^0.
has power both of death and life. I can much commend the commune people,
for as much as they seem to imitate saint Cipriane in using this phrase: when
it shall please god to call me to his mercy and such like. Wherein they de
clare them selfs, not to be of their opinion, which think that men be not
cared for, ne governed (...) god, but that all things d^^ chance even by
very tortune. The which opinton if it were true, God should either be
ignorant of many things, or else abhor from his creatures. And therefore
should he seem either not true, or not good. But this matter left, I will
return to my put pose, seeing that it is appointed for all men to dye, and
when (...) shall please god to call them, l^^ us be content merrily to depat^e
thither, and when as our heavenly, and most bountiful fathet shall call us,
remembringe ever that we ought to work not our own wyll^s, but the will of
god, according to the prayer that we customable, by the commau^ dement of
Christ. Dowe preposte rous and perverse a thing is it, to desire that the will
of god may be fulfilled in heaven and in earth and yet when he wylleth us to de
^arte from this world, we would by our wylles resist him, and like unto ward
and stubborn servants, are rather drawn with the band of necessity, than
with ^oue or obedience due to the will of god? There be none of us but we will
wysh delyueraunce from this Egypt with her captivity and troubles, and to dwell
with god in the land of promission, where is al joy and quietness: pet we be
loath after that god has brought us even to the gate, of the said land (for
as the course of our life is a raise to death, so death is the gate of
everlasting life) Do enter in by it we would gladely be honored with heavenly
rewards, but we be unwilling to go where they be. The cau^^ would eat sweet
milk, but she is loath to wette her feet. wh^^ should we pray so often let the
kingdom of heaven come, if we besomuch delyted with earthly bondage? why do we
pray ye the day^ of the kingdom may he hastenth, if we be more desirous here to
serve ye devil, tha^ to reign in heaven with christ? but let us break our
own waiward wylles, conformyng them to the will of god, and showing our selfs
wyllinge at al times to pay, that we ow^. What other thing is it to dye, tha^
to pay such things as was for a time lyberallylent us? what honest heart will
not, and that willingly, at ye lest if habilite fail not, pay again. xx. li.
to him, which gently did lend it at his nedt, when so ever it shall be
required. And shall we stycke to pay to the ^arthe the mother of us all, our
^odies of whom we borrowed the^, and our souls to god our father that
bountifully did lend them? God forhydde. No, we ought to be much more prope^se
to pay our souls to god, than the better to ^aye his money. For of the payment
of the money few or no commodities do ensue, but after the payenge of our
souls to God, ^nnumerable pleasures, and infinite commomodities succeed. For
then at the lenght they be luckely brought from darkness to light: from fear,
to securite: from travel to quietness, from a thousand dangerous syrtes his
rocks, and waves, into a sure haven: from the use of vain, vile, fylthy, and
transitory things, to the fruition of the eternal deite of god. What thristen
man myll not (...) glad of such an exchange? w^^ loving child will not
harte^^ covyt deliuerauuce, from the m^^sery, bondage, and tyranny (...) this
world, and to dwell with his most merciful father in heaven. Oblindues. what
cause ha^^ we I pray you to hate death? (...) whose mean we be made of b^^ men
fre, of strangers, homed ^^lers, of beasts, like unto angels. If that a
great ruler happen to call any of us to a kynge^ or emperors court,
promisin^^ to do for us, to set us our with temporal riches, to endue (...)
with worldly possessions: we think our selves very fortunate: and when god the
rular of all rulars, and king of all kings shall (...) us to his court, and
give us inheritance, and possessions, not in earth, but in heaven, which be
instant, and shall never be take ^omvs, by storms, nor tempests: ^y craft, nor
subtilte of the law: ^y oppression, nor tyranny: by ^eath, the devil, nor
sin. Shall be think our selves vnfortu^ate? No truly, if we be well in our
wits: But rather count that ^me when so ever it shall come, ^fall times to be
most happy: for ^s much as than the kingdom of god, ye reward of life, the
toy of ^ternall health, perpetual glad^es, possessione of paradise, that was
ons lost, be even at hand. Than for earthly things, heave^^y, for iytle
things great, for tra^^^tory things eternal, shall take place. Who than I
may you, will leare death, but he that has no faith, that laketh hope, that
would not go to christ, and believes not that he begins than to reign^ with
christ, when he begins to leave this world? Oh that we had a sparcle of
the grace and faith that Simeon had: which being a just, and faithful man,
was assured by a godly responsion, that he should not dye before he had seen
Christ. Whom after that he had seen in the temple, and known in spirit,
knew certainlye that he should shortly be called of God, and dye. Therefore he
being merueilouse glad took the child in his arms, and blessing god, cried
out and said: Now dimisse thy servant, o lord according to thy word in
peace. For mine eyes have seen thy saving health. Dear did Symeon prove, and
testify, that than free tranquillite, true peace and sprme securytye, do happen
to the servants of god: when they be drawn from this troublesome world, and
brought to the port of the everlasting man^ion. Peradventure you will say
unto me: Sir as tor Simeon, I ^an not blame him though he was well content to
dye, for as ^moche as he was a man of a great age, and as they say
communelye, even at the pyttes bank, I am but a young mau, I might have lived
yet many years, with no small comfort of my friudes, by the com^nune curse.
my time was not yet come. I grant in deed, you be a man of no great age, but
what ^ay I pray you, can we apoynte for any man's death? Every day may be a
bodies last day if it ^tande with the pleasure of god. We se that some dye in
the^^ mothers bellies, some in their cr^^ delles, some in the flower of their
age, some in their old age, some when they be rich, other some when they be
poor: so that we may plainly vuderstande that god does give to every man his
life of that condition, that he surrender it again when so ever it shall
please him to repete it. But among all other, says the great poet Menander:
Most happy be they and best belouid of god, that dye when they be young. The
which saying, as it is very wytty, so it is very true. And that a man may
easily perceue if he have (...) specte to the spiritual euyls and temporal
incommodities that occupy this lyfet for they communly depart, not yet
infected with so much malice, entangled with so much vice, corrupted with so
much wyckednes, as their elders be. Not yet so surre separate from god by the
reason of syn, and made members utterly and lyms of the dcuyll. It chaunseth
for the most, that men after they come to a ripe and complete age, be clean
drawn from god, from virtue, from symplicite, and integrite of life, to syn,
wychednes, and ungodly living. The rich by iniuriouse handlynge the poor, by
oppression, ingurgitation, and beastly incontinency, The poor by pyckinge,
lyinge, desperation, and blasphemynge the name of God. (I speak of many but
not of al). The wytty by craft, deceat and subtilte. The learned, often by
^eresy, ambition, and deuylysshe ^octrines. I will not speak of ^nuy, malice,
rankor, adulterye, which at the type age increase in growing, and as Scilla,
and Charibdis hurl the greateste part of men into the hoxrible sea of
perdytion. The holy ghost teaches by Salamon, that they which please God
best be quickly and rathe taken from this world, lest they should be polluted
with the wyckednes of the same. He was taken away, says he, lest malice
should change his understanding, for his soul did please god, and he has
made haste to bring him from the mids of miquitie. Enoche did please God,
and he was not found afterward: for God had taken him away. Therefore to
please God, is to be counted worthy of him to be delivered from this world,
and to be brought thither as the de noute soul of the prophet couyted to
come, saying: How derelye beloved, be thy habytations, o God of virtues, my
soul desirethe and makethe hasie to thy hawles. Those trees be not best ye be
most durable, but of whom ^oth spring most profitable fruit Netther be those
songs most commendable, that be longest, but ye most delight the ears of men:
Eve ^o the longest lift is not chefest: but that which is moosle bertu^us, and
lest with vice defaced. Further let us ponder these temporal displeasures and
incommo ^ities, and than judge whether ^^at death when or in what age ^ ever it
chaunsethe) be better ^^an life, according to the wor^es of Ezechiell, or no.
Consider sf what calaniyties, chances, ^yseryes, and perelles, men be in
danger. No man living is happy on every part: No man is utterly content with
his lote, who there that reason or chance (as says Horace) has of^ ered it
unto him. wherefore no man according to Solons words, is happy in deed before
he be buried. For this cause Socrates with other of his sect desired ever
desirouslye to dye: estemynge death not to be miserable, but ye end of al
miseries. Not troublous, Ezechi. 30.
but the end of all troubles. Better says Ezech^ ell is death than life, and
eternal resie than continual sorrows. For every part of this life doutles is
replenisshed with vnpleasantnes, full of sorrow, inquiet^^ with cares,
troublescme, and v^ ed with diseases. What trade ^ life so ever a man shall
folo^ (says Crates, he shall be suer ^ find bytternes therein. In the fildes be
labors, at home cares. In a strange country fear, of a man have ought. In
the sea, fear with Ieopardies, Inyouth foolyshaes, in age, feebleness: in
marriage, vnquietues: in lacking a myfe, solitarines: if a man have thyldren, he
has care: if he have none, he is half mamed. So that one of these two, says
he, is to be mysshed. Either not to be borne, or quicklye to dye. The
wretchedness of this world has compelled even the holy ^e men being weryed
therewith, to wysh for death. Jonas in his travel, said, that it was better
for him to bye than to live. Helyas in his ^yfe time often coueted, and not
^naduisedly, to yield by ye ghost. Neither can I se any cause, why that all of
us which have any hope of an other life to come, should not wysshe for the
same thing: seeing that no man lives which laboure^h not of the indige^cy both
of spiritual and temporal things, nothing truly, though a ma have never so
much excellencye in honors, abundance is riches, delight in pleasures, can
satisfy him or bring a flepe^^^s desires, appetites, and insatiable lu^^es,
no more than the daughters of Danaus can fyl their bottomless tubbes. Is it not
better therefore to change this life, to leave this strange country and god
where is all excellencye of honors, abundance of all good things, where
perpetual plesures shall ever be in thy right hand eue^ to the end. Where thy
divinity shall be seen, loved, and reserved for ever. Death of it self in deed
is somewhat formidable, and the way to death, as says the Philosopher,
paynful. Yet if we consider the premises, and ye death is nothing else but a
gate, where by me^ do enter into life, we shall see it amiable, and much to be
embraced. I maruayle what evil spi rite has so blinded and ve witched the
minds of men, and made the^ mad so shamefullye dotinge: Forasmuch as they
can persmade them selfs to be best here to live still in these rotten tents,
open to all sharp wyndes and bitter stor mes: In these ruinous houses, in
these stinkyng prisones, I mean our bodies, and to hate death as it were a
venomous and poison serpent: seeing it is so frendlye a thing inferring a
great sea of co^ modities and pleasures: seeing it is, and only it, the finisher
of our filthy and painful emprisonment: a consummation of our labors and
grievous wars, and arriuyng at the safe have, nan end of our peregrynacyon:
a leynge away of an heavy bourde^: a terminario^ of all sickness: an evasion of
all dangers: a rerourne into our country: an entrance into glow. If we be
wise, let us be well content to dye, and cherefully give a fayrewell to this
miserable world, continuallye unquieted with troubles, and troubled with
unquietness, subject to sundry euyls, and the false illusiones of vain
fortune. For truly it has much more gall, than honey: much more bytternes, than
swetenes. The which thing is well signified by this wyttye fable of Homere.
Jupiter (says he) sitting in he uen and having before him. ii. great to^nes,
ye one of felicytie the other of myserie, against a little sponefull of
happiness, powrethe out a great ladlefull of unhap. Meaning thereby that
fortune and misfortune among men do not egally part the stayke. Eschi^us
recontyng with him self, the continual tossyng and tormoy^ing of men's bodies
and minds ^ryeth out after this sort: Oh how unjust be those men, how
folyshe that hate death, saying it is a temedy most present for all euyls, and
the chefest expeller of al anxieties. Many of ye infidels for this cause,
thought death of al things most to be desired, as it does appear by the
notable history of Cleobis and Bito, by the manner of ye Chracia^s, by the Epi
grams of Crates, and such like things. How much more ought the same to be
embraced of us, which be well assured by holy scripture of the immortality
of the soul, of a better life to come, ad that death is none other, but a very
enteraunce into that life which is true parmanente, and constante? Let the
wicked Saduceans which deny the resurrection of the flesh take heuely their
death. For they look for none other life after this. Let us which be sure,
that our bodies shall arise again, freshlye renewed, esteem death as a
thing most pleasant. Let those which have had no seole master but
Aristotle, that affirms death of all terrible things to be most terrible,
fear death. Let us which have learned of saint Paul, that to dye is a
gain: That whether we live o^ dye, we be of the lord. And that Christ has
dyed, that he might be rular both over the quycke, and the dead. Heartily say
with Dauyd: Deliver o lord, deliver our souls out of prison, that they may
confess thy name. Besides a thousand incomniodities and displeasures of this
present slyperie life. This does also accede, that our sins daily renewed,
augmented, and increased, we more and more provoke the lord to ire. And the
innocencye of life (if we have any: rather than the which should decay,
saint Paul desired to dye, better says he, it is for me to dye, then any
man should euacuate my glory) is hoorely indaungered. Therefore let us not
love the world (for in deed it will not love us very much if we be true
chrystians) neither the things that be therein or else the charity of the
father ca^ not abide in us. For all things in the world (which is holy set
in malice) be other concupiscency of ye flesh, concupisce^cy of the eyes, or
pride, of life. To conclude, vf that death were only an abolysher of worldly
displeasures, it were a thing not utterly to be abhorred. But for as much as
with worldly miseries, it puts away those that be spiritual, and further
leads us to eternal blessedness, why should we not much wyssh for it,
couette and desire it? Curtius and the two Decii of rome, affectinge the vain
glory of the world, vowed them selves (no man co^maun dynge) willyngly to
death. Ind shall we christians, whereby we may attain to the true and
heavenly glory (god commanding and calling us dye impaciently? or shall we
rather tolowynge the example of saint Paul, wysshe for the dissolution of our
bodies, and to be with Christ? or of Cato which was wont to say: Oh that happy
and pleasant day when it shall be my chance to leave the colluuion of this
lowsy world, and come to their company that inhabit the heavens. What thing
in the world is of such excellency that it may justly so allure you being a
wise (and as I take you) a faithful man, that you should be loath to leave it?
Riches? Incer tain false, and vayn, the use where of is vanity, which shall not
pro fyt you in the day of obduccion and vengeance: to be short, very smoke
Frindes? untrusty, dissem blers, fools, inwhom is no health every man is is an
hiporrite, and wicked, and every mouth has spoken foolysshenes. Parents? you
shall have a father in heaven which louethe and tendeteth you more than these
earthly parents do. Wit, brethren, and thyldren? you shall dwell with your
brother Christ that loves and cares for you, much more than all those care,
which has spente, not his money or other externe things for your sake:
but his most precyouse blood. So much has he esteemed you: so vehementelye
has he loved you before the begyunynge of the world, yea, and louethe you
still. Pleasures? you shall have the presence of God, which so far passethe
all other pleasures as the brightness of the son excellethe the light of a
talowe candell. Honors? Main, and inconstant: For all thyngrs here is
vanity. Your body? A corruptible ^rysonne, which aburdenethe ^he soul, and
depressethe the ense musing on many things. From the which prysonne, the
oule being the very man it elfe (for the body is but a case) ^esprethe more
to be delivered han the prysonners from their ^nprysonmente, and chains. And
as feruentlye couytethe ar^esse unto god, as the chaufed ^atte, boylynge with
heat, desi^eth the sweet flowynge water. ^oure country? A strange ^ountry:
for so long as we live ^ere we be strange freme Christ, here we have no
city ^ermanente, but look for one that is to come. Here we be alia^t^ (as
Dauyd said) none otherwis^ than was all our forefathers, a^ biding in the
reign of the tyran^ the devil, that is to say in the world beset with a
thousand en^ mies. First the foul crokyd serpent him self, a fur of and
nyghoy foyns, and strokes, with al^ kinds of weapons, never ceasseth
endeuouringe to oppugn us. The world disquieteth us, and labors still to
subuerte us? The flessh, as much as lyethe in him, couardly betrayeth us, and
aideth busyly the foresaid enem^ es. No we poverty, no we riches, and care of
things gotten, mo^ lest us night and day: with ho^ many grievous siknesses, be
m^^ bodies vered, what iniuriesscla^ ders, despites, do usually grieve us: No
we we must prepare out selves to fight with avarice and vuclen lines, now with
ire ambition and other carnal vices. To be short, the mind of man is besette
with so many enemies, that scante he can be able to resyst. If avarice be
prostrate, unlawful, lust offers us battle. If lust be subdued, ambition
draws his sword. If ambition be cast down, ^ire provoke us: pride
settethe in his foot: dro^kennes approaches envy breaks concord: emulation
cutteth amity away. I will not speak of desperation, of the deaffe beating of
consciences, of the furies of the mind, with such others, which with horrible
enforcementes furiously assail innumecable: For what should I fight with the
monster Hidra? who can number the sands in the sea? or the stars fyxed in
the High heavens? which I think pass not much the number of men's enemies.
Seeing therefore that man daily suffers so many persecutions and dangers,
should we desire to stand still in the mids of our ennemies among so many
sharp swerdes, or shall we couit by death quickly to fly to chrisse our
defender and helper? Specially seeing that Christ him self instrurteth us and
says: Truly truly I say unto you, that you shall weep and lament, the world
shall rejoice. You shalde sorry but this sorrow of yours shall be turned into
gladness. Who will not be desyrouse to want heuines, and to enjoy perfect gladness:
when this sorrow shall be turned into gladness he decla reth saying. I will se
you again and your hearts shall be merye, and this mirth shall no man take from
you. Therefore seeing that to se Christ, is to be glad, and that we shall
not be glad in deed to such time as we shall se him: what blindness or rather
madness is it here to delight in pain, tears and pe^sifenes, and not rather
court to Come unto ye joy which no man shall cake from us? Let us play ye wise
men, and be glad at the vocation of god, to leave this painful pere grination,
to depart from this labo ^inth, and be transferred to our rountry, and to our
most loving fathers house: where is no sickness, no sorrows, no werines, no
hunger, no cold, no labor, no ^nournynge, no ieoperdies, no enemitie, no
care, to be short, no aduersytye at all: but much tranquillite, pleasure that
shall ever endure, and deep quietness: where we shall have for false riches,
true inheritance, for dissembling fryndes, Abraham, Isaac the blessed virgin
Mary, Peter, Paul, and the angels of god, which (as the proverb is) shall
ever love. Whose faythfulnes, and love shall never be changed from us: who
consyderinge these things, will not say with the prophet, that the day of
death, is better than the day of birth? who will not confess that he which
dies in the lord, makes the permutatio^ of Glaucus and Diomedes, that is to
say, receaueth for brass, silver, and for coper, pure beaten gold.

BUt paraduenture you will say unto me, sir as for this world, how so ever it
be, I know it, and of his good things I am a partaker, but whether I shall go
hense, yet I know not, ne what I shall have after this life Therefore to leave
a certainte for a thing incertayne, how should I be but sorry? Herke^ then I
pray ^ou and give ear a little, and I shall declare unto you by gods ^nfallible
word, both whether ^ou shall go hense, and what you shall have after this
life. The bo ^ye (says Ecclesiastes) shall return to the earth, Eccle. 12.
from whense ^t came, and the soul to god whi^he gave it. The souls of just
men be in the hands of god, and ^he torment of death shall not ^ouche them.
Sapi. 3.
Many mansions ^aith Christ be in the house of my ^ather, if it were otherwise
I ^olde have told you: I go to ^repare a place for you, John. 14.
and if I ^o to prepare a place for you, I will again come and take you to my
self, that you may be, where I am: Trust therefore and you shall be sure by
this promise, to come thither where christ is. Every man that hears the word
of Chritie and believes in him that sent him, ^0.5.
has life euerlastyuge: He comes not into judgment but passes from death
to life. We know (says Paul) that if the earthly house of this our ha
bitatio^ be dissolved, we shall have a buyldyng of God, (...) Lord.
an house not made with man's hands but everlasting in heaven. That dwelling
doutles shall happen to all faithful, which Christ of his great mercy
promised to the these, with these most comfortable words: This day thou shall
be with me in paradise. Therefore seeing it is so, that the souls of just, and
faithful men, be in the hands of god (as you be now assured by scripture)
where the torment of death shall not touch them: seeing christ has prepared a
place for them, and that they shall dwell eue^ there as christ him self
dwellyth. Seeing that we shall have after the dissolution of these our earthly
bodies, an everlasting mansio^ in heaven, Dout no more whether you shall go
after this life, but be ready, repent, and believe, and you shall enter
accompanied of the v. wise virgins into the joyous marriage mentioned in
Matthew. What the faithful shall have after this life, saint Paul in the syrst
to the Corinthians and second chapter, shall sufficiently declare. The eye
(says (...)) has not seen, the ear has not hard, neither the heart of
man has thought, the excellencye of the good things that god has prepared
of them that love him. Again to the Romans. The passions, troubles, and
affliccios we suffer here be not worthy of the glory which shall be reveled in us
in the time to come: Thus saint Paul which was rapt into the third heaven,
and saw secrets which a man may not laufullye speak, has taught you what
the souls of good men shall enjoy after this life: That is glory, and such
excellencye of pleasures, as the senses and wit of man can not comprehend.
But if saint Paul had spoken no thing of the matter, yet a reasonable man
might partly conceive the great and invisible things, that good men shall
possess in the other life, of these present things little and visible. For as
much as our vile and cortuptible bodies, by the be nignitie of god, receive so
many commodities, benefits, and plea sures, of the heavens, the earth, and
the sea: of the light, and darkness, of heat, and cold, of the rain wyndes,
and dew: of birds beasts, and fyshes, of herbs, plants and trees of the
earth: to be short of the ministry of all creatures, serving us successively
in their due times, whereby they may all uiate our werines. What how great,
and innumerable shall those be which he has prepared for those that love him
in the heavenly country, where we shall se him face to face? If he do so much
and so great things for us being in prison, what shall he do for us in the
palace? Saying that the works of god be so great and innumerable, wonderouse,
and delectable, which the good and the evil receive indifferentlyee how great
shall those be which the good shall receive being alone Saying that he
perfourmethe so much for his frindes and his enemies yet being to gether:
what shall he do for his fredes seperately? seeing yt he comfort vsso much
in the day of tears, how much shall he comfort us in the day of marriage?
Saying that the prison conteyneth such things, what manner of things shall our
country conteyne. The eye (as it is said before) has not seen, the ear
has not hard, nor the heart of man can think the excel lencye of those
things, which god has prepared for his fryndes, according to the great
multitude of his magnificencye, (...) the multitude of his pleasauntnes, which
he has laid up for them that fear him. Therefore let us not doubt whether we
shall go neither what we shall have (being faithful) in the other world. For as
much as we may certain dye know, not by scripture only but also by the
leadynge of natural reasonne. All such doubt put away, desire we most
hatrelye and fervently access to those chynges which God has prepared for
his fryndes, musing now and than some such godly meditatione as is this,
which saint Augustine has in his Soliloquiis.

The heart desyrythe not so much (o lord) the wells of sweet water, as my
soul desyrethe to be with ye. My soul has sore thirsted the o lord the well
of life) oh when shall I come and appear before thy gloriouse face? o well of
life, and vain of living waters, when, when shall I come from the earth,
deferte without way, wild and waterish, unto the waters of thy swetenes?
that I may se thy virtue, and satisfy my thyrste, with the waters of thy
mercy. I am a thirst (o lord) and thou art the well of life. Fill me with thy
waters I beseech the. I do thyrst for the (o lord) the living god, when shall
I come and appear before thy face? shall I ever se that day, that day, I mean
of pleasuntnes and mirth that day, which the lord has made, that we might
be glad and merry in it? o day most bright fair, caulme, void of all storms,
tempests, and troublesome wyndes, having no euented nor falling down of the
son: in ye which I shall hear the voice of praise ye voice of exultatio^, and
contessio^. In the which day I shall hear, enter into ye joy of thy lord thy
god, where be great inscrutable and merueylouse things, whereof there is no
number. Enter into joy, without heuines, into joy which conteyneth eternal
gladness. Where shall be al good things and no eyul, where a man shall have what
he will and nothing that he will not, where life shall be lyuelyke, sweet,
amiable, where shall be no ennemie impugnynge us, but safe security, sure
tranquyllite, quiet iucundite pleasant felicity, happy eternite, eternal
blessedness, and the blessed trinite, of the trinite the unite, of the unity,
the debt, of the bless fruitione. O joy above all joys, O joy passing all
other t^ O joy hesydes the which there is no joy. When shall, I enter that I
may se my lord that dwell leth in the, and the great vistone what is it that
lettethe me so long: alas how long shall it be said to me, where is thy
god and where is thine expectation^ art not thou o lord God? we look for
Jesus christ which shall retourme the bodies of our humility, and conform
them to his. When shall he return from the marriage that he may lead us to
his marriage? come o lord, and tarry not, come swear Jesus come and visit us in
peace come and bring us from prison that we may be glad before the with
perfyt hearts, come which art desired of all nations, she we thy face and we
shall be saved, come my own light, my redemer, and bring my soul from prison
that it may confess thy name how long shall I poor mretche, be toste in
the floudes of my mortalite, crypeng to the o lord and thou hear me not?
hear my cry I befech the from this troublesome sea, and bring me to the
port of felicite. Oh happy be they which have passyd the dangers of this
Ieopatdouse sea, and have attaynyd to the, O sureste haven. Dappye thrice
happy be they which have passyd from the sea, to the banks from hany
sshment, to their country, from prysonne to the heavenly palace. Where they
rejoice with continual quietness that they have sought by many tribulations. O
happy and happy agayn^ which are eased of the butden o^ their euyls and
being suer of unmarcessible glory, inhabit the kingdom of comlynes. O
everlasting kingdom. O kyngedom of al worlds, where is light that never
faylethe, and the peace of god that passes all sense. In the which peace the
sowles of saints do rest, where everlasting merines couerith their heads,
with joy and exultation. Where sorrow and moorning can have no place. Oh how
gloriouse is thy kingdom good lord in the which thy saints do raygne,
clothyd with light as it were (...) a garmente, having on their heads crowns
of preciouse stones. O kingdom of everlasting blessedness, where as thou o
lord the hope of saints, and diadem of glory art looked upon of thy holy
ones, face to face, making them glad on every side, in thy peace that passes
al sense. There is toye without end, gladness, without sadness, health,
without sycknes, myrthe, without sorrow, ^ay without labor, light without
darkness, life, without death, all good things, without al evil things, where
youth never wax ^th old, where life has none ^nde, where beautye never
vaydeth, where love is never cold, where joy does never decrease, where
sorrow is never felt, where waylynge is never hard, where no evil is fearyd,
for there the highest felicite is possessed: That is to say ever to se thy face
o lord of powers. Therefore happy be they which have already atteyned unto such
iopes. Unhappy be we for as much as we do yet travel in a straung country as
banished men, suspyryng unto the, being the port of the sea. O country, o our
sweet country a far of we look toward the, from this unquiet oceane we do
salute ye, with tears we desire and sue to come to the. O Christ god of god,
the hope of man^ynde, our refuge, and virtue, whose light a far of among the
dark clouds, over the stormy seas, as the beam of a star, of the sea, does
irradiate our eyes that we may be ditected to the safe haven. Govern our
ship with thy right hand and with the stern of thy cross, least we
perisshe in the floudes, least the tempests of the sea drown us, least the
depth suppe us up, with the hook of thy cross, draw us unto the from this
tempestuouse sea ours only comfort, whom we do se a far of as the morning
star, and the son of justice, with our eyes scante able to weep any
longer. Unto the standing upon the bank and lokynge for us, we thy redeemed, we
thy bantshed men, whom thou haste boughte again with thy precyouse blood, do
cry. Thou o lord of health, hope of all costs of the earth, a far of and
in the sea. We do waver in the troublous sourges, thou most bountiful lord
behold our ieopardyes, save us sweet lord for thy names sake, grant us that
we may so keep a mean betwyxte Scylla and Charyboys, that we may eschew
both the daungets and happely^ come to the port, our ship, and our
marcha^^ dyse sat. Let us I say now and than (all hate of death excluded) muse
some such godly meditation, earnestlye desiring of God not teporally to live,
but to dye, not to continue here in banysshment among our enemies, but to be
delivered and dwell in our country with christ, not to endure here in these
dau^gerouse wars, but through death to come unto peace most pleasant. yet
pataduenture one scruple is left behynd that trobleth your conscience and
suffers not your mind as yet to be quiet. You will say unto me: Sir I
remember, that among many things, I hard you say that the souls of just me
be in the hands of god, and the tormente of death shall not touch the^. I am
not just, no not so much as a dream or a shadow of a just man,but rather a
syuner most mise rabble, which have accustomedeu^ from my young age, to heap
vice upon vice, and with detestable transgression, continually to exasperate my
lord god. Wherefore the judgment of scripture and not without a cause,
troublethmy conscience, fears it, condemns it, and pulls it in pieces.
All offenses says he shall be gathered to gether, And all those that work
iniquity, Math. 1^
they shall be sent into aforuace of fire, where shall be mourninge and
gnasshinge of teath. Math 23
Again, they which have done well, shall go into everlasting life, they that
have done ^uyll into everlasting fire: Nether aduouterers, 1 cor. 5.
fornicatours, tobbers, conitous persons, nor ^orshyppers of images, with such
others shall snheryte the kyngedome of god. This is the sentence of Gods
word, this repellyth me from his kingdom and from paradise, whereof you
made-mentyon, this makes me afraid and with shame utterly puttethe me back,
this confoun death me, and chasy the me clean away. Doutelesse you do^ very
well, in that you confess your own uncleanness. for if that any of us should
say that we have not offended, Ion. 1
we should deceive our selves. All men have swarued, and are made unprofuable,
neither is there any that does good, tom. 3
no not one. We have wandered verelye all of us, as it were sheep every one
after his own way. Being servants unprofitable, and by nature the children
of wroth, ^ai. 59.
neither is any m^ good, god only except. Math 19
Wherefore in his sight no man shall be able to iu^tify him self, nor yet to
abide him if he observe our imquities: for in his syghte the very stars be
not clean, but what than, shall we being brought to this i^rait, cowardly
despair? God forbid. Well, what shall we do? Whether shall we fly? Where is
our refuge? Let us fly unto christ, as unto a suer sanctuary, safe refuge,
and puissant defender Unto christ? How dare we be so bold? Whose precepts
we have never obeyed, whose laws we have seldom, or never kept, whom we
have disdayned to love again, not withstanding that he has ever been our
lover most faithful and true? He being full of mercy, callethe us unto him
of his own accord. Come hither to me (says he) all you that labor, and be
laden with sin, ^ath. 11
and I shall ref^esshe you. Be we bold therefore to sue to his mercy, and of
his holy oracles which are written for our consolatione and learning, let us
require comfort. for they (such is the virtue of them) can easily erecte men's
mindestand quiet troubled consciences they as most hoolesome medicines shall
give us present health. They shall pronounce mercy to the penitent sinner, and
to the captyues pardon. They shall declare us to be no more under the rigor of
the law, but under grace and mercy: They shall teach us that god is pacyfyed
and that our syns be forgyuen us for his sons sake. You be freely justified
(says Paul) by grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom
god has set forth to be ye optainer of mercy through faith in his blood, Romans
3
to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins, that are gone before
in the suffraunce of god, to declare his righteousness in this time, that he
may be righteouse, and the iustifier of him which is of ye faith of Jesus
christ. Ephe. 2.
By grace (as he says to the Ephesians) we be saved through faith, and that
not of our selfs, it is the gift of god, and that not of our works, lest any
man should glory. Wherefore seeing it is so that we be freely justified by faith
in Christ Jesus we shall have no just cause to despair, but rather to be at
peace with god through christ, by whom we have entrau^ce into this grace wherein
we do stand, Romans 5
yea and to glory in the hope of the sons of god. Scripture says not, happy
are those that sin not, but happy whose imquities are forgyuen. Yea and to
him which works not yet beleuynge in him that iustyfyeth the wicked, Rom ^
faith is imputed to him for justice, according to the purpose of ye grace of
god. Doutles if that our iustificatid should depend of the innocencye of our
own lives, we should perish how many so ever we be. But seeing that god which
is rich in mercy, for the great love ye he has loved us with wha^ me were
dead by sin, and has quickened us with christ, and that not of our
deserving, Ep^e. 2.
left any man should glotye, but by the mere grace of god, purchased by the
blood of christ which is made our redemption ^ure ius^^yce, our prudencye, 1.
Cor. 1
and anctificatyon, why should we not peynge penytente and faithful, ^ayenge
our sins upon his back, which has taken away ^ure diseases, and has
carried with him our infirmities, Esal. 53.
and further putting him in remembrance of his promise made to sinners, both
by his prophets, and his apostles, holdely calling his mercy for his sons
sake? Specially considering that he is much more prone of his own nature to
forgive, than we be to ask forgeuenes. Yea and because that you do partelye
mystruste him, me think I should heatehun being somewhat angry swetely
expostulate we the after this sort.

What now my ^ere child? why cease not thy spirit at the last to be
afflicted? (...) a^ te^ quod pulchrum.
Who doeste thou think that I (...) Phalaris the tyrant, Manlius Saleuchus,
or some cruel S^ith or else of mercies the rather and of all consolation the
god, 1. Cor. 1.
long sufferyng, and of much mercye^ art not thou taught by my son Jesus,
Math ^
to call me thy father? have not I promised that I would be thy father by my
prophet Hierel my, Hiere. 31.
and thou should be my son? why do thou not therefore ask me forgyuenes
well hopinge for pardon? who is it of you although you be evil, that will not
forgive his son, forthynkynge his fautes, being supplyant desiring pardon,
and promisyng amendment notwithstanding that he has provoked him to anger an
hundredth times? And thynkest thou that I which am the father of mercies, Ephe.
3
of whom all fatherly nes in heaven and earth is named, which possess the
riches of good nes, patience, and longanimite, Romans 2
not to be ready to forgive my children truly repentinge? Be of good comfort,
my child, be of good comfort, mistrusryng not my mercy ^ hyche surpasses not
only man's mercy how great so ever it be, but all my own works also.
Judgment without mercy shall they feale, whose hearts be obdutate, hardened,
and will not resent, which delight still in their syns, and will never leave
their wyckednes, which contemn my word and trust me not. from the in deed
health must needs be fur away. But as for the, Math 3
repent and the kingdom of heaven shall draw nyghe, trust and thy faith shall
save the. for as Moses has exalted a serpe^^ in the desert, Mat. 9.
so has my son ben exalted, tha^ every man beleuyng in him might be saved,
Ioh. 3.
and have life euerla stynge I would have all men ^abe sauyd, 1 Timo^. ^.
and no man to peryssh, my fashyon is ever to retreat, thinking lest he
perish utterly which is abject. It is not my w^^^ (believe me) that one of
these mylytle ones be cast away. Math. 18.
Whom I have ever loved so well that I would vouchesafe to give my only son
for them. But thy trespaces be great wherefore thou art not lightly perswadyd
to trust in my mercy. Christ Jesus came into the world to save synnets. 1
T^moth. 1
He is thine advocate, 1 Ioh 1
and not for thine only, but for the sins of the hole world, he came to call
transgressors, not the just, and to save that which waslost. I knew (...) thou
an offender should offend, Mat. 9.
and as a transgressor I called the from thy mothers womb: yet for my names
sake will I make my fury far of: thy good works be of no such perfeccione,
^sal 46.
that they may be able to save the, nor thine evil works (so that thou repent
with hope of mercy can hurl the into ye helly fire. for I am I am which put
away thine iniquities for mine own sake and thy syns will not I remember.
Eas^. 43
I am dear son I am that puttethe away thy lynnes for my self, for my
self, and will give my glory to none other. Suppose thy sins be as red as
scarlette, they shall be made as white as snow. Which I have scattered as
clouds, and as mystes have dyspearsed them: Turn to me I say, for I have
redeemed the. I have redeemed the which have pity of all men, and for
repentance wynke at men's syns. Saps. 11.
I would thou should know, that I thy lord god am meke and gentle, 2 par 36
nether can I turn my face from the so that thou will return to me. It is
commonly said, that if a man dimisse his wife, and she departinge, marieth an
other husband, shall he return to her any more? Hiert. ^
shall not she be as a polluted and a defiled woman? thou haste committed
fornication with many lovers, yet for all that, am I read to return to the so
that thou wylt return to me. Such is my facilite, so gentle I am, such is my
benignite, so great is my mercy. which thy most loving brother and advocate
christ, that washed the from thy syns in his blood has purchased
continually prayenge for the Have thou not herd how merciful I showed my self
to David, to the Niniui^^s and Achab, to Magdalen, to the thief, and others
innumerable? why do thou not open the examples of the^, as a table or glass
wherein thou may well learn, how exorable I am, how redye and wyllyng to
forgive? Consider with thy self how heinous ^^utes I have pardoned them,
theft adultrye, murder, idolatrye, Hir^. 3
and what not? Go to therefore be (...) good chere, lift up thine eyes mistrust
me no le^ger, turn to me and thou shall be sauyde. Esal. 45.
Commend thy spirit into my hands and the prince of this world shall have
nothing to do with the. for by me, the lord of truth thou art truly redemyd.
Who hearing these words of his heavenly father (as they be his words in
deed) so swetly alluringe him, so earnestly confortyng him, so pleasauntly
drawing him, to him self, will any more doubt of his mercy? Despair you not
utterly (dear friend) nor yet be you sorrowful for any thing. But if your
false ennemie the deuy^^, approach obiectynge against you the multitude and
greuousnes of your sins, turn you to g^^ and say unto him. Curne a^^^ thy
face from my syns good l^^ and look on the face of thy (...) Jesus. Thy syns
says your enemy in number pass the sands of the sea. Answer. The mercy
of god is much more plenteouss. How can thou hope for the ^^warde of justice,
being all together unjust? Christ Jesus is ^y justice. Shall thou being
co^ered with sins, enter (...) test with Peter and Paul? Na but with the
thief, which hardem the ^^sse, this day thou shall be with me in paradise. How
haste thou this trust, which never d^^veste good? I have a good lord, an
exorable judge, and a gracious admeare. Thou shall be drawn to hell. My head
is in heaven all ^^dy, and from it the inferior members ca^ not be seueryd:
thou shall be damned, ye art a falls accuser, no ^^dge, a damned spirit, no
co^dener. Many legio^s of deuyls do wait for thy soul. I should despair in
^ede if I had not a defe^er, which has ouerco^med your tira^ny. God is unjust
if he give for evil ^^des everlasting life. He is just ^kepeth his promise,
and I have already appelid from his justice to his mercy. Thou do flatter thy
self with v^me hope. The truth (...) not lie. To make false promissi^
belongs unto the. what tho^ leauest here thou see, but wh^^ thou shalt
have thou seeste not. Things which are seen are (...) por^ll, but things
which are (...) seen are eternal. Thou go (...) laden with evil d^des, and
^^^ked of al good works. I shall be sire god to eronerate me of mine euyls, and
cover me with his goodness. God hears no sinners, yet be hears them that
repent, and for sinners be dyed. Thy rep^^taunce is to late. It was not (...)
late for the thief. The thief ha^ a steadfast faith, thine is w^^^ tynge. I
shall desire god that (...) will increase my faith. Thou ^^^est falsely persuade
thy self to fi^^ god merciful, which punysheth the with pains after this
sort herein he plays the part of a gentle phisrcion. why would he that
death should be so bitter? he is the lord, he wylleth nothing but that which
is good. And why should I a servant unprofitable ufuse to suffer that, which ye
lord ^fglorie has suffered. It is a miserable thing to dye. Blessed be the
dead that dye in the lord. But the death of sinners is most wretched. He is
no longer a sinner which has acknowledged his fault, with repentance and
hope of mercy. Thou shall leave this world. I shall go from pain full
banyshment, into my country. Look what an heap of good things thou leauest
behynd the yet a great deal more evil. Thou leaueste thy riches, they be the
worlds. I do carye all that is mine away with me. What can thou carye with
the thou have nothing that is good that is truly mine own that christ has
freely forgyuen me. Thou must forsake thy wife and thy children. They be the
lords, I do commend them to him. It is a hard thing to be drawn from thy
derelye beloved. They shall shortly follow me: thou art plucked from thy
pleasant friends. I haste to friends more pleasant. Thus thou art taught not
to give place to the devil endeuourynge to overthrow the, but boldly to repel
every darte that he can hurl at the. Neither let the care for thy friends,
wife, and children, trouble the, mistrusting not, but god shall provide as well
for them, and peradventure better in thine absence, than he dyd^^ in thy life
time: for thou must consider that thine own power has not all this while
sustained the, or the^, and procured things necessary: but god in whom we
live move and be, has done it. God which fedeth nourishethe, and saves both
man and beast, which ryally clotheth the grass in the feylde, couerethe the
heavens with clouds, carethe for the birds of the air, and prepares meat
for the very chycks of the ravens, shall much more regard thy friends, being
his people, confessing his name. Call to remembrance how mercyfully, he
provided for the pore wydowe and her children, spoken of in the 4 chapter of
the 4 book of the kings. There was a certain prophet (says he) one of the^
that feared the lord, he dyed, and left his wife with his sons much^ indebted.
The creditours after his death, came to fette away^ the children as bondmen,
for that their mother was nar able to pay their fathers debtes, but yet the
lord by his prophet Helyse, dy^ so encreace a pytcher of oil this she had
in store, that she had y^ noughe to sell for the payenge of her dettes, and for
the sussentan^ of her and the children besides.

Thus by the benignity of God this poor woman with her children was much
better provided for, after the death of her husbad (though he were an holy
man) than she was before. God is even the same God is now that he war than, and
can do as much for christen men now in these days, as he could that for the
I^^^^ And he doutles it thou fear him will regard thy wife children, and
fryndes, no less than he did the wife and children of this pro phet. Na rather
more, for as much as our religion and profession be more perfytte than theyrs
was. Further call to remembrance how that they many times which be left of
their frindes rich, and in great honors, be after brought to poverty ye and to
ye beggars staff. On the other side, ye they which be left pore and beggarly of
their frindes, at ye length come to grcatry, ches, auctorite, and honor.
wherefore I do think as I have said often, not I, but the prophet, that both
tyches and poverty come of god. And that men shall hauc (yet Iw^^ not unproue an
houest prou^s^on for men's children) what as ^^^^al please god to give the.
Therefore romn^yrte them to god for they de his. And let them cast their (...)
an the lord and he by hispromise shall nouryshe them.

ANd to you that be his friends here to you I speak what means this your
heaviness? Why do you sorowafter this fort? to what purpose do youfron ble your
selfs with wepynges? why do ye, as it were in a manner draw into the law the
will of god, with your unjust complaints? do ye think him to be a mere matter
of lamenting, sorowing, and waylynge, because he is dely uered from dangers,
to safetye, from bondage to lybertye, from diseases te immorialite, from
earthly things to heavenly, from men to the company of gods aungelles?
wherein has he offended you, that you s^ envy his lurkynes? If ye do not enup,
what needs all these tears? I am sure if ye knew to what feliritie he is go
inge, you would banquet, and be merye, at the least if ye love his welthe.
Christ said to his disciples (when they were sad, for that he would depart)
if ye loved me you would be glad, for as much as I go to my father. wherein
he declared, that we ought not to be sad, but merry, at the departure of our
friends, from hense. What I pray you shall ye lose by his death, but that he
shall be out of your fight, and that but for a time? nevertheless you may at al
times in the mcane space, in your minds, and memoryes, se him, talk with
him, and embrace him. Morn no more for him, for he offerethe you no cause of
moornynge. But if ye wylnedes morn, morn for your selfs, in that ye be not so
nyghe the port of our swear country, flowynge with milk and honey, as he is.
This moorning is more fyt for the Scythyans, and such other barbarouse people,
which know not the condition of faithful souls, than for you which know,
or might all this while have learned. Let them I pray you weep and houle like
dogs, let them cut their cares and noses as they were wont to do, at the
death of their friends. Let us be joyful and merry. Let Admetus Drpheus, and
such other infydeles morn at the death of their friends, and require them
again of Proserpina. Let not us require our fryndes of god again, though me
might have them, with the loss of their wealth and prosperouse being. Were you
not to be counted vuteasonable, and to your friend no friends, if ye should
require him to dyne or dwell with you, having nothing in your house but
horsebreade, and stynkynge water, where he may go to a friend more faithful
than you be, and have at altimes all kinds of deinties? and will you be
counted reasonable, which would by your wyls, let this your frynde, going to
the house of his most faithful friend Christ, where he shall have heavenly
deynties (in comparyson of the which, your chere is worse than horsebreade
and stynkynge water in deed) and meat of the holy angels? Moorne no more for
him I say, but be glad that he being your friend shall attein to such
felicite. What other thing is it for vschristians, to morn at the death of our
friends, than to give an occasion to the infideles to reprehende, and accuse
us, for as much as we do deny the thing in deed that we do profess with our
mouths. For in words we say that the soul of man is immortal, and that
there is an other life better than this. In our mor nynge we seem to show our
selnes to be of an other opinion.

What profitte is it I pray you to pronounce virtue in words, and in deeds
to destroy the truth? Saint Paul does improve and blame them which be
heavy in the departure of their fryndes, saying: I would not have you
ignorant O brethern, as touching them that sleep. That ye be not sad, as
other that have no hope. As who says it belongethe to them to wep^, and be
sorry at the death of their friends, which have no hope of an other life to
come, and not to us which beseue that our souls be immortal, and that our
bodies shall arise again. Moorne no more for him therefore, but prepare and
make ready your selfs to follow him living vertuousely, for that ye know no
day nor hour.

No we to you again my friend se that you be merye in god, and let not this
short afflyccion of your body, disquiet your mind. But sause it rather, and
make it pleasant with the hope of everlasting blyssednes. Reinembryinge that
is you shall be quickly delivered from this sycknes, so you shall no more
hereafter be subject to any sorrows pains or pensifenes. It that day be, to
the faithful? whamens bodies made like to the body of christ, shall inhabit the
king dome which god has prepated for those that fear him before the
beginning of the world. (...) here they shall have joy and everlasting merines.
Where as they being like to the angels of god shall shine as the son in the
kyngedome of they? father. At the last swear friend for as much as I have
declared unto you that all men must dye, and when it shall please god. Further
that in dieng we do no other, but as all the saints, yea and Chrysle him self
has done, with whom we shall rise again. And that death is but a due
repayenge of things that was for a time liberallye lent us: to the earth our
bodies, and our souls to God, ours most bountiful father. That nothing
here is of such excellency, that it should allure a wise man, and him that
hops of an other life to come, long to tarry with it: that good men have
ever de^^red to dye, and to be with god. For as much as death is the end of
all myseries, the vanysher of al sorrows, and an entrance into perpetual
bliss. Further in that I have declared unto you whether you shall go, and what
you shall have after this life. And that god most merryfully has forgyuen you
your sins, for that you be repentaunt and faithful. And ye he will provide
for yours if they fear him, as well or better than he did in your days.
Finally that this body of youres shall tise again from the earth gloriousely
in the last day through his power that gave him his firsh fashione: quiet
your mind, and prepare your self as does the swanne, with song of heart and
pleasure to dye, and to the accomplyshment of gods will, and all tear of death
excluded. Think only of immortality, being willing and glad to depart heuse
to god that calls you. The which thing as the servants of god should
always he ready to do, so at this time most ready. For as much as this
miserable world, be set with the horrible tempests, storms, and troublesome
whorle wyndes of all kinds of evil, be gynneth to decay. Moreover as grievous
things have all redye chaunsed to nations, so more greuouse things are to be
looked for in that sin daily increases among men more and more, prou^ king
the fust ire of god. Where sore, I ca^ not but think it a great game quickly
to departet hense. If the posts of the house were pu^trfied and the trembling
toufe should threaten ruin to be at hand would you not being in health, de
part with all speed? If that a troublesome and stormy tempest wdenly risen on
the sea should threaten plain shypwrake and vrownynge of you and your
company, would you not make haste to the port: Lo, the world decaieth and the
end of things threa teneth plain falling down. Ind shall not you give
thanks to god, and for your own part be glad that you shall be delivered
in time, from such ruins, plages, and tempests as hang over the heads of
men? Think sweet freude, I beseech you, and think again, that 2o long a^ we
be here, we be very strau^gers^ And that we ought chiefly to embrace that
hour, which shall apoynt every one of us to his own house, and testore, us
delyuere^ from all suars of the worl^e, to paradise, and the heavenly kingdom.
Who being in a strange country will not couyt to return to his own country?
Who sailing to wards his friends, will no^ couyt a quycke and prospcrouse
wind, that he may the rather embrace his well-beloved? we count paradiseoure
country, the Patci arches to be our parents and frindes: why than do we not
fee uently desire spdely to se the patriarchs and paradise? where a great
company of our friends looks for us and a wonderful number of our parents,
brethren and systers tarieth for us? being suer of their immortalits and
wisshynge that we had the same. At the sight and metyng of these, oh how
great gladness shall happen both to us and them? Dome great pleasure of the
heavenly kingdom, Without fear of death, and with the eternity of life.
Dow high and perpetual ^elicite? there is the gloriouse company of the
apostles, there is the laudable number of the glad prophyetes, there is
thinumerable host of martires crowned, and triumphynge with the victory of
there sirifes and passions. There be the virgms which have broken the
concupiscencie of their flesh, with the s^renght of continencye. There be the
mercyiul en ioynge their rewards, which by fedynge the pore, and helping the
nedy have wrought the wokes of justice, andkeping the commandments of god
have tra^^ferred their erthly patrimonte^ into heavenly treasures, this t^ the
ioyouse company to this n^ earthly company is to be compated to him which
has bought^ you a place in this company with the price of his blood I do
betake you. Committee your self to his hands for he shall never fail you.
Fair well.

Preciouse in the sight of the lo^^ is the death of his saints.
Prynted at London in Aldergate street by Ihon Herforde. ^ The year of our
lord. M. D. x^^ The. iiii. day of June.


