The illustration to the Frontispice.
OF these two sorts, all commonweals sub^st,
The Natural man, and the Tbeologist:
The pious good man vanity forsakes,
The F^esh, the World, and D^vill his footstool makes.
The Naturalist, things heavenly does disgust,
His Summum bonum, Pleasure is and Lust.
Observe: The zealous man's supporters be,
Firm Faith, fixed Hope, and liberal Cbaritie
The Moral man's dejecters likewise three,
wone, Woman, and the love of Vanisie.
All worldly gain, the one does count his loss:
Save Death, the Decade, Holy book^, and Cross.
The other what is Celestialldoth deryde:
His God's the Throat, the Belly, Gold, and Pride.
One; both his hands to heaven uplifts; the same
Makes this his Motto; Heaven, not Earth's my a^me.
The other; with one, points upward, but his mind
The pomp and frailties of this world does bli^de.
His Inscript is, (who terrene things does love,)
I see, but understand not things above.
A burning ^eave, the one's zeal does express,
The others by a bubile, you may guess.
The Ble^ed S^nt above denotcstru^ bl^ry,
The Stars and P^mets things mee^ transitory.
Those then that would (...) sover (...) attain.
Must know, allthings beneath the Moon are vain.
THE FELICITY OF MAN, or

His Summum Bonum

Written by Sr, R: Barckley, Knight

In Caeli summum permanet arce bonum.

Boeth. De Consol Philos Lib. 3

London Printed by R.Y. and are Sold by Rich: Roystone at his shop in Ivy
Lane. Ao 1631.

^



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT, Earl of Somerset, Viscount Rochester, Knight. of
the most honorable Order of the Garter, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,

MOst requisite it is, that all books should be protected by such noble
Patrones, whose Dispositions and Indowments have a Sympathy and Correspondence
with the Arguments on which they entreat. The Title of this, is Summum bonum:
to the attaining of which, those which best know you, can give assured
testimony, that your Matutini, and Lucubrationes, i. your mornings meditations,
and night studies are devoutly intended. What the true Felicity of man is, (or
at least ought to be) and the directest way to arrive unto it, is in this
work learnedly and religiously discoursed: and therefore desirous to be
shadowed under your wing, who are as able to appceh^nd, as judicially to
censure. This Book (Right honorable) at the request of diverse noble and well
disposed Gentlemen, is brought to express it self after a long silence: At
whose importunity I have added unto the original such needful ornaments (in
the former edition omitted) as best suit with the humor and fashion of the
time; selecting you the sole Mecanas of so weighty and worthy a work; whose
serious contemplations are ^ymed a^ Reality, not Form, as studying to be
actually that, which others strive to seem in appearance. Accept I entreat
your Honor the perusal and patronage, as an humble Tender of his observance
and service, who as he wishes you the fruition of all the Felicities enjoyed
by Man here on earth, so he implores for you all the eternal happiness
ordained for him in Heaven.

Your Honors humbly dev^ted

H. T.

TO THE READER.
A Philosopher having invited his friends to dinner, and seeing them sit at the
table, looking about as though they lacked something, forbearing to eat the
meat that was set before them; and perceiving at last they looked for bread,
which he had forgotten to provide; Ye may see, quoth he, how little the study
of Philosophy serves to the making of a feast. Even so when I had taken
occasion to write of the Felicity of man, and laid before me the goodly
reasons and persuasions of the Philosophers, I seemed to be invited to their
opinion, as to a plentiful feast, that wanted nothing to satisfy mine
appetite. But when I had more considerately perused their reasons and
arguments, whereby they would prove it to be in the power of a wise man to
attain to Felicity, I perceived there wanted, as it were bread to a Feast;
the chief thing that should make their dainty meat or plausible reasons
savorie to their guests: which is she grace of God, from whom all good things
comes, without which all that can be produced and said in this matter has
no taste. So that it is easily to be seenc how little the stndy of Philosophy
serves to the finding out or attaining of the Felicity of man. For though a
man be fortified with much w^sdome and virtue, yet he is in the whole o^r of
his l^fe subject to so many infirmities of body and passions of mind, and
variable accidents of fortune (as the Philosophers use to speak) which draw men
into calamity and (...); that no mortal man has in himself power sufficient
to a^aine to felicity; which must come by the enjoying of Gods graces and
benefits: whereunto the Philosophers for the most part as Heathens, had no
great regard: which made them fa^le of the mark they sh^t at. And to let thee
know (that I may not be mistaken) the cause which moved mce to take this matter
in hand: after the experience of many years, in which I have lived and run a
great part of my race at random with the multitude feeking for I know not what,
nor where to find that I sought; estimating things rather by a common custom,
than an upright judgment, I began at length with more vigilancie to observes
he states of life and condition of men. And musing within my self to what end
and purpose, and whereof it should come to pass, that men were so earnestly
occupied in such varictic of labors and exdle^ travels, to seek after that
they could never find, and the more they had gotten of that they saught, the
less they found of that they desired to have: I compared learned men's opinions
and precepts with worldly men's lives and manners; whereby I perceived that an
erroneous opinion, and wrong estimation of things, was the chief cause that
bindered their attnining to the end of their desires. For every man desires an
happy estate, but because they do not ad^sedly consider wherein felicity or
happiness consists, nor direct the course of their life the next way to it,
b^t mistake some other thing for that they seeks after, they never find that
they would have. The consideration whereof, joined with the calamities and
troubles with which men are arrested so soon as they enter into this world,
and the perils and alterations to which they are subject, and with grief
suffer in this life, both in body and mind, in goods and possessions, some by
their own fault, others by Gods cross, (whereof I have not only been in
others oculatus testis, but also in my self in some part a sensible witness)
brought forth such as it is, this Discourse of man's Felicity For being
desirous to remove out of my head the cogitations that distempered my mind, I
could find no better means, than after Seneca his counsel to his friend
Lucilius, to write of something for my exercise, simplicistilo, that my head
might be possessed with better matter. And as I was considering with my self
what to write, the occasion that moved me to take my penin hand, min stred also
matter whereof to write. For medisating with my self upon the variable and
uncertain state and condition of men, calling to mind many things written
thereof by diverse Authors, and being wi^ing for my ease, as a woman in travel,
to be delivered of the burden wherewith my head was overladen, I could not
find a more apt subject for my purpose, than to discourse crassiori Minerva
upon the Felicity of man. Which kind of exercise I perceived might be
profitable to me, as well by the comfort I should receive by perusing the
sayings and opinions of wise and learned men, as also by renewing the memory of
diverse things which I had long sinceread, and almost forgotten, and of a
multitude of matter, to draw out so much as I thought necessary, and the same
for my recreation: and to make it more favoric to my taste, sometimes to
interlarde with mine own opinion and conceit: And joining to the things I have
read, the observation of men's manners, and experience I have had of worldly
matters, I might see (...) in a glass, that besides the ^cles to which by
external causes and the ord^nery course of nature, men are subject, much
unquietness both of body and mind happencth to them by then own fault, by an
unsatiable desire of such things as are h^nderance to the happiness they seek
after; their minds many times being tormented with a suspended hope of that
which when they have obtained, utterly overthrows them. Some desire to pass
their life in Epicures pleasures, others would have Croesus riches, the rest
Caesar's fortune, all Nestors years, which variety of motions in men's minds,
having undertaken to discourse upon this subject, occasioned me to use the
help of learned Authors in searching out wherein the felicity and Summum
bonum of man does consist. And as I was seeking for this felicity and the way
to it, I fell into the company of certain Philosophers, who directed me to the
branch that rises on the right side out of Pythagoras letter; which said they,
would conduct me to the path that leads to the thing I sought. But some of
them better advised, taught that the Felicity of man, his sovereign good and
beatitude, is to be joined with God in the life to come, and cannot be enjoyed
in this life, and the means thereunto is the purgation and perfection of life,
by entering into our consciences, and searching our sins, and confessing them to
God: Which caused me not a little to wonder, how men by reason only and by
instinct of nature, could be capable of so divine knowledge. But when I saw
them there to stay, and could proceed no further, and except I left their
company and followed a better guide, they would leave me in the middle of the
way (for of the confession of our sins follows damnation, except God be
pacified and made merciful to (...)) I took my leave of the Philosophers, and
followed another path, unknown to them, which leads directly to felicity and
beatitude, by the grace of God through his Son our Savior Christ Jesus. I
have therefore rejected the Philosophers opinions (of whom nevertheless I
think reverently) as not sufficiently conformable to Christianity, though I
have applid many of their sayings to my purpose. And I have labored to
discover the error of them by many examples, that in the course of their life
seem to set their felicity in those things that bring men to infelicity. And I
have enlarged the narration of some histories more than the due method of
writing requires, which I might with less labor have abridged: it may serve
nevertheless to that common end of the Poets, either to profit or delight: Aut
prodesse volunt, aut delectare Poetae.


Every man has not been brought up in the knowledge of tongues. And it
chances often to the Reader, as it does to diceplayers, that gain more by the
bye than by the maine. It may be profitable also to see the errors and
passions of them discovered, by the disordered course of their life, and
extraordinary kind of death that have set their felicity in pleasures, riches,
honor and glory, and such like worldly vanities, which to all, except they be
well used, are hinderance to feli^ty, and have brought many to extreme misery.
I have omitted the names of many authors, whose a^thority and sayings I do
vouch and allege, not with meaning to deck my self with stolen feathers, but
because many of them are fallen out of my memory, and to avoid a confusion of
superfluous words by the multitude of names: and yet diverse were noted by me in
the margent, that are left out by the writer, I wish they were all known to
you, that their authority might give the more credit to the matter. I desire
rather to be taken for a Relator of other men's sayings and opinions, than to
arrogate such sufficiency as to be Author of any thing my self. Many things
written by diverse Authors, dispersed into sundry volumes, serving to diverse
ends, I have simply collected and applied to my purpose, without any affected
style. For as Terence says, Nothing is spoken that has not been spoken
before; So men use to alter the form and order, and set forth the matter with
other words and diversity of application; which makes their writings seem to
be a new invention, wherc^: ndeed hardly can any thing be written that has
not been, though in another sort and application, written before. For how is
it possible among such an infinite number of books, which daily increase
beyond measure, that any thing can be alleged, though it come to him from his
own invention, but the same by some man has been written before, though in
another form and order, and to another purpose? But a collection of things
that lie dispersed in many authors with an apt application to one special
purpose, may be both profitable and delightful to the Reader. The Cook, the
A^oshecary, the servant, go all to one garden, where one gathere^h herbs and
flowers for his pot, the other for his po^, the third to dress up the house,
all making the same thing serve to several purposes: So have I walked in the
Muses garden, and perusing diverse sorts of things, applied by the Authors to
diverse uses, I have gathered together some of those which I thought most fit to
serve my purpose: and although they were good as they lay scattered, yet being
gathered together and applied to some special use, they are made more
profitable than as they lay dispersed. For this is not the least fruit that may
be gathered of learning, to select the sayings and opinions of learned men,
with examples of life out of histories that lie dispersed, and apply them to
some special use and purpose. He bath a great advantage to the providence and
foresight of things to come, that joyneth the knowledge of things past with his
experience of the time present. Nothing is more ava^eable to suppress the
inordinate desire and estimation of worldly vanities, and to discover the false
(...) of rep^ted happ^sse, than to observe the course of men's lives, and
counsels of other ages, and compare them with the manners present. By which we
shall see a cortaine kind of confer (...) and continued order from age to age,
of the variable and tragical events, with the fat all end of them that have
aspired to high dignities, and set their felicity in vain pleasures,
reputation and pomp of the world. Cicero reprehend^ng men's negligente in
seeking after such kind of knowledge, says, To be ignorant of the things
that have happened before thou were borne, is always to be a child. And
Seneca for the like cause says, There are none, ore unhappy than those old men
that have ^ber argument to prove their long life, but their years. If any man
take occasion of offense, because they find the abuses and imperfections of
themselves, their estate or profession discovered, by which they are subject to
reprehension: let them consider that my intent and scope is to search for the
felicity of man; and to see whether it has any part in this life. In doing
whereof I was driven to examine the principal estates of life, not in any
particular Country or Common wealth but generally through the world, and to
discover the evil I found in them; and yet not all that I have found written
in other Authors, nor that may truly be spoken, but so much as I thought
sufficient to make for my purpose. For whon I note the abuses of some estates
of life and manners of men, as not sufficiently furnished with the things that
should lead men to felicity, my meaning is, the abuses of other Countries,
reported by credible Authors, and not of mine own, saving when I name our
Nation, (where nevertheless I wish that all things were so well as there were
no cause to find any fault.) And yet nothing is so generally spoken, but it
does admit some exception. But he that shall walk in so large and spacious a
field, as to treat of this subject wherein he must be enforced to look into
the condition and manners of men, and to unfold, for the truths sake, the
abuses and (...) accidents that befall the estates of life, which are disguised
and lie covered under fair shows, as the Serpent (...) under sweet flowers,
shall find the weeds to overcome the corn, and the evil so far to exceed
the good, that it is not possible for him to pass through so great a throng
and multitude of people, to seek for a happy man, but he must shoulder some
and give occasion of offense, or leave the thing unfound he goes about to
seek. The consideration whereof (...) these verses often into my mind; At
melius fuerat non scribere: namque tacere
Tutum (...) crit.


The truth (as it is commonly said) purchases displeasure, and soothing or
flattery wins good will. Caius Lucilius, a learned man is reported to say,
that he wished the things which he had written, might neither be read of them
that be altogether unlearned, nor of them that were very well learned because
the one sort understand nothing, the other know per adventer more than he. But
I (...) not so much the quality of their learning that shall read that which
I have written (if it chance to be seen of more than I meant) as I wish them to
be of a disposition inclined to virtue and honesty: for such will either find
matter there to benefit themselves, or at least not blame the Author for his
good meaning. Some like nothing but new matter that comes from the Authors
own invention: others delight to have it intermingled with examples of
antiquity, and the opinions and sayings of learned men: which agrees so aptly
with my disposition, that it occasioned me to collect many histories and
examples, with grave sayings and sentences out of learned Authors, as it were
of old stuff to help erect a new building, not naming always the Authors,
because they were (...) forgotten, or sufficiently known to me, that had none
other meaning but to be the end of mine own labors; ^. To repre^d vies, to
exci^e to virtue, to know our (...) by nesse and ^ferable ^state can be
hurtful to none, it may be profitable to (...) in these (...) sifte^ the
(...) of all our Discourse. I wish it may turn to the benifit of them that
sbalread it. I have dividded this Treatise into fix books. In the third, not
in honor and glory: In the fourth, not (...) moral virtue, or in the action
of virtue, after the Academickes and Peripateticks, nor in Philosophical
contemplation: In the fifth, I have declared mine own opinion of the felicity
and happiness of this life: In the (...), I have showed wherein consists the
true felicity and Summum bonum of man, and the way to attain to it. In which
Discourse if I have missed the mark I shot at, as it may well be, the same per
adventure being out of my reach, let him that follows take a better level,
and beware he shoot not as much too wide on the other side. That I go before
and stand besides the prick, will help his aim that shall follow and (...) at
the same mark. I may seem presumptuous, if my (...) be taken as they lie in
some places, though meant for (...) only and order of writing, in taking upon
(...) to show the (...) to felicity; so (...) a matter as has moved much
controversy between the ancient Wisemen and Philosophers, and the best
learned of all ages, and as it were to make my way through them by violence,
allowing and rejecting of theirs at my pleasure, as though I were; Nullius
astrictus (...) in verba magistri.


For to offer only the pen to the book among so many grave and learned men, in
a matter also of such importance, may be attributed to rashness; and to touch
the monuments of so many and profound Authors, whose opinions have been so
many ages allowed, may be taken for a kind of sacrilege. But the reverence and
love of antiquity ought to be no bar to posterity to (...) opinion and
conceit in searching for the truth. And because I took the matter in hand for
mine own (...) only without any meaning to publish it, I was the more bold to
give my self a warrant freely to utter my conceit, (...) any prejudice to the
authority of antiquity. But for that I have not followed the path which they
and others have trodden before me, but rather in a sort have broken the ye in
a new place, to make my way through after (...) own fancy, and refused to
(...) by another man's compass; me thinks I hear the sound of Virgil his
verse in (...); Quis novus hic nostris successit sedibus hospes?


That I have written, though I may seem to have given my self a liberty to
think as I list, and not to hang mine opinion upon any man's sleeve, I protest
to have done it with (...), without arrogancy, or meaning to detract from any
man his (...), having drawn mine opinion in a great part from them, whom in all
things I have not thought good to follow: Neither is mine intent to take upon
me to teach any man, having (...) my self (as the proverb is) with mine own
foot, by which I know my insufficiency; but to discourse only, leaving to
every one his free censure. If any thing has escaped me by want of diligence
or lack of knowledge, or by committing overmuch trust to memory, it shall agree
with your modesty, (...) to excuse my ignorance, than to blame my negligence,
seeing the matter was taken in hand for my exercise only.

(...) Non omnia possumus omnes: An error will easily slip through a man's
fingers whilst he is writing, though he be very circumspect; and a fault is
sooner espied in another, than amended in himself: Bonus aliquando dormitat
Homerus. Take it now as it is, and if it be to your liking, give God the
thanks to whom they are due, that directed my pen to your benefit; if
otherwise, yet my labor is not (...), because I bestowed it upon my self, and
not for you. Farewell, and speak well, and think as ye list.

That wishes happiness to them that secke the right way for it.

Ri. Barkeley.

COurteous Reader (amongst some others) help this mistake page. 151.

Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo,
Et subito casu quae valuere ruunt.
Which Distick, read thus interpreted. All humane things depend by a small
thread, And those most strong are soon demolished.

A DISCOVRSE UPON THE FELICITY OF MAN. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The opinions of the Ethnic Philosophers concerning the Summum bonum. The
difference betwixt the fclicitie of the Soul and the Bodic: And that no man by
his own wisdom or industry can attain to either of them. That there is no
happiness in the Delights and Pleasures of this world: And these illustrated
by the Histories of Sardanapalus, the last Monarch of the Assyrians; and by
Heliogabalus, and Nero, Emperors of the Romans.

THe ancient Philosophers and learned men of diverse ages, among the things
whereof they were inquisitive, found no greater difficulty, than in searching
out what the felicity of man should be, which they called Summum bonum; his
greatest or (...) good or happiness. This (...) ministered such (...) of (...)
among them, and (...) them into so many (...) opinions, that the further they
waded, the more they (...) themselves, and, as if they had been in a (...),
they knew not how to wind themselves out. (...) in his time collected out of
the Philosophers books two hundred eighty eight things, wherein, according to
the inclination of their several conceits, they would have this felicity to
consist. And no marvel: for how was it possible that they that knew not God,
but as it were in a dream, from whom all good things comes, should know or
teach the way to attain to the greatest good thing that God gives to men?
That may be applied to these Philosophers that was spoken by one, of evil
spirits, Damones non (...) benedicere, quia non possunt benefacere: The Devil,
says he, cannot bless, nor speak well, because he cannot do well. So may it
be said of them, that they cannot speak well, or reason aptly of felicity,
because they cannot do the things that appertain thereto. For though our
unworthiness be such, that we are not able of our (...) to deserve so great a
benefit without Gods special favor and free gift, yet we must (...) to do
the things that are pleasing and acceptable to him, to make our selves capable
and apt to receive it. And although God has distributed among the (...) many
goodly gifts, yet they can do nothing, though morally good, that is acceptable
in his (...), and therefore they are not capable of that great blessing which
he (...) to his elect. This argues the error of those Philosophers, that held
it to (...) in the power of a wise man to attain to felicity, which only
said they, was also a good man. But such a wise or good man was (...) doubt as
rare as the (...) of Arabia, and might be sought as Diogenes sought for a man
at noone days in the streets with a candle. For whether it be the felicity
of this life, or that of the (...), no man is able by his wisdom or virtue,
or any power of his own, to attain to either of them; (...) our nature was
corrupted by the fall of our first parents, our force is so (...) and weak,
that the wisest man is not able to make sufficient resistance against the
assaults of the world, the flesh, and the (...), which conspire together
against us, as mortal (...) to our felicity. The things that were made to
obey us seem now, through the curse that followed our fall, to rebel against
us. Reason should rule our affections, but now contrariwise our affections
bear rule over reason. The cause of which alteration in man's nature, because
the Philosophers knew not, they thought a man was able of himself to attain
to felicity, which none can do without the help and (...) of Gods holy
spirit. But whosoever will take upon him to seek for the felicity of man, he
must have respect to the whole man, and not to any part. And forasmuch as man
consists of two principal parts, that is, of body and soul, he cannot be
said to be in the state of perfect felicity, except both parts be partakers
of it. Then can it not be in the power of man, as the Philosophers taught, to
attain to this Summum (...), or sovereign good, but in his power only that
has given men the (...) to be (...) from perpetual misery, and to enjoy in
this world and in the world to come, the things wherein the (...) of man
consists. Which graces God has not given to all sorts of men, but to such
only as believe in him whom he has sent to be our Redeemer from that
miserable estate, into which we are fallen by the disobedience of our first
parents. And if it were as the Philosophers thought, in the power of a wise man
to do the things whereby he might attain to felicity in this world, (for
that was the felicity which some of them treated of) yet were that but one
part of felicity, to which nevertheless they are not able to attain: the
other, and that fair the greater part, is to be enjoyed in the other life to
come; which to bring to pass of himself is not in the power of any mortal
man. And that our meaning may be the better conceived, let us suffer a little
digression.

When God had determined to create natures of The Creation of Angels and Men.
understanding after his own image, of whom he would be known and worshipped
in the same sort as he would appoint them; some he made of a spiritual essence
without bodies, others of a spiritual essence and a bodily substance; the body
being made of clay, most excellently compact together with a wonderful and
unspeakable wisdom, in which he enclosed with a marvelous league of
society, another spiritual nature, that is the Soul; the one sort he called
Angels, the other Men. Both which he endued with a singular wisdom and
knowledge. To this man he gave for his habitation this goodly great Theater,
adorned with such variety of excellent things; and placed him in the most
delectable and pleasant place of all the earth, which in respect of the
flourishing and fertile soil, beautified with goodly rivers and fountains; was
called Paradise, not to be an inhabitor only of this lower part of the world,
but to be a spectator of his Creators wondrous works, thereby first to know
the great glory of his parent and progenitour, and then to love him above all
things; and the time being expired in which he had appointed him here to live,
he should pass from hence to him, where he should continually enjoy his
glorious presence and life everlasting. But some of those Angels being puffed
up with pride through the goodly gifts wherewith God had adorned them, so much
forgot their due obedience, that they thought themselves equal with him that
made them. Whereby they so greatly provoked his displeasure, that he expulsed
them from the number of his ministers, and rejected them from his presence.
This fall was so grievous to them, and the hatred The fall of the Angels.
so great which they conceived against God for the same, that they presently
began to do all things contrary to his commandment, by all manner of means
to offend him, to derogate from his glory what they could, and as much as they
might to deface and corrupt this goodly frame of the world, which he with so
great wisdom had made. And when man persisted yet in the same estate in which
he was placed from above, supposing they had no better means to detract from
the glory of God, than if they could lay a plat to take man from him, and draw
him into their society; they presently put their device in practice, and
fraudulently deceiving him with false promises and hope of greater preferment,
they made him revolt from God, and break his commandment, which he had given
him to make proof of his obedience, and to follow that course and counsel
which they had framed against God, to his own The sell of (...).
overthrow. When man had thus shaken off his obedience, where before he led in
this pleasant Paradise a most happy life, free from all evil and hurtful
things, the earth of its own accord bringing forth all things plentifully, he
was driven out of this delectable place, and with heavy cheer enforced to
seek another dwelling, where he must get his living with the labor of his
body, and with the sweat of his brows; and fell into the punishment appointed
by God for breach of his commandment, that is, death and damnation, bereft of
that rule and dominion, and of all the principal ornaments which he had
bestowed upon him. And where all the mean causes of things, even from the
uppermost heaven unto the lowest part of the earth, depended each upon other in
such an exact order and uniformity to the production of things in their most
perfection and beauty, so as it might well be likened to that Aurea Catena, as
Homer calls it, by the grievous displeasure, which God conceived against man,
he withdrew the virtue which at the first he had given to things in these
lower parts, and now through his curse the face of the earth and all this
elementatie world, does so much degenerate from his former estate, that it
resembles a chain rent in pieces, whose links are many lost and broken, and
the rest so slightly fastened as they will hardly hang together; by means
whereof the heavens and second causes do now far otherwise work in man's
corrupt nature, and in this elementary world, than they did before.

But the son of God, having compassion upon man The Mercy of Christ.
that had thus grievously sinned and was fallen into this miserable estate,
though by his own will, yet not through pride or ambition, nor by contempt of
Gods commandment, but was deceived by the fraud and subtilty of the devil;
cast himself down before his Father with all humility, and besought him for
mankind, and obtained this favor, that they should not be condemned to
perpetual punishment. And yet to satisfy the justice of God which was
immutable, he offered himself to fulfill all that obedience which God
required of man: and so pacified his Father, that he procured him to make a
decree to send him to be a protector and defendor of mankind against the
tyranny of the devil. When man was thus restored into favor again, yet not
with recovery of those goodly gifts and ornaments which he had lost, the devil
begins to rage, and to practice all manner of means to entrap him again:
and when he perceived that he could not deceive all, he handled the matter
so, that the benefit of this promise might come to a very few, and that the
greater part of the world should perish with him, by drawing them from the true
knowledge and worshipping of God to superstition and idolatry. Now to return
from whence we The ma^ce of the D^well.
digressed, seeing the felicity or sovereign good we seek for, concerns
not the body only, but the soul also, and that the soul dies not, but after
it has woond himself out of this prison, it either lives in perpetual
felicity, or infelicitie; this happiness cannot be taken for a temporal
thing, that is enjoyed during this mortal life only, but must be everlasting
and without end. For what profits it a man to have all the world, says
Christ Jesus, if he lose his soul? Whereby it appears that the Philosophers
and Heathens that had not the true knowledge of God, nor believed in him nor
his promise, could not attain to the felicity of man, which in far the
greatest part consists in the joys of the heavenly life. But contrariwise by
their infidelity, they suffer eternal damnation and extreme misery. And then
it follows necessarily that none but Christians, and those which believed in
the promise of his coming, can attain to this felicity or sovereign good,
which have an assured hope to be saved by the merits and passion of Christ.
For they only that are regenerate, and not the No fehe^ but in Christ.
Heathens, after the passage from this life are to enjoy the heavenly life; and
then they to whom the things are given, wherein that part of felicity
confisteth whilst we are in this world, both being joined together, are in the
estate of perfect felicity.

But first, before we come to show our opinion of this sovereign good or
felicity, let us peruse the course of men's lives, that by observing what the
things be that men most desire in this life, they may the more plainly
discover their error, and direct themselves to a better course. Diogenes in a
great assembly of people going backward of purpose, and seeing every one
laughing him to scorn, asked them alowd if they were not ashamed to mock him
for going backward when he walked, whereas they did so all the days of their
life. As if he should say, that no man followed the right course of life, but
rather that all lived contrary to that they ought. For all men desire to be in
a happy estate. Hecopus, hic labor est.


But few take the right course to attain to it. It is commonly said, that wise
men differ from fools in this, that they set up a mark to shoot at, these
shoot their arrows up into the air at random, without any certain mark. And
again, that good men differ in this How good distict slow wicked.
from the wicked, that some propose to themselves a good end, others an evil
end; some that which is good indeed; others that which is good in show only.
Many set up no mark or end at all, to which they should direct the course of
their life, but fall from one kind of life into another, as chance offers,
without any certain end or purpose. Some direct the course of their life to
some end as to a mark, but because they mistake one thing for another, they
never attain to that they desire. Others, though they see what the mark or
end is to which they should direct the course of their life, which is
felicity, yet as men who use to take upon them blind-folded to find out a
post or hillocke, or such like, wander up and down, without finding that they
secke: so they, being made blind by their affections, which (as Plato says)
be very evil counselors, and clogged with worldly cares, and carried away
with insatiable desires, bestow their labor in vain, and can never find that
they seek for. And though all men desire one thing, that is, a happy estate,
yet the great difference we see in the course of their lives, argues their
mistaking some other thing for that they secke after; by mean whereof they can
never attain to the end of their desires. Let us look into men's labors, and
consider what the things be, for the obtaining whereof they employ all their
travel and study: for that seems the thing which they take for felicity, or
a great mean to the attaining of it. For every man naturally desires that
which he thinks to be good.

Three things I observe that the most part of men Three things in which men
imagine selicitie to consist.
greedily hunt after, and leave no stone unturned, as the proverb is, to
attain to them. Some desire to live in pleasure, many seek for riches, others
labor for honor and glory; in these things according to their several
inclinations they put their felicity. But how far they are from the true
felicity, shall hereafter (if God will) appear, rather by the common judgment
of men that will use reason for their guide, than by Logical arguments, and by
examples of them whose miserable estate and unfortunate end has discovered the
error of their disordered and licentious life; that by seeking felicity where
it was not, they found in felicity where it was. By whose example after
Diogenes counsel, we may become wise by another man's harm, for he is wise
very late that is made wise by his own harm. For as Seneca says, Longum iter
per praecepta, brene and efficax per exempla, The way by precepts is long, by
examples short and pithy.

And first to begin with Pleasure, wherein some Of Pleasure.
learned men of account among the ancient Philosophers, as Epicurus, and
others, seeing how willingly men are drawn to pleasures, held that felicity
or sovereign good should consist. They reasoned thus: That action is the end
or felicity of man, to which by nature of his own accord he is most willingly
led: But all men of their own accord are most willingly led to pleasures:
Therefore Pleasure is the end or felicity of man. But the Epicures were in
this greatly deceived: for man, as in the substance of his body, participateth
with brute beasts; so in his spiritual essence, which is a reasonable soul,
he participateth with Angels. And though he be by the worst part of his
nature given to pleasure, yet reason reprehendeth and blames his brutish
affections. But the cause of this dissension in man's nature the Philosophers
saw not, only Christian Religion shows why his affections are repugnant to
reason. If felicity (as the Philosophers affirm) be the proper action of
man, then can it not be in Pleasure; for that is common with him and brute
beasts, but after them it must be an action peculiar and proper to him alone.
And seeing that man is made of two distinct natures, though by the great
wisdom of the Creator wonderfully united together, it is more reason that
his felicity should be agreeable with the best part of his nature, which is a
reasonable soul, and resembles the Angels that are made after the image of
God; than with the worst part of his nature, which resembles, and is of the
like substance to brute beasts. But he that will enter into the due
consideration of man's felicity, must have respect to both his natures, the
body and the soul, both which it must in a sort touch; yet according to the
proportion and difference of excellency that is between them, the one
representing the image of God being immortal, the other participating with
brute beasts, being subject to death and corruption. Such a felicity as
consists in the momentany pleasures of this life, the Indian captives may
challenge.

The Indians have a manner, when they have taken A (...)
one of their enemies prisoner, whom they mean not presently to cate, not to
imprison him, as the use is in these parts of the world, but they bring him
with great triumph into the village, where he dwells that has taken him,
and there place him in a house of some man that was lately slain in the
wars, as it were to re-celebrate his funerals, and give unto him his wives or
sisters to attend upon him, and to use at his pleasure. They apparel him
gorgeously after their manner, and feed him with all the dainty meats that
may be had, and give him all the pleasures that can be devised. When he has
passed certain months in all manner of pleasures, like an Epicure, and is
made fat with dainty and delicate fare, like a Capon, they assemble themselves
together at some festival day, and in great pomp bring him to the place of
execution, where they kill him and eat him. This is the end of this poor
captives pleasures, and the beginning of his miseries; whose case is nothing
inferior to theirs, who, enjoying the pleasures of this life for a small time,
wherein they put their felicity, are rewarded with death and perpetual
torments. For as The Application.
he was taken prisoner by his enemies, so are they captiued by the Devil, who
feeds their humors with variety of pleasures, that he may at length devour
and destroy them both body and soul. Many examples are registered in histories
of the miserable estate and unfortunate end of those that have put their
felicity, and passed their time in voluptuousness and pleasure, which change
was so much the more grievous and painful to them, as it was diametrally
contrary to their former delicious life. But of an infinite number let us draw
out a few, wherewith he that will not be satisfied, to him more will be
insufficient.

Sardanapalus, King of the Assyrians, was so much (...) Mystery of Sardanapalus.
addicted unto voluptuousness and pleasure, that besides his excess in
delicate meats and pleasant drinks, wherewith by all manner of means he
sought continu^lly to satisfy his insatiable appetite, forgetting all humanity
he would never be seen abroad among men, but leading his life like a woman,
always kept himself close in the company of harlots, attired in woman's
apparel, counterfeiting also in his speech a woman's voice. In filthy pleasures
and incontinencie he exceeded the most infamous strumpets, his luxuriousness
(reported by credible Authors, wherein he went beyond all his predecessors)
was such, that it cannot be uttered without offense to modest ears. The
Monarchy of the Assyrians, that was gotten with great labor and industry,
and increased and continued with like virtue and valor, was by the licentious
life of this lascivious man, clean overthrown. For Arbaces his Lieutenant
general of the Medes, a man of great courage, determined to reuote from him;
and being desirous to see how he spent his time, by the favor of an Eunuch
whom he had corrupted, he was let in to Sardanapalus, under pretense to
confer with him of weighty affairs, where he found him spinning among a
company of women, apparelled like them, in a more indecent sort than the common
fame went of him. Which gave Arb^ occasion to disdain him, and encouraged him
the more to shake off the yoke of subjection to such an effeminate man. And
conspiring with diverse others, whom he had drawn to his society, he came with
a great Army toward Sardanapalus, who, hearing of the multitude of people
that had revolted against him, had prepared sufficient force to encounter with
them. And after certain battles fought, wherein Sardanapalus was victor,
presuming upon the co^nnance of his good fortune (...) secure and careless of
his enemies; and ^ again to his accustomed luxurious (...) which he thought
himself to have been long weaned, he falls to his old manners, Luxuriant
animi vebus plerunque facyndis.
Men's minds are often surfeited with prosperity.
and makes a Feast to all his Army: so the day being spent in banqueting and
carowsing, when night came, their heads laden with wine, nothing mistrusting
their enemies, whom they had before vanquished, they gave themselves to rest:
which being known to Arbaces by his spials, he assailed the Kings Camp in the
dead of the night, and finding them unarmed, and unready to fight, put so many
of them to the sword, that the River of Euphrates was made red with their
blood. The King with a few fled into the City of Nyna, where he thought
himself safe, by reason of the answer of an old Oracle made to some of his
Progenitors, that Nyna could never be won, until the river became an enemy
to the city, which he thought could never come to pass. The Town was so
fortisied with walls, that with little resistance the King held out the siege
the space of two years: the third year the river was so increased with
continual rain, that it overthrew the walls of the City, and made a breach
of very great breadth; then Sardanapalus perceiving the time of the Oracle was
come, (...) to despair, and finding no place where to hide himself, left he
should fall into his enemies hands, he caused a great Tabermacle of wood to be
set up, and compassed it round about with store of dry wood, into the which
after he had put all his gold and (...) and sumptuous apparel, he placed his
(...) and Eu^ches in the midst, and lastly shut himself in among them, and
causing his servants to put fire to the frame, they were all burnt together.
Arbaces hearing of the Kings death, entered the City at the breach, and by a
general conse^ was made King. Thus miserably ended Sardanapalus his The end of
the first Monarchy.
pleasures, through whose voluptuous life the Empire of the Assyrians, which
was the first Monarchy of the world, was no doubt by the just judgment of God
translated from the Assyrians to the Medes. But such Monsters of nature
sometime the world has brought forth: as Heliogabalus the Roman Emperor,
abandoning all virtue and honesty, gave himself to follow his beastly
appetite, that he seemed to surmount all before him, and as possibility would
suffer, all that should succeed him, in vice and volup^ousnesse.

This Heliogabalus, of whom grave Authors write The history of Heliogabalus.
such matter as seems incredible, whereof a great part shall be passed over
of me with silence, not (...) to be written. He erected a Council of women,
who should determine what manner of attire the matrones of Rome should wear;
and laying aside all mod^y, His (...)
he caused to be brought into his palace great companies of common women for
his friends, in whose company he was so much delighted, that having gathered
together all the harlo^ and bawd^ could be found, he comes in person into
the place where they were assembled, apparelled in a woman's (...), and made
unto them a very eloquent and well studied ^tion, calling them (...), a (...)
by which the noble Cap^ines and (...) of the Romans, when they would give
their soldiers an honorable title, were vsee to call them, which signifies
Companions in war. The matters which the strumpets were there to treat of
with him, was new inventions and devices of ribaldrie. He would sometimes sit
in his chariot stark naked, which should be drawn through the City of Rome
with four of the fairest young women naked likewise that could be found. He was
in his expenses about his person, his diet, and his house, and other
superfluous toys vnmeasurably sumptuous; which to declare will hazard the
credit of the reporter. All his care and imaginations His Riot,
were, how to exceed in wastesull expenses, to pass his time in all manner of
deliciousness, such as was never heard of before. He never sat down but
amongst most sweet and pleasant flowers, with which were mixed diverse kinds of
odoriferous things, wonderful costly, and of most delectable savor. He would
never eat but of that Curiosity,
which was of excessive price, and devised all manner of means that whatsoever
he did eat should be most costly. He would say, that no sauce made his meat
taste so well, as the greatness of the price. His ordinary Gurmundise,
dinners or suppers never were of less charge than one thousand Marks;
sometime above ten thousand pounds. His apparel was always of purple and
Pride,
cloth of gold, beset with pearl and precious stones of inestimable price,
even to his shoes. He would not wear a garment twice, or drink twice of one
cup, whether it were gold or silver, but he should have it that waited that day
upon his cup. And what ring soever he once drew from his finger, he would never
put it on again. The tables, stools, coffers, and whatsoever else belonged to
his chamber, kitchen, or any other part of his house was of pure gold, even to
that thing which serves to the most base use. In place of oil for his lamps,
he used excellent balm brought from Jury and Arabia. Not so much but his
urinals were made of rich precious stones. When he was disposed to take the
air in the fields, he would have with him six hundred chariots and litters
driven with infamous young wenches and boys, and with bawdy rascals. When he
was near the sea coast, he would never eat fish, but dainty birds that were
brought far off. And when he was far from the sea, then he would eat nothing
but fish brought alive by post with an excessive charge. Whenever he took
his horse to ride, the ground from his door to his horse must be covered with
the dust or scraping of pure gold and silver, because he disdained to touch the
ground with his feet as other men did. Neither did he make this provision of
dainty meats for his own mouth only, but for all his household; Excess,
who should feed upon eggs, and heads of Partridges, popingayes, fesants and
peacokes. His dogs, whereof he had a great number, should feed upon nothing
but the flesh of geese. His Lions were fed with popingayes and feasants. All
things were done by this Emperor Disorder.
in such disorder, that it is not possible to set it down in order. He
commanded for the better government of Rome, that all those works which were
used to be done in the day time, should be done in the night: and those which
were used to be done in the night, should be done in the day. And himself
used to rise from his bed when the Sun went down, and had morning salutations
accordingly: so that the world seemed to go backward. His baths were filled
with precious ointments, whereof he had great store, because he would never
bathe himself but once in any of them. If he chanced to be in any haven of the
sea, he would cause all the ships there with their merchandise to be sunk;
and being reprehended of one of his friends, that told him these excessive
expenses were sufficient to bring him into poverty; he asked him what could
happen better to a man, than to be heir to himself? He wasted in these kinds
of expenses Prodigality
all the revenues which now all the Princes Christian and Heathen do possess.
Amongst the rest of his vain toys, he delighted greatly in jugglers and
jesters. And as there chanced, the even before a festival day, a cart-loade of
roses to be brought to the court, and cast into a chamber, he commanded these
jugglers and jesters to be thrown among these roses, wherein they were all
strangled and stifled. Another of his pastimes was, he caused secretly an
hundred pitchers of flies to be taken, and brought to the court in the hottest
Vanity,
time of summer, and having invited certain Romans to a feast, in the midst
of their dinner he caused his hungry slies to be let loose, who gave so sharp
a charge upon his guests, that they were all put to flight, and the flies fell
to their meat. He had also a manner to invite to his ^eliy,
supper eight bald men, eight that had but one eye, eight that had the gout,
eight that were deaf, eight black men, eight very tall men, eight exceeding
fat men. Many other notorious things were committed by this monster, which for
wearines I will forbear to recite, and draw toward his end, that it may appear
to what pass these pleasures brought him. And as he exceeded all men in the
manner of his life, so he thought to do in his death. For which purpose he had
prepared halters made of Defpaire,
silk to hang himself, when occasion served. He prepared also poison which
he enclosed in vessels made of Emerauds, and other precious stones. He also
made a very high Tower, covered and compassed about with gold and silver, and
within were sharp points of rich and inestimable precious stones, to throw
himself headlong upon them, if it chanced him to be driven to that extremity.
He prepared also swords and daggers of gold and silver wherewith to be slain;
and a pond full of Rosewater wherein to be drowned. But all these preparations
served not his turn, for the soldiers of his guard having long before
conspired his death, after they had slain all those of his adherents that were
in his palace, they found him hidden in a privy, where without giving him
leave to choose his own death, they slew him; and after they had drawn him like
a dog through the streets His infamous end.
and lanes of Rome, they cast him into the river of Tiber, that his body might
never be found again, nor have any other burial: which was done with the
content of all the people.

Such another was Nero, many of whose ontragious Of Nero.
actions so far exceeded the bounds of humanity, that they are not meet to be
spoken. After he had reigned certain years with good fame, he could no longer
dissemble his vile nature, addicted to all manner of dissoluteness; as the
Poet says, Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurret:
Though thou expellest nature with a forke, it will return to the again.


but songht all means with excessive charge and intolerable villainy to pass
his time in luxuriousnes and pleasure. He cooli such delight in shedding of
blood, that besides a great many innocents of the Nobility and others, he put
his own mother to death, and caused nor to be opened, that he might see the
place where he lay. The city of Rome where he dwelt, head of the Roman Empire,
With was then the goodliest, and most flourishing, and best peopled city in the
world, he caused to be set on fire, and would suffer none to quench it in six
days and seven nights; he in the mean time beholding this lamentable
spectacle, with great pleasure in a high tower singing certain verses of
Homer, With contained the burning of Troy; to whom the Poets saying may be well
applied; Libertas scelerum est virtus and summa potestas.
The Liberty to sin, and to offend
As sovereign power, and virtue we commend.


And as one of his pleasures consisted in unmeasurable prodigality, he built
an house that contained a great His Palace.
part of the city of Rome, in which were galleries of a mile in length; the
stuff and the workmanship of such curiosity and charge, as it was
inestimable; the house gilded with pure gold, it was of that circuit, that
there was within the compass of the house, lakes representing a gulf of the
sea, environed round about with buildings; and besides orchards and gardens,
there was within that compass of the house hills and woods representing a
forest replenished with diverse kinds of wild beasts: it had also within it hot
bathes and cold, and many other wonderful things, which argues the monstrous
largeness and sumptuousness of the house, and the outrageous mind of the
maker; whereof to avoyde profixitie, I will surcease further to speak. Besides
the inestimable expense of this house, and many other buildings, he was as
sumptuous in his apparel, and unmeasurably wastefull in all things wherein he
took Ridiculous prodigality.
any delight. When for his pastime he would walk by the sea or rivers to see
fish taken, the threeds of his nets must be of gold, and the lines of
excellent filke. When he went out of Rome, which was often, besides an infinite
number of followers, he had never less than a thousand chariots of mules, for
his provision, wonderful costly furnished, and those that drove them
apparelled in cloth of silver, and gold, and silk, in all extremity of
charge, even to the shoes of the mules, which were of silver. His pastimes,
feasts and gifts which he bestowed upon the people, were of such ineestimable
charge, that it surmounteth all imagination: at such vanities the Poet might
well cry out; O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus inane!
Oh Men's vain cares! How great's their vanity?


He was in all things given to please his senses; and above all the rest of
his abominable vices, extremely addicted to the pleasure of women, and to
lechery, His luxury,
which because it will abhor all modest ears, I will forbear to recite, and
draw toward his end, which was as miserable and shameful, as his life was
dissolute and beastly. His tyrannous and licentious life was become so odious
to all men, that diverse of his Lievtenants in sundry Countries revolted
against him at one time. The Senate likewise by common consent determined to
forsake him, and to deny him their obedience. Which things being known unto
him, he began to despair, and to be utterly out of hope to be able to make
head against them. And as a guilty conscience easily falls into extreme
fear and Repeatance (...)
desperation: so he, supposing the time was at hand in which he must suffer
condign punishment for his lewd life, like a man almost frantic, rent his
clothes, beat his head against the walls, and would receive no couasell nor
comfort. After some pawse, that he was come to himself, he took a box of
gold, wherein he had put poison, and walked into his gardens, where he
deliberated with himself, what course were best for him to take to escape from
this imminent mischief. But as Guicei^rdin says, Nibil difficilius viract
pocest quam fatum, and adversus imminentia and impendentia malanullum valet
remedium: There is nothing more difficult to be avoided than fate, and against
imminent and impendent mischief there is no remedy. Sometimes he thought best
to fly to some foreign Prince, sometimes to yield himself to some of them
that were coming against him, and to desire mercy, other-while to show
himself openly to the people, arrayed in base apparel like an abject, and to
desire pardon for his wicked life past; and if they would not suffer him any
longer to be Emperor, yet that they would give him the government of Egypt.
And to this purpose there was found among his writings after his death an
excellent Oration. Notwithstanding, he durst not put this device in practice,
fearing to be slain of the people, who were now all in an uproare. Thus
having passed that day, and part of the night in this perplexity and fear,
tossed up and down between hope and despair, he withdrew him into a
Chamber, though with very small rest, determining the next day to follow that
course which then should fall into his head. And after a little sleep, about
midnight, news was brought him that the bands of soldiers that guarded his
Palace had forsaken him. This news so much amazed him, that he sent presently
for some of his best friends; but as in such cases faithful friends are no
whereto be found, (neither did Nero deserve it) so had he no good answer from
any of them. And therefore with a few of his servants, covered with the
darkness of the night, he wear in person to diverse of their houses, but the
doors would not be opened, nor any answer made him. Thus he that a little
before was feared and adored of all the world, returned with sorrow in contempt
and fear of every man. And when he came to his Palace again, he found it
risted, and all his goods stolen away, even to his box of poison, which he
had reserved for his last refuge. Which when he saw, he despaimed altogether
Despair.
of life, and was desirous of death; and calling a gladiator, prayed him to
kill him: which when he and others also refused, he cried out, saying, "Thus
now he had no friend nor enemy; and in a fury ready to cast himself into the
River of Tiber, "he asked of some few that were with him, where he might hide
himself, until he might be advised who were best to do: whereupon a servant
of his undertook to convay him forth of the City in the night and with much
fear and travail, he brought him to a house toure miles from Rome: where he
cast himself upon a simple bed, and being hungry and thirsty, there was
nothing to be had but a little brown bread and water. The bread he refused,
the water he drank in wonderful sorrow and fear, to see himself in that
place. Whilst Nero was thus occupied, as soon as it was day the Senace caused
his flight to he published, and by common consent he was adjudged an enemy on
his Countray, and conden^ed to death, and men fem to seek and to execute him.
Which heavy news being brought him, and persuaded by his followers to kill
himself, he took two daggers in his hands, and f^lt whether the points were
tharpe enough, as though he meant to do the act, but being timorous, and
reprehended of the standers by of cowardice, he desired His cowardice,
one of them first to kill himself, by whose example he might be the better
taught to follow. But they refusing so to instruct him, gave him leave to be
his own carver; and hearing the noise of the horsemen that were sent by the
Senate to kill him, seeing no remedy, he thrust his dagger into his throat,
and so, with the help of one of them that were present, slew himself, whose
ugly countenance, representing his monstrous conditions, was terrible to the
beholders. This was His wretched end.
the miserable end of this monster and enemy of mankind, in the flower of his
youth, whose felicity was set upon all manner of pleasures and
voluptuousness, by whose example men may learn to follow the Poets counsel;
Non tibi quod liceat, sed quid fecisse decebit,
Occurras, mentemque domet respectus honesti.
Give not thy lawless will the reine, but serve
The decent mean, and Virtue's rules never swerve.


CHAP. II.
The incomparable Ryots of Vitellins a Roman Emperor. Of Peter de Ruere a
Cardinal. And of Muleasses King of Tunis, etc. Against voracitie and
immoderate Drinking, instanced by sundry Histories. Diverse Motives persuading
into Abstinence and Temperance. With the singular profit, arising from thence.
With Examples and Histories to shat purpose, etc.

(...), another Emperor of Rome, was among diverse other his notorious vices so
luxuriously given, that at one supper he was served with two thousand A costly
(...).
fishes of diverse kinds, and seven thousand flying fowls; who was afterward
drawn throughthe streets with a halter about his neck, and shamefully putto
death.

But what shall we wonder at Emperors prodigalities, when of later years a
simple Franciscan Friar, Fr^ tastings.
Peter de Ruere, after he had attained to the dignity of Cardinal by the
favor of the Pope his kinsman, he spent in two years, in which he lived at
Rome, in feasts and banquets, two hundred thousand Crowns, besides his debts,
which were as much more.

In our time Muleasses King of Tunis was so drpwned in pleasures, that being
expelled from his Kingdom for whoredom, after his return from Germany,
being denied of aid he sought of the Eraperoue Charles the fifth, he spent an
hundred Crowns upon the dressing of a peacocke for his own mouth. And that
he might with more pleasure hear music, he used to cover his eyes. But the
judgment of God fell upon him; for his son or brother dispossessed him of
Ruin followe^ (...).
his Kingdom, and provided him a remedic that his sight should be no longer
annoyance to his hearing, causing his eyes to be put out with a burning hot
iron.

He that is given to please his senses, and delights in the excess of eating
and drinking, may, as Salust says, be called Animal, for he is unworthy the
name of a man. For wherein can a manmore resemble brute beasts, and degenerate
from his Angelical nature, than to serve his belly and his senses? But if our
predecessors exceeded us in superfluity of meats, we can compare and Against
immoderace drinking.
go beyond them in drinking and quaffing. There be carowsets that wll match
Nero, and Vitellius, and Heli^gabalus if they were living, in that faculty.
Vahappie are they, and far from felicity, that think it a glorious thing to
contend for the superiority in carowsing, and to carry away the victory in
such a Bacchandian combat: which pestiferous disease begins so to creep
into our Nation by the infection of our neighbors, that if it be not pi^bmed
by outboritie or laws, it is to be fearedlest it will grow to be habitual,
and take such root, that it will be on possible to be removed, and so
consequently that they which last received itwill go beyond them from whom
they first had it. For, the imitation of evil always exceed^ the example.

King Edgar so much detested this vice of Drunkenness, A limitation of
drinking.
that he fet an order that no men should drink beyond a cert^ ring, made
round about the glasles and cups, of purpose for a mark.

Anacharsis says, that the first draught is to quench the thirst, the second
for nourishment, the third for pleasure, the fourth for madness.

Augustine Lurchcimer renorteth a strange History of three quaffers in
Germany, in the year one thousand five hundred forty nine: these three
companions were in such a ^ollity after they had taken in their cups, according
to the br^ish manner of that Country, that with a coal they pai^d the devil
in the wall, and drank freely to him, and talked to him as though he had been
present. The next morning they were found A remarkable example.
strangled, and dead, and buried under the gallows. I remember a pretty
experiment prastised by the Emperor Charles the fifth upon a drunkard.

As this Emperor on a time entered into Gaunt, there lay a (...) fellow worth
wast the streets, as though he had been dead, who, lest the horsemen should
ride over him, was drawn out of the way by the legs, and could by no means be
wa^ed, which when the Emperor saw, he caused him to be taken up and carried
home to his Palace, and used as he had appointed. He was brought into a fair
chamber hanged with costly arrasse, his clothes taken off, and laid in a (...)
bed meet for the Emperor himself. He continued in sleep A pretty experiment
until the next day almost noone. When he awaked and had lain wondering a while
to see himself in such a place, and diverse brave gentlemen attending upon him,
they took him out of the bed, and apparelled him like a Prince, in very costly
garments; and all this was done with very great silence on every side. When he
was ready, there was a table set and furnished with very dainty meats, and he
set in a chair to eat, attended upon with brave Courtiers, and served as if
the Emperor had been present, the cupboard full of gold plate, and diverse
sorts of wines. When he saw such preparation made for him, he left any longer
to wonder, and thought it not good to examine the matter any further, but took
his fortune as it came, and fell to his meat. His wayters with great reverence
and duty observed diligently his nods and becks, which were his fignes to call
for that he lacked, for words he used none. As he thus sat in his majesty
eating and drinking, he took in his cups so freely, that he fell fast a sleep
again as he sat in his chair. His attendants stripped him out of his fresh
apparel, and arrayed him with his own rags again, and carried him to the
place where they found him, where he lay sleeping until the next day. After he
was awakened, and fet into the company of his acquaintance, being asked where
he had been, he answered, that he had been asleep, and had the pleasantest
dream that ever he had in his life, and told them all that passed, thinking
that it had been nothing but a dream. The like peradven^e would happen to the
carowsers of these days, if they would cleanse their minds from this notorious
vice of excessive quaffing, even to drunkenness, and sometimes to death, and
consider that God has made them creatures after his own image, they would
think, or for shame wish, that the time they had in that sort spent, had been
but a dream. But black is no deformity among the Moors. A long inveterate
custom has made that vice familiar, and turned it into manners. S. Paul
says; Non in ebrietatibus, neque in impudicitiis, nec in contentionibus, sed
induinoins Iesum Christum; Pass not your time in drunkenness, neither in
chambering, nor in contentions, but put on Jesus Christ.

Olaus Magnus makes report of a beast in the North The Ierffe an Emblem of
gluttony.
part of Suetia called a Ierffe, whose property is, when he has killed his
prey, or found some carcass, he devoureth so much, and never leaves feeding,
until his belly be puffed up, and strowteth like a bag-pipe; then not being
able to hold any more, he goes presently between two narrow trees, and
straineth out backward that which he has eaten, and so being made empty,
returns again to the carcass, and fills himself as before, and then
straineth it out between the two trees, and returns to the carcass to eat
again, and thus he continues to do, until he has devoured all: which being
consumed, he hunteth after more, in this sort continually passing his life.
This beast it seems God has created to the shame of gluttonous men, that
pass whole days and nights in eating and drinking, and when they have filled
themselves so full that their bodies will hold no more, they vomit up that they
have taken, and return to their carowsing again, as though it were their
felicity and end for which God has made them: as the Poet says, Plusque
cupit quo plura suam dimittit in alvum.
-- cibus omnis initto
Causacibi est, semperque locus fit inanis edendi:
The more he eats, he asks, his meat
Is of his eating cause,
And be his belly never so full,
Still empty are his jaws.


Which kind of surfeits makes work many times for the Physician, who turning
R. into D. gives his patient sometime a Decipe for a Recipe; and so pays
dearly for his travel that hastneth him to his end. Horace calls such men
that give themselves to their belly, a beast of Arcadia that devoureth the
grass of the earth. Cornelius Celsus gives this counsel when men come to
meat; Nunquam utilis nimia satietas, saepe inutilis nimia abstinentia;
Overmuch satiety is never good, overmuch abstinence is often hurtful.

Mahomet desirous to draw men to the liking of him and his doctrine, and
perceiving the pronenesse of men to luxuriousnes and fleshly pleasures, yet
dealt more craftily in his Alcaron, than to persuade them that felicity
consisted in the voluptuousness and pleasures of this life, which he knew
would not be believed nor followed but of a few, and those the more brutish
sort, but threatened them with a kind of hell, and gave them precepts tending
somewhat more to civilitie and humanity, and promised his followers a Paradise
in the life to come, wherein they should enjoy all manner of pleasures which men
desire in this world; as fair gardens environed with pleasant rivers, sweet
flowers, all kind of odoriferous savours, most delicate fruits, tables
furnished with most dainty meats, and pleasant wines served in vessels of
gold, with beautiful damsels which every man might use at his pleasure.

The Egyptians had a custom not unmeet to be used at the carowsing banquets;
their manner was, in the midst of their feasts to have brought before them
Anatomic of a dead body dried, that the sight and horror A memento mori.
thereof putting them in mind to what pass themselves should one day come,
might contain them in modesty. But peradventure things are fallen so far from
their right course, that that device will not so well serve the turn, as if
the carowsers of these later days were persuaded, as Mahomet persuaded his
followers when he forbad them the drinking of wine, that in every grape there
dwelt a devil. But when they have taken in their cups, it seems that many of
them do fear neither the devil nor any thing else.

Lavater reports a History of a Parish Priest in Germany, that disguised
himself with a white sheet about him, and at midnight came into the chamber
of a rich woman that was in bed, and fashioning A counterfeit spirit.
himself like a spirit, he thought to put her in such fear, that she would
procure a conjnrer or exorcist to talk with him, or else speak to him her
self. The woman desired one of her kinsmen to stay with her in her Chamber the
next night. This man making no question whether it were a spirit or not, in
stead of conjuration or exorcisme brought a good cudgel with him; and after
he had well drunk to increase his courage, knowing his hardiness at those
times to be such, that all the Devils in hell could not make him affraide, he
lay down upon a pallat, and fell asleep. The spirit came into the chamber
again at his accustomed hour, and made such a rumbling noise, that the
exorcist (the wine not being yet gone out of his head) awaked, and leapt out of
his bed, and toward the spirit he goes, who with counterfeit words and
gesture, thought to make him afraid. But this drunken fellow making no account
of his threatenings, Art thou the Devil, quoth he? and I am his Damme; and so
lays upon him with his cudgel, that if the poor Priest had not changed his
devils voice, and confessed himself to be Hauns, and rescued by the woman that
then knew him, he had bin like not to have gone out of the place alive.

This vice of drunkenness, wherein many take overgreat pleasure, was a great
blemish to Alexanders virtues. Drunkenness, the root of other viccs.
For having won a great part of Asia, he laid aside that sobriety he brought
forth of Macedon, and gave himself to the luxuriousness of those people whom
he had conquered. And passing his time in feasting and banqueting in the
company of hariots, he was so overcome many times with drunkenness, that he
wanne more infamy by the outrages he committed through that vice, than
commendations by his virtuous acts. As he sat on a time banquerring among Of
luxury.
those strumpets, one of them called Thais, being drunk, told Alexander, that
he should greatly win the favor of the Greeks, if he would command the
Palace of the goodly Citic of Persepolis to be set Of (...).
on fire, the chief seat of the Kings of Persia, which in times past had been
the destruction of so many great Cities. The same being confirmed by others as
drunk as she, Alexander that then had in him more inclination of heat than of
patience, Why do not we then (quoth he) revenge Greece, and set this City on
fire? wherewith being all chafed with drinking, they rose immediately to burn
that City in their drunkenness, which the men of war had spared in their
fury. And the King himself first, and after his guests and concubines set fire
on the Palace, by whose example others burnt the whole City. Thus the famous
City of Persepolis, head of the East countries, from which so many nations had
before fetched their laws, the royal seat of so many mighty kings, the only
terror sometimes of Greece, the sender forth of navies and armies that
overflowed all Europe, that had done many notable acts, was utterly destroyed
by the enticement of a drunken strumpet, to the perpetual shame of the King,
and all his nation. But when Alexander had taken his rest, and was become
better advised, he repented him of this Of Murder.
foul act, as he did also the killing diverse of his noble men in the like
drunkenness (without judgment) which helped him to conquer so many nations.
John Baptist that holy Prophet was killed by Herod in a drunken banquet.

That great King Cambyses took overgreat pleasure in drinking of wine; and
when he asked Prexaspes his secretary, what the Persians said of him, he
answered, that they commended him highly, notwithstanding they thought him
overmuch given to wine; the King being therewith very angry, caused Prexaspes
son to stand before him, and taking his bow in his hand, Now (quoth Herodocus.
he) if I strike thy sons heart, it will then appear that I am not drunk, but
that the Persians do lie: but if I miss his heart, they may be believed. And
when he had shot at his son, and found his arrow had pierced his heart, he was
very glad; and told him that he had proved the Persians to be liars.

Fliolmus king of the Gathes was so addicted to drinking, that he would sit a
great part of the night quaffing and carowsing with his servants: And as on a
time he sat after his accustomed and beastly manner carowfing with them, his
servants being as drunk as he, threw the king in sport into a great vessel
full of drink that A uniferable end.
was set in the midst of the hall for their quaffing, where he ridiculously
and miserably ended his life.

Ciness being Ambassador to Pyrrhus, as he arrived in Egypt, and saw the
exceeding height of the vines of that country, considering with himself how
much evil that fruit brought forth to men, said, that such a mother deserved
justly to be hanged so high, seeing she did bear so dangerous a child as wine
was. Plato considering the hurt that wine did to men, said, that the gods sent
wine down hither, partly for a punishment of their sins, that when they are
drunk, one might kill another. Paulus Diacrius reports a monstrous kind of
quaffing between four old men at a banquet, which they made of purpose. Their
challenge was, two to Old Drunkards.
two, and he that drank to his companion must drink so many times as he had
years; the youngest of the four, was eight and fifty years old; the second
threescore and three; the third fourscore and seven; the fourth fourscore and
twelve: so that he which drank least, drank eight and fifty bowls full of
wine, and so consequently according to their years, whereof one drank
fourscore and twelve bowls.

The old Romans when they were disposed to quaffe The Romans imitated the
Grecians.
lustily, would drink so many carowses as there were letters in the names of
their mistresses, or lovers; so easily were they overcome with this vice, who
by their virtue some other time, became masters of the world. But these devices
are peradventure stale now; there be finer devices to provoke drunkenness.
Against such gluttons that make their belly their God, the Prophet Esaias cries
out; Cursed be ye that rise early in the morning to follow drunkenness, and
to sit quaffing until evening, (...) 5.11.
that the wine may heat you. The City of -- boing sometime a famous and well
governed City, and Drunkenness the lelle of (...).
head of Hetruria a country in Italy, fell into such luxuriousness that they
became subject to their own slaves, who (...) presuming only to make
themselves of the number of the Senators, shortly after possessed the whole
commonwealth: and ordering all things at their pleasure, they would marry
their mistresses daughters against their will, and made a law that all their
ravishments of widows and married women should go unpunished, and that no
virgin should marry a free man, except one of their number had first defloured
her. Into such a shameful servitude, that which was before one of of the
chiefest Cities in Italy, by the just judgment of God, through their
voluptuous and delicious life, was fallen, and were commanded by their own
slaves, and enforced continually to suffer all manner of villainies. In the time
of Antonius Pias, the people of Rome being given to drink without measure, he
commanded that none should presume to sell wine but in Apothecaries shops, for
the sick or diseased.

Cyrus of a contrary disposition to the gluttons and Examples of tempetance.
carowsers, in his youth gave notable signs, and afterward like examples of
sobriety and frugalitie when he was Monarch of the Persians. For, being
demanded when he was but a boy, of his grandfather Astyages, why he would
drink no wine. Because, said he, I observed yesterday when you celebrated the
feast of your nativitie, so strange a thing, that it could not be but that some
man had put poisoninto all the wine that ye drank; for at the taking up of the
table there was not one man in his right mind. By this it appears, how rare
a matter it was then to drink wine, and a thing to be wondered at to see men
drunk. For when the use of wine was first found out, it was taken for a thing
medicinable, and not used for a common drink, and was to be found rather in
Apothecaries shops than in Tavernes. What a great difference there was between
the frugalitie of the former ages, and the luxuriousness of these latter
days, these few examples will show. This Cyrus as he ma^ched with his army,
one asking him what he would have provided for his supper, he answered,
Bread; for I hope, says he, we shall find a fountain to serve us of drink.
When Plato had been in Sicilia, being asked what new or strange thing he had
seen; I have seen, says he, a monster of nature, But one mcale a day used
of old.
that eats twice a day: For Dionysius whom he meant, first brought that
custom into that country. For, it was the use among the Hebrews, the
Grecians, the Romances, and other nations, to eat but once a day. But now many
would think they should in short time be half famished, if they should eat
but twice a day; nay rather whole days and nights, be seant sufficient for
many to continue eating and quaffing. We may say with the Poet; Tempora
mutantur and nos (...) in illis:
The times are changed and we are changed in them.


By the history of the swine (which by the permission of God, were veked by
the Devil) we be secretly admonished that they which spend their lives in
pleasures and deliciousness, such belly-gods as the world has many in these
days, that live like swine, shall one day be made a prey for the Devil: for
seeing they will not be the temple of God, and the house of the holy Ghost,
they must of necessity be the habitation of the Devil. Such swine, says one,
be they that make their paradise in this world, and that dissemble their vices,
lest they should be deprived of their worldly goods, their offices, benefices,
Prebends and dignities, fearing lest they should lose their carnal pleasures.
Such swine be some flatterers, that all their life time do nothing but
entertain Princes and great States in their errors and pleasures, and that
hold for the first article of their faith, that their is no other God but their
belly: for all their religion is turned into carnal liberty. As for the law
of Jesus Christ, they will none of it, it is too full of pricks, too heavy and
hard for them. They will not drink of this cup, the drink seems to them
to be bitter, they must have a Jesus Christ apparelled in velvet, more soft,
sweet, and delicate: they will none of the austeritie of John Baptist; they
seek nothing but Kings Courts, where all manner of pleasures and delights are:
and they have none other care, but how they may live in this world at their
ease and pleasure. But howsoever they cover their wickedness, and disguise
their conceits, the time will come that all shall be discovered before the face
of God: which was well understood of David, when he said; Lord whether shall I
withdraw my self from thy power? where shall I hide me from thy face? If I
climb up to Heaven, thou art there; if I go down to Hell, thy hand is there,
etc. What Sodom and Gomorrah suffered for their filthy pleasures, is to all
men known. Aristotle counsels men to consider of pleasures as they are
going away, which then show themselves so loathsome and full of weariness and
repentance, that men the rather by that means will refrain to turn to them
again.

CHAP. III.
The vanity of Perfumes, and costly unguents. The miserable and fearful
effects of Adultery, made manifest in Alexander Medices, Duke of Florens: In
the fall of the Roman Tarquins: In Appius Claudius one of the Decemvirate: In
the History of Anthony and Cleopatra: In Roderick King of Spain.

ALI men are not given to like pleasures, but some desire to please one of
their senses more than the rest, and some other; as the Poet says: (...) sua
quenque voluptas: Everyman is drawn after his own appetite and pleasure: and
yet every one has been found sufficient to be many times the destruction of
their followers. Plancus, a Roman, lived very delicately, and took great
pleasure to be made sweet with perfumes and pleasant ointments, and being
banished Vanity and excess cannot be hid.
and driven to hide himself from them that sought him, they found where he
lurked by his savours, and slew him.

Alexander Medices Duke of Florence was so intemperate Alexander Medices.
in the love of women, that Laurence Medices his kinseman and especial
favorite, having a determination to kill him, to deliver his country from a
Tyrant, as he termed him, but chiefly as it should seem, for the desire of
glory, could find no better means to bring his purpose to effect (for he was
strongly guarded) than to offer his help to win for him the favor of a
gentlewoman, his kinsewoman or sister, with whom for her beauty and modesty
he knew the Duke to be far in love. This Laurence comes to the Duke in the
night, and whispering in his ear, tells him that with many persuasions and
certain promises, he had at last, though with great difficulty, won this
chaste woman to yield to his desire, and that the same night she would come to
his bed, upon condition nevertheless that the matter should be kept in very
great secret, and that which he had in his behalf promised should be
faithfully performed. Fistula dulce canit volucrem dum decipit auceps:
To a sweet note the Fowlers pipe is set,
When he the bird betraies unto his net.


Which was a certain sum of money that the Duke should lend her to help her
husbands necessity, who being a merchant was fallen in decay; this he fained
to be the woman's request, to which the Duke easily yielded as a very reasonable
petition. And burning in desire to satisfy his lust, they went presently to a
house joining to Laurences house, whither the Duke was used often to go, from
whence he made him send away two of his chamberlaines that followed him, lest
they should find whereabout he went. Thus the Duke being brought into a
chamber, and laid upon a bed, he advised him thereto repose himself awhile
until the dead of the night were come, and men at rest, that he might the
more secretly and safely bring the woman to him. He persuaded the Duke to put
off his sword, that he might lie the more easily: which being done, Laurence
wrappeth his girdle quickly about the hilts, that his sword could not speedily
be drawn, and then advises him to take his rest, until he had made all
things ready and returned again. So he draws the canopie close about the
bed, and goes his way, and shuts the door after him. When Laurence had
framed all things to his purpose, he calls a young man his servant, whom the
Duke had before pardoned for man slaughter, and exhorts him to help him as
he had promised, to kill a notable man, and a great enemy of his: that there
wanted nothing, but to do it with courage, and not to be terrified with his
countenance, there was no danger in the matter. The young man promises his
help willingly to kill him, whosoever he were, if it were the Prince
himself. Thou have divined rightly, quoth Laurence, it is even he, here we
have him fast locked in this chamber asleep: he opens the door softly, and
in they go into the chamber, with one base fellow more, and finding the Prince
snorting, Laurence draws his sword, and thrust it into his side; the Duke
being terrified with the blow, casts himself to the other side, and crept
upon his hands and feet under the bed, and as the rest stroke at him, he got
forth again, and like lion flies upon Laurence, and got his left thombe in
his mouth and brake it, so as Laurence was feign to call to his companion for
help, who at last killed the Duke. And though there was a great noise in the
chamber, and the Duke alowd called him traitor, yet none of the house that
heard it mistrusted any such matter, because Laurence had craftily accustomed
them to the like noise A politic (...).
in playing with his companions, and throwing stools and cushions about the
house, purposely to deceive them at this time. Thus through the desire of this
fleshly pleasure, Alexander Medices was slain by his own cousin and friend,
that had none other means to entrap him; and he himself was afterward slain
at Venice. Plautus says, Nox, vinum, mulier, nihil perniciosius homini
adolescentulo: The night, wine, a woman, nothing is more pernicious to a young
man. One says, that there is not a more capital enemy given by nature to a
man, than pleasure.

The Bishop of Magdeburge took such pleasure in Against immoderate dancing.
dancing, that as he daunced on a time until midnight with Ladies and
Gentlewomen, he fetched at the last such a frisco, that he fell down and
brake his neck, and the Gentlewoman also that daunced with him: the just
judgment of God.

There is no greater hinderance to the attayning of felicity than the desire
of fleshly pleasures; which has not only been the destruction of many
private persons, but also the ruin of many States and kingdoms. Rape the
subversion of kingdoms.
Tarquinius Sextus son to Tarquinius Superbus King of the Romans, being
with his father at the siege of Ardea, sitting at supper with diverse young
Gentlemen, there grew a question among them, which of them had the modestest
woman to his wife; and as every man preferred his own before the rest; what
need these many words, said Collatino husband to Lucretia, when Rome being at
hand we may soon decide this controversy? Let us take our horses and gallop
presently to Rome, and as we shall find our wives employed, so we shall have
cause to judge of their disposition. Every man allowed of the motion, and
taking their horses, they forthwith galloped to Rome, being dark-night, and
unawares to them, went to visit their wives, whom they found feasting, and
passing the time in pleasures. But when they came to Collatinos house, they
found the doors fast shut, and Lucretia spinning in the midst of her maids.
Then was the sentence given by all their consents with Collatino, they all
commending the modesty of Lucretia. Collatino then being victor, invited them
all to dinner A looking glatle for Ladies.
the next day. But after their return to the camp, the kings son, being
ravished with the beauty and modesty of Lucretia, sought all means how to
fulfill his lust. And for that purpose, coming to Rome on a time secretly in
the evening, he supped with Lucretia, and dissembling his intent, lodged in her
house. When the d^ad of the night was come, he brake into her chamber, and so
craftily undermined her with threatenings of present death, and perpetual
shame, that abusing the simplicity of the modest woman, she suffered him to
use his will. When day was come and he gone, she sent presently for her father,
her husband, and kinsfolks, letting them to understand that a great misfortune
had happened to her. When they were come, perceiving by her sad countenance,
that all was not well, her husband asked whether all things were safe in the
house; she like one in a trance stood silent, unable to answer them a word.
But they urging still to know the cause of her heaviness, and what had
befallen her, after a little pause being come to her self, her cheeks
watered with abundance of tears; What (said she) can be accounted safe to a
woman when her chastity is lost? Thy bed, my husband, that hitherto has
been kept unspotted, is now defiled by the kings son, who coming to me
yester-night to supper, was courteously entertained of me as a guest, and lodged
in my house as a friend, altogether ignorant of his intent: but when we were
all at rest, he brake into my chamber, and standing by my bed side with his
dagger in his right hand, and his left hand upon my breast, hold thy peace
(quoth he) Lucretia, I am Tarquinius, if thou speak any word, this dagger
shall be thy death. Then began he to discover his villainous mind, and
mingling threats with amorous words, showed me what pain and torment he had
suffered for my sake. But the Gods that never fail to strengthen them that
carry an honest mind, gave me sufficient power to resist his treacherous
temptations, and by contempt of death, to prefer an honest same before a
shameful life. And when he perceived, that I would neither be enti^ed with
his amorous words, nor terrified with his threats of death, he altered his
course, and assured me, if I would not consent to his will, he would put a
slave naked into my bed; and after he had killed us both, he would make it
known to the world, that he found us in adultery. Then the fear of
perpetual shame and infamy to me, and to all you my kinsfolks, prevailing
more with me, than the terror of death, though my heart consented not, my body
yielded to fulfill his lust. And albeit I absolve my self of the fault, yet I
will not remit to my self the pains of death, lest any matron of Rome should
hereafter take occasion, by mine example, to live when her honor is lost. When
she had thus spoken, and taken them all by the hand, requiring them as they
were men, not to suffer this villainy, which reached also to them, to pass
unrevenged, whilst they were co^forting of her, and advising her not to take
the matter so grievously, seeing there was no fault where the heart consented
not, she took out a knife, which she had secretly hidden under her clothes,
and thrust it into her heart. Then was there great cries and lamentation by her
A masculine Spirit.
husband and friends, and Brutus one of them perceiving her dead, drew the
knife out of her body, and kissing the same, did solemnly swear by the blood
of that modest woman, he would not suffer that injury to go unrevenged, nor
that any king hereafter should reign over the people of Rome: whereunto when
the rest condescended, he carried the dead body into the market place, and
persuaded the young men to join with him, in revenge of this abominable act,
and to expel their king: whereunto they easily agreed, and armed themselves,
and would not suffer the king, not any of his to enter any more into the city,
and erected a new State, translating the government from a Monarchy to a common
wealth. Thus by the incestuous act of this young man, Tarquinius lost his
kingdom, from himself and his posterity.

By the like occasion of a libidinous desire, after certain years that the
Romans had changed their government of two Consuls to ten principal men,
they returned it back again from them to two Consuls. For Appius Claudius one
of the ten governors was so His name was (...).
extremely enamoured upon a young virgin that was contracted to a young
Gentleman, that when he saw Called Claudius.
she would not be enti^ed with his fair promises and gifts, he entered into a
most odious and wicked practice. He caused a young man that he had brought up,
as she went forth of her fathers house into the town, who was then in the
wars, to challenge her for his slave, and to bring her before him, as he
sat in judgment, that he by adjudging her to him might by that means have
his will of her. This man according to his instructions, claimed her openly in
the Court, and said, that she was borne in his house, and stolen from him, and
conveyed to the house of Virginius, who falsely took upon him to be her
father; which he offered to prove before him, and desired justice, that he
might have his slave restored to him again. There was a great concourse of
people to see the end of this tragedy, and much murmuring against Appius, whose
wicked purpose they began to conjecture. And as her friends desired him, that
for as much as her father was absent in service of the commonwealth, the
matter might be stayed until his return; Appius answered, that he was
contented to defer judgment until the next day, yet so, as he that
challenged her might receive no prejudice; which would be, if he should lose
the possession of her: and therefore he would take order that he should put
in sufficient surety to bring the damsel in place again, when her father was
come, and then he would judge her to him that should have best right. At these
words, he that should be her husband, pressed to come near to lay hold upon
his wife, but being kept out by Appius commandment, he cried out upon his
unjust sentence, and told him he would rather dye, than suffer his wife to be
taken from him; and after many hot words, Appius perceiving the coffeehouse
of the people, set her at liberty until the next day, and sent secretly to the
camp, to some of his friends, to stay her father there. But Virginins friends
having prevented him, he came to Rome the same night. The next day when Appius
had sitten a while in the place of judgment, before he that challenged the young
woman for his slave, spoke any word to demand her, and before her father could
come to answer for her, he adjudged her to the young man that challenged her.
All men stood An unjust judge.
silent, and astonished at his unjust sentence, and the father exclaiming, and
railing upon Appius, he that made the challenge offered to take her away as his
slave, but interrupted by the lamentable cries of the women that were present,
Appius commands silence, and a way to be made for him to carry away his
slave. Then every one departed with great sorrow and anger, and left the young
virgin alone with her master. The father seeing his daughter left alone, void:
of all foccour, holds up his hands to Appius, and desired pardon for his
unreverent speech, and that he might have leave a little to speak with his
wife and daughter apart, to the end, that if his wife would say, that she was
not his own daughter, but that he had hitherto falsely usurped the name of her
father, he would be content to leave her. Appius, supposing he meant as he
spoke, licensed them to go aside. Then the father taking a knife secretly in
his hand; There is no other meanrs, my daughter (said he) to set thee at
liberty but this, and therewith he thrust the knife to her heart. And A cruel
pity.
looking up to the judgment seat where Appius (...); To thee Appius (quoth
he) and to thy he^, (...) crate with this blood: Then was there great
lamentatlon and outcryes among the people, and the women crying; Is this the
comfort of bringing up our children? Is this the reward of chasticie? And
though Appius commanded Virginius to be apprehended, yet he escaped, and went
to the camp, where the unjust sentence of Appius was so much detested, and the
necessity of the fathers fact so much lamenred, that they The end of the (...).
came armed to Rome, and deprived the ten Magistrates, and altered the form of
government to two Consuls again, and cast Appius in prison, where for sorrow
and shame he ended his days.

Antonius a famous Captain, and one of the (...) governors of the Roman
Empire, through the Octivian, (...), and Lepidus (...) the (...).
pleasure he took in the fond love of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, lost not
only his fame and rule which he had over diverse kingdoms and countries, but
his life also, and hers, upon whom he was so much besotted. This Antonius
married with the sister of Octavian, another principal governor of the Roman
Empire, that after was called Augustus Caesar. But the lascivious eatisements
of Cleopatra made such an impression in the flexible disposition of Antonius,
that he little regarding his own wife, gave himself wholly to the love of
Cleopatra, which was the chief cause of the ruin of them both, and the
advancement of Octavian to the Monarchy of the world. For Octavian conceiving
great displeasure against Antonius for his sisters cause, gathered together a
great navy to make war upon him, who had made the like provision to
encounter with Octavian. These two mighty potentates, with two huge navies,
wherein were assembled the forces of all the Princes adjoining to their aid,
met together with like will and power, but not with like fortune. For in the
beginning of the fight, Cleopatra, who accompanied Antonius with the Egyptian
(...), fled back again to Alexandria, from whence they came: which when
Antonius saw, being overcome rather with the blind love of the Queen, than
with his enemies forces, followed after her, and left the victory to Octavian,
who pursued them both to Alexandria; where Antonius being arrived, and
perceiving his navy to join with his enemy, and at the same time also
forsaken of his horsemen, he cried out as he went in the City, that he was
betrayed to them by Cleopatra, to whom for her sake he became an enemy. Which
when Cleopatra heard, fearing the fury of Antonius, she shut her self in her
sepulcher, which she had before so artificially prepared, that being once made
fast, no man could easily enter into it, without the help of them that were
within, and sent word to Antonius, that she had slain her self. After
Antonius was come to himself, hearing and believing this evil news; Why
stayest thou Antonie (quoth he) the only cause that was left to thee to desire
life, fortune has now taken from thee: and so entering into his chamber, and
unarming himself, O Cleopatra (quoth he) I am not sorry for the lack of thee
(for I will be by and by with thee) but that so great an Emperor as I am,
should be furmounted in fortitude by a woman. Then Antonius turning to his man
Eros whom he had provided before to kill him if need were, required him to
perform his promise. Eros taking his sword in his hand, and making as though
he would strike his master, suddenly turned the point to his own body, and
thrust himself through, and fell down dead at his masters feet. Which when
Antonius saw; well done Eros (quoth he) thou have aptly taught me by thine own
example, that thou could not find in thy heart to do it thy self, and there
with he thrust the sword into his own belly, and cast himself upon his bed.
Antonius perceiving that his wound was not present death, desired his servants
to kill him, but they refusing and running forth of the chamber, he raged and
cried out like one that had been mad, until one came that Cleopatra had sent
to bring him to her. When he heard that she was alive, he greatly rejoiced,
and was carried presently to her (...), where the Queen with two other women
which she had ^here enclosed with her, let down cords, out of a window (for
the door she would not open) and with great labor drew him up half dead
into the sepulcher. A more miserable and lamentable sight (said they that were
present) was never seen. When the women had drawn him into the sepulcher, and
laid him upon a bed, Cleopatra began to rend her garments, to rear her
hay^e, to scratch her face, crying out upon her lover, her Lord, her Emperor,
and so employed herself in bemoniug him, that she seemed to forget her own
misery. Antonius used all the means he could to comfort her, advising her to
provide for her self, and her own matters if she could do it without
dishonor, and not to mourn for these last calamities of his, but rather to
think him happy for his former felicity, that was of all other the most
famous and mightiest man; and that now it was no disgrace for a Roman to be
overcome of Romans. After which words Antonius began to yield up the ghost.
When Casar heard of Antonius death, he sent Proculeius presently to Cleopatra,
with charge, to foresee that she might come alive into his power, meaning to
preserve her for his triumph. But after he had talked with Cleopatra, and
perceived that she would not let him into her sepulcher, he caused ladders to
be set to to the window, where Antonius came in to her; and whilst another
held her in talk, he with two of his servants conveyed themselves secretly
into the sepulcher. Then one of the women crying out; oh unhappy Cleopatra,
thou arttaken alive, she turned about and espying (...), took a sword which she
had ready, and offering to kill her self, he steppeth hastily to her and laid
hold upon the sword, and told her, that she did wrong to her self, and to
Casar, that went about to take away the occasion from that mild and merciful
Prince, to show her favor. When they had gotten her out of the sepulcher,
after a few days, Caesar came to see her, of whom she obtained leave, to
celebrate the funerals of Antonius after her own mind. And when she had
prepared things ready to bury him with such pomp as the time then served, she,
with some other of her favorites, came to the sepulcher, and bowing down toward
the ground; O my friend Antonie (quoth she) I buried thee not long sithence
with free hands, but now I do sacrifice to thee a captive, under safe custody,
lest this slaves body should perish by weeping and lamenting, which is
preserved to none other purpose, but to triumph over thee. Thou must look for
none other sacrifice, nor honors; for these be the last thou must have of
Cleopatra: whilst we lived, no force was able to separate us, but now that we
are dead, it is to be doubted lest we shall change places, that thou a
Roman, shall lie in Egypt, and I an Egyptian, in Italy. But if the Goddess
there, be of any power or virtue, suffer me not to be led away alive, nor to
triumph over thee, but receive me to thee into this tomb. For of an infinite
number of miseries wherewith I wretched woman am oppressed, there is none so
great or grievous to me, as this little time that I have lived without thee.
After she had thus bemoned her self with him, and embraced the tomb, with
many teates, she went to her dinner, that was provided for her very
sumptuously. After she had dined, and sent letters to Caesar, she avoided all
other from her, and went into the sepulcher with the two women only, and shut
fast the door. As Caesar was reading her letters, wherein she bewayling her
estate, made lamentable petition to him, that she might be buried with
Antonius; he mistrusting, as the truth was, that she had determined to destroy
her self, sent presently to stay it, if it were possible. The messengers
hastening them to the sepulcher, found the watchmen there, mistrusting no such
matter. But when they had broken up the door, Pride in in death.
they found Cleopatra dead, laid in a bed of gold, attired like a Queen, one of
the women lying dead at her feet, the other half dead was putting the Crown
upon the Queens head: and being asked whether this were well done; Yea, said
she, very well done, and as best becomes the progeny of so many Kings, and
therewith fell down dead. The fame went diversely of the manner of her death.
Some said, it was by a venomous worm called Aspis, which was brought unto her
among the leaves of a fig tree.

The desire of the like fleshly pleasure was the destruction of Spain, which
the Paynims recovered from the Christians. For, in the Reign of King Roderick,
there was a Prince in Spain, called Julian Earl of Cepta, who had a daughter
of excellent beauty and wisdom, called Caba: this damsel being sent to the
Court to attend upon the Queen, the King fell so extremely in love with her,
that perceiving she would not be enticed to agree to satisfy his inordinate
desire, he took her away by force, and defloured her in his Palace. The which
when Count Julian understood, he received thereof such grief, that he
determined to revenge so great an injury upon the Kings own person. But
dissembling the matter, that he might have the better opportunity, when the
King sent him with an army to make war upon the Moors, who then invaded the
borders of Spain, he practiced with the King of the Moors, to send over an
Army, promising to bring all Spain under his obedience; which being done, the
Moors with the Counts aid, joined in battle with King Roderick, and after
great spoil done to the country, overthrew him, with all his nobility and
army; so as the King could never after be found quick or dead: and the
Moors not long after became masters of all Spain.

CHAP. IIII.
Lust, the occasion of many mischiefs, and unnatural acts: Instanced by
Hyppolitus Cardinal of Este: And Galeace a Gentleman of Mantua: Of Pyramus and
Thysbe: Histories of men made ridiculous by dotage: The miserable end of
Abusahid King of Fez, and others. Stories of lascivious Friars, and a Parish
Priest: Of the Tyrant Aristotimus: The (...) love of Antiochus son to King
Seleucus: Of Charles the sixth King of France: Of the Emperor Commodus: And,
that in voluptuousness no felicity can consist.

WHen men let loose the reins of their affections, and suffer themselves to
be overcome with amorous passions, neither fear of God, nor respect of men,
nor regard to their own safety, for the most part, restrains them from
attempting all manner of impieties, to effectuate their dissolute desires. Such
passions excited Hyppolitus Cardinal of Este, to commit a most cruel and
unnatural act against his own brother. This A (...) Cardinal.
Cardinal, or rather carnal, and his brother, were both extremely in love
with one woman, and perceiving that she affected his brother more than him,
he asked her the cause: she confessed that the beauty of his eyes, allured her
liking more than all the rest. The Cardinal departing in a great fury,
watching for opportunity, found his brother on a time a hunting; and
compassing him about with his followers, made him alight from An (...) brother.
his horse, and caused his footmen to pluck his brothers eyes out of his head,
he beholding the matter whilst it was doing, contrary to all humanity.
Nonbenecum sociis regna Venusque manent:
Kingdoms and Concubines brook no competitors.


That act was no more wicked, than this was foolish. Galeace, a Gentleman of
Mantua, courting a damself with whom he was in love, as they stood upon a
bridge, said, that he would suffer a thousand deaths for her service, if it
were possible. She in jest commanded him to cast himself into the River; which
he presently did, A foolish lover.
and was drowned.

The like fond love brought Pyramus and Thisbe, a young man and maid to the
like end. These two young folks were exceedingly in love together: and
perceiving that by the suspicion of their parents, they (...). (...).
could not satisfy their desires, they agreed upon a certain day to meet in
a place afer off; where Thisbe chancing first to come, finding there a Lion,
she hid her self for fear, leaving behind her (for haste) the things which
she did wear upon her head: which being taken away by the Lion, and found by
Pyramus, supposing his love was devoured by the Lion, he slew himself. Thisbe
not long after returning to the place appointed, and finding her lover dead,
slew her self with his sword. But this love that follows, wrought not so
evil an effect.

A French Gentleman lying with his love a Courtisan in Rome, as he was in the
morning about to put A ridiculous lover.
on his chain of gold, which was wont to come four times about his neck, it
would then go but three times. about. And as he was musing with himself how
this matter should come to pass, the Courtisan (who had untyed secretly the
lincks, and stolen part of the chain away) made show as though she marvelled
why he looked so sad, and asked the Gentleman whether he felt any grief: It
seems (quoth she) you have taken some cold, because your head is waxed
great, and your face swollen; and therewith she put a glass in his hand of
that sort that makes things show greater and larger than they are indeed. The
Frenchman looking in the glass, believing that his head was swollen, and that
he was fallen into some strange disease, left musing upon his chain, and
bewailed himself afterward to his friends, as though he had been dangerously
diseased.

There was a young man in Friburge so desirous of the company of a young
maiden, with whom he was in love, that being promised by a Necromancer, he
should enjoy her company, and for that purpose withdrawing themselves into a
secret place of the house, he caused the devil to show himself to them in
likeness of this Virgin; and when the young man offered to No (...) with the
(...).
take her by the hand, the spirit casts him against the walls, and slew him,
and cast his carcass with such violence at the conjurer, that he lay half
dead a great while.

Abusahid King of Fez, by the report of Leo of Africa, was slain, and his six
children by his Secretary, for abusing his wife. In the time of Philip the
Fair, King of France, two Knights were flayed alive for whoredom with the
Queen of Navarre, and the Countess of March, and they condemned to perpetual
prison.

Julius Casar that great Monarch, after he had made conquest of Germany,
Spain, France, England, Italic, Greece, and of Pompey his enemy, had like to
have suffered Love captives conquerours.
a shameful death, through the pleasure he took in the fond love of
Cleopatra, whose company to enjoy, he went to Alexandria in disguised apparel,
where an Eunuch and a child were like to have slain him, if he had not cast
himself from an high tower into the sea, and saved his life by swimming to his
camp, under the galleyes of his enemies.

These passions of love do work wonderful and strange effects, in many that
yield themselves to be overcome by them. Historiographers report of a young The
like we read of Rygnialion.
man in Athens, of very good parentage, and rich, that was so enamoured upon an
Image of Marble, very artificially made, and set up in a public place, that
he would embrace it, and make love to it, as though it were a living Creature;
and could not endure it to be out of his sight, but always remained by it. And
if it chanced him to be from the Image, he would weep and lament so grievously,
that it would pity any hard heart to behold him. This Passion grew so strong
in him, that he made suit to the Senate to sell the Image to him, for such
price as themselves would demand, that he might remove it from thence to his
own dwelling place. But the Senate denying his request, because it was a
public thing, he caused to be made a rich Crown of gold, with other jewels
and sumptuons attire, and put it upon the Image, which he beheld and adored in
such extremity, that the people being moved at his folly, forbad him to come
any more near it: whereat he conceived such grief and displeasure, that he
killed himself. Durius in terris nihil est quod vivat amante, Prop.

Nec, modo si saplas, quod minus esse velis:
None suffers more than they that love profess,
Which, the more wise we are, we practice less.


And though this be very strange, yet that which credible Authors write of the
King Xerxes, is more strange, or rather monstrous. They report that he was so
far enamoured upon a Plane tree, that he would make love to it, as if it had
been a very fair woman.

The desire of this fleshly pleasure brought forth a most vile and wicked sect,
among the Friars and religious men at Naples, in the time of Pope Egidius. As
Lecherous Friars.
there happened a dissension among the Popes, these Friars, in contempt of
Christian Religion, would assemble themselves together in the night, both men
and women, in caves and secret places, fit for their purpose: where, to cover
their villainy with some show of honesty, the Priests that were among them
would sing Psalms, after the manner of Christians. Which being finished, the
Priests, as it were beginning a Sermon, would say something to confirm their
wicked error; the effect of whose speech should be, That above all things
Charity ought to be embraced: which, by the testimony of holy Scripture, was
the head of all virtues; and that the principal exercise of this Charity
among men, (God himself being Author thereof) Horrible blasphemy.
consisted in the coupling together, by the holy Ghost, of male and female, in
the work of Venus. And when every man had defiled that woman (the lights being
put out) whom before he had set his eyes upon, then the divine service was
finished. These men taught publicly, that this was not the Testimony of
Christ, My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave unto you: But this, Increase
and multiply, and replenish the earth. And if any of these women happened to be
with child, the Priests commanded the child to be brought to them, who
assembling together in a place appointed for their sacrifices, after a solemn
sort, would burn the infant to ashes, which they would gather up and keep in a
pot, as a holy thing. And when any new Priest was to receive Orders by them, he
must drink of those ashes in wine. And when their chief Bishop happened to
dye, to avoid envy, and that a new might seem to be chosen to supply his
room, rather by some divine power, than by themselves, they would command the
mother of some child borne in that wicked sort, to bring it to some of their
secret places appointed for that purpose, and the Priests as they sat (the
people standing by) would take the child, and deliver it from one to another,
every one brusing it with his hands, continuing this order still, until the
poor wretch were killed: then in whose hands it dyed, that was the man that
must be the chief Bishop. These be the effects that the desire of fleshly
pleasures brings forth. Quippe nec ira Deum tantum, nec tela, nec hosts,
Quantum sola noces animis illapsa voluptas?
Not the gods wrath, steel, nor the enemy can
Do so much hurt, as only lust, to man.


Many lewd devices have been invented by them, to effectuate their purpose,
that have given themselves to satisfy their lusts with the pleasures of the
flesh. In a village not far from the mountains of Savoy, inhabited with a
rude and ignorant kind of people, there was one chosen to be their Parish
Priest, only because he could read, more meet to drive the cart, than to
serve in the Ministry. This man grew in such favor with those rude people,
that almost all the women used to make him their gossip; with whom by that
means he became very familiar, but especially above all the rest, he was in
favor with a poor man's wife, called Lisetta. This man was much troubled in
mind, to see his wife so great with the Parish Priest, and being jealous not
without cause, he forbade his wife all Priests company. Sir Morice (for so
he was called) being much out of quiet, for lack of his gossips company,
sent an old Witch to consult with her, how they might come together again
after their accustomed manner. My daughter (quoth she) I see your mind is much
troubled, your friend is in the like perplexitic, because he cannot enjoy your
company as he has done; and I my self having felt the like passions in my
youth, seem to feel in my self the pains of your sorrow. But now the matter
standing upon these terms, some remedy must be found: Dare you feign, that you
are possessed with a spirit? O my mother (said the young woman) I could
willingly play that part artificially enough, if I thought that could bring our
purpose to pass. When the old Witch had instructed A wicked imposture.
her what to do, Lisetta at the time the Priest was at Mass, began to stare
with her eyes, to wring her hands, to foam at the mouth, and to howl like a
wolf. The foolish people beholding this unwonted sight, ran to wonder at
her, supposing she had been possessed with a spirit. Her husband likewise
lamenting her miserable estate, supposing her to suffer great torment, laid
aside all suspicion, and ran, like one that had been out of his right mind,
to the Priests house, desiring him to take the pains, by his exorcismes, to
drive this wicked spirit out of his wife. Sir Morice counterfeiting great
sorrow for her torments and pain; O my Gossip (quoth he) your overmuch
frowardness to your wife and jealousy without cause, has brought her to
this; the like whereof happens sometimes to women of greatest honesty: and so
taking his stole and other instruments for his conjuration with him, to the
sick woman he goes: and after he had mumbled softly to himself many
prayers, he asked the spirit who he was. Lisetta being sufficiently instructed
by the old bawd, answered with a low hoarse voice; I am the spirit of this
young woman's father, condemned to this penance for ten years to pass out of
one body into another. The husband hearing him to be the spirit of his father
in law, besought himearnestly to depart out of his wife, and to torment her no
more. The spirit answered him; I will go forth of this woman, and I will change
my lodging, and enter into thee. Then the poor man, terrified with Silly men
soon fooled
this hard sentence, embraces the Priest about the neck, and lamentably
desired him to show, whether he knew any way how he might avoyde this severe
sentence, by prayers, by fasting, by alms, or by any other good deeds. Lisetta
being glad to see this matter frame so well to her purpose; My friend (said
she) your poverty will not suffer you to do that were requisite to avoid this
sentence, and therefore in place thereof, you must visit forty Churches, and
say many prayers in every of them with good devotion, by which means you shall
obtain pardon of God for your sins, otherwise you can never escape Gods
ordinance. This penance Lisetta laid upon her husband, that by reason of the
far distance of those Churches one from another, in that pilgrimage, there
might be time enough to quench the fury of the spirit. But that all things
might be done without fear and suspicion, in her counterfeit voice she
blames him for the wrong he has done his gossip, suspecting him without a
cause, a holy man, whose prayers were greatly acceptable before God, and
advised him whilst he was in his pilgrimage, to commit the charge of his wife
to this holy man. The poor fellow hoping in this sort to be released from the
pains of Purgatory, desired forgiveness upon his knees of the Priest: which
being without great difficulty obtained, he proceeds on his pilgrimage,
lest some worse matter might happen to him. In the mean time, Sir Morice
employed all his diligence, both day and night, that this spirit being chased
out of her, another might supply his room. Which being turned into the form
of a young living child, her silly husband thought himself, after his return
from his pilgrimage, to be thereof the natural father, that had least
interest in it. Thus are they carried away from all respects and duties both to
God and men, that give themselves to satisfy their lusts with fleshly
pleasures. Saint Gregory says; Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod
cruciat: That which delights is momentanie, but that which tormenteth is
eternal.

Aristotimus, under the favor of King Antigonus, exercised tyranny over the
Eleusiens, and as he was evil given, such choice he made of his favorites.
Among the rest there was one Lucius extremely enamored upon a fair young
maiden, daughter to a man of good account: and that he might have his pleasure
of her, he procured the tyrant to command her parents to send her to him. The
father fearing the displeasure of the tyrant, he and his wife used persuasions
to his daughter to go to him. The young virgin that had bin virtuously brought
up, fell down at her fathers feet, and in lamentable wise embracing his
legs, besought him with tears, that he would not suffer her to be
dishonored. She would prefer her honor before her life, and would rather
choose to suffer any kind of death, than to be so shamefully dishonored. The
father and mother being greatly moved with the lamentation of their daughter,
wept bitterly, and made some stay of their resolution. Lucius perceiving her
not to come, unpatient of any delay to fulfill his beastly lust, went to her
fathers house, where he found her upon her knees, holding her fathers legs
fast in her arms, and with great threatenings he commanded her to arise, and to
follow him; but the young maiden renewing her lamentable complaints, and
refusing to go with him, he tare her clothes in pieces, and stripped her
naked, and beat her cruelly. The parents beholding this Lust turns to Tyranny
woeful sight, besought him upon their knees, that he would have compassion
upon her, and them. And when they saw no hope of favor in this cruel man,
they called upon the gods and men for help: wherewith he fell into such a rage,
seeing he could not have his will, that he drew his sword, and thrust it
through the young woman, as she held her fathers legs in her arms. But this
beastly fact so little offended the Tyrant, that such as showed any mislike to
the matter, he either put to death, or banished: which purchased him such
hatred of all men, that certain of his subjects not willing any longer to
endure his tyranny, conspired together and slew him. His wife hearing of the
tumult of the people, shut her into her chamber, and strangled Tyranny rewarded.
her self. The like death suffered two young women his daughters marriage-able,
having liberty to make choice of their own death.

But the love of Antiochus son to King Seleucus was much more commendable,
and used with greater modesty. For being extremely in love with his mother in
law his fathers second wife, yet shame fastness Incestuo^ love.
and modesty made him so dissemble his vehement passion, that he made choice
rather to die, than to discover his affection, suffering himself by little and
little to pine away, until his body was almost dried up. And as he lay
languishing in manner like a dead body, his father, lamenting the pitiful
estate of his only son, desired Erasistratus, an excellent Physician, to use
all his skill to find out what his sons disease should be, with large promises
of reward. This man sitting by the young Prince, observed that ever as the
Queen came to visit him, his blood would rise in his face, his pulse would
beat with more force, and all his body would seem to quicken, and revive, and
as she departed from him, he would wax pale, his pulse would beat weakly, and
would return to his former state again; which when he had diligently observed
two or three times, he perceived that his discase was the passion of love. And
coming to the king, who was desirous to hear whether he had found the cause
of his sons sickness; he told him, that his son was in love with a woman,
but such an one as he could by no means have, which was the only cause of his
sickness. Then he being glad it was no worse, hoping that whosoever she was,
he would by some means obtain her for him, though it cost him a great part of
his kingdom, desired to know who it was that his son was in love with. It is
my wife, quoth he. And will you, said the King, whom I have favored so
greatly, deny her to my only son, and lesser him to perish that is my only
comfort, and uses such modesty, that he had rather dye than bewray his
affection, by which it appears he is violently carried against his will, and
then making carnest petition to him to save his sons life, with promise of
great reward. Your request, said the Physician, is not reasonable; make the
case your own, Would you be content, if it were your wife he were in love
with, whom you affect so tenderly, to leave her to him? Yea, quoth the King,
with all my heart, and I would it were in my power so to save his life. It is
even your wife (said he) with whom your son is in love. Then An indulgent
father.
the King greatly rejoicing that it was in him to restore his son to health,
married his wife to his son, his fatherly affection prevailing more, than the
tender love of his wife.

Saint bernard, lamenting the miserable estate and condition of men, that gave
themselves to the pleasures and delights of this world; O man (quoth he) naked
and blind, that art made of humane flesh, and a reasonable soul, be mindful
of thy miserable condition; why departest thou from thy self, and troublest
thy self with externe things, and art lulled asleep, in the vanities of the
earth, and drownest thy self in the transitory pleasures of the world? Do
thou not consider An holy medication.
that the nearer thou approachest to it, the farther thou departest from thy
God? the more thou think to win without, the more thou losest within; that
is, thy self which is or greater price? the more careful thou art of temporal
things, the more want thou have of spiritual things? Thou set all things
in good order, and make none account of thy self. There is not a beast but
thou tamest, and thy self remainest without a bridle; thou art vigilant in all
things, but in thine own matters thou art fast asleep. The desire of base
things hoyleth in thy heart, and in the mean while heavenly things lies
quenched. The nearer thou come to thy death, the sarther thou go from thy
salvation. We should take heed lest that curse fall upon us, that the Prophet
Isay speaking of the careless nobility and gentry of the Jews, that gave
themselves to banqueting and pastimes, without consideration of their duties
toward God, a matter usual enough, and too much in these days: The lute and
harp, says he, and timbrell and shalme, and good wine abounds in your
banquets, but the works of God you respect not, nor have any consideration of
his d^gs. Then follows; Therefore has Hell enlarged his soul, and opened
his mouth without all measure or limitation, and the stout, and high, and
glorious of this people, shall go down into it.

And that it may appear, how many that give their delight to pleasures and
vain pastimes, through their own vanity and foolishness, are brought
strangely to their ends, when they are in the midst of their jollitie. The
French King Charles the sixth, his mind being distempered, committed the
government of his Realm to others, and gave himself to pastimes: there
chanced a marriage to be solemnized in his Court, where Carriage not becoming
a King.
the King was disposed to make himself and others merry, he put off all his
apparel, and disguised his face like a Lion, anointing his body with pitch,
and flatned staxe so artificially to it, that he represented a monster, rough,
and covered with hair. When he was thus attired, and five others as wise as
himself, they came into the chamber among the Lords and Ladies, dancing and
singing in a strange tune, all the Court beholding them. The Duke of Orleance,
whether that he might better see, or for some other toy, snatched a torch out
A miraculous accident.
of a man's hand, and held it so near the king, that a spark falling upon him,
set them all on a flaming fire; two of the five companions were miserably burnt
in the place, crying and howling most pitifully without any remedy; other two
dyed in great torment two days after; the fifth running speedily into a place
where was water and wine, to wafh himself, was saved; the King having more
help than the rest, before the flame had compassed his body round about, was
saved by a Lady that cast her train and gown about him, and quenched the fire.

The Emperor Commodus, among other his vain toys and pleasures, when he
beheld the Goddess Ifis painted with naked breasts, he caused the breasts of
the Priests of that Temple to be scratched with a horse comb, saying, that it
were no reason their Goddess should have Vain curlositie.
naked breasts, and theirs to be covered. And seeing the Goddess Bellona
painted with a broken Arm, he caused the right arms of the Priests that
guarded her Temple, to be put out of joint, affirming, that forasmuch as their
Goddess had a broken arm, her Priests ought not to have their arms whole and
sound. But his vain pleasures, joined with tyranny, was so offensive to the
people of Rome, that the night before he intended to celebrate the feast of
their God Ianus, Commodus determining to show himself in the habit not of an
Emperor, but of a Gladiator, or sword player, was murdered. Many of all
estates be so addicted to please their senses with the vain pleasures of this
world, that they will not trouble their heads with any thing but sports and
pastimes; of whom it is written, They esteem this our life to be but a
play-game. And in another place; They live as securely without care and
cogitations, as if they had the good works of just men to stand for them. But
what says the holy Ghost? Hoc vanissim^m; this is vanity and foolishness in
the highest degree. Aristotle says, that there are three Excellent
observations.
things which change a man's nature and condition, Lordship, a Woman, and Wine.
The old Romans had a Law, that a wise man being a public loose-liver, should
be more grievously punished than a secret murderer; because he killed but
one, with the sword of his anger; the wise man killed many, with the example of
his life. And one said, that there are three things which hasten a man to his
end before his time; a young woman, excess of eating and drinking, and
unwholesome air.

Beware therefore thou be not allured by their false shows, to seek
felicity in Pleasures: for he that accustometh himself to them, will hardly
be brought to forbear them; and then is he thoroughly in the estate of
infelicitie, whom unhonest things do not only delight, but also please: for
there is no place left for remedy, when vices be converted into manners.
Wherefore if thou find thy self affected or addicted to any of these Pleasures
that draw men into infelicitie, withstand them at the first, after the Poets
counsel, before they have taken root, and grown into a custom. Principiis
obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras:
Look at the first unto thy sick estate,
Often (being delayed) the medicine comes too late.


And if thou be strongly given to any such pleasure or delight, though not
unhonest, which thou can not altogether forbear, use the same then with as
great modesty, and also as seldom, as may be. Sal^oxes gives good counsel;
that these things should be by all means avoided: Sluggishnes from the body,
ignorance from the mind, gluttony from the belly, sedition from the
Commonwealth, discord from the house, and intemperance from all things.

By this which has been said, it appears, how far they are deceived, that
think the felicity of man, or his In voluptuousness there can be no felt
Sunomuns bonuns, to consist in voluptnousnesse: and into what infelicitie they
have fallen, that sought happiness among pleasures; whereby they not only have
procured their own destruction, and the ruin of Monarchies and Kingdoms, but
also through desperation and guiltiness of conscience, contrary to nature (by
instinct whereof all living creatures have a desire to defend and preserve
themselves) using a mischief for a remedy, have laid violent hands upon their
own persons: which may serve us for a document, to seek felicity some other
where than among pleasures, which is common to brute beasts, and has been to
those that have used them, shame and dishonor during their lives, and
perpectuall infamy after their death. But because we said before, that riches
was another thing which many greedily sought after, and therefore seemed
therein to put their felicity, let us prosecute our discourse, and see what
reason men have to hold that opinion.

THE FELICITY OF MAN, OR, HIS SVMMVM BONVM. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The commendable Temperance of the former ages; and how they were free from
avarice: A Competencie sufficient preferred before surfeit, and wisdom before
wealth: Of Gyges King of Lydia, and Aglaus Psophidius: Of the Oracle and the
attempt of Brennius against Delphos: The Sacrilege of Dionysius King of
Syracusa: The Avarice of Pygmalion King of the Tyridns: with the storec of
Queen Dido: Of Venda and Helene Queens of Russia: Of Decebal King of Dacia,
and Vislar King of Gothland, etc.

This is another thing which men generally seek after, with such earnest
labor, and greedy desire, that they seem to esteem that for felicity it
self, or the means to attain to it. And though some men desire to lead their
lives in pleasures, others in honor, the rest according to their several
inclinations, yet all desire riches, as the Poet truly says; Diversas bominum
videam cum sparsa per arts
Ingenia: est cunctis ars tamen una viris:
Omnibus ideas ani^ grates sibi quarere (...)
Omnis inexhaust as undique poscitopes:
When I behold the wits of men inclined
To diverse arts: yet all of them I find
In this one art to meet; To shun no pain,
To hoord up money, gaping still for gain.


But the felicity of man, or his greatest good, cannot consist in Riches,
which is subject to so many adventures and accidents of fortune, and so easily
lost; it must be some other thing that is more stable and permanent. Coin of
gold and silver was but the invention of man, for the commodity of life: for,
a time there was when That age was called the golden.
the use of money was not known, but exchange was made of one thing for
another, and possessions were not divided, but all things were common; and in
some countries it is so at this day. Yet the felicity of man was then the same
as it is now. If riches were good, it would make them good that possess it,
but none are made good by it, many are rather made worse; which being gravely
considered of Licurgus King of Lacedamon, he banished gold and silver out of
his kingdom, and turned his coin into iron. By which act he delivered his
people from two notable vices, and enemies to a commonwealth; besides many
other, from theft and briberie; for who would steal that which was little
worth, and could not be carried away, but in the sight of all men? For he had
so ordered the matter, that a great mass of Iron turned into coin, should be
of small value. And therefore no Magistrate could receive any bribe, but every
man must see it, a cart load being of very small value. Sir Thomas Moore in
his Vtopia, prefers Iron, as a more necessary metal to a Commonwealth,
before gold or silver, which he imployeth to base uses. This English Poet
curses, not without cause, the first finder of this scurfe of the earth, which
has been the occasion of an infinite number of mischiefs. We worth the wight
that first delu'd the mould
To find out the Mine of silver and gold:
For when it lay hid, and to us unknown,
Of strife and debate the seed was unsorvue.


Our Savior Christ teaches us, how far they are deacoived that set their
felicity in riches, by the similitude of a Camel, that may as easily pass
through the eye of a needle, as a rich man may enter into the kingdom of
heaven. And again, Lay up your treasure in heaven, etc. Riches is rather
desired for some other thing, than for it self: of some the rather thereby to
attain to honor; of others to live in pleasure: and then cannot felicity be
said to be in riches. For that thing, wherein felicity does consist, must be
the last end, and greatest good; and all other things must serve for that.

Let us look into the estate of such as wallow in wealth and riches, and that
of a poor husbandman, that has no more than is sufficient to serve his
necessary uses, and by comparing them together we shall see, that his
countenance is more cheerful and merry, and laugheth more heartily and often,
than the rich; he eats his meat with a better appetite, and digesteth it
with a better stomach; hunger is his sauce, biefe and The Commodities of
temperance
bacon is as pleasant in his taste, as the partridge and fesant is to the rich;
small drink is to him, as delicate wine to the other: because the appetite,
and not the meat and drink gives difference to the taste: as appeared by the
example of that mighty Monarch Darius, who flying from Alexander the Great,
being very dry, drank very foul water, and said afterward, he never drank
better drink; the reason was, because he never thirsted thoroughly before.
P^olomy likewise king of Egypt, as he was a hunting, and lost his way, being
hungry, he went into a shepherds house, where, for lack of other things, he
was driven to care rough brown bread, affirming after, that he did never care
better meat; because he never thoroughly felt hunger before. This poor man's
body is Hunger the best lauce.
more healthful, and free from many diseases, to which the rich man is subject
by his casie and delicate life; his head is not so full of cares, and if any
happen, they vanish away quickly, like a thin cloud; whereas they who by their
riches are called happy, rather make show of mirth, than are so from the
heart; their minds being oppressed with continual cares, to keep, or bestow
that they have gotten, and to get more; which makes him wake, when the other
sleeps soundly. And so much the more unhappy the rich man is, that he must
sometimes dissemble his sad and troubled mind, and make show as though he
were in great happiness, when indeed he is rather in misery. What wealth and
riches is comparable to health of body, and quietness of mind? It is better,
says Phocion, to live lying upon the ground with a good and quiet mind, than
troubled in a bed of gold: which the Poet seems to confirm; Si ventri been,
si laters est, pedibusque tuis; nil
Divitia poterunt regales addere majus.
Non domus aut fundus, non aris acervus and auri,
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres;
Non animo curas.
If thou feed'st well, if feet and back be clad,
What to thee more can Kingly riches add?
Not house, not land, not heaps of gold and treasure,
(When sickness of thy body has took seizure)
Can thence remove it, neither can thou find
Virtue in them to cure a troubled mind.


Nature requires but three things; to be defended Nature contented with
little.
from hunger, thirst, and cold; all which this poor man we speak of,
enjoys fully: the rest are superfluous, and unnecessary to happiness of
life. There is no greater Cicero.
sign of a base and wretched mind, than to love riches. One great hinderance
to felicity, besides many other, riches brings, for the most part, to them
that possess it, that they are never content with that they have, but always
desire more. Qui mulium habet, incipit plus Soneca.
posse: He that has much, begins to be able to have more; and then a will
never fails to join with ability: whereof ensues the notorious vice of
covetousness, a capital enemy to felicity; for without contentment, no man
can enjoy that happiness we look for in this life. Great travel have the
poor men that want all things, but much more have the rich men that are
content with nothing. Riches were greatly to be desired, if felicity were to
be bought. But a mind free from all perturbations, and content with his own
estate, cannot be bought with gold nor silver. For contentation is not procured
by abundance of riches, but is rather gotten by taming and mastering our own
desires and affections. He is not happy (says Seneca) whom the common sort
calls happy, that has great store of goods, but he whose goods are in his
mind; that sees no man with whom he would change himself and his fortune;
that estimateth a man by that part, by which he is a man of a sound judgment;
not to be terrified or made afraid with every wind, that depends not upon
the uncertain accidents of fortune, but upon himself. Socrates espying a very
rich man, and proud withal, but endued with no virtue; Here is (quoth he) a
horse covered with a caparison of cloth of silver. And Diogenes likened a rich
man unlearned, to a ram in a golden fleece. Solomon says, If riches be a
possession to be desired in this life, what is richer than wisdom, that
works all things? A Senator of Rome said to Sylla, that vaunted of himself
in the Senate; How can you be a good man, that had little or nothing left you
by your father, and yet in so short time are become so exceeding rich? The life
of a poor man is compared to a navigation made by the sea coast, where they may
at their pleasure get them into safe harborough, and cast anchor when they see
any danger at hand: And the life of a rich man, to them that sail in the maine
sea, far from land; who if a tempest chance to arise, are in danger to be
swallowed up of the sea, without any means to save themselves: which the Poet
seemed to epsy, when he said; O fortunatos nimium sua si bona norint
Agricolae! --
O Husbandmen, too fortunate,
If you but knew your best estate.


Valerius Maximus reports, that Giges king of Lydia being puffed up with
pride through his riches, flattered himself so much, that he thought no man
equal to him in felicity. And yet not satisfied with his own opinion, he
thought to have it confirmed by the Oracle of Apollo, whom when he asked
whether any were happier than he; answer was made him by the Oracle, that
Aglaus Psophidius was more happy than he. This man Modest poverty preferred
before superfluous plenty.
was one of the poorest men in all Arcadia, and though he were old, yet he
never went forth of the village where he was borne, but contented himself with
his mean estate, and the fruits and pleasures of a poor country life. By
which answer, to him that so insolently gloried in the glittering show of his
riches and possessions, the god gave to understand, that he allowed better of a
poor cottage, possessed with a light and merry heart, than a sad Princes Court,
full of cares and pensiveness; and of a little ground without fear, than the
fertile fields of Lydia full of terror; and of a yoke or two of oxen casie to
be ruled, than an army of men combersome with excessive expense; and a barn
serving for necessary uses, of no man greatly desired, than riches and
treasure, subject to all men's snares, and covetous passions. But because we
shall have occasion sometime to speak of this Oracle, a brief description of
the place will give some light to that which shall be said.

There was a steep hill in Photis a Country in Greece called Parnassus, by
which was built the famous city of Delphos: this hill was full of craggie
rocks, and so fortified by nature, that there needed no supply of Art for
defense. In the midst of the hill there was a little plain, wherein was a
deep hole, (the habitation of Satan) out of that hole issued a certain cold
breath, which struck the Priests and Virgins that were there resident, into a
frenzy, and compelled them to give answers to the questions demanded; which
was called the Oracle of Apollo. Because in this plain was a temple builded
(as some say) by Agamedes and Trophonius, and dedicated to Apollo, one of the
Heathens gods. Who having finished the work, desired of their God in
recompense of their charge, that thing which was best for men. They were
commanded by the Oracle to go home, and within three days they should have
their desire: the third night they were both found dead in their beds. Their
God, or rather the Devil, gives thereby to understand, that death was the best
thing that could happen to men. The strange and stately situation of this
temple, with the presence and fame of the God, represented such a Majestic,
that it drew all men into admiration. And though the answer of the Oracle was
many times given in a double sense, to be indifferently taken, (whether by
ignorance of the certain^ie of the event, or of purpose to deceive, and to
drive men into their own destruction, were a matter worthy of discourse, but
impertinent to this subject) yet oftentimes he answered truly, and plainly of
things to come; either by a wonderful foreknowledge, or as an actor, by Gods
sufferance in worldly matters, brought that to effect, to continue his credit,
which before he had foretold. As when the old Romans had laid the foundation
of the Church at Rome, which they called Templum Pacis, they sent to ask
counsel of the Oracle of Apollo, how long the Church should stand; the answer
was made, that it should continue, (...) Virgin brought forth a child; which
(because they thought it was unpossible) they took to be (...). But when
Christ was borne, many hundred years after, the Temple fell down, and verified
the answer of the Oracle. But to (...) from whence we digressed, as it was
said before of them that put their felicity in pleasure, so may it he said of
them that hold the same opinion of riches; the seeking and enjoying whereof,
has many times bin their own destruction.

Brennius, general of a French Army, understanding of the inestimable
treasure of the Temple of Apollo, by the gifts and presents of almost all the
Princes and Potentates of the world, that sought counsel of the God, in their
affairs of importance, stricken with a covetous mind, not fearing to attempt a
notable sacrilege, brought his army to Delphas, with a meaning to spoil the
Temple of his treasure. The Priests and people hearing of his coming, asked
counsel of their God what they should do. He willed them to take no care The
Devil careful to maintain his own.
for the matter, he would defend his own Church. And then Brennius commanding
his soudiers to assau^ the place, there fell by an earthquake a part of the
hill upon his host, which flew a great (...) of his people; then ensued a
wonderful (...) thundering, lightning, and hail, by which were slain a great
part of his army, so that they were enforced to give overtheir attempt; and
Brennius being sore wounded, and unable to endure the gri^, show himself with
his own dagger. Thus by the greedy desire of riches, wherewith he thought to
have amended his estate, he lost that he had, and fell into that in felicity,
that he was feign most unnaturally, to lay violent hands upon his own person.
The like almost happened long before to Xerxes, the great Monarch of the
Persians: for being allured with the same of the riches of the Temple, and
overcome with unsatiable covetousness, attempted the spoil of that Church,
which no man ever durst attempt before. And giving assault to the place, great
sto^ (by the work of the Devil) fell from the hill upon his Army, and such
horrible thunder with fiery darts so terrified them that took in hand to
climb the hill, that they threw themselves down headl^ng as though they
hadbin mad, Xerxes himself escaping very dangerously, was driven to depart
with the loss of four thousand of his men. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames?
What hideous mischiefs do thou not compel
(Golds sacred thirst) in mortals breasts to dwell?


Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracusa, infected with the same humor of
covetousness, committed sacrilege with less danger, and better success than
the others attempted it. This Dionysius, coming into a Church where he found
the Idol of Jupiter, apparelled with a cloak of pure gold, of great weight and
value, he took it from the Idol, and put upon him a cloak of cloth, saying;
that of gold was too heavy for summer, and too cold for winter, and that of
cloth was fitter for both times. And finding the Idol of Esculapius, with
Tyrants mock at sacrilege.
a long beard of gold, he caused it to be taken away, saying, that it was no
reason for him to wear a beard, when his father Apollo went ever shaven
without a beard. And as he saw other Idols made with their arms and hands
stretched out, whereupon they held crowns, and basins of gold of exceeding
great price, which were given them, by the vows of mighty Princes and
Potentates, upon the winning of some notable victory, he took them to him, and
yet said, that he did receive them, and not take them away: For (quoth he) it
were a very foolish part, to desire good things of the gods, and when they
offer it, not to take them. There was likewise a Church in the City of
Tholosa, wherein was great store of gold and silver, which whosoever attempted
to take away, he was sure to suffer a miserable end; which happened to Cepio
and all his Army. And thereof came the Proverb, Aurum Tholosanum, when any
thing is dangerous to be taken away. Leo of Africa reports, that there is a
Church in Marocke, upon the top of whose tower three apples of Massy gold are
thrust through with an iron spear by Necromancie, of the value of one hundred
thirty thousand ducats: which whosoever goes about to take away (as diverse
great states, through a covetous desire, have attempted it) has the like
success as Brennius and Xerxes had, for attempting the spoil of the Temple of
Apollo: and therefore taken to prefage evil success to him that goes about to
take them away. But what is it that the greedy desire of riches makes men
forbear to attempt?

Pygmalion King of the Tyrians, married his sister Dido to Sichaus his uncle, a
very rich man, who afterward fearing Pygmalions unsatiable desire of riches,
(knowing how dangerous it has been many times to those that possess it) hid
his treasure under the ground. But Pygmalion inflamed with the fame of his
great wealth, not respecting his own blood, nor the nearenesse of alliance,
nor the comfort of his own sister, contrary to all humanity, caused Sichaus
to be slain, hoping thereby to become master of his riches. But Dido, though
she took her husbands death very grievously, yet seeing her self in the like
danger, by means of her husbands goods, which were then hers, dissembled the
matter, and determined to steal away secretly with her goods; and told her
brother, that her own house brought the remembrance of her husband (whom she
would willingly forget) often into her mind, and therefore she was determined
to dwell with him. Pygmalion being well satisfied with his sisters resolution,
thinking by that means to be possessed of her goods also, expected the time of
her coming. But Dido having prepared shipping and all things ready, conveyed
her goods secretly into a ship, and follows after with her train. When she
was in the midst of the sea, she caused a great many bags which she A
commendable cunning.
had filled with sand to be cast into the sea, as though it had been her
treasure; and told her company that this was it that was the cause of her
husbands death: and lest it should be also her destruction, which was the
thing her unnatural brother sought after, she had thrown it into the sea,
fearing lest they would against her will carry her to him. She discovered to
them, that her meaning was not to go to her brother, but fained this excuse,
to escape the danger, which she knew, through his greedy de^ of her treasure,
hanged over her head, but now that her goods were drowned in the sea, it was as
perilous for them to return to him, as it was for her; and therefore if they
would go with her, and take such part as she did, she would take them for her
companions and friends. They fearing to return to the King, whose name was
odious to them, for the cruel murder of his own uncle, and sisters husband,
assented to go with her. Her first arrival was at the ^and of Cyprus, where
she took into her ship fourscore young women, meaning to marry them to those
she had carried with her, to increase her Colonie where she happened to
settle her self. The Cypriots had a custom to give liberty to their young
maidens, to get money by unhonest means, to help to marry them. Of this sort
were the young maidens that Dido carried with her. From thence she sailed
toward Africa, and arrived upon the coast of Libia, where she bought of the
people so much ground as she could enclose with one ox hide to build upon:
which she caused to be cut into small threeds, where with she enclosed much
more ground than they imagined, and built a ci^ic called Which now (...) Tunis.
Carthage, where she and her people ^ourished so in wealth and riches, that
Iarbas King of the Moors sent Embassage to her for marriage, with threatening
of war, if she denied. Dido, perciving the imminent danger of her people and
new City, if she refused the King; and remembering the vow she had made, never
to marry again, caused a great pile of wood to be made under her castle wall,
and fire to be put to it, and after she had made a protestation to her
people, standing upon the wall, that her intent was to keep her vow inviolate,
and to deliver them and her new City from the danger of King Iarbas, she cast
her self into the fire. To these extremities riches brought this noble Queen,
first to forsake her Country, and after to destroy her self.

The like happened to Venda Queen of Russia. For the Princes her neighbors,
being importunate (...) to her for marriage, to increase their possessions, and
jealous one of another advancement; after she perceived that no entreaty
would mitigate their ambitious passions, rather than she would be forced
against her will to have any of them, she drowned her self.

Helenc Queen of the same Country of Russia, for the like cause used the like
cruelty upon others, that the other used to her self. For being desired of
her enemies that there might be a truce, to the end a talk of marriage might
be had between their King and her. she caused the Ambassadors to be buried
alive; and before the matter should be known, she used means to have other
Ambassadors sent of greater estate. Then came fifty other Ambassadors, of
the principal men in all the Realm, which she likewise caused to be buried
alive. And under promise of marriage, she caused five thousand to be slain,
which she had made drunk.

When the Emperor Trajan made war upon Decebal King of Dacia, that was very
rich in gold and silver; this King being doubtful to what destiny he and his
kingdom was subject, buried all his treasure in a river, which he removed out
of his natural channel, and in the deepest place thereof he made sepulchers
of stone, to bury his treasure: which being done, he returned the river into
his right channel again: and to the end no man should discover what he had
done, he caused all them which were present at the hiding thereof to A cruel
cunning.
be murdered. But all served not his turn: for a fisher being at that time
fishing in the river, discovered the matter to Trajan. These be the fruits that
great riches and possessions bring forth, not only to the possessours, and
those that seek after them, but to those also that intermeddle with them.

The Emperor Henry the seventh, a Prince endued with excellent virtues, was
poisoned with an Host, which was given him by an Italian Monk, corrupted with
money.

There was a Citizen of Venice banished, and a reward appointed by the
Venetians, to him that should bring his head. His son that was also banished,
slew his father, and brought his head to Venice, and received the reward.

John Magnus reports, Vislar King of Gothland to be so insatiably desirous of
riches, that all the gold and silver in his Realm (he said) was his: and when
he had by all unlawful and unhonest means gathered together great abundance
of riches, being odious, and in contempt with all men, his sons as wicked and
covetous as he, seized upon all his treasure, and set fire on his house, and
burnt their father and all his family.

One says; Upon whom God pleases not thoroughly to bestow good things, he
gives plenty of money and scarcitic of wisdom: and so one being taken away,
he bereaveth him of both. At the sicge of Jerusalem ^phus.
under Vespasian, there was gold found in the entrals of a Jew that was flaine:
which being known to the rest of Vespasians soldiers, they supposing that the
other Jews had also hidden gold in their bellies, slew in a moment above
twenty thousand of them which they had taken prisoners; and against all
humanity, and the law of nations, opened their bellies to seek for gold.

CHAP. II.
The desperate attempt of Captain Damianus, against Solomon the
Grand-Seigniour: Of Caesar Borgias, son to Pope Alexander the sixth, first
Cardinal, and after Duke: Of Croesus and Candaules, two kings of Lydia, and
rich Crassus the Roman: Of strange Fride, and insufferable Avarice in the
Clergy: Of Pope Sixtus the fourth, and an Archbishop of Collen: The rare
Temperance of Origin, with an excellent Oration made by him to Alexander
Severus, etc.

THere was a notable enterprise intended to be attempted, through the desire
of riches chiefly, and glory, by the mountain-men upon Solomon the great Turk,
in our age, if the success had not been interrupted by sinister fortune.
Solomon the Emperor of the Turks, intending to make war upon the Venetians,
brought a great Army to the Adriaticall sea coast, where he encamped himself.
There were a kind of rude people, inhabiting the craggie mountains adjoining
to his camp, that lived upon theft and spoil, without knowledge of God, or
laws of men. These fellows living in great penury and want amoung those
barren rocks and mountains, allured with the greatness of the spoil and
glory, determined to kill the great Turk in his pavillion, and to take the
spoil of all his treasure. And though the attempt were full of peril, yet the
hope of such a mass of treasure, beingso near them, and the fame and glory of
so notable an enterprise, to kill the mightiest Monarch of the world in his
pavillion, in the midst of his camp, made them lay aside all fear of a
certain and almost an inevitable death. Vsque adeo solus ferrum, mortemque
t^ere
Auri nes^it amor.
Only the thirst of gold makes us not feel,
Or fear deaths terror, nor the rage of steel.


And resolving in the dead of the night to steal secretly upon the watch,
Da^anus their Captain and chief author of the enterprise, stole forth
secretly to view the situation of the camp, and the manner of the watch. And as
he climbed up to a tree, to look into the camp, a bough chanced to break,
the noise whereof discovered him and his intent to the Ianizaries, that were
the watch of that quarter. So being espied, and taken by them, and put to
torment, he confessed the pretended enterprise, and by commandment of the
Emperor, he was like a wild beast torn in pecces: and the rest so earnestly
pursued, that they were almost all destroyed.

Pope Alexander the sixth, had a son called Casar Borgias, made by his father
first Cardinal, and afterward weary of that estate, as not agreeable with his
ambitious head, was deprived thereof and made Duke, and commonly called Duke
Valentine, Machiavels paragon. This Pope and his son (as it was a common
practice with them to procure the death of many for their riches) so they
conspired together to take away the life of diverse of the Senators and
nobility of Rome, some for malice, but chiefly that they might be masters of
their goods. They thought there was no better means to bring their purpose to
pass, than to invite them in friendly manner to a supper. The place was
appointed (as the manner is in Italy) under a vine, to avoid the bear. Duke
Valentine had poisoned two pots of wine, which he prepared for his guests, and
delivered them to his servant (that knew nothing of the matter) to be carried
to the vine for supper, with straight charge that he should give of that wine
to no man until his coming. The Pope comes to the place before his guests,
and being thirsty with the heat, he calls for wine. The Dukes servant
supposing by the straight charge his master had given him, that the wine he
brought was especial good wine, and preserved for the Popes own mouth, powered
out of that wine, and brought it to the Pope; who had no sooner drunk, but in
comes his southe Duke, to whom he gave the cup to drink. He thinking Heaven
Justice.
nothing less, than that it was the poisoned wine, by mean of his
commandment to his servant, pledged his father. The Pope presently was carried
away half dead, and languishing a little while in great torment dyed. Sic
percent and qui ^ri t^ a pergent:
So may they perish, and all such as endeavor the like.


The son by reason of his youth, and strength, after certain months
grievous sickness, escaped. The guests percei^ing this treachery, absented
themselves from the feast. This was no doubt the just judgment of God. Dum
pestem parant alijs, labunt^ in illam:
Whilst they dig pits for others, they fall into them themselves.


The Epitaph that was set upon sen^cheribs tomb, who was killed by his own
sons, might aptly have served this Pope; In me qui (...), (...) pius effe: he
that looks upon me, let him lea^e to live in the fear of God: The ^ther and
the son, besides their other good conditions, were so deep dissemblers, that
there went a common proverb of them, One never spoke what he did; the other
never did what he spoke.

Croesus king of the Lydians was an exceeding rich Prince, and presuming upon
his riches, prepared to make war upon Cyrus king of the Persians. But to be
more assured of the event, he sent to Delphos to ask counsel (as the manner
then was) what the success would be of that war: answer was made him by the
Oracle of Apollo, that when Croesus should pass over the river of Halie (which
was the ^termost confines of his realm) he should destroy a great kingdom.
Croesus supposing the meaning The (...) of the D^vell.
of the oracle had bin, that he should destroy Cyrus kingdom, proceeded in his
enterprise with a more assured hope; and encountering with Cyrus, he was
overthrown with his whole army. And as a soldier was about to kill him, his
son that was born dumb, and never spoke word before (the vehement love and
affection of his father prevailing more than the natural defect and impediment
of his tongue cried out to the soldier, Hold thy hands, it is king Croesus my
father; by means whereof he saved his life, and took him prisoner. And when
by Cyrus commandment, he was brought to the stake to be burnt, he cried out
with a loud and lamentable voice, O Solon, Solon: which when Cyrus heard,
marvelling at that (...) cry, asked what he meant in such woeful sort, to
redouble his voice. I lived (quoth Croesus) not long sithence in great
prosperity, and was accounted the richest king of the world: and as Solon one
of the sages of Greece my familiar friend, came to visit me, I brought him
into my Treasury, and showing him all my Riches; I asked him, whether he
thought that any adverse fortune could have any power upon me, that was so
armed and fortified with Treasure, against all accidents that might happen. But
Solon sharply reprehending me, for my vain speech, answered, that no man
could be accounted happy, until after his death: whose counsel now, seeing
my self fallen into this miserable estate, comes to my remembrance, and
makes me call upon his name. Cyrus moved with compassion, and by his example
considering with himself the uncertaintie of humane matters, and that Fortune
never gave any man that power over others, but she threatened him with the
like, caused him to be taken from the fire, and asked Croesus as he kneeled
before him, by whose persuasion he began this war. O Cyrus (quoth he) thy
prosperous fortune, and my evil destiny brought me to it; chiefly encouraged
to make this war upon thee, by the Grecians god: For who is so mad that
without such a principal author dare prefer war before peace? seeing that
in peace the children use to bury their parents, but in war the The
blessedness of peace.
parents bury their children. Cyrus marvelling at his constancy and wisdom,
pardoned his life, and used him ever after with great honor, for his
counselor. Croesus sent messengers with the chains, with which he was bound,
to Delphos, to be dedicated to the god Apollo, and to expostulate with him, for
deceiving him; and to ask if these were their rewards, which had the gods in
so great reverence. Answer was made by the Oracle, that whatsoever was fatal,
was inevitable to the gods themselves: That Croesus was thus punished for the
offense of his grandfather Gyges, that slew Candaules, king of the Lydians: And
as touching the Oracle, that it was not to be reproved for a lie, having
expressed his meaning in plain terms, that if Croesus by the greedy desire
to enlarge his dominion, would make war upon the Persians, he should destroy
a great kingdom, which was the kingdom of Lydia, and it so came Salust.
to pass. Kings and Cities through riches have lost great dominion, which they
that have been poor, have won by virtue. The lamentation made by the
Tragical Poet, under the person of Hecuba, upon the ruin of Troy, sets
forth, not unaptly, the uncertaintie of high estate, and the misery of them
who are puffed up in pride through abundance of riches, wherein they put their
felicity: Quicunque regno fidit, and magna potens dominatur aula,
Animumque rebus credulu^ let is dedit,
Me ^deat, and te Troia: non unquam tulit
Documenta fors majora, quam fragili loco
Starent Superbs --
He that his confidence puts in a Crown,
Or in his Palace potently does frown;
And takes in prosperous fortunes, all his joy:
Let him but look on thee, and me (oh Troy)
Chance, by no greater influence could declare,
In what a fickle state all proud things are.


This Gyges that the god (as they called him) spoke of, was subject to
Candaules king of Lydia, who having a wife of a wonderful beauty and favor,
thought himself to want something of the fullness of the pleasure he took in
her, except some other might also be an eyewitness, and see the beauty and
comeliness of her person. Gyges being one that he greatly favored, he
discovered his intent to him, and made him stand secretly behind a cloth in his
bed chamber when the Queen Wilful (...).
came to bed, that he might see her naked; when she had stripped her self out
of her clothes, ready to go to bed, having discovered those parts (mistrusting
nothing) which modesty and shame would have kept secret, Gyges shows
himself to her: whom when she had espied, and perceived the treachery, she was
in a great agony, and conceived a deadly displeasure against the king her
husband. And within few days after, she called Gyges secretly to her, and
intimating to him the grief^ (...) had taken by this shameful practice of the
king, she told him, that either he must kill the king, or suffer death
himself. If Gyges would kill her husband, she would marry him, and make him
King of Lydia. Gyges whether for fear of his own life, or through an
ambitious desire to reign, by the help of the Devil, made a ring, of that
virtue, that whenever he put the seal to the palm of his hand, he should
be invisible. And aspiring to the kingdom of Lydia, by means of the ring he
killed the King Candaules, and all those whom he thought might be any
hinderance or obstacle to his purpose (they falling down dead, but no man
seeing who flew them) and married the Queen, and became King.

Crassus an exceeding rich Roman, after the manner of rich men, not content
with that unmeasurable riches he possessed, but desirous of more, procured
himself to be made general of the Romans army, in the wars against the
Parthians, being then three score years old, where he was overthrown and
slain, with his son, and almost all the army of the Romans. And to give him
the greater disgrace, the Parthians caused his mouth to be filled full of
gold, with these words; Thou have thirsted after gold, now take thy fill. This
Crassus was used to say, that no man was to be accounted rich, except he
could maintain an army of men, with his own goods.

But the pride and presumptuousnesse engend^ed by riches in the Heathens, is
not so much to be marvelled at, if we consider the prncipall Prolates of the
Christians, from whom examples of humility, and contempt of worldly wealth
should proceed, who have bin carried away from their profession, by the
infection of that disease. Saint Bernard inveighing, not without cause, against
the vain and superfluous pomp of the Prelates in his time, which grew by the
abuse of their abundance of riches, who were not so much corrupted, as they
have been since, painted them out in their right colors, and complains
thus: There is (quoth he) an infamous and defiled sort of men, that reign in
the whole body of the Church, the Ministers of Jesus Christ serve Antichrist.
They jet up and down in great The Luci^ pride of Churchmen.
honor and pomp, with the Lords goods, but they give no honor to the Lord.
And that is the whores attire, which ye see every day carried about. Their
saddles, bridles, and spurs be guilt, the furniture of their feet is set out
with more pride and pomp, than the Temple of God. Their spurs be better guilt,
than their Altars. Hereof it comes, that their tables be so sumptuous, and
furnished with delicate meats; their rich cupboords of plate; from thence
comes their gluttony, and drunkenness, and harmony of their pleasant
instruments, their sweet wine; the money also which they have in their purses
comes from thence. And that they may have the fruition of these pleasures at
the full, they make themselves Prelates of Churches. This is not (says he) to
adorn the spouse of Jesus Christ, but this is to risle her; this is not to
preserve her, but to destroy her; this is not to defend her, but to give her to
thieves for a prey. The magnificence of these men, was far differing from the
poor estate of Saint Peter, and Saint John, that had not a penny to give to
the lame man, that asked their alms at the Church door. Which putt^th me in
mind, of a pretty taunt, given to a Pope by a Friar, that glorying in his
riches, exalted himself above Saint Peter.

Pope Sixtus the fourth, being exalted from a poor Franciscane Friar to that
dignity, brought a Friar of the same order into his Treasury, and showing to
him his great wealth and riches, said; Look Friar, I cannot say as Saint Peter
did, Gold and silver have I none. No truly (quoth the Friar) no more can you
say as Saint Peter said to the lame, and sick A (...) resort.
of the palsy, Arise up and walk. The like taunt the Archbishop of Cullen
received for the like pride, of a poor husbandma^, who as he was at plough in
the fields seeing a great troop of horsemen well armed (after the manner of
the Princes of Germany) passing by, asked of the foremost company, who it was
that came after; and being answered, that it was the Archbishop of Cullen, this
country fellow fell into a great laughing; and being asked why he laughed;
Because (quoth he) Saint Peter, the Prince of Prelates, lived poorly, to leave
his successors rich. Word being brought to the Archbishop, what this fellow
had said, he meaning to excuse and justify himself; Do thou not know
(quoth he) that I am both a Bishop, and a Duke, and have both the
jurisdictions? The^ the fellow laughed more than he did before; and being
demanded the cause; I pray you Sir (quoth he) let me ask you this question;
If the Duke shall happen to be in hell, where shall the Bishop be? One
reports of a Priest that used to have a net spread upon his table where he
dined, that he might the rather by that means resemble Saint Peter, that was a
Fisherman, to whom Christ said, when he followed him, that he should take men.
This Priest by his diligent preaching (which he used so long as he was kept
bare) was at last advanced to a Bishopric: and when he came home to dinner,
being a Bishop, finding the net spread upon his table, after his usual manner:
Now take away the net (quoth he to his servant) I have taken that which I
fished for. The world has too many such fishers.

But where has been found in these latter ages among Prelates, that contempt
of worldly pomp and pride, that was in that great Clerk Origin, the fame of
whose excellent learning and singleness of life, being brought to the ^ares of
Alexander Severus, the Roman Emperor, he sent for him to come to Rome; and
commanded the Proyost of Egypt, to furnish him with all things necessary for
his journey. When this Provost had provided him a ship, and all things
necessary, and beheld him but simply apparelled, he prepared for him diverse
garments, in the most honest and comely sort, that Philosophers then used: But
Origin would receive no part thereof, not so much as hose or shoes, but like
as he used always to go from his childhood (that was, in a single garment
of cloth, and barefoot) so went he to Rome. And when, at his arrival, there
were brought to him a Mule, and a Chariot to use, which he best liked; he
answered, That he was much less than his master Christ, who rode but one day
in all his life, and that was upon a silly asse^mare. And therefore he would
not ride unless he were sick or decrepit, so as his legs might not serve
him to go. And when he was brought into the presence of the Emperor and his
mother, the Emperor with most gentle countenance embraced him as he kneeled,
and enforced him to stand upon his feet. His mother also saluted him with the
like courtesy, and rejoiced much to see him. The Emperor Reverence cannot be
(...) in rag^.
beholding his native gravitie, and stern countenance, judged him in his heart
to be a reverent personage. Then demanded he of him, what he professed. And
when he answered, Verity, the Emperor asked him, what he meant thereby? It
is the word (quoth he) of the living God, which is infallible. The Emperor
asked; which is the living God? and why he so called him. Origin answered,
that he did put that distinction, for a difference from them, whom men (being
long drowned in error) did call their gods; whom they confess to be mortal
once, and to have died. But the God whom he preached, was ever living, and
never died: and is the life of all things that be, like as he was the
creator of them. And when the Emperor had required him, to declare the unity
of God the creator, he devoutly lifting up his eyes, after a short
meditation, with an incomparable and compendious eloquence, forthwith opened
that mystery, in such wise, that as well to the Emperor and his mother, as to
all the standers by, it seemed they were brought out of a long sleep, and then
began to see things, as they were indeed, and that which before they honored,
and esteemed, were but vain dreams and imaginations. The Emperor after a
little pawse, said to Origin, that he much marvelled, why men of such great
and wonderful knowledge, should honor for God a man that was crucified, being
but of a poor estate and condition. O noble Emperor (said Origin) consider,
what honor the wise Athenians at this present, do to the name and image of
Codrus, their last King, for that when they had wars with their enemies, who
had answer made by the Oracle of Apollo, that if they slew not the King of
Athens, they should have the victory: Codrus hearing thereof, preferring the
safeguard of his people, before his own life, took to him the garments of a
slave, and bearing upon his shoulder a burden of sticks, he went to his
enemies camp, and there quarelling of purpose with some of them, and in the
prease hurting one with his knife, he was by him that was hurt stricken through
the body and slain; which being known to the enemies, they being confused,
raised their camp, and departed. And for this cause the Athenians have ever
since had the name of Codrus in reverence worthily, and not without cause. Now
then consider, most excellent Prince, how much more worthily, with what greater
reason and bounden duty, ought we and all men to honor Christ, being the
Son of God, and God, who not only to preserve mankind from danger of the
Devil, his ancient enemy, but also to deliver man out of his dark and
stinking dungeon of error, being sent by God the Father, from the highest
Heavens, willingly took on him the servile garment of a mortal body. and
hiding his majesty, lived under the visage of poverty: and finally not of his
enemies immediately, but much more against reason, of his own chosen people
the Jews, unto whom he had extended benefits innumerable, and after his
temporal nativity were his natural people and subjects, he quarrelling with
them, by declaring to them their abuses, and pricking them with condign
rebukes, at last he was not slain with so easy a death, as Codrus was, but
in most cruel fashion, was scourged until no place in his body was without
wounds, and then had long and sharp thorns set and pressed upon his head, and
after long torments and despites, he was constrained to bear a heavy cross,
whereon afterward both his hands and feet were nailed, with long and great
nails of iron; and the cross, with his na^ed and bloody body being lift up on
high, was let fall with violence into a (...), that his joins were dissolved.
And notwithstanding all this torment and ingratitude, he never grudged, but
lifting up his eyes to heaven, he prayed with a low de voice, saying, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. This was the charity most
incomparable of the Son of God, employed for the redemption of mankind, who
by the transgression of Adam, the first man that ever was created, was taken
prisoner by the Devil, that is to say, kept in the bondage of error and finne,
from actual vision of Gods majesty, until he were in this wise redeemed,
according as it was ordained at the beginning. At these words of Origin, they
that were present, were wonderfully astonished, and therewith the Emperor, with
a sturdy countenance, said to Origin: You have wonderfully set forth a
lamentable history, but yet notwithstanding therein be things dark and
ambiguous, which require a more plain declaration: for what makes you bold to
affirm, that Jesus which in this wise was crucified, was the Son of God, and
God, as you have called him? Sir (said Origin) sufficient testimony, which of
all creatures reasonable ought to be believed, and for most certain proof,
to be allowed. What testimony is that? (said the Emperor.) Truly said Origin)
it is in diverse things. First the promise of God, by whom this world was made:
also by his holy Scripture, speaking by the mouths of his Prophets, as well
Hebrews, as Greeks, and other, whom ye call Vates, and Sybillas. Thirdly, by
the nativity of Jesus of a pure virgin, without carnal company of a man: the
most pure and clean form of his living without sin: his doctrine divine and
celestial: his miracles most wonderful and innumerable: all grounded on
charity only, without ostentation: his undoubtfull and perfect resurrection
the third day after he was put to death: his glorious ascension up into heaven,
in the presence and sight of five hundred persons, which were virtuous and of
credence: also the gift of the holy Ghost, in speaking all manner of languages,
and interpreting the Scripture, not only by himself, Installable proo^es.
but also afterward by his Apostles and Disciples, and given to other, by
imposition of their hands. And all these ordinarily followed according to the
said promises and prophecies. I omit to speak of the confession of Devils,
which by Jesus, and his Apostles in his Apostles were cast out of people which
were (...). The Oracles and answers of them, whom ye untruely call gods, do
remain in confirming this testimony. And when Origin had said all this, he
forthwith began there and disclosed the answers of Apollo, made at Delphos,
affirming Jesus to be God. And alterward he recited and declared the
prophecies, as well of the Hebrews, as of the Sybilles, and other. Last, the
promise of God to the Patriarchs, by the which it manifestly appeared, that
Jesus was Christ, and God; and that by his temporal nativitie, he was king of
Israel; and that the Jews were his natural subjects. Which declaration of
Origin, was so evident and plain, and set forth with such wonderful
eloquence, devotion, and learning, that it persuaded the Emperor, and diverse
other that were present, to embrace the profession of Christ's faith and
doctrine. And for that time, the Emperor licenced Origin to return to
Alexandria. And when this Emperor on a time perceived some to wonder at the
learning of Origin, whereby they were induced to embrace the Christian
profession: Truly (quoth he) the Which was in those days, not now.
humility and charity of the Christian people, which I have heard of, and do
daily behold, does much more stir me to believe, that Christ is God, than the
residue of his persuasion. And another time when two Christians contended
proudly together, and accused each other for speaking reproachful words against
the Emperor, he called them before him, and prohibited them to name
themselves Christians, saying, Your pride and malice do declare, that ye be not
the followers of him whom ye profess: wherefore though ye sinde lack in me,
which I will gladly amend, yet will I not let you, against justice, reprove him
by your acts, whose life and doctrine you all do affirm to be uncorrupted and
without any lack. Thus was this noble Emperor and his mother, with diverse
others by the learned speech of this man (agreeing with the simplicity and
singleness of his life, void of all pride and pomp, and the humility and
charity used in those days among Christians) induced to embrace Christian
profession. But the pomp and pride, that riches has sithence that time
engendered in the corrupt minds and manners of men, has rather diverted than
converted men to Christianity. For when reverence and majesty failed, that
was bred in men's hearts, by the holiness of their life that went before, it
was not to be hoped for, that such concratictie of manners and examples of them
that followed, should bring forth the same effects. The Christians of those
days seemed to prefer virtue before riches, with Solon, that said: At nos
virtutem non per^t abi^s borum
Pulchr^que virtut is munera divit^s.
Virtut is quonia^ somper posse^io per^at:
Ince^ta varia sort fer^ur ^pes.
Their virtue and rare gifts by them displayed
We will not change, for riches that may fade.
Virtues possession ever shall remain,
When most uncertain is the hope of gain.


CHAP. III.
The contempt of Riches amongst the Heathen: of Democritus, Diogenes, and Byas:
of Agathocles King of Sicilia, Philip King of Macedon, Semiramis Queen of
Babylon: Of a coverous Cardinal called Angelot: A Priest buried quick by John
Maria Duke of Millaine: Of an Advocate of Venice: Calipha King of Persia: The
Emperors Mauritius and Phocas. Of Phocion of Athens, etc. The resolute Answer
of Diomedes the Pyrate to King Alexander, etc.

EXamples of contempt of worldly pomp and riches are not so rare to be found
among the Heathens, as among the Christians, Democritus a Senator of Abderita,
entering into the due consideration of the vanity of worldly goods and cares,
determined to alter the course of his former life, and give himself to
contemplation. He used often to go alone up to the top of a hill that joined
to the City of Abderita, where he would kill dogs and calves, and rip them
up, and make Anatomy of them, and ever as he saw how aptly nature had compact
the intrailes and members together, to serve the necessary uses of the
creature, he would fall into a great laughing. He used this so often, that the
Senators marvelling what he meant to go so much up this hill, sent one
secretly after him to watch what he did. This fellow beholding covertly his
manner, how he cut up dogs and calves, and laughed at he knew not what, brought
word to the Senators what he had seen. They supposing him to be mad, or
become foolish, were very sorry, and lamented his case to one of the Sages or
Philosophers of Greece, that was newly come to Town. They told him what a
great loss they had of so grave and wise a Senator, that was now become a
fool, and desired him to examine the cause of his sudden alteration, and to
persuade him, if he could, to leave off those foolish manners, and to reduce
him again to his former gravitie and course of life. This man watched when he
went up the hill, and followed secretly after. And when he had beheld him a
while quartering his dogs, and laughing after his usual manner; he came to
him, and reprehending him for his laughing, admonished him to recall himself
to his former gravitie. Democritus after he had ended his persuasions, leads
him to the side of the hill, where they might look into the City, and
Country round about. Now (quoth he) imagine that This may ^ly be (...) upon
these times.
you see all things that are done within the City: Look (says he) what
familiarity is between that young man, and the young woman you see, which is
yonder old man's wife: there is a bargain making to set a pair of horns on
the old man's head. And do you see yonder two fellows how they watch for the
plain man (...) travelleth about his business, to kill him, and to take his
purse? And look on the other side, how that young man that married yonder old
woman for her goods, provideth a drink to dispatch her, that he may marry a
young woman. At the end of every of these questions Democritus, after his
usual manner, would fall into a great laughing. When he had ministered diverse
of these kind of questions, whereby he noted the ordinary vices, and lewd
behavior of many, which were too common in Cities and other places, where is
much concourse of people, as though they had beheld them in action; Is there
any man (quoth he) that sees these things, that can forbear to laugh? After
this man that was sent by the Senators had some farther discourse with
Democritus, he returned to them: who, hoping that he had persuaded him to be
of another mind, made haste to meet him, and were desirous to know what had
passed between them: You are deceived (quoth he) in Democritus, that think him
to be mad or foolish, for he is only wise, and all you be fools. He
withdraws not himself from the company of you and others, because he is
out of his right mind; but he looks into the vanities of the world with a
sound and upright judgment; and has in contempt this worldly wealth, and
honors, and pomp, esteeming those things as the frumps of fortune, which ye
exalt above the skies, and take for felicity: and gives himself to the
study of Philosophy, and contemplation of the works of God, wherein
consists the true felicity.

Diogenes after his accustomed scoffing manner, which he used to reprehend
vice, and to draw men from overmuch care and estimation of worldly matters
(for there is no cause to let men from speaking the truth, though in jest) on a
time, as he sat in his tub upon the side of the hill that looks into the
City of Syracusa, which was situate at the foot of the hill, beholding every
man occupied in ramming up their gates, and preparing things necessary for
defense of their City against their enemies that were coming to besiege it,
he rolled his tub from the top of the hill to the bottom, and from thence up
to the top again, and then overthwart the hill, from one side to another; and
being asked what he meant to labor so hard: Look (quoth he) what a stir yonder
is, pointing down to the town, it is no reason that I be idle, when my
Citizens are so occupied. By which scoff he would give men to understand,
what advantage they had that con^ed themselves with a mean estate, that is
void of all fear and danger, and free from the uncertain accidents of
wavering fortune, over them that live in abundance of worldly wealth and
honors, always subject to a world of misadventures, not only of the loss of
that they possess, and esteem for their felicity, but of their lives also, and
of them that be most dear to them. Of whom riches is greatly salust.
esteemed, he is neither beloved of virtue, nor of God: neither can that man
attain to divine things, that has not rejected the delights of money, and of
the body.

Byas one of the Sages of Greece, when the town was won by their enemies,
and leave given to every man to carry his goods away with him, Byas being met
carrying nothing (whereas all others were thoroughly laden) and asked, why he
carried not his goods, as all other men did theirs? I carry (quoth he) all my
goods with me: accounting nothing appertaining to him, but the goods and gifts
of his mind: as the Poet says; Divitias animi solas egojudico ver^,
Qui rebus pluris se facit ipse suis:
Those the true Riches of the mind I count,
When men think, They their Riches far surmount.


The mention of this Byas brings to my remembrance a notable example of
modesty, and contempt of riches, showed by the seven Sages, or wise men of
Greece, whereof Byas was one. As certain Fishers were drawing their nets to
land, one bought their draught at adventure, not yet known what was within
them. It chanced them to draw up enclosed within their nets, a table of gold,
of great weight and value. The Fishers, desirous to reserve to themselves the
golden table, said; that they sold only the fish: the other affirmed, he bought
the fortune. The contention grew so vehement, that the matter was brought
before the people of the City, to give their censure. They considering the
strangeness of the matter, and the great value of the thing, referred the
judgment to their god Apollo at Delphos. And when answer was made by the
Oracle, A wonderful modesty in the (...) of Gre^.
that he that excelled all others in wisdom, should have the table: they gave
it with a general consent to Thales, one of the Sages: he sent it to Byas: Byas
sent it to Pittacus: he to another: and so passing through the hands of all the
seven Sages, it came at last to Solon; who sent it to Apollo, as the wisest of
all other, and most worthy of so great a gift. But in what country would the
like modesty, and contempt of gold be found in these later days? In Vtopia
only, and in no other commonwealth of the world. Who is he that thinks so
simply of himself, that being once possessed of such a thing, would yield over
his interest to any other, as the worthier man? A clean contrary course would
be taken; the one to keep the possession, the other to recover it from him
would never leave contention in law, until their Advocates by a certain
sympathy, and attractive virtue, as the load stone draws iron, have drawn to
themselves the gold, leaving peradventure to the other a Table of lighter
substance. A matter grown too common in many countries; which made Ferdinando
King of Spain, when he first made conquest of the West Indies, expressly to
forbid, that no Lawyers should pass into those countries, lest they should sow
seed ofcontention among those simple people, whereof they were then free, which
he perceived, by their means was overmuch used in his own, and other
Countries.

Agatbocles King of Sicilia used great modesty in the midst of his riches
and prosperous estate; which contrariwise puffs up the most part of men with
pride, and makes them to forget themselves. This man being a poor Potters
son, by his virtue was advanced to the Kingdom of Sicilia; but nothing
ashamed of his base parentage (after the common custom of men in such cases)
he would be served ordinarily at his table with earthen vessels, intermingled
with his cups of gold, using these words to those that came to visit him,
thereby to excite them to virtue: Behold what it is to persever in travel and
paines-taking, to become men of virtue and courage: Heretofore we made these
pots of earth, and now we make these of gold.

Philip that good King of Macedon reprehended very aptly Covetousness, and
greedy desire of worldly wealth and possessions; for, falling by chance flat to
the ground, in a place where men used to wrestle, and beholding the fashion of
his body printed in the dust, Good Lord (quoth he) how little ground must we
have by nature! and yet we desire all the habitable world.

(...) is Queen of the Assyrians, made an apt device to reprehend (...): she
had made a sepulcher for her self over the gates of the goodly city of
Babylon, whereon she had caused to be engraven these words: If any King of
Babylon that shall succeed me, shall want money, let him open this monument,
and take what ^ee li^: but if he have no need, let him not open it, for it
will not be best for him. D^rius, after the succession of many Kings (none of
which durst touch the tomb) being allured with the hope of A^ excellent
reproofs of (...).
great riches, opened it, and found no money, but these words written in a
Table; If thou were not a very covetous man, and unsatiably desirous of Riches,
thou would never have opened the sepulcher of the dead.

Pontanus and others report of a Cardinal at Rome, A (...) Cardinal.
called Angelot, that was prettily punished for his Covetousness. This
Cardinal was so much overcome with this vice, that having a trap-doore out of
his garnour where his corn lay, into his stable, he used to come down that
way secretly in the night, without a candle, and to steal away the oats which
were appointed for his horses. He used this so long, that one of his
horse-keepers marvelling how the oa^es should be stolen, the stable-doore being
fast locked, hid himself secretly under the straw, and watched if any man
would come for the oats. The Cardinal according to his custom, came in the
dark for his oats: whom when the horse-keeper espied (not knowing who it was)
ran to him with a staff, and did so beat his master the Cardinal, that he
was feign to be carried away with four men, half dead; Sufficient penance
for such a fault.

But John Maria Duke of Millane punished with more severitie a Priest, that
through covetousness denied a poor widow the execution of his office, in
burying her husband, because she had not wherewith to defray the charges of the
burial. For, the Duke going in person to the funeral of the dead body,
caused the Priest, that would have sold, and made merchandise of the gifts of
God, to be fast bound to the corpse, and so cast them both into the pit
together.

But the covetous man was never more hardly matched, nor cunninglier
over-taken, than by the envious man in the Poetical figment, which aptly
sets forth the conditions of envions and covetous men; both which vices are
enemies to felicity. The Poets fained, that Jupiter being disposed to
understand the estate of the world, sent down one of his Angels in the form
of a man; whom he appointed to fall into the company of two Travelers,
whereof the one was a covetous man, the other an envious man. After they had
traveled certain days journeyes together, in which time the Angel had
learned many things of them, and was thoroughly satisfied of the things he
desired to know, he discovered himself whose messenger he was, and having
power from Jupiter to bestow his liberality upon them, he offered to
recompense them presently for their good company: He willed them to ask what
they would, and he that made the first demand should be fully satisfied of that
he asked, and the other should have double so much. This liberal offer bred
much contention between the Travelers. The covetous man, whose desire of
gain is always unsatiable, observing the Promises of the Angel to be double
so much to the second, as the first ^ould have, would not make the first
demand. The envious man, whose property is to wish no good to any other, used
silence; determining rather to lose the benefit of the first demand, than his
fellow should have double so much. After much courtesy between them, who
should first ask, the envious man perceiving that a demand must of necessity
be made, to the end by suffering a simple harm in himself, he might bring
double so much to his companion, he desired of the Angel, that one of his eyes
might be put out; which being done, his companion was made blind of both his
eyes.

Chilon says, that loss is to be preferred before unhonest gain. Amasis
King of Egypt made a Law, that the Prae^or should examine every man's manner of
A necessary Law.
living; and if he found any that lived by unhonest gain, he was punished as
a wicked man. And in the time of Alexander Severus, there were many persons
that lived by usurie, which brought many to extreme poverty and lack. The
Emperor commanded great diligence to be used, to search out those contracts,
and a memorial of the most notable griefs to be given him. Which when he had
considered, he punished the Usurers, and gave liberty to the poor men that
were oppressed. A covetous man, says Seneca, does nothing well, but when he
dies; for then that money which he had long hoorded up, without employing it
to any use, is dispersed abroad into many men's hands, and serves for necessary
uses.

Detestabilius nil terracreavit avara:
Et nimio lucripejus amore nihil:
Than is the avaricious man
The earth never bred thing worse:
And, than the servile love of gain,
There is no greater curse.
Gold and silver, of it self, is neither good nor evil; but the use, or
abuse, makes it good or bad. Money was not ordained to be hoorded up in
coffers, as covetous men use, but to be employed, to serve our necessity.

To this purpose I remember a Story of an Advocate of Venice (which we call a
Counselor at law) that had gotten much money by his faculty, and was sent by
the State of Venice to Rome, to be there agent with the Pope. Before he took
his journey, he came to take his leave of his Father, who dwele in the
Country, not far from Venice, and was but a man of mean estate, and brought
his money with him, which he locked up in a coffer, and delivered the key
thereof to his father, to be kept until his return. After he was gone
toward Rome, the Father, desirous to see what the son had locked up so fast
in his coffer, opens it, and finds a great many bags full of money: he
takes out the money, and fills the bags full of sand, and locketh fast the
coffer again. In his sons absence he builds his house with his sons
money, which before was old and ruinous, and stuffeth it handsomely, and
apparelleth himself, his wife, and children in decent sort, which before were
somewhat bare; and augmented his fare with better provision, so as all things
with him was greatly amended. After some two or three years, when the Advocate
was returned to Venice, and from thence to visit his father, he marvelled to
see such an alteration. He began to consider with himself, how his fathers
estate could be thus suddenly amended; and desirous to see whether his money
were safe, he receives the key of his father, and opens his coffer, and
finding the bags full, mistrusted nothing, but thought all had been well as
he left it. After a few days, having occasion to use money, he opened his
bags one after another, and finding sand in place of his money, being greatly
perplexed, he ran down to his Father, and told him that he was robbed: his
Father seemed to marvel; How can that be son (said he) seeing I kept the
key of your coffer during your absence? it is not possible that you can be
robbed. The Advocate affirming it earnestly; Come (said his father) let us go
see, I cannot believe it. When the coffer was opened, Look (quoth the father)
be not your bags as full as you left them? I knew you could not be robbed. Yea
Father (said the Advocate) the bags be full, but it is sand, the money is gone.
It is all one to thee my son, (quoth he) so the bags be full. Thou would but
let it lie here fast locked in the coffer; I have taken forth the money, and
employed Money beslowed as i ought to be
it to those uses for which money was ordained. Thou see how I have built my
house, and apparelled my self, thy mother, and thy brethren and sisters. Thus
aptly he taught his son, by an extraordinary kind of demonstration, how
money should be used.

Dionysius used the like means, but with less severity, to make known that
money was to be employed, and not to be hoorded. For, hearing of a rich man
that lived miserably, and hid his money under the ground, he commanded him
upon pain of death to bring his money to him. The man not with standing kept
some part of it back, and brought him the rest, and went into another town to
dwell, where he employed that money that was left in buying of land, and
houses, and such things as he lacked; and lived better with that part, than
he did before with the whole. Which when Dionysius heard, he sent for the
man, and told him, that seeing now he knew the use of money, he would restore
his money to him again; and delivered all he took from him.

Calipha King of Persia was with more severitie, and greater damage (by a rare
example) punished for covetousness, and (too late instructed, not as Di^genes
would, by another harm, but by his own loss and overthrow) was a document
and warning to others, how to use money. Allan King of the Tar^tians making war
upon him, overthrew him, and took him poisoner in his own City. His
soldiers fighting very faintly in his defense, because he had laid up all his
treasure in a tower, and would not pay them their wages: he was by Allan
imprisoned in the same tower, with these words; If thou had not kept this
treasure so covetously, but distributed it among thy soldiers, thou might
have preserved thy self and thy City. Now therefore take thy pleasure, and
eat and drink thereof, seeing thou have loved it so well. And so suffered him
to dye for hunger, in the midst of all his riches.

O that covetous men were as covetous of their own good fame and honor, as
they are greedy of other men's goods! The wise man says, there is nothing more
wicked than a covetous man: and nothing worie than to love money. And therefore
he forbids men to take great labor and care to get riches. It is truly
said, that men ought not to be more careful to gather riches for their
children, than to get renown among the virtuous; seeing it is a rule that
never fails, That of the wicked gain of fathers, comes just loss to the
children. And this is the difference between the covetous man, and him that is
of a noble mind; that the one cares not how he come by riches, so he have
them: the other can take no pleasure in any thing he holds wrongfully from
another. For that to remember, by what means it was gotten, takes away
contentment of the thing he has. For, where the conscience is not quiet (says
one) there the residue of the man is nothing but ma^yrdome. That City or
Commonwealth (says Valerius) is like always to continue, where the desires
of the flesh and money, bear least rule. And surely happy were that
Commonwealth where all things were esteemed as they are worthy, and no more.
For, experience (especially in these days) teaches that where the love and
estimation of riches has taken deep (...) there virtue, and knowledge, and all
other good things are had in small regard. Apollonius being asked, who was the
richest man in all the world, answered, He that was most wise; and the poorest
was he, that was most ignorant.

Mauricius the Emperor had the like success, through his extreme
covetousness, as Calipha had, and his destruction foreseen by a dream, after
a very strange manner. This Emperor dreamed on a time, An ominou dream.
that one Phocas should destroy him, his wife, and children. The next day being
much troubled with the remembrance of this fearful dream, he asked (...)
friend of his, whether he knew in all his dom^on (...) man called Phocas. He
answered, that there was a (...) man of that name in his army in Illyria. And
desirous to know the cause, why he enquired so (...) for such a man, the
Emperor told him his dream. You (...) not (quoth the other) fear any such
matter in him: for besides that he is a man of mean estate, and (...)
condition, he is also taken for a cow^d. He will be (quoth the Emperor) the
more cruel for that. It cha^ced that this pho^ was advanced from one deg^ to
another, until he became the principal man of the whole army, at such time
as the people of Constantinople and other places were in gre^ mislike with the
Emperor for his covetousnes. By which (...) the (...) of Illyria chose ph^cas
for their general, to condust them to Constantinople against their Emperor;
where according to his drea^e, he killed the Emperou^, his wife, and his five
children, and was his (...) in the Empire. And afterward being (...) in (...)
for so horrible a murder, Phocas sent to the Bishop of A T^ant and murderer
first gave Rome the Sup^ macie over other ^shope.
Rome, that if he would ab^olve him of that crime, he would give him the
Supremacy over all other Bishops, and make him head of the Church: which the
Bishop did; and here began his authority over other Bishops. But this high
title, added to the large possessions and great riches of that Church, has
wrought that effect, as all men know, and was notably presaged by some
supernatural power (as it seems) in a prodigious sort. For at the time that
Constantine the great, (if it be true that some authors report) gave to
Sylvester the first, then Bishop of Rome, and to his Successors, the City of
Rome, with the Emperors Palace, called Lateran, and diverse other Cities and
Provinces in Italy, there was seen an hand without any body, writing upon the
wall of the Lateran, much people being present, and reading it, these words:
Hodie venenum E^lesie infusurus est. Some say, a voice was heard from heaven:
This day he will power poison into the Church. Sithence which time, the Popes
have usurped such sovereignty over the Emperors, that they pronounce
themselves to be greater than the Emperors, and so much greater as the Sun
is greater than the Moon: that is, six thousand six hundred forty and five
times, and somewhat more; pretending also a title to the Empire in the vacancie:
saying, That the Emperor holds the Imperial crown of men, but the Pope
holds of God: as though they knew not, that all power comes from God. And
what was it but the love and desire of riches that made the Popes kindle the
fire of Purgatory? knowing that money (...)
cannot be coined without fire and a furnace.

They that think external goods (says Aristotle) to No ^.
be the cause of happiness, deceive themselves no less, than if they supposed
cunning playing on the Herpe came from the instrument, and not from the art.
For as a body is not said to be perfect, because it is richly arrayed, but
rather because it is well proportioned, and healthful: so the mind well
instructed, is the cause that both her self and the body are happy. Which
cannot be said of a man, because he is rich in gold and silver. It is not
possible (says Plato) that a man should be good indeed, and very rich, both
at one time: but he may well be happy and good both together. And to say that a
rich man is happy, because he is rich, is foolish and childish, and unhappy are
they that believe it. Believe me (says Seneca) thou can not be rich and
happy. And this property is joined to the riches and possessions of this
world, that seldom it happens to men long to enjoy those goods, which with
much travel they have gotten. The labor to get them is long; but their use
short. And he that takes greatest pains to gather them, has oftentimes least
use and pleasure of them. And he it is that Guie.
thinks himself most happy by having them, whose body is charged with vice,
and heart laden with cares. They bring pride to those that have them,
covetousness to get them, care to keep them, and finne to enjoy them. And
those goods that are gotten by shift, are (for the most part) lost with shame.
For it falls out by daily experience, that what the wicked father gets
with care and sorrow, the unthrifty son wastes with pleasure and negligence.
And the wicked children inher it the worst of the fathers, that is, Riches: and
are dis-inherited of the best, which are Vertnes. Riches (says one) and
honesty seldom dwell together under one roof. And yet what is more commonly
said? He is an honest man, for he is worth five hundred pounds, or a thousand
pounds: as though it were a strong argument, to prove a man honest, because he
is rich. Which by the opinion of these and other wise and learned men, and by
daily experience falls out, for the most part, clean contrary. I have great
possessions (says Menander) and all men call me rich; but no man calls me
happy, but he that is rich. Men (said Thales) are by nature inclined to
virtue, but riches allure them to vice: and in stead of happiness they bring
care and sorrow. And as they that are sick of the dropsy, the more they
drink, the thirstier they are: so the more men abound in riches, the more they
desire to have. Poverty is the nurse of virtues, and riches of vices.
Democritus was wont to say to him that desires not riches, a little will seem
much: for the desire of small matters makes men rich. Which agrees with the
Poet; Qui nibil affectat, mirum, omnia possidet ille:
He that covets nothing, possesses all things.


For no man ought to esteem himself happy, for that he has more than others;
or that for the same he is esteemed more worthy of honor, though he be
lifted up with a wind of vain glory by men of little virtue, for his power
and patrimony: if he look thoroughly into the matter, he shall find himself
the slave of his own riches. For little avails it to happiness to have large
territories, and great store of land, and sumptuous houses richly furnished,
and to have his mind oppressed with cares, and his desires corrupted with
coverousnesse^ which brings infamy to the owner, and little goodness to the
necessity of life. Socrates, to one that said, It were a great thing if a man
might have all things that he desired, answered, But it were much greater, not
to desire at all. He that will make himself rich, must not add more money to
that he has; but must decrease and diminish his desire of having, and think
that it is Guev.
all one to have, and not to desire. For it is no pain to lack, but to him
that has a desire to have. And this among other evils, is incident to rich
men, who having gotten reputation or honor by their riches, the care they have
to maintain themselves and their credit in their estate, is greater than the
pleasure they take in possessing them. For every small matter they think
detracteth much from their reputation, and when they lie dying and disposing
their goods gotten with such toil of their bodies, and care to their minds,
danger to their lives, and hazard many times to their souls, there is such
gaping for that they have, that they have more trouble to please all, than they
took pleasure to possess all. But improperly and untruly are riches called
goods, when they bring with them so many evils. For greater is the number
without comparison, of such, as being good, become evil by riches, than of
them that being wicked, are by riches made good.

Alexander the Great sent Ambassadors to Phocion of Athens with a Present of
an hundred talents, being Great ^perance.
in value almost twenty thousand pounds. Phocion demanding the cause of this
great gift, seeing there were so many Athenians besides him: Because (quoth
they) our master esteems you among all the rest, for a virtuous and good man.
Then (quoth he) let him suffer me both to seem and to be so indeed; and carry
his Present back to him again. Diogenes in the like sort refused Alexanders
offers of worldly goods. For being visited on a time by him, as he was in his
tub; I see (quoth Alexander to Diogenes) that thou art poor, and have need of
many things; ask what thou will, and I will give it thee. In the mean time
(quoth Diogenes) stand out of the Sun. Some of his nobility standing by, and
supposing that he studied what he might ask, urged him to ask something.
Whether of us two (said Diogenes to Alexander) seems to thee to have most
need, and therefore poorest? I that desire nothing but my tub, and a little
bread; or thou that art King of Macedon, and do hazard thy self to so many
dangers to enlarge thy dominions; so as the whole world seems too little to
satisfy thy ambitious and covetous mind? Alexander had Diogenes in such
admiration for the contempt of worldly goods, that he said with alowd voice, If
I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes. He said further, that there was no
other felicity in this world, than either to be King Alexander that
commands all, or to be D^ogenes that commands Alexander. The like boldness
of speech Diomedes the Pirate used to Alexander, being taken and brought before
him for Piracie. For the King demanding of him, how he durst presume so to
molest the seas without authority: Because (quoth he) I rob but with one ship,
and thou do the same with a great navy, I am accused and called a Pirate,
and thou a King. But if I had a navy, and thou but one ship, I should be
called a King, and thou a Pirate. But the iniquity of my fortune and poor
estate, and A resolute answer.
thy intolerable pride and unsatiable avarice, has made us both thieves. If my
bare estate were something amended, peradventure I should become better; but
the more thou have the worse thou will be. The King pardoned him, and his
liberty of speech; considering with himself, that a great navy which is
prepared with riches, makes not the right difference between a King and a
poor Pirate that has but one ship, if the end of their enterprise be one;
that is, to take by violence that which is none of theirs. But the justice and
equity of the cause makes the true difference, and is appropriate to the
dignity and quality of a King. The same Diogenes before named, being taken
for a spy, and brought to King Philip, Alexanders father, when he made war
upon the Grecians, and examined, said; I am indeed an epsy of thy
covetousness and madness, that come hither to hazard thy self and thy
Kingdom. Julius Casar passing by a little village, said, that he had rather
be the first in that little town, than second at Rome. By which sayings of
these men it may be gathered, that they esteemed him not poor, that was not
endued with worldly goods and possessions, and contented himself with that he
had; but that he rather was poor that had much, and yet desired more: which is
a thing common to all rich men.

Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit: (seth.

The love of money grows as the money it self increa. He is happy, not that has
what he desires, but he who desires not that which he has not.

And where the greedy desire of riches has taken root, there is no prohibited
means, neither by the laws of God, nor by the ordinances of men, that can
restrain them; if all other means fail, to feck for help of the Devil, to
findeit out. There was a Priest but few years past, in the year one thousand
five hundred thirty, to whom the devil had showed treasure in a crystal
glass, at Norimberg. And when the Priest, Magicians punished.
taking one of his friends with him, went to seek for it without the town, he
saw in the hole where he dug, a chest, and a black dog lying upon it. And
as he went down into the hole, the earth fell upon him, and killed him, and
filled up the hole again. Like wise there was one that sought for money by
Magic near Paris, and as he would have taken up the coffer where it was, a
whirle-winde carried it away, and a piece of the wall fell upon him, and made
him lame all his life. A just reward, and good example for men to beware how
they trust to the Devils help. And this was a strange thing, Mercur.
that happened of late in the year of grace, one thousand five hundred ninety
one: there was one Mark Bragadin that professed himself to be an excellent
Alcumist, but indeed a notable Magician. This man came from Venice into
Baviere, and there practiced to make gold in such abundance, that he would give
his friends whole lumps of gold; making no more estimation of gold than of
brass or iron: he lived stately like a Prince, kept a bountiful house, and
had servants of great account, and was saluted with a title of dignity, and
drew many Princes into admiration of him; insomuch, as he was accounted another
Paracelsus. And after he had long exercised his art, made himself known to
all the Princes, and was desired of them all, he came at length into the Duke
of Bavieres Court, who finding after a while his fraud and illusions, committed
him to prison. And when the Duke had commanded him to be examined, and put to
the torture, he desired he might suffer no such pain, promising that he would
confess of his own accord all the wickedness that ever he had c^mitted, and
exhibited accordingly to the Duke, in writing, the whole course of his lewd
life, desiring nevertheless that it might not be published. He confessed,
that he was worthy to dye, but yet made humble suit that his concubine Signora
Caura, and his whole family might return untouched into Italy. Not long
after sentence was given against him. First, that his two dogs, whose help he
had used in his Magic matters, should be shot through with Muskets, and
himself should have his head stricken off. For this mild sentence he gave
thanks to the Prince, alleging he had deserved a much more severe judgment,
and at least was worthy to be burned. The next day a new gallows was set up,
covered with copper, and an halter tied in the midst, covered likewise with
copper, signifying his deceit in making gold. Hard by the gallows was set up a
scaffold aloft, covered with black cloth: upon the scaffold was placed a seat,
wherein this Alcumist sat, arrayed in mourning apparel. And as he sat the
Executioner struck off his head. The Poet cries out, not without cause, upon
this love of riches: Aurum, destructor vita, princepsque malorum,
O quam difficiles nectis ubique dolos!
O utinam natum nunquam mortalibus esses,
Dulcia suppedit as quae nocumenta viris!
Gold, life's destroyer, and of mischiefs Prince,
That every where by snares do us convince:
Would thou had nere been seen by mortals eyes,
Who with delightful harms still man supplies.


CHAP. IIII.
Of sundry men most remarkable for Avarice: Of an English Cardinal: Of
Hermocrates, Cardinal Sylberperger, Hermon, Phidon, Antonio Batistei, etc. Of
such as voluntarily parted with their Riches: Of Antippus the Philosopher,
Ancrates the Theban, and Sabbas Cast, a Knight of Malta, Pope Alexander the
sift, Tiberius Constantine Emperor, Anacreon the Philosopher, Epictetus;
Seneca the Philosopher reproved by Snillius for avarice before Nero: A notable
example of the Roman Fabricius: Of Pertinax: Of Hassan Bassa: The
covetousness of the Fortugals; the French, and the Spaniards reproved,
Concluding, that no sovera^gne felicity can subsistin Riches, etc.

YEt there want not Examples of some wise men, who having abundance of riches,
and means to increase it, willingly made choice, to part with their riches, as
an enemy to virtue, and hinderance to many good things; and reserve to
themselves a small portion. Democritus a very rich man, gave all his patrimony
to his Country, reserving to himself but a little sum of money to live
withal, that he might have the more leisure to study Philosophy: for which
cause he went to Athens.

The Prophet David, perceiving our vain estimation and wondering at riches,
forewarneth us thus; Be not The boly Text against Co^
affra^d, when thou secst a man made rich, and the glory of his bousc
multipl^ed: for when he dies he shall take nothing with him: nor shall his
glory descend to the place whither be go^th. He shall pass into the
progenies of his Ancestors, and world without end he shall see no more light.
The Prophet Baruch with more bitterness asks this question: Where are they
now that heaped together gold and silver, and which made no end of their
scraping? Where be the Princes, and they that rule over the beasts of the
earth? He answered himself presently, Exterminat^ sunt, and adinferos
descenderunt: They are rooted out, and gone into hell. Saint Paul writes to
Timoth^e: Give commandment to the rich men of this world, not to be
high-minded, nor to put hope in the uncertaintie of their riches. And yet for
all that, nothing, even in these days, puffs men up more in pride, than
great store of riches, neither can men forbear to put great trust in them. We
had a Cardinal here in England in the time of Henry the sixth, so exceeding
rich, that he thought nothing was able to prevail against him. And when he
lay on his death bed, and perceiving that he must dye, he murmured and
grudged; If (quoth he) the Realm of England would save my life, I am able to
get it with policy, or buy it with my riches. Fie (said he) will not death be
hired? will money do nothing?

Saint James says; Now go to, ye rich men, weep and howl in your miseries
that come upon you: Your riches are rotten, and your gold and silver are
rustie, and the rust thereof shall be a testimony against you: it shall feed
on your flesh like fire: You have hoorded wrath for your selves in the last
day. This the holy Ghost pronounces, to signify unto us how vain and
dangerous a thing woldly wealth is, and how foolish they are that labor so
earnestly for it, to the perpetual peril of their souls. Job says; We came
naked into this world, and naked we must goeforth again. Yet some have been
so wedded to their riches, that they have used all the means they could to
take them with him. Atheneus reports of Examples of avaricious men.
one, that at the hour of his death devoured many pieces of gold, and sewed
the rest in his coat, commanding that they should be all buried with him.
Hermocrates being loath that any man should enjoy his goods after him, made
himself by his will heir of his own goods. The Cardinal Sylberperger took
so great a pleasure in money, that when he was grievously tormented with the
gowt, his only remedy to ease the pain, was to have a basin full of gold set
before him, into which he would put his lame hands, turning the gold
up-side-downe. Hermon was so covetous, that dreaming on a time he had spent a
certain sum of money, for very sorrow he strangled himself. And one Phidon
was so extremely overcome with that passion of covetousnes, that being fallen
into desperation through a loss received, he would not hang himself, for
spending of three-halfe-pence to buy him an halter, but sought a way to death
better cheap. One Antonio Batistei, an Italian, having lost in a ship that was
drowned five hundred crowns, determined like a desperate man to hang himself;
and as he was about to fasten the rope to a beam for that purpose, he found by
chance there hidden, a thousand crowns. And being very glad of this good
fortune, he exchanged the halter for the crowns, and went away. Not long
after he was gone, the owner came thither to see his gold; but when he
perceived the crowns to be gone, he fell into such extreme grief, that he
presently hanged himself with the halter that he found in their place.
Antippus the Philosopher following a contrary course, Examples of men continent.
having turned all his patrimony into ready money, went to the sea side, and
there cast it into the water, saying; Hence with a mischief ye ungracious
desires; for I drown you, because you should not drown me. Ancrates a Theban,
being weary of worldly cares, and household affairs, forsook his patrimony,
that was of the value of four thousand and eight hundred crowns, and betook
himself to a staff and a Philosophers bag, and departed. He that desires
overgreat riches, or possessions, seems to be wiser in the choice of his
garment; which he will rather have to be meet for his body, than too long or
too large. He that is wise will content himself with that which is
sufficient, and feels no want; but the foolish man troubles himself with
cares and thoughts, and though he wallow in abundance, yet he is never
satisfied. So as his riches and overgreat plenty breeds him extreme penury,
and makes him lead a miserable life.

A Knight of Malta, despising riches, and delighting in a solitary life,
caused this to be written before his garden: He is rich enough that needs
not bread:
Of power enough, that is not compelled to serve.
Ye civil cares, get ye far from hence.


Sabbas Cast, a solitary man, being content with himself, does dwell in these
little secure gardens. Whether he be poor or rich, if thou be of an upright
judgment, consider. Farewell.

The greatest wisdom (says one) and felicity in this world is, to live
quietly, and deal in his own matters, rather than in other men's. Then, in
both fortunes, whether thou must do or suffer, to have regard rather to God
than men, and upon him only to depend. To despise the world; to despise none;
to despise himself; to despise that he is despised: these four things (says
one) makes a man happy. Celius says, it is a great gladness and rejoicing
to the soul, when thou do not oncumber thy self with the care of many
things, but art persuaded that thou may live quietly with a little, and have
cast under thy feet the world and all the pomp thereof. Take away
luxuriousness and excess of earing and drinking, and the lusts of the slesh,
and no man will seek for riches. Pope Alexander the fifth was so liberal to
the poor, that he left nothing to himself: whereupon he would often take
occasion to say merrily: That he was a rich Bishop, a Few such Popes.
poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope. God will not suffer him to live in lack
that is bountiful to the poor, and uses money to that end for which it was
ordained. The Emperor Tiberius Constantine spent upon the poor, and other
good uses, great store of treasure, which his Predecessor Justinian had hoorded
up. Insomuch that the Empress, seeing his poverty, blamed him greatly, and
laughed him to scorn for his exceeding great expenses, that were employed to
so good uses. It chanced him on a time as he walked in his Palace, to see at
his feet a marble stone, in form of a cross: and because he thought it unfit
that men should tread upon that stone, which had the figure and form of that,
upon which our Savior suffered, he caused the stone to be taken up; under
which there was another of like form; and under the same a third: which
Charity rewarded.
being taken up, he found under it great store of treasure: for the which he
gave God great thanks, and employed it as before, to relieve the necessity of
them that had need and lack. A covetous man falling grievously sick, and
perceiving he must dye, and that he could carry nothing with him into another
world, turned to his friends and kinsfolks that were about him, and said; Take
you example by me (my dear friends) to the end, that in heaping up of riches,
you trouble not your selves more than honesty requires. For I that have spent
all my time in scraping goods and treasure together, must now leave this life,
and of so much land, and costly apparel that I have, I shall possess nothing
else, but five foot of ground, and one old sheet. To this purpose serves
Ausonius epigram, wherein Diogenes is fained to see the rich King Croesus among
the dead, and thus to mock him for his great riches, that then profited him
nothing, being in no better estate than Diogenes himself: Effigiem Rex
Craesetuam, ditissime Regum
Vidit apud manes, Diogenes Cynicus.
Constitit; ut que procul solito majore cachinno
Concussus dixit: quid tibi divitiae,
Nunc prosunt, Regum Rex O ditissime, cum sis
Sicut ego solus; me quoque pauperior?
Nam quaecunque habu^, mecum fe^o: cum nihilipse
Ex tantis tecum Crase fer as opibus:
Amongst the ghosts Diogenes beheld
Thee Cresus, of all Kings, with most wealth swelled.
All which he said, and finding thee less proud
Than ^arst: he called to thee (laughing aloud)
And said, (O Cresus) richest once of Kings
Speak, (to this place below) what profit brings
All thy late pomp^? for ought that I now (...),
We are alike, and thou as poor as I.
I (that alive had nothing) brought my store,
And thou of all thy wealth can show no more.
He that loves money (says Ecclesiastes) will never be satisfied with
money; and who so delights in riches shall have no profit thereof. And what
pleasure more has he that possesses them, saving that he may look upon
them with his eyes? A laboring man sleeps sweetly, whether it be little or
much that he eats: but the abundance of riches, will not suffer him to
sleep. I have scene (says he) riches kept to the hurt of him that has them in
possession. For oftentimes they perish with his great misery and trouble. And
it is a general thing among men, when God gives man riches, goods, and
honor, so that he wants nothing of all that his heart can desire, and yet
God gives him not leave to enjoy the same, but another spends Answers worthy
observation.
them. Vincentio Pestioni, an Italian Gentleman, being asked, how old he was;
answered, that he was in health. And to another that asked how rich he was,
he answered that he was not in debt. As if he should say, that he is young
enough that is in health, and rich enough that is not in debt. The rich man is
compared to a Peacocke, that climbeth up to the highest places, as the rich man
aspireth to honor and pre-eminence. And as the Peacocke is decked with fair
feathers, and so delights to be seen, and to behold his tail, that he
discovers his filthy parts behind: So the rich man rejoices in his wealth
and precious attire, and delights in flattery, in pride, and vain glory.
And whilst he goes about to show his body well fed, and set out with costly
ornaments, he shows a brutish mind, void of virtue, and full of vice and
vanity. The more (says Boccace) that riches is had in estimation, the more is
virtue had in contempt. This rule (says Plato) will seldom fail, that when
the fathers have too much riches, the sons have no virtue at all: because
between ease and superfluity of riches, vices and not virtue are wont to be
nourished. A Philosopher said, that the gods are so just in dividing their
gifts, that to whom they give contentation, from them they take riches; and to
those they give riches, they take from them contentation. Anac^con Imitable
examples.
a Philosopher, having received of King Polycrates the value of ten thousand
ducats for a gift, entered into so many conceits and fantasies, that he passed
three days and three nights without sleep; which sudden change and alteration
put him in such a fear of some great evil to follow, that he carried
forthwith the money to the King; and told him, that he restored his gift to
him again, because it did let him from sleep. Epictetus the Philosopher was
wont to say, that poverty does not cause unquietness, but men's desires: and
that riches do not deliver men from fear, but reason. And therefore he that
will use reason, will not covet superfluous riches, nor blame tolerable
poverty. Seneca was wont to say, that a bull fills himself with a little
meadow, a wood is sufficient to feed many Elephants: but man through his
ambition, cannot be satisfied with the whole earth, neither yet with the sea.

And this is to be noted, that notwithstanding the goodly lessons and precepts
that Seneca gave of the dangers and troubles, which commonly accompany great
wealth and riches, he had nevertheless gathered together abundance of riches
and possessions, procuring thereby to himself much envy; which was the chief
cause of his destruction. And the same may be a document to others, to be
very wary and circumspect, that they be not carried away, and overcome with the
inordinate desire, and love of riches and possessions, when so wise and learned
a man, that could give so wholesome counsel and remedies to others, was
himself infected and overthrown by the same disease. Seneca was schoolmasters
to the Emperor Nero in his youth, and afterward in such authority and credit
with him, that for a time he managed all the affairs of the State, and
gathered great wealth: which through envy procured him many enemies; among
which Wise men not free from avarice.
number was one Snillius, who was highly in Nero's favor; and spoke thus unto
Seneca in the Princes presence: By what wisdom, by what instructions, and
doctrine of Philosophy, wherein thou take upon thee to be studious, have
thou within less than four years, whilst the Emperor has favored thee,
and showed thee signs of love, gotten together three thousand times
sesterties? (which value after the french men's account, is seven millions, and
five hundred thousand crowns.) But though Seneca, for that time escaped the
accusations of his enemies, yet perceiving four years after his authority
taken from him, and his former favors diminished, and that the Prince lent his
ears to his enemies, he began to fear, and to save his life; and to prevent
the Emperors cruelty, he came to him, and by way of oration spoke thus: It is
fourteen years or thereabout (O King) sithence I came to you, and eight
years of this time have you been Emperor, in which space you have heaped
upon me such goods and honors, as there wants nothing to my felicity, but
a moderation thereof. And after he had reckoned up many benefits, and great
favors which he had received of Nero, and declared wherein consisted riches;
he began to accuse himself, that he had not kept the Laws of written
knowledge, and lived only by Philosophy, which would have taught him to be
content with a little, or that which is sufficient. He told him that the riches
and possessions which he had bestowed upon him, were so great, that he was
not able to bear them, but rather was ready to sink under his own burden.
And therefore he desired Nero, that he would ease him of this charge, and
send his officers to seize upon all to his use, to whom it rightly appertained:
alleging it to be a thing glorious to the Emperor, that he had advanced
them to the highest dignities, that could also bear mean fortune, and be
content with a little. Nero answered him with great commendations of his
service, and worthiness, and exalted Seneca his merits far above his
rewards, and that he had bestowed greater benefits upon them that had much
less deserved than Seneca had. He told him, that the delivering of his money,
the leaving his Prince, would not be imputed to his moderation, nor to his
desire of quietneste^: but my co^etousnesse (quoth he) and the fear of my
cruelty, will be in every man's mouth. But admit that your continency be
commended, yet it is not the part of a wise man there-hence to procure glory
to himself, from whence springs infamy to his friend. To these fair words
Killing (...).
he added kisses, and embracings, and many courtesies, to cover his hatred. But
not withstanding all these favors, he put Seneca not long after to death.
These be the fruits that covetousness brings forth, with abundance of riches
and possessions. Which confirms his opinion, that made choice of this Poesy:
Medio^ firma. And he that will look into the manners of men in these days,
shall find (no doubt) in diverse Commonwealths, even among the wisest, their
minds eclipsed with the vice of covetousness, and greedy desire to augment
their estate, as Seneca's was; as though it were man's felicity, and end for
which he was borne, to heap riches and poslessions together without end or
measure, to their own scandal, and to the evil example of others.

But Fabricius, Emperor or rather General of the Romans Army, carried a
more upright mind, and gave a notable example of contempt of riches. For the
Embadassours of the Samnites, after they had reckoned up many great benefits
which they had received by his means, offered him a great sum of money, and
very importunately desired him to accept it, alleging the cause why they
presented him with this money, to be, that they saw him want many things, to
the honorable furniture of his house and provision, agreeable with his estate.
Fabricius drawing his hands Ad^rable Continency
from his ears to his eyes, and from them to his nose and mouth, and thence to
his throat, and down to the lower part of his belly, answered the
Ambassadors, that so long as he had the use of all these members, which he had
touched, he should never lack any thing. And therefore he would not receive
the money, whereof he had no need, of them whom he knew could turn it to
their benefit. Whereby he plainly showed, that penury proceeds of greedy
and covetous desires, and not of nature. As Seneca says, frugalitie is
painful to luxurious men, that delight in excess and superfluities: but men
given to temperance and sobriety, contenting themselves with a little, feel
no evil in penuric. And it is no new thing, to see wise men that have the
means to enrich themselves, to fall into the desire of riches, and to be
overcome with covetousness. All ages have yielded their examples, even among
the wisest. Pertinax in the reign of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, having the
government of diverse provinces and countries, and passed through the greatest
offices within the Roman Empire, was found to be very wise, very just. severe,
and sincere, so as sundry nations that misliked the government of other Roman
Magistrates, would desire to have Pertinax, for his wisdom and justice, to
be sent in their places. But after the good Emperor Hon^ change m^.
was dead, he was so stricken with covetousness, and desire of riches, that
from thenceforth, he rather employed his industry (to his infamy) in gathering
riches, than in government of the commonwealth: which was to his former
virtues, a great blemish and discre^r, and may serve for an example to all men
to beware how they enter into the love of riches, when men of so great
wisdom, are so easily overcome by them. Guev^rra thus censureth the Duke of
Veiar, who in his life had gathered so much treasure, that at his death he left
four hundred thousand ducats. This is a matter (says he) perilous to write,
and odious to hear. But my judgment is, he went to seek care for himself,
envy for his neighbors, spurs for his enemies, a prey for thieves, travel
for his person, anguish for his spirit, scruple for his conscience, peril for
his soul, law for his children, and curses for his heirs.

Amurath the great Turk, a few years past, sent Hassan a man that he favored
greatly, as Bassa to Caire in Egypt, where by all undue courses, he would wring
and extort rewards and bribes from every man. By which sinister and corrupt
dealing, he made himself so odious, that it came to the kings care. Who
perceiving that neither Religion, nor Love, nor Justice, nor Reason could
remove his covetous mind, from bribing and ex^rting upon his subjects, and
that these public exclamations went daily so far, that it was now a shame for
him to let them go any further without due punishment, he sent for him, and
cansed all the treasure which he had gathered, to be taken from him, with all
the rest of his private substance, and the same to be carried into the great
storehouse, and himself to be (...) up in prison. But the Queen obtained
pardon for his life, and set him at liberty, with the loss nevertheless of
all his treasure, which he had unjustly scraped together, which remained among
the kings gold and jewels. When a Poet had reckoned up nobility of blood, great
kindred, stately palaces, and such like things, wherein men use to glory and
vaunt themselves, as happy men, he proceeds also with riches, and concludes
thus: Sint tibi drvitia, sit l^rga and (...) supellex,
Esse ta^ vel sic bestia magnapotes.
Deniq, quicquider is, nis^ sit prudentia tecum,
Magna quidem (dico) bestia semper (...).
Say thou have wealth, and stuff both rare and dainty,
Thou may be a great beast for all this plenty,
Be any thing (if, of no wit possessed)
Thou shall be still a great beast at the best.


Covetousness teaches to set all things to sale, which overthrows fidelity
and goodness, two instruments Sa^.
of good counsel. The regard of private commodity, has and will be always
hurtful to public counsels; L^.
and is a strong poison to a true affection and upright judgment. To what
thing may covetous men and u^rers that hunt after gain, by alluring and
deceiving the simple and plain meaning men, be moreaptly likened than to the
fish Polipus, that lying in wait for other fishes upon the rocks, changes his
color to the color of the rock or place where he rests, so as the other
fishes not perceiving him, are taken in his act which he has naturally behind
his head, and can spread at his pleasure, before they find themselves in
danger: So can these men frame and alter their speech and countenance, when
they find one meet to prey upon, as though it were not the same man, until
they have drawn him into their net, that he have no mean to escape. Non
possidentem multa vocaveris ^r.

Recte beatum, recti^ occupas
Nomen beati, qui deorum
Muneribus sapienter (...),
Duramque callet pauperiem pati,
Pejusque lethe flagitium ^imet.
Thou can not truly call him blessed,
That of great substance is possessed:
That title he may rather choose,
Who Gods good gifts knows how to use:
That can broole want (though bare and thi^e)
And worse than death does fear to sin.


Sir Thomas Mo^e pleasantly derideth our estimation of vain things, which we
call riches, in his commonwealth of Utopia: as gold and silver, pearls and
precious stones, and such like; where they tie their bondmen A diso^ worth
observ^.
with chains of gold, and none wear pearls and precious stones but little
children, as toys of none account. There chanced (says he) to come into
U^pia from a far country, three (...) with an h^ndred servants, all
apparelled in changeable colors, the most of them in silks; the (...)
themselves (being noble men) in cloth of gold, and gold hanging (...) their
ears, with gold rings upon their singers, brooches and aglets of gold upon
their caps, which glistered full of pearls, and precious stones. To be short,
trimmed and adorned with all those things, which among the Utopians were either
the punishment of bondmen, or the reproach of infamed persons, or else tri^es
for young children to play withal. These Ambassadors with their train
advanced themselves, and jetted so much the more (...) and proudly as they
perceived the Utopians (who were all come forth into the streets) to be basely
attired. But contrary to their expectation, when they looked for great honor,
the Utopians esteemed all that gorgiousnesse of apparel, shameful and
reproachful, and them that were most abject, and basely apparelled, they
reverently saluted for Lords, passing over the ambassadors without any honor,
judging them by their wearing golden chains, to be bondsman, with which they
found fault, as serving to no use or purpose, seeing a bondsman would easily
break them, and escape away, being so weak and small. And children that had
cast away their pearls, and precious stones, when they saw them sticking upon
the Ambassadors caps, would push their mothers on the side, and say: Look
mother how great a lubber does yet wear pearls, and precious stones as though
he were a little child still. Peace son, would the mother say, I think he be
some of the Ambassadors fools. But after a day or two, when the Ambassadors
understood, how little the Utopians esteemed their gorgiousnesse, they laid
aside their brave attire, and went more plainly and decently apparelled.

The covetousness of the Frenchmen, and Portingals, was not unaptly derided by
an old fellow of Brasile, who perceiving that their long and dangerous travel
to Brasile, was to turn their wood they transported, Plain, but to purpose.
to gain and ^iches, asked them, whether rich men did not dye in their
country? which being granted: who should possess their goods after their
death? being answered their children, or if they have none, then their
brethren, or next kinsfolks; Now (quoth he) I see you are very fools: For
what necessity is there in wearying your selves, to pass these troublous, and
dangerous seas, to draw the occasion of so many evils to your selves? If it be
to seek after riches for your children or kindred, is not the earth that
brought you up sufficient to bring up them also? We have also children and kin,
that be deareunto us, but when we consider, that the same earth which nourished
us up, is sufficient also to nourish them, we rest satisfied.

The Barbarous people likewise of Peru, seeing the Spaniards, that first
planted themselves in their country, given to be covetous and luxurious,
feared lest they would corrupt and alter their accustomed manners. And therefore
at their departure, they railed and called them the scumme of the sea, men
without fathers, and restless men that could stay no where to labor for their
living. Though the pretense of the Spaniards travel, into these new found
lands, were to plant Christianity among these rude people, and to reduce them
to the knowledge of God; yet the infinite number of thousands of people, which
through their cruelty and covetousness, they have there destroyed, in eight
and forty year twenty millions, as appears by their own histories, argues
plainly, and is confirmed by this example following; that the greedy and
unsatiable desire of gold and riches, was the cause that drew them to undertake
those painful and dangerous travailes. Which covetousness and cruelty of
theirs, was a great hinderance to the planting of Religion there. ^Ferdinando
Sotos, a Spaniard went to Florida to seek gold, but being in a great rage and
grief, because he could not there find that he looked for, he exercised great
cruelty among those barbarous people. It chanced that a Prince of that country,
came to see him, and presented him with two Parrots and plumes of feathers:
after their first salutations ended, the Prince asked the Spaniard, who he was,
and from whence he came, and what he sought in these countries, committing
daily so many and so great cruelties, and wicked acts? Sotos answered him by an
interpreter, that he was a Christian, the son of God the creator of heaven
and earth, that his coming thither, was to instruct those people in the
knowledge of his law. If thy An excellent answer of a Hethen.
God (said the Prince) command the to run over other men's countries, robbing,
burning, killing, and omitting no kind of wickedness, we tell you in few
words, that we can neither believe in him, nor in his laws.

Of these greedy covetous men, the Prophet Esaias speaks thus: W^e be to you,
that join house to house, and field to field, till there be no more ground:
Will you dwell upon the earth alone?

The love of money made the French king (...) the eleventh, subject to
obloquie, by his niggardly sparing, unseemely for a Prince, without respect to
his estate. For having driven almost all the Gentlemen out of his Court, he
was served with his tailor; for all his Horaulds of arms, his Barbor was his
Ambassador, and his Physician was his Chancellor; and for a mockery of other
kings, he would wear a greazy cap, of very course cloth: and in his accounts
were found, twenty so^s for two new sleeves to his old doublet, and fifteen
deniers for grease to greaze his boots. Horace reports of a man at Rome,
called Ovid, so rich in money, that he might measure his gold by the bushel:
and yet he went almost stark naked: and for niggardliness, never would fill
himself half full of meat: Insomuch that he lived poorly to dye rich. Of
such the Poet cries out, not without cause, Sed quo divitias tbt per torment a
coact^!
Cum furor haud dubious, cum sit manifesta phrenesis,
Vt locuples moriare, egenti vivere viverefato.
What mean these Riches, by such torments got,
And infinite pains? A madness, is it not?
A phrensey manifest it does implye,
Penuriously to live, richly to dye.


By this which has bin said, it is manifest, that man's felicity and his
summo^ bonum, or greatest good, consists No felicity can be in richer.
not in riches. For who (if he be not senseless) desires riches for it
self, but for some other thing? Some for lascivious, some for sumptuous,
others for profitable and necessary expenses. Which things, if they might be
had without money, no man would desire or care for riches. Neither can riches
be the common end of men; seeing some have great plenty, and others extreme
want and poverty, which have also their estimation by opinion. Some calling
gold and silver, others pearls and precious stones, and others trifling
things, riches; like little children, that set their riches in pinnes and
puppets. But he that puts not man's felicity in himself, and ^nis nis own
matters, does like unto him that estimateth^ sword by his scabbard; or a horse
by his saddle and furniture. Neither can we call that Summum bonum, or the
greatest good, which is no good at all, and is common both to good men and
wicked; which also make more men worse than better. And how can riches be the
principal end of man, that withdraws men for the most part, from the true
end of all things, which is God? For we see plainly, that there is not a more
compendious way, to alienate a man's mind from God, than to wallow in worldly
wealth. So that man's felicity or Summum bonum, must be sought in some other
thing, than in riches. For God placed not man in this world to seek after
earthly things: neither that he should find the end of his desires in the
scurfe of the earth. Which one remembers thus: Memento rebus vanidis diffidere,
Opes, genus, form^ decor, caduca sunt:
Ad ossa nuda mors reducit omnia;
Coelo repostus optimus thesaurus est.
In vain things (see) no confidence thou have,
For neither wealth, nor birth, nor shape can last;
To strippe us to the bone, Death follows fast,
It Is the best treasure that in Heaven is placed.


THE FELICITY OF MAN, OR, HIS SUMMUM BONUM. THE THIRD BOOK^.
CHAP. I.
Of Cineas the Philosopher and King Pyrrhus: Ambition the subversion of
Kingdoms, and Empires: It engenders Parricides: Instanced by Adolphus Duke of
Geldria: Selim the great Turk: Henry the first, Emperor, and Solomon: The
ambition of Snio King of Denmark: Semiramis: Jane Queen of Naples: The
Empress Irene: Bassianns: the sons of Pope Alexander the sixth: with sundry
Histories both domestical and foreign, to that purpose: The death of Pertinax
Emperor: And Didius Iulianus, who bought the Roman Empire: D^uers chances,
and changes in war: Histories of others unmilling to underg^e the Empire.

Honor and glory is another thing, which men labor to a^taine, as though
felicity or the greatest good should consist therein. But this is an erroneous
opinion, and they greatly deceived that hold it. For men desire honor and
glory because they would seem to be ^cndued with virtue, by which they
confess that virtue is to be preferred before glory and honor. And honor
Virtue to be preferred before honor.
is given as we see by daily experience, by man; and many times taken away
again by them that gave it. But that wherein felicity consists, is a thing
more steadfast, and not so easily removed, nor subject to the variable accidents
of fortune. Honor is gotten with much labor, maintained with great exponces,
and lost with intolerable grief and sorrow. It is likened to a man's shadow,
which the more he runs after, the more it flies away; and when he flies
from his shadow, it follows him again; as one says, Qui fugit honorem, eum
sequitur honos: Honor follows him that flies from it. Who is more honored
now than Christ's Apostles, Saint Peter, Saint Paul and the like, that despised
honor when they lived? Of all the disordered passions where with men's minds
are vexed, there is no one that troubles and disquieteth them more, than
ambition and desire of honor. They never content themselves with that which
they have gotten, but their minds are always employed in devising how to get
more. It is a hard thing (says Saint Augustine) for him that is placed in high
estate, not to desire great matters. Alexander the Great, when he heard a
Philosopher disputing of many worlds besides this, fell into a weeping, as
though some great cause of grief had happened to him: and being asked, why he
wept; Because (quoth he) I hear of many worlds, and I have not yet conquered
one whole world. But he that has felicity, is content with that he has, and
desires no more. He is free from all perturbations and unquietness of mind,
and thinks no man in better estate than himself, otherwise he cannot be
accounted happy. Which thing was by Cineas a very wise man aptly given to
understand to King Pyrrhus, that intended great wars, to en^ge his domin^.
For considering with himself, how peaceably and happily Pyrrhus might live, if
he could be content with his own kingdom, as they had conference (...) about
his intended enterprise to (...) wa^ upon I^ly: If Sir (quoth Cineas) the gods
show us this favor to conquer Italy, what good shall we reap by the
victory? We may afterward (said By^) with (...) great difficulty, subdue the
Grecia^ and (...), that border upon that country. When this (quoth the other)
is done, what shall we do then? S^ilia (quoth Pyrrhus) will not then stand
against us. Shall that be the end of our wa^res (said (...)?) Wh^ will stay
(...) ^ter (quoth this Monarke) from passing into Afri^, and Carthage? and from
the recovery of the Kingdom of Macedon, that so we may command at (...)
pleasure all Greece (...) (...), When (...) brought all this to pass, what
(...) Pyrrhus, beginning to smile We will (quoth h^) my friend, give our selves
to rest, and live as pleat^ntly and merrily, as (...). (...) (...) (...) where
he desired; And what Sir (quoth he) let^ (...) from rest at this present, and
from living in joy and pleasure, seeing we have all things requi^, o^ se^king
it with so much effusion of blood, and an ins^ire number of per^ and dangers,
and (...) in (...), where it is uncertain whether we shall find it? These
speeches rather offended Pyrrhus, that was carried away with the vehement
passion of ambition, than any thing diffwaded him, from his viol^t pur^ ^d:
(...), which in the end (...) his own (...) by feeding of his ambitious humout
in ^ing (...), he was at last lain with a (...), (...) his head by a woman,
and so lost his life, and his kingdom, The end of ^bition.
which he might quietly have possessed. And this is the common course of the
world, not only among Princes and Potentates, but also among men of mean
estate, always to aspire and desire more, according to the Emperor Charles
the fifths word; Plus ultra, to whom sometime it happens as it did to Esops
dog, that, snatching at the shadow, lost the piece of meat which he had in
his mouth. The ambitious humor of this King, that aspired to a Monarchy of
many countries and kingdoms, puts me in mind of a pretty taunt, given of
late years to the Spaniards, for the like ambition. A Germane writes a book,
to his contrymen, wherein he does persuade them, to beware they be not
entrapped by the Spaniards; alleging many reasons, that they aspire to the
Monarchy of Germany: and that they let not openly to speak, that the Monarchy
of the world is due to them, from God, and by right. One writes in the
margent; Hispanis monarchia divinit^s, sed in Vtopia debetur: A monarchy is due
to the Spani^ds from above, but in Vtopia.

There is not a more dangerous passion, or affection, nor that has been the
cause of greater mischief, than ambition and desire of honor, which has
been the utter ruin and subversion of many Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and
the destruction of them, in whom this humor has reigned. And yet many times
the worthiest men, and those that are ^ndued with excellent gifts, are most
subject to this passion. For lofty minds naturally have an earnest desire to
excel others; and to bring that to pass, they forbear not to attempt any
thing, whether it be right or wrong: for he is easily ^raen Ambition has no
limit.
to unjust things, that is de^ous of glory. As (...) Casar had usually in his
mouth this saying of ^. To att^ne to rule and principality, which is as it
were the subject of honor and glory, there is no duty respected, nor
natural affection can bear any sway, or restrain or bridle the unruly and
violent passions; neither between parents and their children, between husband
and wife, nor between ^thren or kinsfolk. They that have suffered themselves
to be overcome with this passion, have made shipwreck of all godliness, of
modesty, of honesty, and of humanity it self. But mere madness it is, to
desire that honor and glory, that neither contenteth the (...), nor continues
with the possessor, nor is void of great dangers, both in this life and in the
life to come; and is thus threatened in the Scripture, most severe judgment
shall be used upon those, over others. The mean man shall obtain mercy, but
the great and strong, shall suffer torments strongly.

Adolphus Duke of Geldria, did lead his father in the night when he was going
to sleep, five of their miles in the deep of Winter, without shoes, to a most
vile prison, Of (...).
where he kept him half a year; in the end whereof, for fear of the Emperor
and the Pope he let him forth. And when reasonable conditions were offered by
the Arbitrators, which had the hearing of their cause, he said, rather than he
would yield to those conditions, he would cast his father headlong into a
well, and throw himself after. An undutifull saying of an unnatural son.
Selym the great Turk, and first of that name, usurped the Empire, by favor of
the ^zaries, upon his father Bajazet, and caused him to be poisoned, and slew
A^mat and Corc^the his two elder brothers, with all his Nephews, and others of
Ottemans race: saying, that nothing was more pleasant, than to reign, when all
sear of kindred was taken away. Henry the fifth deprived his father by force
from the Empire, and caused him to dye miserably in prison. Frederiche the
third, after he had reigned thirty years, was mi^rably slain by Manfroy, his
bastard son: who after he had committed this parricide, he poisoned his
brother C^, lawful inheritour to ^redericke, that he might make himself King
of Naples. saly^ King of the Turks, hearing the acclamations and cries which
the army made to Sultan (...) his eldest son, for joy of his (...) from Persia,
jealous of his own estate, caused him to be strangled in his utter chamber,
and cast out to the army, with these words to be cried aloud: That there was
but one God in Heaven, and one Sultan upon Earth. And within two days after
he killed Sultan Gobe, because he wept for his brother: and Sultan Mehemet,
his third son, because he went away for fear. Abimelesh, Athalia, Ioram and
others, by the testimony of the Scripture, murdered many to reign alone.

Snio king of Denmark, not contented with his own kingdom, aspired also to
the kingdom of Suecia, and Gothland: when he perceived his forces were not
^ficient to bring his purpose to pass, he practiced this device. Bior^ king
of Suecia and Gothland had married the daughter of the old king of that
country, which (...) practiced to steal away, to marry her though she were
the other Kings wife, hoping by that (...) to get the kingdom of Gothland, he
made one go (...) the habit of a beggar into the kings Court, to come to the
speech of the Queen (if it were possible) under color of begging her alms.
This counterfeit beggar, having some friendship among the Danes that were in
the kings court, hid himself in a corner, which way the Queen used to go;
and when she passed by, he fell to his begging, and desired her to have
compassion upon him, and withal steppeth to her, as though it were A (...)
beggar.
to receive her charity, and speaks softly; Snio loves you. The Queen
perociving the device, passed by; and at her return, the beggar standing still
in the same place as it were by importunacy, to draw from her something toward
his relief, which before she had denied him, she gave him comfortable words
openly; and secretly whispering she said; I love him, that loves me. The
beggar being glad of this answer, pro^eded further, pea^tiling with the Queen,
to forsake her husband, and to pass the seas to Snio; who expecting
opportunity, when the Queen fained to go forth to wash her self, taking
with her, her husbands tre^re, (...) a ship ready, and transported her into
Denmark, which was the occasion of long and cruel wars, and of wonderful
slaughter on both sides: insomuch as the husband^ being slain, the fields lay
desolate, and the people driven to seek new countries to inhabit; which also
at last cost Snio his life. semir (...) Queen of the Assyrians, A^ Que^.
desired the king her husband, that she might reign with sovereignty one only
day; which being ^ted, she caused the king to be killed, and became absolute
Queen her self. (...) Queen of Naples, caused three of her husbands to be put
to death, who sought to be advanced to honor by her marriage: and at last
(...) the just judgment of God, (...) was (...) herself. Irenes mother to the
Emperor Constantine the sixth, entrapped him by policy, and caused his eyes to
be plucked out of his head, that she might reign in his place: such an
unnatural part, as has not been known done by a woman. Romulus the first
founder of Rome, slew his brother Rhemus, for leaping over the wall of the
City, that he might raign^alone. (...) and Geta, brothers and successors in
the Empire to their father Severus, thinking so large a Monarchy not
greatenough for them both, Bassianus slew his brother Geta with a dagger in his
mothers arms, that himself might enjoy the sovereignty alone: Nulla fides
regni socijs, omnisque potestas
Impatiens consort is erit.
There is no trust in partners to a Crown:
Power brooks no rivals, but makes all his own.


Pope Alexander the sixth had two sons, the elder he made Duke of Candia, the
other Cardinal of Valentia: who being of a disposition, fitter for a man of
war than a Priest, could not ^adure that his brother the Duke, should be
preferred before him in this principality; being the more impatient, because
his brother had a greater part than he in the favor of a young Gentlewoman,
with whom they were both in love, and The effects of lust and (...).
therefore stirred up by lust and ambition (mighty ministers as Guicciardin
says, to all manner of mischief) he caused his brother to be slain, as he
rode alone in the night through Rome, and to be cast into the river of Tiber.

Examples of this kind, our own Chronicles will yield us. Richard the third,
most unnaturally caused his own brothers sons to be cruelly murdered through
the inordinate desire to reign, upon whom fell the just j^dgement of God, as
all men know. The desire of rule and glory, was the cause of the civil wars
between (...) Caesar and Pompey, and of the overthrow of the Romans
Commonwealth, and at last of their own confusion. Pompey being overthrown by
Caesar, fled to Alexandria, where he thought to have found succor of the
young King of Egypt, for the benefits which he before had ^eceived at his
hands. But his Council having deliberated upon the matter, sent a boat, under
color of friendship, to him, to fetch him to land, and caused his head to be
stricken off to gratify Caesar, who not long after was killed in the Senate,
with three and twenty wounds. These men were of such lofty minds, that the one
could abide no superior, nor the other no equal. Alexander the Great, through
ambition and desire of glory, without any right or title, entered into Dar^us
possessions, and made conquest of Asia. And the like desire of rule made
Antipater send his son to poison Alexander, with the water of the river called
Styx, whose property was to break all the vessels wherein it should be
carried, whether it were silver, or pewter, or any other thing, saving the
hoof of a mule. And what was it but ambition, that stirred up and continued
the controversy of the Supremacy between the Churches of Jerusalem,
Antioch, Constantinople, and Rome, the space almost of three hundred years,
until at last Phocas adjudged the Supremacy to the Bishop of Rome, which
brought forth horrible tumults, deadly hatreds, and shameful Schisms among
the Churches? Yet notwithstanding this sentence, the Church of Millan opposed
it self against the Church of Rome, for the Supremacy, and would have nothing
to do with it for the space of two hundred years. King Henr^e of France, upon
the marriage of his sister with the King of Spain, was puffed up with such
pride, and desirous of more increase of glory, that besides his ambitious
conceits, and imaginations of new enterprises, he gave himself a new title,
tres heureuseroye, the most happy King. But God (to whom pride and vainglory
is always offensive) would not suffer this happiness long to continue. For in
sol^mnizing this marriage, with great triumph and joy, after he had run at the
Tilt two or three days, being persuaded and entreated by the Q^eene his wife
(who had dreadful dreams of him) to run no more, and also by his Council, he
would needs run again the last day, and being well mounted, and armed rather
better than any time before, after he had broken many staves, and the day well
spent, and the pastime drawing to an end, some being gone from the Tilt-yard
home-ward, others being alighted from their horses, the King would not give
over until he had run one course more: and looking round about, and seeing
almost none left, he called Count Mongomery to him, that was Captain of his
guard, and commanded him to go to the end of the Tilt; but he refusing to
run against him, desired to be pardoned; but the King (his destiny drawing
him strongly to his end) would allow no excuse, but putting the staff in
Mongomeries hand (that killed him) willed him to go to the end of the tilt, he
would break one staff more before he departed. As they ran, (...) brake the
staff upon the King with a counterbuffe, that the splinters ran into his eye,
and up toward his brain, so as languishing a few da^s, he dyed. Thus he that
thought himself by the allia^ of this mighty Prince, to be advanced to great
glory, wherein, by his new title, he seemed to set his felicity, was taken
away by the Captain of his guard, that was appointed for his defense, in the
beginning of his supposed No predictions can prevent ^ate.
happiness: S^ctransit transit gloria mundi. This strange death of the Kings,
seemed to be fatal, and was presaged before by Ganricus an Italian Astronomer,
who wrote to the King five years before, that he had calculated his nativitie,
and that the heavens threatened him, in the year in which he should be one and
forty, a dangerous wound in the head, by which he should be either stricken
blind, or dead (both which came to pass) and therefore he advised him that
year to bew are of til^s and tourneys, and such like pastimes. Likewise
Nostradamus told some of his friends secretly, that the King would be in great
danger of his life at the triumph, which made them the more attentively behold
the same, to see the event. There was also a child of six years old, brought
thither with his father to see the Iustes; which boy, as he saw them run to
break their staves, would always cry out without ceasing, They will kill the
King, they will kill the King.

But what danger soever follows, or what care or trouble is in coming by it,
there are very few examples of them, that have refused honor and rule, when
they have had opportunity and means to attain it. But an infinite number of
examples of them that by unlawful means have sought rule, to their own
destruction. And no part of the world can afford more than the Roman Empire:
where within the space of one hundred But three out of (...) three (...), (...)
in their be^s.
years, ^n which were (...) and thirteen (...), there were but three that
dyed in their beds by sickness: all the (...) suffered violent death. In the
Reign of Galienns, there were (...) that usurped the name of Emperor. The
Romans had a custom, to have certain bands of choice men, lodged without the
walls of the City of Rome, for the guard of their Emperors, which they called
Pretorian soldiers, who by the negligence of some evil Emperors (forgetting
their old discipline) grew so licentious that they used to kill such of their
Emperors, though they had been beneficial to them (for whose defense they
were appointed) as went about to reform their rapines and dissolute manners,
and advance others in their places. (For this has been always the manners of
men, to be moved rather with the hope of a good turn to come, than with the
remembrance of a benefit already received: and to depend rather upon them,
whose power and reputation they see does increase, than upon them that be at
the highest, and have no possibility to climb higher.) Pertinax was the son
of a slave that was made free, and being trained up in the wars, through his
virtue and valor he obtained to the highest dignities in the Roman Empire:
and after Commodus the cruel Tyrant was slain, he was made Emperor. But
after he had reigned some three months, to the great liking of the Senate,
and people of Rome, the Pretorian soldiers finding his severitie not so fit
for their purpose, as the liberty they enjoyed by his Predecessor Commodus,
certain of them conspired against him, and went armed through the City of
Rome to his Palace, with their halberds and swords drawn; whereof the Emperor
being advertised, sent to the Captain of the (...) bands (who brought him the
first news of Commodus death, whereof he was the principal Author, and cause
of this man's election to the Imperial crown) that he would appease the
soldiers: but he was so far from dissuading them, that he rather allowed of
the enterprise; following the common course of tho world: and as the Poet
says; Dum fueris felix, multos ^merabis amicos:
Tempor a si fuerint nubila solus ^ris:
Whilst happy, thou have many friends: but try
Them in foul weather, and away they fly.


The Emperor thinking it not agreeable with the majesty of his estate, nor
answerable to his virtues, and former valor (by which he was advanced to so
many dignities) to fly or hide himself, as he was counseled, he came forth
boldly to the soldiers, hoping by his authority, and majesty of his person,
to appease them. And after he had demanded of them, the cause of their coming
in this disordered sort: My soldiers (quoth he) if you come to kill me, you
shall do no great or valiant act, nor a matter to me very grievous, that am so
stricken in age, and have gotten such honor and fame, that death cannot much
trouble me: who am not ignorant, that the life of man must have an end. But
take ye heed, that it be not infamous to your selves, first to lay hands upon
your Emperor, that has done you no harm, whose person is committed to your
guard and defense, from all treason and violence. I may not fly that which the
destinies have ordained, neither that which you have determined. But if this be
my last day, and fatal hour, I pray the immortal Gods, that the vengeance of
A charitable wish of an Ethnic.
the innocent blood, which shall be fhed of me, fall not upon my mother Rome:
but that every one of you, do feel it in his person, and his house. And
though some of the soldiers, when Pertinax came to the point to speak these
words, were moved with the authority and grave words of the good Emperor, and
were about to retire, yet the rest that came after, pursued their furious
intent: and especially one Tuncius, seeing all men refusing to kill Pertinax,
he thrust a lance through the midst of his body, with which wound Pertinax
fell to the ground. Which being done, they cut off his head, and put it on a
lance, and carried it through the streets of Rome: and returned again to
their camp, with the like speed as they came forth, which they fortified, and
prepared themselves for defense, fearing the (...) of the people, of whom
Pertinax (they knew) was well beloved. But after a day or two, when they saw
that none sought to revenge his death, they gathered to them a more boldness,
and by a rare example (the like whereof was never heard before) the soldiers
standing upon the walls of their camp, caused to be published, that he that
would give them most money, they would The Empire ^et to sale.
make him Emperor. A proud and presumptuous offer, for a handful of men,
enclosed within a wall of a little circuit, to set the world to sale. A notable
example, and worthy of deep meditation, whereby we may plainly see, how feeble
and weak the things are which we so greatly esteem in this life: and what
small reckoning and account we ought to make of worldly power and dominion,
and all other riches and possessions, which we call the goods of the world,
and how far they are from felicity that think themselves to live in security
and happiness, by possessing worldly wealth and dominion, when three or four
hundred men shall be sufficient to take away the life and dominion, from a
grave and wise Emperor of Rome, a man of great virtue and experience, well
beloved of his people, master and commander of the world, in the midst of the
City of Rome, head of the Roman Empire. And they to carry the matter away
without punishment, or called to answer their Princes death. What reason have
we so much to esteem and desire any worldly wealth and power, with the hazard
many times of our souls, when so mighty a Monarchy, representing such a
majesty, the terror of Princes and Nations, and as it were the throne of the
earth, shall be by proclamation set out to sale for a little money? When this
news was published in Rome, that the Empire should be sold, word thereof was
brought to Didius Iulianus, a very rich man, as he sat at supper in the
midst of his pleasures. Who being persuaded by his friends to hearken to this
offer, went presently to the camp, where he found another chapman, whose offer
the soldiers durst not accept, fearing lest he would revenge the Emperors
death, whose kinsman he was. But receiving the large promises of Iulianus, they
put down a ladder over the wall of their camp, and took him to them: where,
after they had sworn him to perform his promise for the money agreed upon,
they saluted him by the name of Emperor, and marched with him in order of
battle, well armed, through the City to the Palace. The People in stead of
salutations cursing him bitterly, and cast stones at him out of their windows.
And when the Army had entitled him Pater patriae, they found early the next
morning, these Latin letters written upon the gate: P.V.E.P. sounding thus:
Proditor, Venditor, Emptor patria. In English thus: Traitor, seller, buyer of
thy Country. And after he had reigned seven months, in which time he suffered
a great many indignities, being odious to all men, and to the soldiers also,
because he performed not his promise, the Senate sent a Gentleman to kill
Iulianus; who declaring the sorrowful Embassage which he brought him, with
many tears, Inlianus desired, that he might not be slain before he had Gold
that bought the (...), would not save his life.
seen Severus, who was then at the gates of Rome with an army, and elected
Emperor: but the Gentleman durst do no other, than cut off his head. These
and the like examples (whereof histories are full fraught) argue the
imbecillitie and frailty of humane power and riches, which may be likened to
the rattles and toys, which children use to play with, suddenly they come, and
quickly they are gone; no where stable nor settled, but with every blast and
mutabilitie of fortune, tossed hither and thither. He that now is lifted upon
high, is thrown down again into the gulf of miseries. Saepius ventis
agitatur ingens
Pinus, and celsae graviore casu
Decidunt turres; ferunt que summos fulmina montes.
The mighty Pine that grows aloft,
Is shaken by the winds more often:
The higher that the Turrets be,
The greater is their fall we see:
The nearer Heaven the Mountains look,
The sooner they are thunder-strooke.


Unworthy are they to be esteemed and called good things, that double the
bitterness of grief, with the desire of them, when they are lost. Which seemed
to be gravely considered of king John of France, when he was taken P^soner by
the black Prince. For being moved with the sudden alteration of his fortune,
that in a moment, of a mighty Prince was become a captive, in the power of his
enemies, he was very sad and pensive. But when he was brought to the presence
of King Edward, after he had considered of the vanity and uncertainetie of
worldly things, he looked with a very cheerful countenance, as though no such
thing had happened to him. At which change, King Edward, hearing before of his
penfivenesse, much marvelling, demanded of him the cause of his sudden
alteration. I was (quoth King John) the last day, as you know, a mighty King,
and now I am fallen into your hands, a captive at your disposition: Vanitas
vanitatum, and omnia vanitas; Vanity of vanities and all is vanity. To which
saying an English Poet seemed to allude: No wight in this world that wealth can
attain,
Unless he believe that all is but vain.
And look how it comes, so leave it to go:
As tides find their times, to ^bbc and to slow.


The like is reported to be spoken by Gilimer King of Clances and chan^es
(...) war.
the Vandales, when he was overthrown in battle by Bellisarius, and led in
the triumph very richly apparelled, set out with gold and precious stones: the
king was at that time very sad and pensive, until he came before the Emperor
Justinian; and then being commanded to adore him sitting in his chair of
State, he fell into great laughing, and pronounced these words, Vanitas
vanitatu^, and omnia vanitas. And when all men thought by the greatness of his
sorrow, and sudden alteration of his estate, that he was fallen mad, that would
laugh at such an unseasonable time, the Emperor asked him, why (being before
so long sorrowful) he fell so suddenly into such a laughing. He answered,
that he laughed at the variable and unconstant estate and condition of men,
that he, who was even now a king, is now become a slave.

The King Sesostris was aptly taught the uncertainety of humane things, by the
example of four Kings whom when he had taken prisoners, he caused them to draw
him in a Chariot; one of the Kings turned his face always backward, and being
demanded the cause, he answered, that as he beheld the wheels of the
Chariot, that the same which was on high came down below, he called to mind
the condition of men. Which answer made Sesist^is more mild and gentle.
Ecclesiastes says, one comes out of prison, Nothing in this life (...).
and is made a King; and another which is borne in the Kingdom falls into
poverty. And whosoever shall enter into the due consideration of these things
with an upright judgment, shall find, that there is nothing in this life
better than a mean estate: which he that can attain and keep, is of all
other neer^st to this part of felicity. For when ambition and desire of having
has possessed a man's mind, whatsoever is sweet and pleasant in this life is
lost. As appears by Iulianus, who living before in security, wanting nothing
that was necessary for the happiness of this life, but rather had too much,
through ambition and desire of rule and honor, fell into a sea of cares and
troubles; and within a few months, ignominiously lost both his honor and his
life. Pertinax seemed to prefer a private life before high estate. For before
he was Emperor, having borne the principal offices in the Roman Empire, and
governed many Provinces and Countries, a very wise man, and of great
experience, and one of the principal men among the Romans, misliking the
government, in the Reign of the Emperor Co^modus, withdrew himself into the
Country of Liguria, to lead a private life in a poor village, where his
father in times past had lived, and kept shop. And when he had bought that poor
dwelling, where his father had sold oil, fish, wine, and No crown to a (...).
such like, he built about it a stately house, suffering the old to remain in
the midst, without adding or diminishing any thing of it. Pertinax was
greatly delighted to behold that Country, wherein he had passed his life being
but a child, and from whence he had departed so abject, and was returned with
great wealth and credit; and being advertised that the foale of the ass was
alive, whereon he was used to carry wood, be bought it, and cherished it as if
it had been some old acquaintance, or servant of great desert. He rejoiced so
exceedingly to see himself so rich, where he had bin so poor; and to obtain
so great quietness, after so much travel, that he said, and wrote to his
friends, that if Princes had thoroughly known the taste and relish of secure
rest and quietness, they would of their own accord abandon Empires. And if
Pertinax could have kept himself in this private life, he had escaped that
violent death, which, being afterward chosen Emperor, he could not avoyde.

If men could see, how the minds of many Princes and great estates are
affected, what cares and troubles overwhelme them, what agonies and torments
they suffer, in what fear and suspicion they live, we would not esteem them
to be in the happiest estate, but rather to pity their case, and yield them
all the hono^r and duty we can give them, than wish to be in their places. As
they by whose cares their subjects live securely; by whose watching, they
sleep quietly; and by whose infelicitie, they live happily. For, the subjects
wealth, in a great part, depends upon the Princes vigilancie and providence,
which in a sort, was given to understand by Philip of Macedon, being in the
wars, when he was asked how it came to pass, that he now slept so soundly,
so great peril being at hand, whereas at other times, in less dangers he used
to be so watchful: It is no matter (quoth the King) though I sleep, Antipater
is (...); meaning, as before all the estate of his affairs, and Many miserable
that see^ happy.
sa^etie of the people depended upon his vigilancie: so for this one time he
had committed them to Antipater, whom he knew to be as careful as himself.
Philip de (...), a man of great wisdom and experience, and employed in
weighty affairs, in the time of Jews the eleventh King of France, says,
that if he should write of all the Princes, both men and women, which he knew
in his time, that to the judgment of men, seemed to live in great felicity,
and yet to those that knew them familiarly, lived in a miserable estate, that
matter alone would contain a reasonable Volume; which agrees with the Poet:
-- Miser at que infelix est etiam Rex,
Nec quenquam ((...) creed) facit (...) beatum:
Even Kings with miseries are often oppressed,
Nor is it a crown (believe me) makes them blessed.


When Tigranes was newly become King of Armenia, after he had a while
earnestly beheld the diadem, which he had in his hand; O noble, rather than
happy cloth (quoth he) if men knew the cares and troubles thou bring with
thee, no man would take thee up, if he found thee lying on the ground. But none
expressed more aptly the unhappiness of Princes, that came by unlawful means
to their Principalities, than Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracusa, which was then
a name of honor, though now ignominious. For being of Damocles commended for a
happy man; will thou (quoth he) (...), make proof one day of my happiness?
When the other answered, Nothing more willingly; (...) caused him to be set
alone at his table, in a stately chamber richly hanged, a cupboord of plate of
great price, his table furnished with great store of delicate meats, pleasant
wines of all sorts, and attended upon with brave men, and fair boys, in all
points as if he had been there himself. But directly over his head, he caused
to be hanged a naked sword, by the hair of a Danger (...) not (...).
horse tail; which when Damocles espied, his stomach would no longer serve
him to cate of those dainty meats, neither could he take any pleasure in the
service of those fair boys, but being in continual fear, lest the sword
would fall upon his head, he desired he might have leave to depart, he would
be no longer happy. Now thou see (quoth Dionysius) how happy our estate is,
that, not withstanding our guard of armed men, hangs but by a little thread.
Thus did (...) lively and properly reprove the common error of men, that think
felicity rather to consist in principality and worldly wealth, which is for
the most part accompanied with fear and peril, and unquietness of mind,
than in a mean estate, that brings with it a secure and quiet life, void of
danger and timorous conceits. And that which he showed by example in Damocles,
was by action verified in himself, in the course of his life. For he was so
extremely fearful and suspicious, that he durst trust no body. He prepared a
lodging for himself that had no access to it, but over a drawbridge, which
he used himself to draw, when he went to bed. He durst trust no Barbor with
the shaving his beard, but his own daughters, for fear of his throat. And when
they grew toward women, he took the razor from them, and made them learn a
device to burn off his hair. And as he was on a time playing at tennis, he
delivered his sword to his Page; and as one of his familiars told him merrily,
that now he committed his life to his boy, he caused them both presently to be
slain: the man, because he showed the way how he might be killed; and the boy,
because by smiling he seemed to allow of it. As this Dionysius was walking one
day, after he was expelled from his Kingdom, in the City of Corinth, where
he lived A cunning (...).
as a private man: Truly Dionysius (said Diogenes the Sinopian) thou art in an
estate unworthy of thee. The Tyrant, supposing he had bewailed his case; I am
beholding to thee Diogenes (quoth he) that have compassion upon my miserable
fortune. What (replieth the Philosopher) do thou think I pity thee? it
rather grieveth me to see such a slave as thou art, who deservest to grow old,
and to dye like a Tyrant, as thy father did, than to live here among us so
pleasantly, and to pass thy time in security, without fear. Whereby the
Philosophers meaning was, that he lived then more happily, being a private
man, void of fear and peril, than he did before in his kingdom, which was
full of fear and trouble.

The infelicitie, which many times accompanies great estates, and frequenteth
places of honor, was well fore-scene of T^us the go^d Emperor of Rome. For as
he made a feast one day to the contentment of every man, using a cheerful
countenance, in the end of the banquet he struck himself upon the breast at
the table, and withal ^tched a great sigh. And when his favorites desired to
know the cause; I cannot (quoth he) refrain sighing, when I call to mind,
that this great honor which I have, depends upon the will of fortune; that
my estates and dignities are as it were in sequestration, and my life as it
were laid in pawn and pledge to me. Words of like effect were uttered by
(...) to Nerva, when he was chosen Emperor. For when all men came to do
reverence to him, as their Lord and Emperor, and to congratulate and rejoice
with him, wishing him good success and fortune (as the manner is) only
Arrius, a very wise and grave man, a faithful friend to Nerva, used another
form of speech, considering with a more deep meditation than the rest, what a
great charge, and full of peril it was to reign. My friend Nerva (said he)
that thou have taken upon thee the government of the Empire, either it is some
curse from thy predecessors, or some vengeance that the gods will take of
thee: seeing they suffer thee to take the Empire, and at the time thou have
most need of counsel, they bereave thee of thy sound The speech of a worthy
friend.
and good judgment. And surely Nerva (said Arrius) that thou art exalted into
this throne, I attribute it to the good fortune of the Senate, and the people
of Rome, and to all the Empire, and not to thine. For as thou have through thy
virtue and wisdom, escaped with so great honor and credit, from the hands of
so many evil Princes that went before thee: so now the same has made thee
subject to an infinite number of cares and perils, and above all the rest, to
the infamy and hatred of thine enemies, and much more of thy friends. For these
thinking in their own judgment, that they have deserved all things as due to
them, in respect of old friendship, if any thing be denied them, though unjust,
that they shall ask, they will become more cruel enemies, than those that
have so disordered themselves. And when Pertinax was to be elected Emperor,
and went The modesty of (...).
up to the Capitol, he would in no wise sit in the chair of estate, but took
the Consul Glabrion by the arm, and by strong hand would have placed him in
the same, as the worthier man. But he refusing, and persuading (...), with all
the Senate, to accept the Empire, which was so much against his will and liking,
as appeared by the pitiful lamentation he made, and abundance of tears he
shed, that they placed him in a manner by force in the chair. And when he saw
no remedy nor resistance against their (...), he made an Oration to the
Senate, and amongst many other things, spoke thus: When I began to hold offices
in the Commonwealth, I thought it most certain, that it was no humane matter,
but a divine dignity, to be a Roman Emperor: but after I had tasted of the
travels of commandment, and of authority, and understood the peril to reign;
I did clearly see, that amongst all the travels of men, to be an Emperor is
the greatest. Until this day I have had some (...), but from henceforth I
shall be constrained to live discontented: because from the travel and (...)
of the ^nce, peace and quietness proceeds to the Commonwealth. The office
of a Prince is not to sleep, but to watch not to be idle, but to travel: for
that every excessive recreation which his person takes, forthwith redoundeth
to the prejudice of the Commonwealth. Until this day have I been well liked,
served, and reverenced, but from henceforth all men, for the most part, shall
bear me envy: because the estate of Princes is so envied, that th^sea shall
want sand to reckon his enemies, but the number of his fingers of one hand,
shall exceed to point out his friends. He used often to say, that in all his
life he never committed the like fault, as when he accepted the Empire: and
many times he mo^oned to leave the same, and to return unto his house: and
would thus recomfort (...); That forasinuch as he was of so great age, he
should not long live, but be delivered of this redious life. Per^nax had a
son, whom after he was Emperor, he would not suffer to come to the Court, nor
yet to Rome, but held him in his country following his own affairs: which
moved the Consul to say to Pertinax, that he seemed rather the son of a
labourer, than of an Emperor. Whereupon he listup his eyes to heaven, and with
a great sigh said: My mother Rome has cause to be contented, that I offer and
put ^y life in danger for her sake, without venturing my son and house in
like danger. Whereby it appears, he esteemed himself for most unhappy, to be
established in the Empire, and his son to be in great felicity, being free
from the same.

CHAP. II.
The Emperor Trajans opinion concerning Principality and Empire: The like of
Marcus Aurelius Emperor, of the Empire: Saturninus and his death: The modesty
of Sylla the Dictator, and Carolus Martellus: The History of Dioclesian: The
instabilitie of Fortune pr^ved by Justinian the second: The contention of
Sergius, and Formosus about the Pope-dome: Of Pope John the thirteenth and
others: Of Bajazet Emperor of the Turks: The history of Darius and
Alexander: of Baltazar Cossa Pope, and his miserable death: Flattery rewarded
by Antonius and Commodus Emperors: The stories of diverse Popes: Of the Cardinal
of Loreyne and of Martin Luther.

THe Emperor Trajane seemed to be of opinion, that the greatest felicity is
not found in the greatest estate: by a letter which he wrote to the Senate of
Rome, being new chosen Emperor, where among other things he writes thus: Ye
know that albeit I was nephew to our predecessor, yet I never solicited him for
the kingdom, and much less occupied my thoughts to hope for it: having
learned of my master Plutarch, that honor ought rather to be deserved than
purchased. And as I will not deny, but that a kingdom is a sweet prey, and
that the present of so high and excellent dignity, was welcome to me, with
inward gladness: so also I cannot but confess, that I find great difference
between the travels of a kingdom, and the security of a private life. Yea,
after I had tasted of what bitter cares, this sweet prey is compounded, I was
sorry my weakness was so soon enticed, though it be too late to repe^. For of
such quality is empire and government, that if there be great honor to possess
it, there is no less pains and travel to weild it. Oh, to how many
perplexities The troubles of pit^.
stands he subject, who binds himself to govern others? For if he be just,
they will call him cruel: if he be pitiful they will despise him: if he be
liberal, they will hold him prodigal: if he be a husband of that he has,
they will say he is covetous: if he be peaceable, they will esteem him a
coward: if he be courageous, they will term him quarrellous: if he be grave,
they will note him proud: if he be affable, they will impute it to lightness,
and simplicity: if he be solitary, they will judge him an hypocrite: and if
he be merry, they will term him dislolte. So that men will most commonly use
more respect toward all others, than toward him that governs the whole. For
the Prince, they number the morsels that he eareth, they measure his paces,
they observe his words, they mark what company he k^peth, they censure his
works, they are jealous over his looks and gestures: yea, they examine and
murmr at his pastimes, and make conjecture even of his secret thoughts. Who
then considers the travels that are incident to principality, the jealousies
that stand as espials over such as rule, will confess (I doubt not) that there
is no estate more sure than that which is dissevered from Empire and dominion.
Insomuch as government being nothing else but the forge of envy, the best cu^
and remedy is to forbear to be absolute, and live contented with a private
estate. For if a man cannot but with great pain govern a wife whom he has
chosen, train up his children which he has begotten, and instruct his servant
that he has hired, having them all in his honse: far greater pain shall he
find, to entertain in one peace and unity, a whole commonwealth divided
into strange dispositions. Sure the life of a Prince deserves great
compassion, for that in few they can repose or trust, seeing oftentimes they
are most deceived by those whom they most favor. They cannot cate without
watching, sleep without guard, speak without jealousy, nor go without
espiall. So that being Lords over all, they are prisoners to their own
subjects. Yea, if we consider the servitude of Princes, and the liberty of
subjects, we shall find, that by whom a kingdom is best managed, over him
servitude has most dominion. Insomuch that though Princes have authority, to
give liberty to others, yet their place will not suffer them to minister it to
themselves. A large sea, and a great kingdom are two things pleasant to behold,
but most perilous to prove.

The Emperor Marcus A^relaus, seemed to be of the very same mind, by a
discourse written to a dear friend of his, among other things thus: There is
no doubt, that to be Emperor of Rome, is a greathne^ above all the estates of
the world: but weighing with his countenance and majesty, the cares and
infelicities that are annexed to the seat, there is far greater security to
follow a private life, than to manage the affairs and travels of a kingdom.
And because (good Pution) thou art so near me in friendship and opinion, I
will debate it frankely with thee, though not so much for that thou desire to
know it, yet because it brings case to my heart, to communicate my fortune, as
in all adversities, it is one chief comfort, when men know the uttermost of
their mishaps. But this was the case; The Emperor Antoninus adopting me to his
son in law, gave me his daughter to wife, and for her dowry, endowed me with
the Empire: two things very honorable, and even so not a little troublesome.
For that to the A Kingdom and a wife, two hard things to govern.
government of the Empire is tied great pain and travel: and in Faustine my
wife, is great difficulty of moderation, and modesty. Herein thou have no
reason, to marvel so much of that I write to thee now, as to wonder with what
discretion I so long suffered it. Assuring thee, that the travels of the
kingdom shorten my life, and the liberty of my wife diminishes mine honor.
For ^he being the daughter of an Emperor, having withal, the help of riches,
beauty, and authority, forbeares not to use the privilege of liberty, not as
she ought, but as she list. This being a property annexed to most women, rather
to desire liberty, than that they know how to use it: and that which is worse,
she will never suffer reformation of this error, without the prejudice of mine
honor: So that i^ such a form of life as this is, and with the fellowship of a
wife, such as Faustin^ is, it had been better for me, to have taken the state
of a labourer, than to be c^alted to the place of the Empire: for that when the
recko^ing is made as there is no land so hard, which the plough does not turn
up, so there is no man so humble, that will be The greatest (...) i^ in a mean
(...).
comman led. I was never so well served as when I had but one Page, and now
that I am Emperor, all men call me master, and yet I am made servant to them
all. Where thou may see a lamentable difference between that I was then,
and the condition I live in now: For when I followed the study of Philosophy,
I had contentment of mind, whereas the pomps of the Empire carries me into
such strange spirits, that I have forgotten the virtue and science I knew, and
now am troubled with infirmities, which I cannot abide. When I was a private
man, all men held their eyes fixed upon me, and now that I am a prince, there
are few that ^mploy not their tongues against me. Whereby it appears, that as
in Princes there is always something to be admonished, so in subjects are many
things to be corrected. All this (good (...)) I (...) with thee, to the end
thou have compassion upon my estate past, and pity to that I am no^ in: having
neither time to communicate with those friends, with whom I have been brought
up, nor opportunity to seek my solace in the science I have learned. For of
the one side, the cares of the kingdom do carry me into thoughts and
pensiveness, and on the other side, the liberty of my wife leaves me in
trouble of conscience. (...) likewise being advanced against his will to the
name of Emperor by the Egyptians The cares that attends on (...).
and by his soldiers, when he saw them so importunate that he could not
without danger refuse it; My friends (quoth he) ye know not what it is to
(...), I will make you understand it in my self. From this day forward I shall
be daily (...) with swords, axes, and halberds hanging over my head; on every
side I see my self assaulted with lances, and all kind of weapons. Those that
should be my guard and defense, I begin to fear, and to stand in doubt of
them that keep me company. I eat my meat now with no good taste, nor without
suspicion. I go no where in safety, nor without fear. But if I were assured
from all these things, yet it is unpossible for an Emp to please his subjects.
For if he be old, they will say, he is unable, and insufficient: if he be
young, that he is furious, and wants wisdom to command. So as there will
never fail defects to be found in him. Believe me (my friends) you that make
me Emperor, do tie me to death, yet one thing comfort me, that I shall
not dye alone, deal with me as you list: I beseech the gods, that ye repent
not one day that you have done, as I repent it now. And as he seemed to
prophecy of himself, so it happened to him. For Probus being Emperor also,
encountering with him, won the field: and Saturninus being fled into a
Castle, was there slain against the will of Probus, who seemed willing to have
pardoned him.

And although the troubles and perils of these high dignities and honorable
places, were foreseen and duly considered of some wise and grave men, yet few
there have been who refused them being offered, and more few that have yielded
them over, without some urgent cause, and necessity, when they have possessed
them. Sylla after he had vanquished all his enemies, being dictator, the
highest dignity then in the Roman commonwealth, and in men's judgment might
have possessed it quietly, gave it over voluntarily without any compulsion, and
led a private life.

Carolus Martellus showed great magnanimity in refusing principality, when
after many noble victories, he was offered by the Princes and Nobility, the
kingdom of France, he refused it, and contented himself with the estate his
father left him. For which he had this Epitaph: Dux dominusq, Ducum, regum
quoque ^ex fore spe^it,
Non vult regnare, sed regibus imperat ipse.
To be a Duke or Lord over Dukes
Or King, among Kings he did despise:
But thought it greater (than himself
To reign) 'ore Kings to emperize.


Some others did the like. But none has showed a more The (...) of Richard
(...) of (...), in the time of Henry the sixth.
rare example in this kind of matter, than Dioclesian. This Dioclesian, was a
man of base parentage in Dalmacia, and served as a poor soldier in France
under diverse Roman Emperors: (for the Romans had then a custom, not to
suffer their Emperors long to live) and as on a time he reckoned with a
woman, in the house where he was lodged (that was a Soothsayer, of them which
were called Druides) for the charges of some time past, this woman finding
fault with hisstraight reckoning, unfit as she thought, for a soldier.
Content thy self good woman (quoth Dioclesian) I am yet a poor soldier as
thou see, but when I am an Emperor, I will be more liberal. Forasmuch as
thou have spoken (quoth she) more truly than thou art aware of, when thou have
killed an Aper (which signifies a Bore) thou shall be Emperor. Dioclesia^
although he took her words in jest, as a thing unlikely to come to pass, yet
carrying a lot^e mind, he thought sometimes upon her words, and as occasion
served, he used to kill Bores. And through his virtue and valor, being
advanced by degrees from one office to another, he became in time one of the
principal m^ in the army. And as he saw three or four Emperors in his time,
one succeeding another, he calling to remembrance the woman's words: I kill the
Bores (quoth he) but others eat the flesh: It chanced at last, that one whose
name was Aper, traitorously killed (...) the Emperor, notwithstanding he
married his daughter, hoping to succeed him in the Empire. But the same being
known to the soldiers, they apprehended this Aper, and brought him before the
tribunal seat of the Emperor. And devising upon a man that might see this
treason punished, none seemed so meet, as D^oclesian. Whereupon the whole army
chose him Emperor. And heto fulfill the prophecy (though the thing was
unseemely) thrust his sword through Aper, and slew him. And after he had
reigned twenty years and achieved great matters, and now come to live in
great prosperity, his Empire being so strongly fortified, and all things in
such peaceable estate, that in the judgment of men he need fear nothing, by
a rare president never seen before, he gave over the Empire, and went to the
city of Solona in Dalmatia his native country, to lead a private life; where
he occupied himself in planting trees, and making orchards and gardens, and
would never after be brought to entermeddle with any kind of government, of
what quality soever. Which private li^e liked him so well, that by his own
confession, he then began to live, and to see the clear light of the Sun.
And when afterward in process of time, the States of Rome sent Ambassadors to
desire him, that he would return again to be their Emperor, and take upon
him the government, which (they said) would be profitable (...) the
commonwealth, he would in no wife be (...) to accept it, but answered them,
that (...) they ^aw and A remarkable modef^ie.
could enjoy awhile his quiet life, and the pleasure of the herbs and trees,
which he had sowed and planted in his country, they would never send him any
such embassage; that he had heretofore bestowed great travel for the
commonwealth, and that now God had given him time to travel and live to
himself. And that he could not account any part of his time for life, but
this, which he (...) quietly spent, sithence his return to his country. And
when the Ambassadors replied, that he should have respect to the great
matters which he had done, and not to suffer his victories to receive disgrace
in his time, he answered them, that having set his felicite in the goods and
riches of the mind, it could not be accounted for an unhonest thing in him,
to contemn worldly wealth and dominion, and to profess honest poverty; and
that for confirmation of his opinion, there neither wanted precepts, nor
examples of the wise ancient Philosophers. Among all the heathen histories that
are written, there is not in mine opinion, a more notable example, nor of more
efficacy to persuade men, that feli^iry consists not in temporal and worldly
goods and dominions, than this of Di^lefian. For beginning the course of his
life, in the estate of a poor soldier, and ascending through the favor of
Fortune, and his own virtue and wisdom, from one degree to another, until
he was mounted to the highest dignities among men, to be Emperor of Rome,
and commander of the world, and considering with himself (like a wise man) the
uncertainty and mutability of the things of this life, i^ which nothing has
long continuance, but as it h^th (...) time to increase, so being at the
highest, naturally does diminish again; proponing also to himself, the
examples of diverse great estates, whom Fortune had set upon the top of her
wheel, and seemed to be in the highest degree of felicity, she threw them
down suddenly into extreme miseries, as the Poet speaking of Fortune, truly
says: Et tantum constans in levitate suaeft:
He was only constant in his own lightness.
He gave over all his honors and dominions, to lead a private life, in a
mean estate, that is free from all those troubles and peril;, which always
wait upon high dignities, and dominions. Many goodly persuasions, with much
eloquence have been used, prudent precepts given by wise men, and pithy
reasons, and probable arguments have been brought forth by many, to persuade,
that all these worldly riches and honors which we so greatly esteem, are but
vanities, who never tasted of the things from which they would dissuade men,
and therefore not of that credit and efficacy to edify. Aeschines the
Philosopher says; Words well spoken, do awake and revive the judgment: but
great and manifest examples persuade the heart. For examples be of more
validity than precepts, and we are better taught by good life than by good
words: as the Poet says: Mederis aliis, ipsus ulceribus scatens.
He would cure others, that was himself full of ulcers.


But Dioclefian having passed through all the estates and dignities of this
life, from the meanest to the highest, and thereby the better able, not only
by his own wisdom, but also by his experience, to judge which was the best;
and when he was in the highest place of honor and glory, which men so
earnestly labor for and admire, and take for felicity, to leave all and to
betake himself to a private life and mean estate, may serve for a sufficient
persuasion, that felicity consists not in honor and glory, nor in worldly
wealth and dominion, after the common opinion of men. But a common error
continued, many times stands for a law, and a judgment with authority, for a
truth, and therefore not easy to be dissolved and rooted out. And Dioclesians
opinion is both significantly and briefly confirmed by the Poet: Felix ille
animi, divisque simillimus ipsis
Quem non mendaci resplendens gloria fuco
Sollicitat; non fastosi mala gandia luxus:
Sed tacitos sinit ire dies and paupere cultu
Exigit innocua tranquilla silentia vita.
Happi's that man in mind, and comes most near
Unto the gods, whom glory does not ^meere
With lying dross, nor takes unhappy joy,
In swelling lusts, his nature to destroy:
But in an habit mean, and without strife,
Spends the still hours of his innocuous life.


But the Emperors that succeeded Dioclesian, nor they which were before him,
used the like consideration and foresight, of the troubles and dangers of high
dignities. For th^re is hardly to be found, any kind of death, how vile or
ignominious and strange soever, that any man has suffered, but some of the
Roman Emperors have suffered the like, befides cruel torments, and outrageous
^.
dignities, in their lifetime. The instabilitie of Fortune (usual in high
dignities, which was wisely foreseen by Dioclesian) cannot more manifestly be
proved by the example of many ages, than by the experience of some unhappy
ambitious men in a few years, by this example following. By which if the
ambitious and unb^dled passions, and immoderate desire of honor and
principality, were not of such force and strength, that men's weak minds can
make no sufficient resistance, they would be more effectually warned and
taught, than by all the precepts and persuasions of the wise and learned men
that have treated of that matter, to set their felicity in some other thing,
than in honor and glory; which has been the confusion of a^ infinite number,
and brought them to ^eme misery.

When the Emperor (...) the second, h^d reigned ten years, and seemed then to
live in great security and p^peritic, one Leonctus a Senator of
Constantinople, conspired with others against him; and by the favor of the
people and some of the nobility, he went to the Palace, where finding no
resistance, he apprehended (...), and cut off his nose: and making himself
Emperor, he banished him into Chersonesus; where he li^ed in a poor estate
without a nose. Leoncius having obtained his purpose, and seeing himself in
quiet possession of the Empire, sent an army into Africa against the Saracens.
The General having won the victory, left his Army in good order, and returned
to Constantinople, to yield the Emperor account of his charge. In the mean
time one in the army, having gotten the good will of the soldiers (whom they
afterward called Tiber^s) revolted against Le^cius, and by the favor of the
whole army he was chosen Emperor, with such success, that speedily (...) ^.
at Constantinople, he t^oke Leouc^us, that had bin Emperor three years, and
cut off his nose, as he had done to Instinian, and cast him into prison in a
Monastery, that he might feel the more grief, meaning afterward to put him
to death. He banished also one philippicus into Cephalonia, because he dreamed,
that an Eagle did light upon his head; which he doubted did presage that he
should one day be Emperor. Tiberi^ having quietly reigned six or seven
years, without fear of any man, it fell into his head to put Justinian to
death, suspecting lest he practiced some thing against him. Justinian being
thereof advertised, fled for succor to a Prince in Barbary, who entertained
him well, and promised him his daughter in marriage. But after he had lived
there a time in some hope, and without fear of any further displeasure,
understanding that his new father in law was corrupted with money, and meant to
send him to Tibertus, he fled from thence to the King of Bulgaria, whose
sister he promised to marry. By the aid of this King, Justinian gathered
together an army, and encountering with Tiberius, overthrew him, and recovered
again his Empire (but not his nose) which he could never have done, if
Tiberius had suffered him to live in exile without further molesting him. When
Justinian came to Constantinople, finding Leoncius there in prison, after many
torments, he put him and ^berius to death; and always, as he had occasion to
wipe his nose (if he had had one) he caused-one of his conspirators to be
executed. When Justinian had thus gotten again the possession of his Empire,
he determined to put Philippicus to death, that dreamed of the Eagle, and to be
revenged of the people of Chersonesus, of whom he pretended not to be well
used in his banishment. And raising a power for that purpose, Philipp^cus
having intelligence what was intended against him, like a man desperate,
gathered tog^her such forces as he could, and encountering with the Emperor, he
overcame him, and struck off his head, and of a banish^d man became Emperor.
The like happened to Philippicus, for after he had reigned six months,
Anastasius raised a power against him, and overthrew him, and put out his eyes,
and took from him his Empire: which when he had enj^yed one year, Theodosius
deposed him, and made him a Monk, and himself Emperor. Thus fortune played
with those Princes, sometime lifting up some o^ high, that she might throw them
down with the greater fall; to some giving more than he had before, that she
might at last take all from him; sometime making Emperors exiles, another time
making exiles Emperors; Which agrees aptly with the saying of the Satiricke:
Ille crucem sceleris pretium ferat, hic diadema.
One suffers on the gallows as his meede,
Another crowned in an Imperial weed.


Such is the malice of ambition, that is not always satisfied with the
torments or death of his competitour, except he be also revenged, and use
despites upon his carkase. There was a contention between Sergius and ^ange
ambition in (...).
(...) for the Popedom. Sergius being of greater force, cast the other out of
Saint Peter's chair: who flying into France, found fortune so favorable, that
he recovered again the possession of his place, and died within a little
while after. Sergius the Antipope, rejoyeing in the death of his competitor,
got him into Saint Peter's chair, and burning with a desire to be revenged, he
caused Formosus to be taken out of his grave, and setting him in the Popes
seat, apparelled in a Priests habit, commanded his head to be cut off, and
spoke thus to him: Thou wast Bishop of such a place, why have thou through the
spirit of ambition, usurped the universal seat of the Roman Bishops? When
these sacred ceremonies were finished, he caused his vestiments to be taken
from him, and three of his fingers to be cut off, and his body to be cast
into the river of Tiber.

And this was a horrible fact that was committed by Tyranny.
Pope John the thirteenth, when he had cut off the noses he put out the eyes
of certain Cardinals, because they favored Otho, that meant to depose him,
and set up another in his place. Which Pope was afterward (as some write)
killed by a Roman, because he found him abusing his wife. And as these Popes,
through ambition have committed many outrages and tyrannies, so have they by
the just judgment of God, suffered many indignities, and torments: some
expelled, some banished, some imprisoned, some their eyes put out; as Pope John
the thirteenth. Which examples were sufficient to dissuade men from aspiring to
high dignities, and glorious estate, if their eyes were not bli^ded with the
humor of ambition. And in no estates of life, examples of ambition have been
more apparent, than in the Popedom: two, three, and sometimes four Popes
being at one time, within the space of forty year; who have raised cruel
wars, and contended together most maliciously, to the great effusion of
innocent blood, and to the impoverishing and troubling of all Christendom. But
Benedictus the ninth, Gregory the sixth, and John the third, all three Popes at
one time, used the matter with more moderation, and greater discretion. For
after some contention for the Popedom, one being set up and another put down,
they fell to a friendly composition: and because Saint Peter's chair was not
large enough for them all three to sit together, they divided Christ's garments
(as their writers report) and the revennues of the Church equally between
them, and dwelt neighbourly at Rome together, taking several Churches to their
charge. And here might arise a disputable question of no small difficulty;
which of them was the right Vicar of Christ; A disputable (...).
but I leave it to them to whom it appertains, to be decided, not
appertaining to this matter. A rare example of the inconstancy of fortune among
great Princes, happened to Bajazet, Emperor of the Turks: for, being overcome
in battle by Tamerlan, that of a peasants son became a great Monarch, and
taken prisoner, he caused him to be led with him, in a cage of gold, and to be
fed with crumbs that fell from his table: and when he meant to ride, he used him
for a footstool, to get up to his horse. Valerianus Emperor of Rome, being
taken prisoner by Saper King of the Persians, was used in the like sort, as a
footstool for him to get up to his horse. When Alexander the great had taken
king Porus Prisoner, and asked him what he thought meet for him that was
victor to do with him: Even as this day (quoth P^rus) does admonish thee,
wherein thou see, how uncertain a thing felicity is. Dum versat dubio vitam
fortuna ten^re
Felicem sese dicere (...):
No man can count himself happy at all,
Whom with suspense blind fortune does inthrall.


Darius that mighty Monarch of the Persians, tasted of the like inconstancy of
fortune. For at Alexanders first coming into Asia, being puffed up with pride,
by his great riches and dominion, thinking himself to be in the highest
degree of felicity, he wrote to Alexander a disdainefull and proud letter:
Darius king of kings, and cousin to the gods, to Alexander my servant: I will and
command thee to return home to thy parents, and lie in thy mothers lap, and
learn the duty and part of a man; for which purpose, I have sent thee a pair
of reins of Scythia, a tennise ball, and a purse full of gold; the ball,
because it agrees with thy years; the gold, that thou may therewith buy
what thou lackest. Alexander received A kingly con^ction.
these gifts, as a prognostic of his good fortune: and wrote to him again,
that he had received his gifts: the reins, he meant to use to rule them, that
were now subject to him: the ball did presage, that he should be master of the
world; the gold was a token that he should be master of him, and all his
treasure. Which letter when Darius had read, he sent to the governors of his
country, that he heard there was a young man, the son of Philip, that
overranne his countries of Asia, like one that were mad: he willed them to take
him and whip him with rods like a boy, and send him to him clothed in purple:
and for his noblemen and captains, that they should destroy them and his
navy. But afterward when he was overthrown in battle, and his wife and
children were taken prisoners, himself hardly escaping, Nabarzanes and Beslus
two of his principal captains through an ambitious desire of rule, conspiring
traitorously against Darius, looked for opportunity to kill him. Where of when
Darius was advertised, and counseled by some of his friends, rather to commit
himself to the guard of the Grecians, than to trust his own contrymen,
being predestinate to his chance, he could not then bear any wholesome
counsel; and hearing that such as were accustomed to the guard of his person,
which should have bin his defense in all perils, were fled from him, for fear
of the great number of conspiratours, which they supposed to be coming, he
called some of his friends, and willed them to provide for themselves,
commending their fidelity to their prince, till the last hour. Here (quoth he)
I tarry for the fatal law of my destiny. After which words they filled the
kings lodging and all the camp with mourning and lamentatior. Such as
appertained to the conspiratours, deceived by the con^ed cries and lamentation,
brought tidings to the rest, that the king had killed himself. Whereupon they
galloped thither as fast as they could, and such followed after, as they had
chosen to be ministers of their mischief. When Bessus and Nabarzanes were
entered (...).
into the kings pavilion, hearing by his Eunuchs that he was alive, they
commanded him to be bound. Thus he which before was carried in a chariot, and
honored of his men like a god, was made prisoner by his own servants, and put
into a vile cart, covered over with beasts skins. His men understanding how the
matter passed, all forsook him. But to the intent that Darius should not w^nt
such honor, as was due to his estate, they cau^ed him to be bound with golden
^tters. Such were the despites that his fortune made him subject unto. And for
that he should not be known by his apparel, they covered his chariot with
foul hides of beasts, and c^sed unknown men to drive it forwards. News being
brought to Alexander, that Darius was forsaken of his own men, and either
taken prisoner or slain, he follows after him as speedily as he could. And
when he was come so near them, that the Macedons saw the Persians flying, and
the Persians the Macedons pur^ing them, Bessus and other of his accomplices came
to the cart where Darius was, and persuaded him to leap on hor^backe and fly
from his enemies that were at hand^ but he crying out that the gods were come
to his revenge, and calling for the assistance of Alexander, said, that in no
wise he would go with traitors: wherewith they being exceeding angry, threw
d^s at him, and left him wounded in many places of his body: they thrust in the
beasts also that drew the cart, that they might not be able to go forward, and
slew his two servants that did wait upon him, and fl^d to save themselves.
Within a while after, the beasts that drew Darius wagon, having no man to
govern them, were swarved out of the highway, and wandering here and there,
had drawn Darius four ^rlongs from the place where he was wounded, into a
valley, where they fainted by reason of their heat and hurts. And as
Polistratus a Macedon came that way, to drink of a spring being overcome with
thirst, he espied, as he was drinking out of an helmet, the beasts that were
thrust in with darts, and looking into the foul cart, he found the body of a
man half dead, and at length he perceived it was Darius, that lay there sore
wounded, gasping for breath. Then he brought him to a Persian that he had
taken prisoner, whom when Darius knew by his voice to be of his country, he
took it for a comfort of his present fortune, that he should speak before he
died, to one that understood him, and not ^ter his last words in vain; he
required him to declare unto Alexander, that though he had never deserved any
thing at his hands, yet it was his chance to dye greatly his debtour, and had
great thanks to give him, for the G^ude in death.
favor and goodness he had showed to his mother, his wife, and children, to
whom he had not only granted life, but also the reverence of their former
estate and dignity; whereas he of his kinsmen and friends, to whom he had given
both life and lands, was now by them bereaved of all. He prayed therefore that
he might always be victor, and that the Empire of the whole world might (...)
into his hands: requiring him that he would not neglect to revenge so soul an
act; not only for his cause, but for an example, and the love of other
Princes: which should be a thing honorable to him, and profitable in time to
come. When he had spoken these words, he fainted, and calling for water,
after he had drunk, said to Polistratus that presented it to him; whatsoever
thou art, this is unto me the last misery in all my adverse fortune, that I am
not able to require thee this benefit, but Alexander shall reward thee; and the
gods shall require him, for his great humanity and clemency, showed toward
mine: unto whom in my behalf thou shall give my hand, as a pledge of a kings
promise. And having spoken these words, and given to Polistratus his hand, he
dyed. When his sayings were reported to Alexander, he repaired where the dead
corpse lay, and there bewailed with tears, that it was his chance to dye a
death so unworthy of so great an estate: and taking off his own cloak to
cover the dead corpse, adorning Curtefie (...) a (...).
also the same with all things that appertained to a king, he sent it to his
mother to be buried, in such sort as the count^ie manner was to bury kings, and
to be laid among the rest of his predecessors. This was the miserable end of
this mighty monarch, which may be an example to all estates, that f^licitie
consists not in abundance of treasure and glorious dominion, wherein this man
exceeded all the Princes of his time: and which also discovers the mutable
estate of Princes, when of the infelicity of the one depends the felicity of
the other. Which mutability of humane matters, the Poet in few words does well
set forth: Omnia sunt hominum tenni pendentia filo;
Et subito casu qua valucre r^.
No man can count himself happy at all,
Whom with suspense, blind Fortune does inthrall.


And Bessus one of them that murdered Darius, for the desire of rule, was
afterward taken prisoner, and committed by Alexander to Darius brother, that
he should cut off his nose, and ears, and hang him upon a A (...) reward.
cross, causing his own men to shoot him through with arrows. One says,
that Prince which has more than all other, enjoys least of any other: for
the Prince that possesses much, is always occupied in defending it, but the
Prince that has little, has leisure quietly to enjoy it.

Abraham king of Marocco was driven to such extremity, by a preacher called
Elmaheli, who had raised a power against him, and overthrew him in the field,
that being void of all hope of succor, he stale forth of the town in the
night on horseback, and took the Queen his wife behind him, and being come
to the top of a high rock that stood upon the sea coast, he put spurs to
his horse and fell down headlong, he and his Queen, tumbling from one place
to another until they were torn in pieces. The instability of high dignities,
and the grief for the loss of them, was effectually set forth by lamentable
verses made by a Pope, called Baltazar Cossa, when he was thrust out of Saint
Peter's chair, and cast in prison, strangely presaged by the report of Nicholas
Clemangie. This Pope was a very wicked man, and being forced from his place,
assembled nevertheless a Council of some few strangers and Italians, his
favorites: wherein consultation was had of some vain matters, nothing
appertaining to the utilitie of the Church; but before the first session, when
they had prayed (as the manner is) for the assistance of the holy Ghost, and
the fathers were set in their places, and the Pope in a high place above them
all, there comes an Owl, which always ^
brings with him, a prognosticke of evil fortune, and alighteth upon a beam
in the middle of the Church, singing in his natural tune, and looked
continually in the Popes face. And every man marvelled to see this unfortunate
bird (that flies the light) so boldly in the middle of the day to sit among
such an assembly of people, ominating some evil to follow: the Pope, upon whom
the Owls eyes were earnestly fastened, chafed and sweat, and being in a great
agony, dismissed the Council, and departed. At the next session, the Owl
comes to the same place again, and beholds the Pope as he did before, who
being more ashamed than he was the other day, commands this unlucky bird to
be feared away with crying and clapping of hands. But the Owl would not be
removed away from the place, The death of the (...) the death of the P^e.
until she was stricken with a staff, and fell down dead among them. The
Council not long after was to the shame of the Pope dissolved, and he deposed,
and cast in prison: where he beway led his fortune, with these doleful verses:
Qu^ modo summus ^ram latatus nomine Pr^ful,
(...) and abjectus, nunc mea fat a gemo.
Excelsus solio nuper versabar in al^o,
Cunctaque gens pedibus ofcula prona dabas.
Nunc ego p^narum fundo dev^lvor in imo;
Vultum deformem, pallidaque or a gero.
Omnibus e terris, aurum (...) sponte ferebant;
Sed nec gaza juvat, nec (...) adest.
Sic varians fortuna vices adversa secundis
Subdit, and ambiguo numine ludit atrox.
Cedat in exemplum cunctis, quos gloria toll^t
Vertice de summo mox ego Papucado.
I the glad name of Pope who had but late,
Now (most deceived) mourn mine own sad fate;
Once lifted to a throne sublime, where placed,
Nations to crouch and kiss my feet were graced:
Am now cast down into pains lowest abyss,
Pallid my look, deformed my countenance is:
Then from all nations I had store of gold,
But now nor wealth, nor friend can I behold.
Such is the change of Fortune, good with bad
She mingles. So naught certain can be had:
All such whom glory swells with proud ostent,
Make me (once Pope) their woeful president.


In our fathers time Tomombey Sultan of Egypt, Atabalixa king of Peru, and
Mutexuma king of Mexico, lost both their kingdoms and lives in a short time,
in a miserable sort, the one dying in prison, the other with a soft fire burnt
and smothered to death: the third shamefully hanged in his own town. Apreyes
king of Egypt persuaded himself and would vaunt, that he had so established
and fortified his kingdom, that none either of the gods, or of men could take
it from him. But being overcome in battle by the Persians, he was taken
prisoner, and after he had been kept some time in prison, he was strangled.

The great Prince Saladine after he had won Jerusalem, lying in his death bed,
and considering with himself, what vanity was in the pomp and glory of this ^
world, commanded his (...) to be hanged upon a pole, and car^ied through
(...), in the sight of all men, and to be cried: Behold Saladine the conqueror
of Asia, of so great a kingdom, and such abundance of riches, he carri^th
nothing with him but this. But Alexander ^
the Great used not the like modesty, but contrariwise being puf^ed up with
pride, and vain glory after his victories, he could not bear the greatness
of his fortunes, with that virtue he wan them. But being more desirous of
glory, than able to receive it, he commanded himself to be called the son of
Jupiter, and to be honored as a God. And whilst he went about to increase the
glory of his acts, he corrupted and defaced them with such vain titles. For he
received more mockes of the wiser sort, than adorations of his flatterers. When
he had sent to the Cities of Greece to have his new title of Godhead to be
confirmed by public authority, and the matter being had in consultation, one
steppeth up and said; Well seeing Alexander will needs have it so, let us make
him a god. A frumpe worthy of such a vain glorious petition. And as Cleo, an
Italian of Sicilia, given to flattery both by his own nature, and by the
custom of his country, had used persuasions, and set down a form to honor
Alexander as a God: Callistenes being of a contrary opinion; Are not they
goodly gods Cl^o (quoth he) that thou and I can make? I pray thee let me prove
thy power, if thou can make a god, first make a king: it is much more easy
to give a worldly kingdom, than the possession of heaven. But flattery was
never better rewarded, than by M. Antonius the Triumvir. For when he entered
into Athens, all the Citizens having first prepared exceeding great honors for
his entertainment, went to meet him, and they being desirous to win his
favor, used this kind of flattery: They told Antonius that they had in their
city the goddess Minerva which wanted a husband, and ^
were desirous to give him her to wife, who was the god Bacchus. Antonius being
offended with their shameless flattery, said that he was content to accept her
for his wife: but I will have (quoth he) a thousand talents for her dowry,
which is requisite for so great a marriage. But the Emperor Commodus used more
severity, or rather cruelty in punishing flattery. Certain young gentlemen of
Commodus chamber, understanding that Ebutianus was put to death for weeping and
lamenting the death of the Consul Byrrius: and Apollaustus another Senator,
for bemoning the death of Ebutianus, the day that Apollaustus was executed,
thinking to please the prince, made show of great mirth and joy for the death
of Apollaustus. Which being known to Commodus, he commanded their throats to
be cut, saying, that for any act done by the prince, they ought neither to
laugh nor weep, but hear and see and hold their peace. Xerxes the great
monarch of Persia, being unmeasurably overcome with pride and vainglory,
after the bridge which was made to transport his army over the sea called
Hellespont, was overthrown by the tempest and raging of the sea, he with such
arrogance, disdaining that the elements would not be obedient to him, commanded
the sea to be beaten with 300 stripes, and a pair of fetters to be cast A
kings ^diculous solly.
into it, and sent messengers to burn marks in it with a hot iron, and to
beat it, saying, O bitter water, thy Lord does thus punish thee, because thou
have hurt him, that deserved no evil of thee; yet the king Xerxes, will pass
over thee whether thou will or not: neither does any man sacrifice to thee,
because thou art a deceitful and bitter river. To such madne^e and vanity,
glory and dominion brought him, that he would seem to be exalted above the
condition of men. But what may be said of them, that take upon them to make
Saints, as the other would be made a God? and as this arrogated to himself a
power over the sea, so they will command the Angels in heaven, that there may
be nothing wanting to the fullness of their power? Yea and that their madness
and extreme folly and wickedness, may be in the highest degree, without
possibility to extend it self any further, these titles and power, the Popes
do challenge by the gift of their parasites.

That God rati^th whatsoever the Pope does: the will of the Pope is a rule of
equity and right: That the Pope can do absolutely in this world whatsoever
God does; because he is all things and above all things. And if he change his
mind, it is to be presumed that God does also change his mind. And if the Pope
carry with him many thousands of souls into hell, yet no man may say, why do
you so? That all power is given to the Pope both in heaven and in earth: That
he may extend himself to heavenly, earthly, and infernal things: That it is
not lawful to appeal from the Pope to God: That the Pope may decree against
the Epistles of Paul, because he is greater than Paul: and also that he may
decree against the old Testament, because he is greater (...)
than all the authors of the old Testament. Yet their ambition and desire of
vainglory would not suffer them here to stay, but it was searched and
disputed among them and their parasites, whether the Pope might decree things
contrary to the Gospel? whether he were not above Peter in power? whether he
were a pure man, or else as it were God: It was also disputed in their
schools, not very many years sithence, whether the Pope did participate both
natures, divine and humane, like unto our Lord Jesus Christ. It is like that
he is some strange kind of creature, that they cannot tell what manner a thing
he is, nor what to make of him. And therefore it may be that he is of the
nature and essence of a woman, or one that was taken for a woman in Italy,
whose condition was set forth in an Epitaph, thus: Aelia, L^lia, Crispis; nec
vir, nec mulier, nec Andtogyna, nec puella, nec inven^, nec anus; nec casta,
nec casta, nec pudica; sedomnia: nec meretrix, nec aquis, nec terris, sedubique
tacet.

Aelia, Laelia, Crispis; nor Man, nor Woman, nor Hermophradite, nor Virgin,
Young woman, nor Beldame, nor Chaste, nor Whore, nor Modest, but all of these:
she lies neither in the air, nor water, nor earth, but every where.



Who will marvel at the promises that the kings of Mexico make when they are
first chosen, that will compare them with the power the Popes arrogate to
themselves: that the Sun shall hold his course and brightness, that the
clouds shall rain, the rivers shall run, and the earth shall bring forth all
kinds of fruit. But what is it that these ^atterers of the Popes will shame to
speak, to win or continue their favor: (...) ^ndacia sunt opes and aurum:
^gunt quaque volunt, put antquc palmam
Mentiri (...).
Lies are to them, their wealth, their gold,
As feigning all things that they would.
The glorious palm they seek to gain,
Untruths by speaking and things vain.


What wickedness has been in many Popes, their o^ne authors do testify,
besides many that gave themselves to the Devil, and were notable Necromancers,
Some (...).
as has been said before, and by that means came by the Popedom. Pope
Marcellinus sacrificed to the Gentiles Idols. Pope John the three and twentieth
taught, that there was no life after this. For which cause he was called by
the Council of Constance a Devil incarnate. And diverse of them were of such
wickedness and infidelity, that they were by the authority of Councels
rejected, not only for heresy, but also for atheism. And yet these men would
be taken for the Vicars of Christ, that rather resemble viceroyes of Satan.
Pope Clement in a Bull kept in lead in Vienna in France, commanded the Angels
of heaven, to bring the soul of him that went to Rome in pilgrimage for
pardons, and returned discharged of purgatory, to the perpetual joys of
heaven: saying moreover; We will not that the torm^nts of hell be inflicted
upon him in any sort. Granting also to them that be marked with the sign of
the cross, at their vows and prayers, power to take out of purgatory three or
four souls, such as they list. But here he seems to me, to commit an error
in a preposterous sort, that he had not first let men believe that he could
give power to a man to take out of purgatory three or four souls such as he
list, and then afterward to persuade them, that he had power to command Angels,
to bring men the next way to heaven: and that no torments of hell should be
inflicted upon them that went to Rome for pardons. The Priest seemed in his
own conceit to proceed by degrees in better order to persuade, that went up
into the pulpit to preach to his parishioners, and took for his text the The
(...) of a Pr^eft.
Gospel where Christ fed with a few fishes four thousand people. And when he
was entered into his Sermon, Yea (quoth he) and he confirmed his doctrine with
a great miracle; he fed with a few fishes four hundred people. The clarke
that stood under the pulpit, hearing him say four hundred, stepped up to him;
Ye mistake the matter, Sir (quoth he) it was not four hundred, it was four
thousand. Peace soole (quoth the Priest) let them believe this first.

The virtue that flowed so plentifully from this Pope brings to my
remembrance a pleasant story of a mischance that happened to a present sent by
a Pope, which he had sanctified with the like virtue, as the other had done by
his Bull. In the civil wars of France the Cardinal of Loreyne, was a great
maintainer of the Guisians faction, and persecuted v^hemently the Protestants.
The Pope to gratify him for his great care, and pains taken in defense of his
religion and authority, sent him a table wherein was painted our Lady, with a
little child in her arms, representing Christ, by the most excellent and
famous painter in Christendom, and consecrated with his own hands, and
enclosed it in a case of silk, and a letter withal, giving him thanks and
high commendations for his travel and providence in maintaining the Catholic
religion: signifying to him also that in recompense of his pains he had sent
him such a table, painted by the famous man whom he named, and consecrated
with his own hands. The messenger that carried this present, chanced to fall
sick in a town in Italy, before he came to the Alps, and finding there one ^
this present to the (...) When he (...) where the Cardinal was, he presented
to him the table and (...); which when he had read, he laid the table upon
his bed, and would not open it, until he might do (...) with greater (...).
For this purpose he (...) the Duke of Guise to dinner, with diverse other
noblemen, and gentlemen of the (...), and alliance of the Guises. But in the
meanetime one that liked not the Cardinal, having intelligence of this
present, found the (...) to steal it secretly out of the case, and to put in
another table which he had prepared for the purpose, and shut up the case
again so cunningly, that what was done A pretty jug^g.
could not be perceived, and laid it upon the bed, where he found it. When the
day was come to celebrate this feast, and the Cardinal and his guests were set
at the table, he caused the Popes letter to be openly read. When they heard
of the present, they could no longer forbear the fight of it, nor would (...)
any more (...) until it were brought in place. Then by the Cardinals
commandment, this holy thing was brought with great solemnity to the table,
every man expecting with a kind of reverence, what manner of thing that should
be, that was sanctified by the holy hands of so stately a (...), and sacred
person, and made by so good a workman. The table was taken out of the case, in
thesight of the Cardinal, and all his guests, wherein was painted in place of
our Lady and her child, the Cardinal of Lorreyne stark naked, the Queen
mother, the young Queen of Scots, and the old Duchess of Gui^ naked also,
hanging about the Cardinals (...), and (...) legs (...) between his legs.
When the (...) and his guests saw how their exoec^tion was (...) what a
confusion there was among them, every ^ ^
that are sent from Rome by the Pope^, (...) world, are obeyed of the Angels
and Devils, they are not so dangerous (thanks be to God) among men as they
have (...), (...) so much regarded. It (...) to be appropriate to that (...)
city of Rome, fith^e the Popes have been in so great authority, that great
(...) should be there wrought, by Bu^s, if it be lawful to allude to their
name. P^lus lovi^s repo^eth of a great pestilonce in Rome, in Pope Hadrians
time, which was like to have consumed all the people, if a Grecian called
Demetrius had not undertaken to stay it. He caused a wild Bull to be taken,
and after he had cut off one of his horns in the midst, and whispered a
charm in his right ^are, the Bull became presently so tame, that he tied a
little string to the whole home, and lead him to the Amphitheater, where he
sacrificed him; whereupon the rage of the disease began immediately to
assuage. But this may seem strange, that this Necromancer, a stranger, and an
instrument of Satan, employed his natural Bull to the safeguard of the people
of Rome: and the Popes that call themselves the Vicars of Christ and take upon
them to protect his people, employ their unnatural Bulls, to the destruction
and subversion of whole kingdoms and countries; arming and exciting Emperors
and Kings, against their subj^s, and subjects against their Princes. But the
Gospel (thanks ^
be to God) where it is professed, has so charmed that savage beast, and
abated his force and fury, that children deride him, which was wont to be
dreadful to mig^ Princes, and terrible to all the world. The old Ro^ had a
certain kind of soothsayers in great estimation among them, called (...), that
had invented a Science to divine of things ^o come, by the ^lying Their (...)
found out by the bea^ten.
and voices of birds. But Cato having espied the vanity and illusion of them
and their Science, would say, that he marvelled how those soothsayers, when
they chanced to meet together in the streets, could forbear to laugh one
upon another. And may not we likewise think it a hard matter, for the Pope
and his Cardinals to ^orbeare to smile one upon another, when consultation is
had among them, to send their Bulls abroad, which they know to be nothing but
vanity and illusion? But their greatness is greatly decayed, which was foreseen
of Luther, who seemed by this verse pronounced in his death bed to prophes^e of
the Popes fall, whose credit and authority we see plainly to be in
declination. Pestis eram vivens, moriens (...) mors ero Papa.
(Oh Pope) I am thy plague whilst I have breath,
And dying, I will be thy fatal death.


Which prediction was not in vain: For he has given him such a deadly wound,
that all his Jesuits and Seminaries, with the rest of his Cloyster-men, will
never be able to heal. When Frederike Duke of Saxony, had desired Erasmus, to
tell him plainly, whether Luther did err in the matter then in controversy,
and Erasmus had answered him, that Luther was of a good opinion: why then
(quoth the Duke) be they so spiteful against my ^illy Monk? wherein has be
offended, that they so persecute him? O noble prince (said Erasmus) A witty
saying of Erasmus.
he has committed two very great finnes, be has taken away the crown from
the Pope and Bishops, and the belly from the Monks. Which brings to my
(...), a jest of a merry fellow, who hearing a Monk say that the way to
obtain forgiveness of men's fine was by giving of alms, and especially to the
Monks: he gave them alms and fed them more plentifully than before: and when
there happened any talk of offenses against God, he would say, that the Monks
had eaten up all his sins.

CHAP. III.
Of diverse that came to be Popes by Necromancy: Benedictus the ninth: Sylvester
the second: Boniface the eighth: Contention betwixt the Augustine ^riars, and
other Orders: Of Pope Gregory the seventh: The incomparable pride of sundry
Popes, illustrated by history: Of Pope Joan: Pride punished in Herod, and
derided by Philip king of Macedon: Of Calanino, Simon Magus, and Cynops, three
notable Magicians: Tritemius a learned Abb^t: Albertus Magnus: Pope Gregory the
seventh: An epistle writ from Beelzebub, to the Clergy: The Earl of Mascon:
Spanish Magdalen: The fickleprophet Mahomet: Salmoxes: Of a Pilgrim whocounter
feiting sanctity, became Monarch of many kingdoms: A prodigious Child borne
in Babylon: The storte of Nicolana, Dambrie.

BUt to return from whence we digressed, the ambition of the heathens, that
lived after the world, and knew not God, is not so much to be marvelled at, if
we look into the lives of some Christians, that forbear not any unlawful
means to aspire to the highest places of honor; and especially of them in
whose (...) pect^ all knowledge lies hidden, that prosesse by title all
humility; calling themselves the servants of the servants of God; but indeed
aspire and take upon them to be the master of the masters of the world. Whereof
though their own histories may afford many examples, yet for brevities sake
we will make choice of a few. Alexander the sixth, a very ambitious man,
mistrusting by like the favor or power of the holy Ghost, by whose help we
must believe, that the Popes are chosen, by joining together the Cardinals
consent, to make choice of the holiest man (a matter of no small difficulty) by
corrupting the Cardinals with money, which was no rare thing in those days,
was made Pope. Which time and manners seems to agree with the Poets saying:
Aurea nunc vere sunt secula, plurimus auro
Venit honos.
This is the golden age, not that of old:
For now all honor's to be bought with gold.


Wherein they were greatly overseene so to discred^ the sincerity of their
election, and make themselves subject to obloquie, that had always the holy
Ghost so ready at their commandment, as it seems by the report of Paulus
Iovius. For when the general Council sat at Trent, the posts went so fast
between the Pope and them, that it was commonly spoken by the Italians A ^est
of some Papists.
as they saw the passing by; there goes the holy Ghost enclosed in a box,
from Rome to Trent, viz. to inspire the Council, what the Pope would have
decreed. The Emperor Charles the fifth, and the French king sent the holy
Ghost accompanied with Angels to Rome to the Cardinals to help elect the Popes
that were chosen in their times, as is reported.

The Devil showed a strange example upon Benedi^ the ninth, who through his
wickedness and ^orcery was called Maledictus, and was killed by the Devil
(...) a wood. This Pope after he was dead, or rather Satan in his habit, was
met by a Hermit, his body like a Bear, tail like an Ass, a myter upon his
head, and a Cope These (...) his governo^ent.
upon his back: the Hermit knowing him by his habit, and not by his face or
form, which resembled so many kinds of bruit beasts, asked him how it chanced,
that he was fallen into such a metamorphosis? Because (quoth he) in my Popedom
I lived without law, I now wander like a beast.

Pope Sylvester the second, called before Gilbert, a Frenchman borne, came by
the Popedom, as Platina, Nauclerus, Benno, the Cardinal, and others report,
by the help of the Devil. In his youth he became a Monk; A ^refull ^lling off.
but for saking the Monastery, he followed the Devil, to whom he had wholly
given himself, and went to Hispalis, a City in Spain, for learnings sake:
where his hap was to insinuate himself, into the favor of a Saracen
Philosopher, skillful in Magic. In this man's house he saw a book of
Necromancy, which he was desirous to steal away. But the book being very
warily and safely kept by the Saracens daughter, with whom he had familiar
acquaintance, at last he wan her favor, that he might secretly take it away,
and read it over. Which when he had gotten into his possession, with promise
to deliver it again, he determined to depart thence, fearing nevertheless
what danger he might fall into, by his theft. After he had escaped this
danger, being overcome with ambition, and a divellish defire to rule, he
obtained first by corruption, the Archbishopricke of Reymes, and afterward that
of Ravenna, and at last the Popedom, as is said before, by the help of the
Devil; upon condition that after his death, he should be wholly his, by whose
subtilty, he had attained to that high dignity. And although in his Popedom
he dissembled his Necromancy, yet he kept in a secret place a Brazen head, of
whom he received answer of such things, as he was disposed to demand of the
Devil. At length when this Gilbert, desirous to reign long, asked the Devil
how long he should live Pope, the wicked spirit answered him cunningly after
his manner, that if he came not to Jerusalem, he should live long. And as it
happened him to say Mass, after he had reigned four years and somewhat more,
in a Church called the holy Cross at Jerusalem, he fell suddenly into an
extreme fever, and knew by the rumbling and noise of the Devil (who looked for
performance of his promise) that his time was come to dye. But he falling into
an earnest repentance, and openly confessing his impiety, and familiarity with
the Devil to the people, bewailed his grievous offense committed against God,
and exhorted all men, to beware of ambition, and the subtlety of the Devil,
and to lead an honest and godly life. When he perceived that death approached,
he desired, that his hands and tongue might be cut off, because with them he
had blasphemed God, and sacrificed to the Devil, and then that his mangled
carkase, as it had deserved, might be laid in a cart, and the horses driven
forth without any guide, and where they did of their own accord stay, that
there his body might be buried. All which things being done, the horses stayed
when they came against a Church of Lateran, where they took him forth and
buried him. Whereby men conjecture, that through his repentance God had showed
him mercy. Nevertheless whatsoever Gods great mercy.
became of his soul, the Devil would not leave his old acquaintance with his
body in many years after. For their writers report, that a little before the
death of many Popes that succeeded him, his bones should be heard to rattle,
and his tomb would ^weate. By which signs men knew that a Pope would shortly
dye. But if a common custom had not altered the case, and qualified the
greatness of the fault, it would have seemed strange, that they which profess
themselves to be Vicars of Christ, should be so familiarly acquainted with
the Devil. For there were eighteen Popes Necromancers, one succeeding
another, as some write. Tantum exempla valent, adeo est imitabilis error.
Examples are of such validity that even errors are imitated.


Bonifacius the eight relying upon his own crafty wit which he thought was
sufficient to bring him to the Popedom, practiced this device. He used to put
a rcede through a hole, into Pope Celestinus chamber, fast by his beds head,
and in the night he would speak through the reed, and tell the Pope, that if
he meant to save his soul, he must yield over his Popedom to such a man,
Simplicity in bu^ility.
naming himself. The simple Pope supposing he had bin warned by a voice from
heaven, for his souls health, called the Cardinals together, and told them,
that he was determined to give over his Popedom, and desired their consent to
Bonifacius. In this sort Bonifacius became Pope, and when he was dead, there
went a common proverb of him, that he crept in like a Fox, governed like a
Wolf, and died like a Dog. And what was it but a desire to increase their
glory and reputation, that invented their myters, adorned with peatle and
precious stones, and other their masking garm^s and habits of strange form,
though they pretend a vain signification of things by the^, in maintaining of
which toys they are so curious, as sometime that has mi^stred occasion of
much controversy among them, which children would take for trifler to play
with.

Cornelius Agrippa reports of a contention between the Augustine Friars, and
other religious men, whether Saint Augustine did wear a black stole upon a
white weed, or a white stole upon a black weed. This matter was brought
before the Pope, and when Vain cutio^.
upon search of the Scriptures, nothing could be found to prove the one or the
other, order was taken by the Judges, that images should be sought, and
pictures: by which example, says Cornelius Agrippa, I being desirous to know
the beginning of Cowles, and could find nothing in the Scriptures to serve the
turn, I resorted to the Cloisters of the Monks and Friars, where are usually
painted the histories of the old and new Testament. And when I could find in
the old Testament none of the Patriarchs, nor Prophets, nor Levites, wearing a
Cowle, I perused the new Testament, and finding there Simeon, Zacharias, John
Baptist, Joseph, Christ, his Apostles and Disciples, the Scribes and Pharisees,
Bishops and many others, all without Cowles, marvelling at it, as I was about
to peruse them over again, in the very beginning of the history, I found the
Devil painted with a Cowle, he that tempted Christ in the desert. Then was I
glad (quoth he) that I had found that among the pictures, which I could find in
no books, That the Devil was the first author of the Cowle: of whom I suppose
the Monks, and Friars afterward borrowed it under diverse colors, or received
it, as it were by inheritance from him. The like may be said of these men,
that was spoken by Campanus of ^call Poets: ^
^
Foolish mad Poets live, but so deserve,
That take their trifles from them they would sterve.


So their life and reputation is maintained by superstitious ceremonies, and
disguised habits: take away their frivolous toys and they will dye with hunger.

And as these principal Prelates have come to this glorious place by unlawful
means, so have many of them used it with intolerable pride, unmeete for a
Christian. What is it but an excessive desire of glory, that causes them to
make Emperors and Kings kiss their foot, and hold their stirrup when they
get up to horse, and lead him by the bridle, and walk by them on foot, as
though they were his servants? What a presumptuous part was it of Pope Gregory
the seventh, (...).
to make the Emperor Henry the fourth, stand three days and three nights at
his gate, bare-foote, and bare legged, with his wife and children, in the deep
of winter, in frost and snow, to entreat for absolution? And what pride and
vainglory, was in Pope Alexander the third, that made Frederick the Emperor
at Venice fall down before him to the ground, and ask him forgiveness,
whilst he trod upon his neck, and pusht him twice: and to show a more
arrogancy, he used the place of Scripture, for a cloak and pretense, saying,
Super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis. But Pencerus ^teth, that one of the
Emperors Gentlemen, came to help him up, with such a frowning and threatening
countenance, that for fear he thrust himself into the Emperors arms, from
whence the Pope durst not depart until the Emperor had assured him from
harm. And was not the like in Pope Celestinus, that put the cro^ upon the
Emperor Henry the sixth his head, not with his hand, but with his foot, and
threw it down from his head again with his foot, affirming also, that he had
power to make Emperors, and depose them? And what pride was in the Pope, that
cast Francis Dandalus Duke of Venice, king of Cre^, and Cyprus under An in
(...) of that Ta^e did to (...).
his table, to gnaw bones among dogs? Pope Julius the second was nothing
inferior in pride and presumptuousnesse to these his predecessors: for after
he had received many and great benefits of the French king Jews the twelfth,
yet envying his prosperous success in Italy, whose neighborhood he liked
not, he sent forth his Bulls of excommunication against him, and pronounces
the king to be an heretic, and gave away his kingdom to him that could first
possess it. And also the kingdom of Navarre from this man's ancestor, for no
other cause but that he took part with the French king; by which title the
king of Spain holds it to this day. And when he had stirred almost all the
kings and nations round about against the French king, and also caused certain
libels to be dispersed through Italy, by which he did not only excite the
people against the French nation, but also gave every one pardon for his
sins, that would kill any Frenchman: by means whereof there was a horrible
slaughter of the French people through all Italy. And perceiving nevertheless
that all this wrought not that effect he looked for, the Frenchmen standing
like loyal subjects with their King against the Pope, he determined to prove
whether the sword would do, that the keys could not bring to pass. He
gathers together an army, and forth of Rome he marches toward the King,
well armed like a man of war, though very old, an infinite number of people
standing round about him, to behold this un^onted tragedy. And as he beheld
them gazing, as it were expecting some strange matter, he said with a loud
voice: Seeing Saint Peter's keys will do us no pleasure, let us now draw Paul's
sword: and immediately he casts the keys into the river of Tyber, and
taking a naked sword in his hands, he shows it in warlike sort to all A p^y
construction.
the people. This Pope seemed to have no meaning that either himself or his
flock should enter into heaven, seeing he cast away the keys, that should
let them in. The like pride and vaineglory was apparent in Bonisacius the eight
before named, for which he suffered condign punishment. In his time was the
year of Iubilee solemnized at Rome, where was a wonderful concourse of people
out of all parts, according to the doting simplicity and blindness of that
time. The first day of the Iubilee the Pope showed himself publicly to the
people, (...) attired in his pontificalibus. The second day he showed himself
in the habit and sumptuous attire of an Emperor, a naked sword borne before
him, triumphantly like a coaquerour, pronouncing alowd, that he had both the
heavenly and earthly Empire. This was the Gospel he preached to the people
that came to this Iubil^e. He testified also his pride sufficiently, by an
arrogant and impudent letter, sent to Philip the fair, King of France.

Bonifacius Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to A peremptory letter.
Philip king of France: fear God, and keep his commandments. We will you to
know that in spiritual and temporal things you are subject to us: the gifts
of benefices and preb^nds belongs nothing to you: and if you have the custody
of any that are void, ^eepe the profits thereof to their (...): and if you have
bestowed any of them, we decree the same gift to be of none effect, and we
revo^e, how far soever it has proceeded: they that believe otherwise, we
account them fools. Given at Lateran the fourth of the (...) of A prince like
answer.
December, in the sixth year of our (...). The king answered him thus. Philip
by the grace of God king of France, to Bonifacius that takes himself for the
chief Bishop. Be it known to your extreme foolishness, that in temporal
things we are not subject to any: that the gift of certain Churches and
prebends, being void, belongs to us by our Regal right, and to receive
their fruits, and to defend them against all the possessours; and them that
believe otherwise, we account fools and mad men. Given, etc. This Pope sent
out his Bulls of excommunication against this king, pronouncing him an
heretic, and gave away his kingdom. But the king after he had long suffered
a great many intolerable injuries and indignities, being unwilling any longer
to endure his pride and ambition, sent two hundred horsemen toward the Pope,
who handled the matter so, that they took the Pope in a town in Italy, and
brought him prisoner to Rome, from whence he had withdrawn himself for
fear, and put him in prison in his own Castle of Saint Angelo, where he fell
into a frenzy, and knawing and eating his own hands, dyed a miserable death.
This disdainefull answer to this proud Priest puts me in mind of a short
answer, aptly made in our time by the French king, Henry the second, to the
Pope the^ being, who after the custom of his predecessors, pr^suming to offer
injuries to the king, and seeing himse^ unable (his (...)) to ^ch the king who
made warre^with with him, sent emb^dours to him to treat of peace: who told him
from their masters mouth, that he had done the Pope many wrongs, for the which
he did appeal him before the tribunal sear of Jesus Christ in heaven. Yet
(...) being desirous of peace, he craved his consent to the articles which he
had sent. The king answered the ambassadors, that he would accept of the
conditions, and would also answer the matter in heaven: but I doubt (quoth the
king) I A (...) answer.
shall not find the Pope there. A dangerous heresy, that doubt should be
made, of the Vicar of Christ's going to heaven. And it is worthy the noting,
that Valdemarking of Denmark wrote to a Pope, that went about to trouble his
estate, by arrogating to himself a power over him, as their manner is: We
would have it known to you (says the king) that we have our life of God,
nobility of our parents, our kingdom of our subjects, our faith of the Church
of Rome, which if you envy in us, we return the same to you again, by these
presents. And it is reported that Rodolph now Emperor, so soon as he was
elected, promised by his ^bafladours reverence to Pope Gregory the xiij. and
obedience to the Church: but to the Pope himself, he denied that obedience he
challenged to be due to him. But to return to show further of the events of
pride and vainglory.

The Emperor Henry the fourth being at Go^ar at Church upon Whitsonday to
hear mass, there fell a great contention between the Abbot of Fulda, and the
Bishop of Hildeseme, which of them should sit (...) to the Archbishop of (...);
insomuch that there (...) parts taken on both sides, and the quarrel so (...)
^sued, that (...) words they (...) to blows, and many (...), on both (...).
When the matter was appeased, the Priest proceeded in his mass, and as he sang
his last verse appertaining to the mass of the holy Ghost, (...) diem (...);
that is, This day thou have made glorious; the devil being under the vault of
the Church sung with a great base voice; Hunc diem (...): that is, This day I
have made warlike. By these ambitious manners, they think to climb up to
heaven, for which (...) was from thence thrown down into hell.

But why should they aspire to possess that high dignity, with such pride, as
peculiar to men of excellency, when a simple woman became Pope through her
own industry, and governed the Church two years and more A woman (...).
with as much credit as some others; until she had committed a little fault,
the like whereof has been done by other masculine Popes? This woman was of
our nation (as some say, and others say of Germany) being in love with a
learned yongman, in her youth, she apparelled her self like a man, and
calling her self John, she went with him to Athens, which then flourished in
all kinds of learning. And giving her self there to (...), she profited so in
learning, that after a certain time, desirous to visit Rome, she read openly
in the schools in the habit of a Doctor, and behaved her self so (...) in
public disputations, that she was accounted equal in fame with the best
learned men of her time. By which she had gotten such credit and authority
(the Sea being void by the death of Leo the fourth, in the year of our Lord
God, eight hundred fifty two) (...) she being taken for a man, was made Pope,
and (...) the Church two year and more. But by chance (...) grew into such
familiarity with one of her servants, that she became, with child: Fortunanon
(...) genus: And as according to a certain usual solemnity, she went to
visit Saint John of Lateran, her time being come, she was delivered of a
child, in a place between Saint Clements Church, and a Theater called Coliseo
with great pain. In detestation of which act, the Popes use to avoid that
place, and to turn aside another way, when they have occasion to pass through
the street. And when any Pope was after to be chosen, he was set in a chair
That (...) is called the (...).
with a hole through the seat, that they might feel whether he were a man. All
which argues the credit of the report made by their own writers, who also
affirm, that in the same street, where this happened, there has been an
image of stone, standing upon his feet, representing her deliverance and death.

How greatly pride and desire of glory is hated of God, Herod king of the Jews
gives a notable example. This man going up into the pulpit, appointed for
orations, and rejoicing to hear the people cry out to his praise, That it was
the voice of God and not of man, he was suddenly stricken from heaven: and
when he perceived himself to consume away with lyce, he cried out to the
people: Behold how he dies now with intolerable pain, whom not long sithence
you called God. But Menecrates received a more gentle punishment for his
vainglory, of Philip king of Macedon, and yet worth the noting. This man,
because he knew himself to be anexcellent physician, would needs be called
Jupiter the savior. The King meaning to reform his arrogancy, invited him to
a feast, and caused a table to be set for him alone: whereof at the first he
was very glad, but when Pride (...).
he saw that in steed of meats, the ministers gave him nothing but
frankincense, he was much ashamed, and departed from the feast in great anger.

And as they which desire honor and glory, seek after it, often by ungodly
and prohibited means, so they also, that are possessed of it, many times use
the like means, to understand the continuance of their glorious estate; but
their counselor, whose advice they use, answers them for the most part so
cunningly, that they are nothing the nearer of their purpose. The Emperor Nero
asked counsel of the Devil, how long The craft of the Devil to those that
speak to him.
his reign should continue: he willed him to beware of sixty four. Nero
being then young, was glad to hear that answer, thinking the meaning had bin,
he should have reigned Emperor, until he had bin sixty and four years old:
But not long after Galba was chosen Emperor against him who was of the age of
sixty and four, and deposed him with loss of his life. King Philip of
Macedon, moved with the like desire, sent to Delphos, to know his destiny:
answer was made him, by the Oracle of Apollo, that he must take heed of a
chariot. The king commanded all the carres and chariots in his realm to be
plucked in pieces: and such places that did bear that name, he would always
avoid and forbear to come near them. But all that would not serve his turn;
for Pausanias slew him with a sword that had a chariot graven in the pummell.
Pope Paulus the third delighted much in Nicromancers, being himself skillful
in the art; and desirous to know his fortune, a Necromancer told him, that he
should be Pope, in the year, one thousand five hundred thirty four, long
before it happened, in the time of Leo the tenth, when there was no likelihood
of any such matter: and that he should be Pope fourteen years, at which time
he should end his Popedom with his life; which came to pass. Whereby it
should seem, that the Devil has a voice among the Cardinals in the election
of the Popes: and that God suffers the Devil sometimes to make Popes, and to
take it from them again at his pleasure, life and all.

The humor of glory and desire to rule, rests not only in the affections of
great estates, but also is many times found to be in men of base condition. And
when Ambition in men of base condition.
possibility fails to attain to honor, by rule and authority, they covet
to win it by some singularity, wherein they would excel others. And some fear
not to run into a voluntary and present death, to win fame and glory after this
life, by some notorious fact, without respect of the wickedness thereof,
whereof these examples following shall serve for proof. Calanino understanding
that the people of Capua a city in Italy (himself being a Tribune there) were
determined to kill the Senators, whom they hated deadly, went with them, as
though he allowed of their enterprise, but advertised the Senate before of the
peoples resolution, and what he would do to save their lives. He shut them up
fast in a close place as prisoners, that they might not be subject to the fury
of the people. And when they were assembled together, to put their purpose in
execution, this Calanino told them, that seeing they had determined to kill all
the Senators, they must first devise with themselves, who were the worthiest
men to supply their places. And making as though he would bring them forth to
be killed one after another; will yea have (quoth he) such a one killed first?
naming him that he knew they most hated: they all allowing it with great
gladness commended him for his choice. Then (said he) who will ye have to
supply his place? Then stepped forth diverse men of several trades and
occupations, every one contending with other, to have chosen one of their
company, to supply his room. And thus naming all the Senators, one after
another to be killed, and asking them the like questions for supply of their
rooms there was such an earnest contention among themselves, every one fearing
lest one should be preferred to a more honorable place than the other, that
they were all content rather to endure and submit themselves to the government
of the old Senators, than any of them should have more honor than others. And
thus by the wisdom of their Tribune, and the envy and emulation of the common
people, the lives and honors of the Senators, were preserved, whom they had
determined through hatred and malice to have killed. Scinditur incertum studia
in contraria vulgus.
The uncertain rabble is divided into contrary opinions.


What was it but desire of vainglory, that made Simon Magus that notable
Necromancer labor to be singular in that art, and by doing strange things in
the sight of the people, he thought by help of the Devil to deifie himself.
For which cause, his image was set up by Claudius Caesar, with this
inscription, Simoni sancto Deo. Which at last wrought his own destruction. For
as Saint Peter saw him lift himself up into the air, in a great assembly of
people, making them believe he would ascend up to heaven, to the great
admiration of them all, he desired God that he would not suffer him any
longer to seduce the world: whereupon he fell presently down headlong, and
brake his leg, whereof he dyed shortly after. The like happened to a Saraceo
(...) Constantinople: for when there was at a triumph, a great assembly of
people beholding certain justs, this Saracen went up to the top of a high
turret, that stood in the Tilt-yard, and bragging that he would fly in the
air, he had provided him a long white garment down to the foot, full of
playtes and gatherings, made for the purpose, to hover in the air; he began
to flitter with his hands, in steed of wings; and when he thought he had
soared enough, he committed himself to the wind and weather, and fell down
headlong to the ground, and bruised his bones to pieces, and, like a
vaineglorious Coxcombe, there ended his life. Saint John the Evangelist being
banished into the Isle of Pathmos by the Emperor Domitian, because by calling
upon the name of Jesus Christ he drove away a devil out of the Temple of
Diana, that seduced the people, which had possessed an Idol there two hundred
forty nine years, into Ephesus; in the which Island Saint John found a
notorious fellow called Cynops, that by the help of the Devil did wondrous
things before the people; and bragged that he would raise men, that were
known to be dead: who had gotten such a reputation among them, that he was a
great hinderance to the Gospel, which Saint John preached. And as on a time
he had played many strange feats, in a great assembly of people standing upon
the sea coast, Cynops seeing Saint John coming toward them; Come on, good
fellow (quoth he, to Saint John) thou shall see more strange things, than has
been yet showed. Saint John standing among them, and seeing three evil
spirits, which had taken upon them the form and face of men, raised out of the
sea by Cinops, which the people thought had been men, commanded them in the
name of Jesus Christ that was crucified, not to depart. Then Cynops, to show
more feats clapped his hands together, and leapt into the sea, as he had done
diverse times before, where he would tarry under the water a long time. And as
soon as he was under the water, the sea began to work, in the place where he
leapt in, of a great height, as though there had bin a tempest. After he had
stayed under the water longer than he used to do, the people cried out; Thou
Cynops art the only man of the world, thinking he would show himself to them
again as he did before. But Saint John prayed to God that he might be no more
seen among men: which prayer took such effect, that Cynops could be no more
seen. Which when the people perceived, they turned The Conjurer conjured.
their admiration to Saint John; who then said to the three spirits; I command
you in the name of Jesus Christ, that was crucified, that ye depart, and be
seen no more in this Island. Which words were no sooner spoken, but they
forthwith vanished away. The fame of this art being blown abroad, was the cause
that a great many books of Necromancie in diverse places were burnt.

This desire of vaineglory through singularity of knowledge, was not wrought in
the minds only of Cynops, and other Infidels, by the instigation of the devil,
whose help they used in a^ayning the same, but in our Christian Prelates also,
who used the like means, being overcome with the same des^es, to what peril of
their souls, I leave to the judgment of others. T^itemius the Abbot, an
excellent learned man, and worthy of fame (if by adding Necromancy to the rest
of his learning, he had not made himself infamous) by his own confession,
burned with an exec^ive desire of vaineglorie. For (says he) as I went up and
down musing and devising with my self, how I might find some thing, that
Needless cu^.
never any man knew before, and that all men might wonder at, and laid my self
down to sleep in an evening, with the same cogitations, there came one to me
in the night that I knew no^, and excited me to persever in my intended
purpose, promising me his help, which he performed. What kind of learning he
taught him (he said) was not meet for the common sort, but to be known only
of Princes: whereof he shows some examples, denying the same to be done by
the devils help, but by natural means, to which he will hardly persuade any
man of judgment. And though he would cover some of his strange feats, under
the pretext of nature, yet his familiarity with the Devil, in many things was
apparent. The Emperor Maximilian the first, married with Marie the daughter of
Charles Duke of Burgundy, whose death (loving her dearly) he took g^evously.
This Abbot perceiving his great love toward her, told him, that he would show
him his wife again. The Emperor desirous to see her, went with the Abbot, and
one more into a chamber. The Abbot forbad them for their lives to speak one
word whilst the spirit was there. Mary the Emperors wife comes in, and
walks up and down by them very soberly, so much resembling her when she was
alive in all points, that there was no difference to be found. The Emperor
marvelling to see so lively a resemblance, called to mind that his wife had a
little black spot (a Mole some call it) behind in her neck, which he
determined to observe the next time she passed by him, and beholding her very
earnestly, he found the Mole in the very same place of her neck. Maximilian
being much troubled in mind with this strange sight, winked upon the Abbot,
that he should avoid the spirit. Which being done, he commanded him to show
him no more of those pastimes, protesting that he was hardly able to forbear
speaking: which if he had done, the spirit had killed them all. The Devil was
so ready at the Abbots commandment, that as he traveled on a time in the
company of a man of account, who reported this story, they came into a house,
where was neither good meat nor drink, the Abbot knocked at the window, and
said, adfer, fetch. Not long after, there was brought in at the window, a
sodden pickerell in a dish, and a bottle of wine. The Abbot fell to his meat,
but his companions Quick cooke^y.
stomach would not serve him to eat of such a Caterers provision.

Albertus Magnus, being a notable Necromancer, besides his other learning, that
had been Bishop of Regenspurg, and after became a Monk at Collen, at such
time as William Grave of Holland was chosen Emperor, and returned from his
Coronation at Aquisgraven to Collen, with many Princes and great estates, where
in the night was made him a sumptuous banquet. Albertus being there also, to
show the Emperor and the Princes some pastime after their journey, by his
skill caused the chamber where they were, in their sight, to be like a forest,
the floor seemed to be ground covered with green grass, and be^bes, and
flowers, planted with trees of diverse sorts, the Lark singing A (...) and a
(...).
in the air, the Nightingale and the Cuckoo singing in the trees, and
haw-thorne bushes, as though it had been in the midst of May. In the which
pastime, the Emperor took such delight, that he rewarded the house, whereof
Albertus was Monk, with land and privileges, thinking that no sinful act,
which was done by so famous and holy a Monk, in the presence also of so many
Prelates. But what their reward shall be at the day of judgment, the Lord only
knows. But to excel in these prohibited sciences, is not sufficient glory to
these kind of men, except they also leave their knowledge in writing, to the
prejudice of posterity: which argues their desire of glory, to be agreeable
with that of the Poet, that says; Vade ^tur felix liber, and long: ss^ma vive,
Tempora: quumque meos tellus obduxerit artus,
Tu varios populos, diversaq, regna superstes,
Quaere, studeque meum late diffundere nomen.
Go happy book, live long, and when in the dust
My bones are laid, as (sure I am) they must,
Be thou still safe, and wander the world round,
(With all thy care) my name abroad to sound.


Among the rest, Pope Gregory the seventh, an excellent Necromancer, by the
report of the Cardinal Benno, would by shaking his sleeves, make sparks of
fire leap out of them, to the judgment of men, by which strangething, he
sought to win an opinion of great holiness. By these examples of Popes and
Prelates, with the rest, it appears how ready the Devil is to stir up men's
minds, where he sees any inclination to the desire of vaineglory, whose help
and service they never lack, until he has brought them to destruction of
body or soul.

These kind of men be they (it should seem) to whom Beelzebub is supposed to
write an Epistle reported by an old author thus: Beelzebub the prince of Devils
and Duke of darkness, with his guard and all the potentates of hell, To
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and other Prelates and rulers of Churches, his
welbeloved friends, now and for ever Infernal salutations, and a league of ^
inviolable society, which can never be dissolved: we repose great confidence
(my welbeloved (...)) in your amity, we rejoice much in you, because ye agree
very well in opinion with us: and that ye s^eke and procure with diligence
those things that be ours: always defending and protecting whatsoever ye
know to appertain to our right. Know ye therefore that ye are in great favor
with our universality, whose travel and diligence we accept with many thanks,
because infinite number of souls, by your service, example, and negligence in
doing the work of God among the people, are led away from the truth, and
forsaken, and broughtdaily captive to us, by means whereof the power of our
kingdom is grea^ly increased. Persever therefore in our friendship, as
faithful and assured to us, in the work ye have begun: we are ready for all
things, to recompense you with a reward worthy of you, and agreeable to your
service, in the lowest parts of hell. Fare ye well, our blessing be with you
for ever.

The Earl of Mascon not contenting himself with the title and estate of his
Earldom, to increase his glory, with some singularity, fell by Necromancy to
be so familiarly acquainted with the Devil, that as he sat at dinner with
diverse noblemen and others, he was called by a man unknown, and going down,
he found a black horse, which attended for him at his gate, which carried him
and the man suddenly up into the air three times very swiftly round about the
city, he crying out most miserably, help, my Citizens help me, in the sight
and to the great admiration and terror of all the people, of whom he was never
more seen.

This ambition and vainglory the Devil knows to be so offensive to God,
and enemy to the felicity of men, that he leaves nothing unpractised to stir
up men's minds to the desire thereof, himself being always ready at hand,
where he finds a disposition meet for his purpose, to assist them to work
strange feats, and counterfeit miracles, not to the destruction of them only
that are entered into his society, but to use the^ as instruments to seduce
many others, and to divert them from the true service of God, from whom only
comes man's felicity, to seek help at his hands. And to this purpose there
is a strange history of a Spanish woman, of base parentage, called Magdalen,
which happened in the year of grace, one thousand five hundred forty five, in
the City of Cordube in Spain. When this Magdalen was yet scarcely five years
old, her friends made her a Nun: and though it was too rathe for those young
years, to know the wickedness of the world, yet (such is the secret judgment
of God) it is reported, that the Devil in the likeness of a man, black as an
Ethiop, appeared to this maid, who at the first being something afraid, yet at
last by flattering words and fair promises of such things, as that old Serpent
knew, were meet to allure her tender years, he found means, to enter into
familiar communication with her, injoyning her straightly, not to speak of
this new acquaintance. The (...) on the best wits.
This young maiden was of a singular capacity and rare disposition, by means
whereof she was greatly esteemed among the rest of the Nuns, both young and
old. The devil having a meaning by her to deceive all Spain, seemed very
provident by making choice of this towardly young thing, whom he thought so much
the more meet for his purpose, as she excelled the rest in sharpness of wit,
and ripeness of judgment, that by framing in her a (...) of religion and
holiness, which has been always accounted the only means to deceive the
world, he might at last bring his purpose to effect. When she was come to
twelve years old, the Devil became a suter to her for marriage, promising her
that for the space of thirty years, or I know not how many more, he would
advance her to such estimation of holiness throughout all Spain, that she
should match or excel in glory and reputation all that at any time have bin
most famous in that kind of matter. The desire of glory, pierced so deeply
into her tender affection, that she seemed to consent. And as they used to
pass the time pleasantly together in secret, the Devil would send his servant
in her very likeness, to supply her room in the Church, and to do all things
that was for her to do. The Devil when she was not employed in attending upon
divine service, was accustomed to bring her news of all things that were done
in the whole world. Which when she declared to them that favored her, it
greatly increased the opinion of her holiness: by means whereof, she was
accounted a Prophetess. And rather than her years required, she was by a
general consent of the whole company of Nuns, chosen Abbess. It was
commonly known that at such times as the Nuns did usually receive the
Sacrament, the Priest should ever lack one of the consecrated cakes, which was
secretly brought by her angel to Magdalen, as she sat in the quire among the
rest of the Nuns, which she would show as (...) held it in her mouth, to the
standers by for a miracle. It is also reported, that in the time of Mass when
the elevation was, a wall that was between her and the quire, would open, that
she might see and be seen. And likewise at such solemn festival days, as
the Nuns used to lead the Abbess, she would by a strange miracle, in the
sight of all men, sometime cause her self to be lifted up from the ground into
the air, three cubits or more: sometime she would be seen, to bear a naked
young child, representing Jesus newly borne, with such other vain devices, to
make the festival day the more holy. By these frvolous illusions, and juggling
casts of the Devil, she grew in such reputation, that she received letters
from the Pope, the Emperor, and the nobility of Spain, wherein they commended
themselves and their important affairs to her most holy prayers. They would
also use her advice, in matters of very great weight, as though she had been a
Prophetess that could foresee things to come, as it manifestly appeared
afterward, when her wickedness was discovered by the letters of the greatest
Princes of Christendom, that were found about her, written to that effect.
Diverse noble women also, would not Strange superstition.
have their children newly born, wrapped in their swaddling bands, until they
had been handled and consecrated by this woman's hands. In all this while among
so many notable and learned men, there was not one, that could find these
fraudulent toys of the devil. Such was the darkness and blindness of that
time. At last God of his unspeakable goodness, would suffer this treacherous
hypocrisy no longer to be hidden. For after she had thus abused the world,
near about thirty years, she began to fall into repentance, and discovered her
detestable practices, to the visitours, and contrary to all expectation,
confessed her wicked fact. This news seemed wonderful strange to all men: and
that they might procced orderly with her, she was committed to prison and
examined, where she confessed all that had happened. But this Ethiopia^ Devil
would not so leave her society: for as she was kept close in prison, whilst
her cause was examining, when the Nuns after midnight used their ordinary
service in the quire, the Devil would transform himself into her likeness,
and sit in her place, and kneel upon his knees as though he prayed, they all
thinking it had been Magdalen, and that she had that liberty given for her
repentance. But the next day when they understood that she was kept in prison,
and the night following seeing her again in the quire, they told the visitors;
who examining the matter, found that she went not forth of the prison. And
when the cause was known to the Pope, through her repentance, he pardoned her,
and gave her absolution.

But Satan never found so fit an instrument to serve his purpose with such
effect, as was that false Prophet Mahomet, who through ambition, and an
unsatiable desire of glory, wherein his life showed him to put his felicity,
not content to become of a base fellow, a Monarch of diverse goodly kingdoms,
but must also take upon him to be a holy Prophet, sent from God, to give laws
to his people, whereby he has not only damned his own soul, but also
sends daily infinite numbers of souls to the bottomless pit of hell: to
whom the Poets saying may be aptly applied. Alsquid tamdudum invadere magnum,
Men's agitat miht, nec placida contenta quiet est.
My mind has in long labor bin (nor yet
In quiet is) some great thing to beget.


And that it may the better appear, what pernicious effects the desire of
vaineglory has wrought, and therefore contrary to that Summ^ bonum, or
felicity we seek after, it will not be impertinent to the matter, to make a
brief narration of the course of Mahomets life, whereby we shall see, how by
the help of the Devil, and his own subtle wit, by Gods sufferance for our
sins he was adva^ced from a poor wretch to a mighty Monarch, and reputed
Prophet, and lawmakers. This Mahomets Cnustin His parents. His country.
father was an Arabian called Abdalla, and his mother an Ismaelite, called
Enyma; he was borne in a little village, not far from Mecha, called Itrarip,
about six hundred years after Christ's incarnation. The Turks say that the
same day he was borne, there fell down to the ground of their own accord, a
thousand Churches and one; which was a sign, that in his time there should be
a great decay of Christianity. Being in his youth brought up by His bringing up.
his parents in two religions, every of them desirous to draw him to his
opinion, when he came to be a man, he was of no religion. He was sent no doubt
by the Devil, to the shame of mankind, who cannot endure the sincerity of
Christ's Gospel; but finding so apt an instrument to work the dishonor of God,
and the destruction of men, and knowing the disposition of the world, to
embrace new things, he practiced by his means to plant a new religion, having
fit opportunity thereto, by the wavering minds of the Arabians, and Affricans,
who were at that time he was borne, in doubt, whether they might follow the
religion of the Christians, or of the Jews, or Arrians. There was great
f^iendship about this time between Mahomets father and a Jew, that was an
Astronomer, and well learned in the old law, and in the Christian religion. It
chanced that Mahomet was borne when his father was gone to Jerusalem, and at
his return this Jew having calculated his sons nativitie, told him, that he
should be mighty in dominion and law. Not long after the birth of this apostle
of Satan, Abdalla the father died. When Mahomet was 4 years old, this Jew
devised a notorious and most shameful lie. He said that he saw two Angels take
Mahomets heart out of his body, and divided it in the midst, and took out of
it a drop of blood, and afterward washed it clean with fair water, and put it
in a pair of balance, and weighed it with ten other hearts, because his heart
weighed them down all. Then one of the Angels said to the other, if his heart
were set against all the hearts in Arabia, it would over weigh them all. This
(said the Jew) the Angel Gabriell showed him. When Mahomet was viijyeares old,
his mother died, and committed him to his uncle by the fathers side, who
delivered him to the Jew to be brought up in learning. The Jew instructed him
in natural Philosophy, but especially in the Jewish and Christian religion,
wherein he proved so good a scholar, that it help to work the destruction of
his own soul, and many others. Some write, that when Mahomet was thirteen
Mahomet an horse driver.
year old, as he wandered abroad, he met with merchants that were going into
Egypt, and desirous to be of their company, they took him with them, to help
to keep their camels and horses; and wheresoever he went there was many times
seen a black fellow standing by him. And when they came to a village in
Egypt, where at that time were diverse Christians, the Parson of the town
invited the^ to his house: they followed the Parson, and left Mahomet to keep
their camels. The Parson enquiring whether all their company were come into his
house, they are all here (said they) saving a boy that stays without with our
camels. As the Parson went forth he saw a black fellow (...) by the boy, which
put him in mind of a prophecy that he had read, of one that should descend of
parents, of two sundry nations, who should establish a religion, against the
christian faith, by whom for a sign should many times stand a black fellow.
The parso^ desired the mercha^ts to call in the boy, and understanding A
prophecy of Mahomet.
his name to be Mahomet, he remembered him so to be called in the prophecy, and
that he should be a mighty man, and a great trouble to Christendom, and that
his religion should not continue above 1000. years, and then it should vanish
away. When the Parson had considered of his name, and of the black fellow
standing by him, he perceived that it was he the prophecy spoke of, and set
him at his table above the merchants, and did him great reverence. After they
had eaten, the Priest asked the merchants, whether they knew the boy: who told
him the manner how they came by him. The parson informed the^ of the prophecy
he ha (...) read, who affirmed that they had seen such a black fellow stand
by him. Then said the Parson to the boy: Thou shall be a great learned man, and
shall establish a new religion among the Heathens, and with they power thou
shall be great annoyance to the Christians, and thy successors shall be mighty
men. Now I desire thee that thou will suffer my country men the Armenians to
live in peace. Mahomet promised that he would so do, and went forwards with
the merchants to Babylon. When he was four and twenty years old, he went
into Egypt about his trade of merchandise: where he stayed a long time, and had
familiar acquaintance and friendship with Christians and Jews, with whom he was
much co^oversant, but especially with a monk of Antioch called John, that was
an obstinate heretic, enticed thereto by the Devil, through a desire of
vaineglory. Of this Monk he learned to falsify the Scriptures, both the old
and new Testament, that he might be the better armed against the Jews and
Christians. It is reported that he was also scholar to a Monk called
Sergius, an Arrian heretic, and expulsed from Constantinople by his brethren,
and fled into Arabia, where he fell acquainted with Mahomet, and help him to
(...) the Scriptures after their own fancies, and to hatch a new law out of the
new and old Testament. About this time there Prodigies.
were strange things seen in the air, and monsters brought forth in diverse
parts of the world; as children with four feet and two heads, and comets and
fire falling from heaven, and such wonderful lights and thunderclaps, that the
earth seemed to shake, and open: whereof ensued extreme pestilence, that
consumed a great part of the earth, so as (...) thought that the last day had
bin come; which did presage the wrath and threatenings of God, for the sins of
men. In his youth, he used the trade of Merchandise, and went often with his
camels into Egypt and Palestina. And as he came on a time into the land of
Canaa, the Princess of that Country, called Tagida, marvelling at his strange
kinds of wares and merchandise, fell into great liking of him, which when
Mahomet perceived, he omitted not that opportunity, but entering into familiar
communication with her, he uttered all his skill and eloquence to seduce her.
When he perceived her to wonder at his skill in both laws, and to be as it
were rapt with his stately style, and glorious words; My dear Lady (quoth he)
I will hide nothing from you, but tell you the truth: I am the Messiah sent
Fearful blasphemy.
from God, which the Jews look for to this day; which he labored to prove by
miracles wrought by the help of the Devil, himself being a Necromancer,
whereby he not only deceived this Lady, but also diverse Jews and Saracens, who
thought him to be the very Messiah they looked for. By mean whereof, in short
time he had a great many followers. This Lady seeing the Jews and Saracens,
thus reverence and depend upon Mahomet supposed that there lay hid in him
some divine majesty, His marriage.
and being a widow, married him. Thus was Mahomet suddenly advanced to great
riches and dominion, according to his desire, he went afterward into Spain,
where he preached at Corduba, such doctrine, that the Bishop sent to apprehend
him; but he being warned by the devil, ^d into Africa; where he seduced
infinite numbers, as also in Arabia. When he understood that he was esteemed
for a high Prophet, of all the countries round about him, greater matters began
to enter into his conceit, devising how he might become a great Monarch. And
seeing himself well followed of the common people that resorted to him daily in
great multitudes, he persuaded the people to cast off the yoke of their
obedience to the Roman Emperor, and making himself strong with a sufficient
army, invaded the territories of the Empire, and overthrowing the Emperors
Lieutenants he won from him that which belonged to the Empire in Africa, and
Egypt, and likewise Syria, and Mesopotamia, and other of the East countries
belonging to the Persians. And when the Saracens and the rest of his followers,
saw that he had overcome the Emperors power and set them at liberty from the
Romans, they resorted to him out of all parts to Damasco where by a general
consent they chose him to be their king, and let the crown on his head. And
thus without respect of right or wrong, he joined kingdom to kingdom, and
country to country, and of a base fellow became a great monarch; Mahomet
becomes a monarch.
using all manner of rigor and cruelty, confounding divine and humane things,
and like a torrent did bear all things down before him, to the admiration of
all men, and to the great effusion of innocent blood. This holy prophet was as
wicked in life, as divellish in doctrine; among the rest of his vices, much
given to whoredom, though he had 4 wives; persuading the people, that God had
given that prerogativeto him alone. But when The ground of his religion, lust
and liberty.
he perceived men began to murmr at him for his vicious life, he licenced
every man to have four wives. And as one of his wives found him in a chamber
secretly with one of his minions; Are these (quoth she) the manners of a
prophet? where with Mahomet was so ashamed, that he swear solemnly never to do
the like again. And as on a time he fell down with the falling sickness
before the queen his wife (to which through Gods plague he was much subject)
and fomed at the mouth, after the manner of that disease, perceiving her to
take it grievously, that she had matched her self to such an unwholesome
creature, he told her that the Angel Gabriel was sent to him from God, to
inform him of his mind, the bright shining of whose countenance he could in no
wise endure; which was the cause of his falling to the ground. And to confirm
her the rather in this opinion, he wrought some miracle, by the Devils help,
which gave the more credit to his words. His wicked sect began about the latter
end of the reign of Heraclius the Emperor, from whose obedience, taking
opportunity by a sedition amongst his soldiers, by whom Mahomet was made
their chief captain, had dissuaded his subjects, making them believe that
Gods will was that all men should be at liberty, and subject to no man. By mean
whereof the Saracens and Arabians depended wholly upon him, as has bin said,
and made him their king. When he had determined to publish his law, which
Sergius and he together had seemed out of the Old and New Testament, he
appointed a great assembly of people to repair to a certain place to hear
him preach, where by miracles they should see that God had sent him his holy
prophet, for the souls health of his people, to moderate the law of the Jews
and of the Christians, which were too hard to be kept, and to give them another
which should be a mean between them both: And as he was preaching of his law
in the place appointed, Mere imposture.
there comes a Dove flying toward him, and alighteth upon his shoulder, and
pidleth in his care, looking for meat, having used her before to feed in his
care for the same purpose. The simple people not mistrusting his subtle
device, thought it had been the holy Ghost, sent from God, to inspite him what
to say. He had also used a bull to feed in his lap; and made him know his
voice. And as in his Sermon he spoke aloud of his law, the bull being placed
not far off, hearing his voice, came running to him through the press of
peoply, overthrowing diverse of them, and laid his head in Mahomets lap, having
the book tied between his horns, wherein the law was written called Alcoran:
the people believing the rather by Sergius perswa^, that God had sent the bull
with the book of the law, because about the pigeo^s neck they had fastened a
little schedule, wherein was written in golden letters; he that can put a yoke
upon the bulls neck let him be king. Sergius fetched a yoke and delivered it to
Mahomet, who put it ^fily upon the bulls nocke, and was of the foolish people
called King, and sergius a Prophet. By these kind of devices he seduced the
people, and after he had reigned ten year, being about four or fi^ and
thirty years old, it happened that one of his (...) ^ proof, whether ^ or
not, whether he would (...) again the third day after his death, and (...) up
to heaven, as he had of^old told them he would do; after he had reigned ten
years, he (...) gave him poison to (...), which when Mahomet had drunk, his
color began to change, and the poison went presently to his heart, and
dispatched him, as he Mahomet poisoned.
had well deserved. A just judgment of God, to punish the wicked by the
wicked. His body was diligently watched by his disciples, looking for his
re^rre the third day, as he had said. But when the third day was past, and that
they saw he would not rise again, and that his body began to stink, they let
him lie (...) and departed. And the eleventh day after his death (...) that
poisoned him, came again to see how he lay, and (as one Lucas reports) he
found his body eaten with dogs. And gathering his bones together, he took
them with him and buried them, in a town called Madinaraziell. When the
Arabians and others perceived, how he had deceived them, and that he rose not
again, according to his promise, many of them fell from him, and would no
longer hold of his religion. But in his life annexed to his Alcoran, some of
his disciples (...) strange things of his death and resurrection: and (...)
that his body of himself, after a miraculous fort hangs on high under a
vault of the Church at (...) where indeed it is done by art; a Lodestone (...)
up the Iron Coffen, wherein his body or bones (...) though it did hang in the
air. But the Turks, and though of his sect, believing that he hangs there
by ^vine power, go thither yearly in pilgrimage, as Christians do to
Jerusalem, to the Sepulcher. This was (...) beginning and end of this glorious
Apostle of (...), whose holiness was in his youth such, that the Citi^ of
Mecha condemned him to death for these, whom now they adore for a high Prophet
of God. Such fruits the desire of glory (wherein he put his felicity) brought
forth, to the perpetual torments of his own soul, and of infinite thousands
besides. But such an Epitaph had bin more meet for him, than to be so exalted,
as was engraven upon the tomb of a Viceroy of Sicilia, by the people of that
country, in revenge of his tyrrannous government. Q^i propter nos homines,
Et propter nostram salutem,
Descendit adinferos. That is:
Who for us men,
And for our salvation,
Is gone down into hell.


Salmoxes device, to persuade the Goths, that the soul was immortal, was
more tolerable, being done with better meaning. He taught those people that
neither himself, nor any that lived, nor they which were to be The meaning
good though the course indirect.
borne should dye for ever, if they lived virtuously: but they should go into
such a place, where they should always live, and enjoy all good things, and
lead for ever a most happy life. And when he had thus persuaded his followers,
he conveyed him secretly out of their sight into a building under the ground,
which he had before prepared for the purpose, where he remained three years,
leaving his followers lamenting and sorrowing, as if he had bin dead: the
fourth year he returned to them again, they being sufficiently satisfied of
the eternity of the soul, and the perpetual reward of virtue. By which
device he wan to himself such reputation and glory, that he was accounted
equal with the king, who made him his companion in the government of his
kingdom.

But the death of Mahomet was not the end of much troubles and mischief, that
arose through his false doctrine in diverse parts of the world: For thereof
ensued sundry sects, according to the several inclinations of the fantastical
heads of his disciples and followers, in whom the Devil stirred up such a
desire of glory, that imitating their masters example, and treading in his
path, some of them became little inferior to him in riches and dominion. Among
the rest ^
in our age Africa (that according to the old proverb, is accustomed always
to bring forth some new and strange thing) raised up one of Mahomets disciples,
from a poor Hermit to be a Monarch of many goodly kingdoms and countries.
This man was borne among the famous mountains of Atlas, of very base and poor
Thevet.
parentage, and became an Hermit, which the Affricans call Morabuth, that is, a
holy man. This fellow began to preach his vain doctrine, in the year of
Grace, one thousand five hundred fourteen, and would admit no gloss or
interpreter of the Alcoran, but followed simply the text. He played the
hypocrite so kindly, that ^
by a counterfeit show of holiness, and simplicity, and austerity of life, he
was greatly esteemed and honored. And when he saw himself well followed of
the people of Fez and Maroque, where he made himself strong, and that the
multitude depended upon his word, he told them whom he best favored, that he
had a desire to visit the King of Taphilletta, because he lived not according
to the sincerity of their law. The cause (...) he desired this kingdom, was
that if his devi^ took not that effect he looked for, it might serve him for
a place of retreyt. As he traveled toward Taphilletta, there was no village
that he passed by, but he preached his doctrine; into the great towns they
would not suffer him to enter, because of his (...), and for fear of some
tumult. His travel was always by the sea coast, because that country was
well peopled: insomuch that within short time, his train resembled a huge army
of above threescore thousand men strong. The simple king of Taphistetta would
needs hear this Hermit, and talk with him of matter touching his conscience,
who was not so intentive in his Sermon, as he was circumspect in viewing the
kings forces, and the means he had to defend himself. At length he told his
followers, God had revealed to him, that he must expel this king out of his
kingdom, as unworthy to reign. For confirmation whereof, he showed them
certain false miracles. By mean whereof they slew the (...) the (...) for
murder.
king, and made the Hermit his successor. By the like policy he thrust the
king of Darapt out of his kingdom. All this while he would not take upon him
the name of king, but was called Seriph, that is, high Priest. When he had left
sufficient garrisons in the kingdoms he had gotten, he goes to the king of
Tremissen, who nothing suspecting that the murder of the king of Taphilletta
came by this Prophets means, suffered him to come into his town, yet upon
condition that he should leave his train behind him, being somewhat jealous of
the, because they were well appointed with their bows and arrows in their
hands, and their cimyters by their sides, contrary to the accustomed
simplicity and manner of going. The Hermit to avoid suspicion, leaves his
train ^thing behind him, and goes slenderly accompanied to the (...). And
after (...), (...) showed him by the king, his train (...) into the town,
which they began presently to sack, and to make open war, and (...) about an
hundred thousand persons. And in the end the king likewise, and all his
children were put to the sword, and he made kong: which title he would no
Iocger refuse. And pursuing his ambitious purpose, under the color of
reforming the Alcoran, he made war upon all the kings his neighbors,
destroying all things with fire and sword that was in his way. Africa was
never so plagued, not in Mahomets time, that fought two and twenty battles, as
it was by this hypocrite. It was a most pitiful spectacle to see the Princes
murdered, like beasts in the shambles, the great estates spoiled of their
goods, and slain or made slaves, men, women, and children daily put to the
sword without mercy, according to the Poets saying: Libert (...) sceler^ est,
regnainv^a (...):
^.
Then liberty to mischiefs is allowed,
When kingdoms are usurpt by Tyrants proud,
When (...) reason they no place afford,
But sentence all things by the cruel sword.


Fortune was so favorable to him, that he became within the space of three
years, king of Tremissen Maroch, Darapt, Taphilletta, Su, and at length of Fez
also. So that the Turks and Barbarians stood in great fear and admiration of
him, supposing that these things could not be done without some divine power,
when they considered that such a poor simple Priest should so (...) become a
king of the goodliest and most (...) kingdoms of all Africa. But we will leave
him in (...) prosperity, and draw toward his end. The king of Algier doubting
the greatness of this (...), determined (after the old proverb) when the
Lions tail is short, to tie the Fox tail to him, to make proof, seeing
force would not prevail, what policy would do. He sent some twelve or
thirteen hundred (...), under the conduct of a valiant man, whom he had
instructed what to do, to this Hermit king, (...) themselves to have (...)
the king of (...), and to depart as malcontents. They found the king at (...),
rejoicing in his conquests, but yet troubled in mind, to see himself among a
sort of people, that loved him not greatly, by reason of the injuries he had
done to them and to their Princes: for which cause he retained a strong guard
of other nations. And when he saw such a band of men, he demanded the cause of
their coming, and of their departure from their king. They answered him, that
they were poor soldiers, that had left the king of Algier, because he had
used them uncourteously, and if it would please him to entertain them, they
would be faithful to him even to death. The king entertaineth them, and made
them not long after his principal guard, and favored them more than his own
people. Which procured them much envy, and especially of the great estates of
his Council, who advised him to beware of these Turks, who they suspected
came to him for no good purpose: alleging diverse reasons, that moved them so
to think, and that the Turk made none account of his life, if he might do
his master any acceptable service. The Hermit being as subtle as they, said
little, but determined to find some occasion to put them all to the sword. It
chanced, that news was brought about that time to the king, of a rebellion in
some of his countries, whereupon he took occasion to raise a power to repress
them, but indeed to put the Turks to the sword, of whom he grew very
suspicious. The Turks perceiving the preparation for this great journey, and
observing that the king had often conference with his Council, whom they knew
to be their capital enemies, began to doubt, that this preparation was made
for them. To retire they had no means, and to refuse they should make
themselves odious to all the army, and by that means, they should put the
king out of doubt of that which he did now but suspect. Whilst they were
debating these things, they had certain intelligence of the kings intent, and
that the time of execution was at hand. The Turks seeing no way to escape,
resolved upon a most desperate enterprise, and watching for opportunity, as the
king sat in Council, with the Princes and captains of his army in his
pavillion, deliberating how to put in execution his purpose against these
Turks, at what time it chanced the principal men of his guard to be gone for
forage, and only two hundred renegates left to attend, the Turks entered into
the pavillion, where they slew the King and his Council; with the captains,
and sacked his tents of such treasure as there was; the renegates in place of
defending the king, joined with them in the spoil. Desinat elatis quisquam
confidererebus.
Let no man put his confidence in things that succeed well.


The Turks after this murder without any resistance, the army being amazed with
the suddenness and greatness of the matter, departed with their spoil
toward a town called Torodant, which they easily surprised and sacked, they
fearing no hostility, and there stayed to refresh themselves, hearing that the
army stirred not, for the space of fifteen days: whereas if they had followed
on their journey, they had been at Algier before the army had overtaken them.
But (...) (...) of the Hermit, and his successor in his kingdom, hearing of
his fathers death, hasteneth him with his forces after the Turks: who
understanding of his coming, trussed up their baggage upon Camels, and
departed toward Algier in very good order, carrying certain (...) of ordnance
with them for their better defense. When they had marched a few miles out of
the town, the king ^aileth the^, but being valiantly received by the Turks,
they marched forward in despite of the whole (...) And being charged thus for
the space of three or four days as they marched, in which time the Turks had
stain many of their enemies, the king being moved that such a handful of men
should be able to make (...) a resistance, caused a very hot charge to be given
upon the^, wherein the Turks being overmatched, and oppressed with the
multitude of their enemies, were all slain, saving the captain, and some
thirty more, which saved themselves for the time, upon a little hill, which they
defended against the whole army. But seeing that they were not able to
prevail, the captain choosing rather to die by his own hands, than to suffer
his enemies to have the honor of such a revenge, took his two sons, that were
between fifteen and eighteen year old, and slew first them in the sight of the
army, and then himself. The rest Brave (...) in (...) Turks.
of the soldiers seeing the noble courage of their captain, charged their
great pieces, and after they had (...) the spoil, rather than they would fall
into their enemies hands, and suffer an ignominious death, they standing at the
mouths of the great pieces, put fire to them, and (...) themselves, the King
and all the army beholding the matter, and highly commending the valor and
noble minds of the Turks. By these examples it may appear, what estimation
men ought to make of worldly honor, and glory that is gotten by rule and
principality, when a poor Priest in a short time, was able to dispossess many
kings of their kingdoms, and to make himself a mighty Monarch of them all.
And when he was in the judgment of men in the highest degree of felicity, a
handful of men of his own guard, could in his own pavilion in the midst of
his army and forces, secure and free from all imagination of peril, put him
and his nobility with his principal Captains to the sword, and had escaped
without any harm or let, enriched with a great prey, if they had passed on
their journey all at their ^ase, and had notbin so careless, to attend their
enemies coming, which they might easily have prevented. Diverse other Hermites
of Mahomets sect, about the same time, both in Africa and Asia, excited with
the like desire of glory, attempted the like enterprises, and attained to great
matters, to their own harm, and to others, though not altogether with like
success.

This principality and rule made the Jews, the chosen people of God, despise
his help and favor, that had done so many wonderful things for them. For a
Jew having gathered together two hundred thousand men of that nation, they
trusted so much to their own forces, that every man did cut off one of his
fingers, and Diabolical contempt.
when they were to join in battle with their enemies, their General
pronounced these words: Lord of the world, help us not, seeing thou have
rejected us. And more than this, there were diverse of the same nation, in the
age wherein Christ was borne, knowing by the (...) Prophecies, that the time
was come, in which the (...) must show himself to the world, that (...)
themselves to be Christ: but their lives and doctrine, (...) almost the memory
of them, vanished away like smoke, notwithstanding they had many followers, and
were maintained by the authority of their principal doctors. But these Infidels
and Jews are not so much to be ^velled at, that sought glory with so great
hypocrisy, if we behold the wicked mind of a Christian in our age, that
through an excessive desire of glory went about to persuade men, that he was
the very Messiah. This man was of Frizeland, named George David; he called
himself a new prophet, and the nephew of God: he feined to have talk with
wild beasts and birds, in all manner of languages: and that they brought him
meat for his sustena^ce. And among other his vanities and toys, he said that
heaven was altogether empty, and that he was sent to adopt men, to be sons
and inheritours of the kingdom of heaven.

That the Devil is the author of these horrible and heinous offenses
committed by men, to the dishonor of God, and destruction of themselves, by
his instigation and stirring up their minds to the desire of vaineglorie, may
something appear by this strange history, reported by Licosthenes in his
Prodig^. By which men may be warned to beware of the subtle devices and
practices of that old Serpent, that (...) continually in weight whom he may
devour: who if he can find no (...) ^ment among men, to serve his purpose, can
by (...) sufferance (as it should seem) (...) himself or possess infants,
and do wonderful things, by his false shows of counterfeit miracles and
crafty illusions, to (...) A (...).
the world. In the kingdom of Babylon, the vij. day of March, in the (...)
1532. a child was borne of a mea^ woman, whose favor and form was good, and
well proportioned, but his eyes and teeth shined contrary to nature. At the
hour of his birth not only the elements, but all the powers of the heavens
were moved, and shewod forth terrible and fearful signs. For at midnight the
Sun was seen to shine bright as if it had bin day; and after it was turned
into darkness again, so as it was not seen in Babylon (which is not noted
for a miracle) the space of a whole day: the Sun was seen again with
stars of strange figures and of diverse kinds wandering up and down in the
element. Over the house where the child was born, besides other signs, fire was
seen fall from the air, that killed men. The next day the Sun was eclipsed,
the weather being very The devils (...).
tempestuous, it rained pearls. The third day a fiery Dragon was seen to fly
about Babylon. There appeared also a new hill, exceeding in height other hills,
which was by and by divided into two parts, in the midst whereof was found
apillar, wherein was written in Greek: The hour of the nativity is come, and
the end of the world is at hand. The xiij. hour after his birth, a voice was
heard crying in the air: Prepare your hearts to receive, and blessed are they
that keep his word. After this child had lived two months, he brake out in
speech like an old man, and professed himself to be the son of God. And being
asked what these signs did pre^ The pearls that fell from the element, he
said did (...) the people that would believe his word: the flying (...)
signified his adversaries. He healed all (...); he restored sight to the blind,
he revived the (...) with his word; and professing himself to be a true
interpreter of the holy Scripture and secret mysteries, he was through all
Babylon contrary to the laws of their cou^ adored and worshipped for a God.
Thus will Satan never leave to use the help of men, as instruments to oppose
himself against God; and to draw them from true obedience, to the destruction
both of their body and soul. For to believe that there be no Spirits (as I
hear there be such in these days) or that they show not themselves to men, in
diverse figures, and work not things here in the earth among men, and in the
air above us, contrary to the opinion of so many learned men of diverse ages,
and to common experience of all times, is mere ignorance, and wilful
obstinacy, and the next way to atheism. (...) an excellent learned man, was
also according to that time, singular in Necromancy. We have certain
knowledge (says he) that wicked spirits can do very much in these parts of
the world, under the Moon, and upon the earth.

But that it may in some part appear, and their ignorance and obstinacy be
discovered that be of that opinion, of an infinite number of histories, both
old and new, we will recite one notable example (let the credit of the matter
remain with the authors) that happened of late years in France, whereby we
may be warned to observe Gods secret judgments, and to call continually upon
God for his Grace and assistance, against the old Serpent our common
adversary, that works many strange and dreadful things amongst us, always
to some evil end and purpose, if his platformes were not interrupted by Gods
power and providence. The history is reported by many credible authors, as also
by Cornelius Ge^ma, in his Cosmocritices, a learned man. In the city of
Landunu^ there was a handsome young woman newly married, called Nicholas
Dam^rie, in the judgment of men both virtuous and of good life, who in the
year 1565. in the month of Nove^ber was possessed with an evil spirit, that in
sight of thousands of people, played wonderful strange parts. But first this
spirit appeared to this woman, in the likeness of a dead man, professing
himself to be her grandfather, but afterward The Devil plead^ (...).
being compelled (say my authors) by the power of Gods word, pronounced by a
Priest (using belike their ordinary exorcismes) he confessed himself to be
the Devil: and then he became black, hairy, and of a much more ugly and
terrible form than at any time before. He would violently take her up and
ca^rie her from place to place: and after he had showed himself in diverse
forms, especially of a cat, or of a hornet, or of a betle, at last he entered
into the woman, and possessed her. At the first he would salute very
courteously, as well those that were known to her, as unknown, and call every
one by their names. And many that had not cleansed themselves by being at
shrift and confession of their sins, after the Romish manner, he would discover
the faults and sins they had committed, until the priest had give^ her a
consecrated host, as it were putting a bridle in his mouth (says mine author)
he made him hold his peace; yet nevertheless he ceased not to work strange
things in her. He would at one instant, take away the use of her eyes, ears,
and mouth. But when the hallowed bread was put into her, she was delivered of
that torment. It was thought good to place her openly in the common Theater
that the people might see how she was ve^ed. Where the wicked spirit being
exorcised by the priests, would profess himself to be the second to Lucifer,
and that he possessed her not alone, but that there were xxx. of them in the
whole, which appeared by manifest signs, when she was carried to a Church,
where were (...) out of the woman 26. at one time, like unto a black thin
little cloud. Not long after, there went out of her three other spirits, being
in another Church, making a great noise at their departure, who professed
themselves to be the third order from Lucifer. There yet remained one spirit
more, the Prince of the rest (as he said) who told them, by what signs they
should know when the deliverance of the woman from him was at hand; affirming
nevertheless, that he would not leave her until he were driven out by the
Bishop of Landunum. When the woman happened to be present, as the Priest was
at Mass, it was wonderful to see her ugly countenance, and such strange
forms and figures of her body, that it (...) all imagination. Her body would
become three or four times greater than it self: her eyes would be (...)
backward, fiery and horrible to behold, and would be thrust out of her head, as
great as an egg. She would stretch out her tongue to her breast, to her ears,
and to her temples. Her force was so great that hardly eight or nine men were
able to hold her. And this was a (...) toy, not unworthy to be laughed at, and
also to be noted, how artificially this subtle Serpent played his part in this
(...); whereby it may be conjectured, that the drift and end of all this
device was to this purpose, which took effect not altogether contrary to his
expectation. When the spirit was asked why he turned away the face of the
woman, when the Priest was at Mass; because (quoth he) the image of white
(...) does make me afraid; who nevertheless though not The cunning of the
(...).
willingly, I now acknowledge to be my Lord and master. And being asked why he
so called him; because (said he) I have taught the new professors of the Gospel
so to call him: Quanquam istic sit, (...): Though he be ^hcro, yet this ^Inihar
sort, abruptly alluding to Hocestcorpus means: This is my body, etc. But (said
the prelates) locing thou art the author and percot of all lies, who will
believe thee though thou speak truth? It is true (said the spirit) that of
mine own nature I spea^ not the truth, but now being copelled, I utter the
truth, as it were borrowed ware. This toy (says my author) who was of them,
that call themselves Catholics: wrought much trouble to them that held the
contrary opinion of the Sacrament. Insomuch as multitudes of people being
gathered together, the matter was so hotly disputed upon, that it was like to
have grown to sedition. The Devil the author of discord.
And after many practices used by physic and medicines, and other devices,
her only health (says mine author) came of the body of our Savior. For after
she had received the Sacrament three days together, by the hands of the Bishop
of Landunum, the spirit who called himself Beelzebub departed out of the
woman, the viij. of February (having first showed the sign promised before)
with such terrible thunder, howling, smoke, and fire, that the noise was heard
a great space beyond the city. The prince of Condy hearing of this matter, sent
for the woman, of whom he understood the truth as it has bin here recited. And
it is to be noted by the way, of what force an opinion is that has taken deep
root, when so learned men could not or would not, petceive the illusions and
subtle devices of the devil, to seduce or confirm the^ in their error; but
rather were ready to receive his testimony, or censure of the matter in
cotroversic in religion. And this is recited with the history, that the woman
wrestled with her physician, and boxed him well with her sists, and sent him
away with shame enough: the divelin her confessing openly that the physician
had secretly cast into the womeans mouth vi^grains of Amsimani^, to the great
danger of her life, which because they were not made small enough, she vomited
up again, which otherwise must have gone through her body: (...) match of evil
splries, the rather because by their iostigation, men fall into many things,
that are not only hinderance to their happiness, but also bring them to extreme
infelicity. But this matter belongs to another subject: and to go about to
prove it, is all one, as if a man should offer to show the light of the Sun
with a candle. And therefore to return from whence we digressed, that the
fruits which ambition and desire of dominion and glory does ordinarily bring
forth, may further appear, the bloody practices, and tragical events, that
lately happened between the French King Henry the third, and the Duke of
Guise, are nothing inferior in that kind, to any examples of antiquity.

CHAP. IIII.
The death of the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his brother: The treason of
John lustinian, and his reward: Of diverse that by notourious and infamous Act;
sought to win fame and glory, as Pausanias, Herostrarus, Poltrot, John
Ianrige, Balthazar Seracke, James Clement, a Dominican Friar: The Story of a
Spanish Priest: Of such as from baseness aspired to principality and empire:
of Tamerlaine, Arsace, etc. With many histories to that purpose. The original
of the Amazons: of Sivard king of Sencia: of fundry ^artike Ladies, etc. A
discourse of beauty and varity in apparel: And that no traer felicity can
sabsist cytber in pleasure, riches, or benour.

CRedible ^bors affirm, that the Duke of Goise, aspired to the kingdom of
France: which at length being known to the king, he applied all his wirs to
prevent him. And after many accempts, and long deliberatio^, he could find no
berser means, than to take his life from him. And to bring this to pafs; he
called together diverse of the Cardinals and principal nobility: among which
were such as he most mistrusted, and misliked, and made the of his counsel. And
being assembled to co^sult upon matters A curious cursning policy.
of great importance, the king makes to them a solemn and eloquent speech;
feining that he was now sufficiently taught, that the king of Navarre being an
heretic, and excommunicate, and by the Pope pronounced not capable of a
kingdom, conspired with his consederats, to take from him his crown. He told
them, that he was weary of the wars, and travels of a kingdom, and was
resolved to yield over all government, and give himself to ease and rest. And
forasmuch as God had given him no heir of his body to inherit his crown, and
small hope thereof left, he desired them with a fatherly care, that they would
think upon some man that were meet to succeed him, and take upon him the
government of the Realm; such an one as would pursue the King of Navarre and
the heretics to death. That at length the flourishing kingdom of France, may
enjoy his religion and long looked for peace. These words he spoke with such
gravity, and show of plain meaning, that no man mistrusted any fraud or
dissimulatio^. This speech of the kings was nothing unpleasant to some of his
new counselors; who answered him that the King was young and lusty enough, and
well able to govern the Realm himself, for the continuance wherofthey praicd to
God nights and day: that he needed no other man's counsel or help. Nevertheless
seeing that the kings t^ind was more addicted to quietness and rest, than to
wars or government of his realm, it were no reasorr for the to deny the king
their counsel in those things, that were agreeable to his will, and were
profitable to the commonwealth: yet they desired the king to name some man,
whom he thought able to bear so great a burden, and worthy of so high a
dignity, that after his death were meet to succeed him. The king after he had
reckoned many Princes worthy The project will prosecuied.
to reign, he concluded, that he knew none among them more meet for this
purpose, than the Duke of Guise, whose worthiness and praises, and service done
by him and his father to the Commonwealth, when he had set forth, with a great
many goodly words, his council willingly allowed his choice; and sent
presently to the Duke of Guise, to ^ine to the Court, hom whence for fear he
had before absented himself. Who presently came in post to the king, of whom
he was with great courtesy and honor received, and the whole Realm committed
to his government, with high ^tes of dignities. But this felicitic continued
not long. The King to avoid the mischief that hanged over his own head,
pursuing his resolution, to deliver himself of the fear of the Duke, to bring
the matter the better to pass, the king stiored by devotion determined to
remove to a Cell, meaning there to be confessed and to receive the Sacrament.
He called into his chamber sour of his Council, such as he best trusted,
where he discovered about them, the i^arits and indigtitles he had received
of the Duke of Guise: his extreme ^bition and desire to migne: the danger he
stood in by the reasons continuatly practiced by the Duke and his consederares,
against his person. He told them, that he was determined to have the Duke
slain as a Traitor, and unprosicable member to the rea^me. And when he had
desised their advise, some were of opinion, that it were better to commit him
and some of his consederates to some strong prison, and to proceed against
them by order of justice. But the rest considering the imminent danger; were of
a contrary opinion. The King likewise uttered his conccit, allodging it to be a
thing full of porill to delay the time, and to proceed with him by order of
law. That the Duke was grown so great, that no Judge in the realm would or
durstadjudge him to death, and therefore he was determined to have him killed.
Being thus resolved, the king sends one to the Duke, to show him that he had
some secret matter, whereof to confer with him before he went to consession,
and receive the Sacrament, The Sacrament made a color to shed blood.
and therefore that he should come to the king in his chamber, where he stayed
for him. The chamber was hanged with very rich Arras, behind which were hidden
eight men appointed to do the act. The Gai^comm^ Mercury.
into the the chamber, but king was not there to he found having withdrawn
himself into and the chamber, which made the Duke suspect (...) one steppeth
forth from behind the hangings, and whom as the Duke co^ end (...) the ^her
seven^ him many wounds, so as being ^ ground, crying alowd for help and mercy.
The C^dinall his brother perceiving by his voice, the danger he was in, ran to
help him, but being kept out by a^men, another came into the chamer, and
already ^ing and vised him to ask God forgiveness, and the (...). The Duke
twice asked mercy of God, and then spi^ The death of the Duke of Guise.
no more words, but held his hand upon his mouths,as though the name of the
king was odin^s to him. Alter the Duke was dead, the Cardinal of Guise, and
diverse others were apprehended, and the Cardinal being brought into the place
where his brother lay, the king comes in, and asked him whether he knew that
body. He answered, that he knew him well to be the body of his most dear
brother and Lord, with whom he wished presently to be in the same world he was.
Assure your self (said the king) I will bring it to pass, that you shall have
your desire, and that shortly. The next day the king caused the Cardinal to
be brought into the place where his brother lay, and to be slain. When the
The death of the Cardinal.
death of the Duke and his brother was known, the Duchess their mother, and
the late wife of the Duke, made suit to the king for the bodies of the two
brethren: With being denied, the mother expostulates bitterly with the King,
accusing him of infidelity, charge him with the breach of his oath, of his
promise, of his agreement, pucceth him in mind of the benefits, which he and
his realm had received of the Duke, and also of his father, for which so great
ingratitude and barbarous cruelty, she asks vengeance of God upon him and
his. The king being moved with her bold speech, commands her to prison. And
as she was going away, Madame, (quoth he) be of good comfort, the same kind
of death is happened to your son the Duke, that chanced in times past to
Julius Casar: who was killed in the Senate. But when the wife or widow of the
Duke, saw that she could not obtain her suit of the king, she lifting up her
eyes and hands to heaven, shedding abundance of reares, complains with a
lamentable voice, upon the uncertaintie and unconstancie of humane matters:
that nothing was to be found any where certain, but only with God: who I hope
(says she) as a most just Judge will not suffer me to dye (though nothing
would be more pleasant to me, than to dye, and to enjoy the company of my
most dear husband) until I see so barbarous and beastly a butchery of my Lord
and husband The lust complain of the (...) of (...).
revenged, the like example whereof was never heard before. And when she had
reckoned up his virtue and valor, and the great service he had done to the
king and his country. Is this, O king (said she) the crown of Laurel, which
is due to them that regard not the danger of their estate, and of their life
for the safety of their king? Is this the (...) that ought to be granted to
him, who has not only defended France from strangers, but also has often
overthrown and destroyed whosoever were enemies to his country? Then turning to
her husband: O my Lord (said she) how happy and fortunate had I been, if
after thy praye^ offered to God, thou had been slain giving charge upon
thine enemies; thy death in that sort taken would have been to me much more
tolerable, nor would have wounded my mind so greatly: so should you also have
taken away all emulation from them, that envy that honor. And after she had
reprehended his emul^tors, and set forth his merits: yea, (says she) he had so
great confidence in the king (but I would to God he had not done so) that he
feared not to come unarmed to him, being armed, of whom in steed of reward he
was slain. Oh how great a wickedness is this, that he who has so often
defended the kings life, should by the kings commandment have his life taken
from him^ That he who with so great peril of his life and all his goods (...)
possessions has kept the crown upon the kings (...), should be falsely
suspected to affect the crown him^, and without any kind of law or justice,
without (...) of the cause, so great a Prince should be so cruelly murdered? O
how great an injury is this to him, that has bestowed all his care for the
preservation of his country, and safety of the king^ But why do I call him
king? ought he to be called a king, who commanded him to be murdered, in whom
all his felicity and safety consisted? O my God, the most just revenger of
wicked acts, I ^ye unto thee, it is thy part to judge justly, (...) not the
wicked slanders devised of his enemies, to darken the perpetual glory of my
husband, nor let not that villainous act committed upon him remain (...) Then
she speaks to her kinsfolks and friends; will ye behold with equal eyes and
minds, the glory and fame of so great a chiefetaine, and an invincible
soldier, to be extinguished so quickly? Will ye, that I, as it were always
for saken, dye at last without any hope of revenge? will ye that the revenge of
so foul an act be deferred until these my children, yet void of reason, come
to be men? O my little sons and daughters, how happy had ye been, if so soon
as ye had been borne, ye had presently changed life with death? O king, do you
think that they be slain, that be yet alive? You have taken the bread out of
the hands of the little ones: you would have buried the remembrance of an
excellent Prince in oblivion for ever: ye have in some sort your desire, but
the vengeance of God you shall not escape, neither shall so barbarous an act go
unpunished, which your enemies do detest, and your friends bewail. O king who
will hereafter believe you? who will put his trust in you? to whom will not
your fidelity be suspected? Do you think that your friends do commend you for
this your fact, especially seeing they see your mouth speaks one thing, and
your heart thinks another? As for my self (O King) I will not hereafter call
you my King, but ye shall be in that place with me, as they upon whom the
judgment of God will assuredly fall, that whereas y^e ought to have protected
widows and orphans, ye have made me a widow, and my children orphans, by
taking away the life of my most dearly beloved husband. In this mourning and
lamentation of this sorrowful Duchess, in place of two brethren that were
slain, she was delivered of two sons. To these extreme passions and
miserable estate, ambition and desire of dominion brought the Duke of Guise and
his friends, which not long after cost the king also his life, and great
trouble to the kingdom of France. These be the fruits of worldly glory. Vain
glorious men, are not only hurtful to themselves, but also to others. Solon
says, To name a vain glorious man in right terme^, is to call him a fool.

Whosoever escapes best, that is desirous of honor and glory, he is sure not
to strike the (...) he shoots at, any thing the rather by that means, that
is, felicity, or Summum bonum, or sovereign good. (...) of Genua, by treason
or cowardlinesse let Mah^met the great Turk enter into Constantinople, upon
his promise to make him king. And when Mahomet was gotten into the town, he
made him king, according to his promise, and after three days he put him to
death. A short reign, with no long glory, and yet worthy of such a wretch, by
whose means the Emperor, the P^triark, and almost all the Christians in the
town were cruelly slain: and the Empress with her noblest Damsels led
captive before Mahomet, and after a thousand villainies, all cut in pieces.

Notwithstanding that death is a thing naturally shunned of all men, yet some
have so thi^ (...) and glory, having no other means to (...) it, (...)
committing some notorious wicked fact, have wi^fully lost their lives, to win
that way fame after their (...) (...) desirous of glory, asked (...), how he
might ^ame win fame; If thou (...) (quoth (...)) (...) famous man, for then his
glory will be turned to (...). Whereupon he went to Philip king of (...),
father to Alexander the Great, that was the most famous man of his time, and
(...) him. The like humor reigned in him that burned the goodly T^mple of
D^ana, which for the sumptuousness of the building, and curiosity of the
workmanship, was accounted one of the seven wonders of the world: who conle^ed
to have done it for no other cause, but to win (...), hoping his na^ with the
memory of the fact, should be commended to posterity by writing, according to
the Poets saying: ^
^
Live happy, if my verse can ought, or I,
Memorial of thy name shall never die.


Livie makes the like report of a Roman, who was so ambitious of glory and
^ame, that he (...) fire on the treasure house, where the people of Rome laid
up their treasure. And being taken, tormented, and examined, he confessed he
had none other meaning in this wicked enterprise, but that (...) should make
mention of him in their Chronicles. But the (...), as Petrarke says, we seek
after, is but (...) or (...), it is a shadow, it is nothing. And though death
deliver^ a man from the rule of fortune, yet whether (...) will or not, fame
will follow (...), as the (...) a body. And therefore (says he) (...) (...)
live, and (...) in (...), and (...) find same in thy grave.

The Duke of Alva seemed to be touched with the like desire of vainglory, when
after he had expulsed the Prince of Orange, with his army of Almaines out of
the Low country, and in some sort pacified the (...) of The ^tion of the Duke
of (...).
the people, erected a stately and sumptuous Trophee in the Castle of Antwerp,
for a monument, and perpetual memory of his acts done in the Low Countries. It
was an Image of copper, representing the Duke himself, which had under his
feet, a body lying flat or prostrate, with two heads, and six arms, where of
the one held papers written; the second a torch; the third, a broken hammer;
the fourth, a nail; the fith, a purse; the fixth, an axe; under his feet, was
a disguised person; behind the prostrate body was a great sachel, out of which
appeared a Serpent, at whose cares there hanged a sawcer. The whole work of
fifteen foot high was placed upon a plate of the same metal, and the plate
upon a marble stone, four square, whose base was of the largeness of three
paces, all excellently well made according to the proportion of the Image. The
title written in this triumphant stone was thus:

Ferdin ando (...) a Toledo, Alba Duci Philippl secunds, (...) apud Belgas
(...), quodextinct^ sedition^, rebellibus pulsis, Religione (...), (...),
Provinciae pacem (...), Regis optimi (...) po^. Upon the one side was an altar,
with this title: Deo patrum (...): on the other side, was the morning, driving
away the darkness of the night, with this title: (...)This notable p^ce of
work, had many interpretations, what should be thereby ^gnified: but few or
none could rightly con^ the Dukes meaning. But that glorious trophee wrought
him much envy and malice among the people, and was misliked of all men, and of
the Spani^ themselves, that he would (...) and glory so much in other men's
calamities, whereof he was the author, and wherein he used the part rather of
a tyrant, than of a Viceroy. But not long after, when the Citizens of (...)
recovered the Castle, the people as it were triumphing over a cruel tyrant,
threw down and defaced this glorious Trophee.

But what need we seek for (...) of (...), when besides that of the Duke, our
(...) time will ^ford us too many of them, that have sought for glory and fame
by committing most notorious and wicked facts, though their pretense is (...)
of (...), (...) some other thing. In these civil (...) of (...), Poltrot, for
none other cause watched for opportunity to kill the old Duke of Guise and as
he lay at the ^ege of Orleance, and took a boat to pass the river, (...) as
one of his (...), nothing suspected, pisto^ his pistol at him, charged with
two or three bulletts, and wounded him to death. And as he fled being amazed
with darkness of the night, and partly with the greatness of the fact, after
he had wandered on horseback all the night, by that the day was ready to
break, he was come to the Suburbs again, and fell into the watch of the
Almaines; where he was apprehended, and afterward torn in pec^ with four
horses for his reward.

The like murder was attempted, but not with the like success, at this time,
against the Prince of O^enge, in the low countries by a Spaniard of Bilbo,
called (...). This young man served a (...) werpe, a Sp^niard likewise. And
having determined to kill the Prince of O^enge, by all likelihood to win fame
(for to escape with his life he had no hope) he made choice of the day, in
which the Duke of Alenson being at Antwerpe, had appointed to celebrate the day
of his nativity with justs and triumphs, and a sumptuous supper, to which the
Prince of Orange, with the (...) men of the (...) were invited. For this
purpose, this (...) had provided a little short dag, and girding his dagger to
him, after he had drunk off a bowl of good win^; I go (^th he to one of his
fellows) I go to deliver the world of a most cruel Tyrant. And though the
low contrymen per^dventure think otherwise of it now, the time will come,
that they will allow what I intend to do. And so he goes to the Princes
house: And walking by the door of the par^ur, where the Prince dined, he
watched for his coming forth. And as the Prince came to go (...) another
chamber, this young man presents to him a supplication, which as the Prince
stayed to read, he discharges his dag, and strikes him under the chin, the
bullet coming forth under his right care. And because the dagge being
overcharged brake, and struck off his thombe, he draws his dagger to stabbe
him; but Count Hollacke took thee young man about the midst with his arms,
and stayed him, whom the Princes followers presently slew with seven and twenty
wounds, as is reported. The Prince escaped this danger, the wound though it
were grievous, not being mortal. The example of this young man's evil
success, could not forewarne another, stirred up with the like desire of glory
and fame, to make the like attempt. But of such force the desire of glory is as
the (...) ^th: Magnum ^ter ascend^, sed das (...) gl^ria vires.
I undertake a journey of great length,
But glory, to or come it, gives me strength.


A Gentleman of Burgundy called Balthazar Seracke, after he understood that the
king of Spain had proclaimed the Prince of Orange a traitor, sought for
opportunity to kill the Prince. Who seeing his reputation to decay, by reason
of the Prince of Parma his prosperous success, and fearing the people, that
were (...) of the wars, he left Antwerpe, and withdrew himself to Delfe.
About this time the Duke of Alenson died, which the Queen Mother signified to
the Prince by her letters, and made choice of this Balthazar to be the
messenger, because he was well known to the Prince, in whose Court he was
seven years brought up. This man having delivered his letters and message, was
conversant with the gentlemen of the Princes Court, seeking continually for
opportunity to put in execution, that he had long before determined. When he
had received his dispatch, and prepared speedily to (...) into France (as it
was thought) he had provided a very good horse, to stay for his coming
without the (...) of the town, ready for him, whatsoever should (...). About
two of the (...) in the afternone, what time he thought the Prince would rise
from (...), he returned to the Court, and faining that he had (...) something,
he was without suspicion let in. He (...) the Princes coming forth of the
place where he (...), and offering to speak to him, having a pistol under his
cloak, charged with three bullets, poisoned and chained together, he
discharges it at the Prince, and struck him so deadly, that the Prince fell
presently to the (...), and without any further time, but only to (...) the
Lords prayer, moving a little his lips ended his life. His guard hearing the
clap of the pistol, and perceiving by the cry and noise of his servants, that
the prince was slain, they sought for the man that did the act: but he in the
mean time escaped through a stable, near to the garden, and was almost come
to the gate of the town to his horse, when one of the Princes retinue, that
was present when he was slain, had overtaken him, and wrestled with him until
others came and apprehended him, and led him to prison. And when he saw that
all means was taken from him to escape, and no hope nor place left for pardon,
laying all fear aside, he asked them whether the Prince was dead; which when
they affirmed, he told them, that he was assured to dye: but he rejoiced
very greatly that he had done the thing, which he had many years wished might
take effect. And therefore that he would take his death joyfully and
willingly, that he had done the thing with so good success, whereof others
before him had failed, with the loss of their lives. No torments could make
him (...) confess, who set him on, to commit that murder. But he constantly
answered, that he was moved thereto, by the persuasion of no Prince, or any
other man, but of his own accord and free will. But said, that diverse causes
excited him to do that act. The first cause he said) was, that he believed it
was done to the glory of God; because the Prince was a professed enemy to the
Romish Catholic faith. The second was, that to take away the life from a most
cruel enemy of the lowcountries, he knew would be beneficial and profitable
to his country, to which he owed his life: which all good men, and lovers of
peace, would commend and allow. And last of all, that he should do notable
service to the King of Spain his master: of whom nevertheless he denied to be
hired, or allured with any promises or rewards, to commit the murder. He
protested that he nothing repented him of the fact, but greatly rejoiced that
his enterprise had taken so good effect, and had success according to his
desire. He suffered all manner of torments with a wonderful patience, so as he
brake not out into howlings, or cryings, weeping, or making moan and (...) as
the manner is, nor gave any sign of a troubled or dismayed mind, but
constantly affirmed that it was much better and more profitable to the
commonwealth, that two men (meaning the Prince and himself) should suffer
violent death, than so many thousands, that by his means were brought to their
end. The first night he was hanged up in a kind of torture, and ^ourged most
grievously five times with rods, besides other grievous pains: and at last he
was put in a vanne, his hands and feet being bound, and ^sed up and down that
he might not sleep. The days and nights following he was hanged up again in
the instrument made for torture, an hundred and fifty pound weight hanging at
his toes, and diversely torm^ced; which he took with such a stout and resolute
mind, that they which tormented him being drawn into admitation, and asking
him how it came to pass, that he seemed not to be troubled with so great
torments: he answered that it was to be attributed to the prayers (...) the
(...). After he had bin many times examined, and suffered many tortures, and
news brought him, that he was condemned, and must dye; he with a joyful
countenance and voice, gave God thanks. And when a Minister of the reformed
religion, was sent to comfort him, he would not hear him, but answered, that
he knew well enough in what favor he was with God. When he was brought to the
(...), the (...) pu^th upon his feets (...) of shoes, tudely made of dr^e
leather, and presses his feet between two iron plates burning hot, so were
his f^t parched. Then he plucked away the ^ews of his hips, and arms, and a^ms
with a pair of ^ngs fire-hote, and beats him upon the head with the pistol
that killed the Prince. And last of all he opened his breast, and being yet
alive, plucked out his heart, and (...) it (...) his face; and bowelled and
quartered him, as the manner is. This was the end of this glorious enterprise:
the murder of a notable Prince, to the great grief and sorrow of all the
people, of whom he was dearly loved, and to the prejudice of the
Low Countries Commonwealth: besides the loss of his life by cruel torment^,
that committed the fact, with the hazard of his soul, if God were not
merciful unto him.

And what was it, as we may conjecture, but a desire of vaineglory, that
emboldened the poor Friar, to (...) great an enterprise, to kill the late
French king Henry the third? a most notorious and execrable murder of his
annoy^ted Prince, that was of his own and the^ religion that set him on work.
After the death of the Duke of Guise, the Monks and Friars, and the rest of
that rabble of Cloister-men were greatly incensed against the king, and by all
manner of means sought (...) destruction. And when they could find no man
among the tempora^ and lay men, that would consent to^ vile an act, to murder
his Prince, they searched dilig^ in their cloisters and religious houses, for
one of (...) own stamp, to serve their turn. And at last they (...) a young
novice of their own for their purpose, called James Cle^, a Dominican Monk or
Friar, about (...) and twenty year old, who not past half a year before
sung his first Mass. This harebraind fellow, they perceived was a fit
instrument to commit this vile murder of their king: him they persuade with
many reasons, and fair promises of great matters to undertake this enterprise;
and put him in hope that he should escape without danger. But if the worst
happened, yet they assured him that he should be canonized for a Saint. This
young man at length being overcome with their persuasions and subtle devices,
not considering sufficiently the great danger both of his body and soul, gave
his consent and promise to kill the king. But afterward being pricked in
conscience, and doubtful whether the matter were good, he desired to be
satisfied by the Jesuits (who in learning and virtue are in men's opinions
preferred before al other orders) that his conscience might be assured of the
goodness of this enterprise. And when the Jesuits had put him out of doubt,
that the act was very honest, and meritorious for his soul, he was resolute.
His favorers are not ashamed to write, that as this Friar was with great
devotion praying to God, for the good success of this meritorious enterprise,
an Angel came to him, and said, Friar James, ^ise; and prepare thy self to
attain a crown of Martyrdom. Thou shall defend the Catholic religion in
France against all the persecutors, and shall kill the king himself, that
laboreth to destroy the same religion. And after a certain time, when he had
prayed and fasted (with great devotion no doubt) he took his journey the
twentieth day of July, in the year one thousand five hundred eighty nine, from
Paris to Clowes (which is about two leagues) where the king lay with his camp:
having for his companion, another young Friar like himself. The next day in the
morning, the Friar having told the Kings servants, that he had letters and a
Message to deliver to the King, he was presently without any suspicion,
brought into the Kings chamber (for the King was better affected to the
Dominicans, than to any other order of Friars, and suffered them at all times
to have access to his presence) and because of the secretnesse of his message,
all other were commanded forth. Then this hypocrite with great humility and
duty delivered A (...).
his counterfeit letters, but this caytiffe with a knife that was double
poisoned, struck at the king, thinking to have thrust him to the heart. But the
king perceiving the blow coming, struck down the Friars hand, and received
the wound in his belly, about the wast, where the knife was left sticking. The
king drew forth the knife out of his body, and turning himself to the Friar,
thrust him into the face, supposing his body had been armed. The Gentlemen
without, hearing the noise within, ran into the chamber, and beholding what was
done, after the kings Council had examined the Friar, they fell upon him and
slew him: and cast the other Friar that stood without, headlong into the
river, and drowned him. The day following his carkesse was torn in pieces with
wild horses: and the king died after midnight.

And that it may the better appear, what dangerous and horrible effects this
ambitious humor and desire to maintain them, and the reputation of the high
dignities and glorious estate, that are possessed of them, works, it shall
not be impertinent to the matter to show some part of the proceedings of Pope
Sixtus after the French kings death, whereof he was taken for the principal
author. Whereby we shall perceive how far they are deceived, that think
felicity to consist in honorable and glorious estate, when the same shall so
blind and corrupt the mind of the principal Prelate, that arrogateth to
himself such high titles and holiness, and authority over all, as to
conspire with traitors, to excite a Monk or Friar treacherously to lay
violent hands upon his anointed king; and contrary to all humanity and
Christianity, to allow and exalt the fact above the skies, wherein he forgot
this good sentence: (...) peccato addit, qui culpa quam fecit, patrocinia
defensionis adjungit. When news came to Rome of the kings murder, whereas all
men were amazed and astonished at so horrible a fact, the like whereof was never
heard before, lamented of thousands by infinite streams of tears, Pope Sixtus
nothing dissembling his joy and gladness, made all Rome triumph and rejoice
with him, with all manner of pleasures and pastimes; and the Pope himself
assembleth the Cardinals and others of his retinew in the Consistory, A Fri^
(...) a Saint for being a Regicide.
to hear him preach. The argument of his Sermon was, that the wicked and
traitorous Friar that murdered this king, should be canonized a Saint: and that
his praise and commendations for so worthy an act, ought to be exalted above
the skies. And because he was not ignorant that it was of great moment to the
setting forth of a notable act, if it were compared with such, as were most
worthy of commendation: and finding none of all those heroical and glorious
acts of famous men that are registered in histories of antiquity, worthy to be
compared with this, he brings his comparison from God himself. He feared
not (which a man may tremble to report) to compare the murder of this Christian
king, by the treason of a Monk or Friar, with the work of the creation of the
world, and also with the incarnation of Christ, and with the other mysteries
(...) careful comparison.
of our salvation. In the second part of his Sermon, he defameth and slandereth
the king, whom by his wicked counsel, he had caused to be killed most
shamefully and ignominiously, pronouncing him damned, whom not long before for
his singular godliness, he exalted with his praises up to Heaven, calling him
son^e, and the most Christian king. And all this spoken, and much more to the
like effect, with such bitterness and rancor, that it is easily seen what
monstrous minds many of them carry, that are overcome and blinded with passion
of ambition, and unsatiable desire to aspire, and maintain their estate in
honor and glory.

The manners of these ambitious Popes brings to my remembrance a story of a
Spanish Priest, that in the rebellion in Castile against the Emperor and King
of Spain Charles the fifth, every Sunday for the space of three weeks,
recommended to the prayers of his Parishioners, among other things the usurped
king and captain of the rebels, called John of Padilia, and the Queen his
wife: For of a truth (said he) these be the true kings, all the rest before
were tyrants. It chanced shortly after, that John of Padilia passed that way
with his army, and the soldiers that lodged in the Priests house, enticed away
his woman, drank up his wine, killed his hens, and eat up his baco^. The
Sunday following the Priest being angry with his loss, said in the same
church: It is not unknown unto you (my brethren) how John of Padilia passed
this way, and how his soldiers have left me never a hen, have eaten me a (...)
of bacon, have drunk out my wine; I say that hence forth ye shall not pray to
God for him, but for king Charles and for our Lady Queen Jane (for they be the
true Princes) and let these strange kings go to the Devil. The like manners
the Popes have a long time used, one day to establish kings, another day to
depose them, not because they did take away their bacon, but their usurped
authority, nor for that they (...) away their women, but because they (...) and
(...) men to leave them and their vain traditions, to follow Christ and his
Gospel, and many times, for causes of much less importance, as appeared by
this lamentable example of this late French king and others: and when they
intend to persecute any king by their Bulls, or by the sword, or by some
treachery, their pretense should be zeal and love to the commonwealth, which
they would bewail with fighes and sorrowful (...), like the Lady Mary de
(...), that (...) forth the plate of the Church of Toledo. This Lady in the
(...) of Castile, against the (...) Charles the sift, whereof she was one of
the principal authors, lacking money to pay the soldiers (rebels) entered into
the Church (...) and holding up her hands, covered with black, knocking her
breast, weeping and sobbing, with two burning torches before her: And after
this manner (...) a sorrow and devotio^, committed a notable (...), and did
take away the plate out of the (...) ^
(...). Even so did Pope Sixtus, and the rest of them that have undertaken the
like enterprise, first bewail with great sorrow the state of France, and then
excited (...) people treacherously to murder their (...). A most happy man was
the French king that (...) to be murdered with so great zeal and (...). When
men intend a mischief, they go willingly to commit a murder, and lament when
they go to be hanged, but the Pope contrariwise did lament when he was about
to kill, and peradventure would have gone merrily to execution.

No man could give a better censure upon the vani^ of this world, than Solomon,
not only by his singular wisdom, where with God had endued him, but also by
his experience, who was the rich^st king of the world, and abounded so
exceedingly in glory and prosperity, and in all those things that gives
delight and pleasure, which men so greatly desire and esteem for happiness in
this life, that all the kings of the earth desired to see his face, for his
wisdom and renowned felicity. I have been (says he) king of Israel in
Jerusalem, and purposed with my self to seek out by wisdom all things: and
I have seen that all things under the Sun, are mere vanities and a^ctions
of spirit. I said in my heart, I will go and abound in delights, and in every
pleasure that may be had, and I saw that this was also vanity: I took great
works in hand, builded houses to my self, planted vin^yards, made orchards
and gardens, and beset them with all kind of trees: I made me fish ponds to
water my trees: I possessed servants and handmaids, and had a great family,
with herds of cattle, above any that ever were before me in Jerusalem: I
gathered together gold and silver, the riches of kings and provinces: I
appointed to my self singers, both men and women, which are the delights of
the children of men fine cups also to drink wine withal: and what soever mine
eyes did desire, I denied it not unto them: Neither did I let my heart from
using any pleasure, to delight it self in these things which I prepared. And
when I turned my self to all that my hands had made, and to all the labors
wherein I had taken such pains and sweat, I saw in them all vanity and a^iction
of the mind. This was the judgment of (...), which he had gathered not only
out of his own wisdom, and out of the observation of the course of other
men's lives, but by his own experience, that so fully did enjoy and possess
these goodly things which men have in such admiration, as never any man more.
And when he had the fruition and use of all these things to the full, and many
more, whereof the Scripture makes mention, he pronounced nevertheless at last
this sentence of them all: Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia van^tas; Vanity of
vanities, and all is vanity. What reason have men then to have worldly wealth
and pleasures in such estimation, when this wise and mighty Prince, having
tasted of them fully, and seen and perceived what goodness was in them,
accounted them nothing but vanity? It is (...).
truly said, that ambition is the beastly nourse of covetousness, and both
they in these days, creep in under a form and manner of severity: so that
the man which desires power, must needs be an evil maintainer of justice, and
he that thirsts after glory, runs speedily into actions of injury and
oppression. And therefore who aspireth to glory, and hunts after praise of
wicked men, must of necessity be like them. Honorable honor consists not
in the dignities we possess, but rather in the good works, by which we
deserve them. More honorable is he that deserves honor and has it not, than
he that possesses it, and deserves it not.

But such is the vanity of men, to hunt after glory in vain things. If they
want worldly wealth and honorable estate to glory in, they will find out some
other thing: they will take occasion to glory either in the nobility of their
blood, or in the form and beauty of the body, or else in gorgeous apparel,
and new fangled fashions: or if all these fail, they will not let to glory in
the delights they have taken in the vain pleasures of the flesh. And what ca^e
is there to glory so much in honorable estate, as though it were due to
Nobility of blood, when the basest men of the world have attained to the
highest dignities? V^at a Portingall was ^.
the son of an Heardman, and in his youth help his father to keep sheep,
and after that was a plough-man, but carrying a lofty mind, he left that base
trade and became a hunter of wild beasts: And when the Romans came into that
country, he assembled his companions together, and would often skirmish with
them, and at last he grew so valiant and expert in arms, and had gotten such
ateputation, that he gathered together a sufficient army, and became the
principal man of his country, which he defended from the Romans fourteen
or fifteen years, in which time he wan many notable victories.

The great Tam^ne was a peasants son, and kept ca^ell: who persuading five
hundred sheepheards his companions, to sell their cattle and betake them to
a^mes, they watched the highways, and robbed the Merchants of that country;
which when the King of Persia understood, he sent a thousand ^orsemen to (...)
them. But T^ane so handled the matt^, that of enemies, he made them his
friends, and (...) forces together, they did notable feats (...). And taking
occasion by the civil wars between the king of Persia and his brother, he
subdued that country, and made war against Bajazet Emperor of the Turks,
whom he overcame in battle, and took him prisoner. He wan also great
victories upon the Sultan of Egypt, and upon the king of Arabia. And ^o became
one of the most famous and mighty Princes of the world.

(...) king of the Parthians was of so base a stock, that his parents could not
be known. Yet he got such a^ putation by his virtue, that his succe^ours were
called (...), as the Emperors of Rome were called (...), of (...). (...) the
(...) of Rome was the son of an artificer, whose grandfather ^.
was a gardiners son. (...) the Emperor was also the son of a crafts man.
The Emperor Probus was a gardiners son. (...) the third king of the
Lombards, was the son of a poor common strumpet: who being delivered of two
sons, like an unnatural mother cast them into a great ditch, where was a
little water. The king Agelmond passing by chance that way, (...) this child in
the water, touched it gently with the end of his spear, which he had in his
hand, to see what it was. The child feeling himself touched, as young as he
was, catched the (...) by the end with his hand, and held it fast. The king
(...) to see (...) young a creature, to hold the (...) with (...) force, (...)
it to be taken up, and to be (...) with great care, and the place being named
Lama where it lay, he (...) the child (...). Who afterward found fortune
(...), that he became king of the Lombards. In (...) two brethren borne in an
(...) in the (...), called (...), and (...), of base estate and (...), of
Pirates first in one galley, and after joining more with them, became kings of
Algier. In the same age also Dragut of like condition, being a Pirat, became
king of Tripoly. The Sultan of Caire was chosen out of the Mamalukes, to which
dignitle, none could ascend, except first he had been a slave, and a renegate
Christian: so that afterward he commanded absolutely in Egypt, and Syria.
Diverse other Emperors, and kings, and men of honorable estate were descended
of the like baseness of parentage, which for brevities sake ^omit. And if we
should examine spiritual dignities, we shall find the like accidents in the
Church. Pope N^cholas the first, was descended of so base parentage, that his
father and mother were feign to go up and down to sell ^ullets and eggs. Pope
John the two and twentieth, Gregory the seventh, and diverse other Popes, which
I will pass over, were very basely descended. Which examples seem to confirm
Platoes opinion, that every king comes of a slave, and every slave of a king.
And this was a strange thing, which happened not long sithence in Munster, a
principal town in Westphalia, where a Butcher being retired from his
country, as an exile, called John of Leydon, was proclaimed king, and was
served and obeyed of all the people, until the town was taken, which was
defended for the space of three years. But why should men glory so much in
high dignities and honorable estate, whether they have attalned the same by
their own virtue, or by their parents, as a matter in their opinion proper to
their sex, when there has not been so high a dignity or honorable estate,
how great soever that has been gotten by the virtue and valor of any man,
but by the same virtue the like has been gotten and kept by women: whom we
seem to have in contempt, as insufficient and unworthy to a^chieve so great
matters, in respect of the opinion we have of our selves? Out of a great many
examples we will draw forth a few.

The Scithians were a warlike people, by the report of many histories, and were
sometime governed by two kings. But as the manner of men is not to ^dure a
copartner The (...) of the (...).
in supreme government, these two kings fell into dissension, and after civil
watres had continued a certain time, the party vanqu^ with his adherents, were
enforced to forsake the^ own country, and to plant themselves near the
frontiers of Cappadocia upon the river called Thermodon: which country they
possessed certain years in despite of the inhabitants. But in process of
time, the people of that country finding themselves grieved with their
government, conspired secretly against the Scithians, and put them all to the
sword. This news was so grievous to their wives, that were left behind in
their own country, that they determined to arm themselves like men, and to
revenge their husbands death. And that the fortune of them all might be equal,
and the sorrow common, they sieve the husbands of them that remained behind,
when the others departed out of their country. They chose two Queens among
them, to whose government, they submitted themselves, and assembling themselves
together, they forsook their own habitations, and like men of wa^re marched
toward their enemies country, who understanding that they were women, made of
them little account. By mean whereof being unprovided to make such resistance
as was necessary, they were all put to the sword, and their country possessed
and inhabited by these women: which were called Amazones, because they had a
custom to cut off their right papps, that it might not be any impediment to
their shooting, being much given to archery, a principal weapon among them.
These Amazones made conquest of many countries, and for their valor and
prowess in arms, they became the most famous people of the world. And that
then name mi^ht not perish for want of ^sue, they agreed to marry with certain
of their neighbors, upon this condition, that they should come to a certain
place, and (...) appointed, and there stay with them certai^e d^yes un^ll they
found themselves with child, and then to r^e h^me to their houses again: and
the daughters that they brought forth should be brought up with them, in feats
of a^mes, and other m^nly exercises; the boys should be sent to their fathers.
And if they chanced to detain any of them, they would so ma^gle and maime
them, that they should be altogether un^t for wars, and serve to no other
use, but to (...), and to do the work of women. (...) ^king of Su^ia made
war upon the king of Norwey, and overcame him, ^
and took from him his kingdom: and laying ^de all modesty, let loose the
^eynes of his intemperat lust, and deflowred all the noble women of the kings,
that he had taken. The young king of Denmark raised a power to aid the
Norwegians, and to deliver them from so ignominious a servitude, who being in
the field with his army, there comes to join with him, a company of noble
and gentlewomen, excellently well armed, that either had suffered, or else
feared they should suffer injury. The battle grew very hot, and a great
slaughter on both sides, when the women charged the Tyrant with such virtue and
valor, that they slew him, and by all men's confession, were the only cause of
the victory. In the wars between the Succians, Goths, and Danes, there were
two notable women, expert and Warlike (...).
valiant soldiers in the army, called H^tha and V^sna, one being the chief
Captain, the other being Standerd bearer; whose right hand was st^ken off in
the ^ght, by the Valiant Champion star^. And in sea matters also, women have
been nothing inferior to men. Alvilda a virgin gathered together certain
young maids, and exercised piracie, in the North parts, where she achieved
great matters, for the which she is registered in Chronicles to perpetual
memory. Many of these examples may be produced out of histories, of the
excellency of women: and among the rest, of Amalasuenta, daughter to
Theodoricus king of the Goths, whose virtues are exalted above the skies.
About three years past, there was a Gentlewoman slain at the siege of a
Castle in Gelderland, who had served the States, in the wars as a soldier in
the habit of a man many years. When there was any going abroad to do some
exploit, none was more forward than she, nor more valiant and hardy in fight.
She was not known to be a woman of those that were most familiar with her,
until she was dead. And if we should cite examples of learning, we shall
find them in this also, nothing inferior to men. Among which number was
Leo^cia, a woman of such excellent learning, that she wrote against
Theophrastus, the greatest Philosopher of his time, reproving him of many
faults in Philosophy. And Corinna was of such excellent learning, that she
contended often with Pindarus at Thebes in ve^ying, and five times wan the
victory. Aretha was so excellent well learned, that she read openly in the
Schools of Athens, natural and moral Philosophy, five and twenty years. She
made forty books: She had an hundred Philosophers to her scholars.

semiramis Queen of Assyria, after the death of Ninus her husband, by whom she
had a son, not then at man's estate, fearing how so many nations should be
governed by a boy, and doubting also how she should be obeyed, if she should
take upon her the government being a woman, she feyned her self to be her
son, who in lincaments of face and stature of person did so resemble one
another, that hardly any difference could be perceived. She apparelled him like
a woman, and her self like a man, that the one might be taken for the other.
And in this sort she governed the Monarchy of the Assyrians, not only
defending the countries left by her husband, but increasing by conquest more
nations to them, the space of many years. But Theodosia nothing fearing to
show her self as she was, without counterfeiting another sex, after the death
of her husband and brother, handled the matter with such prudence that she
became Empress, and governed with great fame, in peace and prosperity during
her life. Zenobia Queen of Palmarynes, a woman endued with singular virtue,
after the death of her husband governed the East parts of the Roman Empire
many years, in despite of Galienus and Claudius his successor, Emperors of
Rome; making war at some one time upon the Persians, on the one side, and
defending her territories from the Roman Emperors on the other side. But
forasmuch as justice is the proper office of a Prince, whose end after Socrates
is to bring his people to felicity, and seeing authority and maj^stie in a
Prince of all other things is chiefly to be respected, as a singular gift of
God, which is gotten especially by these four things, by wisdom, virtue,
felicity, and love of the people; what need we seek for examples so far
off, when we have at this Queen Elizabeth.
present a virgin Queen, not only equal to any of them but comparable also to
the most renowned kings that have been in any age? whether ye respect her rare
gifts of nature, multiplied by industry, or her honorable reputation gotten
among foreign Princes and nations, by her singular virtue and wisdom; or the
long continuance of her flourishing reign, and of the peaceable and happy
estate, with the dutiful love and obedience of her subjects; who by her wise
and politic government in so perilous a time, that the fire burning round
about, yet by Gods goodness, in her providence, feel not so much as the heat
of the flame: such a Queen I say, as performs not only the part of a good
Pilot, in the government of her own ship, but stands as a lantern, in the
high tower of Pharos, by whose light the Princes, and afflicted people round
about her, in this tempestuous time, escape the dangerous rocks that daily
threaten their subversion, and direct their course to a safe port. That has
not taken occasion by her neighbors dissension and troubles (after the usual
manner of Princes) to enlarge her territories and dominion, which she might
have done, to her great advantage. But contrariwise to her great charge and
expense, and to their great benefit, she has assisted and protected the
oppressed in their just causes: whose forces have daunted the pride of mighty
Princes her enemies: whose fame has been carried round about the world, and
will no doubt be registered to perpetual memory in strange countries, as
trophies of her virtue. O ^mium dilecte Deo, cui militat at her,
Et con^rati veniunt adclassica venti.
Oh of the Gods thou over-lov'd,
For whom the Heavens do war;
And to whose fleet the conjured winds,
Pressed and assistant are.


To what Prince in the world could these verses be more a^ly applied, than to
her Majesty, that were written by Clandian the Po^t, in commendation of the
felicity of Theodosius the Empetour? But lest in going about to particulate the
praises of this noble Queen, and paragon of Princes, my gracious Sovereign,
according to the worthiness of her talent, I should do as they that offer to
show the light of the Sun with a candle; the brightness of her worthy and
heroical acts and virtues shining more clear to the world, than I am able
with words to set them forth, I will conclude her commendations with this
Danish verse: Vincit opus famam, ^serma suppetit actis.
The work does much outgoe the fame,
Nor can weak words the act proclaim.


And what cause have we to glory in the nobility of our blood, when we come by
it by the virtue of our parents? For the first nobility had his beginning for
some virtuous act or service done to his country, who for his worthiness
excelling other men, was by the people ennoblized, and had in estimation above
the rest. Which title for his sake descend to his posterity, as it were by
inheritance. So as the praise and glory of nobility of blood appertains to
the parents, and not to the children, the memory of whose virtue and
worthiness many times are notes and marks of the degeneration of their
posterity. For seldom it happens, that of a singular man comes a singular
son. One says, Nabilium liberi, placulamund; the children of the nobility,
are sacrifices of the world. Cicero taking occasion to rcprchend Catiline, by
comparing the antiquity of his blood with the greatness of his vices, says;
He was not more famous by the nobility of his parents, than ignominious by
his notorious vices. -- Non census, non clarum nomen avorum,
S^d probitas magnos inge^mque facit:
Not wealth, nor birth, but honesty
Does make thee great in dignity.


Osorius reports of a strange custom they have in the Indies, which shows
the respect they have to nobility; Marriage is forbidden their nobility,
because they shall have no let to follow the wars: but Lemmans they may have as
many as they list, so they be likewise of the nobility. The like liberty is
given to the noble women. But if any noble man or woman, have any carnal
knowledge of any other than of the nobility, he or she is thrust through with
the swords of other noble men.

He that desires true nobility, let him endeavor to True Nobility.
ennoblize himself by his own virtues, and not by his parentage: that he may
answer as Anacharsis the Philosopher did to one, that glorying because he was
borne in the famous City of Athens, objected to Anacharsis in disgrace, that
he was a Scythian, which was a barbarous Country in respect of Greece. It is
true (quoth he) that I am a Scythian, and thou a Grecian; but thy country
gives honor to thee, and I give honor to my country. Or as Cicero answered
a Roman, that demanded, why he that descended of rustical ploughmen, would
compare with him, that was of the nobility of Rome? I confess (said Cicero)
that thou art descended of noble Roman Magistrates, and I come from poor
ploughmen. But thou can not deny that together with this, all thy lineage is
ended in thee, and all mine begins in me. The uncertainetie of Gentilitie
was rightly espied by him, that said; once in an hundred years from the plough
to the spear, and from the spear to the plough again. A matter of small
glory, that is subject to such mutabilitie. Which was well considered of Job,
when he wrote these words; I said to my rottenness, thou art my father, and
unto worms, (...) are my mother and sisters.

He that by his base conditions and manners deserves nothing, may be rather
ashamed to seek credit by high titles of his ancestors, than to accumulate
glory to himself by their virtues, and nobility; and ought rather to be taken
for a monster, than a man, that challenges nobility by descent without
virtue. And by how much the more renowned is the fathers life, so much the more
ought to be accused the childrens negligence, as the Poet says: S^s licet
ingenuus, clarisque parentibus ortus,
Esse tamen vel sic besti a magna potes:
Say the art borne nobly, and with titles sweld,
Yet may thou be a great beast, and so held.
Let the French King and Queen (says one) be thy parents, and if there be no
virtue in thy mind, I will esteem thee no more, than if thou had a
husbandman to thy father, and a country woman to thy mother. For so much the
greater a man is in estate and dignity, so much the more apparent and
unseemely his vices are. And though his ancestors leave him high titles, great
riches, and possessions, yet very little does he inherit that does not
inherit his ancestors virtues. Cicero writing to his friend Atticus, says;
that the Romans did never admit or consent to entitle them with the name of
knight or gentleman that could gather much riches, but such as The (...) of
(...).
had been at the victory of many battles. Of these men God spoke by the
Prophet; they are made abominable, even as the things they love: Their glory is
from their nativitie, from the belly, and from the conception. Christ utterly
confounded this vanity, when he descended himself of the greatest nobility
that ever was in this world, and besides that, being the son of God, yet
called he commonly himself the son of man, that is to say, of the virgin Mary
(for otherwise he was no son of man.) He sought not for honorable titles of
antiquity (as we use to do) to furnish his style, but called himself a
shepherd, a base name, and of contempt in the world. And when he was to make a
king first in Israel, he sought not out the ancientest blood, but took Saul, of
the basest tribe in all Israel; and after him, David the poorest shepherd of
all his brethren. And when he came into the world, he sought not out the
noblest men to make his Apostles, but took the poorest and simplest; thereby (as
seems to some) to confound the foolish vanity of this world, that gives such
a preeminence to flesh and blood, that must be eaten with worms and fall to
dust. Maximilian to one that desired him to make him a noble man, answered, I
can make you rich, but virtue only gives nobility. But if nobility or
gentility of blood be joined with virtue and humility of mind, it is a thing
worthy to be had in estimation, and gives a comely grace and reputation, and
may serve to put men in remembrance to be virtuous, after the example of their
first parents, by whose virtue they are exalted to that title and dignity. One
says; Nifi fundamenta ftirpis jact a sint probe,
Miseros necesse est esse deinceps posteros:
Unless thy stocks foundation be well laid,
Misery must thy posterity invade.
Nobility is of another man's good, but virtue depends of his own good. And the
man of virtue never wants nobility, neither can his honor be taken from him,
seeing honor is joined to virtue, as the briar is to the rose. And though all
other things hang upon fortune (as we use to speak) yet true nobility
depends upon virtue. Nobility of parentage (says Herod an) is nothing,
except nobility of manners and courtesy be joined with it. When Demetrius
Phalereus heard that the Athenians had defaced and cast down his images, which
they had set up; But (quoth he) they have not overthrown my virtue, for which
they set them up before. So that except nobility of blood be joined with
nobility of virtue, it is but vanity, and of none account. For virtue is a
nobleness of the mind, and not borrowed of parentage; and therefore more
excellent than nobility of blood: as the Poet rightly says; Felix quem virtus
generosa exornat avorum, and
Qui virtute suis adjicit ipse decus:
Happy is he whose Ancestors
Of virtue made profession,
And of himself example leaves,
Of virtue to succession.


And what vanity is it to glory in the form or beauty of the flesh, that as
a flower in May shows it self to day, and to morrow withers away, and
returns to the earth again, from whence it came? Vain is beauty Of Beauty.
says the wiseman, and deceivable is the grace of countenance. Histories both
divine and profane are full of many mischiefs that beauty has brought to men.
Beauty is compared by holy men, to a painted snake, that is fair without, and
full of poison within. But what estimation should we have of that which a
little scratch or scarre disfigureth, a short sickness alters, a small
blemish disgraceth, a few years withers and wrinckleth? To all these, and a
great many more, the most beautiful ^ace that has been is subject. The
Prophet compares man to a shadow, that is nothing but an appearance, which
deceives the sight: a false figure without substance, which sometime shows
great, by and by little. So happens it to a man, which sometime seems to be
great, and yet he is nothing: but when he is lifted up on high, and placed in
the highest degree of honor, even then he perishes suddenly, and no man
knows what is become of him: no otherwise than a shadow, when night is come.
Likewise the Psalmist says, I saw the wicked man mighty, and flourishing like
a green bay tree, and I passed by him, and he was no more there: I sought for
him, but he was not to be found.

Likewise the glory we take in gorgeous apparel, is Of vanity in app^.
vain, yea and more foolish than the rest. The wife man says: See thou never
glory in apparel. And yet wherein do men that are able to have it, take more
pleasure or pride, than in gay apparel, which was devised to cover our shame
of nakedness, and other infirmities contracted by the fall of our first parent
Adam? And that which was invented for our necessity, is now used for pride and
glory. We rob almost all the creatures in the world to deck our bodies withal.
Neither are they sufficient that are upon the earth, but we must borrow
feathers of the fowls of the air, and we must go into the sea, to rob the
fishes of their pearl, and the sands of their precious stones. And then we
must dig into the ground for gold and silver, as the Poet says; Effediuntar
opes irritament a malorum.
Wealth is dug up the incitement to all evil.


And all this forsooth to make our selves in our own eyes, show to be more
goodly creatures by our vain devices, and fantastical toys, than God has
made us by his great wisdom, and specially to allure love and liking to bad
intents and purposes. And when they have attired themselves with the ornaments
that God has given to the creatures of the earth, to the birds of the air, to
the fishes of the sea, for their necessity and beauty, and with the stones
and scurfe of the earth it self, they jet it up and down be holding themselves
and others in great bravery, as though all this counterfeit beauty, came
naturally from their own persons: yet all is not gold that glistereth, their
minds be soyled with foul and filthy vices. It is a strange thing to see the
blindness of men, that will not consider the great difference of excellency,
that is between the body and the mind, by the one of which we resemble and are
like to the Angels that are immortal, yea and to God himself, and by the
other, to brute beasts, that live after the motion of their senses, and are
subject to death, and corruption. And yet how careful men are to deck the
body that is but a lump of clay, and to provide for his pleasures, and how
negligent to provide for the mind or soul that is immortal, and of an
Angelical nature? ^an the Emperor was wont to say, that it was unseemely for
a wise man, seeing he had a mind, to hunt after praise from his body. Saint
Bernard speaking of the vain curiosity of men, to adorn and cherish their
bodies, says; Thou take great pain to deck and nourish this body, that is
but a vessel of dung, and a sepulcher of worms, and leavest thy poor soul
(which is the ima^e of God) hunger-starved and forsaken. Kings in eld^ time
made no great account of their outward sy^.
habits, making no difference between them and the common people by their
apparel, but by their mind and in^rd furniture. When Alphons^ King of Arragon
was admonished to wear more costly apparel: I had rather (said he) excel my
subjects in manners and authority, than in a Diadem and purple. Socrates
being asked, which was the most beautiful creature in the world; A man (quoth
he) adorned with learning. Plato being asked what difference was between the
learned and the ignorant, answered; As much as is between the Physician and the
diseased. And Aristotle to the Arist.
same question, said; That there was as great difference between the learned
and the unlearned, as was between the living and the dead. And as the sight
receives light from the air that is round about it, so does the mind from
learning. And Ennius likeneth a wise man without Arist.
learning to an unclean glass, that is fit for nothing: and yet not he that
knows many things, but he that knows things fruitful is wise. When
Alphonsus king of Arragon heard, that a King of Castile should say, that
learning was not meet for noblemen and gentlemen, he exclamed and said: These
are the words of an ox, and not of a man. That man (says Marcus Aurelius)
that takes upon him to be a man, and has no learning, what difference is
there between him and a beast? When the Aeseh.
people of Mitylene were become masters of the sea, they inflicted this
punishment upon their colleagues that were revolted from them: That they should
not teach their children to read, nor the liberal sciences: esteeming that to
be of all kind of punishment, the most grievous, to pass their life in want of
knowledge, and the liberal Fer.
sciences. There is nothing more unjust, than a man unlearned, because he
thinks nothing to be right, but what he does himself. Pythagoras engraved in
a stone with his own hand, these words, and set it before his Acad^my: He that
knows not that which he should An excellent saying.
know, is a beast among men: he that knows no more than he must needs, is
a man among beasts: he that knows all that may be known, is a God among
men. If the gallants of the world were so careful to adorn their minds with
virtue and learning, as they are curious to garnish, and set out their bodies
with gay garments, and new ^angled fashions, and vain toys, and to please
their senses, there would be no place for the Poets saying, that speaks thus
of Courtiers: Scorta placent, fracti curvique e corporegressus,
Et (...) crines, and tot nova nomina vestis:
The Congees, Cringees, and affected pace
Of common strumpets are in most request:
And now the loose locks dangling 'bout the face,
With the new names of strange attyres please best.
The Emperor Alexander Severus would not suffer any of his servants to wear
any silk, cloth of gold or silver, and used often to say, that open excess of
apparel, and secret vice, were the destruction of Courtiers. It is happened well
that Diogenes is dead, who surely would give bitter taunts, and make some men
to blush, if he lived in these days. For, meeting an effeminate young man on a
time that had attired himself finely, but undecently for a man, as he thought;
Art not ashamed, quoth Diogenes, when nature has made thee a man, to make thy
self a woman? Nec mul^ebri comptu lotuque po^ta He^od.

Vir quisquam. No man with such effeminate dre^ing and polisht washing would
disgrace himself.


King Philip of Macedon deprived a Magistrate from his office, which he had
given him, whom he loved well, only because he heard he was more occupied in
combing his head and trimming his person, than in studying his books. Quintus
Hortensius a Roman Confull, is infamed by Historians, because he looked into a
glass when he made him ready, and was too curious in trimming up himself. But
to leave Magistrates, and speak of inferior callings; what would they have
said, and what will hereafter be said to the infamy of this age, if virtue ever
come again to be in estimation, that men should be so effeminate and nice, to
bestow a good part of the day in trimming up themselves by a glass like women,
as though they would transform themselves out of one sex into another, and
had rather resemble women than men? If Aristotle spoke thus of women, then what
would he have spoken now, not only of women, but of men also? Neither the
gorgeousness of apparel, nor the abundance of riches, makes so much to the
praise of women, as does modesty with honest and sober behavior. But this
metamorphosis being now more common and usual than in those days, is not so
much perceived, nor taken for so great a fault, and peradventure may be
justifiable by authority and prescription from Sardanapalus, and Heliogabalus,
two of the greatest Monarks of the world. He that will look into the abuses of
these days, shall find cause sufficient to cry out with the Orator; O
tempora! O mores! And it is to be feared, lest that happen unto us, that the
Prophet wrote against the women of Jerusalem, who after he had reproved their
stately gate, their wanton looks, their rolling eyes, the immodest trimming of
their heads, their chains, rings, bracelets, girdles, jewels hanging at their
ears, and other proud attires; It will happen to you (says the Lord) that in
place of your sweet Isay 3.
savor, ye shall become a great stincke; instead of your girdles, you shall
have an halter; in place of your frizled hair, a shaven head; and the ^rest
men in the company shall pass by the edge of the sword, and the valiant and
hardy shall dye in the wars. But let us leave this (Veritas odium parit) and
conclude with the Prophet, who says; We pass over our days in vanity, and
do not perceive our own extreme folly.

And what a madness and fleshly mind has possesled them, that not only
wallow in filthy pleasures, like swine in the dirt, but think there wants
that fullness they look for of them, except they glory also in their
wickedness, and make that known to others, which should be unknown to
themselves? Such there be, that rejoice not only in the sweetness of
pleasures, but in the infamy it self. Proculu^ a Roman Emperor was
unmeasurably addicted to the lust of the flesh, and yet he thought there wanted
something of the fullness, except Sin is not sufficient, unle^e it be boasted
f.
he also bragged thereof. And therefore when he made wars upon the
Sarmatians, he vaunted that in fifteen days, he had gotten with child an
hundred virgins of that country, which he had there taken prisoners.
Sardanapalus king of the Assyrians gloried so much in the pleasures he had
taken of the flesh, that he commanded to be written after his death in his
sepulcher; These things I have, which I have eaten, and which with love and
pleasure I have taken. It is strange to see what joy and pleasure men take in
banqueting, and quaffing, and lasclvious talk, as though they would make
podicemexore, and what contention there is for the victory, in such an
unseemely, and unchristianlike pastime, which is so common, that there need no
rehearsal of examples. The wiseman says; It is better to go into the house
of sorrow, than into the house of feasting. And Job says of such men; That
they solace themselves with all kind of music, and pass over their days in
pleasure, and in a very moment they go down into hell. Which is affirmed with
a grievous threatening in the Apocalypse; Quantum in delitiis fuit, tantum date
illi ^rmentum. Look how much he has taken of delights, let so much torments
be laid upon him.

The felicity therefore we seek for, must be sought in some other thing than
in pleasures, in riches, or in honor and glory. For in them (as appears by
that has been said) felicity is not to be found. But it happens many times
to them that seek felicity in any of those things, as it did to the boys and
the ass, in the fable. A man had laden an ass with a sack full of birch, and
drove him homeward, staying behind about some other business. As the ass came
by a schoole-house, which was in his way, he cried apples, apples, who will buy
any apples? The boys that were within at school, hearing of merchandise so
fit for their purpose, ran forth to the ass, and took down the sack,
thinking to have found it full of apples. But when they perceived there was
nothing but birch, they fell all upon the ass, that had deceived them, and
beat him cruelly with his own rods. The like happens to them whom the fair
shows and flattering promises of pleasures, riches, or honor and glory
allureth to the inordinate desire of them. But when they make trial, and look
into them with the eyes of the mind, cleansed from the corruption of impure
affections, they see how much they are deceived of that they look for. And
where they sought felicity, they find matter of infelicity. And they that
possess pleasures, riches, or honor, and glory, and make show to be laden
with felicity or happiness, are many times punished with the burden they
bear, and worthily beaten with their own rods, that deceive not only
themselves, but others also by their example, with the false show of fe^rie or
happiness. For how can ambition or honor be taken for man's felicity and
(...), or his greatest good, when so few attain to it, in respect of the great
number that be excluded from it? And wherein are they happier that have honor,
than they that lack it? They are many ways tormented, either Envy (...) on
honor.
by envying others, or being envied themselves; either they suffer hard things
themselves, or they offer such measure to others; they be either oppressed, or
oppress. Of which things the others be free that want that imagined felicity,
and the only evil is, that they think the lack thereof to be evil. A
goodly happiness no doubt, when for one reputed good thing, thou shall have an
infinite number of evils; for the shadow of felicity, a sea of troubles and
miseries. And what be the fruits of these torments of ambition? Thou art
saluted in assemblies of people with caps and knees, and art reverenced in
feasts with the highest places at the table: But thou considerest not that many
a wicked and vicious man is of^imes preferred before thee. And wherein does
that help or amend the estate of thy body or mind, whereof a man does consist?
Thou art of great power and dominion: if that should be man's end and felicity,
how comes it to pass, that one man's power should spring of the impotencie of
infinite numbers of others? and how can that be accounted the greatest good,
which is not only converted often into evil, but also perverteth them that
possess it, and makes them worse. But admit power and dominion to be good: one
is adored, ten thousand make courtesy: one triumphs, thousands follow the
chariot: one rules, millions obey and serve: So that one man shall be the end of
infinite numbers, the felicity of a few, the misery of al. But we ^eck not now
the end, and good of a few but of all men. Neither do these few, if we look
thoroughly into them, possess it: Which the Courtiers themselves, even the best
sort of them, that be in most estimation, must needs confess, whose hearts be
more painefully pinched by a sour look or sharp word of their Prince, than
their ears and eyes can be pleased and delighted by a thousand flatteries,
and as many a dorations, a whole day together. It is not without cause said,
that the displeasure of the Prince, is the death of the subject. And Princes
themselves feel many times more corzies and unquietness of mind, by some
offense taken within their own walls, than any triumph or public pastime can
^create or make glad But felicity is in the matter it self, and depends not
either upon the frowning countenance of any person, or of fortune it self,
which must be also pe^tuall. But honorable estate dies, and is buried with
the body. And what is honor but a vain admiration of the common people?
Ambition therefore is so far from the right way to that good we seek, that
the very same thing has cast us all down head long from the greatest good,
into extreme evil and misery: Insomuch that if we desire to find that good we
must be driven to seek it in our selves; seeing we cannot find it with others,
nor in these worldly matters. In vain therefore do we seek felicity in
worldly vanities, which is to be found in the service of God: which was well
observed by the Poet: ^
^
^
^
^
^
Si (...) alies in qualibet art; quid inde?
Sifaveas (...), si prosper a (...); quid inde?
Si prior, (...) Abbas, si Rex, si Papa; quid inde?
Si rota fortunate (...) ad astra; quid inde?
Annos si felix reg^es per (...); quid inde?
Tam cito, (...), (...) nihil inde.
Sola ^ inde.
Ergo Deo servi, quia (...) inde,
(...) voles in (...);
(...) corpore (...) haberis.
If that thy house be fair, and table (...); what then?
If that thy mass of coin and gold be great; what then?
If thou have a fair wife, that generous is; what then?
If children, and great farms, and naught amiss; what then?
If thou thy self be valiant, rich and fair; what then?
If in thy full train many servants are; what then?
In Arts if thou to others Tutor be; what then?
If fortune, like the world shall smile on thee; what then?
If thou be Prior, Abbot, King, or Pope; what then?
If fortunes wheel raise thee beyond all hope; what then?
If thou should live a thousand years in bliss; what then?
Since that so swift (so swift) times passage is, that then
All Is nothing: only then by virtue strive,
That after death thy glory may survive.
All you that are Gods servants and good men,
(From what is before said) learn this lesson then,
All these good deeds, you to your death defer,
Do when y' are young, so shall you no way (...):


The end of the third Book.
THE FELICITY OF MAN, OR, HIS SVMMVM BONVM. THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Aristotle: Concerning the Summum bonum, with other of the S^cks: Of king
Alexander, and the G^rdian (...): The excellent effects of Moral virtue Of
king Agesilaus and Mene^aus a virtue glorious Physician: Of Marcus Regulus
Decius: Codrus king of Athens: Of Tubero, and six observable Frenchmen: Of
Marcus Curtius, a noble young Gentleman of Rome. Of Leonidas king of Sparia who
with five hundred men put the Army of Xerxes to ^ght which consisted of 1000000.

We have showed before by many examples, and by the opinions and reasons of
wise and learned men, how much they are deceived, that think the Felicity of
man to consist in pleasure, riches, or in worldly honor and glory. Now before
we come to show what opinion is meet for a Christian to hold of this matter,
let us first discourse upon one thing, wherein the most approved Philosophers
Plato and Aristotle held that this Felicity or (...) should consist, that is
in virtue, or in the action of virtue. The opinions of the Philosophers.
The Philosophers entering into consideration of natural things, found that the
proper action of every thing, was the end for which it was created: as the
proper action and end of the Sun is to illuminate the earth. And in natural
things there are three kinds of life: vegetative or increasing, which is in
plants; sensitive, which is in beasts; rational or reasonable, which is in
men. So that the life of plants, is to grow and increase; of beasts, to follow
the motion of their senses; of men, to live according to reason, after the
Philosophers opinion. Which reason shows a man how to live well: but what it
is to live well, the Philosophers cannot agree. After Aristotle and others, it
is to live virtuously. But Aristotle.
because a man is a sociable creature, and not borne to himself, but to be
helping to others, it is not sufficient for a man to have virtue in him, but
he must also exercise, and be a doer of virtue. And because all our actions
and labors be to some end, which end is taken of us to be good: (for every
man desires that which he thinks to be good for himself) the last of all
ends, to which the rest are applied, and for which all our labors are, and
ought to be bestowed, is the most perfect and best of all things that nature
desires: and therefore the thing wherein the felicity of man consists. For
that is desired for no other thing, but for it self. Which after Aristotle is
the action of virtue: for that is his proper action, and peculiar to himself
alone. And if there be any virtue more perfect and excellent than the rest,
that is it by which all the course of our life ought to be directed, as to the
last end, and greatest good, which is called Felicity. Which Felicity
Aristotle defines to be the action of man according to the most perfect
virtue in a perfect life. By which last words he excludes children, that
cannot judge of actions: and also those that do well but once or twice;
according to the old proverb, One swallow makes no summer. For perfect virtue
or felicity requires time and long exercise. If therefore the action of
virtue brings forth felicity it shall be necessary for him that would be
happy, first to know, and then to exercise virtue; that teaches reformation of
manners, which is the sum of Moral Philosophy; that has for his subject a
private man, a family, and a common wealth. For he that possesses virtue,
gives laws to himself, and endeavors to make himself a perfect man, by
exercise of good and virtuous acts. And when he has gotten the habit of
v^rtue, and knows how to govern himself, he then shall be able in the same
sort, to instruct and govern his family, which is compounded of many private
and part^ men. And after that he knows how to do both (...), he shall with
no great difficulty be able to govern a Common wealth, which is composed of
many families. But first of all he must learn to govern him^: for one says;
^, index fiat vita (...). It is a hard case, when he that cannot govern
himself, shall bear rule over others. For with what face can be correct other
men's faults, that has not yet reformed his own? But to this felicity there
are three things after Aristotle required, ^.
as necessary instruments of virtue: that is, the goods or gifts of the body,
the goods of fortune, the goods or gifts of the mind. But here the (...) and
other Philosophers bayteth him, saying; that seeing nature is perfect, it is
sufficient of it self to bring forth felicity But if fortune be requisite,
then nature cannot make felicity; for fortune is not in our power. This
contra^ety of opinions of these Philosophers will at length help us to
discern which is the true felicity: as one says; The false opinions of
others rightly declared, many times discovers the truth. But to proceed
awhile in prosecuting their opinions; these three kinds of good ^.
things (say they) that is, virtue, wisdom, knowledge, and such like good
things of the mind: then, health, beauty, st^ure, and comeliness of the body:
and lastly, riches, nobility, friends, and such like, which are the goods or
gifts of fortune. These things being joined together, brings to men such a
sufficiency of al things requisite to happiness, that whosoever possesses
them is in the perfect state of felicity, after Aristotle's opinion, felicity
being no other thing, but an end of men's actions; and that end which of all
other is most perfect and excellent, and to, and for which, all other ends and
actions, and labors of men are applied and undertaken.

Seeing therefore that felicity is the action of virtue, which is the last and
most perfect of all the works and labors of men: it must follow, that it is a
civil faculty or science, that teaches a man to govern himself and others.
And what science or faculty soever, is as it were the master and commander of
all other (...) and faculties, and for which all other are ordained: that
science is conversant about that end and work which is most worthy and perfect
of all other, and is the felicity of man or (...), we seek for. And because
policy and government of a Commonwealth, is the commander of all other arts
and sciences, for whose use they are ordained, therein must consist the
felicity of man. And that the government in a Common wealth is the worthiest
and most principal of all other sciences, it is apparent, because that
procures the universal and common benefit of many, and seeks no other
thin^ nor uses all his diligence to any other purpose, but to make his
citizens become good men, and apt to do honest and virtuous things. And (...)
the second (...).
says, that no point of Philosophy is more excellent, than to deal in
public affairs, and to do justice, whereby they practice that which
Philosophers teach. By this which has been said, it is manifest, that after
Aristotle, the felicity of man consists in the action of virtue, and that in
the most perfect virtue (which is prudence) that teaches a man how to live
well, rightly to govern himself and others. And though he joyneth three kinds
of good things, that is, the goods of the mind, of the body, of fortune,
necessary to him that seeks after felicity: yet he esteems those that be
(...) things, but as instruments to help to further his work and end. As a
Carpenter or any other artificer may be a good A (...).
workman, though he have not his tools, or instruments about him; but yet
he cannot work without them: so a man may be endued with virtue, and yet not
able to do the work of virtue, for want of health and strength of body, to
govern in a Common wealth; for want of riches, which are the goods of fortune,
to exercise liberality, and such like. But the principal good things without
the which no man can have felicity, are those of the mind, which after the
stern Stoickes are sufficient alone to bring forth felicity. For when
Aristotle says, that by great sinister fortune a man may fall from beatitude
to infelicitie: they course him with bitter words, and labor to prove that
felicity depends upon virtue; and that fortune has no power upon a wise
man; and that if he suffer never so grievous torments, if he were thrust into
Phala^is bull, yet for all that he shall be always in be atitude and
happiness. These, and the like reasons, the Philosophers make to prove, that
the felicity of man consists in virtue, or in the action of virtue. But this
matter was unto them like Gord^s knot, wherein could be found no beginning nor
end.

In the Country of Phrygia, there was a city called The Gordi^n knot.
Gordis, the royal seat sometime of King (...), which when Alexander the Great
had won, he went into the Temple of Jupiter, where he saw the wagon, wherein
M^das was wont to be carried. The same in outward appearance differs little
from other common wagons; but there was in it a thing notable, which was a rope
foulded and knit in many knots, one so wreathed within another, that no man
could perceive where the knots began, or where they ended. Hereupon the
contrymen had a prophecy, that he which could (...) that endless knot,
should be Lord of all Asia: which made the king very desirous to be the
fulfiller of that prophecy. There were a great number of Phrygians and
Phrygians about him, the one part ^ing to what pass this matter would come,
the other fearing the rash presumption of their King; because they could
perceive by no reason, how the knot should be undone. The King also was
doubtful lest (if he should fail of his purpose) it would be taken for a
token of his future evil fortune. After he had considered the thing; What
matter is it (quoth he) which way it be undone? and strived no longer to
unknit it, but presently drew his sword, and cut the cord asunder: thereby,
either illuding or fulfilling the (...) ^.
of the Prophecy: So happened it to the Philosophers in searching for the
felicity of man, wherein they could find no beginning nor end, but used reason
as a sword to decide the difficulty of the question; which was not the right
way to find it out. For in all their arguments and discourses, there is no
mention made of the will of God, nothing spoken of the fear of God, nor of the
trust and confidence we ought to have in him. In whom they that will find true
felicity, must secke the beginning and end of the knot; whereby to dissolve the
difficulty of the question the right way, and not by the sword of reason, as
the Philosophers did. There is a great difference between the end, and
felicity, which is showed to us by God, and that which reason is able to
comprehend. For Christ says; This is everlasting life, to know God, and Jesus
Christ, whom he has sent, that is, to believe, that for Christ's sake the
father forgiveth us, and loves us, that he preserves and justifies us.
Therefore true felicity consists not in any civil action ^.
but in faith, and the knowledge of God, through his holy spirit. For we can
do nothing of our selves, that is good in the sight of God, but it must come
by his holy spirit. Saint Augustine says, (...) he has written some where,
that a man is just if he live according to his best part; but he recanteth
that again; and says, that a man is not yet just, if he only live according
to his ^est part; but if he be governed by the holy Ghost. For that shows us
the corruption of our nature, and by what actions and mea^ we may attain to
the true felicity, which by our power and reason we are not able to
comprehend. We may therefore reject the Philosophers opinions of felicity.
which consists in moral virtues, and civil actions of this life only;
which small part of felicity men nevertheless by those means are not able to
attain to. For how can the Stoickes wise man account himself in happy estate,
though he be endued with a consummation of moral virtues, if he live in
torment and pain? Seneca says; Non sentire malasua, non est hominis: non
far, non est viri. And in another place; silence can not command pain and
sorrow. They are goodly persuasions to excite men to virtue, and to have the
unfortunate accidents of the world in contempt. But men are not made of iron or
steel, but of flesh and blood; which must feel of necessity the pains of
torments, except they be assisted by the spirit of God, as was Sydrach, Mysach,
and Abed^ego in the fiery furnace. And they that live in pain, cannot be said
to be in felicity; for the happy man desires not to change his estate with
any man: otherwise he is not to be accounted happy, which is a thing in the
highest degree of perfection. But he that suffers pain and grief, would
willingly exchange for another man's health and ease. For if there be no
pleasure nor delight in life, but continual pain and grief, death were to be
preferred before it, and to be desired more than life; as the Poet says; --
Vitacst quam proxima letho,
Quam merito spernenda, ^
(...), (...) que (...) solasia nulla (...)?
How near is life to death? and with what ease
To be despised? Did no vain pleasure cease
On our affections: and no solace might
Make these our grievous labors to seem light.


But though the felicity of man consists not in virtue, nor in the action of
virtue; yet moral virtues, so far forth as they disagree not with Christian
virtues, The effect, of (...).
may serve as instruments, and means to help to the attaining that part of
felicity that is to be enjoyed in this life. For by them the extrem^y of
affections that would grow to an evil habit, and be great hinderance to
felicity, are qualified and reduced to a mean. They either extinguish or
suppress, or at least moderate, by the rule of reason, all vehement passions
and perturbations of the mind, by which men are as it were violently carried
to the desire of sensual pleasures, of vain glory, of riches, and such like
capital enemies to felicity. By them men are taught to have all pomp and
worldly vanities in contempt, and to have small estimation of those things
which the common sort have in great admiration; and to be content with that
which is sufficient to supply the necessity of nature. Virtue (says (...)) if
there be any at all, has all things under him that may happen to a man, and
despising them all, he contemns whatsoever chances to men: and being
unspotted, he judges nothing to appertain to him, but himself. It is a
pleasant thing to behold and consider how reason has found out what an
excellent thing virtue is, and how it is to be preferred before all pleasure
and profit; and that men ought not to digress from virtue, for any gain or
commodity whatsoever. These persuasions were in the heathens that knew not God;
which wrought in them great effects. Plato says, if the sorme and beauty of
virtue might be seen with the eyes, men would be wonderfully in love with
her. (...) says, virtue is more liberal than fortune. She denies nothing but
that which would be hurtful being granted, and profitable being denied; nor
takes any thing away but that which would be hurtful to have and profitable
to lose. Seneca, to him that would know what virtues An ^.
be in a man, gives this counsel; When thou art desirous to look into a man
(says he) and to know what is in him, strip him naked, let him lay aside his
patrimony, his honor, and other false shows of fortune, let him put off his
body, and behold his mind, what manner of man, and how great he is: whether
he be great by his own, or by borrowed ware. Riches, honor, power, and such
like, which in our opinion are of great price, but of themselves vile and
little worth, seduce us from discerning the truth: they have in them no great
nor glorious matter whereby to draw our minds to them, saving that we have
gotten a custom to wonder at them. Whatsoever the common sort prayseth, that
for the most part is worthy of disprayse. Aristotle likeneth the mind of a man
to a smooth table, that is not garnished with any figure, but prepared by the
painter, and made apt to receive any kind of picture, either monsters of vice,
or images of virtue. The old Romans desirous to excite their young men to
virtuous acts, and considering how men are inclined to the love Two Temples
(...), to virtue and honor.
of honor, they built two temples, the one of which they dedicated to virtue,
the other to honor, and joined them so artificially together, that no man
could come into that of honor, but he must first come through virtue. By which
apt device, they would have it known to all nations, that the right way to
honor is by virtue. But in these latter ages the temple of virtue is so little
frequented, that the path which was wont to lead to it, and be well trodden, is
grown green, and another way found to that of honor, by some back door,
not so well known in the elder time. And if any chance to seek to come the
right and old accustomed way to honor through virtue, the door is kept so
fast shut, by a porter called envy, and his servant detraction, that hardly one
among thousands can come to honor that way, which is a great discouragement to
those that would come to honor through virtue; and makes their devotion cold,
and slow to freq^ent that temple. One says, Virtute ambire opo^ non ^bus: but
if he have no other help in these days to prefer him but his virtue, he is
like to have but a cold suit. We may wish it were in use that Pla^us says:
Sat (...). But the case is much altered. For in stead of favorers he shall
have deracters, secret enemies always to virtue. Which made Plato commend the
law ^
of the Lydians, that punished detracters with the like punishment as they did
murderers: For as one takes away the life of a man; so the other takes away
his reputation and good fame, which after Saloman is more worth than worldly
goods. The Poets saying could to no age be more aptly applied than to these
latter days. Virtus (...) and alget.
Virtue is praised but not cherisht.
Which confirms Seneca his saying; That men allow better of honesty, than
follow it. Medea says, video (...), (...). I see and allow of the things that
be better, but I follow the worse.

Virtue is a medicine to the mind, and heals the diseases thereof, as drugs
are medicinable to the body, and restore it to health. For the mind has his
diseases, as the body has For when the body is distemp^d, and not in his
perfect estate, he is said to be sick of this or that disease, as of an ague,
of a pleu^sie or such like, and needs Physic. So the mind that is
distempered with this or that passion or perturbation, as with pride,
covetousness, vaineglory, voluptuousness, or such like, is not in his perfect
estate, but needs virtue, as a medicine to restore him to health, or his
perfect estate again. Which was well signified by Agesil^, king of Sparta, to
Menela^, a vaineglorious Physician: who being puffed up with pride, through a
reputation he had gotten by his skill in physic, called himself Jupiter: and
having occasion to write to the king, his superscription was in Latin, and
English signification thus: Menel^ Jupiter Agesilao Regi salute: (...) Jupiter
wishes to king Agesilaus health. He answers him with this superscription:
Agesilaus rex Menelao (...), king Agesilaus Vain ^.
wishes to Menelaus health of mind, reprehending his vanity with one word,
by which he signified that want of health and perfection in his mind, which he
wished to his body. Moral virtue therefore is to be embraced of all men, as a
necessary and excellent thing; and a special gift in our carnal nature; by
which men's minds are purged and purified of all vehement passions and
perturbations; (with which whosoever is oppressed, can not enjoy the happiness
of this life;) and by which they are continued, or restored to their perfect
estate and health. The good are by this virtue excited and maintained in honest
conversation and civillity, the bad are reformed and reduced to good life. Yet
for all that it is not eternal Justice, by which we are justified before God;
for that Justice, free will or reason cannot bring forth. But moral virtue
makes men live civilly and honestly; which God looks for, even of the
heathens or infidels themselves. It is better (says (...).
one) to live so as thine enemies may be amazed at thy virtues, than that thy
friends should have cause to excuse thy vices.

The Poets feign, that as Hercules in his youth sat musing alone, what course
of life were best for him to take, there appeared to him two virgins, the one
representing virtue, the other vice. She that represented virtue, told him that
if he would follow her, he must ^
climb over mountains and craggie rocks, and take great pains and labors.
But the other, to allure him to follow her, promised him a plain and pleasant
way down the hill all at his case without any pain or labor. Hercules after
he had considered of the matter, refused the fair ossers and promises of the
virgin, that represented vice, and made choice with labor and pains to follow
virtue, by which he became the most famous man of the world.

The heathens were diligent observers of moral virtues, through which many of
them in all ages became excellent men. By them they learned to know their
duties to their country in general, and to private men in particular: to
moderate their affections: to estimate things as they are, and not as they are
commonly reputed: to contemn the vanities of this world to prefer an honest
death before a shameful life. Reg^s a man Of Ro^ (...)
endued with great virtue, was sent by the Romans into Africa with an army to
make war upon the people of Carthage; who after diverse victories and
overthrowes given to them of Carthage, was himself at last taken prisoner, and
sent by them to Rome to treat of peace, upon his oath, that if that could not
be obtained, not the exchange of prisoners for himself, he should return to
them again. When he came to Rome, and had delivered his embassage, he
dissuaded the Senate from peace, and told them, that either Carthage must be
subject to Rome, or Rome to Carthage: and advised the^ to make no change of
lusty young Gentlemen, that were able to do their country great service against
the Romans, for him that was but one man, and old, and unable to do his
country any great good, and though the Romans were loath that the old man, who
had done them such service, should return again to them that would put him to
some unworthy death; yet he was so affected to the love of his country, and to
the keeping his promise with his enemies; that he refusing to be stayed by the
Romans, told them he would rather choose to dye any cruel death, than that it
should be said he had broken his faith. And so returning to Carthage with the
other Ambassadors, for the hatred they conceived against him, for dissuading
the Romans from their petition, they cut off his eye-lyddes, and put him into
an engine, that was sticked round about full of very sharp nails, and
suffered him there with continual Misdeath.
watch and pain to dye a most grievous death. Decius another noble Roman, and
one of the Consols, being in the field with the Romans forces against the
Latins, and perceiving his men to shrink and give place to their enemies, he
by the advice of their Priests, made his prayers to their false gods for their
help, and offering himself to a voluntary death for his country, put the
spurs to his horse, and thrust himself into the midst of his enemies, by
whom after he had slain many of them, he was himself at last overthrown and
Such as preferred their countries before their own lives.
slain. But the courage of Decius so daunted them, and emboldened his own
men, that they carried away the victory, with the destruction of the greater
part of their enemies. The like love to his country (to which men owe the
greatest duty next unto God) wrought the like effect in Codsus king of Athens.
For as the Docrians came with their forces to besiege Athens, Codsus having
intelligence that his enemies had sent to Delphos to ask counsel of Apollo,
what would be the event of their wars; and that answer was made them by the
Oracle, that the Docrians should have the victory, except they killed the king
of the Athenians. Codsus apparelled himself like a common soldier left if he
should be like a noble man, he might be taken prisoner, and live^ and went
out of the City with a burden of wood upon his shoulders, into his enemies
camp; and quarselling of purpose with a common soldier, wounded him, and was
slain himself. The Docrians hearing that the King of the Athenians was slain,
raised their siege and returned home again. As Tubero was sitting in judgment
in Rome, a Pie alighted upon his head, and i^te so still, that he took her
with his hand. And when the Soothsayers answered, that if the Pie were let go,
it b^tokened destruction to the Empue: if she were killed, then the same would
fallupon himself: he pretening the good of his country before his own life,
killed the Pie, and not long after fulfilled the propheci with his death. There
want not some such like examples (...) (...).
Christians of later years. When Call^ had been besieged eleven months by King
I dw^d he third, and the inhabitants driven to that extrmine that they must
yield to the Kings mercy or pe^, he refusir (...) offers, would accept no
other conditions, out that (...) (...).
the best of the town should suffer death, the (...) depart. When the matter
was had in consolation in the Council house among the pune pall men at the
town, who considering that ^yther six of (...) must dye, or else the whole
must beedest reved, he that sat in the first seat ^ole up and said, that he
would offer himself to the wrath of the enemy, and give his life to his
country: which example wrought such emulation of piety to their country in the
rest, that the second rises likewise, and then the third, and so the rest, one
after another until they had made up the number of six, required by the King:
who all willingly suffered death for their Country.

There happened at Rome in the midst of the market place, by means of an
earthquake and other causes, the earth to open, and a very deep hole to be
made which would not be filled with all the earth that could be thrown into
it: the Romans caused their Priests to use their accustomed ceremonies to
their Gods, to understand their pleasure about this matter: when they had
finished their sacrifices, answer was made them, that if they would have their
Commonwealth perpetual, they must sacrifice into this hole something, wherein
the Romans power did most consist. And as this matter was published, and
consultations daily had what manner of thing this should be, Marcus Curtius a
Noble young Gentleman, and a Marcus Curtius.
valiant soldier, meditating upon the interpretation of this answer, told them
that the thing wherein the power of the Romans most rested, was the virtue,
and valor, and arms of the Gentlemen: and offered himself willingly for the
benefit and prosperity of his Country, to cast himself alive into that hole.
And when he had armed himself, and attired his horse very richly he puts
his spurs to him, and kapeth into the midst of the hole, which immediately
closed together. Xerxes King of Sparta having intelligence that Xerxes King of
Persia (who brought into Greece an L^nidus King of Sports.
army of a 1000000. men, after some writers, besides his navy) had found out a
way to assail him, and the rest of the Grecians army at their backs, that
were desending his passage through a straight, he persuaded the Grecians to
retire and preserve themselves for a better time: and when they were departed
to their own Cities, he with five hundred men, who were all resolute to dye
with him for the honor of their Country, in the night assailed Xerxes camp,
such an enterprise as never before nor since has been heard of: The enemies
being dismayed with their bold and furious charge, an accident unlooked for,
and terrified by the darkness of the night, suspecting that all the force of
Greece had been assembled together, fl^d to save themselves, and gave
Lconidas, and his company leave to kill them at their pleasure, without any
great resistance. And as Lconidas having promised before to kill the king with
his own hand, if fortune favored him, pressed into the Kings pavillion,
killing all that guarded the place, and made search for him in every corner;
he understood that Xerxes had convayed himself away in the beginning of the
tumult, who otherwise was like to have drunk of the same cup as the other did:
And when they had wearied themselves with killing their enemies, and the day
began to show, the Persians that were fled up to the top of an hill,
looking back and perceiving the small number that pursued them, turned again,
and put them all to the sword. Thus Leonidas and his company, for the love of
their Country, sacrificed themselves to a voluntary death, without any hope or
meaning to escape: whose courage and valiant enterprise made such an impression
of fear in the hearts of the Persians, that Xerxes left his Lieutenant to
prosecute the wars, and returned back again into his country: an
enterprise A rewardable victory
worthy of perp su^ll memory; five hundred men to put to slighean (...) that
drank the rivers dry as they passed.

CHAP. II.
Of Lawmakers the Lawmakers: And of Charondas: A remarkable Justice in
Solomon: Strange Justice amongst the Sw ZZers: I he Justice of the Emperors
Frajan, Antoninus Plus, and Alexander Severus: Of Antonius Valentinian.
Theodosius, Augustus, Marcus Aurelius, etc. Of S^s Lewis the French king: Of
Favorites to Princes: Constantine the Great: Of Alexander Severus his
commendable Justice upon Vetorius Turinus: Belon, etc. Of their great vices
observed by Historians, Impiety, Injustice, and Luxury, etc.

THe respect the Heathens had to the observation, not of one or two, but of all
moral virtues, may make Christians blush to think what observers they would
have been of Christian virtues, if they had known God as we do. Zeleucus
made a law among the Locrians The rare justice of Zeleucus.
that whosoever committed adultery should lose both his eyes: it chanced that
his son was condemned for that crime, and determining that the penalty of the
law should with severity be inst upon him; yet being entreated by the earnest
petition of the whole city, who in as much as in them was, for the honor and
reverence of the father, forgave the necessity of the punishment of the young
man, first caused one of his own eyes, and after one of his sonues eyes to be
plucked out, leaving sight to them both. Thus though the rigor of the law was
in a sort qualified, yet the penalty thereof was by a wonderful moderation of
equity sufficiently fulfilled, dividing himself indifferently between a
merciful father, and a just lawmakers. Charondas having pacified the seditious
assemblies of the people, and meaning to provide for the like in time to come,
made a law that whosoever did enter into the Senate with any weapon, should
presently be slain: in process of time, it chauned him to return to his
house from a far journey out of the country, having his sword by his side,
and in the same sort as he then was, forgetting the law, upon some present
occasion he went into the Senate: and being admonished by one that stood next
him, that he had broken his own law: not so (quoth he) but I will confirm
it, and immediately drawing his sword, and turning the point to his breast, he
fell (...)
down upon it and slew himself. I note not this example, because I allow of
the fact, but that men may see how carefully the heathens observed justice and
moral virtues, which they preferred before their own life: for when he might
easily have excused himself, by haste and forgetfulness, yet lest that might
be an occasion to some other with an evil intent to offend the law, he chose
rather to warn others by his own example. Julius Casar caused one of his
Captains Severs lust^.
to be beheaded, because he had dishocoured the mistreste of the house where he
lodged, without staying for one to accuse him, or for her husbands complaint.
Solomon Emperor of the Turks, sent his Bassa into Valona to pass into Italy;
this man landed at the haven of Castro, which so dismayed the inhabitants, that
they yielded themselves to him, upon his oath and promise that they should
depart with bag and baggage: but contrary to his faith, he caused them all to
be slain, except such as were thought fit to serve for slaves. After his
return to Constantinople the great Great justice in an ^sidell.
being advertised of his breach of faith, caused him to be strangled, and sent
back all his prisoners with their goods into Italy. Among the rare examples of
the Heathens, we will recite a strange kind of severitie used by Christians,
out of the Histories of the Switzers. The Switzers have a free commonwealth,
whereof they are very jealous: There was a young man among them, that went about
to usurp the government and alter the state; whom when they had condemned to
death, judgment was given, that the execution should be done by his father, as
the cause of his evil education, that he might receive his death by the
author of his life, and that the father in some sort might be punished for his
Unnatural justice.
negligence used in the education of his child.

And these were notable examples of Justice and policy used by the Emperors
Trajan, Antoninus Pius, Worthy Emperors.
Alexander Severus, and others, worthy of consideration; because the felicity
of Princes is said to be in well governing their people. For that commonwealth
(says one) cannot decay, where the poor have justice, and the wicked rich men
punishment: and especially, if there be good doctrine for the young, and
little covetousness in the old. In the days of Trajan, none that had charge
of justice might augment his goods: but in that estate of riches or poverty
wherein he began to govern, in the same he was to contain himself, and
to look for reward at the Princes hand, according to his merit. Hoc deterius
habet Salust.
respublica, quo magis res privatae slorent. He also confidering the great
impoverishing and tediousness that long suites brought to his people, ordained
that all suites of Italy should continue but one year, and the suites of other
countries but half a year. The Emperor Antoninus never sent any praetor to
govern any Province, that was wise and valiant only, but he also must be
without any infection of pride and covetousness: For he thought that no man
could well govern a common wealth, that is subject to pride or covetousness.
Unto Pretors, Censors, and Questors, before Imitable government
he gave them any country to govern, he caused them first to give up an
Inventory of their own proper goods, to the end that when their charge was
finished, the increase of their wealth should be considered: And jointly
therewith he did both say and warn them, that he sent them to minister
justice, and not by fraud to rob his people. The Emperors Valentiman and
Theodosius took this order with Judges and governors of Provinces, that they
should swear at the entering into their charge, that they had not given nor
promised any thing, and that they would not give, nor cause to be given any
thing; and also that they would take nothing but their fee. And if it were
proved that they had taken any thing (being lawful for every man to accuse
them) they should pay four times so much, besides the infamy and perjurie;
and the like penalty was against him that gave the present. The Emperor
Iustiman Coignet.
would say, that all Judges ought to contemn riches, and to show their hands
clean to God, to the Emperor, or King, and to the law: which is also to be
understood of all Magistrates and governors. It is unpossible (says one) but
the same day that riches and treasures Observe.
begin to increase in the houses of Magistrates and Judges, that the self same
day, the administration of Justice should not decay. And though he were ready
to pardon all other offenses: yet in the execution of justice, he that did
offend, though the matter were not great, he would with great severity punish
him grievoasly. Institia and (...) maxim reddunt d^turnum (...) When Augudus
Casar sent a Governor into Africa An ex^llentlaing of Augustus.
with the change of Justice; My friend (quoth he) I pat you not in trust with
mine honor, nor commit to you my justice, to the end you should be envious of
innocents, and an executioner of transgressors: but that with one hand you
should help to maintain the good, and with the other hand help to amend the
evil: and if you will know what mine intent is, I send you to be a
grandfather for orphants, an advocate for widows, a plaster for the grieved,
a staste for the blind, and a father to all. Marcus Aurclius finding fault
with the evil choice that is made many times of Magistrates and Judges,
demands whereof springs the scandal of the people, and infamy of the
Prince, and the danger to Justice: The cause is (says he) the order now
adays, by which all things go out of order; the favorites importuning the
Prince, and the Prince not refusing; they deceiving him, and he suffering
himself to be deceived. They prefer their friends to offices in Necessary
(...)
recompense of their friendship, sometime their servants in recompense of their
service, as though they provided offices for men, not men for offices. So that
few offices remain for the virtuous, that are given him only, because he is
virtuous. But the office of Justice ought not to be given to him that procures
it, but to him that best deserves it. And Hurault says, that a Prince should
take heed that he bestow not two offices or more upon one man; for in so doing
he bereaveth himself of the means to recompense many, and is not so well
served as otherwise he should be: for (as Alexander Severus was wont to say) it
is a hard matter that he which has two charges at once, should be able to use
them to his own honor and his masters profit. The way likewise to attain to
honor is stopped to others that are meet men and sufficient, when one
occupies the place and honor of many. The like care a Prince should take,
that the offices which he gives may come ^eely to him upon whom he bestows
them: and that no persons take Alexander
any money or gift for their helps or furtherance to the obtaining of those
offices: for he that buyeth an office, must sell the administration of it: and
this discommodity also comes of it, that men will be discouraged to seek and
follow virtue, when they sh^l see that advancement is not obtained by virtue,
but by money. And a Prince should foresee that he place very good men in
offices, for such men as Princes place in Fran.
authority, such they are taken themselves to be: and therefore a Prince should
inform himself by secret intelligence, as also by common fame of sufficient
men, upon whom to bestow his offices, and rather make his own choice, than
prefer men at the suite of his favorites. It is an ancient pestilence (says
one) in the Courts of Princes, that when the Prince is disposed to bear
affection, or to honor any person, forthwith they murmur and join together to
disgrace and persecute him: for up steps envy on the one side, and detraction
on the other, two old Courtiers, and sworn enemies to virtue, who never leave
to solicit and importune the Prince, until they have wrought him out of his
favor. And yet were it more commendable and behoovefull Fra^.
for a Prince (says one) after good deliberation, and advised resolution, to
be constant in his determination, and not to be removed nor altered with words.
Gregory Tholos says, that Princes commit a fault when they give offices of
rule, for favor, love, or recompense unadvisedly without due examination of
their sufficiency; for they should remember that they are called to the
government of the commonwealth, not for themselves, or for their friends or
favorites, but rather for the profit of others that be committed to their
government: and therefore in an evil choice, The great charge that Pruices
undergo.
they are in danger of a double punishment, when they shall come to answer
their doings before God; both for that they of whom they made choice have
behaved themselves evilly; and for that they gave them power to do evil. Yet
they may nevertheless bestow honor and riches upon their friends and
favorites, but so far forth as the right of the commonwealth remain whole,
and take no harm thereby. S. Jews the French King by his testament ordained
that his son should see good laws observed, and to make choice of wise
Counselors and of ripe years, and that no money should be taken to make
Officers; for men should not obtain offices by money, by ambition, nor by
favor; that he do justice indifferently to all, by which kings do reign; and
not believe too soon. That his sevrants be wise, peaceable, not covetous,
backbiters nor quarrellers. Q. Curtius says, a Prince ought to bestow more
care and cost in getting a wise Counselor, than in conquests. Alexander
Severus, Adria^, and others, Emperors of Rome, would call to their council, not
their favorites, but men learned, grave, and experienced, and of a good
conscience. Princes should not esteem men by their riches and state, but by
their virtue and conversation. One asked Trajan the Emperor how he made so
good a choice of counselors and friends: he answered, that his good hap came
hereof, that he chose them neither covetous men nor liars: for they in whom
covetousnes or lying has any place cannot love perfectly. And the French king
Charles 8, would often say to his friends or favorits, that he made choice of
them, for the opinion he had that they were of the honester sort, and such as
in whom he might put his trust, fearing but one fault in the^, that they will
suffer themselves to be overcome with covetousnes, whereunto they may be easily
allured and tempted, by means of the credit they have with him, but if he
should understand, that for gain they should command any unjust thing, or not
honest, they should lose his favor for ever. They that be in favor (says one)
with Princes, Greg. Thol. Favorites to Priaces.
abuse the Prince when they name or prefer to offices and dignities, and
government, such as be of their faction, and at their command: not such as be
worthy, but such as will be instruments to serve their turn, and such as they
may freely command as their creatures and dependants, and dare not gainesay
them; whereof ensues often many inconveniences. And therefore Princes ought to
be very circumspect, and so to handle the matter, that they who be chosen to
offices of government and dignities, depend immediately upon them, and not upon
others, that they may have free men to their officers and magistrates, that are
bound and beholding to none but to them. A Prince (says one) should be sure
to make choice of very good counselors, of approved life and ma^ners, such as
God commanded Moses to make choice of: and they Greg. Thol.
should be (says he) faithful, wise, true speakers, not flatterers, constant,
godly, secret: such as know the minds of the subjects, and state of the
country: of good years, that have tasted of both fortunes, and are more apt to
execute than to innovate matters: chosen not by suit, nor by private, but by
public commendation: and such as be not headstrong and obstinate in defense
of their opinion, free from passions and affections, and not desirous of gain.
Good Counselors make a good and happy principality: and wisdom and
counsel is better than force, as it was said in times past of the Romans:
Romanus sedendo vincit. By the law in the twelve Tables, a Senator or
Counselor must be free from vice, and be a spectacle to others: and that no
man might come into that order that was given to any vice. And this is
commendable in a wise Prince, to hear the opinion of many, and keep secret to
himself which of them he means to follow, until Note.
he command to put it in execution. Vegetius thus advises a Prince: What ye
have to do, confer Excellent counsel from Vegotias.
with many; what ye will do, with very few, or rather with your self only:
for there be no better counsels, than those which the enemy knows not before
they be put in execution. Epaminondis the Philosopher gives this counsel to
Princes: In the courts of Princes there ought no greedy or covetous men to be
familiar with him, nor of his council: for the Princes give great occasion to
be hated of the people, when their servants have always their hands open to
receive bribes. In the Courts of Princes there ought no fleshly men to be
their favorites: for the vice of the flesh has in it so little profit, that
he which is wholly overcome therewith, ought always to be of the Prince
suspected. In the palace of a king, there ought not to be drunkards nor
gluttons: for they that be overcome with the excess of eating and drinking,
are unfit to give their Prince good counsel. In the palace of Princes there
ought to be no blasphemers: for he that will not fear to blaspheme his Creator
openly, will not fear to speak evil of his Prince secretly. Alexander
Severus in the beginning of his reigng, discharged all them that were known to
be vicious persons from their offices, and forced them to make restitution of
all that they had bribed or purloyned, and from thenceforth to live of their
own proper labor. Pindarus greatly commends the city of Corinth, Honesties
three daughters.
because honesty reigned there, which had three daughters: Good laws, Justice
and Peace, that brought them all good things. Constantine the Great, after he
had overcome Licinius, caused this proclamation to be made: If there be any, of
what place, estate, or dignity soever, that assures himself he can truly and
manifestly prove any thing against any of my Judges, Earls, Friends or
Palatines, that he has not seemed to deal uprightly and justly, let him come
safely, and inform me: I will hear, I will know, and if it be proved, I will
revenge my self. By which it appears, that as a good pastor of his people,
appointed by God, he accounted the injuries done to his people, to be done to
himself. For a Prince, says one, should never deny Justice to the poor man
because Duties in a prince.
he is poor, nor pardon the rich man, because he is rich: he should never give
reward for affection only, nor punish only through passion. He should never
leave evil unpunished, nor good unrewarded: he should never deny justice to him
that demands it, nor mercy to him that deserves it: he should never
command punishment being angry, nor promise reward being merry: he should
always labor to be loved of the good, and feared of the wicked: and lastly,
he should favor the poor, that can do little, that he may be favored of
God, that can do all. The chief strength of a kingdom is to David.
love Justice. Cicero would have the contempt of temporal goods to be no less
in Magistrates than in true philosophers. Aristotle would say, that there was
not Precepts from Philosophers.
a rule to be given of greater importance in every commonwealth, than to
provide by laws that Magistrates should not be covetous, nor sharp set upon
their profit. Plutarch says, He that enricheth himself by managing the
affairs of the estate, and takes presents, commits sacrilege, is an
unfaithful Counselor, a forsworn Judge, a corrupt Magistrate, and defiled
with all manner of wickedness that a man may commit. Hesiodras says, that
justice is a virgin undefiled, always lodged with honor, reverence,
temperance, and the Polybius. Against bribes.
common profit, hating all presents. There are many ancient orders in diverse
commonwealths, that forbid all manner of presents to be taken by Magistrates
and Judges. Demosthenes says, that those commonwealths are sick, where the
magistrates be occupied in receiving presents. Cato would say, that a man
should not desire of a Judge or magistrate neither a just nor an unjust thing:
he would also say, that Judges, Captains, and Governor should not enrich
themselves in their charge, but with honor and good reputation. Unsatiable
covetousness in magistrates and officers (says one) infecteth the
commonwealth with all manner of vices. And therefore many Princes in time past
would take away from their magistrates and officers, the riches and lands which
they had excessively gotten together. Cicero would have that to take place in
all Magistrates, that they might carry themselves the more circumspectly, which
Alexander the Great would vaunt of himself, that he thought all things that he
did, to be done in the Theater of the world. The Emperor Alexander Severus
Veturius Turinus.
had a servant in his Court called Veturius Turinus, a man of bad conditions,
whom he seemed to love and favor. This man had access to the Emperor at his
pleasure: no door was shut against him; he made all men believe (that were
suitors) that no man had so much conference with the Emperor as he. And when
Alexander was advertized of his lewd behavior and bribery, and how he deceived
many; he caused one to request Turinus to obtain a sure of Alexander: who
going and coming daily into the Princes chamber, would always inform the
suter, though most untruly, what he had said to the Emperor in his behalf,
and what answer was made him again. After Alexander had intelligence of these
things, and of the bribes he had received he caused Turinus to be apprehended;
and the matter being proved, and how much he had that way robbed, and how
largely he used to promise, and how little he performed; the Emperor caused
him to be fastened aloft upon a stake openly in Rome, and under him was set
green wood and wet straw; whereunto when fire was put, there came such a smoke
up to his nose, that within short time he was miserably choked and stifled to
death; a crier Excellent Justice.
with a loud voice making proclamation, Funiopunitur, qui fumum vendidit: he
that sold smoke, is stifled with smoke. This Emperor had another servant
called Belon who promised a Gentleman to obtain a great suit for him of
Alexander, with whom he pretended to be in great favor, and received of him
a great sum of money; which being known to Alexander, and that which he
promised to be very hurtful to the commonwealth, and a most unjust matter, he
caused him to be crucisiedr saying, that none should dare to adventure to sell
the favor of the Prince to the prejudice of his people. And though this
Emperor would use the advice of men that were wise, and of a sincere mind in
weighty affairs: yet he would never commit his trust and secrets to any
special person; for he used to say, that when the people do understand that
the Prince is counseled or directed by any one person, such a one may be with
gifts and requests easily corrupted. Philip de Comines says, that if any
private man has such favor and grace with the Prince, that all others be
compelled to fear and please him, that man reigns and enjoys the kingdom,
and provideth so carefully for his own matters, that he neglects the
affairs of the commonwealth. And those Magistrates that bear chief rule in
the common wealth under their Prince, are thought to commit a fault, when they
give such especial credit to any of their servants or favorites, as to suffer
them to be the preferrers and solliciters of men's suits abusing thereby many
times their credit with their master, to the hindrance of right and justice, to
their own gain, and his scandal: wherein they might do much better to hear
suitors deliver their own cause, and let their servants or favorites meddle
with their private affairs. These two things may be observed in histories to
be dangerous, and apparent signs and notes of the ruin or alteration of a
commonwealth: the one, when the riches and wealth of the realm is gathered
together into a few men's hands, and the rest live in want and extreme poverty:
the other, when the Magistrates be covetous, and justice corrupted, and the
people licentious and wicked, and given to Three observable (...).
all manner of vice. And there be three srnnes especially above all others
(noted by historians) that bring danger and public punishment and calamitic to
kingdoms and empires: Ungodliness, Injustice, and Luxuriousness: Ungodliness
troubles the Church, Injustice the commonwealth, Luxuriousness private
families; and the hurt in particular redoundeth to the whole. The vices of
private families enter into the commonwealth; Mel. Pene.
the vices of the commonwealth into every man's house; and the infection of
them both corrupts the Church. As contrariwise: If the ecclesiastical
discipline begin to decay, the others fall with it: for if godliness be
extinguished, the love of honesty and virtue waxes cold. These vices
delivered the Jews to the Assyrians, and the Greeks to the Turks. Josephus
reports that in his time the Jews were grown so wicked, that if the Romans
had not destroyed them, without doubt, either the earth would have opened and
swallowed them up, or else fire from heaven would have consumed them.

CHAP. III.
Of Henry the third king of France: The miseries that attend on the neglect of
justice: Venses presented to the Senate of Rome by king Boccas: The rare
continency of Roman Scipio, and king Alexander the Great: Examples of rare
friendship in Damon and Pythias, and in Ephenus and Everitus: Foolish
friendship in the two kings Hading and Hunding: The treachery of Duke Valentine
son to the Pope: How dangerous it is for young Gentlemen to travellinto Italy
Marcus Aurelius Emperor: Of the vices of Rome: Ancient writers concerns
friendship: The ingratitude of men reproved in the histories of bruit beasts,
as Dogs, Horses, Oxen, Lions, etc.

OUr own age has given us examples and experience of the dangers that the
generality of vices, and corruption of good manners and customs has brought
to a commonwealth; and how necessary it is for a Prince to be inquisitive,
and look often into the manners of his ministers and subjects; and to foresee
in season, that the corruption of a few members do not infect the whole body
of the commonwealth. In the latter troubles of France, in the reign of Henry
the Examples of late times.
third, all the states, by the kings appointment, were assembled, to reform
the disorders, abuses, and corruptions, that were crept into all parts of the
realm. When they had reckoned up to the king, in the assembly, the generality
of vices, the disorders, abuses and corruptions which had overrun all parts of
France, they set before his eyes, with eloquent speech, the evil bestowing of
the ecclesiastical functions upon persons unfit: the ambition, the
covetousness, the plurality of benefices, the non-residencie, the contempt of
the law of God; the luxuriousness and dissoluteness of Bishops and principal
Prelates, (except some few) that jetted in great pomp up and down his Court,
and in all other places with troops of servants the most wicked and lewd in all
the realm; their houses sound not of Psalms and songs to the honor of God,
but of barking of dogs, and singing of birds, and of all manner of dissolute
voices. Then they showed how their Noblemen and Gentlemen were degenerate from
their forefathers, and what vices were now usual amongst them: and among the
rest, their swearings, and blasphemies of the name of God, whereas the oath of
their forefathers was, By the faith of a Gentleman, which was done with
reverence, and in cases necessary, and not oherwise. And speaking more
generally, blasphemy (say they) is their mother tongue, and ordinary with many
Frenchmen: Adultery is to The French nation reproved for many vices.
them a pastime: Symonie is common merchandise: The richer ignorant sort of the
Realm find place in the chief dignities: men are known rather by their
proud attire than by their virtue, their knowledge, or by their goodness. Then
come they to the overthrow of Justice, and the great abuse that was therein
committed, the delays, the subtilties, and disguising of the truth that was
there usual, the misery of them that followed suits by the subtlety of the
parties, the little zeal and negligence of Judges, by so many delays such
prolongings, whereby justice was not exercised, but rather vexed and encombred,
and often trodden under foot: that the particular respect of many, was the
cause of these evils, who labored by this means to increase their estate to
their posterity. Of these and the like things (say they) the King had
appointed to be informed of his Judges, but his commandment was all one, as if
he had not commanded: for all was unprofitable and unfruitful. And this is
the wickedness of this time, that the Judges are bound to judge according to
the Laws, as they have sworn, and promised when they received their charge:
yet notwithstanding it is glorious to a great many Judges in these days to
say, that they are not bound to judge according to the laws written by the
Lawyers, but they will judge according to their own brains, whereof it
follows, that as every one abounds in his own sense, so many heads, so
many opinions; so many Courts, so many sentences. Hereof rises the diversity
of judgments in the like cases, and in the self same matter; by mean whereof
the poor suitors fall into infinite charges and immortal suits: Laws seem no
other things than written papers. Then proceeding to other disorders and
abuses, they came to the selling of offices, and the power of judgment, which
was the cause that the more wicked sort was most honored, the most ignorant
most esteemed; that the stronger oppresses without punishment the weaker; that
without scruple they sell that justice by retaile, that was bought in gross;
that Miseries attending the neglect of Justice.
the Cities and Countries were overwhelmed with murders and robberies
unpunished; that there was no order in government, neither respect to the law,
nor love to virtue, and that a licentiousness addicted to all evil is spread
throughout all the realm. Now (said they) if you will turn from you the
ruins that are prepared, you must degrade and discharge a number, as well of
your Prelates, as of your civil Magistrates, that are now established in your
high Courts, and punish them severely that have abused themselves in their
callings and offices, otherwise you cannot preserve your estate. Then make
inquiry in all parts where good and honest men do dwell, and replenish your
counsel with them, and God will be there among them: God is always at hand
with the just man, and will rather bring to effect your enterprises by their
hands whom he blesses, than by the subtle devices of profane wise men, whose
labor he curses: it is very true, that good men are not seen to walk in
troops by great companies, yet let the torrent of corrupt manners be never so
violent, the world was never nor will be without some number of men of
excellent virtue. How many heroical courages replenished with a holy
magnanimity, and with an incredible valor, be in the state of the Nobility
and Gentilitie (not these villainous blasphemous Nobility and Gentilitie) but
that which loves and fears God, that never saw your Court, but remain in
their houses without being employed? which kind of men, if they were employed
in your service, would in a few months reform all the ruins and disorders of
the state. But these men are not known but of God, and of some good men. King
Boccas presented to the Senate of Rome these verses, among others, in
reprehension of some disorders that were dangerous to a Commonwealth.

Woe be to that Kingdom where all be such, that neither Three verses worthy
observation.
the good are known among the evil, nor the evil among the good.

Woe be to that Realm where the poor be suffered to be proud, and the rich to
be tyrants.

Woe be to that Realm where so great vices be committed openly, which in some
other Countries they would fear to commit secretly.

But to return to the Heathens. And what an example of continency or rather
temperance (for Plutarch says, Continency is no virtue, but the way to
virtue, that is temperance) was showed by Scipio, being General Raretomperance
in Scipio.
of the Romans Army in Spain, when in the slower of his youth, certain
beautiful young women of the Nobility were taken Prisoners, and brought to
him: among the which there was a young virgin that was contract unto a Prince
of the Country of Luccio, of such a singular beauty and favor, that whither
soever she went, she drew all men's eyes to behold her. Scipio committed her
and the rest to safe custody, with straight charge, that no dishonor should
be offered them: and sent for the parents and husband of this young virgin:
and after some comfortable words used to them, he restored the virgin to her
husband undefiled, in the same sort he received her: for the which he told him
he would look for none other satisfaction, but that he would be a friend to
the people of Rome: And when her parents offered him a great sum of money in
gold, which they had brought for her ransom, desiring him earnestly to accept
it; and affirming that they should take the receiving of that money for as
great a pleasure as the restoring of their daughter: Scipio seeing their
importunacie, told them he would accept it, and commanded them to lay down
the gold at his feet; and calling the young Prince, he gave him this gold
with his wife for her dower, over and besides that which her parents had
promised to give him. The young man returned into his Country with his wife
and gold in great joy, and published every where as he went, that there was a
young man come into Spain, like unto the gods that overcame all with Arms, with
Courtesy and Liberality: and within few days after, to show himself
grateful, he returned to Scipio with one thousand four hundred horse.
Alexander the Great when he had taken Darius mother and his wife The
temperance of Alexander.
prisoners, a woman of singular beauty, with diverse other fair young virgins
attending upon them, was of that continency, that he would not be allured by
their beauties, though in the flourishing time of his youth, to offer them any
dishonor: but caused them to be kept safe from all violence, and honorably
used according to their estate. The same Alexander having appointed on a time
some woman to be brought to him; after he had looked long for her, when she
came to his bed, side he asked her, why she had tarried so long: because
(quoth she) I could no sooner steal from my husband: when Alexander heard that
she was a married woman, he sent her presently away untouched, because he
would not commit adultery. Where shall we find such scrupulosity of conscience,
or respect of honesty among Christians, that know the greatness of that sin,
and peril thereof, as was in that heathen Monarch, that commanded almost all
the world, and was subject to the controlment of no man, and did forbear only
for virtues sake? It is true that the Poet says; Non facile invenies multis e
millibus unum,
Virtutem pretium qui putet esse sui:
Among many thousands (to find one) it is hard
Who virtue makes the price of his reward.
Dionysius the elder, hearing that his son, who was to succeed him in his
kingdom, had committed adultery with a man's wife, rebuked him sharply, and
asked whether ever he heard of any such act done by him: No marvel (quoth he)
for you had not a king to your father: Against adultery.
No more will thou (said Dionysius) have a King to thy son, if thou leave not
these manners. The tyrant thought his son worthy to be dis-inherited for
committing adultery, which now is an ordinary matter, and accounted a pastime
and play of the better sort. Agapete said to Justinian, you are now rightly a
King, seeing that you can rule and govern your delights, by wearing on your
head the Diadem of temperance: for it is a very great and princely virtue to
rule himself, and to beware of his affections, the enticements of pleasures,
of fraud, and of flatteries.

And where is there to be found that faith and perfection of friendship (a
necessary virtue, and to be embraced of all men, among us Christians in whom
charity and love ought to abound) as was between Damon Rare friendship in
Damon and Pythias.
and Pythias, and diverse other heathens. Damon and Pythias were joined together
in such perfect friendship, that when Dionysius the tyrant had determined to
put one of them to death, yet having obtained of Disnysius license to go home
for a time, to set his things in order before he should dye, upon condition
that his fellow should remain with him to dye the death appointed to him, if
he brake his day: the one departed homeward, delivered of the danger he was
in, the other consented to remain as a pledge in captivity, that might have
lived out of danger. When he was gone, all men, and specially Dionysius
expected attentively what would be the end of this strange and doubtful
matter. When the day appointed for his return was as hand, and he not come,
every man condemned the other of mere folly, that so rashly would adventure
his life upon another man's word: but he assuring himself of his friends
fidelity, told them plainly, he repented nothing that he had done, nor had
any mistrust in his coming: the very same day and hour that was by Dionysius
set down for his return, his friend came: the tyrant marvelling at their
constancy and fidelity, pardoned them both: and further, desired them that
they would accept him for a third person into the society of Friendship has
power even in tyrants.
their friendship. Ephenus having offended Dionysius likewise, and being
apprehended and brought before him, and condemned to dye, made suit to the
tyrant for license to go home into his country to dispose of his things,
promising to return to dye such a day: Dionysius demanding a pledge, he
delivered him his friend Everitus, who boldly assented to be his pledge, and
to suffer death if he returned not: Ephenus departed Ephenus and Everitus.
and came again at the day prefixed, to the great admiration of all men, and
specially of Dionysius, who pardoned them both: such force had virtue to
pacify the rage of a cruel tyrant; whose disposition inclined to no other
thing but vice. The performance of this friendship was joined with honesty and
discretion, but this that follows was more faithful than wise. There were two
Kings, one of Denmark, the other of Suecia, called Friendship without wisdom.
Hading and Hunding, that had promised such an assured friendship, that
whatsoever happened to the one, the other would be partaker of the same, even
to the death: it chanced that a false rumor was brought to Hading that Hunding
was slain by treason: he, believing the report, to perform his promise,
invited his Nobility unto a banquet, and in the midst of his Hall he had
filled a great deep vessel with delicate wine: and himself filled their
cups, and gave them drink until they were all drunk: and they being fallen
asleep, he threw himself down headlong into the tub of wine, and drowned
himself: which being known to the other King Hunding; he to perform his
faith toward his friend, in like sort assembled all his people together, and
in the sight of them all hanged himself. Such faith as was between Damon and
Pythias must be sought for in some newfound land, where swannes be black;
for it will hardly be found in the known world. As the world declineth to old
age, and brings not forth his fruits with that vigor and virtue it has done
in times past: so the virtue and goodness of men seems to decline from that
of former ages, and to wax old and decay, which was foretold in Esdras; for
the weaker that the world is by reason of age, the more shall the evils be
increased upon them that dwell therein; for the truth is fled far away, and
lies are at hand. For there is so little heed taken, and Vices that take the
shape of virtues.
so small account made of moral virtues (I will not speak of Christian
virtues) now adays, that the vices next to them are taken for the virtues
themselves. Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and umbra,
Cum sit triste habitu, vultuque and vest severum:
Nec dubie, tanquam frugi laudatur avarus:
Vice does deceive us when she does disguise
Her self like virtue, in sad shape and eyes,
Severe in life and gate: Most certain when
The avaritious are called thrifty men.


They that be furious and passionate, and quarellous, are called stout and
valiant men that stand upon their honor: to live loosely and lasciviously,
abusing men's wives and daughters, is called friendlinesse and courtesy: they
that be ambitious, and practice all unlawful means to make themselves great
in dignities, are honorable and worthy men, and meet for government: to be
covetous and miserable, is called thristinesse and good husbandry; and these
kind of men call their like, provident men: to be prodigal is called
liberalltie: and if we shall run over all the virtues and vices in this
sort, we shall see such a metamorphosis or transformation, that it were
sufficient to persuade us, that the ages past have discharged all their malice
into the age we live in, as into a gowt or sink: to dissemble and deceive, is
now taken for wisdom or prudence, a singular virtue which cannot be
dissevered from honesty and plain meaning. One says, be wary and
circumspect how thou believe any thing: these be the sinews of Epich.
wisdom, so as now we may say with the Poet: -- nam front politi
Astut am vapide servant sub pectore vulpens:
A crafty fox does often himself invest,
In a brow polisht and ill-tasted breast.


And he is accounted the wisest that can most artificially beguile, which is
the cause that Machiavell exalts Machiavell.
Duke Valentine the Popes son above the skies, and calls him the paragon of
his time, as he that in wisdom exceeded all the Princes of that age. One
cause of his commendation is this; when he perceived that for his tyrannous
government he was misliked of the nobility, and that by open wars he was
not able to destroy them: he feined a desire to be reconciled, and invited
them to a feast for that purpose: the nobility, desirous of the Princes
favor, mistrusting no treason, came to him to dinner, where he entertained
them with all manner of courtesy: but under sweet flowers lurkes the serpent:
when he had dined, his guard (which he had prepared before for the purpose)
took them aside, and presently cut off their heads. And when this news was
first brought to Pope Alexander his father, he smiled and said, his son had
showed them a Spanish trick: Mali corvi malum ^vum, A bad egg of an evil
crow: I doubt there be too many Machiavillians that have his vices in more
estimation, than the virtues taught by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle: and
carry his precepts better in memory than the lessons of good and fruitful
Sermons; and in their life more exactly put in practice his humanity than
Christian divinity. It may be wished men were not so much Italianated, whose
habits many have gotten both of body and mind, and are become as artificial
apes, counterfeiting a formal kind of strangers civilitie: but that which
some perform may rather be called Divillitie. They must dissemble cunningly,
Italianisme deciphered.
promise liberally, and perform niggardly; give all, and deliver nothing: as
one aptly expressing in himself the condition of many, said; I am all yours
except body and goods, which is now grown into a common proverb: such
friendship and courtesies are very usual: The Italian has an old proverb;
Inglese Italianato, ediabele incarnato: An English man Italianated, is a Devil
incarnated. Our nation, although it has received many great blessings from
God, as no people in the world more, both in proportion and agilitie of body,
and in valor and nobleness of mind, with diverse other singular gifts: yet we
are by a certain natural inclination, and a worse custom, too apt to
counterfeit strangers manners: we imitate the Spaniards in their pride, the
Italians in their dissembling, and other vices, the Frenchmen in their
rashness and inconstancy; the Fleming, we begin to follow in their quaffing
and drunkenness: and all these we counterfeit, or rather exceed in their
vanity of attyres and gestures. Pride and excess were two of the finnes for
which Sedom was punished. For many of our travelers bring us the worst of
their manners, leaving the best behind: as the Spider draws poison from the
same flower the Be sucketh honey: as though they made a conscience to bring
any good thing from them. Nothing is more odious and contemptuous to us, than
the simplicity of manners, and habits of our forefathers: and yet Histories are
full of examples of famous men and Nations, The danger of travel.
that so long as they continued in the simplicity of habits, and manners, and
singleness of life of their ^fathers; so long also they kept their virtue and
fame gotten by the same: but as soon as they drew to them the manners of other
countries, they brought also their vices with them, and thereby lost that
reputation which before they had gotten by their virtue. So long as the
Lacedaemonians observed Lycurgus ordinances and singleness of life and
manners, they were one of the most flourishing Commonwealths in the world, and
when they changed them with strangers manners, their reputation was soon
decayed: Princes should foresee that Fran.
the corruption of an evil custom creep not into their Realm, for it
brings in vices, and drives out all virtues. Alexander the great was
conquered by the luxuriousness of Asia, of which by his virtue before he had
made conquest. The Romans likewise so long as they used the simplicity and
singleness of life of their forefathers, increased their estate until they
became masters of the world: but afterward, when they brought into their
country the luxuriousness and delicatesse of Asia, they lost all, and
themselves also; and were so drowned in voluptuousness, that they got not so
much fame and reputation by their virtue, as they lost by their vice and
vanity. The care of antiquity was to adorn their minds with vertueland
knowledge, not regarding the ornaments of the body. Epaminondas was a famous
Captain among the Grecians, and wanne many victories, The thriftinesse of
ancient times.
who had but one only garment: and if it chanced him to send it to the Fuller,
he was driven to tarry at home for lack of another; and yet being of so small
substance, when the King of Persia had sent him gold of great value for a gift,
he would not take it. Paulus Aemilius a Romanc, when he was made the second
time Consul, was sent to make war upon the Macedons, where he wanne a
notable victory, with wonderful store of riches and treasure: which not
withstanding, he lived in such poor estate, that after his death, his wife
could hardly have any dower. But the Italians since that time have changed
their manners from virtue to vice, turned matter into form, with diverse
frivolous inventions. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius says, that by the prowess
of our forefathers are honored those that now live; and by the little that is
in them that live now, our posterity shall be infamous: for they that are now,
have turned the acts and labors of antiquity into Guevarra concerning Travel.
foolish toys and vanity. Guevarra seemed to be of the opinion, that
Travelers into Italy brought no great good home with them into their own
Countries: for writing a letter to an Ambassador of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, among other things wishes that he come from Italy so sound of body
and so perfect of soul, as when he departed from Spain; for in new Countries
always there are learned new fashions: for to speak the truth (says he) I
have seen few come from Italy, that came not only absolute, but also
dissolute. The property of Bells is to call men to service, and never enter into
the Church themselves: and in my judgment such is the condition of Italy, where
be a great many Sanctuaries that provoke to prayer, but the people thereof have
no devotion: but seeing you come from Rome, I would not have you boast of that
place: for the fashions of Italy are more pleasant to be declared, than sure to
be followed. Rome is not now in the power of Christians, as it was in the time
of the Heathens: for then being the mother of all virtues, she is now turned
What Ro^e was, and what it now is.
to be the school of all vices. O how much and how much is between the
customs of Italy and the law of a good Christian? and when he had reckoned up
many vices there usual, he concludes, that if he desire with those conditions
to be a Roman, much good may it do you (quoth he) for upon the day of
account you would rather have been a labourer in Spain, than an Ambassador
at Rome, which agrees with Mantnan: Vivere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma
Omniacum liceant, non licet esse pium:
From Rome depart, you that would holy be,
Religion lives not with such liberty.


And yet this is the Country and people that we havein such admiration, and
desire to see and imitate. Hear also what the Emperor Marcus Aurelius says
of the vices of Rome and Italy, in his time brought from other Countries, and
how much they are degenerate from the ancient Romans, which he often
repeateth in his writings, and bewayleth with tears; he calls Rome the head
of vices: O Rome without Rome which now have naught but the walls, and art a
common stews of vices: not without tears (quoth he) I say that there was
Victory with loss.
never any Roman Captain that did kill ten thousand Asians with the weapons
he brought into Asia; but that he lost an hundred thousand Romans with the
vices they brought to Rome. At the same time when the war was kindled in the
East, ten valiant Captains brought these vices to Rome: whose names my pen
shall forbear to tell, because their vile offenses should not obscure their
valiant deeds. Before that Rome conquered Asia, we were rich, we were
patient, we were sober, we were wise, we were honest, and above all, we lived
contented: but now all vices may be learned in Rome, as all sciences may be
heard in Greece; O unhappy Rome that have now nothing but the name of Rome!
because there is in thee such scarcity of virtue, and such plenty of vice: the
walls of Rome are carried of a great height, but her virtues be very low: Rome
braggeth of the great number of her inhabitants, but Rome may weep that her
vices be many more without comparison. In one month a man may number all the
stones of her stately buildings: but in many years a man cannot comprehend the
lewd and wicked manners and customs that be in Rome: o cursed Rome, cursed
thou have been, cursed thou art, and cursed thou will be: as thou have with
tyranny made thy self Lady of Lords, so the time will come when thou with
justice shall return to be the servant of servants. In the time of our
forefathers all the youth did exercise themselves in arms and now all their
pastime is in courting young women: In times past when thou were peopled with
true Romans, and not as thou art now with bastards, the armies that went out
of Rome, were as well disciplined as the Academies of Philosophers that were in
Greece: if the gods would raise up our forefathers again, either they would
not know us for their children, or else they would bind us for madmen. A young
man told the Senators that he came out of strange countries only to see
Rome, and now he found Rome without Rome: if my An excellent inversion.
judgment (says he) deceive me not, either ye be not Romans of Rome, or else
this is not Rome of the Romans: o Rome if thou knew truly the virtue of our
forefathers, and did consider the lightness of us, the day that they ended
their life, the same day not one stone in thee should have bin left upon
another, and so the fields should have savoured of the bones of the virtuous,
which now stink of the bodies of the vicious: that which our forefathers did
fly from, our vain people in these days run after. Thus may ye see what
accou^ wise men have and do make of Italy, the country and manners which our
Nation has so great a desire to see and imitate: for the Italians have drawn
their viocs, and evil manners from the Romans, being one natin, as the
Romans brought them from other countries: might not our forefathers have
truly prophesied, that when our nation became travelers into Italy, our
manners and conditions would be made worser might they not have said, we shall
then learn to speak much and perform little; to know how to dissemble
injuries, and never to forgive them; to be very constant in hatred, and very
changeable in love and friendship? and out of other countries also, other
conditions worse than our own: is there a more unseemely thing for a man, than
quaffing and carowsing, even to drunkenness, and to death, which happens
often? Antiquity did so much detest luxuriousness and gay clothes, that at
Thebes there was a pillar set up in the Church, wherein was contained cruel
curses against the king Menin that first invented a King (...).
more delicate life. And will you see how odious this vice of quaffing and
drunkenness was to the old Romans? Plutarch reports that in the Senate of
Rome, there was an ancient man who made great exclamations, that a young man had
so dishonored him, that he deserved death: when the young man was called to
his answer; Fathers conscript (quoth he) though I seem young, yet I am not so
young, but that I knew the father of this old man, who was a virtuous and noble
Roman, and kin to me. And I seeing that his father had gotten much goods,
fighting in the wars, and this old man spending them in eating and drinking,
I said to him one day, I am very sorry (my Lord and uncle) for that I hear of
thy honor A great observation in a youngman.
in the market place, and for that I see done in thy house, wherein we have
seen fifty armed men here before in onehouse, and now we see an hundred
knaves made drunk, and as thy father showed to all those that came into his
house the enfignes he had won in the wars, thou show them diverse forts
of wines: when the Senate had hear dih^ both speak, they gave judgment that
all the goods should be taken from the old man, and a tutor provided to
govern him and his house, who should not give him one cup of wine, because he
was noted of drunkenness. The old Romances so much detested this vice of
quaffing and drunkenness, that when the Consul Lucius Pius was sent to make
war upon the Sarmatians, after a season a truce was made, in which time the
Consul made them a banquet, and filled them so full with wine (a thing which
the Sarmatians above all things most desired) that their Captains yield
themselves and their country into subjection of the Romans. After the wars
were ended, the Consul returning to Rome, required the accustomed triumph,
which was not only denied him by the Senate, but also by decree in recompense
of his service, his head was stricken off, and all his acts defaced, and the
Sarmatians set at liberty again, and freed from the subjection of the
Romans: who would not win kingdoms and countries by quaffing and
drunkenness, but by virtue and valor. The people of Brasill make a feast when
they kill their prisoners, and sit drinking three days and three nights: and
never leave quaffing until they have emptied all their vessels: every draught
they drink is of execeding great quantity, and he that holds not out to the
end, is accounted infamous and effeminate. And seeing we, with so great
liking, imitate the Italians, because we think their manners agree better with
civilky them ours; then contrariwise we should reject and concen^ the manners
which are usual among those barbarous Heathens that disagree with civility,
humanity and Christianity. Men's minds and desires are grown very variable, and
therefore their resolutions and labors very uncertain: but will ye see what
the things be whereabout men's minds are most occupied in these days

In getting of riches they care not how: increasing their possissions until
they know not when. In setting out their bodies with they cannot tell what:
Carried away with pleasure they wot not whither:
Hunting after reputation they know not fro whence:
Seeking happiness they cannot tell where:


Luxuriousness (says one) and the intemperanese of meat and drink, is a
flattering evil, and creeps sweetly into men's minds: but with these vices
virtue is destroyed the glory that has bin gotten is turned into insamie, the
strength of the body and mind is weakened, the laws of honesty are overcome;
neither can there be any thing invented that is more loathsome and hurtful.
And (as Valerius says) it is hard for a man to know, whether it be more
hurtfullto be taken of his enemies, or of those vices. A poor table is the
mother of health, and a rich table the mother of diseases. Ense caduns multi,
crapula sed perimit plures.
Many fall by the sword, but more by surfeit.


Sophecles said to one, I esteem thee greatly happy for thy life, but the best
is, if thou have never bin in a strange This is still observed in the kingdom
of China.
country. The happy man indeed (says he) will stay: at home. When I think
upon Lycurgus laws, I cannot but have the ma in admiration that could so
providently foresee the corruption of good and simple manners, by the
intercourse with strangers: for which cause he did forbid trassique out of the
kingdom, or suffer strangers to enter into their Country, saying, that if
kingdoms grow rich by trading with strangers, they become poor of their proper
virtues. We cannot say with the Poet: C^lum, non animors mntant, qui trant
more current:
Though foreign seas you pass, and nations strange,
Yet it is the Climate, not the mind, you change.


For we change both air and mind, not as he would have it, in reformation,
but rather in deformation of manners, from simplicity or singleness, to
diffinulation or doubleness. I allow well of the counsel of Favorinus the
Philosopher: Vivendum est moribus prateritis, loquendum verbis prasentibus: We
should live after the manners used in times past, and speak with words used at
this present. It is noted among learned men for a dangerous As ill omen.
thing in a commonwealth, and a change or ruin to be feared, when the
authority of good laws is contemned, faults go unpunished, virtue not
rewarded, and honest manners changed for worse. The people of Creta being ill
used of the Rhodians their enemies, desired their gods that they would suffer
some evil manners to be brought in among them, thinking that to be a worse
curse than war, or pestilence, or any other thing: But had it not been more
honorable and commendable for our nation to have continued in the simplicity
of habits, and manners of our forefathers, retaining their virtues, than to
receive the vanity of attyres and gestures of other countries, with their
corruption of manners, and with them to exchange our virtues for their vices?
are our manners and habits better now, than were in times past those of our
forefathers, because they cannot lately out of Italy, out of Spain, out of
France, and from the Dutchmen? Is there no better rule to be given how to
discern between that which is good, and that which is not good, but by the
example of other countries? does dignity consist in sumptuousness of
apparel? decency in variety of attires? civility in vanity of gestures?
hospitality in excess and luxuriousnes? order in consusio? Virtue in former
ages was wont to be in estimation with the antiquity, and a rule to direct
their lives by, through which many became famous, as well private men, as whole
Nations. But what fruit has bin brought to us with these new fashions and
strangers manners? what effect has it wrought? If it be lawful to speak the
truth, besides to be proud and effeminate, and the exchange of our virtues for
their vices, a confusion of all things: What difference is there in habits
between estates? Does not the baser sort glitter in gold and silver equally
with the greater, whereof ensues many mischiefs? The manners that in time past
for reverence were peculiar to Princes, and the greater states of the Nobility,
as due only to them, are they not now common and usual with the baser sort,
and even among carters? But this alteration of fashions and manners so highly
esteemed, both brought forth no Decios, no Fabios, no Fabricios, no Scipies, no
more than they have done with them from Needful observations.
whence we had them, since their old simplicity of manners were corrupted: for
where there is so great care for the back and belly, there is small regard had
to provide for the mind and soul; where men so carefully desire to deck their
bodies with silk, silver, or gold, they have no care to garnish their minds
with virtue, learning and godliness. The manners and fashions of these latter
ages, I mean in a civil life, are so contrary to the manners and precepts of
antiquity, that (...) must needs be either they were fools then, and we wise
now^ else they were wise then, and we not sowise now. But because they were
schoolemasters to the world, and attained to that by their virtue which we
hunt after by a formalitie of habits and manners, and cannot come by, that is,
to be famous in the world in all ages, and had in admiration even to this day:
I rather believe that they were wise, and led us the right path by moral
virtue to civility without these vain toys now in use, and we out of the
highway and many ways their inferiors. For what is civilitie but the manners
of men grounded upon moral virtue, and the precepts of wise men? No man is
looked into what is within him. If the outside be gay and well set forth to the
show, and his (...) tricks used with the right grace, then all is well, (...)
is a worthy man: and surely he that beholds him must have a deep conceit, if
he think better of him than he thinks of himself: like unto the Ass that
carried the image of Isis upon his back, when he saw all menbow their A (...).
knees, and do reverence to the goddess, he waxed (...) and stately as though
they had done all that reverence unto him, until he that drove the Ass gave
him a (...) or two with his whip, and told him that this honor was not done to
him, but to that which he carried upon his back: and yet an ape is but an ape
though he be clothed in purple and gold. And it may be said to them (...) set
so much by outward form, and (...) inward matter, as the Fox when he saw a
man's head so artificially made, that there seemed to want (...) vital spirits
to (...) The Fox.
it a lively head of a man the took it up, and after he (...) be held it a
while, o (quoth he) what a goodly head (...) is, but it has no brain. And
such vainglorious (...) that hunt after fame beyond their merit, may do (...)
teach birds to speak, and to give them a (...) let them fly into the fields
as (...) did. If (...) advisedly consider what a disorder and confusion,
befides many inconveniences, the alteration of our manners and habits from the
simplicity and plainenes of our forefathers, through a vain imitation of other
countries fashions, and mislike of our own, has brought forth, may we not
rightly say to the authors thereof? Defunct is patribus successit (...),
Cujus (...), (...) valuere ruunt.
The fathers dead, they leave a wicked brood;
Whose lewd example ruins that which stood.


And it is not sufficient for men to delight in the matter of evil, but they
must also give it (after the manner of other countries) a peculiar form to set
it forth with the greater grace, that it may allure and draw their desires to a
further and more general mischief. The Romans complained that the men of
Asia and Greece sent their vices with their manners into Italy, and corrupted
the simplicity of their former manners and virtues left to them by their
forefathers, from whence our travelers have brought the same corruption to us,
and given us the like cause of complaint of them, as they had of the other.
There has been an old saying, that all evils rise out of the North: but we
may say that all our evils come to us out of the South. How happy were that
commonwealth where young men would labor to shine to the world by the
ornaments of their mind, and to excel one another by virtue and knowledge; as
they now covet to glitter in gold and silver, and to exceed in vanity A
taxation of vanity in attire and gesture.
of attires and gestures: and where old men would give example of godliness,
temperance, and modesty; and (...) their desires from worldly superfluities?
If Noblemen and Gentlemen would follow the manners of kings in times past, who
had (...) care of their (...), not thinking themselves kings by their apparel,
but by their mind: differing from the common sort, within and not without. One
of the praises that the Emperor Commod^ ^e spoke well that never did well.
gave to his father Marcus A^relius after his death was, and that worth^ly,
that others had made the commonwealth rich, but his father had m^de it
virtuous: others repaired walls, but he reformed manners: and one of the
praises given to the Emperor Severus was, that he never beheld any man in
Rome apparelled in filke or purple: But to what time could ^cans verses be more
aptly applied than to this? Non ^ro tectisve modus, mensasque priores
Aspernata fames.
There is no mean in gold, or buildings proud,
Our fables skorne what former times allowed.


After the famous champion Starchater had recko^ up the old manners of the
antiquity, and reprehended the deliciousness of the latter ages, he conch^:
Nunc re^ens (...) facies (...) ^mnia pressit.


New men new manners. But admit that the m^ of other Nations, which we so
greatly desire to im^, be more agreeable with civilitie, and their knowle^ of
virtue likewise greater than were those of our fo^faters, surely their
ignorance of strangers vices, (...) more profitable to them, than is now the
(...) of their manners and virtues to us.

And what made these great Princes and wise men of former ages so careful to
continue the old manners and simplicity of habits of their forefathers, but
only habits by their excellency of wisdom and virtue they (...) (which we
find by experience) that when the and habits of other co^ were brought (...)
their vices would also come with them: and that when costlinesse and variety
of (...) had gotten (...), men would be easily drawn to such a delight to (...)
forth their bodies with (...), that they would have small regard to the
ornaments of their minds: for proof whereof we need not go far to seek for
examples. But to return again to fri^ship, where we left. (...) friendship.


Gain now adays contracteth frie^p, which is no sooner discontinued, but
friendship is also dissolved. Virtue and honesty neither begins nor
continues friendship: but as the Poet truly says; Vulgus (...) as utilitate
probat.
Cura quid expediat prior est (...) quid sit (...):
Et cum fort^ statque caditque (...).
Friendship, the vulgar do no further prise
Than for their profit: we do first devise
What Is gainefull, before hone^ profits all:
And faith with fortune does both rise and fall.


(...) writing to his friend Atticus, restrains one friend to wish to another
more than these three things: to enjoy health, to po^ honor, and not to suffer
necessity. But if I had such authority over my friends, I would make some
alteration, and forbid them to wish one to another more than these three
things: to fear God, to enjoy health, and not to suffer The better limitation.
necessity, which were sufficient to bring them to the felicity of both
worlds. Friendship was wont to extend ^, but now ^: what is more common in
every man's month than friendship and honesty? and what thing more rare and
less in use? Plato says, that friendship is given us by nature for a help to
virtue, and not for a companion of vice. Dicearchus advises to make all men
our well-willers if it be possible; but only good men our friends, who are not
obtained but by virtue. Plutarch warns men to take heed how they seek for a
swarm of friends, lest they fall into a waspe-neast of enemies. Pythagoras
disswadeth men from joining hands with every one. All which counsel tends to
this end, to make us wary what kind of men we make choice of to be our
friends, and that no friendship can be perfect but between a few, and those
virtuous and honest men, such as was between Jonathan and David, and some
others: but such counsel is needless in this latter age, when virtue is in
declination: men be no^ so hasty to enter into faithful friendship, nor so
forwardly in performing, that they need raynes to draw them back, but spurs
rather to prick them forward. The fable The tale of the (...).
of the Bear could not be more aptly applied to any time than to these latter
ages, for the reprehending and setting forth of false friendship. As two men
were walking together in the fields, that had professed faithful friendship
each to other, there comes o^ of the woods by chance a Bear toward them;
the one perceiving the Bear at hand, leaves his friend, and climbeth up a
tree to save himself: the other seeing himself forsaken and left alone, fell
down to the ground as though he had been dead: the Bear came running to
devour him that lay upon the ground, and muzling about his mouth and (...),
finding that he breathed not (for he held his breath, knowing that the
property of a Bear is not to prey upon a dead carcass) the Bear departed:
and after the man was risen again, I pray thee (quoth he that was come down
from the tree) what was that the Bear whispered in thine ^are? he willed me
(said the other) to beware hereafter how I trusted such a false friend as thou
art. There need no such trial of friends in these days, a less matter than
the fear of a Bear will discover men's infidelity and dissimulation. And if men
would consider how far they are surmounted by brute beasts in perfect love
and friendship, they should find cause to be ashamed to see themselves
inferior to unreasonable creatures in things that appertain to virtue and
honesty. Report is made by credible authors, that as king Pyrrhus Of a Dog.
marched with his Army, he happened to pass by a dog that guarded the body of
his master who lay dead upon the high way: and after the king had beheld awhile
this pitiful spectacle, he was advertised by some of the countrymen, that the
same was the 3d. day that the poor creature had not departed out of the place,
nor forsaken the dead corpse, without meat or drink: which moved the king to
command the body to be buried, and the dog for his fidelity to be kept and
cherished: and caused an inquisition to be made of the murder, but nothing
could be found. It chanced that not long after the king was disposed to take
muster of his whole Army, that he might see how they were furnished: the dog
always followed the king sad and mute, until such time as they that killed
his master past by: then he flies upon them with a wonderful violence and
fury, as though he would tear them in pieces, turning this way and that way,
howling most pitifully, sometime toward the king, beholding him earnestly, as
though he demanded justice: which made the king and all the company suspect
that these men committed the murder: whereupon they were examined and
tormented; and upon their confession of the fact, put to death. The like
happened in France; one Gentleman having killed another, and the dog of him
that was slain would not depart from the body, until he was by the kings
commandment taken away: the murderer could in no wise be known, until the
king by some occasion took view of his men; and as the murderer passed by,
the dog waiting upon the king, ran furiously upon him, and returning again to
the king, looked up earnestly to his face, as though he required justice; and
thus ran too and fro barking and howling so often, that the king and the rest
suspected the Gentleman to have committed the murder. And being examined, and
denying the matter, the king thought good to make trial what the dog would
do: he gave leave to the Gentleman to use his sword for his defense, and armed
the dog with leather, and turned them together: the dog assailed the
Gentleman with such fury and violence, that perceiving himself like to be
torn in pieces, and unable to defend himself from the dog, he desired to
be delivered from him, and confessed the fact. The manner of this fight was by
the kings commandment painted in a table for a memorial, and kept in the
kings Court, to be seen many years after. King Lysimachus had a dog which
The dog of (...).
had long waited upon him in the wars, and when he was on hunting or any
otherwhere; and when he saw the king his master dead, and laid upon a pile of
wood (as the manner was, to be burnt, the dog with great howling and sorrow in
the sight of all men leapt into the fire, and was burnt with his master. When
Titus Sabinus and his The dog of T^ (...).
family were put to death as Rome, one of their dogs would never be driven
from his master: and when one of the Romans did cast meat to the dog, he took
(...) up and carried it to the mouth of his master, that lay upon the ground
dead; and when the car^ was cast into Tyber, the dog swam after, and labored by
all the mean^ he could to li^t up his master out of the water, all the people
wondering at the love of the dog. Nicomedes king The (...) of (...).
of Bithynia had a horse which he used a long time in the wars; and when
Nicomedes was ^ine, the horse would never cate meat after, but wasting daily,
with sorrow and emptiness dyed. And this was a strange thing that happened at
Constantinople, when the Turks for their pastime had cut off diverse Christians,
whom they had taken prisoners, in the midst with their swords, so as their
bodies were divided into two parts, besides a great many other in the same sort
most cruelly ^aine: at this time there were five hundred captives brought into
the (...), and so divided with their swords in the midst: and after these dead
bodies had lain upon the ground a while where they were slain, there comes
an ox roaring, and finding his masters c^kasse among them, he lifted one part
of him upon his horns, and Of an Ox.
carried it away to another place, and returns and fetches the other part
likewise, and joyneth both parts together; which thing being greatly wondered
at, and brought to the (...) of Mahomet the great Turk, he caused the parts
of the dead body to be separated again, and brought to the former place: the
ox follows roaring as before, and finding out his master among the rest of
the dead bodies, takes him up, and carries him away again: the great Turk
being much amazed with this strange fight, commanded the dead bodies to be
buried, and the ox to be kept among his ca^ during the rest of his life.

And if we shall descend from these that be domestical to wild and salvage
beasts, we shall find them in this matter nothing inferior to the others. A
Gentleman of a noble house, called Andr^cles, being taken prisoner, and made a
slave, taking occasion by his masters hard dealing, ran away from him, and fled
into certain desert woods in A^frica, adventuring himself rather among wild
beasts, than to endure the tyranny of his cruel master: and after he had
wandered a long time in the desert, ^ee espied a cave under the ground, into
which he goes to repose himself the night following, which (unknown to him)
was the den of a Lion: he had not been long there, but a little before night
in comes a great and terrible Lion, roaring and Of a Lion.
halting, which had been a hunting for his prey, to rest himself that night
in his accustomed lodging: the poor slave looking for no other, but that the
Lions belly should be his sepulcher: the Lion espying the man, lay down by
him, and stretched forth his forefoot that was lame, making moan, as though he
desired help: the slave perceiving the Lions meaning, began to pluck up his
heart; and looking into the Lions foot he found a thorn sticking fast in it,
and the wound festred, which caused his foot to swell: he lanced the wound,
and let forth the corruption, and took out the thorn; which though it were
wonderful painful to the Lion, as appeared by grinding his teeth and wrying
his mouth, yet he endured it with great patience: when he had washed the wound
with his urine, and lapt up his foot as well as he could, they remained
together in the den all that night: so soon as it was day the Lion goes forth
to hunt for his prey; and after he had been abroad a certain time, he
returns to the den again with part of the wild beast in his mouth, which he
laid down before the man for his dinner, and went forth again to hunt for
more: The slave having eaten nothing Rare gra^tud in a beast.
in two or three days before, went forth of the cave and laid the flesh in the
Sun to be roasted; and before it was thoroughly roasted he eat it very hungerly,
and when the evening was come the Lion returns with more meat: and thus he
continued fed by the Lions provision certain days: But at length waxing
weary of his dict, and of his solitary life, he stale forth of the den in the
absence of the Lion, and hid himself not far from the place: but when the Lion
was returned after his accustomed manner with meat for his guests dinner, and
found him not there, he made pitiful lamentation and moan, which declared his
great sorrow for the man's absence: when the Lion was laid to rest, the slave
departs; and wandering to seek some place of refuge, he fell by chance into
the hands of them whom his master had sent to seek him: and being taken and
sent to Rome, his master laid him in prison, to be devoured of wild beasts:
for the Romans had a manner, when the Emperors or principal men were disposed
to celebrate some festival time, to make some pastime to the people in their
Theaters; among which this was one, to cast slave; and condemned men to wild
beasts to be devoured. And as for this purpose they used to cause wild beasts
to be taken in the deserts: so it chanced that this Lion amongst others was
taken by hunters and sent to Rome, about that time that Titus the Emperor
returned from the wars, and had determined to show some of these pastimes to
the people of Rome: and as the Emperor and the people sat beholding these
matters in the Theater, this Lion was brought in place: and after he had
cruelly rent in pieces certain prisoners that were cast in to him; this poor
slave was also thrown into the place to be dismembered and devoured, as the
rest were: but as the Lion ran toward him to tear him in pieces, he knew the
man, and laid down his ^ares, and wagged his tail, fawning upon him like a
dog with all the kindnes^e he could use: Then the poor slave that looked to be
devoured, and was almost dead for very fear at the fight of the Lion, gathered
his spirits to him, knowing him to be the same Lion with whom he lived in the
cave: and renewing old acquaintance, stroked the Lion gently with his hand upon
the back, and made as much of him as he could: After the slave and the Lion
had thus courteously entertained each other, to the great admiration of the
Emperor and all the people, whose minds were diversely drawn to see so strange
a thing, some saying the Lion was enchanted, others alleging other causes,
according to the inclination of their conceits; the Emperor called the man to
him, whom the Lion followed like a dog, and asked him how this strange matter
should come to pass: the slave told him all the manner of it, as has been
said: whereupon (...) the petition of all the people the Emperor pardoned him,
and gave him the Lion, who waited upon him whithersoever he went.

CHAP. IIII.
The gratitude of an Eagle, and of a Dolphin: of a Roman Cens^r, and his Host.
The rare modesty of Cato sent to govern Spain: of Collatinus: of Regulus: of
Cincinnatus the Dictator, etc. Pride derided in Teribarus the Pe^sian. The
Contemplative life preferred before the Civil. Illustrated both by the
authority of (...) asti^ns Philosophers, and other later examples.

THe like examples of love and friendship has been found in fowls of the
air; and that which is more strange, in fishes of the sea. Philarchus
reports a history of a boy that had a great pleasure in birds: among A^ Eagle
the rest he took a singular delight in a young Eagle that was given him,
which he fed and cherished very carefully, and cured him also being sick: and
when the Eagle was fully grown, and had lived a good time with this boy, he
showed many signs of mutual love to him: for when the boy happened to fall
sick, the Eagle would continually sit by him; when he slept, the Eagle would
also sleep; when he waked, the Eagle would wake; and when he would not ^ate,
the Eagle would abstain from meat. And afterward when the boy was dead, and
carried forth upon a hearse, the Eagle followed; and when he was burned, the
Eagle flew into the fire. Aelian writes of a singular love of a Dolphin
toward a boy; this A Dolphin
boy being very fair, used with his companions to play by the sea side, and to
wash themselves in the water, and practice to swim. A Dolphin fell into great
liking with this boy, above the rest, and used very familiarly to swim by him
side by side: the boy, though at the first he feared the Dolphin, grew by
custom so familiar with him that they would contend together in swimming each
by other: and sometimes the boy would get upon his back, and ride upon the
fish as though he had been a horse: insomuch that the Dolphin would carry him
a great way into the sea, and bring him to land again in the sight of all the
people of the city adjoining, wherein they took great pleasure: it chanced at
last that the boy lying with his belly close to the Dolphins back, the sharp
prick (which those fishes have) rising out of the midst of his back ran
into the boys belly, and killed him: The Dolphin perceiving by the weight of
the boy, and by the blood which stained the water, that he was dead, swam
speedily with all his force to land, and there laid down the dead boy, and for
sorrow died presently by him. These examples may make many men seem more brute
than beasts, that perform things appertaining to virtue more effectually by
the instinct of nature only, than they do by nature and reason joined
together. Many will use honesty so long as it serves their turn to be honest;
but when to be honest will no longer serve their turn, then farewell honesty.
In this general confusion of things and depravation of manners, we may say
with the wise man; Quos fugiam sc^d: quos sequar non video: whom to avoid I
know, but whom to follow I see not.

Examples of virtue in these corrupt days are so rare, that he which will
seek for a faithful friend, or a man endued with virtue and honesty, must be
d^iven to seek for him as one sought a good man, by the report of Marcus
Aurelius. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius makes report of a custom among the
ancient Romans, to send once or twice every year their Censors into the
countries under their dominions to see how the laws were executed, and how
justice was done: One of these Censors coming to a town in Italy, commanded
his host of the Inn where he lodged, to call A witty bo^
the good men of the town unto him, that he might understand by them how
justice was ministered. This man, being wiser peradventure than the Censor,
goes with his message into the Churches, to the graves and sepulchers of such
as in their life time were of most estimation among the people for their
virtue, and were dead many years before; and calling every man aloud by his
name, het old them the Censor commanded them to come to him; and returned home
again: The Censor looking long for their coming, asked his host, whether he
had done as he commanded him: who answering him that he had done it; the
Censor willed him to go again, and hasten them away, and to show them of his
tarrying: The host goes again to the Churches, and to the tombs and graves,
and with a loud voice calls them, as he did before, and returns to his
house again: the Censor waxing angry for their long tarrying, sent for his
host, and enquired of him the cause, and who they were to whom he had spoken:
You commanded me (says he) to warn the good men of the towneto come to you;
the pestilence and civil wars has consumed long since all our good men, so
that I was driven to go to the graves and sepulchers of the dead, none being
left alive worthy of that name. Such search must be made in these days for
such a man under the ground among the dead, being hardly to be found above
among the living. We are not to say with him; Our civil wars and pestilence
have consumed all our good men: but the iniquity of this time, having turned
the virtue and simplicity of former ages into vice and dissimulation, and the
traducing and counterfeiting of strangers manners and fashions, has as a
pestilence, infected and corrupted our manners left to us of our forefathers,
that hardly a faithful friend or an honest man is any where to be found: but
Seneca says, It is very good to follow the steps of our forefathers, if they
have led the way well: for lands and riches and other vanities have gotten away
the reputation; virtue and honesty is out of Lamblicu^.
request: whatsoever is had in reputation increases; but that which is had in
contempt, and not regarded, diminishes. In pretio pretium nunc est: dat census
honores;
Census amicitias; pa^per ubique jacet.
Price is held precious, wealth does honor buy:
Wealth begets friends, the poor does each where ly.


If a man unknown be named, the question is by and by whether he be rich,
what living or lands he has; and thereafter he is had in reputation, or in
contempt: no man asks whether he be honest, whether he has virtue,
learning, or knowledge, as though they were things of none account, not worth
the inquiring for, which makes men so careful to get the one, and so
negligent to come by the other: Riches and possessions (...)
have afflicted the manners of the world, and so overwhelmed the common wealth,
that is (...) in her vices as it werein a sink. Virtue is supplanted, and vice
sown in her place: the name of virtue and honesty is of many desired, but of
very few deserved: and they that be worthy of that name, except they have
great store of goods and land, they have no grace among men. Callimachus the
Poet said, that riches without virtue, does never give reputation to a man, but
virtue without riches gives him some credit: but now we see it fall out
clean contrary, for riches without virtue gives great reputation, and virtue
without riches gives none at all. Et genus and formam regina pecunia donat.
Queen money gives both birth and beauty. And again
-- quidvis nummis presentibus opta,
Et ven^et.
Wish what thou will and present money will purchase^


In no time it could be more truly said tha^ in these days: Virtus post (...);
Virtue after money.

For he that is of great lands or riches though he have no virtue nor learning,
yet he is wondered at, as if he were some Heroes or divine thing: and yet in
time past among the ancient Romans poverty was a sound praise and true
virtue. Riches and possessions are preferred to honorable places, and are set
at the upper end of the table: but virtue and learning is thrust down behind
the screene: ubi multum de intellectu, ibi parum de fortuna: as if he should
say; They that be most rich in the goods and gifts of the mind, are commonly
most poor in the goods of the world: to no time the Poets saying could be more
aptly applied; Non facile emergunt, qu^rum virtutibus obstat
Res augusta domi:
They do not easily rise, that have small means.
Our manners are so contrary to those of former ages, that the world seems to
be turned upside down: which will easily be perceived, by comparing some few
examples of other ages with our time. A Lacedaemoni^ was sent Ambassador to
make league with the king of Persia: and finding his great estates playing at
dice, he returned home leaving his embassage undone: and being asked at his
return, why he had left those things The contempt of dice-players
^done which were given him in charge by the commonwealth: he answered, that
he thought it would be ignominious to his country to enter into league with
dice-players.

And this is no less to be noted, that a Censor of the Romans put a Senator
of Rome out of the Senate, because he kissed his wife in the sight of his
daughter: But where is this modesty become among Christians, that was looked
for of this Heathen? The severity of such a Magistrate was never more necessary
than now, who should find plenty of other manner of matters to reprehend. A
custom in China.
In China at this day if any man bring into their country any new fashions of
garments or manner of ^tire, other than has been used of antiquity, he
suffers death. In the country of Licaonia none might wear but one garment
in one whole year: and if any need a new garment he must not only have leave,
but also show wherewith he would buy the same. In that country there must be
no new inventions: if any devised Against new (...).
any new fashions that differed from the ancient manner of their country, the
deviser was banished, and the device abolished: neither would they suffer any
perfumes among them, affirming it to be no less in famie to a man to be
perfumed, than to a woman to be manifestly ^chast of her body. As there was
wont to be contention of virtue and modesty, so now is it of quaffing, of
pride, of vain attires, and gestures. When Agesilam king of Sparta, sometime
the most flourishing commonwealth of the world; went into Asia, and saw their
timber square that was in their buildings, he asked whether their (...) did
grow square; and when answer was made that dry grow round, but were made square
by art: And would ye (quoth he) make them round if they grew square^ noting
their superfluous curiosity. What would these men say, if they lived in these
days, not to see the excessive sumptuousness of buildings only, and houses,
which should not be decked and set forth with stones and pictures, and such
like toys, but with the (...) of the inhabitants; but also the pride and (...)
variety of fashions in attires and manners; not (...) some round things square,
but rather by their vain ^riosity and niceness bringing all things out of
square^ (The Theba^es had a Law, that no man should make a An excellent law.
house for himself to dwell in, but he should first make his grave.) If they
saw the quaffing and carowsing commonly used until they be ready to rumble
under the table: the licentious covetousness, blasphemica, and all manner of
luxuriousness: all allowed for good, as things commendable, that beget a
reputation to those that exceed the rest? The Emperor Adrian Against foreign
manners.
would say, that there is not any thing that more does offend a Commonwealth,
than to infect the same same with strange and unaccustomed manners, which
occasioned him to make a law of reformation both for eating superfluous meats,
and also for wearing of garments, either too many or too costly. The Re^sians
had a law, that whosoever brought into their country any strange or new manners
and fashions, he should lose his head. In Rome maids and wives were forbidden
to drink wine, and men to buy musk, amber, or any perfuming smells; where it
was as ordinary to punish them that did use perfumes, as women that were found
drunkards. The Emperor Vespasian having his pen in his hand, ready to sign a
dispatch which he had given a Roman knight, and feeling him smell of perfume,
he not only revoked his grant, but with many threats banished him out of his
presence. Been olet, qui nihil olet. Mart.

Non been ^let, qui been samper ^let:
Best she does smell that sents of no perfume.
She worst, that to smell sweetly does presume.
But now wives and maids will not only accompany men in their carowsing, but
men in perfumes labor to exceed women, and be more careful to smell sweet
than to live well: And what can be more loathsome than for a man to have his
garments perfumed with sweet favors, and himself polluted with stinking
vices Seneca.
and foul conditions? The luxuriousness used in feasts and garments is a
sign of a sick commonwealth; and when men have wasted all their own, they
seek to be master of other men's: many of which things chiefly come to pass
by evil examples worse followed, brought from foreign countries, and lache
peradventure of sufficient reprehension by those, whose charge is publicly to
rebuke and cry out upon the generality of vices, never more used: But it
happens to many of these men now adays, as it does to him that comes into
the sight of a Wolf, whose property is to take away his voice; where of came
a common proverb, Lupus est in fabula, when some thing is spoken that every
man may not hear: But now it may be said of many of this sort, Lucru^est in
fabula: for the desire of gain and promotion makes them ho^rse, and draw in
their voice when they should reprehend (...) lest they offend. And in truth the
generality of all manner of vice is so crept into almost all estates, that a
man may more safely and with less blame live viciously than reprehend vice.

Among other virtues which the Heathens carefully observed, they used great
modesty and temperance in their manner of life, and had worldly pomp and
vanity in contempt, as things repugnant to felicity. When the elder Cat^ was
sent by the Romans to govern Rare modesty in times of old.
Spain, he was attended upon but with three servants; the coverlet of his bed
was goat-skinnes: he contented himself with the same wine and meat that the
^riners provided for themselves: which kind of life, by his accustomed
frugalitie, was as pleasant unto him, as all the pomp and delicates used by
the great estates of other ages. The Romans sent messengers to Colati^s to
come to Rome, to take upon him the government of the Roman Empire; whom they
found sowing of corn in the fields: this man, after he had overthrown his
enemies and won a great victory, for which he triumphed after the manner of
the Romans, yielded up his office, and returned to his plough again. This man
(says Valerius Maximus) may be a comfort to poor men; but much more he may
teach rich men how unnecessarie a thing the careful getting of riches is to
the obtaining of sound praise and felicity, he might also have said: Regulus
making wars in Africa (after he had won many victories upon the Carthaginians,
and understood, that for his good service the Romans prorogued his government
for another year) he wrote to the Consuls, that his bailiffe of husbandry,
which was but of seven acres of ground, that he had in the country, was dead,
by means whereof his hired servant had taken away the things that belonged to
his plough, and was gone away; and therefore he desired them that one might
be sent to supply his place, lest his husbandry being neglected, he should
not have wherewith to maintain his wife and children: which when the Consuls
had delivered to the Senate, they appointed a new bay liffe to manure his land,
and provided for his wife and children, and caused those things which he had
lost, to be paid for out of the common treasure Cincinatus likewise, being made
by the Romans Dictator, which was the highest dignity in the Roman Empire, an
office never used but in great necessity, was by them that were sent for him
found at plough in the fields: and understanding the matter, he caused his
wife to fetch his gown, and shaking off the dust from his garments, he went
with them presently into the city without any more curiosity, where he was
received by the Senate with great honor. Contempta tempore sape crescit Glory
despised in time increases.
gloria: and after he had overthrown his enemies, and brought all things into
good order, which was done in twenty days, he gave over his office. This man
likewise had but seven acres of ground to live by, whereof three he lost, which
he had laid in pledge for his friend: and paid out of this little land a fine
for his son for want of appearance at a day appointed: and yet with the four
acres left he maintained himself and his family, and for his virtue and
worthiness was made Dictator: He would now think (says valerius) that he
wanted elbowe room, whose house should contain no greater circuit than
Cincinnatus demaines. These men set their felicity in virtue, and not in
riches, nor in honor and glory, and yet both followed them. In this time the
worthiness of men was measured by their virtue, and not by their riches and
honorable estate; which was the causes the Romans made so many notable
conquests of sundry nations, to the great enlarging of their dominion. They
that follow virtue as their guide, shall have fortune for their companion.
Anaxarchus the Philosopher showed a notable example of magnanimity, when by the
commandment of Ner^ he was taken prisoner, that he might reveal a certain
conspiracy made against him: as he was led toward him for the same
purpose, he bit off his tongue, and spit it in the (...) (...) perform the
works of Christians.
face, knowing that by torture he should be compelled to discover the rest.
These men, though they believed as heathens, they do the works of Christians;
but we believe as Christians, and do the works of heathens: and if we exceed
them in curiosity of attyres, and formalitie of manners, they went beyond us
in good life and conversation.

Let the brave men and jolly fellows of these days, that glister in gold and
silver, and think themselves graced by their tragical habits and gestures, as
the only paragons of the world, and them that are wondered at and accounted
happy by their great trains and troops of followers, and them that set their
felicity in dainty and delicate meats, and spend whole days and nights in
banqueting and quaffing; let these men (I say) leave to ^latter themselves,
and with an upright judgment indifferently examine themselves by these men, and
compare Catoes virtues and the rest with their vanities; these men's frugalitie
and modesty with their excess and luxuriousness; these men's temperance with
their licentiousness; the simplicity of habits, and finglenesse of their life
that governed kingdoms, and triumphed over nations, with the pomp and pride
of this age, and with their lascivious manners and effiminate attyres, that
pass their time in courting and carowsing. These things duly considered, our
gallants must needs let fall their peacocks tails, and wish that some of
Argus eyes were restored into their heads, whereby they might be more
provident, and better able to discern between the others virtues and their
vanities, that diverteth them from felicity: who then would exclaim upon the
iniquity of this time, that will yield them no examples to follow. And those
men that be so careful to beautify their bodies with brave attires, leaving
their minds soyled with foul vices: and they that aspire to honorable places
without virtue, A fit (...).
seem to me to be like them that wash their face with fair water, and wipe
it with a dish-clout. There was a Persian called Teribarus, who so greatly
delighted in brave attire, that on a time having apparelled himself in very
costly garments, more meet for a Prince than for him, set out with pearl and
precious stones, and diverse kinds of jewels and furniture, such as women use
to attire themselves withal, thinking thereby to increase his reputation above
the rest: the King Arta^erxes had no sooner espied him, but he fell into a
great Pride derided.
laughter; and turning to him, said, We give thee leave as an effeminate man
to use women's delights, and as a madman to wear Princes apparel: as if he
should have said, that to hunt ambiciously after honor and reputation after the
custom of many, is rather worthy of laughter than of anger: and that it is a
kind of madness to aspire to honor and reputation by any other way than by
virtue, which rather flies away, than follows after them that seek for it.
Divitum and prapatentum feda mollities, malorum ^mnium fomes and scaturigo.
Many (...) advanced to estimation and honorable estate through their great
riches and possessions, and other by favor without merit, that were but
yesterday of no account, and of base parentage: but very few rise to honor by
the worthiness of their virtue.

And such men being so suddenly exalted, do many times as snailes do when
winter is past, who feeling the heat of the sun, thrust out their neck and
horns out of their shell in a stately sort, and are fearful to little
children: even so, many of these new men that lur^ed obscurely, and lived
without reputation and ver^e, finding themselves advanced suddenly to high and
unlooked for estate, abusing the favor of the Prince, carry up their heads
aloft, grow proud, and look big, as though they would be terrible to all the
world: Asperius nihil est humili, cum surgit in altum:
None look so big as beggars being raised.


One marvelleth that seeing men are called men, and live by their mind, and not
by their outward form, that they are so careful to deck their bodies, and so
negligent to adorn their minds. Where great care is had (says Cato) to deck
the body, there is great carelessness and little regard of virtue. If Diogenes
were now living, he must have a torch to seek for a man at noone days; for he
would hardly find such a man as he looked for with a candle. But to return
from whence I digressed. By the exercise of these and the like virtues, the
Heathen thought they might attain to felicity: for to live according to
nature they thought was sufficient to live happily, because by nature we have
an inclination to virtue, though not made perfect without exercise: but they
knew not how our nature was corrupted by the fall of our first parent, by which
we can do nothing that good is without Gods holy spirit: neither can fortune
give us any help to it, avaine name among the Heathens given to those effects,
whereof they knew not the cause proceeding by the providence of God. There was
found engraven in a precious stone called Topaze, these words in old Roman
letters: Natura deficit, Nature fayles.
Fortuna mutat^, Fortune changes.
Deus omnia cernit, God sees all things.
Which words against the Philosophers, that thought the way to felicity to be,
to live according to nature whereto they would have the help of fortune, may
be thus applied, by the defect of nature: by the mu^abilitie of fortune:
without the providence of God, no man can attain to felicity. For our nature
being degenerate from his first perfection and estate to wickedness and
corruption, and fortune (as they call it) being variable and uncertain, void
of all constancy, we have no means to come to felicity without Gods providence
and grace: and to think that a man may be able to attain to it by his
wisdom, is extreme arrogancy and mere folly. Patrarke says, To believe
that thou art wise, is the first degree to foolishness: the next is to
profess it. By this Observation.
which has been said, it appears that the felicity of man consists not
in the action of moral virtue, as the Philosophers would; for that is not his
end: but the end of man, is the glory of God; to know and worship him, which is
also his proper action: for unstable and uncertain are all humane matters, not
only in the minds and actions of private men, but in Monarchies also and
kingdoms: to day they flourish and seem to be in great security, to morrow
they decline and fall into thraldom and misery: another time they return
again to their former estate: thus continually prosecuting their periods, even
as the heavens that go round, always moving, and in circular sort returning
where they began: so by virtue they are raised up on high, and by vice
following (as it were by a necessary succession) they are thrown down again.
Virtutum soboles pax est, at copia pacis,
Vbertas luxum peperit, luxuriabe^,
Bello pauperies sata:
The off spring of virtues peace, plenty and increase,
Which are the fertile issue of long peace,
Beget excess, excess begets hostility,
And war the parent is of poverty.


And thus it fares with the condition of men, that adversity springs of
poverty, and prosperity of adversity. Plin.


But though the Philosophers exalted so highly moral The life (...) preferred
before the civil.
virtues, and the actions and operations of a civil life, as that wherein the
felicity of man consists: yet they preferred a contemplative life before it,
as a thing wherein was a more perfect felicity, excelling all other operations
and actions of man, and bringing him to a most perfect and exact felicity, and
beatitude: for all operations or works, receive their perfection from the
powers and faculties from whence they proceed, and from the subject whereupon
they work: so as the perfection of the power or faculty that works, and of
the subject upon which it works, makes the operation or work more or less
perfect, as the power and subject has in them more or less perfection. So we
say, that the operation or work of the sight, is more perfect than the
operations of all other senses, because it comes from a power more perfect,
and is more pure and subtle. And the art of a black Smith is less perfect
than that of a gold Smith, because the matter whereupon he works as his
subject, which is iron, is less perfect than the matter which is gold, upon
which the gold smith works: so the operations of the understanding,
proceeding from the most perfect power of al other, and working upon an object
most perfect, which is substances abstract and divine, must needs be the most
perfect operation, which is nothing else but the contemplation of divine
substances. But the operations of the senses are not pure, but are mixed with
pain or lack: as to eat, endures no longer than we suffer the pain of
hunger, or have need of meat; so that the pleasure of eating is joined with
the pain of hunger; and likewise of all the other senses. The operations also
of a civil life are not pure and simple, as are the operations of the
understanding, which is a power void of all matter: but they are full of
perturbations and troubles, and affections, far from the delight and
quietness of a contemplative life. For all our operations and actions, and
likewise the exercise of moral virtues, are full of travel and weariness:
the troubles and unquietness of the wars wherein men exercise fortitude, is
known to all men: likewise the endless labors both of body and mind, that is
in government in a commonwealth, by exercising justice, liberality, prudence,
temperance, and other virtues, is apparent: and all our travels and labors,
whether it be in wars or peace, is to enjoy quietness. As one said, every
motion is to rest: and if we see a man withdraw himself from public affairs,
and from meddling with worldly matters, to a private and quiet life, all say
with one voice, that man is happy that leads a secure and quiet life, free
from worldly cares, and troublous affairs of the Commonwealth: by which we
confess, that we judge a peaceable and quiet life to be the end of all our
travels: so that the felicity of man seems in our own judgment to consist
in a quiet life, free from worldly cares and troubles: and forasmuch then, as
such quietness is in no kind of life to be found, but in a contemplative life,
then in must rest the felicity of man, after the Philosophers. The
contemplative or studious life also is not only to be preferred before the
active and civil life, by the excellency of the subject whereupon it works,
that is, divine things, and the vacancie of worldly cares and troubles, but
also that it is of such condition that fortune has no power over it, as it
has over other states of life. Fortune has no power over the contemplative
life.
A small provision serves his necessity, he is free from all fear of loss
of goods, and from any great care of keeping that he has, because his riches
is in his mind, he carries all his goods about with him, and is content with
himself. And therefore (say they) a wise man that gives himself to
contemplation, though he be placed in a most solitary place or wilderness,
yet he is happy by reason of the excellency of his mind, which is occupied
in despising humane matters as base things, and in beholding divine things as
the Poet says: Felices anim^, quibus bac cognascere primum,
Inque domus super as scandere cura fuit:
Blessed they, who these things did both know and love,
Whoselove was with the gods to dwell above.


But because a civil life requires continual action, man's felicity cannot
consist in contemplation, except there should be one felicity of a private man,
and another of a Commonwealth. And therefore after Varr^, man's felicity (so
long as he lives in this world) does neither consist in rest nor in action,
but rather in a mixture of both together: if there must be one felicity of a
commonwealth and of a private man: for the mind cannot thoroughly have the
fruition of perfect contemplation; until it be separated from the body. And
Aristotle says, that as a horse is borne to run, an ox to till the ground,
and a dog to hunt: so a man is borne to two things; to understand, and to do:
For, that nothing might be wanting to the excellency of the mind of man, by
which we resemble God the great Creator of all things, he placed man as the end
of the whole frame of the world, in this goodly great Theater, not only as an
inhabitour of the lower part of the world under the Moon, to make one entire
Commonwealth with the rest of his kind, like to that heavenly principality
above; but as a certain spectator also of divine things: who by comparing
things past, with things present, might foresee things to come: and know and
love by his word, and work the glory of his parent. And when he should ascend
up to him, he should join himself to God, and conform all the harmony of
his gifts, to his goodness and glory; which by two manner of ways is brought
to pass; when he helps and maintains his fellows and brethren according to
his calling by the rule of Gods laws: and magnifieth God in continual
contemplation by prayers and thanksgiving. Therefore that the mind being
fallen into the prison of the body, might raise it self up again, as it were
by certain degrees to perpetual light. In man, there is from the body a
continual ascending by the spirit to the inward soul: In the world, where with
we are environed, from the elements and compound things, by the Aethereall
substance to heaven: In man's commonwealth from kingdoms and cities to the due
order of the whole course of nature; from hence to the incorporate world and
God himself, as the first example and pattern of all justice and truth. For
besides the incorporate world, that is above all the rest, of which all the
others depend, there are three bodily worlds coupled together one with another,
as it Three bodily worlds, concatinated.
were with a chain of gold; the greater, the less, and man's commonwealth
between them both: and the contemplative life is to be preferred before the
active life in this, that it resembles God more near than the other, because
it is occupied in the operations of the mind and understanding, God being
understanding it self. Now if the contemplation or studious life of the
Philosophers which they bestowed in the knowledge of God by his works, and by
their reason and understanding, were employed to the knowledge of God by the
testimony of his holy Scripture and by faith, then may it more rightly be
said, that the contemplative life is more perfect than the active life: But
Christian contemplation properly isto be exercised in afflictions, and to feel
motions of the spirit; and not to be studious only, that resembles rather an
active life; which afflictions and spiritual motions may as well be in him that
gives himself to study, as in him that is occupied in matters of the
commonwealth, as it is to be seen in David, and then may it truly be said,
that such a contemplative life is to be preferred before all other kinds of
life, as that which leads to the true felicity and beatitude or Summum bonum.

The contemplative or studious life has been in such estimation among men,
that diverse examples are registered in histories both of Heathens and
Christians, that have voluntarily forsaken the world and all society of men to
lead this kind of life: to whom many strange things have happened: among the
rest (by the report Examples.
of St. Jerome) Anthony being in the wilderness, met with a strange kind of
creature or monster that resembled a little man, and a crooked nose, a horned
forehead, whose lower parts ended into the feet of a goat, who brought him
dates to eat: And when Anthony asked him what he was, he answered, I am a
mortal man, one of the inhabitants of the wilderness, whom the foolish
Gentiles worshipped, being deluted with many erroneous opinions, and called
them Fauni, Satyri, and Incubi: I am the Ambassador of my companions; we desire
thee to pray to our common God for us, whom we know is come for the salvation
of the world: which words were no sooner spoken, but he seemed to fly away.

One reports of one Paul an Hermit, that from the time he was sixteen
years old, until threescore, he lived in the desert with dates: and from
threescore unto an hundred and twenty, at what time he died, he was fed daily
by a Crow who brought him bread, by which he lived without any other
sustenance. Persius exciteth men thus to the contemplation of things, and to
the love and exercise of virtue: Discite and O miseri, causas cognoscite rerum.
Quid sumus, aut quidnam victuri giguimur: orde
Quis datus: aut metae qu^m victur: flexus and ord^:
Quis modus argenti, quid fas optare, quid asper
(...) nummus habet: patriae charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat, quex^ te Deus esse
Iussit, and human^ qua part locatus es in re.
O wretches, learn the cause of things to know,
And what we be, and why we were borne so;
And what to overcome; what to order give,
And in what bounds and limits we should live:
How moderate coin, what justly to desire;
And being possessed of money, to enquire
What use to make of it; what we do owe
Upon our kin, or country to bestow:
With what endowments God would have us grace,
And in what part of mortal things we are plact.


The end of the fourth Book.
THE FELICITY OF MAN, OR, HIS SVMMVM BONVM THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Wherein the true property of felicity consists: The difference betwtxt the
felicity of this life, and the Summum bonum: The life of Tymon of Athens:
Diverse weighty considerations touching the life of man: Of the Seaman: The
life of the Husbandman: of the Merchant: Of the Soldier: Calamities of war:
Of Miriam: Inhumane Cruelty of the Jews: Of the Numantians: The misery of
Famine: The insolency of war: Of Paris: The estate of a Soldier truly
deciphered: The estate of a Lawyer: The miser^es of a Client.

NOw that we have showed by diverse reasons, and by the opinion of learned men,
and by many examples, that the Felicity of Man, or his Summum bonum consists
not in pleasure, nor in riches, nor in honor and glory, nor yet in virtue, or
in the action of virtue: order requires to prosecute our discourse, and prove,
whether we can find out, wherein this felicity does consist, and the way that
leads to it. In which discourse although in part we will deliver our own
opinion according to that talent which God has given us; yet in the principal
which is contained in the last book, we will follow the opinion of learned
Divines: otherwise it may be said, -- tractent fabrilia fabri.
Let Smithes meddle with their Forges.


But the greatness and difficulty of the matter does not a little terrify me,
and makes me ready to withdraw my pen from the paper, the subject being
beyond my strength to handle as it ought; and puts me in mind of a wise
answer made by Simonides the Poet to Cyrus; of whom being desired to show his
opinion, what God was, the Poet craved three days respit to answer him: and
when the time was expired, An excellent answer of Simo^ides.
he desired double so much time more: and that being come he doubled that time
also; giving him to understand, that the more he considered of God, the more
difficulty he found in the matter, and the further he was from the perfect
knowledge of God. So in this matter, though far inferior to the other; the
more I consider of it, the more difficulty I seem to find; yet the common
saying does something animate me: In arduis voluisse satest. We have said
before, that whosoever will search for the felicity of man, he must have
respect to the whole man, which consists of body and soul: for such part as
the soul takes in this life, and in the life to come, such does the body take
also: whether it be joys or sorrows, felicity or infelicity. And though this
life in continuance is nothing, in respect of the life to come, nor can admit
any comparison or proportion between them, the one being temporal, and the
other without time, no more then that which has end, to that which is
infinite; yet because it is something in respect of time, whereof it is a part;
we will first treat of the felicity of this life, and then of that of the life
to come. But here rises an ambiguity of no small importance, The Argument of
the Succeeding doubt.
how we may conform and apply the things which the name of felicity seems to
purport, and our humane nature with true and Christian felicity. For affliction
for Christ's sake in this world, is the direct means to attain to the perfect
felicity of the life to come: God having appointed to the godly no other
passage, but through the flame and furnace of afflictions. Dulcia non meruit,
qui non gustauit amara.
He deserves not to eat sweet meats, that never tasted of what was bitter.



Which seems to be repugnant to the name of felicity, and to our humane
nature. For the felicity of this life, if we have any respect to the
imbecility of our humanity, seems to look for a contentment, joined to the
other things wherein felicity consists. And in afflictions and troubles,
though men use patience, they hardly find contentment; that is, not to desire
to be in a better estate: but the property of felicity is to satisfy his The
true propertic of (...).
desire, and to be void of fear. And he upon whom God bestows that great
blessing, after a quiet life in this world, to inherit the joys of the life to
come; seems to be more happy then he that lives here in affliction, and
enjoys the same heavenly blessedness in the other life. But if we cleanse
our minds of our corrupt affections and passions, and look into the matter
with a sound and upright judgment, we shall see, that either there is no
felicity in this life, that answers to that name, or else that affliction
and such crosses as God will lay upon us, detracteth not any thing from our
felicity. For seeing the difference of greatness, and distance of space, that
is between things that are circumferiptible and have end, can make the less
seem nothing, and bear no proportion to the greater, then a fortiori, that
which is temporal and comprehended within time, and has end, seems nothing,
nor bears any proportion to that which is without time, perpetual, and
infinite. The globe of the earth, which for his show of greatness we call
sometime improperly the world, and is after the Mathematicians computation, one
and twenty thousand miles in compass and above, yet being compared to the
greatness of the circumference of the eighth sphere or starrie sky, it is but
as a center or little prick to the circle, to which it bears no proportion:
much less the afflictions and troubles of this temporal life, in respect of
the perpetuity of the joys in the life to come, bears any proportion, but
is to be accounted nothing. And who will call him a sickly man, that in the
whole course of his life has never felt any sickness, but only one little
short fit of an ague: but rather will call him a healthful man? much less can
the afflictions or troubles of this life be called infelicitie: or withdraw
any thing from the name of felicity: because between the other there is some
proportion: between this life and the life to come, none at all. But yet
because the life we lead in this world, is something in respect of time, let
us see whether we can find any thing in it worthy to be called felicity.
And because there is a great difference not only in continuance, but also in
greatness between the happiness of this life, and the life to come: we will
distinguish Distinction betwixt the (...) of this life and the (...) Bonum.
between the words, and call the happiness of this life, Felicity, and that
of the heavenly life, Beatitude, or blessedness, and Summum Bonum, or
Sovereign good.

In the sundry and manifold things created by God with such variety, some
things he made with a simple essence, some things with life, and some other
with sense; To man he gave all these, together with understanding, of whom he
would be known and worshipped: he made him also good and after his own Image,
and adorned him with many goodly gifts, and gave him dominion over all other
creatures, and made the world for him, and gave him the use of all things
contained therein; esteeming him not as his creature, but rather as his son,
and discovered to him his will; which when he disobeyed, preferring his own
appetite before Gods commandment, by the fraud and subtlety of the di^ell, he
cast him out of his favor, and bereaved him of many of these goodly gifts and
ornaments wherewith he had endowed him: and where before his life and estate
was most happy and blessed, his nature was then altogether corrupted and
altered; his goodness was turned into sin and wickedness, his understanding
dark, and as it were covered with a cloud. All which imperfections descend
from the first man unto us: but Christ the Son of God, through the special
love and favor he did bear to mankind, has reconciled us again to his
Father, though without recovery of those goodly ornaments, by taking upon him
the burden of our sins, and satisfying his justice in his own person. Now
therefore the only means we have to attain to blessedness or Summum Bonum
again, which we lost by the fall of our first parents, is by the merits and
mercy The first (...) to the (...).
of Christ, to return to God again: and seeing that God is the greatest and
chiefest good of all things, from whom all things have their being and
goodness, in him is to be sought that Summum Bonum, and blessedness or
Beatitude we look for, and no otherwhere. And for as much as he made us to his
own glory, and that we might know and worship him: the end and true Felicity
of man in this world is, to know God, to magnify and worship him; to which end
is joined the fruition and enjoying of him in the world to come, which is the
Beatitude or blessedness, and Summum Bonum we seek for. But because men are
commonly called happy or unhappy, according to the course of life they lead,
let us examine the estate and condition of this life, and see whether we can
find any thing in it, other then that last above spoken, worthy of the name of
Felicity.

Many ancient Philosophers and Wisemen, having diligently observed the nature
and manner of life of all sorts of creatures of the world, and compared them
with the estate and condition of men, cried out, that of all the creatures that
breathed and went upon the earth, There was not any more miserable the^ man.
Heracltt^ No creature more miserable then man.
moved with the like consideration, never went forth into the streets among
the people but he wept, bewayling continually the calamities of men, being
persuaded that all that we can see under the uppermost heaven, is nothing else
but a very Theater of misery, worthy of continual complaints and compassion.
Democritus for the like cause never went forth of his house in the sight of
men, but he would fall into a great laughing, esteeming all men's actions and
labors mere vanities Another company there were of a more strange disposition,
that would not only murmur and grudge at the nature and condition of men, but
were as hateful enemies to their own kind, supposing that nature had set up
man as a Butt or mark, against which she would discharge all the bullets of
her wrath and indignation; among which sort of men was one called Tymon a
Philosopher of Athens, who Of Tymon, (...).
professed himself openly an enemy of mankind, and performed it in effect. For
he would never dwell or keep company among men, but withdraw himself into the
Defa^ts, and lead his life among beasts, that he might not be seen of men:
and passing his time in this solitary sort, he would speak with no man saving
only with Alcibiades, a valiant Gentleman of Athens, neither with him, for any
love he had to the man, but for that he did foresee, he would be one day a
plague and scourge to men, and specially to the Athenians. And it was not
sufficient for him to abhor and detest the company of men as furious wild
beasts, but he sought also all the means he could, if it had bin possible, to
destroy mankind: and for that purpose he set up a great many gibbets in his
garden, that desperate folks and such as were weary of their lives might hang
themselves: and after certain years, meaning to enlarge his little Cottage
where he dwelt, he determined to cut down those gibbets for his building: and
being loath the lack of them should be any hindrance to his Citizens death, he
went to Athens, and openly in the market place he caused the people to be
assembled, that he might deliver some news to them, who knowing his humor
that used to speak with no man, ran to the place out of all parts, expecting
attentively some strange matter: when they were come together, he cried out
with his hoarse voice; My Citizens of Athens, if any of you be disposed to hang
your selves, do it quickly, for I mean shortly to cut down the gibbets for
my necessary building. And when he had ended his charitable motion, he departed
home to his house, without speaking any word more; where he lived many years,
continuing in the same opinion, detesting the miserable estate and condition of
men. And when Tymon perceived that death approached, he took order for his
burial to be at the low water mark, in the very brinke of the Sea, that the
waves might not suffer any man to come near him to see his bones or ashes, and
caused this Epitaph to be written upon his tomb, made Latin thus: Hic sum
post vitam miseramque inopema; sepultus: Tymons Epitaph.

Nomen non quaeras; dij, lector, te male perdant.
After a poor and wretched life,
Here I am laid in ground;
Reader, forbear to ask my name
So: Thee the Gods confound.


And as another of his condition, that lived solitarily in the woods, eschuing
likewise the company of men, came to him to supper; In the midst of their
banquet, O Tymon (quoth he) what a pleasant supper is this, that has no more
guests but thou and I? So were it (said Tymon) if thou were away: he was so
hateful to the condition of men, that he could not endure the company of him,
that was of his own disposition. Pli^ie meditating upon the miseries where
with man is borne, and the endless travels wherein he lives, says, Among
all the creatures that nature has brought forth, only man is ambitious, man
only is proud, covetous, and superstitious, only desires long life, and
makes a sepulcher wherein to be buried: and rightly was this spoken by
Pliny; for other beasts neither riches do make proud, nor poverty sad; they
weep not when they be borne, nor wax sad when they shall die.

Marcus Aurelius both an Emperor and Philosopher, entering into a deep
contemplation of the calamities and miseries wherewith our poor life is
continually afflicted, burst out in these words: The battle of this world is
so perilous, the issue so terrible and dreadful, The meditation of M. (...).
that I assure my self, if any old man should come out of the earth, and would
make a true discourse and declaration of his life, from the time he came forth
of his mothers belly, to his last breath, and that the body would recite all
the pains it has suffered, and the heart would discover all the conflicts of
fortune, all men would be astonished at the body that had suffered such
things, and at the heart, that had in such sort languished and dissembled,
whereof I have had experience in my self, and will freely confess it, though
to my infamy, but in time to come it may be profitable to some others: In
(...). years that I lived (says he) I would needs prove all the vices of
this life, and make proof whether the wickedness of man might in some sort be
satisfied. And after I had seen all, I found that the more The imperfections
of man since his fall.
I ate, the more hungry I was: the more I drank, the more I thirsted: the more
I slept, the more I desired to sleep; the more I rested, the more weary I was;
the more I had, the more cou^tous I was; the more I sought, the less I found:
and to conclude, I never had thing in my possession, that was not sometime
troublous to me, and by and by I desired some other thing. S. Chryso^some being
in admiration, after he had with great compassion bewailed the calamities of
men, and the darkness wherewith they are overwhelmed, pronounced with a loud
voice; I wish that I were placed in so high a tower, that I might behold all
men, and that I had such a voice, that it might be heard over all the earth,
and understood of all people; that I might with a shrill cry speak thus with
King David: O ye children of men, how long will your hearts be hardened? and not
without cause; for he that will behold with a sound judgment the estate of
the world in these days, what fraud and deceit, what dissimulation,
blasphemies, adulteries, licentiousness, wars, effusion of blood, rapines,
ambition, covetousness, malice and such like, wherewith the world is as it
were drunk, may think that the time is at hand, whereof the Prophet Esaias
spoke in such detestation, Your iniquities have made a division between you
and your God; your sins have hidden their face before you, that it might not
hear: for your hands be soyled with blood, your fingers with iniquity, your
lips have uttered lies, and your tongue wickedness: there is not one that
calls upon Justice: no man judges according to equity: they conceave
fellonie, and are delivered of iniquity, they have disclosed eggs of Aspis,
and have spunne the cobweb of a Spider: he that shall eat of their eggs,
shall die; he that shall break them, forth will come a Basyliske: their feet
run to evil, and they make haste to sheade innocent blood: their thoughts
be wicked imaginations, truth is thrown down the streets, and equity cannot
enter in; our wickedness is multiplied, and our sins witness against us.

When the Preacher had considered the vanities of the world and miseries of
men, he said thus, Wherefore I judged those that are dead, to be more happy
then such as be alive: yea him that is yet unborn, to be better at ease then
they both: because he sees not the miserable works that are done under the
sun. Silenus says, that the greatest gift which God gave to man was, not to be
borne: the next to that was, to die as soon as he was borne.

Plato that divine Philosopher entering into the due consideration of the
miseries of this life, Know thou not (says he) that the life of man is no
other thing but a pilgrimage, which wise men pass with joy, singing heartily
when they see the necessity of their approach to the inevitable end thereof?
Know thou not, that man in his greatest part, consists of the soul, that
is enclosed within the body as in a tabernacle, wherewith nature has environed
us, not without great pain and trouble; and if she bestow upon us some little
good things, they are hidden, and of small continuance, and are seasoned with
bitterness and pensivenes; by means whereof, the soul feeling grief,
desires the heavenly habitation, and wishes for the fruition of the joys
there? Consider that the departure from this world, is nothing but a change
from evil to good. But come hither (says he) from his nativity to his grave,
what kind of misery is there that he suffers not? whether it be of poverty,
of heat, of cold, of whippes, of stripes, even before he can utter his
conceit? what other messenger or better t^ouchman can he have of his miseries,
then his weepings, cryings and sighs? when he has disgested so many evils,
and come to be seven years old, he must presently have tutors and masters to
instruct him in learning; when he is further grown, The estate of man's life.
and become a young man, he must have reformers and masters, more severe and
stern, the better to tame and accustom the heat of these young folks to
labors: that being done, hair begins to cover his face, and then he is
come to be a man; and yet this is the time that he enters into his trouble
and unquietness of mind: Then he must frequent public places, he must haunt
companies that be as touch-stones to know both good and evil. If he be
honorably descended from any Noble house, he must take upon him a thousand
enterprises in the wars, offer himself to an infinite number of perils,
hazard his life, shead his blood to die in the bed of honor: otherwise he
shall be accounted a carpet knight, an effeminate man, and had in contempt. If
he be of base condition, and called to the exercise of handicraft, he must
then also run into a thousand labors, travels, and perturbations both of
body and mind: he must labor day and night to get wherewith to live with
the sweat of his brows: and for the most part, howsoever he employ his labor
and diligence, he can hardly provide for his necessity. But let us run over
briefly some of the principal estates or trades of life, and see what opinion
is holden of them, and prove whether we can find any that are content with
their estate; but rather has sometime or other found fault with it, and has
been weary thereof, and wished for some other, which is so far from
felicity, that it ought rather to be accounted misery.

Let us begin with seafaring men, who be in continual The estate of the
Seaman.
peril both day and night; their habitation is as a prison: their manner of
life is not much unlike to the same: they are always as vagarants, and in
continual exile, for the most part without rest, tossed up and down with the
wind and weather, in danger of ^ockes, and to be buried in fishes bellies.
Byas one of the sages of Greece, doubted whether he should account these kind
of men among the dead or among the hu^g: and Anacharsis said that there was but
two or three fingers breadth between them and their death, meaning the
thickness of the boords. And though some become Masters of many ships, and
are accounted happy by reason of their riches that way gotten; yet that
happiness is not much to be regarded that hangs upon ropes.

And if we look into the life of husbandmen, which Of the husbandman.
at the first sight seems pleasant, quiet, simple, without guile, and happy,
and such as Patriarchs and Prophets have made choice of, as that which has in
it least fraud and deceit: and also great Emperors have forsaken their stately
Palaces, their Pomp and Dominion, to give themselves to the planting of
gardens and orchards: yet he that will look thoroughly into the matter, shall
find that among these roses, there be many thorns: for when God cast man out
of Paradise, he sent him abroad as an exile; saying, The earth shall be cursed
for thy sake, thou shall eat thereof with travel all the days of thy life:
for it shall bring forth thorns and thistles, and thou shall eat the herbs
of the earth: with the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, until
thou return to the earth again, from whence thou came: and who has more
experience of that the Lord spoke, then those poor souls, who after they have
labored in the fields day after day, tilled and sowed their ground, endured
the rigor of the heat and cold, and sweat as it were water and blood, in the
midst of their hope to gather the fruits of their travel, there happens
unseasonable weather, overmuch plenty or want of rain, frost and snow,
mildewes, and such like? Some lose their cattle, other suffer spoil of their
corn, and all that they have long traveled for, in a moment by men of war,
even as they are laboring in the fields: so that in place of comfort and rest,
he returns home sorrowing, where he finds his wife and children weeping and
lamenting for fear of famine: so that this kind of life is full of trouble and
unquietness, always in fear of some thing or other. But let us leave the
husbandmen in their labors, and see what goodness is in the traffic of
merchandise: this trade of life, if we look into it superficially, The
Merchant.
will seem to be exempt from all manner of misery and unhappiness, and to
promise quietness and ease because of riches, wherein it abounds: a trade
invented for the necessity of our life, which many wise men, as Thales, Solon,
Hippocrates and others have exercised; and which nourishes amity and love
between Princes, transporting their commodities from one country to another;
yet notwithstanding that trade cannot so be disguised with fair shows, but it
will easily appear to him that will enter further into the view of the matter,
how full of unquietness and troubles their life is, as the Poet says; Impiger
extremos currit mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens per saxa, per ignes.


To how many dangers they are continually subject, either in their own persons,
or in the loss of their goods, both by sea and by land, by tempests, by
pirates and thieves, and how great a part of their life many of them spend in
strange countries, differing nothing from exiles, saving that their banishments
are voluntary; and all this through an excessive desire of gain, which makes
them leave the pleasure and comfort of their wives and children, of their
friends, and native country: and what craft (an epytheton peculiar to them in
time past, but now grown more general) and deceit is used of many of that
trade, their own country proverb seems to discover, That there needs
nothing but to turn their back to God a few years, and a little to enlarge
the entry into their conscience, to make themselves rich, and to overcome
fortune. But we will pass over many things that be written, and may be said
of them, and conclude with the words of Saint Augustine and Saint Augustine:
That it is hard for them to please God, or duly and rightly to repent them of
their sins.

But let us leave the Merchants in their accounts, The Soldier.
and see what happiness is in the men of War, who think themselves to
exceed all others in worthiness and honorable estate, and therefore have
this epytheton aptly given them, Gloriosi milites, glorious soldiers: and yet
not he (says one) which leads his life in the wars, but he that ends his
life well in peace, wins both honor in this life, and also perpetual
memory after his death: these men lead a very painful and dangerous life, not
only by their enemies, but by an infinite number of diseases that follow the
camp: they must suffer hunger, thirst, heat and cold, wind and weather,
frost and snow; they watch and ward, and wake almost continually; and when they
sleep, they must take up their lodging in the plain fields at the sign of
the Moon. And this pains they take to embrue their hands in the blood of them
for whose preservation Christ was contented to shead his own blood. Lions,
Bears, Wolves, and all other kind of wild beasts, spare to exercise their
fury upon their own kind: but these use extreme cruelty, and utter all their
rage upon men that Christ dyed for, as well as for them, not upon the Heathens
only, which were more tolerable. And what be the fruits of these men's
profession. Beside their own miseries which are many, as the effusion of their
own blood, and that of infinite numbers of innocents, men, women, and
children; burning and sacking of goodly cities and towns, spoiling and (...)
men's goods, wasting territories and fields; rapes upon matrones and virgins;
profaning Temples and sacred places; making men captives and slaves, and to
end in one word, all manner of impieties and outrages that men can commit,
which is confirmed by the Poet: Nulla fidesx, pietasque viris qui castra
sequuntur,
Venalesque manus, ibi fas, vbi maxima merces.
No faith, no piety's in those,
That are of Mars his train.
Their servile hands hold all as just,
Where they can rub to gain.


And when they return from the wars, many of the common sort that lived
honestly before, by want of discipline and good example, get such
licentiousness and dissoluteness of manners, that they become beggars or
thieves, and so lead and end their lives in myserie, of whom the Italian has a
proverb; Wars make thieves, and Peace hangs them up. The better soldier
(says one) the worse man: but that we may the better see what fruits spring
out of this profession, let us produce some examples of the miseries and
calamities that men have suffered by the wars; yet not of the great number of
thousands of men that have been slain in the field with the sword at one
battle: or the goodly cities that have been utterly destroyed and Sundry
(...) suffered by the wars.
made desolate, (for those examples be infinite) but of some few that be more
strange, and not so common.

Josephus reports, that when Jerusalem was besieged by the Emperor Titus,
besides wonderful things that the people suffered by the extremity of famine,
as the eating of the leather of their girdles, shoes, targets, and also of
their old hay: There was a rich woman had gathered Her name was Miriam.
together her goods into a house within the City, and lived sparingly upon
that she had left: but the soldiers in short time took all away, and she
could no sooner beg a morsel of meat to help to relieve her, but they would
take it from her and devour it themselves: at last seeing her self ready to
famish, she committed a horrible Act against nature: she took her child that
she had sucking upon her breasts, O unhappy child (quoth she) but much more
unhappy is thy mother! what shall I do with thee in this War, in this
famine, and among these seditious people? If I should save thy life, thou shall
live in perpetual servitude with the Romans: come hither therefore (my little
wretch) and serve thy mother for meat to relieve her, and for a terror to the
Soldiers that have left me nothing, and for a perpetual memory of the
miseries of man's life, which only wants to the calamities of the Jews:
after she had spoken these words, she killed the poor infant, and put him
upon the broach, and roasted him, and ate the one half, and laid up the rest:
which was no sooner done, but the Soldiers came into the house again, who
smelling the savor of the roasted meat, threatened to kill her, except she
brought it forth: Content your selves, my friends (quoth she) I have dealt
well with you; look how I have reserved the one moitie for you; and therewith
she set the rest of her child upon the table before them. The soldiers being
amazed with the horror of this loathsome spectacle, stood silent, unable to
speak a word: but the woman contrariwise beholding them with a stern and
sturdie countenance; What now my friends (quoth she?) this is my fruit, this is
my child, this is my fact; why eat ye not? I have eaten before you, are ye
more dainty or scrupulous then the mother that brought him forth? do ye
disdain the meat that I have tasted before you, and will eat the rest, if
ye leave it? The soldiers were not able any longer to endure this lamentable
sight, but went trembling away, leaving her alone with the rest of her child.

In the time of Traiane the Emperor, the Jews rebelled, in which Wars the
Jews not content to have slain the Romans, but brought also their Inhumane
cruelty in the Jews.
dead bodies to the shambles, and there quartered, cut them in pieces, and sold
them by weight, and ate them with as good appetite as if they had been Hens or
Feasants: and further, adding one cruelty to another, they brought forth
certain Romans which they had in prison, and made wagers one with another, a
denier or a point to strike off the head of a Roman at a blow. They would flay
the Romans quick, and tanne their skins for leather: and further to
disgrace them, they would cut off their privy members, and toss them as a
ball in the market place. The Greeks and Romans that were in all places
slain in these Wars, were reported to be five hundred thousand, which cost
the Jews so dear, that if the dead had been living, they would have thought
themselves sufficiently revenged. After the Emperor (...) had killed his
brother Geta, and was in possession of the Empire, the Praetorian soldiers
finding themselves rich by the rewards of Bassianus, and their enemies subdued,
went into Rome, and entering into the houses, slew all persons with whom they
had any unkindness, and upon wagers would kill a whole kindred, until they
had left no person in whom any remembrance might remain.

The people of Numantia in Spain were driven In the Numantians.
to such extremity when Scipio besieged the City, that they would hunt after
the Romans, as men do use to hunt after a Hare or Dear, and eat their
flesh, and drink their blood as hungerly as if it had been Beef or Mutton:
they would vow to their Gods not to break their fast but with the flesh of a
Roman, nor to drink wine or water until they had tasted of the blood of
their enemies which they should kill: so that none of the Romans were taken
prisoners, but when they had killed any of them, they would flay him, quarter
him, and wey him in the shambles, and sell him more dear being dead, then his
ransom would yield being alive. When Scipio perceived the great harms the
Romans sustained by those desperate men that would accept of no reasonable
conditions, nor commit themselves to the clemency of the Romans: who would
answer, that seeing they had lived so many years in liberty, they would not
now die slaves: he remooved his camp something farther from the town, and
entrenched them so straightly round about, that no victuals could come unto
them: Then was there great cries of the women within the City: lamentable
complaints made by the Priests to their Gods: and shrill and pitiful
exclamations made by the men to Scipio, that he would let them come out to
fight like men of War, and not to destroy them by famine like cowards: O
Scipio (said they) thou that art a noble and valiant young Roman, do not
advisedly consider what thou do, nor they that give thee counsel: thus to
keep us in, is but a policy of War, but if thou overcome us in battle,
thou shall then win to thy self immortal fame and glory. But when the
Numantines perceived that Scipio would not be removed from his resolution,
after they had endured the siege a year and seven months, the young and
lusty men assembled themselves together, and killed all the old men, women and
children, Desperate resolution.
and brought all the riches of the City, and Temples, and heaped them up in
the Market place, and gave fire to all parts of the City, and then poisoned
themselves; so as the Temples, Houses, Riches and People of Numantia ended all
in one day, leaving to Scipio, neither goods to spoil, nor men or women upon
whom to triumph. When Scipio entered the City, and beheld this lamentable
spectacle, not without sheading tears: O happy Numantia (quoth he) the
Conquered, but not overcome.
Gods would thou should one day have an end, but never to be overcome. The
Danes under their King Hading making War in Suecia, in the winter suffered a
wonderful famine: for being so straightly besieged by Vffo King of Suecia,
that they had no means ^o proceed further in their enterprise, nor yet
return into their country: when their victuals were all consumed, they were
driven to eat the herbs and grass in the fields, then the roots and barks
of trees, (...) when all their Cats, and Rats, and Horses were consumed, they
that were left alive, killed many of their The misery of famine.
own fellows and ate them. And the Caliguritans, when Pompey besieged their
City so straightly, that all things were consumed that might serve them for
meat, they ate their wives and children. Among the rest of the infelicities and
miseries that ensue of the Wars, this is not the least, that Olorus King of
Thracia, when he had subdued the Daces, compelled all the men to be servants
or slaves to their wives, in token of extreme servitude, and of the most
spiteful disgrace and ignominy that he could devise to inflict upon them. And
this was no less spiteful, that Attilus King of Suecia made a Dog King of the
Danes, in revenge of a great many injuries received by them. And Gunno likewise
King of the Danes made a Dog King of Norway, and appointed Counselors to do
all things under his title and name. But the Emperor Frederick the second
used a more moderation, when he had overcome the people in Hungary: We have
(said the Emperor) done a great work, but now there remains a greater
work, that we overcome and master our selves; that we make an end of our
covetousness and desire of revenge: words worthy of an Emperor. Marcus
Aurelius noting the infelicitie of these kind of men among the Romans, says;
After our men of War are gone out of Rome, they neither fear the Gods, nor
honor the Temples: they reverence not the Priests: they have no obedience to
their Fathers, nor shame to the people, dread of justice, neither compassion of
their country: some rob the Temples, others break up doors: the nights they
pass in plays, the days in blasphemies: to day they fight like Lions, to
morrow they fly like Cowards: some rebel against their Captains, and others
fly to the enemies: finally, they are unmeet for all good, and meet for all
evil: and therefore, to speak of their filthiness, I am ashamed to describe
them: they leave their own wives, and take the wives of others: they The
insolency of War.
dishonor the daughters of the good, and they beguile the innocent virgins:
there is no neighbor but they covet, nor Oastesse but they force: they break
their old wedlock, and yearly seek a new marriage: so that they do all
things what they list, and nothing what they ought. What? will thou I tell thee
more of the injuries which the Captains do to the Cities whereby they pass?
of the slanders which they raise in the Provinces where they abide? the Moths
do not so much harm to the garments, nor the Locusts to the corn, as the
Captains do to the people: for they leave no beast but they kill, nor orchard
but they rob, nor wine but they drink, nor doue-house but they climb, nor
Temple but they spoil, nor villainy but they commit: they eat, without
meaning to pay: they will not serve, unless they be well paid: and the worst
of all is, if they have their pay, immediately they spend and play it away; if
they be not paid, they rob and mutine: so that with poverty they are not
content, and with riches they are luxurious and insolent. I heard one day
(says the Emperor) but he saw not me, a Captain of mine say to an Oastesse
of his, that would not let him do in the house what he would: Ye of the
country did never know Captains of Armies, and therefore know it now (mother)
that the earth does never tremble, but when it is threatened with a Roman
Captain: and the Gods do never A Cowardly boaster.
suffer the Sun to shine, but where we are obeyed. Within short space after,
this Captain went to a battle in Arabia, where he was the first that fled
and left the Standard alone, which had almost made me lose the battle; but in
recompense of his valiant service, I commanded his head to be cut off. Of these
men one speaks thus; Viviolas leges and ferro iura lacessit,
Obterit innoc^os, alieno pascitur are.
Gods Laws and Man's, by steel and force
Dissolve and break they would,
The Innocent they grieve, and seek
To prey on others gold.


But what need we seek so far for examples of this kind, when our own age
yields us more then sufficient, to prove the miseries that follow this trade
of life? In these Civil Wars of France, Sanserra was so The siege of
Sanserra.
straightly besieged, that for want of victuals almost half the people were
consumed by famine: when they had eaten up all their Dogs, Cats, Mice, and
Wants, they fell to the hides of their Oxen, and Kine, and Sheep: then to
their leather girdles, saddles, bridles, and halters: to their purses, points,
and all manner of leather garments: then they ate the hooffs of Horses, Oxen,
Stags and Goats, whereof many had long hanged at their keys: when all their
corn was consumed, they made bread of straw cut in small pieces and stamped in
a mortar, and of a kind of tile-stones: and when all these things were spent,
the rage of their hunger was so extreme, that they ate the dung of beasts: and
also their own excrements: they would also seek among the dung-mixens for the
bones and horns of beasts that had long lien there rotting, and eat them
greedily. There were that would have eaten the carcasses of dead men, but being
taken with the manner, they were punished by the Magistrates: and when they
were driven to this extremity, that all manner of things that might be eaten
were almost consumed, they cast out of the town all those that were
unserviceable for the Wars; who were without any mercy or respect of
humanity most cruelly with stripes and wounds by the enemy driven into the
town again: but the sight of the town was so hateful unto them, that many
chose rather to suffer any extremity then to return thither again, and were
slain with their shot. It was a lamentable sight to behold men, women and
children like a dried corse, nothing left upon them but skin and bone: but
nothing could moove the hard hearts of their enemies, so as at last they were
enforced to yield up the town upon certain conditions. When the French King
that now is and of Navarre besieged Paris of late years, the famine Of Paris.
grew so extreme within the City, that they fed upon their Horses, Asses,
Dogs, Cats, Mice, Vine-leaves; and after some Writers, there died by famine
above thirty thousand persons: and this lamentable History is also reported;
that a Citizen having nothing wherewith to feed himself, his wife and his
children, not able any longer to endure the sight of this misery, nor to hear
their lamentable complaints, he first hanged up his wife and his children, and
then himself. But before this was done, he tied a writing to his breast,
declaring the only cause why he committed this act to be, that he was no
longer able to endure this misery, and therefore he prayed God that he would
forgive him this fault.

In the same Wars, besides a great many other cruelties, which these kind of
men continually exercised, they would roast their own countrymen whom they
had taken, by a ge^^le fire, that they might suffer long torment before they
died: some they would kill with often little pricks and blows with swords and
daggers for their pastime. Others they would hang up by the chin upon
pot-hookes, and put a little fire under them, that they might suffer a long and
miserable death. To others they would cut off their privy members, and put
them into their mouths. They would tear the Psalms of David and other books
of holy Scripture, and thrust them into the wounds of dead men: Such as would
fly Barb^rous inhumanity.
into castles, when the town was won, and yield them selves upon condition and
promise to have their lives saved, should be cast over the walls, and their
necks broken, and their bones in such sort with the fall, that streams of
blood like little rivers were seen run down the castle. There were that
opened a man's breast, and took out his heart (and as they had often before
wished) did eat it up. Another there was that hanged up his own son: others
would open dead men's bodies, and take out their intrals, offering them in scorn
to sell, crying about the city, Who would buy a Hugonits puddings? There were
that cut off a man's ears and fried them in a frying pan, and ate them
sweetly, and with horrible oaths and curses invited other soldiers to this
banquet. To be short, they devised all the ways they could to put men to
strange kinds of death, and torments not usual. Some they would burn, others
they would smother to death with smoke, some they would drown; others they
would stone to death; some they would cut into small pieces; others they would
bury alive; some they would take out of their graves and cast the^ to dogs to
be devoured; others they would famish for lack of meat; some they would kill
with cold, others with very fear; to some they plucked out their eyes; others
they would kill, because they mourned for others calamities, to bemoane and
behold a wicked act with pitiful eyes, was with them to commit wickedness.
But this was not sufficient for them to rage and exercise barbarous cruelty
against men, women and children, and those of their own nation, except they
also had used intolerable blasphemy against God: when they had an intent to
commit some of these kinds of murders, that one of them might know another,
their watchword sometime should be; Three times I curse God. And as they brake
into a Merchants house, where they found many books, they made a fire in the
midst of the town, and burnt them all, saving certain Bibles which were very
fair bound and set ou^; them they fastened to the points of their halberts,
and carrying them about the town in a triumph, they cried out, Behold the
truth of the Hugonots hanged, the truth of all the Devils in hell: and when
they came to the bridge, they threw those Bibles into the river, crying,
Behold, the truth of all the Devils in hell is drowned. The intent of these men
was not to follow acitm counsel: Bellorum egregij fines, quoties ignoscendo
tra^sigitur. The end of those wars are notable, when peace is made by
forgiving. And Cyrus King of the Persians was wont to say, that the works of
humanity and courtifie were much more pleasant and gracious then the works of
the wars: for war brings to men very much evil, and humanity very many
goods things. These be the fruits of this glorious profession, which is
exalted above all other estates of life, and the manners of them that follow
it: but so far are these men from happiness, that if any estate be more
unhappy then others, these seem to challenge the vantgard.

But let us license men of war to follow their own manners, and to enrich
themselves by violence with the spoil of other men, seeing it will be no
better, that we may with more safety pass through their pikes to another sort
of men, whose profession neither allows war, nor they will suffer men to live
in peace, as though they were borne to this end, neither to be quiet
themselves, nor to suffer other men, who in a more civil sort, not like a
torrent, throwing down all before them as the other does, but soberly like a
consumption, know how, not with effusion of blood out of men's bodies, but of
money out of their purses, to make their gain much greater in few years by
peace without sheading their blood, and endangering their bodies, then
soldiers can do by the wars all their whole life, with the loss of their
blood, and continual hazard of their persons: and see what happiness is in
their life, who now somewhere be the only men that be reputed almost above all
other The estate of a soldier truly deciphered.
estates! These be the lawyers that live by other men's loss, that become rich
by making others poor, whose felicity brings other men to misery. These be
they that can win castles and towns to themselves with more ease and less
peril, with their tongues, then men of war can do with their Cannons.
Lingua licet mollis, frangere dura potest.
The tongue is soft by which we speak,
And yet a hard thing it can break.


But what happiness see we in their faculty, except gathering of riches, is
to be happy, wherein it has been showed before, felicity does not consist? And
yet how many years labor they must bestow day and night, in a painful
study, before they can come to the sweetness of the gain they look for,
themselves best know: And when they come to that perfection of knowledge in the
law, to reap gain as the fruits of their travel, with what conscience they
enrich themselves to the impoverishing and utter undoing of a great many, God
will be one day their Judge: but gain is sweet, which way soever it come.
Sophocles says; Susue est lucrum profectum The estate of the Lawyer.
etiam a mendacio. The law as it is now used in some places, is like a
Camelio^, that receives his color from the color it touches; so the law
receives his credit from his credit that delivers it: for that which is law
this year, is the next year many times no law: which peradventure comes to
pass by the reason that Ckanthes alleged to one that asked him, how it
happened that men were better learned in elder time then now? Because (quoth
he) men then disputed upon matter, but now upon words. Unhappy (says one) is
that Commonwealth where laws be used like wax, pliable to the passions of
men. The abuses whereof Gerson complained in his time in the handling of holy
Scriptures, may happily be applied to the handling of the law in these days. All
the vigor and efficacy (says he) of sacred divinity, is reduced to an
ambitious contention and ostentation of men's wits, and to mere sophistry.
Ci^ro said, that he seemed to him in this to do more evil that corrupted the
Judge with speech, then he that did it with money, for that no man can corrupt
a wise man with money, but with speech he may. The old Romans esteemed the
judgments that were given before, to be of great moment: for they gave to the
judgments that should follow of the like things (as it were) a most firm and
sure example, from which they thought it an vni^st thing to diff^nt. And Plato
says, That Commonwealth is like to go to wrack, where Magistrates rule the
laws, and not the laws ^ule Magistrates. The number that be made rich by this
faculty, are few, and yet peradve^ too many: but infinite numbers be
impoverished and undone: and that cannot be a happy estate, by whose
happiness other men be unhappy and fall into misery. One has lost his
matter, and evil spent his money and his time; the other that is victor, goes
away many times a loser; having spent more in the suite, then the matter is
worth. For as the number (says Tacitus) Tacit.
and force of diseases brings gain to the Phisicions, so the corruption of
the pleading courts, brings money to the lawyers. One thus notes the abuses
of certain estates. Causidicis, Erebo, fisco fas viuere, rapto est,
Militibus, medico tortori occidere ludo est,
Mentiri astrologis, pictoribus atque poetis.
Lawyers, Hell and the Exchecker, live by spoil,
Soldiers, Physicions and Hangmen, kill in sport.
Astrologers, Painters and Poets lie by authority.


There was a plain countrieman not long since in A difficult law-case.
France, that had retained three famous Lawyers to be of his counsel, whom
after he had heard debating his cause together, and received their opinions:
Truly, my masters (quoth he) ye have labored fair, for ye have left me in a
greater doubt then I was before. And who takes in hand the controversy
between brother and brother? who animateth and exciteth to contention the
son against his natural father, the wife against her husband, and
maintains their causes, but these men? And who serves their turn best, but
they which of all sorts of men be the worst? envious men, malicious,
contentious, covetous, and uncharitable. If it be a true sign that the people
be healthful, when the Phisicions be poor, then is it also a true sign, that
men be contentious and uncharitable, when the lawyers be rich. There has been
a common saying: Serpens, ni Serpentem ed^ draco non fiet. Unhappy are they
that make the miseri^ of others, riches to themselves. These seem not to be
the peacemakers to whom the kingdom of heaven promised: they call them to
whom they be counseller^ their Clyents; because, according to the signification
of the word, they pretend to receive them into their defense. But by such
defenders, happy is he that has ^o need to be defended. If Platoes meaning be,
that ^he multitude of Lawyers as well as Magistrates and Physicions be evident
signs of an evil constituted Commonwealth, then could it not to any age be
more aptly applied then to this; because the one sort (says he) shows the
people to be malicious and full of contention; the Tacit.
other to be gluttonous and luxurious, and given to ease and idleness. Very
many laws are notes of a very corrupt commonwealth. One says; Nimium
altercando veritas In too much arguing, truth is lost.
amittitur. And he that will look into this age, must confess, that as
commonwealths heretofore were troubled and annoyed with wicked acts, so are
they now with laws. There is a common proverb, that neither: A proverb not
more common then true.
Physician lives well, nor a lawyer dies well: procceding peradventure hereof,
that those have bin accounted (...) intemperate, doing that themselves which
they forbid others. And these are noted dilligent observers of the laws of men,
and many of them negligent enough in the laws of God. Gueuarra inveighing
against the abuses of these days in suites of law, says, He that would give
himself faithfully to set forth the deceits, the delays, the perph^ities and
dangerous ends of suites, should find it a (...) not to be written with ink,
but with blood: Seeing if every suitor should suffer as much for the holy faith
of Christ, as he endures about the travel of his suite, (...) would be as
many Martyrs in Chanceries and other Courts of Justice and record of Princes,
as was at Rome in the times of persecution by the old Emperors. For The
miseries of the Client.
to begin a suit at this day, is no other thing then to prepare sorrow to his
heart, complaints to his tongue, tears to his eyes, travel to his feet,
expenses to his purse, toil to his men, trial of his friends, and to all the
rest of his body nothing but pain and travel. So as the effects and
conditions of a suite are no other, then of a rich man to become poor; of a
pleasant disposition, to fall into melancholy; of a free mind to become bound;
from liberality to fall into covetousness; from truth, to learn falsehood and
shifts; and of a quiet man, to become a vexer of others: so that I see no other
difference between the ten plagues, that scourged Egypt, and the miseries
that afflict suitors, then that the calamities of the one were inflicted by
Gods providence, and the torments of the other are invented by the malice of
men, who by their own toil make themselves very Martyrs.

Peter de la Primandaye thus notes and reprehendeth the abuses of this time,
in suites of law in his country of France. Cicero complains of his time, that
many notable decrees of law were corrupted and depraved by the curious heads of
the lawyers: what would he do, if he were now alive, and saw the great heaps
and piles of books, with our practice in the law? If he saw that holy temple
of laws so shamefully polluted, and miserably profaned; where a thousand
cavils and quiddities are continually coined by such writings, according to the
saying of the Comicall Poet: that through craft and subtilty one mischief is
begotten upon an other. But times have been when there were but few laws,
because men thought that good manners were the best laws; and that natural
sense, helped with an upright conscience, and joined with due experience, was
the right rule to judge by. But after that men became so skillful in suites,
and that offices of justice, that were wont freely to be given to them that
deserved them, became to be gainefull and free from yielding any account of
their doings, and set forth to sale as marchandisc for them that offered most:
after that men began to spice their suites with great sums of money: after
that lawyers began so greatly to gain, and slightly to consider of their
clyents causes, because they would make have to another that waited for them,
with gold in his hand: after that they began to write with seven or eight lines
on a side, and to disguise matters with frivolous answers: after that Proctors
and Atturneys, who in former time were to be had for nothing, and appointed for
certain causes, became hirelings and perpetual: after that sollicitors were
suffered in the midst of them all to be as it were the skum gatherers of
suites, with all that rabblement of practitioners, who devour the substance of
poor men, as drones eat up the honey of Bees: Lastly, after that the Chauncery
did let loose the bridle to all sorts of expeditions, and went about to teach
the Judges. After these things (says he) began to be practiced, we fell into
this misery of long suites, gainful to the crafty and wicked, and very
prejudicial to plain meaning and good men; who many times had rather lose
their right, then hazard their undoing by following a suite so long by way of
justice: for that commonly we see the rightest cause frustrated by delays, by
affection, or by corruption. We see how suites are heaped up one upon another,
and made immortal, that nothing is so certain, which is not made uncertain:
that no controversy is so clear, which is not obscured: no contract so sure,
that is not undone: no sentence or judgment so advisedly given, which is not
made void: all men's actions open to the slanders, craft, malice, redemptions
and pollings of Lawyers: the Majesty and integrity of ancient justice lost:
and last of all, that in the dealings of men nowa-dayes, no show of upright
justice, but only a shadow thereof remains. This evil is become so great,
and grown to such extremity, that it is unpossible but that according to the
course of worldly things, the ruin thereof must be at hand, or at the least
it is to receive some notable change within some short space. For as Plato
says, In a corrupt Commonwealth defiled with many vices, if a man should
think to bring it back again to his first brightness and dignity, by
correcting small faults, and by curing the contagion thereof by little and
little, it were all one, as if he should cut off one of Hydraes heads, in whose
place seven more did spring up. But that alteration and disorder, whereby all
evil and vice was brought into the Commonwealth, must be plucked up by the
roots: For an extreme evil must have an extreme remedy. And true it is, that
there have bin times Lawyers and Physicions banished.
when both Lawyers and Physicions have bin banished out of diverse countries, as
men rather hurtful then profitable to the Commonwealth, which argues the
same to be no happy estate. And some reason they had to maintain their
opinion; because men being more temperate in their life and diet, and not so
co^tentious and malicious in those days and countries, as they have bin since,
they needed not so greatly Physicions nor Lawyers. But since that time the
luxuriousness and intemperancie commonly used, and the contentious and
malicious minds of men grown to extremity, have brought forth a necessary use
of both their skils. Of the one, to cure the disease engendered by disordered
life, or some way to ease the pain: Of the other, to help minister matter of
contention, and at length to decide the controversy: for such is the
necessity of our humane condition, that in many things they are driven to
seek remedy there, from whence their harm comes: As the oil of a Scorpion
is a present remedy for the stinging of the Scorpion. Chilo said, Comitem
aeris alieni ac litis, esse miseriam. But why Lawyers and Physicions should be
Lawyers and Physicions have one common end.
coupled together in such a co^gruence, I see not, except, because they have
one common end, that is gain; and the manner of both their proceedings in
their faculties, is by evacuation. Sine Causidicis satis olim fuere futuraque
su^ urbes. And may not we say to these men, as Accius said to the Augures?
Nihil credo auguribus, qui aures verb^ ditant alienos, suas ut auro locuplete^t
domos. But Princes, where the abuses of this profession begin to grow to an
extremity, that shall see their people impoverished, and thereby the less able
to do them service, have means enough to reform them, and to reduce the
professors to their first integrity. There is no art or science, faculty
Nothing so well intended, but may be abused.
or profession, that in process of time, be they of the^. selves ever so good
or necessary, that may not be corrupted by abuses, and need reformation.
Humanum est errare. Councels were ordained to reform errors and abuses crept
into the Church: Parliaments, to redress the abuses slipped into the
Commonwealth, and the authority of Princes suffices to reduce their subjects
into good order. And Princes should foresee and beware lest their
Co^mon-wealths, that were founded upon laws, be not overthrown by laws.
Baldus a famous man, an interpretor of the civil law, noteth-that Lawyers
oftentimes are oppressed with sudden death. But though the abuses in that
faculty make the professors subject to obloquy, yet they that speak worst, if
they yield them their due, must confess them to be malum necessarium;
necessary Lawyers a necessary evil.
members for our corrupt nature, by whose skill men's malicious and contentious
humors are many times, especially in these days, so artificially fed and
maintained, that they who at the first were ordained as instruments to defend
men from injury, seem now to be employed as whips to the punishment of men's
sins. The elder Cato was wont to say, that pleading Courts were strawed with
Caltrops. Pope Pius the 2d. compares the Suitors to Birds, the place of
pleading to the Field, the Judge to a Net, the Atturneys and Lawyers to
Fowlers. Pope Nicholas the third (a man well learned) banished out of Rome,
Advocates, Proctors, Notaries and the rest of that Society; saying, that they
lived by poor men's blood. But Pope Martin his successor, caused them to return
again, saying; they were good men to draw water to his mill. One reports
that if Jews the eleventh had lived a few years more, he had reformed in
France the abuses of the Law and Lawyers. Of these me^ one speaks thus:
Dicere sepeforo, turpique inhiare lucello,
Gaudet, and hoc studio vitam solatur inertem,
Vaenali celebrans commissa negotia lingua.
To plead of gaping for dishonest gain,
Fattens the Lawyer, studying to maintain
A slothful life: And (be they right or wrong)
Opening men's Causes with a servile tongue.


Thus much of this estate as it is used in other countries written by their
own Authors, and much more which I forbear to recite, because I take this
sufficient to prove that felicity is as hard to be found in this estate as in
others, though some countries be free from these faults: for the general^y
makes the matter, and the use or abuse of every state of life brings to
their professors felicity or infelicity: For the law is necessary in every
Commonwealth. Plato says: principatus sine lege grave and molestus subject^s:
another calls it prasiaem and bonu and malis: and that in the laws
consists the safeguard of a Commonwealth. And how great infelicitie happens
to the ludges, who when they are old, and should reap the fruit of all their
travel in their youth, that is, rest and quietness, then must they begin to
travel about their Circuits, in heat and cold, dirt and dust, frost and snow,
wind and rain, as it were a penance for their life past, The Lawyers penance.
which they must continue until they be ready to fall into their graves?
Alexander Alexandrins, an excellent Doctor and Advocate, when he had lost at
Rome, against all right and reason, a matter of great importance, gave over his
practice, and betook himself to the study of humanity, saying; That the
greatest part of them, that in these days sit in judgment, either (as
ignorant m^n) do not understand the laws, or (as naughty men) do corrupt
the laws. And Augustine says, That the ignorance of the Judge, is often the
calamity of the innocent. On^ said, These five things bring chiefly the
Common wealth far out of square. A (...) Judge in the Consistory, a
deceitful merchant in the market, a coverous Priest in the Church, a fair
whore in the Stews, and (...) in Princes Courts. One likeneth the law to the
web of a Spyder, that takes little Flies, but g^eater things break their way
through: which seems to point at some thing that makes nothing for the
felicity of Judges and Magistrates.

CHAP. II.
The estate of Judges and Magistrates: Of Bellizarius: A Villain reprehends
the Senate of Rome: An excellent Oration of a Jew: A Dialogue betwixt a
Philosopher and Justice: The estate of a Courtier: A Courtiers description: The
manner of the Court: The Courtiers life: The estate of Princes: The Hystory of
Cleander, and of plantianns.

LET us leave these men pleading their Clients causes, and look further into
the estate of Judges and other Magistrates, which is an honorable estate, and
necessary for our humane nature. And though these men command and judge, and
are honored above the rest, yet have they their part in those troubles and
unquietness, whereunto other men are subject. The estate of Judges and
Magistrates.
Their charge is great, and care without end, to preserve the people committed
to their government, in peace and concord at home, and to defend them from
their enemies abroad. They must wake when others sleep, and howsoever they
behave themselves, yet are they in danger of their Princes displeasure, or the
peoples obloquy, whereof ensues many times their utter overthrow. A great
number of examples may be produced of good Magistrates and honorable
Personages, that by the ingratitude of the Prince or people, in recompense of
their good service, have been bereaved of their lives and goods. pellizarians,
a noble Gentleman and General under Bellizarius.
the Emperor Justinian, overcame the Vandals, triumphed over the Persians,
delivered Italy many times of the Barbares: in recompense of so notable
service, the Emperor through envy and suspicion caused his eyes to be plucked
out of his head, insomuch that he was driven to get his living by begging: And
standing in a little cottage that was placed in one of the most frequented
streets in Rome, asked alms in this sort: Ye that pass by, give poor
Bellizarians a farthing for Gods sake, who for his virtue was famous, and
through envy is made blind: so that it is truly said, A great good turn is
often rewarded with great ingratitude: and the uncertainty of the peoples
favor Petrarke taxes thus: Fair weather of the Spring, the mornings sweet
wind of Summer, calmes of the Sea, the estate of the Moon, the love of the
people, if they be compared together, the palm and price of mutabilitie shall
be given to the last. But of Magistrates that be evil after the corruption of
our flesh, grievous curses be threatened upon them. Cursed be ye that be
corrupted with money and by prayers; by hate or love judge evil to be good,
and good evil; making of light darkness, and of darkness light. Cursed be
ye that have not regard to the goodness of the cause, but to the favor of the
person; that have not regard to equity, but to the Presents that are given you;
that regard not justice, but money; that have not regard to that which reason
shows you, but to that only which your affection or desire leads you: ye
are diligent in rich men's causes, but ye delay poor men's suites; to them ye
are stern and rigorous, but to the rich pleasant and affable: which agreeeth
with this saying of Aristotle: Amor and odium and proprium commodum (...)
faciunt indicem non cognoscere verum: Love and hate, and his own commodity
oftentimes makes a ludge not to know the truth. The wise man pursuing this
matter, says, The poor man cries out, and no man harkneth to him, but they
ask what he is: the rich man speaks, and every man clappeth his hands, and
exalts his words with admiration above the skies: yet this suffices them not
that are advanced to honorable estate: there is another worm that gnaweth
upon them; they do by their children, as did the mother of Zebedee. Make
(Lord) that my children may sit one at thy right hand, the other at thy left.
So after them, they set their sons in their dignities, sometime of small
knowledge and capacity. There was written in the Council house at Ratisbone
in a Marble table with Golden letters, these words following, which are meet
to be written in the breasts of all Counselors and other Magistrates: What
Senator Words worthy to be ingravon over every Seat of luslice.
soever thou art, that enterest into the Council house to execute thy office,
cast away before this door all private affections, anger, violence, hatred,
friendship, flattery; put on the person, and have care of the Commonwealth: for
as thou art just or unjust to others, even so shall thou also look for and
endure the judgeme^t of God.

The villayne reprehending before the Senate of A villain his reprehension of
the Senate of Rome.
Rome, the corruption of their Judges and Magistrates sent by them into his
country, reprooved them thus: You send us officers so covetous, that they are
all transformed into private gain, and Judges so ignorant, that are not able
to comprehend our Statutes; nor make us understand your laws. They punish
grievously the faults of the poor, and dissemble with the faults of the rich:
they take all that is offered in public, and refuse nothing that they can take
in secret: they consent to many offeces because they will have occasion to be
greater gainers. The Law is led by affection, and justice measured by opinion:
whereby it comes to pass, that unbridled covetousness consults with secret
mailce, and private malice gives place to public theft: which because no man
cal^eth to due examination and trial, it resolves into this inconvenience,
that the covetousnes of one wicked man is satisfied by the prejudice of a whole
Nation. If he that complains, be poor, and the party that does the wrong, be
rich, the suite is not dispatched according to the equity of the cause, but
according to the wealth of the party. If a poor man come to demand justice,
and have not wherewith to give bribes; at the beginning he shall be
entertained to spend all that he has, through a vain hope to obtain his
cause; and being entered, they consume him by delays; and whilst h^e has
means to bear out the charges of the suite, they assure him that he has good
right: but when his liberality fails, they pronounce sentence against him:
and so where he came to complain but of one, he returns accuising all;
crying to the Gods for justice and mercy: ye Romans have this poesy in your
banners; Romanorum est, debellare superbos, and parcere subiectis: but ye might
more truly say; Romanorum est, expoliarek innocents, and inquietare quietos. I
swear by the immortal Gods, that in fifteen days that I have been in Rome,
I have seen here such and so great things done in this Senate, that if the
least of them had been done at Dar^by, the gallows had bin hanged thicker with
thieves, then A bold leproote.
a vineyard is with grapes. The third year after pompey had won Jerusalem,
(Valerius Gracchus being President of Judea) a Jew came to the Senate of Rome
to complain upon the grievances and injustice done in that country by their
Magistrates and Judges: and among other things spoke thus: O fathers
conseripl!^ o happy people! your happy destinies that favored you, and our God
that has forsaken us, made Jerusalem that was Commander of all Asia, and
Mother of the Jews, servant to Rome and to you (Romans.) Great, surely was
the power of pompey, and great was his army that overcame An exellent oration
of a lew
us: but I will tell you, much greater was the wrath of our God, and without
comparison, the number of our sins, by which we deserved to be utterly
overthrown: ye have banished the son of a King, in whose place ye have sent
us three others for presidents. They have b^n four plagues, the least whereof
was sufficient to poison the whole Roman Empire, much more our miserable
kingdom of Palestina. What more monstrous thing can there be, then for the
Judges and Magistrates which Rome sends to take away the evil manners of the
wicked, to be themselves the inventers of new vices? What greater disgrace can
be to justice, then when those that should punish the youthful prankes of
young folks, glory that they be the Captains of light men? What greater
infamy can there be to Rome, then that they who should be just in all justice,
and an example of all virtues, be evil in all wickedness, and practisers of
all vices? I lie, if your Judges and Magistrates have not done so many wrongs
in Justice, and forsaken their discipline, that they have taught the Youth of
Judea inventions of vices, which were never heard of our fathers, nor read in
our books, nor seen in our times; they supply with malice their want of
discretion, and they measure the justice they minister to others, by their own
profit: the common speech in Asia is, that the thieves of Rome hang the thieves
of Judea. O ye Romans, we little esteem the thieves which keep the woods,
in comparison of the Judges and Magistrates which rob us in our own houses:
Assuredly that Judge and Magistrate that rather wins men's good wills then
money, is to be loved; but he that hunteth after money, and alienateth men's
good wills, that man ought always as a pestilence to be abhorred: We Jews hold
it for most certain truth (and spoken also by the mouth of our God) that every
Prince that shall commit the charge of Justice to any man which he shall see to
be insufficient for it, whose chief respect shall be, not that he shall do
Justice, but rather that he shall increase his treasure, or else to do
pleasure to the party, let him be assured that when he thinks least upon it,
he shall see his honor turned to infamy, his reputation lost, his goods
diminished, and some great punishment to light upon his house.

Their injustice was likewise thus taunted by an Ambassador An Ambassador of
Lysbone.
of Lysbone that came to Rome to treat of matters with the Senate; before whom
he proved, that since his entry into Italy he had bin robbed ten times: and
whilst he was in Rome, it chanced him to see one of them that robbed him, to
hang up another that defended him: when he had beheld so foul an act and so
great an injustice, like a desperate man, he took up a coal and wrote upon the
gallows these words, O gallows, thou art born among thieves; sprung up among
thieves; cut down of thieves; hewed of thieves; made of thieves; planted among
thieves; holden up of thieves; and when time serves, they let loose thieves,
and people thee with true men.

There was written in a Church a dialogue between A dialogue betwixt a
Philosopher and Justice.
a Philosopher, and Justice, which sets forth aptly the nature and property of
Justice, and how a Magistrate should behave himself in doing thereof. What
Goddess are you (says the Philosopher?) Justice (says she.) But why look
you so sowrely? Because I am not to be entreated or moved with rewards. From
whence derive you your kind? From heaven. What parents did beget you? Measure
did beget me, and sincere faith brought me forth. Why is one of your ears
open, and the other shut? One is open to just persons, the other is deaf to
the wicked. Why does your right hand bear a sword, and the left a balance?
This does weigh causes, the other strikes the guilty. Why go ye alone? Because
there is small store of good men, these ages bring forth few Fabritios. Why go
ye so poorly apparelled? No man will desire exceeding great riches that
coveteth always to be a very just man. Apollonius noting the corruption of
Magistrates and government, having traveled over all Asia, Africa and Europe,
said, that of 2. things whereat he marvelled most in all the world; the first
was, that he always saw the proud man command the humble, the quarrellous the
quiet, the tyrant the just, the cruel the pitiful, the coward the hardy, the
ignorant the skillful, and the greatest thieves hang the innocent. In these
days (says Mar. Aurelius) in Italy they that rob openly, be called Masters or
Lords, and they that steal secretly, be called thieves. One wishes there were
no greater thieves in the world then those that rob the goods of rich men. Cato
said, Thieves of private theft lived in fetters and irons; but public thieves
lived in gold and purple. The old Egiptians used to paint their magistrates
blindfolded, and without hands: meaning that a Judge or Magistrate must know no
kin nor friend from a stranger; and without hands, because he must receive no
bribes or rewards. And this was no unapt device to paint in a table 30. Judges
without hands, and the President only looking upon the image of truth that
hanged at his neck. The Ariopagites These were the Senators of Athens.
used to hear no causes but in the dark nights, that the Judges might have
respect to the words that were spoken, not to the persons that spoke. iosaphats
speech to Judges should be noted: Look what ye do, for ye exercise not the
judgment of men, but of God, and whatsoever ye shall judge, will redound to
your selves. Choose lethro to Moses
out of all the people men virtuous, that fear God, that love the truth, and
hate covetousnes, and make them Judges. Ecclesiasticus gives this counsel,
Blame no man before thou have inquired the matter; understand first, and then
reform righteously: give no sentence, before thou have heard the cause,
neither interrupt men in the midst of their tales. There be four things
necessary in a Judge: to hear patiently, to answer wisely, to judge uprightly,
and execute mercifully. Judges and Magistrates (says one) should not employ
their study to get friends, to maintain their estate proudly, but rather to
read books, to judge men's causes uprightly. The good Magistrate should take the
authority of his office which the Prince gives him for accessory, and his good
life for principal; that the uprightness of his justice, and the sharpness
which the wicked feel in the execution thereof, should be so tempered by his
discretion, that all may hold authority by the syncerity of his life. Aristotle
requires three things to be in all good Judges and Magistrates, Virtue and
Justice, a love to the present estate, and a sufficiency to exercise those
duties that are required in their office.

Now let us look a little into the estate of Couniers, The estate of the
Counier.
who seem to challenge a peculiar interest in happiness, in respect of their
easy and delicate life, and reputation above others, being near the well head
from whence their ^elicity springs: for the estate of Princes they think to
be perfect felicity. These men, for the most part, have a special regard to
please their senses, and be more careful to deck their bodies then to garnish
their minds. Nescis quale tegat splendida vita malum.
Thou know not what mischief, a smooth life covers.


They set more by formalitie of manners, then by A Counier described.
substance of matter: so they show to be such, as they would be, they care not
though they be not such as they should be. Many of these men make it their
felicity to pass their time lasciuiously in courting young Damsels, as though
they were borne (as Boccas says of himself) por l'amore delle done: but in
the kingdom of pleasure virtue cannot consist: others that cannot have that
favor of the Prince they look for, insinuate themselves into the favor of
some of them that be most in favor, and receive holy water at the second hand:
him they follow, his beckes and countenance they observe; when he is merry,
they laugh; when he is angry, they are sad; what he allows, they affirm;
what he likes not, they dispraise: Et ho^a summa putant, aliena viuere quadra.


And thus they continue with him so long as the wind blows in the poope: but
if fortune begin to frown upon him they depend, they find some reasonable
cause for saving their credit (if they think not the common custom a
sufficient warrant) to leave him, and follow some other. Thus for riches and
reputation they(...) sell their liberty, so precious a thing of instemiable
price, and transform their nature into his whom they desire to please:
otherwise they must fall short of that they look for. The happiness of these
men differs as much from felicity, as a dark dungeon differs from the
clear light of the Sun: and this is incident to those great estates that are
so followed, that many of them, who to salute them, take their hattes from
their heads, wish that his head were taken from his shoulders; and that bow
their knee to do him reverence, wish his leg broken, that they might carry
him to his grave. Alfonsus king of Arragon, sailing upon the sea from Sicilia,
beheld certain foul soaring about his Galley, and looking for meat of the
mariners: and when he had cast them meat, he observed how greedily they
contended for it: and ever as they had gotten their prey, away they would fly
and return no more. Some of my Courtiers (quoth the King, turning to his
company) are like these chattering birds: for as soon as they have gotten any
office or reward at my hands that they gape after and contend for one with
another, they fly away and return not again, until necessity compel them
to sue for more. Gueuarra, to his friend that asked him how he employed his
time, answered thus; According to the fashion of our Courtiers, bear
euil-will, blaspheme, loyter, lie, prattle, and curse; and often time we may more
truly say we lose it then employ it: and to another demand with whom he was
most conversant in that Court, he answered, that the Court and people there of
were grapes of so evil a soil, that we who go in the same, and from our
childhood be brought up therein, study not with whom to be conversant, but in
discovering of whom to beware, with much pain we have time to defend us from
our enemies: and will you that we occupy our selves in seeking new friends?
which agrees with Pliny: that in the courts of Princes, the idle and vain
name of friendship only remamth. In the courts of Princes, I do confess,
there is a conversation of persons, but no confederation of will. For enmity
is holden for natural, Tacit.
and amity for a stranger. In Court the manner is, The manner of the Court.
whom they deprave in secret, the better to deceive, to praise them openly. The
Court is of such nature, that they that do most visit them, the worse they
entreat them; and such as speak best to them, the more evil they wish them.
They which haunt the Courts of Princes, if they will be curious and no fools,
shall find many things whereat to wonder, and much more whereof to beware. And
to another question, whether the Court be dear or good cheap; he answered:
Some things What is cheap in the Court.
in the Court are at a good price, or to say it better, very good cheap; that
is, cruel lies, false news, unhonest women, fained friendship, continual
enmities, double malice, vain words, and false hopes; of which eight things,
we have such abundance in this Court, that they may set out Boothes, and
proclaim Faires. In the Court (says he) there be few that live contented, and
many that be abhorred. In the Court none has desire there to die, and yet we
see not any that will depart from thence. In the Court we see many do what
they list, but very few what is meet. In the Court all dispraise the Court,
and yet all follow the Court: and the fashion of the Court is, if a man be in
favor, he knows not himself; and if the same man be out of favor, no man
will know him: This life at Court is no other thing then a languishing The
Courtiers life.
death, a certain unquiet life without peace, and principally without money;
and a certain purchase of damage and offense to the body, and of hell to the
soul: which moved one to say, Excat aula qui vult esse pius. It may be wished
that the Spanish Court, which he means, had a privilege or special
prerogative to use these manners alone. An Italian compares the life of
Courtiers with that of Seafaring men; saving that there is in them this
difference, that the Seaman comes to the end of his purpose by sailing well,
and the Courtier to his by doing ill. Zenobia the noble Queen of Palmerines,
is reported to have had a well ordered Court, as appeared also by her answer
made to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who making war upon her, offered her
conditions of peace, and demanded her son to be sent to him for a pledge. I
mean not to satisfy thy request, (said she) An excellent answer of a Queen.
for I hear, thy Court is replenished with many vices, where my Palace is
furnished with sundry Philosophers, from whom my children draw doctrine one
part of the day, and erercife the knowledge of Arms the other part. Of such
men one thus notes their niceness; Horum aliquis vest is operosa tegmine
cultus,
Molliter alivedem flectit, sparsamque renodat,
Casariem, and laxos patitur flaitare capillos.


If these men would have more respect to inward virtue, and less to externe
vanity, and not be so curious in decking their bodies, that they neglect to
adome their minds, nor to effeminate themselves to the delicitenesse of tender
women, but rather to fo^me themselves to the comeliness of manly men (for the
outward habit of the body for the most part discovers the inward disposition
of the mind) they might better find the way to felicity. To him that slike is
as cloth, and gold as brass, it is no matter what vesture he has, so as
accoram be observed: for it is the mind, and not the habit that gives grace
to a man: and yet there may be between them and others a difference in habit,
and a respect had to the dignity of the place and person: pride and
vainglory may be as well covered with base apparel, as with gorgeous attire;
as appeared by the taunt which Socrates gave to Antisthenes the Philosopher:
for this man used to wear bare apparel, as it were in contempt of the vanity
of gay garments; and when he walked in the streets, as he chanced to meet men,
he would set out to the show a hole in his cloak; whose manner when Socrates
had observed: I see (quoth he) thy pride and vanity through the hole of thy
cloak.

Let us leave Courtiers entertaining their Ladies, and follow other men's
paths, in examining a little the estate of Princes; for whom only, in the
judgment of The (...) of Princes.
men, it seems Felicity was created: for he that considers what the things
be, that bring a man to a quiet, contented and happy life, will think that
fortune has provided for them above all others most plentifully. What makes a
man more had in admiration in this world then riches, dignities, dominions,
liberty to do well or evil without controlment, ability to exercise
liberality, to have the fruition of all manner of pleasures both of body and
mind? They have all things that may be desired for a man's contentment, whether
it be in sumptuous apparel and ornaments of the body: or in the varfelicitie
and happiness: which whosoever will only consider superficially, must needs
confess that they alone triumph over all those things which are the cause of
other men's sorrow and trouble: But if we will behold the matter near hand, and
weigh it in equal balance, we shall find, that the same things which we think
Their supposed felicity, cause (...) their (...).
to be the means to attain to felicity, and to make them happy, is the cause
to many of their infelicitie and unhappiness. The danger they are in by the
greatness of their estate, and malice of their enemies, seems to detract
from their felicity, and gives them just cause of suspicion and fear. It
appears by histories, that there were Emperors that durst not go to bed,
until they first caused their beds and corners of their chamber to be
searched, for fear lest they should be slain when they were asleep. Were it
not better (said Inlius Caesar) to die once, then to live in such continual
fear and suspicion They command all, and yet many of them seem as though they
were governed by one or two, which is much disallowed of diverse State men. And
it is said in the Proverbs, that safety comes of many Counselors, Many
Counselors and that good.
and that good counsel comes of God. And the Philosopher advises Princes,
not to commit all their matters to any one Counselor alone: for no man can
always of himself, rightly consider and know all things, and in reasons that
are contrary one to another, discern which is best: and therefore he that
follows his own opinion alone, is rather accounted proud then wise. Through
such an opinion of his own wisdom, Lautrec is reported to have lost the
kingdom of Naples ^.
from the King his Master, and all that he had in Italy, because he would not
ask nor follow the advice of them that were wiser then himself. The ordinary
guard of principality (says Aristotle) is to make no one (...).
man great: And in truth they are to be taken for unprofitable members, that by
abusing the lenity and bounty of their Prince, covet to augment their estate
by the sweat of the Commonwealth. Worthy of blame (says one) are some Princes
for the ^aults they commit, but much greater is their offense in dissembling
the offenses of their favorites and private servants. Many examples Princes may
find to warn them to take heed how to magnify their servants with too much
wealth and authority, which has ostentimes been dangerous to them and their
estate, and odious and scandalous to their people, as this of Cleander, who was
brought to Rome amongst other captives, when the Emperor Marcus Aurelius
triumphed over the Argonautes, and was openly sold in the Market place, and
bought by a Clarke of the Kitchen to sweep the Larder at Court. This slave
Cleander, being The story of Cleander.
a young man, behaved himself so well in sweeping the house, and other his
Masters service, that not many years after, his Master made him free, and
advanced him to his office of Clarke of the Kitchen, and married him to his
daughter. Now when Cleander saw his estate thus amended, he endeavored to
obtain the favor of the Emperor; which when he had gotten by his diligent
and careful service, the Emperor being dead, he was so favored of Comodus,
that he made him Captain of his guard, and Lord great Chamberlain of his
chamber, and advanced him to such dignity and honor, that all matters were
dispatched at his will and pleasure: all offices must be obtained by his
means. He grew so ambitious, and thrust himself in such wise to entermeddle
with the affairs of the estate, that the Emperor firmed nothing, if Cleander
did not sign and allow the same. He did so insinuate himself into Comodus
favor by flattery, that never any servant of his obtained the like grace. He
fained to wish nothing that Comodus wished not, nor to allow any thing that he
said not. He was not ashamed to affirm, that he did not think or dream, but
that which Comodus did think or dream. With these and the like lies and
flatteries Palpable flattery.
he wanne the favor of Comodus, and governed the whole Empire, and obtained
the custody of the common treasure, and of all the money and jewels of the
Emperor: by means whereof he grew so exceeding rich and proud, that not
contented to use these high dignities and estates as a subject or servant, he
practiced to kill the Emperor, that he might put the Crown upon his own
head: but his practice being discovered, Comodus caused his head to be cut off
and carried to Rome upon a pole, A traitors reward.
to the great liking of the people: his children also, servants, and friends
were executed, and their bodies drawn by boys through Rome, were cast into
sinkes and filthy places. It has been always dangerous (says Tacitus) when
the name of a private man is advanced above or near the Kings name: this was
the miserable end and overthrow of Cleander, of his children, his house, his
riches and honor, whereof may be drawn examples and warnings to serve diverse
purposes: for besides that Princes may be warned to beware how they exalt any
one to over-high estate and authority, private men also ought to take heed,
that they be not overcome with the dangerous humor of ambition and greedy
desire of riches, seeing in this and the like examples they may behold as in a
glass, the wavering inconstancy of fortune, and variable events of the
miserable estate and uncertain accidents of this life, where no man possesses
any thing with surety. (...) as some be lifted up from a base estate to
honor, so others are dejected from high dignity to base and poor estate; as
was apparent in Cleander, who of a Slave, was made a Freeman; of a Freeman, a
Steward; of a Steward, a Praetor; and then a Great Chamberlain, and as it were
Monarch of the world, and afterward in one day and in one hour, he and all
his were utterly destroyed. The particular love (says one) which Favor begets
envy.
Princes show to one more then to another, breeds many times much envy in
their Realm: and when a Prince shows not to equals his favor indifferently,
he puts fire into his Commonwealth. The like example may be taken of
Plautianus, an especial favorite of the Emperor Seuerus. This Plutianus was a
poor The story of Plautianus.
Gentleman when he came first to Rome, from whence he was banished, by the good
Emperor Marcus Aurelius for his evil conditions; but afterward he obtained
such grace of Seuerus, that he read no letter but he must see it, signed no
commission that he liked not, nor gave any reward that he craved not: In the
Senate he was placed in the most honorable estate: When he came forth of
Rome, all the Gentlemen did accompany him: When he came out of his house, all
Ambassadors did attend on him: In time of War, all Captains sued unto him;
and so many honors were given him, that it was never seen in Rome that any
man, without the title of an Emperor, enjoyed so great a portion of the
Empire. scuerus gave Plautianus the confiscate goods of all condemned persons
within the Empire, whereby he grew so rich and covetous, that he caused an
infinite number of men to suffer death, not for their demerits, but that he
might possess their goods: wherewith he grew so proud and stately, that when
he passed through the streets, he had a naked sword borne before him, and no man
might behold him in the face, but cast down their eyes to the ground: and
besides all this, he found such favor with Seuerus, that he married his
daughter with Seuerus the Emperor his eldest son: so as beholding himself
thus advanced and honored, it seemed to him but a small matter to be Commander
of the whole world. But at length this heaping of honor upon honor, dignity
upon dignity, without end or measure, wrought his own destruction: for
perceiving the Emperor to withdraw his favor from him, suspecting that he
would also take away his life, he practiced to kill the Emperor and his son
Bassianus, that he might not only prevent the suspected intent of Too much
grace begets ingratitude.
his own death, but also succeed him in the Empire: but the same being
discovered to the Emperor in the presence of his son, they trained him into
his chamber, where Bassianus slew him with his dagger. This was the end of
Plautianus, through his immoderate desire of riches and honor, and the good
fortune of the Emperor that escaped narrowly his own death and his sons, by
the exceeding favor and authority, and countenance he gave to his servant
and subject: by which example the Emperor seuerus was warned, never after to
give the like favor and grace to any person: alleging, that he knew not whom
to trust, seeing his servant Plautianus, whom he so greatly loved and favored,
had deceived him. It behooveth Princes to Aristo^.
foresee, that no man exceed overmuch, either in abundance of friends or
riches, and not to be so familiar with any man, but that he may be angry with
him, if there shall be cause, without danger or alteration of things. And what
felicity can a Prince have, that has under his government so many thousands
of people, who must wake for them all, hear the complaints of every one, have
care for all their safety? His waking defends all men's sleeping, his labor
all men's rest, his industry all men's delights: that he is occupied, brings to
all men case: for as if the Planets of the world make never so little stay, or
swerve aside, it is to the exceeding hurt of all things; so a Prince cannot
rest, nor be idle, without the great detriment of his people, whose care is no
less to maintain his people in peace, then to defend them from the invasion
of their enemies: besides many other calamities that accompany Scepters,
whereof a mean estate never finds any taste. For rightly (says one) that it
is not sufficient for a Prince to draw to him all virtues, but he is bound
also to root all vices out of Note.
the Commonwealth. These be the thorns they have for a counterpoyse of their
brightness and royal dignities, which ought to be like a lamp that gives
light to all the world: But if it be eclypsed with any vice, then it is more
notorious, and subject to greater reproach then in any other private person: for
they are not only blameworthy (says Plato) for the fault they commit: but
for the evil example they give. And it is a great felicity (says St.
Augustine) not to be overcome of felicity. Great compassion (says Marcus
Aurelius) should be had upon a Prince, because all follow him for their own
profit, but none for his love and service, as appears by that, when he
leaves to give them, they begin to hate him. The Emperor Dioclesian said,
that there was nothing more hard, then for a Prince to rule well: for three or
four of those who have credit with the Prince, join sometime together in one
speech, and of purpose tell fained things for true, whereby he is often
deceived.

CHAP. III.
The estate of Popes and Prelates. St. Bernards complains of the Clergy;
Eberard Archbishop of Salisburch Oration against the Church of Rome. Alberius a
learned Divine to the same purpose, with other Coherences: The estate and
charge of the meaner Clergy. The estate of Marriage. The Commodities arising
from Marriage, confirmed by many noted Histories. The discommodities of
Marriage approo^ed by sundry examples: Of Solon, and Thales, two of the Sages:
with other pertinent stories. Of the goodness of peace, and the bad effects
thereof, etc.

LET us now enter into the consideration of Prelates, beginning with Popes: who
as they challenge the Supremacy over all other estates, so they seem to be
placed in the highest degree of Felicity: they come by their dignity without
labor, and for the most part without effusion of blood, and preserve their
estate The estate of Prelates.
without peril, commanding all. The Monarkes and Princes of the world honor
them: they are rich, and seem to want nothing that men desire in this world,
to make their life happy, although those whom they represent, were the very
patterns and examples of poverty. But he that will with an upright judgment
consider of their estate, shall find them rather unhappie: for if they will
take upon them the government of St. Peter's ship, according to the
commandments of God, they must be, not as they profess in words, but in
deeds, the servants of the servants of God: which must not regard his own
life, in respect of the care he should have of them under his charge: which
being wisely considered of Pope Adrian (a learned man and of good life) Pope
Adrian
finding by experience, that dangers and troubles of principality, specially of
his calling, would confess oftentimes to his familiar friends with tears,
that among all the estates in the world, there was not any that seemed to him
more miserable and dangerous, then that of Popes and Bishops: for although the
throne and chair where he sat, was richly garnished with diverse pompes, yet
it was full of thorns: and the costly cloak that covered him, was full of
sharp needles, and so heavy to be carried, that it made his shoulders ache, how
strong soever he were that did bear it: and for the trim myter which covered
their heads, it was a very flame that burned them, even to the inmost part of
their soul. And if to enter into the dignity of the Apostleship, not called
thereto by the Holy Ghost, and not to enter into the Church through the door,
which is Christ, but by the window, by the favors of men, by corruption, by
the authority of Princes, is not to be the Vicar of Christ and successor of
the Apostles, but is a thief, and the Vicar of Judas Iscariot, and of Simon
Magus: what case are then the Popes in, that have come into the Church by all
these ways, and also by the Devils help, as appeared by the example of
Syluester the second? They take upon them to keep the keys of heaven, but
they shut up the way thither, that neither themselves will enter in, nor suffer
others: they procure wars: they vex Princes, and trouble the people: they
excite the subjects against their natural Princes, the Prince against his
subjects. When Otho the 4. and Frederick the 2. were in One thing preached,
another practiced.
contention for the Empire, Pope Innocent the 3. maintained it under hand: yet
notwithstanding he made a very cloquent Oration of the unity and concord that
ought to be between Christian Princes. A Citizen of Rome perceiving his
dissembling, said unto him, Holy Father, your words seem to be of God: but the
effects and drifts, which are contrary to them, come from the devil. They
build sumptuous Palaces: they are clothed in Purple and Gold, to the infamy of
religion, and intolerable burden of the people, exceeding in pomp and pride
the most notable tyrants that have been. A holy and learned man in a sermon in
the presence of a Pope, reprehended their manners thus: that they were not
hired men for shepherds, nor wolves for hired men, but devils for wolves: And
yet they are not ashamed to call themselves the successors of Saint Peter: who
might rightly say to them, as unworthy to succeed him, You wicked dissembling
men, depart from my house: Fallaces prauique domo discedite ^ostra.


Bernard thus complains of the Bishops of his time: S. Bernards complaint of
the Clergy.
The Bishops to whom the Church of God is now committed, be not teachers, but
seducers; not Pastors, but deceivers; not Prelates but Pylates. And if
felicity can not easily be found in temporal principality, how much more hard
it is to be found in their estate that challenge Empire over all Monarkes and
Kings, and supremacy over all spiritual functions: so as they take upon them
authority over body and soul? which estate and dignity, being by their
usurpations exalted above all other estates of life, and so far beyond the
imbecility of man's nature to bear with that moderation it ought (so as such
men as were of good condition before, being once made Popes, many of them
become the most wicked of all others) hardly will felicity be found in their
estate: for besides that the Popes have been Atheists, Heretics, Conjurers,
Adulterers, Murderers, and given to all kind of vice and wickedness, their
pride, vain toys and illusions of the people make it apparent, that religion
is with many of them but a scoff and mock. The Cardinal Benno writes thus
of Hildebrand called Gregory Pope Hildebrand.
the seventh. The Emperor Henry the third (says he) used often to go to pray
in the Church of S. Mary, in Mount Aventin. Hildebrand having by spiall watched
all his doings, caused the place where the Emperor used to pray, to be marked,
and hired one with promise of money, to lay secretly great stones upon a beam
of the Church, so as he might let them fall directly upon the Emperors head as
he was praying, and knock out his brains: which thing when this wicked fellow
made haste to accomplish, as he was about to place a stone of great weight upon
a beam, the stone by his weight drew the fellow to him, and breaking the thin
boords that were under the beam, both the stone and he (by the judgment of
God) fell down to the pavement of the Church, and with the same he was crushed
to death: which thing being known to the Romans, they tied a rope to his
feet, and drew him three days together through the streets. This Hildebrand,
by the report of the same author, after he had asked something of the
consecrated host, which they call the body of Christ, against the Emperor, he
cast it into the fire, though the Cardinals that were present, persuaded him to
the contrary. And nothing shows their infelicity more apparently, then their
illuding and deriding of religion, abusing the world with their Their figments
fabulous figments, and seducing the people from the Word of God, and the true
Christian Religion, to their vain toys, and childish inventions: dealing with
the Scriptures, as a naughty painter did when he ill-favouredly painted
certain cocks, he caused his boy to dir^ away the natural cocks out of
sight, lest they should discover and disgrace, the evil workmanship of his
counterfeit cocks: So when the Popes had set forth their Their traditions.
own traditions and their Friars figments, they caused the Old and New
Testament to be laid out of sight, knowing that the true Word of God would
discover and disgrace the vanity of their traditions and counterfeit illusions;
as the fables of Friar Francis, and Dominicke, and such like miracles which are
received into the Romish Church, and must be believed upon pain of heresy:
such as the Poet might well cry out upon: -- O (...)
Credula men's hominis and erectae fabulis aures!
Oh how credulous is the mind of man, and how ready are his ears to listen to
fables!


And if so many evils happen to men by the Popes, not only in their bodies,
goods, and possessions, as appears by Histories, and the writers of their
own lives: but also to the danger of their souls, by the opinion of learned
Divines; that estate cannot be a happy estate, that brings men to so great
unhappiness. Which Popes are so puffed up with pride and vaineglory, that a
Pope was not ashamed to accept the name, but gloried that Constantine the
Emperor called him God. Eberard Archbishop of Salisburge, in a Eberard
concerning the government of the Popes.
public assembly of the Princes and States of Germany, two hundred years
since, in an Oration spoke thus of the Popes: These Babylonian Flamines (or
Gentiles Priests) covet to reign alone: they can suffer no equal: they will
not leave until they have cast down all thi^ under their feet, and sit in
the Temple of God, and be lifted up above all thing that is worshipped. Their
hunger after riches, and thirst after honor, is insatiable; the more ye give
to the greedy-gut, the more he desires: offer him your finger, and he will
cove^ your hand. He that is the servant of the servants of God, desires
nevertheless to be the Lord of Lords, as if he were God: He speaks great
things, as if he were God himself. This castaway changes laws, establishes
his own: he defiles, rifleth, spoyleth, deceives, kills: which lost man
they use to call Antichrist, in whose forehead the name of blasphemy is
written: I am God: I can not err: he sits in the Temple of God: he rules
far and wide. And Chrysostom says; Whosoever desires the supremacy upon
earth, he shall find confusion in heaven: Neither shall he be accounted among
the servants of Christ, that seeks after the supremacy. And Alberius a
learned Divine says, that the rulers of the Roman Church, by their crafty and
subtle wits, observing times, sometimes lift up the Empire, another time by
leisure abase it again, and to what purpose? saving that by little and little
they may cast down under their feet (as themselves vaunt) all heavenly and
Their insolence.
earthly things, all spiritual and temporal things. And searching the old
Histories (says Hierom) I can find none that divided the Church, and seduced
the people from the house of God, but them that were appointed Priests to God.
But the pride and covetousness of Popes, with many other vices, and their
illuding the Pride and Co^usnesse.
world, discovers their hypocrisy, and shows them plainly not to be the
men they profess. Besides advancing themselves above Emperors and Kings, and
making them hold their stirrops, and lead their horses as has been said, and
glorying to be called God: it is established among them, that all men, of what
dignity or preeminence soever they be, as soon as they come into the Popes
sight, a great way off, they must make three courtesies, and kiss his feet.
Saint Bernard speaking of their pomp, says, Saint Peter was never known The
difference betwixt S. Peter and his successors.
at any time to have gone apparelled with precious stones or silk: not covered
with gold, nor carried with a white horse: not attended upon with soldiers,
nor compassed about with great trains of servants: he believed that without
those things, that healthful commandment might sufficiently be accomplished:
If thou love me, feed my sheep. The same Bernard detesting their pomp and
covetousness, called them Antichrists; and says thus: The offices of dignity
of holy Church are translated into filthy gain, and the works of darkness:
it remains that the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, a
spirit not only of the day, but also of noone-light, that is not only
transformed into an Angel of light; but is also advanced above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. And the extreme covetousness of the Popes
and their Court was more truly then eloquently thus set forth by one of their
own authors: Curia vult marcas, bursas exhaurit and arcas:
Si bursae parcas, fuge Papas and Patriarchas:
Si dederis marcas, and (...) implever is arcas,
Culpa solueris quaqua ligatus cris.
Intus quis? tu quis? ego sum: quid q^ris? vt intrem.
Fers aliquid? non: sta foris: fero quod satis; intra.
The Court must have money: It Exhausts both purses and coffers.
If thou show thy purse, thou must neither have To deal with Popes nor
Patriarchs.
But if thou will give money, and supply their coffers, Thou shall be absolved
of what crime soever.
Who Is within? what art thou? it is I. what would thou? I would enter.
Bringst thou any thing? no: stay without then: I bring what is sufficient:
come near then.


And Mantuan noting likewise their unmeasurable covetousness, sings thus: --
Venalia Romae,
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, calum est venale, Deusque.
Temples are to be sold in Rome (Inquire)
The Priests, the holy Altars, crown and fire,
The Incense and their prayers are to be sold,
There thou may buy both heaven and God for gold.


But now that they find the want of that which was wont to feed their
insatiable humors of covetousnes and ambition, by mean that the better half
of Europe being revolted from them, both their credit and treasury is greatly
decayed. The Popes rage of late years, like as the Asses of Thuscia are
reported to do, when they have fed upon hemlockes; which as Matheolus writes,
casts them into such a sound sleep, that they seem to be dead; in so much
as the country men go oftentimes to take off the skin, and have half
flayed him, before the Ass will awake. And when they have A Simile well
applied.
taken off the skin to the midst of his back, the ass rises up suddenly
upon his feet, and half his skin hanging down, breaks out into such a
roaring, that he puts the husbandman many times into a great sear. The like
is used by the latter Popes, who have been a long time in a sound sleep,
until they having felt the one half of revenues revenues and dominion taken
away from them, fearing the rest will follow, they fall into such a roaring and
thundering with their Bulls (arming subjects against their Princes, and Kings
against their subjects, and one of them against another) that they put all
Christendom many times in a great fear, which in these days in many places
works effect like unto that which Chaucer (if I forget not) speaks Geffrey
Chaucer.
of, when he describes a great fear that happened in the break of the day; the
dogs barkt, the duckes quackt, the cocks crowed, and the Bees ran out of
the hyue. John Peter of Ferrara, a learned man, taxing the Popes ambition and
covetousness, after many other things writes thus, above one hundred and
fifty years since: The Pope labors to have superiority of the Emperor,
which is ridiculous to speak, and abominable to hear: And note how, and by
how many means the Clergy men lay snares for the Lay men, and enlarge their
jurisdiction: But alas, ye unhappy Emperors and secular Princes, that suffer
these and the like things! and make your selves servants unto the Popes! and
see the world abused by them infinite ways: And yet ye think not upon
reformation, because ye give not your minds to Wisdom and Knowledge. And
Saint Hierome says, Italy will never be at quiet, until the Church of Rome
do not possess all the Cities and Castles, and that the gift of Constantine
be by some good and mighty Emperor utterly revoked: because (says he) non
been c^eniat Psalterium cum Cythera: neither was it granted of Christ to Peter,
that they should possess such things: but A strong argument against the Popes
supremacy.
that which is Caesar's, should be given to Caesar, and that which is Gods, to
God. Now if the Popes be the Antichrist spoken of in the Scripture, after the
opinion of learned Divines: or if he set forth vain and wicked fables, and
horrible blasphemies, in place of true Christian Religion, as the miracles done
by Friar Dominicke and Francis, to be more and greater then those done by
Christ and his Apostles; and Their errors.
the rest of the Fables written by them by their own Authors: also their
imagined purgatory, worshipping of images, invocation of the dead, their daily
renewing of the sacrifice of Christ in their Mass, Christening of Bells,
absolution for him that has killed his father or mother, and many other such
like things; this cannot be a happy estate, that opposes it self so
directly and apparently against Christ and his doctrine; whereby, besides the
danger of their destruction, they draw infinite numbers of souls to the danger
of eternal damnation, except Gods mercy be the greater. Gregory the Great
does testify plainly, that the Pope is described under the person of
Nab^chodonozor: For Kings and Princes in hell that are damned, are brought in
as though they came to meet the Pope Their entertainment into Hell.
after his death coming to them to salute him, who mock him thus: Hell was in
great fear of you, when it heard of your coming: all the dead Princes of the
earth rise up to you; all Kings of Nations rise out of their thrones, and
speak to you after this sort: Art thou made subject to the same infirmities as
we are? and art thou become like unto us? Thy pride has brought thee down to
hell. When did thou fall, Lucifer from heaven, thou son of the morning,
and art come into the earth that were terrible to all Nations? (...).
But thou said in thy heart, I will go up to heaven; I will lift up my seat
above the Stars of heaven; I will ascend above the height of the clouds, and
will be made like the highest. They that shall see thee, will say, Is this he
that troubles the earth, and overthrew kingdoms? Thus they deceive the world,
who at last are deceived themselves Liuie says, There is nothing more
deceivable in show, then false religion, when the power of God is made a cloak
for wickedness. And if the Popes were of that holiness and virtue they would
be taken, it could not be, but by their example, instruction, and discipline,
their Imperial Seat and City, whereof they are Head, would not deserve for
their abominable vice and wickedness, so infamous speech by the learned
Italians themselves. Petrarke, Mantuan, and many other call Rome the shop of
all wickedness, Babylon, Sodom, the School of errors, the Church of heresies,
an Harlot with a shameless face. Mantuan thus notes the vice there used: I
pudor in villas, si non patiuntur easdem,
Et villae vomicas: Roma est iam tota Lupanar.
Go shame unto the villages,
If they as yet be free
From the same filth, for now all Rome
Is naught save brothelry.


And Pasquil confirms the same, when one having been at Rome, at his
departure takes his leave thus: Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse, reuertar,
Cum leno, aut meretrix, scurra, cynedus ero.
Rome farewell, I have seen and now
Am glutted with thy sight:
I will return, when I am Bawd,
Whore, Iester, Catamite.


Thus much of the ambition and manners of the Popes, whereunto I am unwillingly
drawn, in respect of the dignity of their place and profession, to say so
much, which nevertheless is very little to that may be truly said, and is
written by others, because I must examine the principal states of life,
whereof theirs is accounted among the highest, and are esteemed the happiest
men, that also pretend to give happiness to others. In examination whereof, I
was driven to discover the worst parts of them, and their estate, as I have
done of all the rest, the better to prove my subject: and how much they are
deceived, that think felicity No felicity in the Popes Soueraigntic.
to be in their estate. But because the examples before produced, seem to
testify their infelicitie; whereof the estates next to them in degree are
partakers, we must pass from them to the inferior members of the Church. The
charge of these men also is so great, that The charge of the Clergic.
hardly they can find that quietness, either in body or mind, whereby they
may attain to the felicity of this life: and so much the more exactly they
perform their function, so much the further they seem to be from it. They
must wake whilst others sleep; they must be the Watch of the world; there is
no intermission of their travels; but all the hours of their life they must
employ their labors, for the common safeguard of men, for fear lest Satan
should seduce their flock. Saint Chrysostom says, that he which has the
charge of one only Church, with difficulty can be saved, so great is their
charge. What may we think then The fearful estate of the Friars and
Cloyster-men.
of that sort, that have corrupted the Word of God, and in place thereof have
foysted in their own traditions, as Monks, Friars, and that crew of
Cloyster-men; if it be so hard for good Pastors to attain to the blessedness
of the other life, without which there is no felicity in this world, as has
been said? But where the light of the Gospel has dispersed the dark clouds
of their divinity, arise daily (such is the depravation of this time) to the
great slander and prejudice of true Religion, new Sects and Schisms, many
times rather to expel or insert superficial ceremonies, and to alter and
innovate orders already set and established for decency, then for substance of
matter, wherein (says Vrsinus) they offend God, because they disobey the
Magistrate. They can strain Gnats, and swallow Camels: as Bernard says of the
Prelates of his time: Whilst they make show to treat of great matters, they
handle trifles, notable estimators of things, who in the least matters use
great diligence, in the greatest matters little or none at all: Nitimur in
vetitum semper, cupimusque negata:
We always strive for things untride,
And covet what is most denide.


The authors whereof do not with due providence consider the dangerous fruits
that may thereof arise, and that it were better to suffer some inconvenience,
then to disturb the peace of the Church, for fear lest by falling from one
Sect to another, never being settled, that happen to many which was spoken by
Menedemus of them that went to Athens to study: Many (says he) go to Athens
for learning sake, who first become Wisemen, then Philosophers, that is,
lovers of Wisdom, after that, Rhetoricians, and last of all, in process of
time they become stark fools. Such fruits, it may be doubted (if God of his
mercy prevent it not) the new Sects and Schisms of these latter daics will
bring forth: that by falling from one Sect into Diversity of Sects begets
Atheisine.
another, many will become Atheists, that is, sta^ fools: For so the Psalmist
calls them: The fool says in his heart, There is no God. There was written
in golden letters upon the door of the Church in Collen, these verses: ^,
Deficit Ecclesia virtus, pariterque facultas.
Whilst Discipline does cease to be,
And privatemalice reigns:
The virtue of the Church does fail,
And power with it contains.


This function is grown to that disorder, that there is hardly to be found so
mean a Clarke, that will not take upon him to expound the Scriptures after his
own fancy: And if their want of learning be objected, their answer is ready,
that such Christ chose to be his ^.
Apostles: neither Scribes nor Doctors of the Law, but out of this or that
Trade, that were never brought up in Synagogues or Schools: As though Christ
were now to begin his Church again, and lay a new foundation with miracles.

Now that we have passed through the principal estates of life, and cannot
find that happiness in any of them we look for; let us see whether we can
find it in the estate of marriage, which is both an The estate of marriage.
honorable and necessary estate, ordained by God for the comfort of man's
life, and preservation of his kind; which he sanctified and made an holy
thing with his blessing. And if we will in our own conceits feign to our
selves the form and image of a perfect and excellent marriage (as Plato, or
Sir Thomas Unity begot (...) marriage.
Moore did their Commonwealths) there is nothing in the world that may be
compared to marriage, for a consummation of pleasures and delights. All things
with them are common, both prosperity and adversity, riches and poverty, one
bed, the same children: so as it seems by the unity and conformity of their
bodies and minds, that two are transformed into one. (...) boni sine socio
iucunda est possessio: One can possess no good thing pleasantly without a
companion: The wife is a companion in all manner of fortunes. If the husband be
rich and liuc in prosperity, she is partaker of it, and makes men enjoy it
with greater pleasure. If he be poor, and in adversity, she bears half
the burden, and comfortcth and assisteth him. There be diverse notable examples
of the love between the husband and his wife, which helps to the
commendation of marriage: Baptista Fregosa reports of a Neapolitane, A (...)
husband.
whose wife being taken on the Seacoast by the Moors, he presently cast
himself into the Sea, and following their Bark, desired them to take him
also, which they did, and brought them both to the King of Thunes; who being
moved with their faithful love and affection, delivered them both. Tiberian
Gracchus having two Snakes taken in his house, the one a male, the other a
female, and being advertised by a South-sayer, that if he let go the male, his
wife must die, if the female, present death must fall upon himself, he loved
his-wife so dearly, that preferring her life before his own, he let go the
female, and killed the male; and within a while after he dyed. Which makes it
a doubtful question (says Valerius) whether A doubtful question.
Cornelia his wife were more happy by having such a husband, or unhappy by
the loss of him. Women have been nothing inferior to their husbands in this
kind of duty. When Rhabbi Beuxamut a Moore was Examples of Conjugal (...).
slain, his wife called Hota, celebrated his funerals with abundance of
tears, and lamentable cries, and buried his body very sumptuously. And after
she had abstained from meat and drink nine days, she would not live, her
husband being dead; but before her breath went out of her body, she commanded
her burial to be with her husband, thinking it no reason to be separated from
her husband (whom she loved so dearly) either by death, or by burial. P^rcia
the wife of Brut^s, Porcia.
loved her husband so dearly, that when she heard of his death; her friends
having taken away all iron from her, fearing she would kill her self, for
sorrow took up quick coals of fire, and ate them as greedily as others cate
meat. The Lacedaemonians had The wives of the Spartans.
condemned certain men to death, and committed them to prison: when the night
came (as their manner was) in which they should be executed, their wives
obtained leave of their Keepers to come into the prison to them, to take (as it
were) their last farewell, who changed apparel with their husbands, and sent
them away, and stayed behind themselves to die in their places. Theopompus a
Lacedemonian in like sort being in Pisca.
prison, changed his apparel with his wife, and by her means escaped, and
left her in the same danger he was in. When the wife of King Admetus, that was
grievously sick, understood the answer of the Oracle to be, that he could not
recover, except one of his best friends dyed for him, she prefer^ing her
husbands life Her name Alcesta.
(by a rare example) before her own, killed her self. A woman called Pisca
seeing her husband pine away Pisca.
daily through an incurable disease, she persuaded him to assuage his pain by
death, offering her self to bear him company: whereunto her husband agreeing,
they embraced each other, and cast themselves headlong into the Sea, from the
top of a rock. Solacium est miseris socios habere paenarum.


It is comfort to the miserable, to have companions in their punishment.

And the number of wives and husbands that happen to some, argues the happy
estate of marriage, who otherwise would be (after Chylons opinion, one of the
Sages of Greece) warned to beware by the first: he accounted him a very fool,
who having saved himself from a dangerous Shipwreck by painful swimming,
would return to Sea again, as though a tempest had not power over all
Sailors: meaning that he which was delivered from his first marriage, would
prove himself a fool to marry again. But St. Hierome reports, A man that
had twenty wives, married a woman that had two and twenty husbands.
that he saw at Rome a man that had had twenty wives, marry a woman that had
had two and twenty husbands. And after great expectation of the Romans, which
of them should over-live the other, the woman dyed: whereupon the men crowned
him with laurel, and caused him in token of victory, to carry a branch of
Palm in his hand at his wives funerals. And this was a notable example of love
showed by women toward their husbands: When the Emperor Co^radus the third
made War upon the Duke of Bauier, this Emperor having besieged the Dukes
City very straightly a long time, and would by no entreaty nor persuasions
upon no conditions be removed from his resolution utterly to raze and destroy
the City, the Noble and Gentlewomen of the town came forth Remarkable piety.
to the Emperor, and besought him to suffer them safely to depart forth of
the City, with so much as they could carry upon their backs: which at length
being granted by the Emperor, they returned and brought forth upon their
backs the Duke himself and their husbands, and such as had none, their
parents and children: at the sight whereof the Emperor took such pleasure,
that weeping for very joy, he laid aside all his anger and fury, and spared the
City, and entered into friendship with his mortal enemy. Diverse like
examples are registered in Histories: and a great many things more may be said
in commendation of marriage: But because the scope of our intent is to search
whether there be any estate of life void of those evil things that detract
from Felicity, which evil being granted, there is no happiness or felicity
in this life (for one drop of poison spoyleth a great quantity of good wine)
let us see what evil is said to be in marriage: for among sweet and pleasant
dewes, there falls many times sharp storms of hayle. The Athenians,
Inconveniences belonging to marriage.
accounted a wise and politic people, perceiving how hard a matter it was to
frame a woman to perform the part of a good wife to her husband, by means of
the infinite number of occasions of strife and contention that would rise
between them, ordained in their Commonwealth certain Magistrates, which were
called Reconcilers, to make atonement between men and their wives. The
Spartanes had the like officers to reform the insolency of women, and to
correct and compel them to the true obedience of their husbands. Gueuarra,
after he had excused himself, and refused to describe the particular fancies
of women, because they are without limit; places the things that women most
desire, and wherewith they hold themselves best contented, in these four: To
be gorgiously apparelled; to be esteemed fair; to go whither they list; and
that men believe what they say. To contract matrimony with a woman (says he)
is a thing very easy, but to sustain it to the end, is a thing very
difficult. For those that marry without any other respect, but only for love,
lead their life afterward with sorrow: But this sauoureth something of the
Spanish humor. For God never fails to bless them with sufficient, that
join themselves together, and live in his service and fear. If thou marry a
rich wife, she will be proud, and she will esteem thee rather as her slave,
then her husband, and it may happen thee to be ashamed of her kindred: if she
be poor, she will be contemned, and thy self the less esteemed: if she be
foul and euill-fauoured, thou can not love her: if she be fair, thou will
be jealous of her, and in danger to fall into an unnatural metamorphosis.
Fastus inest pulchris, sequitur superbia formam:
Arrogance is in fair ones,
And pride attends on beauty.


If she be of great parentage, in place of a wife, thou shall have a severe
Mistress and Commander, and in place of kinsfolk and friends by her, thou
shall have Masters: if she be honest and chaste, she will fear the contrary in
thee, and vex thee: so that wealth makes a woman proud, beauty suspected, and
hardness of favor, loathsome. A great many examples may be produced of the
evils that have happened to men by women. But because there is matter enough
besides, we will pass them over, and show only what has bin said of them by
wise and learned men. Hypponactus having had experience of the Martyrdom of
marriage says: that there are but two good days in one marriage: Only (...)
good days in marriage.
the one is the day of the marriage, the other the day of the wives death.
Because the first day is passed in feasting and pleasure, and the marriage new
and fresh, and therefore pleasant; as of all kinds of pleasure the beginning
most delights, sacietie of all things makes weariness. The last day (he
said) was good, because by the wives death, the husband was made free and
delivered from servitude. In consideration whereof, they that hold this
opinion, produced an history of a noble Roman, who the next day after his
marriage, being very sad, was asked of his friends the cause of his pensiuenes,
having matched with a wife that was fair, rich, and of noble parentage: he
showed them his foot: Why friends (quoth he) ye see that my shoo is new,
handsome, and well made, but ye know not in what part of my foot it pincheth
me. Is there any thing (says Plutarke) more light then the tongue of an
unbridled woman, more biting then her outrages, more rash then her boldness,
more execrable then her spiteful disposition, more perilous then her fury? If
thou have children by her, The trouble of Children.
thou have much trouble and charge by the care of their education: if they
prove untowardly and given to lewdness, what greater grief can happen to a
man? It cannot be denied, but the fathers felicity is diminished by the
childrens vntowardlinesse: and how many are occasioned by the vntowardlinesse
or undutifulness of their children, with deep sighs to pronounce often
within themselves this verse of Homer? Coniuge non ducta, natis vtinam car^ssem:
Not being married, I would
I had had no children.


If they be towardly and given to virtue, the loss of them is as grievous:
which affection is of such force, that the wisest men many times are not able
to bridle; as appears by this example of S^lon one of the seven Sages or wise
men of Greece.

There was a disputation on a time between this Solon, Of Solon and Thales.
who was married and had one only son, a towardly young man, and Thales
another of the Sages, that was unmarried, which estate was better, Marriage or
a single life: Solon commended matrimony, Thales preferred the other: and when
he perceived that he could not persuade Solon by reason and argument to be of
his opinion, he practiced this device, When their talk was ended, being both
at Thales his house, Thales went forth and caused one to feign an errand to
him, and say as he had instructed him, as though he came from Athens, where
Solons dwelling was: this man like a stranger, as these two wise men were
talking together within the house, knocks at the door; Thales lets him in
the man faineth a message to him from a friend of his at Athens: Solon hearing
him say that he came from Athens, went forth of the next room to him, and
asked what news at Athens? Little news (quoth he) but as I came forth of the
city, I saw the Senators and principal men of Athens going to the burial of
a young man. Solon going into the other room again, and musing who this
should be, being in some doubt lest peradventure it should be his son,
comes forth to him again, and asked him whether he knew who it should be
that was dead? He answered that he had forgotten his name, but it was the only
son of a notable man in Athens, and that for the reverence and love that they
did bear to his father, all the Nobility and principal men of the city went
to his burial. Then Solon greatly confused and troubled in mind, goes from
him again, fearing his own son, and being far (...) of quiet, returns
to ask him, whether he could not call to remembrance the name of this young
man's father, if he heard it reckoned? He answered, that he thought he could
remember his name, if he might hear it again. And after Solon had reckoned up
the names of a great many of the principal men of the City, and the other
denying them to be the man, he came at last to his own name, and asked whether
he were not called Solon? And when the other affirmed that to be the name of
the father of this young man that was dead, Solon cries out upon his only
son, and makes great lamentation; he teareth his hair, and beats his head
against the wall, and does all things that men use to do in calamity. When
Thales had beheld him a while in this passion, Be of good comfort, Solon,
(says he) thy son lives; but now ye see by your own example what cuill
things are incident to marriage. A Philosopher being Needless (...).
demanded why he married not? Because (quoth he) if the woman whom I take to
wife be good, I shall spill her; if she be evil, I must support her; if she be
poor, I must maintain her; if she be rich, I must suffer her; if she be
foul, I shall abhor her; if she be fair, then I must watch her: and that
which is worst of all, I give my liberty for ever to her that will never show
her self grateful. Riches breeds care; poverty sorrow; sailing fear; eating
heaviness; going weariness; all which travels we see divided amongst many,
except amongst them that be married, where they join all together: for
seldom we see the married man go without care, sorrow, wearied, heavy, and
comfortless, as though he were always in fear of some thing that may happen.
If thou shut thy wife within door, she never cease to complain; if thou
give her leave to walk at liberty, she ministers occasion for thy neighbor
to talk, and thy self to suspect; if thou chide, she will look sowrely; and
if so be that thou say nothing, then will she be more angry; if thou stay much
at home, she will think thee suspicious; if thou go much abroad, she will
doubt all is not well, when her feet be cold at home; if thou show thy self
loving, she will have thee in contempt; and if thou show no signs of love, she
will suspect thee to be in love with some other; if thou deny what she craves,
she will lay to thy charge thou love her not.

This Thales being asked in his youth, why he married The like answer we read
was given by Diogenes.
not, answered, that it was too rathe: and afterward being asked the same
question again, when he was old, he said that it was too late. With the like
passion of Sol^n Euphrates a Philosopher seemed to be touched; for when his
wife was dead, whom he loved dearly: O tyrannous Philosophy (quoth he) thou
command to love, and if we lose the things beloved, thou forbiddest us to be
sorry for them: what should I then do in this miserable estate? When there
chanced a tempest to arise on the Witty husbands
sea, and the Master of the ship commanded all men to cast the heauiest things
into the sea, a married man took his wife presently in his arms and cast her
over the ship, saying, that he had nothing more heavy then she. A man of
Perugia wept bitterly, because his wife had hanged her self upon a fig tree:
and being reprehended of one of his neighbors, that wondered how in so great
prosperity he could find tears to shead: Give, me I pray thee (quoth he) a
graffe of that fig tree to plant in my garden, that I may see whether it will
bring forth the like fruit with me. One seeing his wife fall into a swift
river, sought her up the stream, and being reprehended of others of his
neighbors, and asked what he meant to seek his wife up the river, seeing she
fell in beneath? I see the place (quoth he) well enough where she fell in, but
because in all her life time she did all things against reason, and contrary to
all others, I know that she is gone against the stream, and must find her up
the river, or else not at all. Sir Thomas Moore says, Men commit faults often,
women only twice, that they neither speak well, nor do well. Cato said, All
men rule their wives, we rule all men, but our wives rule us. One says, In
vxorem (...) omnis amor turpis est: in suam (...) nimius: For a wise man should
love his wife by judgment, not by affection. Marcus Aurelius having diverse
earnest suitors to ^arcus Aurelius concerning marriage.
marry his daughter; Be not so importunate with me, (said he) for if all the
discretion of wise men were laid together in one heap, it were not sufficient
to give good counsel to make one good marriage; and will ye that Ialone give
mine advice, and that so quickly? It is (quoth he) six years sithence
Anthonius Pius made choice of me to be his son in law, and gave me the Empire
with his daughter, and yet we both were deceived; he for choosing me to be his
son in law, and I for taking his daughter to my wife. He was called Pius,
because he was very pitiful to all but to me, with whom he was cruel; for
with a little flesh he gave me great store of bones, which in few words is the
gall and aloes that is mingled with the pleasures and delights of marriage:
which if we will speak the truth, we cannot so artificially cover and disguise
with eloquent speech, but we must needs confess, that if we will weigh the
sorrows and miseries in a pair of balance, with the pleasures and delights,
that those will weigh down these. I was (says Time tedious, spent with a bad
wife.
he) eight and thirty years without a wife, which seemed not unto me eight and
thirty days; and six years that I have been married, seems to me six
hundred years. The Philosophers said, that nature had (...) worse with men
then with brute beasts, for to them she has given knowledge to avoid their
contrary and enemy: but to man she has given a desire to join with a woman,
which is his contrary, whose malice is a swome enemy to the reason of man. The
old Romans had a custom, when the wife was married and brought home to her
husbands house, they would (as she entered into the gate) lift her up so high,
that she knocked her head against the uppermost part of the door, that she
might remember always as she were going forth of the door, her harm, whereby
to be warned to keep home, and not to gad too much abroad. And this
discovers the malicious and frowardly disposition of some women; that
Socrates wife having such a husband as all men admired Xantippe.
for his virtue and wisdom, yet she made so little account of him, that after
she had a long time brawled with him, she watched his going forth, and standing
in a place right over the door, she powered a pisse-pot upon his head: I
thought (quoth he) after so great thunder we should have rain.

When Pompey the great passed with his Army into the East, he found a people
called Messagetes, who The law of the essagetes.
had a law that every inhabitant should have two caves (because in those
mountains they had no houses) in the one of them dwelt the husband, sons,
and menseruants: in the other, the wife, daughters, and maidseruants. Their
manner was to eat together, and to sleep once a week together. And when they
were asked of Pompey what was the cause they lived in this strange sort,
contrary to all the world besides? They answered him, Behold us, Pompey, how
the (...) have given us but a short life, that no man passes threescore years
at the most; and those we endeavor to live in peace: if our wives should dwell
with us, in living we should die: for that we should pass the nights in
hearing their complaints, and the days in suffering their brawlings: whereas
keeping them thus apart from us, the sons be brought up in more peace, and
we avoid the unquietness that kills the fathers.

But though many evils be reported of marriage, by the defects that be in some
women, yet in this they seem to be of a charitable and kind disposition
toward their husbands; if their nature be not altered from that it has been
in times past, in that they will double the evil of marriage to themselves, to
deliver their husbands from the one half: for rather then their husbands shall
be troubled with two wives, they will consent to be troubled with two husbands:
as appears by this example of the Matrons of Rome. A^lus Gellius reports
that the old Romans had a An History reported by A^lus Gellius.
custom, that every Senator might bring one of his sons (when they were
little Boys) with them into the Senate House, until they were seventeen
years old, that they in their youth might be instructed in matter of estate,
and see the good order that was there observed by their parents, thereby to be
the better able to govern when they came to be men: with charge nevertheless,
not to speak of any thing which they heard deliberated among the Senators. It
chanced on a time the Senate to sit in counsel longer then their accustomed
hour, consulting upon matters of great importance: whereupon because they
could not then agree, they deferred their resolution until the next day, with
charge that every one in the mean time should use silence: when a young little
Boy being there that day, the son of Papyrius, one of the principal families
among the Romans, was returned to his fathers house, his mother desirous to
know the cause of the Senators long sitting, desired the little child to tell
her what matter was debated in the Senate: the Boy refusing to tell her, and
excusing himself upon the commandment given to keep silence, she was more
desirous (as they say the manner of women is) to know the matter then before:
and when she perceived that by no fair words nor promises she could allure
the Boy to discover it, she threatened to beat him: then the boy for fear of
the rod, to satisfy his mothers importunacy, made this device: The matter
(said he) that was in question, and must be determined to morrow, was this: It
seemed good to many of the Senators, as well for the Commonwealth, as for the
increase of people, that every man should have two wives; but others were of a
contrary opinion, and thought it more expedient that every woman should have
two husbands, which matter should be determined the next day. The mother
believing her son, was greatly perplexed, and advertised presently other
Matrons of Rome what she had heard, that they might devise some way to hinder
the resolution for men to have two wives, and to bring to pass rather that
women might have two husbands. The matter was carried so speedily from one to
(...), that the next day when the Senators should enter into the Senate House,
they found at the door a great number of the principal Matrons of Rome upon
their knees, who made a very earnest petition to them, (...) they would not
make so unjust a law, that a man should have two wives, but rather that a woman
might have two husbands. The Senators knowing nothing of the matter, were not a
little amazed; and when they were entered into the Senate, one asked another
what this strange kind of inciuilitie and shamelessness of their wives should
mean? But no man being able to make any reason of the matter, the little Boy
seeing them so confused, steppeth forth, and told them openly how the matter
had passed, and that he was driven for fear of stripes to devise this answer
to satisfy his mother. The Senate commended the Boy, and decreed that none of
their sons should enter any more into the Senate House, but only this
Papyrius, lest their secrets might be disclosed by the importunacie of their
mothers. Demosthenes gave this counsel unto Corinthus, How to choose a wife.
that asked him, with what conditions a wife ought chiefly to be furnished? Be
sure (says he) that thy wife be rich, that the necessities of thy life may be
supplied, and the continuance of thine estate plentifully supported: Let her be
nobly descended, the better to minister to thy reputation, and bring honor to
thy posterity: Let her be young, that she may the better delight thee, and
thou find no occasion to think marriage loathsome: Let her be fair, the
better to content thy desires, and contain thee from others: And let her be
virtuous and wise, to the end thou may safely commit thine estate to her
government. For whosoever takes a wife without these conditions, is sure to
find that he fears, and fail of that which should make the marriage happy.
For of all accidents ordained to trouble the life of man, there cannot be a
greater infelicitie, then to be evil encountered in marriage. He takes small
pleasure of all that ever he has besides, that is wiued against his appetite.
One being asked, who was a chaste wife? answered, She that is not bold; that
does not cuill when her husband offends her; that may and will not; that hates
money, the door, and the window; that cares not for feasts and bankets, for
dancing, nor to be curious in apparel; that hears no messages, nor receives
letters nor presents from lovers; that will not go (...) stand alone; that
esteems her husband, whatsoever he be, above all others; that spinneth,
seweth, fears God, and prays often and willingly to him; that is the last
that speaks, and the first that holds her peace: which made Propertius
commend women of the elder time thus: Non illis studium vulgo conquirere
amantes,
Illis ampla satis, forma, pudicitia.
They studied not to range abroad
For Lovers to inquire,
To be held chaste, the beauty was
Which they did most desire.


The old Romans seemed not to think marriage a happy estate, by a speech used
by Metellus the Orator, to The opinion of (...).
persuade them to marriage; If we could (said he) be without wives, we should
then be all free from that trouble; but seeing nature has so ordered the
matter, that we cannot commodiously live with them, nor by any means without
them, we must have respect rather to the perpetual good, then to the short
pleasures. And what does more unquiet a man's mind, then to stand in doubt,
whether the children of whom he bears the name of their father, be his or
not? To this purpose I remember a pretty device, reported by a credible
Author, that a woman made to satisfy her husband. This man was of the
Nobility, and of great possessions, and married a wife of the like estate, and
beautiful withal, but not of the best fame. This woman was delivered of a
goodly boy, and as she held him on a day in her arms, and perceiving her
husband sit very sadly, as though his mind were greatly troubled, fetching
deep sighs; she asked him what was the cause of this great pensiveness and
sighs? The husband sighing again, I would (quoth he) give half my land that
I were as certainly assured that this boy were mine, as he is known to you to be
yours. There shall not need (said the wife, keeping her countenance with great
sobriety) so great a price, only give me an hundred acres of meadow wherewith
to feed my cattle, and I will put you out of doubt of this matter: and when he
had told her it was impossible, yet they agreed to call in certain Noblemen
and Gentlemen to hear the bargain, which in their presence being agreed upon,
she holding the boy in her arms, said unto her husband, Is this boy in very
deed mine? When he affirmed it to be so, she held forth the boy in her arms
to her husband: Take him A witty answer.
(said she) I give him to you: now he is out of doubt yours. Wherewith all
that were present fell into a laughing, and gave sentence with the wife,
condemning the husband. Alphonsus King of Arragon was accustomed to say, that
if a man will see a perfect and well sorted marriage, the husband must be
deaf, and the wife blind, that he may not hear her brawling, nor she see
her husbands wanton toys. When one admo^shed his friend, that he should stay
the marriage of his son, until he were wise: Ye deceive your self (my
friend, quoth he) for if he once grow to be wise, he will never marry. One
hearing this preached, Whosoever will be saved, must bear his Cross, ran to
his wife and laid her upon his shoulders. Pbilem^ said, that a wife is a
necessary and perpetual evil to her husband, because there is nothing more
hard to be found in all the world then a good wife, following the old proverb:
That a good wife, a good Mule, and a good Goat are three naughty beasts. But
enough of this. It shall be good to be warned by old Homers counsel, and not
to touch this string too much, lest we pluck the house upon our head. Talia,
nate, loquens, haud multo tempore viues.
Speaking these things, oh son,
Thou have not long to live.


Thus may we see how hard a matter it is, to find No felictic^ in marriage.
out any estate that is not subject to infelicitie and misery: and if we
should peruse the estate of peace which is desired of all men, and is a great
blessing of God, we shall find, that the long continuance of that happy
estate, is many times the cause of great infelicitie. Such is the corruption of
our nature, to turn that good which God sends to the benefit of men, to our
own evil and harm: which is by the Poet truly affirmed; Nun^ patimur longae
pacis mala: saeuior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque vlciscitur orbem.
The evils of long peace
Now luxury is held w'indure,
Amongst us: raging worse then War,
To avenge the conquered world.


Philemon in his Comedy brings in a plain Countriman that derided the
Philosophers, disputing upon their Summum Bonum, one placing it in this thing,
another in that, according to the diversity of their conceits: Ye mistake the
matter (quoth this homely fellow to the Philosophers) peace is the thing
wherein the felicity of man consists: for nothing is better, nor more
desired or pleasant, that God has given The effects of peace.
to men, then peace. Yet notwithstanding we do see, that a long continued
peace engenders luxuriousness and intemperance, whereof ensues beastly
drunkenness, and an infinite number of diseases, both of body and mind, that
besides many torments hasten men to their end, it increases riches, which
brings forth covetousness, pride, vain glory, and ambition; whereof
ensues uncharitable contention by law, and effusion of innocent blood by
civil Wars, to the utter ruin and destruction oftentimes of many goodly
Kingdoms and Commonwealths: Which was the cause that moved Scipio to
dissuade the Romans from the destruction of Carthage, lest by living securely
in continual peace, without fear of any enemy, they should at the length
turn their weapons to their own bodies, which came even so to pass.
Lodouicus Guicciardine in his description Presages of the fall of Antwerpe.
of the Low Country, seemed to presage the fall of Antwerpe, before their
Civil Wars began, by reason of their abundance of riches (wherein they were
thought to exceed all the towns in Europe) and luxuriousness, and security of
life by their long peace: Which may be a warning to other countries, that find
themselves drowned in the like vices. Cato said, that luxuriousness and
covetousness were two plagues that overthrow all great Empires. Cyprian
finds fault with the corruption of his time by long peace. Idleness
Idleness the child of peace.
(says he) and long peace has corrupted the discipline delivered by the
Apostles: every man labors to increase his patrimony, and is carried away
with an insatiable desire to augment his possessions. What would he have said
of the covetousness and greedy desires of these days? Many examples may be
produced out of Histories, of the overthrow of Cities and countries by the
vices gathered by long peace. Euscbius reports that the long peace and rest
which the Christians enjoyed from the persecution, that was in the government
of the Emperor Aurelian, to the reign of Dioclesian, was the cause that the
Christians manner of Peace the mother of persecution.
living began to be corrupted, so as many iniquities did grow presently, and
the former old holiness began to decrease, and such disorders and dissentions
began to be moved among the Bishops and Prelates, that (as Eusebius says) God
suffered the persecution of Dioclesi^ to serve in place of revenge and
chastisement of his Church, which was so extreme and bloody, and full of
cruelty, that neither is it possible for a pen to write, not tongue to
pronounce it. So that whether we live in the wars or in peace, each of them
has in them their infelicitie: Occidit ignavus, dum pralia pace quiescunt:
The slothful dies, whilst wars sleep in peace.


Now if we should prosecute in a generality this discourse of the miseries of
man, as we have done of their particular estates, how many kinds of pains and
torments he suffers in this life, and how many ways, and in what miserable
estate he comes by his death, we should rather lack time then matter to
write of. But to follow the course that we have already taken in other things:
let us, of an infinite number of examples, select some few. What pains and
troubles men suffer in this life, in laboring to attain to their desires,
something has been said before, and more shall be said hereafter. Likewise
what miseries men have suffered by the wars, has been touched already. Now
rests to speak something of the calamities that happen to men by diseases
and accidents, which bring them to their end: whereof we will recite some few
examples of those that be rare and somewhat strange: But first we will add
one more to that which has been spoken before of famine, a most miserable
plague, and horrible kind of death, one of the whips and scourges wherewith
God uses to punish the sins of men. In the fourth book of the Kings,
mention A great famine.
is made of a famine in Samaria in the time of Helizeus, which was in all
extremity: and when all their victuals were consumed, the mothers did eat
their own children; insomuch that a poor woman made her complaint to the King
(seeing him upon the walls) that a woman, her neighbor, would not perform a
bargain made between them, which was, that they should eat her child first,
which, (said she unto the King) I have performed: for we sod and ate my
child, and she presently has conveyed away her child, and has hidden him,
that I should not eat my part of him: which when the King heard, his heart was
ready for grief to break and leap out of his body; and he began to rent
his garments, and covered his flesh with sackcloth, saying, God make me so,
and as follows in the Text.

CHAP. IIII.
Of sundry sorts of plagues and pestilence, and great mortalities. The
Judgments of God upon diverse evil men. Of Popyelus King of Polonia and his
Queen. Arnolphus and Hotto Bishop of Ments, etc. Other strange accidents
concerning Gods great Justice. The miraculous effects of fear, sorrow, and joy
approved by History. The instability of fortune instanced in the story of
Policrates King of Samos. His daughters ominous dream. His great prosperity
and miserable end. That no man can be said to be happy before death. Of the
vain trust in riches, and of rich and covetous men. Avarice reproved and
punished, etc.

CRedible Authors report, that in Constantinople there was a strange kind of
pestilence, in such manner, as those which were sick thereof, thought themselves
to be killed by other men, and being troubled Diverse kinds of pestilences.
with that fear, died mad, supposing men did kill them. Thucidides
reports, that there was a corruption of the air in Greece, that infinite
numbers of people died without finding any remedy, and such as recovered
health, lost their memory and knowledge, so as one knew not another, not the
father his child. Certain soldiers that were under the Lieutenant of the
Emperor Marcus Anthonius, being in Seleucia, went into the Church of Apollo,
where they opened a coffer, thinking to find some great treasure, but the
contagious air that came forth of it, first destroyed a great part of the
people of Babylon: then it entered into Greece, and from thence to Rome, whereof
ensued such a pestilence, that it destroyed a third part of the people. In
France there was such a disease at Aix, that the people would die eating and
drinking; many would fall into a frenzy and drown themselves in wells;
others would cast themselves out of their windows, and break their necks:
The mortality growing of this disease was so great, that there was no room in
the Churchyards to Miserable mortality.
bury the dead: and many finding themselves infected with this disease, being
out of all hope of recovery, would presently sow themselves in sheets, looking
when death would come to separate the soul from the body. These were the whips
that God used in a generality for punishment of sins. But what would we
speak of diseases, when Pliny and others write, that in two thousand years
to their time, they have discovered above Man subject to (...). (...) diseases.
three hundred diseases to which men are subject: we may say with the Poet;
Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus (...),
Prima fugii, subeunt morbi tristisque senectus,
Et labor, and durae rapit inclementia mortis.
The best days of us miserable men,
The first are, that make haste from us, and then
Diseases come, with sorrowful old age,
Labor, and lust, Deaths implacable rage.


Let us descend to some particular matter, which has happened to men, either
by the secret judgment of God, or by some rare accidents. Popyelus King of
Polonia, a man of evil life, would often wish that he might be devoured of
mice. At last as he was sitting at dinner The secret Judgments of God.
banqueting and (...), a company of great mice set upon him, which came from
the carcasses of his uncles, which he and the Queen his wife had killed with
poison. These mice in great heaps assaulted him, his wife and children, as
they sat feasting, and never left gnawing upon them day and night, though his
guard and soldiers did all they could to drive them away; great fires were
made, and the King, his wife and children placed in the midst: yet
notwithstanding the Mice ran through the fire, and fell to their gnawing again:
Then they went into a ship, and proved what the water would do: the Mice
followed them, and gnawing continually upon the Ship, the Mariners seeing
themselves in danger of drowning, the water coming in at the holes which the
Mice made, brought the Ship to land, where another company of Mice joined with
these, and molested them more then before: when his followers saw these things,
perceiving it to be the Judgment of God, they all fled. The King seeing
himself left alone, and those departed that should defend him, he went up into
an high tower; but the Mice climbed up and devoured him, his wife, and two
sons. By which it appears, that there is no policy nor power to be used
against God. The Emperor Arnolphus was likewise eaten up with Lice, his Herod's
disease. A cruel Bishop.
Physicions being unable to give him any remedy. Hotto Bishop of Ments in
Germany, perceiving the poor people in great lack of victuals by the
scarcity of corn, gathered a great many of them together, and shut them into
a barn, and burnt them, saying: That they differed little from Mice that
consumed corn, and were profitable to nothing. But God left not so great a
cruelty unrevenged: for he made Mice assault him in great heaps, which never
left gnawing upon him night nor day: he fled into a Tower which was in the
midst of the Riu^r of Rhyne (which to this day is called the Tower of Mice, of
that event) supposing he should be safe from them in the midst of the River:
But an innumerable company of Mice swam over the river to execute the just
Judgment of God, and devoured him. The like happened to a Bishop of
Strasbrough, who was also devoured with mice. When Harold King of Denmark made
war upon Harquinus, and was ready to join battle, there was a dart seen in
the air flying this way, and that way, as though it sought upon whom to light.
And when all men stood wondering what would become of this strange matter,
every man fearing himself; at last the dart fell upon Harquinus head and A
prodigious accident.
slew him. An Italian Gentleman being unjustly condemned to die (as it was
thought) by Pope Clement the fifth, at the request of Philip the fair King of
France, seeing them both out of a window, speaks to them aloud in this sort:
Thou cruel Clement, for as much as there is no judge in the world, before whom
a man may appeal from that unjust sentence, which thou have pronounced against
me; I appeal from thee as from an unjust Judge, to the just Judge Jesus
Christ, before whom I summon thee; and likewise thee King Philip (at whose
suite thou have given judgment of death upon me) within one year to appear
before the Tribunal seat of God, where I shall plead my cause, which shall be
determined without covetousness, or any other passion, as ye have done. It
chanced that about the end of the time by him prefixed, both the Pope and the
King dyed. The like Gods great Justice.
happened to Ferdinando the fourth King of Castile; who putting to death two
knights rather through anger then justice, whose favor could not be obtained
neither Strange examples of Gods Justice.
by weeping and lamenting, nor by any petitions, they summoned the King to
appear before the Tribunal seat of Christ within thirty days; the last of
which the King died. A Captain likewise of the Galleys of the Genowayes took
a vessel, the Captain whereof never did harm to the Genowayes, yet for the
hatred that the Captain of the Genowayes did bear to his Nation, he commanded
him to be hanged: And when no petitions nor prayers would be heard, nor excuses
allowed, nor any mercy would be found, he said to this cruel Captain, that
he did appeal to God that punishes the unjust: and summoned him to appear at
a certain day appointed, to render account before God of the wrong he had done
him: the very same day that he appointed, the Captain of the Genowayes dyed,
and of like went to yield his account. A strange example likewise by a false
accusation of an Archbishop of Mentz called A remarkable story.
Henry: This man was endued with many virtues, and had great care of his
flock, and would punish severely public sinners, which procured the hatred of
many wicked persons, who accused him to the Pope, as a man insufficient for his
charge; laying many faults against him. The Pope holding a good opinion of the
Bishop, advertised him of it, who to purge himself, and to declare his
innocence, made choice among all his friends of one Arnand, whom he loved
dearly, and advanced to many dignities, to go to Rome. This man being rich,
intending to deprive his master, and to occupy his place, suborned two wicked
Cardinals, with a great sum of money, to favor his practice: when he came to
answer for his master, he confessed how much bound he was to him, yet he was
more bound to God, and to the truth, then to men; and said, that the
accusations laid against the Bishop, were true: By means whereof the Pope sent
the two corrupted Cardinals to heat and determine the Bishops cause: when they
came into Germany, they sent for the Archbishop, and upon hearing of his
cause, deprived him of his dignities, and placed Arnand in his room. The
Bishop being present at the sentence; God knows (said he) that I am unjustly
condemned, yet I will not appeal here from your sentence, because I know that
ye shall sooner be believed in your lying, then I in speaking the truth: and
therefore I receive this judgment for my sins: Nevertheless I appeal from
your sentence to the eternal Judge, which is Christ, before whom I summon you.
The Cardinals fell into a laughing, and mocking him, said, That if he would go
before, they would follow: it happened that the Bishop having withdrawn
himself within a Monastery, dyed within a year and a half after: whereof when
the Cardinals heard, they were in a great iollitie, and in a scoffing manner
said one to another, that they must go seek the Archbishop. Within few days
3. Fearful judgments.
after, one of the Cardinals had such a blow by one of his own people, that
his trypes and puddings went forth at his lower parts and dyed: The other
Cardinal grinding his teeth, (...) his own hands, and dyed mad: arnand for
his cruelty and seditions which he maintained among the people, was so hated
of all men, that being assaulted one day in a Monastery, he was there slain,
and his body cast into the towne-ditch, where he lay three days, all the
people both men and women using all manner of cruelties and despites upon it.
Lucian a notorious blasphemer of Christ his Divinity, was devoured with dogs.
Arrius had also a wonderful Strange stories, to the same purpose.
end: for as he was coming to dispute with the Prelates, he fell into such a
looseness of belly, that he avoided his guts and bowels. The death of Lewis
the eleventh King of France, was also something strange: for as he was
beholding Tennisse players with his wife, among other talk, he said, that he
hoped to do nothing hereafter that should offend God; which words were no
sooner out of his mouth, but he fell down speechless, and languishing a few
hours, he dyed in the same place: which argues the miserable condition of
men, that a mighty King, when he least thought upon death, and had many goodly
houses and buildings, ended his life suddenly in the most vile and filthy place
of all his Castle, where men used to make water. And the manner of the death
was very rare that Atterius Rufus, a Roman knight An ominous dream.
suffered. This man dreamed or was warned by a vision, that when the Gladiators
or Fencers exercised their (...) at Syracusa (as the manner then was) to kill
one another with their naked swords, he should be slain by one R^tiarius, a
man to him unknown: which dream he declared the next day to them that sat by
him, to behold this fight, or pastime. This Retiarius chanced to be brought in
place with one Mirmillo, whose face as soon as Atterius beheld, he told them
that this was the man that he dreamed should kill him; and rose up presently,
meaning to depart: but being persuaded by them that sat by him, he stayed: As
the two men were fighting, Retiarius chanced to drive Mirmillo to the place
where Atterius sat, and having cast him down by him, he thinking to kill
Mirmillo, thrust his sword through Atterius, and slew him.

It is no less strange to consider of the miserable end of men by two contrary
passions; sudden sorrow and joy. Don Pedro, and Don John, having the government
of the kingdom of Castile, in the nonage of the young King their Nephew, made
wars upon the Moors (...) Grenata; and as they returned homeward in good
order, Offeare and joy.
Don Pedro being in the vaward, and Don John in the rereward, whom the Moors
preased so hard, that he was feign to send to Don Pedro to return to his aid.
He hastening to assist Don John, could by no means make his soldiers follow
him: and drawing his sword to strike some of them, thinking thereby to make the
rest more obedient, he was so troubled to see he could not help Don John, that
he fell down dead from his Horse: which when Don John heard, that was
valiantly fighting with the Moors, he conceived such grief, that he fell
down speechless, his strength failing, and dyed within a little while after.
Herennius a Sicilian, as he was led to prison for being partaker of a
conspiracy, was so perplexed through fear of the future Judgment, that he
fell down dead at the entry into the prison. Plantius looking upon his dead
wife, cast himself upon her dead body, and with very sorrow dyed. The like
happened to a French Gentleman, the son of Gilbert of Mompensier, Of sorrow.
who went to Pozzuola, to visit his fathers tomb, and being overcome with
extreme sorrow, after he had shed abundance of tears, he fell down dead upon
the sepulcher. This is no less strange, that joy has The strange effects of
joy.
wrought the same effect: and such as sorrow could not kill, sudden joy has
dispatched. A woman hearing of a great slaughter of the Romans, by their
overthrow at the battle of Thrasymeno, where her son served as a soldier,
meeting him at the gate unlooked for, fell down dead in his arms, as she was
embracing him. Another woman, hearing a false report, and believing that her
son was dead, as soon as she saw him, dyed presently. Philemon had certain
figs gathered for him, and being set within his sight, an Ass came to them and
began to eat: he willed a Boy to drine away the Ass, who went so slowly, that
he had eaten all the figs before the Boy came. Because thou have made no more
haste (said Philemon) give the Ass wine also, wherewith he fell into such a
laughter, that he dyed forth with. Diagoras and Chilon, hearing that their
children had won the prize at the games of Olympus, laughed so heartily for
joy, that they dyed immediately. Of late years Sinas having the charge of
certain Gallyes under the great Turk, seeing his son restored to him
again, that was taken prisoner by the Christians, dyed with extreme joy, at
the first sight of him.

But that the miserable conditions of men may be seen, as well by the
strangeness of their death, as by the infinite troubles of their life, we will
allege a few examples more (for to prosecute it at the full, would contain a
great volume) of the severity or cruelty that has been used in a strange
sort. The Transiluanians Barbarous cruelties.
having taken certain Rebels with their Captain, made them fast three days,
and then made them eat their Captain half roasted, and afterward his bowels
sod, before they put them to death. There were six men for some notorious fact
condemned and judged to this death; they were set alive into the ground, all
saving their head above, in front three against three, and face to face; and
there continued in that sort, until they miserably ended their lives. An
Italian Gentleman having the upper hand of his enemy, who upon his knees asked
for mercy, willed him to deny God; which when the other had done in hope of
life, he thrust his sword through him, saying; I will now kill thee body and
soul. Certain Italians were sent from a Free State, in Embassage to the Duke
of Moscouia: and as one of them kept his Cap upon his head, in the presence of
the Duke, he being (...) tyranny.
therewith offended, caused a nail to be driven through his Cap into his head.
Ludit in humanis diuina potentia rebus:
Et certam prasens vix habet hora fidem.
The Divine power all humane things derides,
And scarce one certain hour with us abides.


The Emperor Marcus Aurelius meditating upon the miserable condition of men,
spoke in this sort: I have imagined with my self whether it were possible to
find any estate, any age, any country, any kingdom, where any man might be
found, that durst vaunt he had not in his life tasted what manner of thing
adverse fortune is: And if such a one might be found, it would be such an ougly
monster, that both the quick and the dead would desire to see him. Then he
concludes; In the end of my reckoning, I have found that he which was
yesterday Necessary considerations.
rich, is to day poor: he that was yesterday whole, is to day sick: he that
yesterday laughed, to day I have seen him weep: he that was yesterday in
prosperity, to day I have seen him in adversity: he that yesterday lived, I
have seen him by and by in his grave. Saint Augustine entering deeply into the
consideration of the miserable condition of men, and wondering at their
infelicitie, makes thus his complaint to God: Lord, after men have suffered so
many evil things, merciless death follows, and carries them away in diverse
manners: some it oppresses by feauers, others by extreme grief; some by
hunger, others by thirst; some by fire, others by water; some by the sword,
others by poison; some thorough fear, others are stifled; some are torn in
pieces by the teeth of wild beasts; others are peckt with the fowls of the
air; some are made meat for the fishes, others for worms: and yet man knows
not his end. And when he goes about to aspire higher, he falls down and
perishes: And this is the most fearful thing of all fearful things, the
most terrible of all terrible things, when the soul must be separated from the
body. And what a miserable sight is it to see one lying in the pangs of death,
and how loathsome when he is dead?

And then follows the dreadful day of Judgment, when every one must yield
account of his life past. This is the time when Monarkes and Princes must The
general account.
give account, whether they have laid intolerable exactions upon their
subjects, and been the cause of the effusion of innocent blood to feed their
ambitious humors. This is the time when the Pastors and Prelates must give up
a reckoning of their flock; and with what doctrine good or bad they have fed
them. This is the time when Merchants must yield an account, and all other
Trades that stand upon buying and selling, for the falsehood they have used in
uttering their Wares, whose case is hard, if it be true the Poet says:
Periurata s^o postponit numina lucro
Mercator, Stygiis non nisi dignus aquis.
The perjured Merchant will forswear for gain,
Worthy in Stygian waters to remain.


This is the time, when Lawyers will tremble how to answer the animating their
poor Clyents to The account of Lawyers.
waste their goods, to their great hinderance or utter undoing, in continuing
their suits in a wrong cause, the end whereof is their own gain. This is the
time (...) Judges.
that Magistrates and Judges must be called to a reckning, whether they have
administered justice uprightly and indifferently, without favor or corruption.
This is the time when men of War must answer Soldiers.
for their spoils and rapines, and intolerable outrages and cruelties used
upon every sex and age that Christ dyed for, as well as for them. This is the
time that covetous men and usurers must yield an account Usurers.
for their rapines and oppressions, and for the undoing of infinite numbers, to
enrich themselves with their excessive and unlawful interest and gains. This
is the time that Widows and Orphans, and other afflicted people will cry out,
and present their complaints before Of the wicked in general.
God, of the injustice and wrongs they have sustained and suffered. This is the
time when the wicked shall say (quaking and trembling for fear, and repenting
too late;) Look how yonder folks which we had heretofore in contempt, as base
persons and of none account in respect of our selves, are now exalted in the
sight of God, and are accounted among the Saints. This is the time (says Saint
Hierome) when they that stut and stammer, shall be more happy then the
cloquent. And many Sheepheards and Heardmen shall be preferred before
Philosophers; many poor beggars, before rich Princes and Monarkes; many simple
and gross heads, before the subtle and fine-witted. Then shall the fools and
insensible persons (says Saint Augustine) take hold upon Heaven, and the wise
with their wisdom shall fall down into hell, where is the misery of all
miseries, and such as the miseries of this world, be pleasures and delights in
respect of them. This is the judgment spoken of in Saint Matthew; Go, ye
cursed, into hell fire, where is nothing but lamenting and gnashing of teeth,
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels before the beginning of the
world, where they shall be tormented for ever and ever, and shall wish for
death, but they shall not find it; they shall desire to die, and death shall
fly from them. These miseries to which men are subject, made the Prophet Esaias
sorry, that he was not destroyed or styfled in his mothers womb; and murmured
that his legs did hold him up, and complained upon the paps that gave him
suck. ^remie moved with the like spirit, considering that man is formed of
the earth, conceived in sin, borne with pain, and in the end made a prey for
worms and serpents, wished that his mothers belly had served him for a
sepulcher, and her womb for a tomb. The consideration of the miserable estate
of this life, brought in a custom to the people of Thracia to weep and lament
at the birth of their children, and to rejoice when they dyed. But the
Philosopher Demosthenes discovered his conceit by a more particular passion.
For being demanded of the Tyrant Epymethes, why he wept so bitterly for the
death of a Philosopher, being so strange a matter for a Philosopher to weep?
To this Demosthenes answered, I weep not (O Epymethes) because the A bitter
Answer.
Philosopher dyed, but because thou live; being a custom in the Schools of
Athens to weep more because the cuill do live, then for the death of the good.

Seeing therefore we have perused the principal estates of life, and can
find nothing in them worthy to be called Felicity, nor answerable to the
thing which that word seems to purport, but rather that they all defect so
much from felicity, that they decline to infelicitie and misery: Let us do
(yet with a better mind) as many now a days use to do in matters of greater
importance, the more is their iniquity, when their obstinacy will not suffer
them to apply their opinion to the words and meaning of the authority they
allege, they will wrest and apply the words to their opinion: So let us use
some force to the word, and wrest it from his proper signification, and apply
it to the matter, and call that happiness of life, Felicity, which a man has
possibility to attain; and set down such a felicity as agreeeth with the
condition of men, and as has been and is enjoyed of some. For to conceive by
imagination such a felicity, as is Plato his Common wealth, or C^ero his
Orator, that never was, nor will be; or such a felicity as Aristotle sets
forth, which no man can attain to, serves not this purpose. For to set up a
mark so far beyond a man's reach, that he cannot shoot near it, will rather
discourage, then encourage him, to take his Bow in his hand, and to A smile.
make any attempt, when he sees his labor lost before he begin: So to feign
or set up as a mark, for men to direct the course of their life to, such a
felicity as never any man has, nor by possibility can attain, is to
confirm or leave them in their erroneous opinion, embracing some other thing,
for the true felicity they ought to seek after: But when they see before
their eyes such a felicity or happy estate, as is within their reach, men
will cheerfully use their endeavor to attain to it. And though it happen but
to few, to enjoy this felicity in the highest degree, yet in bestowing their
labor with hope fully to possess the same, they shall come near it, and fly
further from those things, which by mistaking have brought many to infelicitie.
For in a game he that wins the second or third prize, departs
victoriously, though he could not win the best. Est quoddam prodire tenus, si
non datur vltra:


It is something to get so far, though we have not power to go further.

We have showed before, that the true felicity of man, or his Sovereign good
is enjoyed in the life to come: and that there is no estate of this worldly
life void of No estate free from calamity.
troubles and calamities. For as there is no Sea without waves, no more is
there any kind of life without trouble: So that we must be driven to call that
life, felicity, which has in it least miseries, and him to be happy, that
feels least troubles and calamities, and best bears them. For there was
never any man to whom some thing either has not happened, or may happen, to
make him sometimes sorrowful. But he that makes least account of it, is wise
and happy, as one says: He^est est enim mortalium foelicitas, dolere quam
fieri potest rarissime. For this is the felicity of men, to feel sorrow as
seldom as may be. Socrates answered one that asked him, how a man might feel
little sorrow? That there was no man that dwelt in town or country, or
conuersed with men, but he should sometimes be sad. The The best remedy for
sorrow.
best way to avoid the occasion of sadness, is to live well: but to be
sorrowful before there be cause, and to fear evil things to come, before
they happen, is mere foolishness. For what necessity is there to hasten or
call evil things, and anticipate that we must suffer too soon, whenever
they happen? and to lose the present time with the fear of that is to come? It
is madness Against those that are curious after predictions.
for a man to make himself unhappy now, because the time will come he shall
be unhappy: and the things that many times occasioneth us to be sorrowful,
are either not evil, but an opinion only, or else no great evil. Sacrates
was wont to say, that if all evil things were laid together in a heap, and
every man should take away a part, there is none but would think, that his
own evils were less then that portion which he did bear. And in truth a man
shall sometimes receive more comfort in sadness of them that be in calamity,
then of them that be merry: For if he consider and compare his own evils with
those of others, he shall find that to be little which he suffers, in
respect of that which others endure. And nothing brings greater sorrow to the
mind, then the loss of the thing dearly loved: and though many men win
opinion of wisdom; because they seem not to be grieved with the lack or
loss of that for the which we see others tormented with great sorrow and
anguish of mind; yet if the same men were touched with any thing that they did
strongly affect, we should see that humane wisdom were not able to make
sufficient resistance. For in such cases our affections and reasons contend
together: and if reason be stronger in us then the affection that moves the
mind, reason prevails and overcomes the other: But if the affection be
stronger then his reason, then it prevails, and reason yields. And the more
near they be in equality, the more vehemently they contend together, and the
longer endures the conflict, before the victory be won: like as two
wrestlers, the stronger overthrows the A Simile.
weaker, except he be assisted by skill: So naturally happens it between
affections and reason, or wisdom; affections being the stronger, if the mind
moved be stricken in the right vain, and does commonly make reason give place,
except it be assisted with Gods grace above our own strength. It is a hard
matter to refrain Arist.
from pleasures that delight and tickle the senses, yet it is more hard to
resist and endure things painful and grievous. But we must contend
nevertheless, and endeavor with our reason and wisdom, against our unruly
affections, and call to God for the assistance of his holy Spirit. For to what
purpose serves our wisdom, our learning, our knowledge and experience, and
observation of the ordinary course of worldly matters, if we apply not the same
to our own benefit? As the Poet says: Quid iuuat humanos, scire atque
euoluere casus,
Si fugienda facis, and facienda fugis?
What boots it humane things to know,
Or after them Inquire.
If what is not to be done, we do,
And: To be done, forbear.


But seeing that by the fall of our first Parents we are drowned in sin and
iniquity, and our nature is so corrupted, that we can do nothing of our
selves, not deserve any thing that is good, nor have any means to escape the
torments of the life to come, and the calamities of this present life, which is
extreme misery, nor enjoy the pleasures of the heavenly life, nor the
quietness and vacancie of trouble in this life, without Gods especial grace
and free gift, through the merits of lesus Christ our Redeemer; we must
confess and acknowledge, that both the felicity we seek for in this life, and
the beatitude and Summum bonum in the life to All felicity depends upon God.
come, depends wholly upon God, and comes from him: so that we may call the
Felicity of this world, the contentation of a faithful mind in a godly life
and death, which comes by the enjoying of Gods benefits and graces. And
although all good things that can happen to us come from God, yet we must
bestow our endeavor, and use those means which he has given us, to make our
selves capable of them, and to dispose them to the attaining of a happy life.

Seeing therefore that our endeavor and labor is requisite to felicity, let
us see how and to what end we ought to bestow the same, that we may enjoy it.
There are two sorts of ends, some are precedent, some subsequent, some the last
ends, to which when we have attained, we rest settled and contented, and
proceed no further: others are degrees to the last ends. As for example. A
Merchant builds a ship to the end to sail A comparison.
over the Sea to such a Port, to transport his Wares; he transporteth his
wares to sell them, to make money to buy other commodities; that he does to
sell them to his gain: this he does to gather riches; he gathers riches to
build houses, or to buy land, or to live in pleasure, or to win honor and
reputation, or such like: and thus being come to the last end of his labor,
for which all the rest were undertaken, he rests settled, and seeks no
further. Even so all men's desires and labors are addressed from one end to
another, hoping at last for a contented and happy life. But because many
understand not wherein felicity consists, nor the way to it; others take the
instruments for the thing it self: few attain to the end of their desires.
First therefore, when we know what the felicity is to which we may attain,
we must submit our selves to the will and pleasure of God, from whom all good
things do proceed, and with all humility desire him to bless our labors,
and bestow upon us those his benefits and graces (with condition nevertheless,
if it be his will, for he only knows what is best for us) that are necessary
to happiness of life. Then we must set before our eyes Felicity as a mark,
to which we must direct the course of our life; wherein we must have a
continual respect to the true felicity and beatitude, or Summum benum of men;
that is, to glorify and magnify God in this life, as has been said, which
is his last end and proper action, whereunto is joined the joys of heaven in
the life to come, without which our life here is mere infelicity, how pleasing
so^uer it be. To this end, which is our proper action and true felicity, we
must always have a special regard: For in every nature, the end must be
common to all of that kind. But that we commonly Earthly felicity is only in
name
call felicity or happiness in this life, is rather so by name then indeed:
for th^s life is but a pilgrimage and way to that common end and true felicity
of men, which through their own faults, some overcome with great troubles and
labor (as they that) not knowing the right way, or not willing to follow it,
pass over mountains and rocks with much weariness; others, better advised,
that follow the right path, walk quietly, as in a plain smooth ground, and
come to the end of their journey without any great pains: and therein rests
our endeavor, to make choice (as much as in us lies) of the smooth way, and
avoid the rough and stony passage, that we may come to the end of our journey
with less trouble and unquietness. But let us see what manner of felicity or
happiness that is, which depends upon Gods benefits and graces, and may be
enjoyed in this life; and how far those graces must extend to make us happy.

Seeing this felicity comes from God, the author of all good things, and
goodness it self, and is so much desired of all men, it must needs be some
one good thing, or many, wherein it does consist. And for as much as it
concerns both the body and soul or mind (things of a contrary condition) it
must be more then one thing. Aristotle says, Of evil things a little will do
a great deal of harm: but to do a little good, requires a great many, or a
great quantity of good things. So we may say of this matter, That to bring
forth such an effect as is felicity (the greatest good thing that happens to
men in this world) many good things are requisite. The things (after Gueuarra)
that cannot be bought with treasure, 4. Things not to be bought with gold.
nor can admit comparison with any other things, are, the Liberty we have, the
Knowledge we learn, the Health we enjoy, and the Virtue for the which we
deserve commendation: for Liberty lights the heart; Knowledge enricheth the
understanding, Health preserves our life; and Virtue is the glory of the
soul: All which are so much the more precious, as they are the true figures
and forerunners of Gods grace, to such as it pleases him to esteem and
choose. Let us examine some of the good things which God has diversely Sundry
blessings bestowed by God upon man.
distributed among men: to some he has given a continual health and liberty
of body: to others he has given a light heart, and merry disposition of mind:
to some, an inclination to this or that virtue: to others, a contempt of
worldly riches and honors: to some, a quiet mind and void of perturbations and
passions: to others, judgment to discern between things good in show, and
those that be good in deed: to some, an inclination or apt disposition to make
choice of the one, and refuse the other: to others, a quiet life void of
troubles: to some, patience to bear afflictions and crosses if any happen, so
as they seem to verify the Poets saying; -- Gaudet patientia duris:
Patience endures adversity.


To others he has given a competent portion and sufficiency of worldly wealth
to maintain their estate, and to serve their necessary use, and such other
like things. Now if all these good things did concur together in one man,
with the remission of his sins, which is the greatest good that can be
inioyed in this world, without which beatitude cannot be obtained, who would
deny him to be happy? For he in whom these things do meet together, lives a
pleasant and contented life, and makes a godly and quiet end: and whoto^uer
leads continually a contented life, and dies in the savor of God, he is in
perfect felicity. But many that live quietly, seem to live contentedly, when
indeed if their minds Difference betwixt a pleasant and a patient life. No man
contented with his estate.
were known, they may be said rather to live patiently; because they want the
means to have that they would, they seem content with that they have. This
fault is common to all men, that every one likes another man's estate better
then his own, as the Poet wisely notes when he asks this question: Qui fit,
M^cenas, vt nemo quam sibi sortem
Seu ratio dederit, seu sors obiecerit, illa
Contentus viuat? laudet diuersa sequentes?
How comes it (Oh Mecenas) that we see,
None with their own estates contented be,
Whether their choice or chance has given the^ free,
But still in others praise the contrary?
He answers himself afterward with an apt proverb:
Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus:
The Ox the saddle does allure,
The Horse does wish to prove the plower.


But he that lives contentedly, desires no more then that he has, nor would
exchange his estate with any man: but whether any such man may be found in this
vale of misery, whose pleasing and contented life is not interrupted with some
displeasures and overthwart accidents, may greatly be doubted. Homer duly
considering the miseries of this life, and the instability of humane matters,
fained that there were two vessels at the entry of the great Olympus, the one
being full of honey; the other full of gall; of which two mingled together,
Jupiter causes all men to drink. Whereby his meaning is to give us to
understand, that there is no life so sweet or pleasant, but has in it some
bitterness: which agrees with his opinion that says, God does mingle
bitterness with worldly felicity, that we might seek another felicity in
whose sweetness there is no deceit. And Plutark says, Men can never simply
and sincerely enjoy the quietness of any great prosperity: but whether it be
Fortune, or the envy of destiny, or else the natural necessity of worldly
things, their quietness is always during their life intermingled with evil
among the good; yea and that which is worst, the evil surmounteth the good:
for this life has in it much aloes, but very little honey. The consideration
whereof moved Philip King of Macedon, An excellent with of Philip King of
Macedon,
when he had three messengers brought him good news at one time, two of
victories, the third of the birth of his son, to desire the gods that they
would mitigate the envy of Fortune, with the moderation of some mean chance,
because he knew that some sorrow would always follow good tidings.

The instability and uncertainty of worldly prosperity, moved Amasis King of
Egypt to give this counsel to Policrates King of Samos. This Policrates in all
his actions was so fortunate, and lived continually in such prosperity, that
Amasis, with whom he was joined in a perfect league of friendship, fearing some
great evil hap, according to the ordinary course of this world, to hang over
his head, wrote thus unto him: Amasis says thus to Policrates; It pleases me
well to hear that all things fall out so happily with my friend, yet your
great prosperity likes me not, knowing how envious a name it is; but for my
part, I had rather that both mine own matters, and also theirs that be dear
to me, should sometimes go prosperously, sometime otherwise, and to pass my
time after the variety of fortune, then in all things to have good success.
Follow therefore my counsel, and Good counsel of a friend.
do thus against prosperity: Consider with your self what thing ye have that
ye most esteem, and which being lost, would most grieve you; which when ye
have found, cast it away, so as it may never come to the hands of men again:
and if then there shall be no alteration in your good fortune, temper it
sometime in this sort as I have told you. When Policrates had read this letter,
he determined to follow his friends counsel; and examining with himself what
thing he had, that of all other was most dear to him, and which being lost
would most grieve him, he found that the same was a Ring of great value, which
he had in very great estimation: he puts this ring upon his finger, and
goes into a ship, and after he was in the midst of the sea, he let his ring
fall as though it were unawares, thinking in that sort craftily to beguile
fortune, and returned home again sorrowful (as it seemed) for his great
loss. After five or six days, it chanced a fisher to take a great fish,
which for the rareness of him he presented to Policrates: and A strange chance.
as the fish was opened to be dressed, the ring was found in his belly, and
brought to the King: Which when Amasis understood, perceiving that it was not
possible for one man to divert from another the evil destiny that hangs over
him, nor that Policrates could have any good end, whom Fortune had so
exceedingly favored all his life, he sent a Herald to Samos to signify to
him, that he would break the league of friendship with him, lest Policrates
falling into some great misfortune, which he feared, might be to him the cause
of sorrow and grief, being his friend. It chanced not long after, that
Policrates made war upon the Persians, by whom he was taken and deprived of
his kingdom, and shamefully hanged upon the top of an high hill: this
miserable Fortunes inconstancy.
end followed his great and long prosperity. A notable example of the
instabilitie of man's estate, whereunto he seemed to be strongly drawn by an
inevitable destiny for no entreaty of his friends, nor cuill signs and
tokens going before, neither the dream of his daughter that presaged his
unfortunate success, could dissuade him from that journey. She dreamed that
she saw her father aloft in the air, and that he was An ominous dream.
washed of Jupiter, and anointed of the Sun: all which came to pass; for as
he hanged in the air, he was washed with rain that fell from above, and was
anointed with his own grease by the heat of the Sun that drew out his sweat.
The prosperous life and miserable end of Policrates, confirms the opinion of
Solon: that no No man happy before death.
man can be accounted happy before his death: For to judge them happy that are
alive, among the dangers of so many alterations whereunto they are subject, is
all one, as if a man should appoint beforehand a reward of the victory to him
that is yet fighting, being uncertain whether it will fall on his side.

Which agrees with Pythagoras, that said, We ought to choose the best life,
and save our selves from the blasts of Fortune, as the Galley is safe from the
winds in the Sea. That riches in this mortal life are weak Ankers, glory
weak, and the strong body also feeble. So offices, honors and all such things
(says he) are weak and unconstant: and the sure and strong Ankers are
Wisdom, Magnanimity, Fortitude and Virtue, which Four sure Ankers.
cannot be overthrown with any tempest: all other things he accounts
foolishness, dreams and wind.

Seeing therefore there is no life in this world to be found that is void of
calamities, but pleasures and delights are intermingled with sorrow and grief,
ease and quietness with pains and troubles, so as no man leads continually
a contented and pleasing life, but either in the beginning or end of his race,
or in the midst thereof he finds some alteration, and suffers something
that discontenteth him, and desires amendment of his estate, we must be
driven to seek felicity in the midst among troubles and calamities, and call
him happy, that feels least of those things that do cause coffeehouse.
And he that looks always to live happily, seems to be ignorant of the
one part of nature; for the crying and lamenting of a child when he first
enters into this world, does seem to presage his painful life, as a
vauntcurrer of his miseries to come: for where is he that can vaun^, that
either in his body he has not felt some pain, in his mind some grief, or
has not suffered loss of his goods, or reproach to his person? These be
diseases incurable, accidents remediless, and always incident unto us: even
as there is no Sea without waves, no War A proper application.
without peril, nor journey without travel; so is there no worldly life free
from troubles, nor any estate void of encumbrances. So as no man lives so
happily, that has not something whereof to complain and be grieved. Boethius
says: -- Nihilest ex omni part beatum:
-- Nothing is in all parts happy.


There is nothing in this world universally blessed or perfect: and therefore
that which cannot be avoided by prudence, nor resisted by fortitude, must be
overcome by patience, after Saint Augustines counsel: Vt exercitatione
tolerantiae, sustineantur temporalia, and sperentur aterna: that by exercise of
bearing, we may endure temporal things, and hope for eternal things.

For as much then as there is such a mixture in this life of good and evil, as
the Poet says, -- Miscentur tristia latis:
-- Let sad things be mixed with glad.


That no man can always live contentedly or happily, but the felicity we
seek, must be found in him that lives least discontented or unhappily, let us
see how a man must behave himself (so much as in him lies) to enjoy this
felicity or happiness. Though we cannot fly from cares and troubles so long
as we walk in this world, yet we may endeavor our selves to avoid as many of
them as we may: for much more in number be the displeasures and griefs we
seek to our selves, then those that are brought to us by any other means. We
said before that he upon whom God bestows his graces, by which he lives
contentedly, is happy, and in felicity: Necessary observations.
and no man is unhappy, but he that thinks himself so: neither is any man
happy, but he that so esteems himself. And yet not every contentment
brings forth happiness, but such as is contained within a certain manner
and measure. For as contentation consists not in the much or little that we
have, no more does happiness consist in that to which generally we are
inclined. Many by nature, or ^uill education, or custom, are so inclined to
vice, and strongly addicted to lewd life; that neither reason, nor persuasions,
nor terror of laws can reform them: wherewith though they be contented, yet
are they far from happiness, and may rather be accounted most unhappy. For
in all our actions, and in every course and trade of life we must have always
respect to our common and true end, that is, to praise and glorify God, that
we may have the fruition of the joys of the other life; which is our true
felicity and beatitude. And seeing the happiness we seek for in this life
seems to require contentation, I see not how that happiness can well be had,
except in some measure we enjoy the things whereunto we are inclined, that
thereof contentment may follow: for reason may rather persuade patience, then
bring forth contentment. And therefore we may affirm, that as they which
seek for contentation by following their vicious appetites and inclinations,
in stead of felicity, find infelicitie: so they that enjoy the things
whereunto they are inclined, not being repugnant to virtue and honesty, nor to
our common end before recited, have a great advantage to the happiness of this
life; which comes by co^tentation: For he (says one) lives happily, that
lives as he will, and will nothing that is evil. Men's minds are diversely
affected according to the variety of their inclinations, which draws their
labors and industry to satisfy their appetite, and to bring them to
contentation and happiness. And if the end be good for which they employ their
study and labor, whether their life be active or contemplative (for happiness
consists not in nihil agendo, ^ter the Cyclopes) they may attain to that
they look for. Among things that be indifferent, that which pleases one,
displeases another; every So many heads, so many minds.
vocation and estate of life contenteth not every man; some desire rest, others
love to travel; some like to exercise their minds, others their bodies; some
wish for pleasures, others for riches and honor: and if the end be good for
which they desire these things, the way and means right, which they follow to
come by them, and the use as it ought to be, being gotten, they may attain to
a contentation and happiness, notwithstanding the great difference of the
estates and kinds of life, because they enjoy the things whereunto they are
inclined. And this diversity or contrariety of men's inclinations, makes a
good harmony that is compounded of contraries, and seems necessary to the
maintenance of society. But seeing we have no good inclinations nor motions of
our selves, since the corruption of our nature, we must pray unto God for his
grace, to stir them up in us, and then so to employ our endeavor, as we
receive not his grace in vain. They that Job.
plough unrighteousness, and sow encumbrance, gather the same. Divine seed is
sown in men's bodies, which Seneca.
if a good husband receive, it rises up like his beginning, but if he be an
evil husband, it kills, like a barren and morish ground, and brings forth
cockle in stead of corn. The Sun shining upon wax, makes it soft, and dirt
hard. He that rightly receives Gods holy Spirit, turns all his
inclinations, and all that happens, to his good. For such a mind is stronger
then all accidents that chance; but an evil mind turns all into evil. But
it may be objected, that seldom or never all those good things concur
together in any one man; God by his secret judgment having so disposed them.
And Ennius says: Nimius boni est, cue nihil est mali; It is too good, that
has in it no evil: for he does all things for our good, and respects our
true felicity or beatitude in the world to come; to the attaining of which he
bestows his graces according to his own pleasure and our disposition. We
see some Several dispo^tions in children.
children of so gentle a nature, that they will be sooner reformed with a fair
word, then others will be with stripes: others again there be of so stubborn
a disposition, that neither threatenings nor severe correction is sufficient to
bring them to obedience. So God distributeth not all his gifts equally to all
men; but to some he gives riches and possessions, others he suffers to line
in lack and poverty; some he afflicts and punishes diverse ways, to
others he gives a quiet and peaceable life, according to his pleasure and the
difference of men's dispositions: because he sees that those benefits and
graces, which do lead men to the happiness of this life, will be to some an
hinderance to the true felicity of the heavenly life: and therefore he takes
from them the occasions wherewith they may offend him, and leads them in the
exercise of such things as stand them most in stead to serve him. For, the Lord
(says Justin Martyr) will not honor his children with worldly happiness for a
reward of godliness: for those things which be subject unto corruption,
cannot be a recompense to good men for their virtue. When God sends
adversity, it is to exercise us: if he Note.
afflict us with poverty, it is to make us to deserve better: when he
blesses us with plenty, so much the more ought we to give him thanks, do
him service, yield him praise, and glory, and obedience: if he chastise us
with sickness, or any other way, we ought to think, his meaning is to amend
and make us better: for God for the most part suffers adversities to use
their force against such as are most strong, not to tempt them above their
power, but through exercise, the better to confirm them. If we obeyed God as
becomes us, it is certain that things should Calvin.
be ruled here after such fashion, as we should be contented.

Well then, let us admit that all those good things before spoken of, which
engender felicity, meet together in very few or none at all: yet nevertheless
let us pray to God to bestow upon us so many of them, as it shall please him to
think meet for us, and use our endeavor to pass our time in such felicity as
is agreeable with our humane condition; which (as we said before) is improperly
called felicity, or at least with as little infelicitie as may be. But if his
pleasure be otherwise, then to bear his crosses patiently, always looking up
to the true felicity. For he that falls into a ditch, and cries, God help,
without employing those means which he has given him for his help, may lie
there long before he come forth: therefore we must use those means which God
has given us. He has endued us with reason, to judge of those things that be
subject to our senses, and as a necessary means, by which we should sustain
and govern this corporal life. By this reason we are taught to discern
between good and evil, between virtue and vice. Reason shows us felicity,
and what it is to be happy: Reason is concra^ed by will.
but our stubborn and unruly affections will not be obedient to the judgment
of reason, sithence our nature did degenerate, being corrupted by original
sin. Therefore Gods grace must assist us, otherwise our endeavor is nothing:
for in this so great imbecillitie of nature, and by the subtle practices of
the devil, who lies in wait to hinder and pervert our good intents and
purposes, our power and forces are very little: so as we be no otherwise able
of our selves to do those things which are requisite to the attaining of
felicity, then as a body that is made weak with long sickness, is able to
go; who is by and by weary: and if any chance to thrust him ever so little, he
falls to the ground: so our strength and force is often overcome with the
vehemency of our affections, and often overthrown by the subtlety of the
devil. Yet nevertheless we must not desist, nor be discouraged, but use our
endeavor and force, such as it is, and call to God to supply our defects with
his grace.

Our principal consideration and care must be daily Our gratitude that ought
to be to God.
to praise and glorify God, to meditate often upon him, and to be thankful
for all his benefits, which is our proper action and end in this mortal life
(as has been said) and the means to bring us to the joys of heaven, which is
our greatest good and beatitude, or true felicity. Then how to pass through
this vale of misery and troublous life, as plain and smooth a way, and with
light burden, as our endeavor can find, and God will permit. I liken a quiet
life and mean estate, void of worldly cares, to a plain way; and that which
is interrupted with greedy desire, and hunting after riches and honors and
reputation, with such like perturbations, to a rough and uneven way, full of
hills and stones, and they that possess them, to be laden with a great burden,
and therefore travel painfully in respect of the other, to the end of their
journey. To bring this to Means that ought to be ^cd.
pass, we must purify and cleanse our minds from our corrupt and unclean
affections, that we may be the better able to see and desire those things which
be good indeed, and avoid those things that be good in show only: wherein
moral virtues are very necessary: for by them our unruly affections and
unprofitable desires are bridled or suppressed, or at least moderated, which
are the chief cause of an unhappy life. They move men's desires to pleasures,
to riches, to honor and glory, which has been showed before by many examples
and sayings of wise men, to be the cause of infelicity; they stir up pride,
envy, hatred, malice, desire of revenge, fear, and such like perturbations and
unquietness of the mind, and will never suffer the soul or mind to be in
quiet and rest, which is contrary to felicity and a happy life; which
consists not in fleshly pleasures, nor in the abundance of riches or
possessions, nor in principality or power, but in a contented and quiet mind,
void of sorrow and fear, which cannot be obtained without Gods special grace
and gift, and his assistance to our endeauours.

The counsel which King David gave to his son in his deathbed, is meet to
be followed of all men: Thou Solomon my son, know the God of thy father, and
serve him with a perfect heart and willing mind: for the Lord searches every
man's heart, and understands all the thoughts of men's minds. If thou seek
him, thou shall find him: but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for
ever. And Tobit gave this counsel among other things to his son: My son,
set our Lord God always before thine eyes, and let not thy will be set to
sin, or to transgress the commandments of God: do uprightly all thy life
long, and follow not the ways of unrighteousness: for if thou deal truly,
thy doings shall prosperously succeed to thee, and to all them which live
justly. Bless thy Lord God always, and desire of him that thy ways may be made
straight, and that all thy counsels and purposes may prosper.

And if thou desire to know whether thou be happy To examine our selves.
or not, examine thy self whether thou be glad, merrily disposed, of a quiet
conscience, without fear of worldly things, and content with thine estate:
whether thou be never pensive or melancholic, for the lack or loss of any
worldly thing: whether no hope in gaping for any thing to come troubles thy
mind; whether day and night thy mind be pleased, and in one estate. If these
things be so, thou art come very near to the felicity that a man can enjoy in
this life. But if thou desire or think to find happiness in pleasures,
riches, or honor, thou art as far from felicity, as from the true joy and
contentation thou seek: for these things after which thou huntest, as though
they would bring thee gladness and contentation, are rather the causes of
sorrow and grief. Every man seeks after the things that should make him
joyful and content: but where to find that joy The wrong way
which is certain and constant, they know not. Some seek it in feasting and
carowsing, others in ambition and great trains of followers; some in brave
attire; others in courting young Damsels: but all these and such like be false
and deceivable pleasures and joys, and bring men rather to infelicitie, then
unto happiness. He that will be happy, must think upon the variety of
accidents that chance unto men before he feel them: he must account of his
riches and possessions, of his wife and children, and all other things that be
most dear to Seneca.
him, as if he should not always have them, and as if he should be nothing the
more unhappy, if he should leave to have them For he is in a miserable state,
whole mind is vexed with fear of that which may happen, and he is unhappy
before unhappiness come, that with fear is careful, lest the things wherein
he delights, should not always remain with him: for that man shall never be
quiet; and by looking for that is to come, he shall lose the pleasure he might
take in the things present. Providence must foresee, and wisdom prevent the
evils that may happen: and not to follow the common manner of men: then to
judge when they begin to repent: for nothing is more miserable nor foolish then
always The vanity of fear.
to fear: and what a madness is it for a man to run before, or accelerate his
own evil? He is more sorrowful then is necessary, that is sorrowful, before
there be necessity. But all these things will not bring thee to happiness,
except thou direct them to the true felicity and beatitude, and end of man;
that is, Gods service and thy souls health. And therefore thou must yet
examine the matter further: how thou do use honor and riches, and bear
poverty and contempt; how thou carriest thy self in health and sickness, in
prosperity and adversity; how thou use thy self having much learning or
little: for all these things be Gods creatures and gifts, made to our use:
which if thou use as thou ought, and carriest an indifferent hand upon them,
and desire no more nor no less of these and the like things then is
necessary to the attaining of our end and felicity, then art thou in the right
path that leads to the same: but if thou desire or seek, love or use these
creatures to any other end then for this, thou runnest astray, and art out of
the way that should bring thee to that end and happiness.

Seeing then that the fountain of our happiness of life, in a great part is
within us, and proceeds of a contented and quiet mind, that is, by a
moderation of our affections, which is brought to pass by the exercise of
virtue: let us labor to make our selves virtuous, and cleanse our minds of
all manner of perturbations, that we may the sooner come to that happiness of
life we desire. Even as a field (though the ground be fertile) Simile.
without manuring and tillage, will not be fruitful; so the mind (though well
inclined) without exercise of virtue and learning, will grow dull and sluggish,
and as it were, gather rust. Diogenes walking on a time through the street in
Athens, wherein were placed diverse images of such ancient men as had best
deserved of the Commonwealth, asked alms of them one after another: the cause
being demanded; I learn (quoth he) to take denial patiently: so should we
practice to master and command our affections, and inordinate desires of
fleshly pleasures, and patiently to take denial of riches, reputation, worldly
pomp and vanities, which allute and deceive men by the like means, as they
that prepare a bitter drink for a child, anoint the cup with honey, that the
poor infant may by the sweetness of the one, the less perceive the
bitterness of the other: and as the drugges that are tempered with unwholesome
and venomous herbs, have written above, A medicine for such a disease, that
the poison may be nothing suspected of him that reads the superscription. So
the worldly vanities we have in such estimation, allure and deceive us, with a
fair, but a false show of happiness. All men desire one thing, that is, a
happy life; but because they take the instruments for the thing it self, and
follow not the right way; the more they labor to come to it, the further they
go from it. For whereas Felicity requires a quiet and contented The benefit
of a quiet and contented mind.
mind with that which is sufficient, men heap to themselves causes of worldly
cares and troubles, leaving the plain straight way, to go over hills and
mountains: to whom it happens as it does to travelers, that being once set
out of the right way, the further they wander, the more they go astray. Every
man complains of the troubles of this life, and yet no man is contented with
quietness: wherein they resemble foolish seamen, that when they should fly
from the sea to the land, they run from the land to the sea. And nothing
seems to me more to resemble the variable accidents of this worldly life,
then that of seafaring men, that are sometimes tossed up and down with
tempestuous weather, sometimes swallowed up with the Sea; otherwhile sail in a
fair calm; sometime lie at anchor in a safe harborough; sometimes advanced to
great riches; another time undone, or cast into great poverty. Democritus
says; He that will live happily, must propound to himself things possible,
and be content with things present.

That which brings forth contentation, is a sufficiency of things: this
sufficiency is measured either by the necessity of nature, or by the opinion
of men. The Things necessary to nature.
things that are necessary to nature, are health of body, and liberty, and to
be defended from hunger, thirst, and cold. These be the things that nature
requires; the rest are superfluous, and not necessary to contentment or
happiness. Why do thou embrace (says Boethius) externe good things for
thine own? Do thou think that fortune will make these thingsthine, which
Nature has made nothing appertaining to thee? The sufficiency of things by the
opinion of men are, diversity of pleasures; abundance of riches and
possessions; honor and glory; pomp and principality. The election or choice
of these things helps to make the life happy or unhappy. But although the
things which nature requires, are sufficient to bring forth contentation: yet
because, to live according to the law of nature only, is barbarous and not
meet for them that know ciuility, which is to be preferred before the other;
let us see what is sufficient in a civil life to make contentment. To live in
pleasures, is rather beastly then agreeable with humanity; and as has been
said before, has been the destruction of them that have been addicted to
them: for the more a man gives himself to pleasures, the more he subiecteth
himself to vices: and as the Poet says: Delicias mundi fragiles, qui mente
sequetur,
Perdidit aterni certissima gaudi coeli.
Who the frail pleasures
Of the world will choose:
The certain Joys of Heaven
Are sure to lose.


And yet honest pleasures or rather delights, (for by this name I would
distinguish between the pleasures of the flesh, and those of the mind) for
recreation and A limitation for pleasures.
healths sake, joined with sobriety and modesty, are not denied a Christian,
nor any hinderance, but rather a furtherance to felicity.

Aristippus says, That man moderateth pleasure, not which abstaineth utterly
from it, but which uses it in such sort as he is not carried away with it; as
we govern a ship or a horse, when we lead them whither we list.

The immoderate desire of riches (as appears by that which has bin said)
has been the overthrow and confusion of many, and cried out upon, not only by
the Philosophers, as a most pestiferous passion, but also by the Prophets and
holy Fathers, and by Christ himself, with sharp and bitter threatenings of
extreme misery to those that possess them. For he is not in the right path
that leads to happiness, who runs after the goods of the world, but he
that flies from the vices of the world: and nothing brings more care and
unquietness of mind, then the love of riches; which is never Avarice never
satisfied.
satisfied with that he has, but always desires more, and therefore never
contented. For liberty of the mind, and care of worldly goods, will never agree
together: and yet riches well gotten, and well spent, is to be accounted the
blessing of God; and may be a furtherance to felicity, as one says: Eaelix
opes qui cum sapientia tenet.
Happy is he that inioyes
Wealth with Wisdom.


But as it is now commonly gotten and used, it may rather be taken for the
blessing of the devil. Rich men, for the most part, are said to have riches,
as men are said to have an ague; when indeed an ague has them: And so riches
possesses them, and not they their riches, being slaves many times to that
should serve their use. Riches Senec.
with a wise man do serve, but with a fool they rule. If thou content thy
self with that which is sufficient to serve thy necessity, thou can never be
poor: but if thou go about to satisfy thy covetous desires, thou can never
be rich. Endeavor therefore to make thy desires equal with thine estate, but
not thine estate equal Sentence.
with thy desires. There is not more beautiful nor Xen. The best riches.
more honest riches for a man, especially for a Prince, then virtue and
justice. He ought to give more thanks to God, to whom he has given wisdom
and a contented mind, then for that he made him rich. Unto whom soever God
gives riches (says the Preacher) goods, and power, he gives it him to enjoy
it, to take it for his portion, and to be refreshed of his labor: this is now
the gift of God. Seneca advises, lest fortune should find us unprovided, to
make poverty familiar to us. He shall be rich with more security, who knows
that it is not painful to be poor. For he that agrees well with A riches in
poverty.
poverty, is rich; because nature desires but a little; but opinion would have
without measure, and a man may be poor in the midst of great riches. And so
much the more excellent is honest poverty, then hateful covetousness, by how
much the poor man is contented with little, where, to the rich man, a great
deal seems nothing: for he is not rich that possesses much goods, A poverty
in riches.
but he whose desires are satisfied, and his mind content with a little. And
what a madness is it to seek to exchange contentment for care, mirth for
sorrow, liberty for bondage, pleasure for pain, and watching for sleeping? It
is given for a penance to ambitious and covetous men, never to content
themselves with enough, nor yet with too much. Seneca speaking of the measure
of riches, says; Primus modus habere quod necesse est, proximus quod sat est.
The first is to have so much as is necessary, the next, that which is
sufficient. That which is necessary, has respect to the maintenance of
himself and his family: for every man is bound by nature to provide for his
off spring: and that child has a great advantage to be an honest man, that is
provided for in his cradle. That which is sufficient, has respect to his
estate or calling, to which he is either borne, or has attained by his
industry or virtue; but not by scraping together riches and possessions by
ungodly or dishonest means, wherein respect must be had to decency, by an
upright judgment of reason, not by the common custom of men. For the common
error in estimation of riches and possessions, brings infelicity to many,
that Of Midas and Pythius.
otherwise would be happy. Midas had an Asses ears (as it is said) fastened
to his head for his extreme foolish desire of gold. Pythius had good counsel
given him by his wife, by an apt device to dissuade him from overmuch love of
gold: for when there was found out mines of gold, he commanded all men of his
City to dig for gold, and to do no other work by sea nor by land. Which,
when all men took grievously, because they hadho fruits out of the earth to
sustain themselves nor could do any thing for the maintenance and necessity
of their lives, they complained to his wife: she willed them to use patience
for a time, and gathering together all the Goldsmythes, she commanded them to
make fishes of gold, and foul, and all other things that men use to eat. When
Pythius was returned from his journey, and called for his supper, his wife
caused a table of gold to be set before him, with diverse dishes wherein was no
meat, but all things made of gold like unto meat: When Pythius had praised the
workmanship, and called for something to eat, she caused other things of gold
to be set before him likewise, whereat when he waxed angry, and said he was
very hungry; Yehaue (said his wife) caused all husbandry and ^llage to be laid
down, and all other arts that were necessary to sustain man's life, and ye
have commanded to dig unprofitable gold, which serves to no use, except they
may also sow and plant the ground, and reap the fruit thereof. Thus by his
wives wisdom, Pythius was taught to leave digging for metals, and willed his
citizens to return to tilling the ground, and to fall to their occupations,
and to the exercise of their trades as they did before. To him that esteems
riches for a good thing, the false name of poverty is a torment. And therefore a
greater revenge ^neu.
cannot be wished to a rich man, then that he live long; for that greater is
the penance by his long life in covetousness, then any other revenge that can
be taken of him. And if covetous men knew, what a sweet thing liberality is,
they would turn their desires to gain much, into a disposition to give more:
as the Poet says: Extra fortunam est quic quid d^natur amicis,
Quas dederis solas, semper habebis opes.
What Is given to friends, is beyond fortunes frown,
Gifts so bestowd, shall always be thine own.


Avoid therefore poverty as much as thou may, and yet fall not in love with
riches, lest thou be overcome by them: for many labor for riches to live, and
many live to get riches: as the Satyricke says: Non propter vitam faciunt
patrimonia quidam,
Sed vitio c^ci propter patrimonia viuunt.
Some be that not for life their purchase make,
But blind with sin, live for their purchase sake.


Saint Augustine says; Whosoever suffers himself to be governed by
covetousness and desire of riches, he Eccle.
makes himself subject to all vices, and to all wickedness. There is nothing
worse the^ a covetous man: there is not a more wicked thing then to love money.
Democritus Extreme covetousness worse then extreme poverty.
affirmed, that extreme covetousness was worse then extreme poverty. And he that
will look thoroughly into a man, shall find that he is unapt to al manner of
virtues. Di^genes opinion was, that in a rich city there ca^ be no place for
virtue. God (says Gueuarra) we see, gives power to many covetous men to get
riches, policy to keep them, hearts to defend the^, life to possess them, but
not liberty to rejoice and use them; so that though they be Lords over the
riches of others, yet they are slaves to that themselves Richest men the
greatest slau^.
possess. The pleasures of life of a covetous man, will end before his
covetousness. For where vices have had long continuance, there death only
must pluck up the roots. He takes no pleasure but in casting his reckenings,
in telling his money, in selling his wares, and in multiplying his commodities:
esteeming it as a Paradise to be always gaining, and never spending; to be
always winning, and never losing; to be always receiving, and never lending;
and to be always getting, as though he should never die. And if he have two
keys to his chest to keep money from stealing, he suffers ten cares in his
heart, to keep him from spending. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam. So that
the care being great to keep, and the grief no less to lose; men should be
advised how they begin to get, since to save a little of their wealth, they
hazard much of their honor: for gain and getting are but weak pillars to
uphold a good name: because covetousness and honor are of themselves
contrary, and cannot agree together in one man. And although he have great
riches and possessions, yet in his own conceit he lacks so much, as he sees
himself advanced by another that has more. It is painful to many, to see a
few above them; because they consider not how many be beneath them. Riches is
neither good nor evil of it self, but by relation, according to the use or
abuse of it. Neither do riches hurt the possessour, Riches in themselves
neither good nor evil.
if he use them well; nor need makes a poor man commendable. And therefore
says Saint Ambrose, Let rich men learn, that there is no fault in riches and
possessions, but in them that know not how to use them. For as to the wicked
riches is a hinderance, so to the good it is a furtherance to virtue. For what
profits it thee (says Augustine) to have a chest full of goods, if thy
conscience be empty? Thou will have goods, and thou will not be good thy self:
Thou ought to be ashamed of thy goods, if thy house be full of goods, and
have of thee an evil master. And Ecclesiisiicus, What profits it a fool to
have riches, seeing he cannot buy wisdom? For a guilt saddle and bridle
makes a horse nothing the better. And this is commonly seen in these Similies.
days, that whom fortune raises a foot in riches and reputation, he lifts
up himself a yard in pride and covetousness. By which sayings, it appears,
that riches neither couetously gotten, nor niggardly hoorded, nor vainly
spent; to him that estimateth them with a sound and upright judgment, and
uses them as they ought, and to that purpose for which they were ordained, may
be a furtherance to felicity. To this purpose serves the old Greek Poets
counsel, Hesiodus, made Latin (if I forget not) by Sir Thomas Moore: Tanquam
iam moriturus, partis vtere rebus,
Tanquam victurus, denuo parcetuis.
Ille sapit qui perpensis his rite duobus,
Parcus erit certo, munificusque modo.
As at thy death, so liberally give,
Yet therein be, as thou were long to live.
He shall be held wise that both these can do,
Be equally both free and sparing too.


But the pains men commonly take in getting No true felicity in riches.
riches, and the care in keeping them, and the sorrow for losing them, makes
men rather unhappy then happy that possess them. The next way to riches
(says Sene^) is by contemning riches: for some man may contemn all things,
but no man can have all things. And yet to possess riches without fear and
care, may be profitable to him that has them. The only way to do that, is
for a man to persuade himself, that he may live well without them. Compare
the riches thou have lost, with the cares that be gone with them, and thou
may call it gain. It is more easy to depart from the rules of virtue in
the state of riches then of poverty. He, whom in abundance (says Gregory)
pride puffs not up, nor in necessity defires provoke, knows how to use
plenty, and to suffer penury. For no man is overthrown with the grief of
adversity, Aust.
that is not overtaken with the pleasures of prosperity. Our forefathers
(says one) were so wise, and we so simple, because they labored not, but to
know, and we travel not, but to have. Antist. said, that riches without virtue
yield as much pleasure, as a banquet without any body at it.

But Horace noting the evil estimation and use of riches, said, it brought all
things to pass. Virtus, fama, decus, diuina, human^ que pulchri^
Diuitys parent, quas qui construxerit, ille
Clarus erit, fortis, iustus, sapiens, ctiam Rex,
Et quicquid volc^, haec, veluti virtu^ paratum,
Sperabit magnae laudi fore.
Virtue, fame, hono^r, things humane and divine,
All these ^iue place unto the golden mine,
Which w^onso has, his Clarity shall spring,
He shall be valiant, just, wise, nay, a King,
Be what he will, and from it hope more praise,
Then he expects whom noble virtues raise.


CHAP. V.
The great Modesty and Temp^nce of the Emperor Traian: Antiochus King of Asi^
Th^pompus Agesilaus King of Sparta: A noble custom among the Romans, in
conserring their great honors: The estates of this life compared to the Zones:
A dialogue betwixt Socrates and another: Of such as have (...) death: Of the
Emperor Charles the fi^: The rare effects of virtue: The manner how the
Venetians created their (...) Magistrates: Of Kings and Princes: The Princes
Court a Theater: The age imitatcth their Kings and ^ulers What manner of man a
good Prince should be: (...) of sundry good Princes: Kings Courts ought to
(...) schools of Virtue: What manner of men Princes should make their
Familiars, and Counc^llers; variety of discourse to that purpose, etc.

THe desire of honor, and glory, and principality, has been showed by many
examples, and is seen by daily experience to have brought many to extreme
misery: which, being duly considered by diverse wise Princes, has induced them
in the highest degree of honor, to give over their principality, and to lead
in a mean estate, a private life. Traian said, that he marvelled ^.
more of the contempt, that Cincinnatus, Scipi^, and M. Porcius had of great
estate and worldly goods, then of their victories. King Antiochus, when the
Romans had taken from him his Dominion in Asia, and removed him beyond the
mountain called Taurus, gave them thanks, that they had unburdened him of so
great a charge, and left to him the possession of a mean Kingdom, that would
be governed with more ^ase, which argues that there is nothing so glorious and
magnificent, but it desires a moderation. When Theopompus heard that his
countriemen had by decree given him very great honor, he refused it, saying;
That time did increase mean honors, but did abolish those that were exceeding
great. It is better to be worthy of honor then to have honor. Agesilaus King
of Sparta, A Princely modesty.
hearing that diverse Nations and people in Greece had decreed to set up his
image or picture in their Cities for honors sake, wrote to them, that he
would have no picture nor image of his, made in any sort to be set up in any
place. But where is that modesty and contempt of vain glory to be found, not
only among Christian Princes, but in meaner estates, who for the most part
think themselves bereaved of their due, if they be not both pictured and
registered, as worthy of perpetual memory, though their merits be little or
nothing? But Agesilaus contented himself with honesty, choosing rather to be
engraven by his virtue in men's breasts, then to hang up against the walls, or
to be set up in the market place, in gold or brass. For there is not a more
beautiful picture, then the honorable memory of a life well spent. And
therefore men should be careful to leave such pictures behind them, as may
rather show the images The best in a ge^.
of their mind, then the lineaments of their face and body. And men of noble
minds, glory not in the beauty of their bo^e, which is so soon defaced and
at an end: but in Wisdom, in Fortitude and in those things that show the
Virtue of the mind. And therefore the Romans, when they appointed to any
excellent man his image to be made, they caused it to be apparelled in a long
gown, if they de^ed it to (...) for any civil commendation; but if it were
for the gl^y of the wars, then he was armed: expressing not only the form
of his body, but also in some sort the virtue of his mind. He is worthy of
honor in deed, who in his own opinion deserves not that he has, and in the
opinion of others, deserves much more then that he possesses. Honor
therefore and glory, and rule, and reputation have no necessary part in a happy
life; neither Honor an hinderance to (...).
are they any help, but rather hinderance to ^ehcity. And yet they that use
honor as they ought, may be nevertheless happy, by the testimony of a
learned man: Honorem consecuti, diuiti as probae virtutis instrumenta facite:
Sic boni credimini, and vitam beatam aegere poteritis.

Having attained unto honor, make riches the instruments of honest virtue: so
you shall be esteemed good men, and lead a blessed life.



This sufficiency therefore that brings forth contentation and happiness,
must have respect to nature, and to civility, measured by the sound judgment
Cl^ud.
of a mind void of all perturbations. Nature has given to every man to be
happy, if he knew how to use it: for he that thinks his goods and
possessions not to be great enough, is fair from felicity, though he were
Emperor of the whole world. For what matter is it what estate a man be in, if
himself think it ^.
not to be good, seeing happiness comes of a contented mind? He is happy,
that seems not so to other men, but to himself. But this is a great
unhappiness, to which men are subject, that then they shall know their folly,
and not before, when they shall not be able to find any remedy. Such a mind
that is cleansed from the intemperance of his impure and unruly affections,
knows how to find out this sufficiency, and suffers reason to persuade him
to be therewith contented. He can make choice of pleasures and delights, and so
moderate them, as they shall be no hinderance to felicity: he estimateth things
as they are, and not as they show to be: honor and glory, dominion and
reputation, and all other pompes and worldly vanities, which are so much
desired and wondered at of me^, as the perfection of felicity, he esteems as
the (...) of ^ortune, and ruggles for children to play with, and nothing
appertaining to happiness. Riches, if they happen to him, he uses to serne
his necessity and calling, and to the benefit of others, and not to be made a
slave unto that which is made for his use: knowing that a covetous man is good
to no body, and worst of all to himself. The best measure of riches after
Seneca his opinion, is, not to fall into poverty, nor to be far from poverty:
which agrees with the Poet: Foelix qui potuit contentus viuere paruo.
Happy is he that is content to live with a little.


One compares a temperate man that is contented with A companion.
a little, to him that trauelleth in the Spring by little iourneyes through a
pleasant fertile country. Philip de Comines says, that there is nothing better
in this miserable life, then to fear the judgment of God, in all things to
observe equity, and to be content with a mean estate; and not to weary our
selves with those cares, which are undertaken of many through ambition, and a
greedy desire to increase their estate. If we could enter into this course of
life and hold it, we should live the more quietly, and be less afflicted with
sickness and fear of death. For as much then as by the opinion of wise and
learned men, and by common experience, the mean estate, or that which is betwixt
the mean and the extremity downward, is most free from the things that bring
infelicity, it shall be good for him that desires to live happi^y, to aspire
no higher, thereby to heap upon himself causes of infelicity, if it please
God so plentifully to bless him.

Homer writes, that King Caluicius, a man endued with many goodly gifts, sent
to their Oracles to desire them that they would not give him so little, that he
should be ^cellent modetation.
inferior to all, nor so much, that he should be hated of all, but rather a
mean estate, that all men might love him: for I had rather (said he) be a
companion with many by love, then King of all with envy.

The estates or kinds of life may be compared to the Zones, by which the
Cosmographers divide the world, A (...).
according to their temperature. The high dignities and honorable estates may
be likened to the burning Zone, which the Mathematicians call Zona torrida,
because they that live under that part of the heaven, are continually parched
and unquieted with the extreme heat of the Sun, that has his course always
over their heads. So the Princes and great estates, by the ordinary course of
their affairs, and unlooked for accidents incident to that calling, are in the
whole course of their life unquieted with care and troubles, with suspicion and
fear, or with an ambitious desire to enlarge their Dominion or Possession, and
to increase or maintain their reputation, and such like. And therefore one
calls imperium, honeitissimam sepul^uram. They that live in poverty and
lack, an ex^emitie contrary to the other, whereby they are v^quieted with
continual care and fear of want, to supply the necessity of them and theirs,
may be likened to them that dwell under the cold Zone, called Zona frigida; who
by want of the Suns heat, through his fair distance, f^le for the most part
extreme cold, and lead a painful life. In the midst between them both is
the temperate Zone, called Zona temperata, where according to his name, men are
neither subject to the extremity of heat, nor the bitterness of cold, but
live in a pleasant mediocrity, void of both extremities. So they that live in
a mean estate, are free from the troubles, cares and dangers, to which high
dignities are subject by their excess and supeisluities, which allure to vice:
and likewise from the fear of penury and want, which tormenteth the poor
estate. He therefore that is in a mean estate, or not ouer-neere extreme
poverty, has a sufficiency of riches to the help of felicity. -- Non capit
magnos motus
Humilis tecta plebeia domus.
The humble lowe-bred cottage is not sensible of violent gusts.


In every Commonwealth (says Aristotle) there be Three kinds of men in every
Commonwealth.
three kinds of men; rich, poor, and the mean between both; among which,
they that be in a mean estate be best, because the mean is always best. For
he that will behold many of them that glitter in gold and silver, and are
accounted happy by their brave attire and great train, not that way as they
are seen and appear to be in outward show, shall perceive them to be like
puppets; who, so long as they are covered and disguised, show like men, but
when any thing happens that disturbeth and uncovers them, then appears
what base matter and pusillanimitie lies hidden and covered under that false
show and counterfcit bravery. And they that be always scraping together
riches, and devising how to encre^se their poss^ssions, can never l^ade a quiet
life, nor enjoy that happiness they look for. For by expecting continually
after that which is to come, they lose the pleasure they should take in that
they possess: like to a dog that waiting at his masters table, swalloweth
whole the meat he casts him, without any pleasure, gaping still for the next
morsel that is to come. But it may be said, that the toil and labor Proper
(...)
men take in gathering riches, is pleasant, when they see their wealth
increase: so is it, even as to those unclean bodies, whose ulcers and scabs
desire rubbing and scratcting until they smart and bleed, it is a pleasure to
be hurt with their own hands: so to them in whose corrupt and defiled minds,
immoderate desires and cupidities break out as it were scabs or byles,
painful labor and unquietness, and turmoyling in the world, to feed the
humor of their greedy and insatiable desires, is a pleasure and delight. Let no
man think whilst he lives in the flesh, Ign.
to satisfy the flesh: it has power to take our life from us, but we are not
able to take away from it his inordinate desires. And the Scripture says, that
worldly men do so drown themselves in the cares and cogitations of this life,
that they leave no place to think upon Gods affairs, which are the business
of their own Souls. But happiness consists in a mind endued Wherein
happiness most consists.
with virtue, void of all perturbations and unquietness, that is contented
with that which is sufficient, that contemns worldly pomp and vanities, and
all other things which men's superfluous labor provides as an ornament to
please their senses, which are given or taken away by Fortune (as the
Philosophers use to speak.) Calamities, loss, and injuries can do no more
against S^.
virtue, then a thin cloud against the Sun.

He that will make choice of an happy life (says Seneca) must not follow the
manner of life used by the multitude and greatest part of men, but rather such
a kind of li^e, as is altogether contrary thereunto: and that must be by
despising the glory, honor, pride, and praise of the world; and judge nothing
worthy to be esteemed but virtue; which is sufficient to bring men to the
fullness of true glory and felicity: for virtue depending upon her own riches,
cares not for the favor and praise of the multitude.

Now he that has found a sufficiency in riches or possessions, and in other
things necessary to life, must prepare a mind to withstand and resist all
manner of accidents and misaduentures, to which men are subject so long as they
walk in this vale of misery. He must be void of all fear of any thing that
may happen to him, whether it be loss of dominion, or of lands, or goods, of
children, or any other thing that is most dear unto him: which he may the more
easily do, if he consider with how little a man may maintain his life, as the
Poet says: Discite quam paruo liceat producere vitam,
Et quantum natura petat:
Learn with how little thou can live,
And how much unto nature give.


Socrates opinion was, that neither principality, nor abundance of riches and
possessions makes a man happy; as appears by a communication which Plato
brings in to be between him and another, thus: But o Socrates, A dialogue.
there need no examples of antiqnity to confute you; but it may be manifestly
proved by new examples, even but yesterday, that many unjust and dishonest men
be happy. Which be they (says Socrates?) Do ye not see (says the other)
Archelaus, son of Perdicas, reign over Macedon? Though I see it not, I hear
it: Does he seem to you happy, or unhappy? I know not, because I was never
conversant with him: but what if you had had his company, would you then know
him? Can you take knowledge of his felicity by no other means? No truly. Then
it seems (o Socrates) that you will say likewise, I cannot tell whether the
great King of Persia be happy or not: and so it is true, for I know not how he
is instructed with learning or with justice. Does all felicity consists in
this? Truly by mine opinion; for I account that man or woman that is honest and
good, to be happy: and him that is unjust and dishonest, unhappy. Then according
to your words, Archelaus is unhappy. Yea surely, if he be unjust and dishonest.
Thus much of Socrates: Yet negligence is to be avoided, and providence without
overmuch care, and possession without Providence requisite.
fear is necessary and requisite. It is a wise man's part to put aside
dangerous things before they come to do hurt: for the loss or harm a man
receives by his own fault, is more grievous then that which happens to him
by another man. Thucidides says, It is no shame for a man to confess his
poverty: but it is a shame to fall into it by his own fault. He must have all
things premeditate that happens to men, and think the same may fall upon
him: for the things that are foreseen before, pierce not so deeply as that
which comes suddenly, and takes a man unawares. He that will make his life
pleasant, Necessary observations.
must not take overmuch care to provide for it, neither can any man take full
pleasure of any thing, except he have a mind prepared for the loss of it. One
pro^steth by long study to have learned this, to contemn mortal things, and
not to be ignorant of his ignorance.

Death is to all men by nature terrible, but to a Christian Death not terrible
to a good Christian.
that knows with how great an advantage he changes his estate, it ought to
be had in contempt: whereof the heathens that knew not God, nor what should
become of them, made little account; who for frivolous causes would offer
themselves voluntarily to die: whose examples though they be not to be
followed, but avoided as an unlawful and unnatural act, yet they may serve to
persuade men the rather to discharge themselves of all fear of death, that
have an assured hope and certain knowledge to possess the unspeakable joys
of heaven, when the Infidels through a vain hope of a better life, wherein
nevertheless they were deceived, would often make choice of a voluntary death.
Cleo^brotus having read Plato his book of the immortality of the Soul,
wherein he disswadeth men from the overmuch love of this life, and thinking he
had found the ready way to deliver his soul out of prison, cast himself down
headlong from a high wall and brake his neck. The women of Narsinga.
They have a custom in Narsinga, that when the men die, their wives be buried
alive with them, and that with great solemnity and joy: and when the king is
dead, there is a pile of wood of a most pleasant savor set on fire, and the
kings carkeise carried into it: and then all his concubines, whereof he has
great store, and all his familiar friends and favorites, and such of his
servants as were in estimation with him, are likewise carried into that pile of
wood: to which place they go with such haste and joy to be burnt, that to
accompany their king in that kind of death, they seem to esteem it the
greatest honor and Valor. Max.
felicity that can happen to them. The Indians by custom The women of India.
do marry many wives, and when the husband is dead, there is great contention
among his wives, which of them he loved best, that she may be buried with him:
then she that has judgment with her, with great joy and merry countenance is
led by her friends to the place, and casting her self into the fire upon her
husband, is burnt with him as a most happy woman; the rest remaining, leading a
sorrowful life. There has been a people dwelling by the mountains called
Rifei, who hold this for a custom, when they come to the age of 50: They make
great piles of wood, and put fire to them, and there burn themselves alive,
and sacrifice to their gods: and the same day the kinsfolk and children make a
great feast, and do eat their flesh half burnt, and drink with wine the dust
of their bones. How much less then should Christians fear death, when it
pleases God to send for them, that hope for a crown of glory after this life?
They make a good bargain, that with the death of the body seek the salvation
of their Soul. Plato says, All the life of wise men, is the meditation upon
death: and that men ought not to be careful to live long, but to live well.
For the honorable age (says Sa^mon Casar.
) is not that which is of long time, neither that which is measured by the
number of years, but wisdom is the gray hair, and an undefiled life is the
old age. And Euripides says, This life is life by name, but in very Necessary
meditations of death.
deed labor. Death is not a torment, but a rest and end of all man's miseries
and labors. And Seneca, Before old age come, a man should learn to live well,
and in old age to die well. But the day of our death (says Gregory) our
Creator would not have known to us, that the same being always unknown, may
be always thought to be at hand: and that every man should be so much the more
fervent in operation, by how much he is uncertain of his vocation: that
whilst we be uncertain when we shall die, we may always come prepared to
death. And because that is so certain a thing that no man can escape, it shall
be good always to think upon death, especially in the time of prosperity:
^or the thinking often thereof, will bridle and restrain all other cuill
thoughts and desires of worldly vanities: for in prosperity we forget humane
srailty. It is reported that the Emperor Charles the fifth, five years before
he died, Charles the (...).
even when he was occupied in his greatest affairs, caused a sepulcher to be
made with all things appertaining to it, that was necessary for his burial,
being dead, and that secretly, lest it might be taken for ostentation or
hypocrisy; Which things he had closely carried with him whithersoeuer he went
five years together; some thinking there had been some great treasure in it,
some other, that there had been books of old stories; some thought one thing,
some another: but the Emperor smiling, said, that he carried it about with him
for the use of a thing, to him above all others most precious. In that sort he
seemed to set death always before his eyes, that the continual remembrance
thereof might drive from his heart the vain pomp and pride of this world. Let
us imagine that we see a man of mean estate, whose mind is cleansed from all
perturbations and unquietness; that has worldly wealth, reputation, and all
other vanities (for which men are called happy) in contempt; that is resolute
and void of all fear, even of death it self; that esteems nothing to be
greatly regarded or cared for, but a virtuous mind; that takes all things that
happen to him, either as Gods blessing, or his cross, and all for his good;
whose mind is always quiet and clear; that holds this opinion, as the
sentence of an Oracle, Every man is his own greatest enemy.
That no man can be hurt, except he be hurt of himself; who would not reverence
that man in his heart, and think him equal with the Emperor? Nay, who (if he
be of a right judgment) would not prefer him before all Emperors and Kings
in the World, as more happy then them all?

He is accounted a great estate that has dominion Note.
and power over others, but he is a great estate indeed that has himself in
his own power. And therefore if thou desire to be great, and to make all
things subject to thee, make thy self subject to reason: thou shall rule much,
if reason rule thee. But if such a man as we speak of, be not, or hardly to be
found, that is able among so many assaults and afflictions, to which men are
subject, to make sufficient resistance (as without Gods especial grace, joined
to his endeavor, it is not possible) yet let us set such a man before our eyes,
in our conceit to give us aim, the better to direct our level: and though we
strike not the mark, yet let us labor to shoot as near it as we can. And if
we cannot attain to that which is answerable to the name of felicity, yet we
shall the rather by that means avoid many parts of infelicity. For he that
labors not to err (says Plato) misseth narrowly. We are troublous many
times to our selves, by desiring and coveting those things that be not worth
the having, as abundance of riches, reputation, and such like. But Plato says,
not the rich, but the wise and prudent avoid misery. We are often unquieted
with fear of the loss of those things, the lack whereof, if we look
thoroughly into the matter, is not hurtful to us, but an opinion of harm. We
fear many things, that have in them nothing that is dreadful but the fear it
self. Put away joys, fear and hope, and be not sorrowful; the mind is
cloudy and bridled where these things reign. Demetrius said, that he accounted
none more A true saying.
unhappy, then he that never tasted of adversity; which to a virtuous man is an
exercise of his virtue, which otherwise would wither and lose his force and
brightn^; as iron with rest, gathers rust, but with use and occupying it
shines bright. The best thing in worldly things, is to contemn the things of
this world. A man by nature is subject to sickness; and by loss of his goods
may fall into poverty; and by the displeasure of the Prince or people, may lose
his reputation; but to Things about the power of fortune.
make him vicious, that is virtuous; wicked, that is honest; a coward, that is
valiant; base minded, that is of noble courage, is neither in the power of
nature, of men, nor of fortune: and therefore to a man endued with virtue,
nothing can happen that can greatly distemper him, who only triumphs over all
those things that make other men happy. Ille sapit solus, volitant alij vclut
vmbr^:
He is only wise, whilst others fly like shadows.


When virtue is present, men take example thereat, The effects of virtue.
(says Solomon) and if it go away, yet they desire it: it is always crowned,
and triu^pheth, and wins the battle and the undefiled rewards. He stands
as a tree well rooted, which though it be shaken with diverse winds, yet none
ca^ make it fall. He knows his body, his lands and goods be subject to the
power of men: but so long as his mind is free to himself and at liberty, he
makes no great account of the rest: he can moderate prosperity; bear stoutly
and assuage the sharp stings of adversity; and despise those things which other
men wonder at. It is the property of a great mind to contemn great things, and
to desire rather mean matters then ouergreat. If there be any happy man in this
world (said Socrates) it is he that has a clean and undefiled soul, and a
clear conscience stained with nothing: for in him only the Things most
pleasant in man's life.
mysteries of ^od may bebeheld and seen. The most pleasant and sweet thing in
man's life (said he) is learning, virtue, and the history of unknown things:
and quietness of life, free from worldly affairs and troubles, and void of
cupidities and desires, which distemper the tra^quillity of the mind, he
prefers before all that a man can possess: for he is happy that has no
need, and desires no more. Tra^quillity of conscience, and security of
innocence makes a happy life: for nothing brings more labor and trouble to
this life, then to boil with earthly desires: and nothing causes more
quietness, then to desire nothing of these worldly matters. Seneca affi^meth
this by his own experience, Rebus paruis alta prasta^ quies. The wise Emperor
Marcus Aurelius seems to be of the same opinion, when he taxes the folly of
m^n, ^olly.
that forsake a quiet life they might find at home, to seek with trouble, for
advancement and credit abroad: here be (says he) many men wise, but more
fools; and the greatest fool of all is he, who being at r^st in his house,
searches with diligence elsewhere, troubles, travels and pe^plexities: for
that for the most part he (...) no other fruit of the offices and ^states for
which he searches abroad, then to suffer continual pain, care, and grief at
home. If men inferior to this noble Emp^rour in wisdom and knowledge, would
rely upon his ^dgement and counsel, and learn to fly opinion grounded upon a
common custom of the multitude, they should find better means to attain to a
happy life with love and quietness, then by hunting so earnestly after credit
and reputation, to make them envied and hated of others, with travel and
vexation both of body and mind to themselves. And though officers and functio^s
must of necessity be in cue^y commonwealth, and cue^y one must fe^ue and employ
his travel in the same, yet they should expect ^he time of their calling, and
not prevent it, by intruding themselves before their vocation. The Venetians
have Magistrates called Pragadi of the word, because in the Magistrates called
Pr^gadi.
first foundation of their city, men were prayed to take the office, and to
help to govern the estate. But in these days there is no need to pray men to
take offices of government, but men themselves will pray, and with great labor
and other means sue with shame enough for offices of rule, though mean, and
themselves insufficient, and of little worth. Every man now will be a
Magistrate, and bear rule over others, though he cannot well govern himself;
which has brought things that were heretofore had in regard, almost in
contempt, as Saint Hierome says; Things of great price by overmuch use lose
their estimation. The pride, ambition, Pride and vain glory beget confusion,
vainglory, and corruption of these latter days, has engendered a confusion
of all things: but those ambitious and vainglorious men, that hunt after
offices of rule and charge, without due consideration of their own
insufficiency, and unworthiness to bear rule, even in mean callings also,
are aptly reprehended by the Earl of Surrey, thus: For with indifferent eyes,
My self can well discern,
How some in storms to guide a ship,
Do seek to take the stern.
Whose practice if it were proved,
In calm to guide a barge,
Assuredly believe it well,
It were too great a charge.
And some I see again,
Sit still, and say but small,
Who could do ten times more then they,
That say they can do all.
Whose goodly gifts are such,
The more they understand,
The more they seek to learn and know,
And take less charge in hand.


Septimius Seuerus, after he had passed through many of the most principal and
most honorable offices of the Roman Commonwealth, and ended his Consulship,
he remained a whole year without any office; after which time he would often
say, that the best and merriest days in all his life, he passed that year,
wherein he had no office in the Commonwealth. Plato says, that Fortune is
more contrary to that man, whom she suffers not to enjoy that he has, then
to him, to whom she denies that which he craves: for many (we see) by daily
experience, can attain to honor, fame, reputation, riches and quietness,
that have not the means afterward to enjoy them; some because they cannot,
others, because they will not.

By this which has been said, it appears, that felicity The greatest part
of felicity consists in the mind.
in the greatest part proceeds from the mind. Of externe things, a little is
sufficient to bring contentment to him that has a mind framed to the purpose,
and inclined to virtue: so that we must have a mind prepared, and all things
premeditate that may happen; and not to unquiet our selves with a desire to
advance or change our estate, and think other men's fortune better then our
own: but when such motions trouble us, to look into the matter with a sound
and upright judgment, whether the cause of such unquietness be within us, or
without us; whether in the matter, or in an evil affected mind; whether there
be cause indeed, or in opinion. The want of which consideration, brings to
many much unquietness and coffeehouse, imagining the cause to proceed from
the matter, when it comes of an evil affected mind. Thine own passions are
they that make war upon thee, and when thou keep thine enemies within thy
house, thou complainest of them that be abroad. Which inconstancy of men's
variable minds is well noted of the Poet, when he alleges a contention
between the country life and that of the town: Rure ego viuentem, tu dicis
in vrbe ^eatum,
Cui placet alterius alterius nimirum est odio sors:
Stultus vterque locum immeritum causatur inique,
In culpa est animas qui se non eff ugit vnquam.
I pleased am with the Countries rest,
The belly life thou hold'st most blessed:
He whom another lot does please,
To him his own is a disease,
Fools both to blame the place, when we
In our own minds the error see, etc.


And many might live more happily, if they desired Note.
not rather to content others then themselves, having more regard to that men
say, then to that is meet for them to do.

Plato compares our life to table play, wherein the A comparison.
dice must chance well, and the player must dispose well of his cast: now of
these two things, what the chance of the dice shall be, is not in our power:
but to receive patiently whatsoever shall chance, and so to dispose every thing
in his right place, as being good, it may most profit us; or being bad, do
least hurt, is in the power of a skillful player: so he that shall live
happily, must not only have things chance well to him, but he must also
dispose well of them. But that things shall chance well, is not in our power:
but in the power of God that gives all things; but so to dispose of them, as
either they may do good, or little harm, is partly in our power, if God
withdraw not his grace from us. And in this sort to dispose of things, is
(whether God bless our life and labors with prosperous success, or
intermingle it with some cross and adverse events) to be thankful and
patient, and think all to be done for the best. Whatsoever comes Ecclesiast.
unto thee, receive it patiently: for he that can moderately use prosperity,
and patiently bear adversity, has a great advantage to felicity. Whilst we
live in this world, we should take felicity for borrowed ware, and adversity
for our natural patrimony. So that whether a man be in high estate or low,
whether rich or poor, if Gods graces be joined to a mind endued with virtue,
he may live happily: for A necessary observation.
no estate or calling is excluded from felicity: yet nevertheless some with
more difficulty attain to it then some others, and need GODS graces in
greater measure then the r^: and therefore Se^ca his counsel is, because men
have not sufficient force to make resistance to the diversity of accidents that
chance to great estates, to straighten their possessions to a certain measure,
that they may be the less subject to fortune: he that bears his sails low,
goes sure in a storm: Quatiunt altas sape procella,
Aut euertit fortuna domos:
Minus in paruis fortuna furit,
Raros patitur fulminis ictus humida vallis.
High houses often by storms are shaken,
Or else by Fortunes rage forsaken.
Less frowns she upon things kept under,
And Dales are seldom struck with thunder.


Isocrates likened the life depending upon Fortune, to a great land-flood, that
is troublous, swift, roaring, dirty, hard to pass over, and during but a short
time: but the life given to virtue, he likened to a goodly fountain, whose
water is clear, untroubled, sweet, me^te to be drunk, to men well-affected
apt for nourishment, fruitful, and void of all corruption and filthiness.
Dante was used to say, that such as sought the way that leads to the
sovereign or greatest good, are withstood with three principal impediments;
which to overcome, Three principal impediments.
they ought to employ all their endeavor. The first is, The delights of the
senses, figured by the Lioness, fair and hot by nature, and she through
luxuriousness, accompanied with gluttony and sloth. The second is, The glory
of the world, expressed by the proud and disdainful Lion, to whose ambition
and pride is joined anger. The third is, The getting of worldly wealth,
signified by the shee-wolfe, malicious and hungry, whose covetousness is
followed hard at the heels with envy. One says, that the false felicity of
the world consists False felicity consists in five things.
in these five things: Lordship, Riches, Honor, Fame, and bodily pleasure; the
desire whereof he that can suppress or moderate, shall the more easily find
the right way to the true felicity. S. Bafill says, that men are wicked and
unthankful, never content with that they have, always seeking for that they
have not, sad and sorrowful for not obtaining: the slave, his liberty; the
vnnobleman, nobility; the noble, riches; the rich, Lordship; the Lord, a
kingdom; the King, a monarchy and the Empire of the whole World. (...).
The Philosopher used to say, that as a man, who is invited by his friend to a
feast, takes of that which is set before him, and is contented, so ought we to
take, and content our selves with that God gives us. For if it be against
good manners, to ask of that friend for Partridges or Quails, or other dainty
meats and drinks then that which he has provided for him, much more is it
against equity and reason, to ask of Almighty A simile.
God this or that thing, more then he gives us, especially of his Majesty,
that knows better what we need, and is meet for us, then we know our selves.
Socrates was used to say, that they which desired of God gold or silver, or
such like, their demands were not unlike to them that desired to play at dice,
or such like things, the event and end whereof is uncertain. The things which
are commorly called the goods of fortune and of nature, though they be of
themselves good, because they were created and given of God, yet they neither
bring commodity nor praise, but to them that use them well: and therefore they
that desire those things of God, ought also to desire the right use of them,
that The use to be principally observed.
they may be commodious and comfortable to them: for they that torment
themselves in getting goods, and are vexed with ouer-great care in keeping
them, and unquieted with grief and sorrow for the losing of them, to them
goods are not good: so as we desire many times the things that are not
profitable, but hurtful to us, because the use of things proceeds not from
our judgment, but from the will of God.

Learn therefore to content thy self with thine estate, and that which God
gives thee; and behold advisedly what the things be that drive men almost
into madness for the desire and lack of them, and thou shall perceive that
their loss and lack is not hurtful, but the opinion we hold of them. No man
feels their want, but only thinks that he lacks them. Thou have little
money, so have thou also thereby the The less money the less care.
less care and trouble: thou have little credit and reputation, and thereby
the less envy. The next way to riches and reputation, is to contemn them:
but if that seem to thee ouer-hard, live so as though thou did not contemn
all things, but rather as though thou did give other men leave to have them:
and if thou will believe Seneca, the safest way to felicity, is to despise
externe things, and to be content with that which is honest, and to think
them happy, whom we call most unhappy. Hope and Fear raise great tempests in
men's minds, which join together to vex m^n more then infelicity it self:
for by gaping with unquiet minds after things to come, they cannot quietly
enjoy things present: and the fear of not obtaining that they hope for,
tormenteth their minds more grievously then any evil that can happen; which
is contrary to felicity, that requires a quiet and contented mind. Some covet
riches, others aspire to honor, all desire to live in a prosperous estate, and
few or none know how to use it: as Petrarke rightly says with other Authors:
Many are tormented with adversity, and others know not how to use prosperity:
which caused Flaccus to say; Been far magnam disce fortunam.
Learn how to carry a great fortune well.


For all desire great estate and high dignities, but very few know how they
ought to behave themselves in them: And this may seem strange, that many
Strange, but most true.
can with a constant mind and upright Judgment bear loss, poverty,
imprisonment, exile, punishment, painful diseases, and death it self; and
few can bear with the like mind and judgment, riches, possessions, honor,
power or dominion: and so much the more miserable is their case, as they can
neither suffer the disease, nor endure the remedy. Saint Paul gives counsel,
that we should use the world, as though we did not use it: so should we use
honor, riches, and such like things, as though we did not use them: and
though it be a hard matter to do as we ought, and to have that is meet, and
to attain to the mean: yet we must endeavor not to depart far from the
mean: and if we cannot reach to the best things, yet let us hold those that
have in them least evil: following Aristotle's counsel, that we ought to wish
for a prosperous wind to bring us to the mean: but because that happens
seldom or never, yet we must not omit the other kind of navigations, that is,
the wind failing, to row our ship with oars, and so use our endeavor to
attain to the mean; The necessity of industry.
which to our purpose may be thus applied: If we want the means, either by the
defects of nature, or of Fortunes favor (as we use to speak) to lead a happy
life, we must endeavor to supply the same defects with labor and industry.
For Alexander the great was used to say, that labor and industry is of a
princely dignity; but idleness and sluggishnesse of a servile condition. And
Solomon says, The Soul of an idle man is always in desires, which bring with
them many impediments to felicity. It is not unseemly for good and Alex.
Scucrus.
virtuous men to wish, that the best things may happen to them, but they must
bear whatsoever chance, so shall they deserve the name of virtuous men; as one
says: Euenta quisquis recte fcrt mortalium,
Mihi modestus is vidctur and optimus.
He that all mortal chances can digest,
I Will count him modest, and of men the best.


To foresee that no evil happen, is the part of a wise man, and of a stout man
to bear them, if they happen: and no less wisdom is it to have no confidence
in the world, for that (as G^arra has rightly espied) it has a custom to
hide under a little gold, a great deal of dross; under a resemblance of
truth, it leads us in many dece^ts; and to our very few and short delights, it
joins infinite griefs and displeasures: unto whom it shows most favor, in
him is most peril of destruction; for that the allurements of the world be but
baits to beguile such as bite them: and who serves the world in disdain and
mockery, finds his recompense most i^st and true: where, to him that loves
indeed, it ministers reward of scorn: and when we think our estate best
established, even then we are nearest our overthrow and ruin. But it is hard
for a young man to be wise, and for an old man to be happy. Solon calls him
happy, who being meanly possessed with exteme things, behaueth himself
virtuously, and lives modestly. The part of a wise man is A wise man.
not to wish for that he has not, but to use well that he has. Anaxagoras
also seemed not to think him happy that was rich, or of great power, because
himself despised worldly wealth and possessions; for the which being scorned
and mocked of the people, he said, He marvelled not that he was of the common
and base sort of men accounted a fool and unwise, because such judge according
to externe things, and as they can comprehend with their senses. And they that
by their industry have attained to wisdom and knowledge, are for the most part
less contented then they were before they had gotten that wisdom, and also
then they that be unlearned and not greatly wise. For the simple and ignorant,
because they cannot look thoroughly into the estate of things, nor know how they
should be managed, are not troubled and unquieted in mind so much as the wiser
sort are, that cannot endure with patience to see things evil done, though
they be not their own, which brings much trouble and unquietness to their
minds: which made Solomon say, I gave my heart to the understanding of wisdom and
learning, of errors and foolishnes, and I perceived that in these things also
is pain and affliction of spirit, because into much wisdom enters much
grief, and he that gets knowledge, gets sorrow: by which words it seems,
that Solomon would give us to understand, that he lived more contentedly being
ignorant, then when he had received wisdom. For true it is The ignorant li^e
with the least trouble.
that the ignorant live with less vexation of spirit, and suffer things to
pass without any great grief, because their heads are not occupied with any
deep imaginations or co^ceits, supposing that no man knows more then
themselves: neither are they so much unquieted with ambition and desire of
honor. For they that be of the greatest wit and deepest conceit, are for the
most part given to vice, because they suffer themselves to be guided by their
natural inclination, and are more subject then others to this humor of
ambition, reposing their felicity in honor and glory; to the attaining whereof
by their excellency of wit, they find better means The best wits have not the
soundest Judgments.
then the rest. For experience teaches us, that men commonly of sharp
judgment, are not always of sound condition. The consideration where of moved
Aristotle ask whereof it came to pass, that man being so greatly instructed,
was the most unjust of all creatures? To which problem he answers, that a
man has much wit and great imagination; and therefore he finds many ways to
do evil: and (because by his nature he desires delights, and to be superior
to all others, and of greater felicity) he must of necessity offend, for that
these things cannot be attained without doing injury to many.

The estate of Kings and Princes (in the common opinion Of Kings and Princes.
of the world) is taken to be a most happy estate, but to those that look into
the matter, with a sound and upright judgment, many of them seem to be
further from felicity, then meaner men; except they upon whom God bestows his
graces in greater measure; as upon some he does. For as their dignity is high,
and their charge great, so are they more subject to the assaults of fortune,
then all other earthly things; and have many occasions to move their
affections to sorrow, sometime to anger, sometime to fear, sometime to the
inordinate desire of pleasures, and such like passions, more then the inferior
sort has: and therefore they need a mind strongly fortified with all manner of
virtues, and prepared to resist the violent assaults of those unruly affections
and temptations, which having once gotten the upper hand, their felicity is
clean overthrown, as has been showed before by many examples, with the
dangerous estate of principality, by the confession of wise and mighty
Emperors and Princes themselves. If it be b^rd (as Hesiodus says) for a man
to be good, then must it be likewise hard for a Prince (without Gods special
grace) to be good. For the abundance of honors, and pleasures, and delights,
whereof they see themselves possessed, inflameth and allureth many of them to
vice. As the Roman Emperors which commanded the most flourishing
commonwealth in the world, after they had attained to that dignity, many of
them grew to be more Empire makes men monsters.
like monsters then men. The like may be said of the Assyrians, and other
Monarchies. But to leave the Heathens that knew not God, what was Saul before
he was Profitable observations.
chosen King? how is his goodness exalted in the holy Scripture? whom the Lord
himself did elect; and yet how soon was his virtue eclypsed? How marvelous
was the beginning of Salomons reign? who being drowned in Princes pleasures,
gave himself within a little while, a prey to women. Of two and twenty Kings
of Judah, there were not above five or six that continued in their virtue and
goodness. The like may be found in the Kings of Israel: and there wants not
examples in Christian kingdoms. And what profits it a Prince to be Lord of
many Kingdoms, if he become subject to many vices? Many Princes (says a
Philosopher) begin well, because their nature is good; and end evil, because
no man does gainesay them; and they commit such follies, because there is great
store of flatterers that deceive them, and great want of true men, that should
serve them. And therefore Demetrins Phal. advised King Ptolomie to read those
books, in which precepts are given to Princes and great States, because those
learned men did write those things, which no man dare at any time say to
Princes. Agapet wrote to Justinian, aduising him that they who had need, might
have easy access to him, by reason of his exceeding high estate: that he
would open his ears to them that were afflicted with poverty, that he might
find the access to God open to him. For a Prince should consider in what
degree of dignity he is, and how much he is of God preferred before others, and
for what cause, and to what end. The conversation and manners of a good Prince
and his court, stands with his people for so many laws: for every one
frames himself to follow the examples of his Prince and his Court. A Princes
Court is as a Theater, The Prince^ Court a Theater.
upon which his subjects cast their eyes. Theodericus king of the Goths,
writes thus to the Senate of Rome: Facilius est errare nature am, quam
dissimilem sui princeps possit Rempublicam formare: It is more easy for nature
to err than for a Prince to make his people to be unlike to himself; for
whether it be good or bad, men will follow their Prince. In the reign of
Alexander the great most Quiequid delira^t r^ges (...) Achivi.
part of men gave themselves to be men of war: under Augustus Casar every man
would make verses: under Nero Rome was full of singers, players of (...),
conjurers and juglers: Adrian made all men love ancient writers. In the time of
Pope Leo, all things at Rome sounded of songs: and in Pope Julius time, with
the drum and the fife. Every one imitating All cstate^ strive to imitate
their Princes.
the manners of his Prince. Because the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Henry
the eight our noble king, and Francis the French king favored learning, and
gave countenance and credit to learned men, in all parts of their dominions
learned men in their times began greatly to increase. And when the same king
Francis was polled, for the better healing of a wound in his head, all his
Courtiers presently, and others by their example, out off their hair, which
before they did wear long as a beauty. Alexander the great by nature did hold
his head aside, whereupon his Courtiers, to be like him, would hold their
heads aside also. And what earthly creature represents so much the image of
God as a good King? For by how much the greater a man is in power, and uses
the same well according to Gods appointment, by so much he The expression of a
good King.
draws nearer to God, and therefore so much the nearer to felicity. He
gives good laws to his people, and governs with equity, administreth
justice indifferently, he punishes the wicked, maintains the good,
protecteth the innocent, he shows mercy to diverse, and gives life to many.
He only among men does all things as he will, yet always respecting
justice, and remembering from whence he has his authority. And Ecphautes the
Philosopher says, that he which bears rule over others, must not be
ignorant who rules him: For as Marcus A^relius Note.
says; The Magistrate is judge of private men, Princes of Magistrates, and God
of Princes; By me Proverbs.
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, for justice is the end of the law,
the law the work of the Prince, the Prince the image of God. One says, that a
Prince is custas boni and aequi, and quasi animatum ius. And therefore they
that come to the Prince, seem not to come to him as to a man, but as to
justice and equity it self. Artaxerxes to one that demanded of him an u^iust
thing, said; that the office of a good King is above all things to esteem
justice and equity. And Philip King of Macedon answered Arpalus, that
importuned him to favor a cause of his Cosins: It were better that your Cousin
should be defamed in the state be is in, for his outrage, than I that am a
King, and command over so great a country, should give occasion to my subjects
to speak evil of me, for doing this injustice in favor of him or of you.
The Emperor Galba would often say, that a Prince should foresee that they of
his Court should do no man wrong, but he that did it should be punished with
rigor. Pliny the younger speaks thus of the good Emperor Trajane; Vtenim
felicitatis est posse quantumvelis velis, sic m^tudinis, velle quantum possis.
For as it belongs to felicity to be able to do what thou will, so does it
belong to mightiness to will what thou art able to do. As if he should say,
that the felicity of a Prince consists in commanding and governing according
to justice. Alexander the great was used to say, that all the felicity of a
Prince consists in well governing of the commonwealth: for as the subject
owes to the Prince obedience, aid and honor, so the Prince owes to his
subjects justice, defense, and protection. The end of all laws and government
(says Plato) is that the people be happy, love one another, and follow virtue.
As it belongs to the eye to see, to the ear A^iani.
to hear, to the nose to smell, so does it to the Prince to provide for the
matters of his people; a kingdom being no other thing than a care of others
safety. Antigonus The counsel of a good King.
said to his son, that their kingdom was a noble servitude. In show (says a
king) we live in greatness, but in effect we serve our people. For a king is
chosen not to live deliciously; but that they who choose him, should live well
and happily. A good king is a public servant, a distributer of the goods of
fortune, a protector of the good, and a whip of the wicked, a minister of mercy
and justice, and example of life to his inferiors. Pliny said to Si^con.
his master Trajan, the life of a Prince is a censure, that is to say, the
rule, the square, the line, and the form of an honest life, according to which
their subjects direct their manner of life, and govern their families; and of
the life of Princes the subjects take their pattern and example, more than of
their laws. In maxima fortuna minima licentia est: for in a true Prince,
public piety does always restrain private affection. A King is Lord of all,
but then especially when he over-ruleth himself, and becomes master over the
lusts that bring all the world in subjection. That Prince (says one) that has
Who is an happy Prince.
his mouth full of truth, his hands open to give rewards, his ears stopped to
lies, and his heart open to mercy, is happy, and the people that has him
fortunate. Alphonsus king of Spain said, that the fimple word of a Prince
ought to be of as great weight as the oath of private persons. And Princes
oftentimes commit faults, not because they have no desire to do well, but
because no man dare or will admonish them. Vices (says one) are nourished in
Princes palaces, because pleasures abound, and counsel wants. Neither do
they become evil so much by their own disposition, as by the evil example
and shameless flattery of their parasites. One says, Principum aula mendacii,
and adulationis gymnasium Seneca.
est. Will thou know (says Seneca) what thing is very scarce with them that be
advanced to high dignities, and what is wanting to them that possess all
things? a man that will speak truth. The administration (says one) of the
affairs of a commonwealth by experience only without learning, does often
deceive; as learning only without experience does the like: but when both are
joined together, it makes a happy commonwealth. It is a goodly thing (says
the Emperor Theodosine) for a Prince to have stout captains for the wars: but
without ^alust.
comparison, it is better to keep and have wisemen in his palace. It is very
hard to find a man that is a very valiant soldier and a very good cou^seller.
The counselors and officers of Princes ought to be so just, that sherers
cannotfind Epi^.
what to cut away in their lives, nor that there needs any needle or thread
to amend their fame. It is an unseemly thing for a man that is in an honorable
place to live delicately, loosely, or incontinently. The Emperor Alexander
Severus would often say; that good Princes ought to esteem them for greater
enemies, that deceive them with flattering and lies, than such as do intrude
upon their countries; for the one takes not but of his goods, but the other
robs him of his fame. Flattery Cur.
has more often overthrown the riches of Kings, than his enemies. Miser est
imperator apud quem vera reticentur. Miserable is that Emperor from whom truth
is Cap.
concealed.

Dionysius would bewail the state of Princes, specially Truth necessary to be
whispered in Princes cares.
in this, that men will not speak freely before them, and that the truth is
hidden from them. The Emperor Gordian would say, that all things were
disguised to them, and their flatterers would cast dust in their eyes. Trajan
was a great enemy to liars and detracters, and would say, that it were more
safe for Princes to have patience to hear their own errors, than to give ear
to such as report other men's defects. And this is no small Simeon.
infelicity to those Princes that have none that will speak the truth to them,
and that are not willing to hear it, that they must believe well or evil of
every one by the mouth of another. The French king Lewis the eleventh would
say, that he had plenty of all things but of one: and Truth scarce in Princes
Courts.
being asked what that was; Truth, quoth he. If truth be so scant in Princes
Courts, it is no marvel though in time past they used such severe means to
reform that vice. In some countries lying was grievously punished with
imprisonment, with deprivation of all dignities, and with more severity; in
some only, he that had told a lie to another man's harm, should carry a stone
in his mouth a month after. The wise king said, that to give no place to
flatterers, and to give honor to good and virtuous men, were very great
ornaments to a princely power. King Antiochus being iu hunting, lost his
company, and was driven to lodge in a poor man's house, who not knowing the
king, told him all the faults which he and his favorites had committed. To whom
at his return he said, that he never understood the truth until the last
night: and carried himself more virtuously ever after.

The Persians were wonderful careful in bringing up the children of their
Princes: for which purpose they The education of per^ Princes
would make choice of four excellent men, and singularly given to virtue. The
first of which should be very famous for his justice; the second for his
wisdom; the third should be of rare and mavelous constancy and courage; the
fourth of like modesty and contine^cie. To these should be given the charge of
the education of the kings children of the Persians: who should be called up
every morning by some of his chamber in due season, and admonished to rise and
provide for the affairs which the great God has committed to his government:
for Princes be the ministers of God for the charge and welfare of men. And
Cyrus says, that none ought to reign, that is not better than them over whom
he does command. It is a much more beautiful thing and more princely, to show
forth a mind garnished with knowledge, and framed to virtue, than a body
attired with gorgeous apparel. Alexander Severus would wear no gold nor
precious stones: saying, that a Prince ought not to measure himself by the
things that cover the body, but by the goodness and virtue of his mind. But
all the difficulty is to become good, among so many allurements and
temptations to evil; which must come of Gods special grace, whereto he must
join his own endeavor, to make himself capable of it. A good Princes Court
Good Princes court schools of va^ue.
is a school of virtue and wisdom: for where should wisemen be sought for,
if they cannot be found in good Princes Courts? It is expedient for a Prince to
admit some, both to his Council and company, that are given to a very quiet
life, that have not intermedled with any affairs of the commonwealth: for
their same will make greatly with his fame. O that Princes would withhold their
grace and favor from them, whose minds are stained with covetousness and
immoderate love of riches, or any other notorious vice, and give it to them
that follow virtue: which would work greater effect than Lycurgus laws, that
banished gold and silver as enemies to his country; or any other penal
statutes that were made to reform misdemeanors offensive to the weal
public. Such a Prince that would give countenance and grace to men of virtue,
and reject the others that are of a contrary disposition, should be better
served at home, and all manner functions better executed abroad, to the great
benefit and contentment of his people, and to his own immortal fame and
glory; who should by that means in short time see a most flourishing
commonwealth, as if it were reduced, if not into that golden age, so greatly
celebrated by the old Poets and ancient Writers, yet at least into that of
silver, which is next to it. For such men and manners as the Prince graceth, of
the same condition every man will frame himself to be. Facere recte cives suos
Princeps optimus faciendo docet, cumque sit imperio maximus, exemplo major est.



By well doing, the best Prince teaches his subjects to do well and, when he is
greatest in Empire, he is the greater Whom good Princes should make their
familiars.
in example. A Prince can show no greater sign of a good mind, than to admit
to his presence and familiarity, men known to be virtuous and of good fame.
Aristotle remembers a saying of Theognis the Poet, that it is a certain
exercise of virtue to converse with good men. A Prince (says one) should make
choice of such, as for their virtue he thinks worthy of his favor and
presence: and should not use them with whose company he is delighted, for their
pleasant talk and courtly behavior; but them by whose labor and counsel he
may best atchieve great matters. And therefore he should be very circumspect
what choice he makes, and search out their manners with whom he means to
converse and communicate his mind, that he may discover what spots and stains
they have, to the end he may commit so much to every one, as he shall find in
him cause of trust and honesty. The good Emperor Antoninus used every year to
have his house visited, what disorders were there committed; and among other
things, whether there were any in his house notably vicious: and if any such
were found, what order the Visitor would set down for reformation, was
presently performed. Marcus Aurelius says, he observed one thing during the
time he governed Rome: that he never took into his house a man that was hated
of the commonwealth. He was also greatly commended for that he would never
have in his house any vicious man. He would often say, that those Princes lived
in more security, that had gotten into their Court treasures of good men, than
into their chests treasures of evil money. For, unhappy (said he) is that
Prince, that likes to have his chests full of treasure, and his Court full of
evil men. The Emperor Adrian with great diligence and secrecy used to enquire
what life the Senators or Cou^sellors did lead, and what exercise they used:
And such as he found poor and virtuous, he augmented their patrimony; and such
as he found rich and vicious, he would deprive them from the the Senate. He had
a gentleman in his Court, which he greatly favored: but when he perceived that
all the suits which he preferred to the Emperor, and obtained, he sold for
money, he commanded the man to be apprehended, and that all the things which
by bribery he had purloyned, should be taken from him, and restored to the Rare
lu^ice
owners, and he to be banished to the I Will of Pontus: the Emperor using these
words; Of this offense thou shall remain chastised, and I warned for evermore,
to show overmuch love and extreme favor to my servant, whereby to convert love
into pride, and to sell favor for covetise. The Emperor Antoninus would say,
that a gracious reward ought Gratis to be dispatched. But Archelaus king of
Macedon, gave a good example to Princes, how to bestow their liberality: for
when one begged of the king as he was at supper, a cup of gold, that thought no
time well spent, but when he was craving, the king commanded his servant to
give it to another more worthy than he: and beholding him that begged the cup;
thou (said the king) art worthy to crave, and not to receive; but Gifts ought
to be given ouely to the worrhy.
this man is worthy to receive, though he does not crave. For men given to
virtue, take it as a great offense and disgrace, when there is no respect had
of their merits; and when vicious men, or they that have little or no thing in
them are made equal, or preferred before the^ in favor or honor, which is the
reward of virtue. For Princes should not look to be sued unto for reward or
preferment, by them that are worthy and have deserved well; (Meritum petere
grave:) for honor forbids to flatter or beg the rewards of virtue, which
should be offered to those that are worthy, or have deserved them. Alexander
the great would play many times at tennise, and his manner was to give them
that played with him as they were playing, some gifts and rewards that did ask
any thing of him: Serapion a modest young man, and pleasantly disposed, that
played often with the king, perceiving, because he never asked any thing, he
never had any thing given him, he cast the ball to every one but Alexander: And
being asked of the king, why he cast the A witty courtier or cunning beggar.
ball to every one but him? Because (quoth Serapion) you did not ask him of
me: then the king smiling to himself, gave him a very great gift; which when
he had with very great joy received, he played more lively than before. Then
said the king, I see plainly, that gifts are more gracious to him that asks
not, than to him that asks. A Poet says: Principis est virtus maxima nosse
suos.
It is the greatest virtue in a Prince to know his own.


The Emperor Sigismund was wont to say, that those Kings and Princes of the
earth were happy, that banished proud men from their Court, and brought in
their places men given to courtesy and humility. I doubt not, but his meaning
was also to have flatterers and disseblers and detracters banished; saving that
he doubted many of their Courts would then be left desolate and unfurnished.
By this which has been said it appears, that felicity does not always
attend necessarily upon the highest estates, and the higher the estate, the
more hard there to be found; except where God does plentifully bestow his
graces and blessings: Because Princes seem rather to be ordained to the
happiness of others that be committed to their charge, than of themselves, as
touching worldly felicity; for the troubles and cares that are joined with
government, draws them many times from contentation to discontentments, which
detracteth from felicity. What the eye is in the body, the same a Prince is in
the commonwealth: what the Sun is in the element, the same a Prince is in his
people: the Sun is the eye of the world, a Prince the eye of the multitude:
what the Mind is in a man, the same a Prince is in his realm: what God is in
the administration of the whole world, the same a Prince is in the people
committed by God to his charge. As God when he sees all things, is
nevertheless as not seeing any thing; so a Prince should know all things, and
make as though he knew not many things. And as the Sun is no other to the
poor man, than to the rich man: but indifferent to all; so a Prince should not
respect the person, but should wisely consider of the matter, according as it
is requisite in every thing. Ecphantes says: Rex unicum and excellens quoddam
opus cst, imago supernii^iusregis regis, creators suo semper familiaras, a
subdit is vero regno tanquam lumine conspicua. Menander and others, call a
Prince the lively image of ^od that governs al things, appointed to minister
justice; and therefore we ought to consider of Princes, not The maje of God
honored in a Prince.
what they are of themselves, and as men; but how much is given or permitted to
them of God. Neither do we reverence and honor so much the private person in
Princes, as we do consider the majesty of God, and the image and power of him,
whose delegates and deputies they are here upon the earth. They are the lights
of the world. And as to govern well in principality, is the most excellent
dignity of all other; so is it of all other the most difficult. And though
their charge and care be very great, yet that Prince that will with humility,
join his own endeavor with Gods graces, to consider with himself, that as he
is exalted above all things in dignity and dominion, so he should labor to
surmount all others in worthiness of virtue and goodness, to suppress or
moderate his unbridled affections, which Plato says, be very evil
counselors; to purge his mind from all manner of perturbations; to use
magnanimity in contemning all perils; patience in bearing such crosses as God
shall lay upon him; to have a mind prepared for all things that may happen; to
be like the Ethereall substance, that is above the Moon, which is always
clear and in one estate; that considers with himself, that religion and the
service of God is the foundation of a kingdom, and that the chief means to
rule well, consists in the worthiness and magnanimity of the mind, and in
a certain contemning, and despising of humane thing, after which other virtues
will then easily follow. For as stones and rocks, beat back the waters, so
the mind of a Prince should break all adverse things, and always persist in
his virtue; neither to be lifted up with prosperity, nor dejected with
adversity, but to take both fortunes with a constant mind, nor to fear death
it self. Such a Prince, I say, may not only attain to the highest degree of
felicity, but by his example may be a means to the happiness of many others.
For such as the Prince is, such commonly are his subjects.

CHAP. VI.
The Earthy felicities that belong unto the mean estate with the way how best
to manage it: Of E^vy, Hatred, and Contempt: Of Prudence, Silence, and
Bashfulnesse: Who are the happiest men in this world: Not those which outwardly
appear such: Wholesome Counsel and necessary Instructions to attain to that
felicity of true friendship: And the distinguishing of Friends and Kinsfolks:
The great difference betwixt these lat^er Times and the former: Of learned
Emperors: The true and direct way to enjoy Happiness, etc.

THe inferior state of men likewise is not excluded from felicity, for though
they want much of the superfluities of great estates, yet they have sufficient
wherewith to be contented, and to lead a happy life, and are not so much
subject to the inconstancy of Fortune. As they exceed these in dominion and
possessions, in wealth and sensual pleasures, in honor and reputation: so
have they more cares and unquietness of mind, and live in greater fear and
peril. For so ^ath The felicity of the moan estate.
God disposed of these worldly matters, joining troubles and unquietness with
high dignities and riches; security and quietness with poverty, and low
estate. He lives more cheerfully upon who^ Fortune never smiled, than he whom
she has forsaken. Alexander severus was used to say; There is no kind of
mis-hap so unfortunate, as for a man to call to remembrance, that in times past
he had been fortunate. Adversity never dismayed any but such as prosperity
deceived. He is more happy to whom honors, riches, and worldly pomp is
superfluous, than they that have the fruition of them at the full. All these
which we call good things, wherein we seem to take a singular and sound, but
indeed a deceiptfull and false pleasure, as riches, reputation, authority, rule
and such like, which men's vain and greedy desires have in so great admiration,
are possessed with pain, Note.
and beheld with envy. And to them that are so adorned, or rather burdened,
they threaten more evil than they promised good. And those estates that are
between these extremities, have also their means to attain to felicity; but
with so much the more difficulty, as they exceed or defect from the mean. For
the extremities of estates, specially the highest, are more subject to those
things that are hinderance to felicity, than the mean estates. And therefore
they require Gods graces in greater measure, and a mind fortified with many
virtues, to make resistance to the things that are offensive to happy life. And
yet there is no estate but is subject to troubles and unquietness. Pontanus
reckons up Troubles of this life.
some of the troubles of this life, in an Epitaph made for his friend, thus:
Do you ask me what be the sawces of this life? labor, sorrow, sickness,
mourning; to serve proud masters, to bear the yoke of superstition, to bury
those that be dear to us, to see the ruin of our country; for the troubles
of a wife I never felt.

Seeing then there is no estate excluded from felicity, and that there are more
encumbrances and impediments to happiness in some estates than in others, it
shall be requisite for him that would live happily, to content himself with
that estate that has in it least difficulty in the attaining of felicity, and
not to aspire to high dignities, and great possessions: neither to hunt after
credit, and reputation, the immoderat desire whereof, I observe generally to be
a great hindrance to felicity: but rather to think a reputation of virtue and
honesty Good fortune the greatest (...).
sufficient to a happy life. Better is a good name, says the wise man than
much riches; and better to have renown among the good sort, than to be Lord
over the whole world: there being no such riches under heaven, as to be well
thought of among men. And therefore nothing ought to be so dear to us as good
fame, being the true and only reward of virtue, all other things being the
gifts of Fortune. And nothing in this miserable life can rightly be called
loss, but when we lose good fame. And Good same the greatest losie.
because in seeking for felicity, there must be a respect had to civility,
which consists in decency of habits and manners, it shall be good for him
that means to prefer virtue before vanity, to follow Seneca his counsel:
Temperetur vita inter bonos mores and publicos: Temper thy life (says he)
between good manners, and those that be commonly used. For it is one thing to
live after the common custom of men, and another to live as thou ought.
Covet not to win estimation by trimming up thy self in disguised habits and
new fangled fashions, nor by wrying thy body with tragical gestures and Frierly
ducks, and such like Italian and Spanish tricks and tuckes, which are but
fantastical toys, and the invention of idle heads: for honesty is of small
estimation with him that is overcurious, and careful in decking his body. Nor
yet be over-rusticall, as though thou did condemn all things, saving that
thy self allowest; but be modest in attire, and temperate in diet, The best
bravery.
and use a mean, observing decency. Adorned thy mind with virtue and learning,
that men may rather esteem thee for the gifts and ornaments of thy mind and
honest co^versation, than the brave attire of thy body, and formality of
manners. Curious neatness is meet for women, but Marius.
labor for men: for he that passes his youth vainly, makes his old age
odious: but that time being well spent, he gathers to himself the fruits of
credit and authority in his latter age: as a Germane Poet says: Qualiter in
teneris adolescens vixerit annis, Eras.

Talem prabebit c^rva senecta senem.
Such as in youth thou striv'st to be,
Such age in age shall render thee.


We are no less beholding to them, from whom we had good education and
instruction, than to them from whom we had our being: for good inclinations
are many times corrupted by vicious conversation.

Neither wonder at these kind of things now in use after the common custom,
nor yet despise them, but give every one leave to use his own manners, and
laugh in thy fleeve. Thou art nothing the worse though the gallants think thee
rude, because in all things thou do not imitate them. Let it suffice thee
that thou know thy self, and the office of a man, and many of their formal
manners to be vain, ridiculous, and fantastical: If the manners used in times
past were good then, they are not evil now. A common custom makes things
more familiar, but not Good. The wise Emperor Augustus Caesar, foreseeing the
inconvenience that ordinarily ensues the alteration of outward habits and
manners, said in a great assembly of the Romans; En palliati cives: behold our
cloaked Citizens; a thing Moral principles.
not then used: but if he lived in this corrupt age, he would say: En
Tragaedi: Thrust not thy self into offices and charge for credit sake, nor yet
for gain; nor incumber thy self over much with worldly affairs: they bring
with them troubles and unquietness, rather than happiness. He is not least
happy that is most free from worldly cares: Obtundunt siquidem curarum pondera
sensus; for
The weight of cares duls and besots the senses.


Let matters rather follow thee, than thou follow them; oncerning law suits.
and avoid contention and suits in law: for hardly there can be found a more
miserable life. A bad end at home, is better many times than a good sentence in
court. It is not in his power that begins contention, to end it at his
pleasure. And though no man is borne to himself, but all to be helping to
others, yet because an interlude has no grace, if all be players, and none
have leave to look on; this life may be compared to an interlude, that has
many players, and few spectators. If I were to begin the world again, I would
willingly choose (if it were lawful) to be one of the lookers on. All men are
not equally affected, some desire labor, others quietness: some hunt after
honor, others after riches and reputation: some like a sole life, others
think it no life without a companion: which diversities of affections, when
one had considered and reckoned up, he breaks out into this speech: Hac alil
cupiant, liceat mihi paupere cultu,
Securo chara conjuge posse frui:
Those things let others covet, let me wear
Poor habit, and enjoy my wife that is dear.


The way to purchase to thy self much quietness, is to meddle as little as
thou may with other men's matters. The way to purchase quicn^sse.
If thou desire to know and reform thy self, observe diligently what thy
enemies think and speak of thee; for they will be the first that will
discover thy faults: for the old Proverb will always be true; That men carry
other men's faults in the wallet before, but cast Non videmus id manticae quod
in tergo est.
their own behind their back. And if thou will reap fruit also of the
flatterers, endeavor to be such as they commend thee: and if thou will wade
safely through the troubles of this world, make no great account of externe
things; and set honesty always before thine eyes, and therewith content thy
self. Think not to win happiness by depending upon the favor of great
estates, gotten with flattery; give them their due, and live of thy self.
Liberty is a great furtherance to felicity. Plain dealing and honest
conversation will bring thee favor and reputation enough to lead thee to a
happy life: Vsibus edocto si quicquam credis amico;
Vivetibi, and long nomina magna fuge:
Live to thy self, if ought thy friends proved breast
Conceales, and bigge-swolne titles far detest.


The higher the tree, the more subject to the wind, whose fall many times
overthrows them that stand near him. And the more favor thou have with
great estates, the greater is thy disgrace and grief when they reject thee.
And when thou have used all thine endeavor to please them, what greater grief
can there be, than to see thy self defrauded of the fruits of thy labor? And
where thou did expect a reward, or thankfulness for thy good will and
diligence, thou shall sustain loss and disgrace: and therehence receive harm
and unkindnesse, where thou thoughtest to find help and favor. Three things
avoyde as much as thou Three things to be avoided.
may, envy, hatred, and contempt. Wherein thou must be very circumspect,
lest by avoiding the smoke, thou fall into the fire; believe not all thou
hear: do not all thou may: nor speak all that thou know. And three
things prepare to thy self to be always in readiness: Three things to be
pra^sed.
prudence in thy mind: silence in thy tongue, and bashfulnesse in thy
countenance. By this after Diogenes, thou shall agree in color with virtue. By
prudence thou shall avoid many things that bring men to infelicitie. By modesty
in speech thou shall avoid many quarrels, and occasions of trouble and
unquietness. As the wiseman says; he that keeps his tongue, keeps his
soul: much speech has often been hurtful to many, but silence seldom or
never to any. As overmuch silence brings a man's simplicity into suspicion, so
many words discovers his vanity. And therefore one says, we have two ears
given us by nature, and one tongue; to the end we should hear much more than
we should speak. It is a Princely virtue, quickly to conceive, and slowly to
break out into speech. The Psalmist Wholesome counsel.
says; he that is wise, has his tongue in his heart; but the fool and
furious has his heart in his tongue; hide thy virtues as other men do their
vices, and use few words thy self, but hear them patiently that will speak.
Think upon the end before thou begin any thing: hear every one, believe but
few; and fall not twice into one error. Speak little, and think much: covet
not to win an opinion of wisdom, by setting forth a fine tale with eloquent
words, when there is no just occasion, as though ye would draw your hearers
into admiration of you, after the manner of vainglorious men; for he is not
always the wisest that loves to hear himself speak, and that can tell a smooth
tale, though it be a common custom so to esteem him: for wisdom consists
chiefly in judgment, as Scaliger says; Iudicium est anima sapientiae: Judgment
is the soul of wisdom. Nor reason over earnestly with a contentious man, that
is full of words: for that may be called a battle of fools. Look not too
much into other men's estate and manners; for thereof envy has his name: as
well to eschew the torment that comes of envy, as also that no man is
envious, but he that mistrusteth his own virtue: as the Poet says; Invidus
alterius rebus marcescit opimis:


The envious man grows lean to see others fat. Of envy.
Envy bears such rule in these days, though men be less virtuous than they
have bin, that he is in miserable estate that has no enemies: for if his own
merits will not procure them, envy will: yet forbear not to follow virtue, to
avoid envy: but live so as thine enemies may rather wonder at thy vertnes,
than thy friends shall have cause to excuse thy vices. And remember the words
of Hermocrates the tyrant of Syracusa spoken to his son lying on his deathbed.
Son, the last words I speak unto thee, are: Be not envious in condition; but
do such deeds, as therefore thou may be envied. Advice meet to be
followed of them that aspire to honor by virtue, although the enmity be
greater, that is grounded upon euive, than that which is founded upon injury
for the injured man does often forget, but the envious never cease to
persecute. There is to a man no To (...) commendable envy.
greater enemy, than he which sees that thing in thee, which he desires to
have in himself. But there is not so modest or mean a felicity that can
escape evil tongues, howsoever he can avoyde all other things. But he that
has his conscience clear, will say with the Poet: Consciamens recti fam a
mendatiarides:
He that is conscious of truth, laughs at lying report.


It belongs to a King to hear evil, when he does well. In all things follow
reason, and fly opinion, and content thy self with thine estate; and think
there is no difference between having and not desiring: A little will serve
thee to happiness of life: to which thou shall the more easily persuade thy
self, if thou consider, (as has been said) that the true end and felicity
of man, and his proper action, is to glorify God; and that the common opinion
of happiness that comes by pleasures, riches, honor and glory, is
contracted by the fall of our first parent, and by the corruption and
alteration of our nature: As to him that is sick of Imitable precepts.
an ague, sower things seem sweet and pleasant, because the disease has
corrupted and altered his taste. If thou will avoyde the things that be odious
to God and men, in poverty be not proud, nor in riches covetous; in age be not
lecherous, nor in youth shameless. If thou see thy self in poor estate,
without credit and reputation, and of a clear conscience, and beholdest
another live in abundance of wealth and honors, be not dismayed, nor think
thy self less in Gods favor, or less happy than he, because he surmounteth
thee in riches and reputation, and worldly vanity; for God distributeth these
temporal goods in differently both to the good and to the bad. For if God
should give them only to good men, the wicked would think for that cause he
should be worshipped and prayed unto: and if he should bestow worldly goods
upon the wicked only, the weak in faith would fear to be converted wholly
to God, lest he should want. It is a manifest sign of damnation A manifest
sign to be out of Gods favor.
for a man to ^live here wickedly, and to enjoy at the full, health of body and
the goods of fortune. All such (says one) as God marketh with recompense and
reward in the book of this world, it is a sign that he has raced them out of
the Register of heaven. Arm thy self therefore with patience, and expect the
islue of Gods ordinance with a quiet and thankful mind, and thereto wholly
submit thy self. That which seems sometimes to a man full of grief and
pain, becomes many times the cause of his joy and comfort. And the same, that
in the beginning seems to work his infelicity, brings to him unlooked for
happiness. The best way is to take those things patiently that thou can not
amend. And if thine estate be not sufficient to maintain thee and thine,
endeavor by honest means to amend it. But if God bless thee plentifully
with riches and possessions, hoord it not niggardly, nor spend it prodigally,
but be beneficial to others, and use liberality to those that lack and
deserve well of thee: for (after Cicero) we ought to do most for them that
most loves us: yet with this consideration, that thou spare at the brimme,
lest whilst thou should power out a pint, there run forth a pottle, and let
the old proverb never fall out of thy mind; Sero parsimonia in fundo: It is
too Necessary parsimony.
late to spare when all is out. Cicero counsels us not to shut our purse so
fast, that a will to do good cannot open it, nor yet so to unloose it, that it
be open to every body. And Alcmenes says, he that possesses much should
live according to reason, and not to his lust, meaning that riches are
hurtful, except thy mind be above riches, that can moderate riches by their
use, not by their plenty.

Remember alwayesthat thou live by thy mind, which (after Plato) is the true
life, and thereof have chitsly the name of a man. The substance of thy body is
common with that of brute beasts, but by thy mind thou resemblest the Angels
and God himself. The mind is not disgraced with the deformity of the body,
but by the beauty of the mind the body is graced. Give not thy self to
fleshly pleasures, to ambition, nor to covetousness, as the most part of men
do: thy understanding Who is happy.
was not given thee to that purpose. Thales being asked who was happy,
answered, he that has an healthful body, and a learned and a virtuous mind.
And Ecclefiasticus says, better is the poor, being whole and strong, than a
rich man that is afflicted in his body. Health and strength is above all gold,
and a whole body above infinite treasure. There is no riches above a sound
body, and no joy above the joy of the heart. And Anxagoras to the like question
said; none of these that thou accountest happy, but he rather is happy, that
thou beleevest is unhappy: meaning that the rich and honorable persons, who
are wondered at as the happiest men for their wealth and reputation, are
unhappy; and he happy that contenteth himself with a little: which agrees
with Democritus opinion, that he is happy that is merry with a little money;
and he unhappy that is sad in the midst of great riches. Give not over thy
mind unto heaviness, and vex not thy self in thine own counsel. The joy
of thy heart is the life of man, and a man's gladness is the prolonging of his
days. Love thine own soul, and comfort thine heart: drive sorrow far from
thee, for sorrow has slain many, and there is no profit therein: envy and
wrath shorten the life, and carfulness brings age before the time. Socrates
walking in the Burse or market place, and beholding Unnecessary sorrow.
the great variety of things there to be sold; How many things (quoth he) have
I no need of? Others are rather tormented in mind at the sight of such
things, and will say within themselves, how many things do I lack? but he
contenting himself with that which is sufficient to nature, esteemed gold and
purple, and precious stones, and such like delights of rich men, more fit for
players of Tragedies, than necessary to the use of life; as he showed by these
verses, which he had often in his mouth: Argentea ista vasa simul at purpura,
Trag^diarum accommoda bistrionibus
Sunt; ad beatam conferunt vitam nihil
Those silver vessels, and that purple be,
More fit for Actors in a Tragedy;
To blessed life they no way do belong.


With such vanities men's minds be occupied by the corruption of our nature,
and our judgments are so blinded with our impure affections, that of all
creatures man does leaft perform his proper action, and least directs the
course of his life, to his true end and felicity.

For whereas the great God of nature has tied together all his creations, with
some mean things that agree and participate with the extremities, and has
composed the intelligible, athereall, and elementarie world, by indissoluble
means and bounds; as between plants and living Creatures, he has made
Creature intermediate.
sponges and oysters, that in part resemble living things, and in part plants;
between the creatures of the earth, and those of the water, Otters, Tortoyfes,
and such like; between those of the water and birds of the air, flying
fishes; between brute beasts, and those of a spiritual essence and
understanding, which are Angels, he has placed man, which combineth heaven and
this elementarie world together, whose one part is subject to death, and the
other part immortal: all other creatures of the earth live according to their
nature and kind; man only is seen to degenerate: but if we lay aside the
consideration from whence our corruption comes, by the fall of our first
parent, and account of our selves according to our present state; among so many
millions, as replenisheth all the corners of the earth, how many use their
endeavors to live as they ought? If things be laid before us that differ in
value, every man will make choice of the best: But in our selves that are
composed of a body, which participateth with brute beasts, and of a soul that
is of an Angelical nature, and resembles God himself, who makes choice of
the best? that is, to live after his best part, which is immortal: how many
thousands live like brute beasts, pleasing their senses, feeding their belly,
and following the lusts of the flesh, without any respect to the excellency of
their mind, as though they would incorporate their soul to their body with an
indivisible bond of brutish nature? and how few hundreds contemn their mortal
part, which is the body, to join their better part, which is their immortal
soul with the Angels and heavenly creatures, whom they in that part resemble?
A third sort there are, far exceeding A third sort of men.
born the other in number, that neither give themselves wholly to live after
the flesh with the one, nor after the mind with the other: but in a sort
participating with them both, employ their greatest care and labor to the
attaining of the things that are in most estimation of the world. They labor
and aspire to excel others, not in dignity of virtue and knowledge, but in
estate and reputation: and to the attaining of the things which lead to that
end, every one willingly bestows his labor and diligence: for no man is
content with his estate. Hinc illa lachryme, hereof arises all our complaints
and grief, and the greatest part of the calamities and miseries that happen to
men: for men's desires be so unsatiable, and their minds so uncertain No man
contented with his estate.
and variable, the no estate of life always pleases any man, because they
seem to want some things that be incident to the estates opposite to theirs.
For they that be in principilatie and honorable estate, desire to have joined
to their rule and reputation, the security and tranquillity of a private life,
which they seem to lack. And the private man affects to have joined to
those things which he enjoys, the dignity and authority to command of
honorable estates. The rich man wishes to have added to his abundance of
wealth, the poor man's quietness of mind and freedom of worldly cares, and
safety of person and goods. The poor man would have added to those things of
his, the rich man's plenty and credit. The Citizen would have joined to his
civil and easy life, the pleasures and delights of the fields and country.
The Couutrey man would have the civility and company and good fellowship of the
town joined to the wholesome air of the Country, and pleasant gathering of
the fruits of Horace.
the earth. The soldier wishes to his glorious title the safety of a
peaceable life. He that lives in peace, desires to the security and safety
of his estate, the honorable reputation of a man of war, which he has
gotten by the continual hazard and peril of his person. And so of all other
estates of life, some things are desired that seem to be wanting to the
fullness of their happiness, which are as unpossible to be joined together, as
for heat and cold to be at one time both together in one subject, being
diametrally contrary in quality. So hat the greatest hinderance to our
attaining of felicity or happiness of life, proceeds from our evil affected
minds, that desire unpossible things, which also diverteth us from our proper
action and true end or beatitude. We pass our time in vain hope of things
never like to come to pass; as Petrarke says: Been sperando and male habendo
transit vita mortalium. In hoping well, and having evil, the life of man
passes away. Every good Ou.
thing we possess is less, the things hoped for seem great. And such is
also the infirmity of our common nature, seldom or never so sully to enjoy
prosperity, as in no respect to find cause of complaint of the quality of
our estate. For many are raised to great wealth, Gu. No one man can enjoy all
things.
that bear shame of their base lineage: some ennobled by birth and parentage,
and yet live in poverty: many blessed with riches and nobility, that want the
delight of children: and some made glad with procreation, that feel great
sorrow and discomfort by their childrens untowardlinesse. No man is wont to be
long and Octav.
every way happy, a worse fortune ever follows the former. But what estate or
course of life soever thou follow, have always a special regard to these two
things; to live in the fear of God, and to observe the rules of honesty among
men: from which, what soever happen, let nothing divert thee: To God thou owe
The end which all men should aim at.
a good conscience, and to thy neighbor a good example. All things will happen
well to thee, if thou place God the beginning and the end: For in this life
thou shall not find greater comfort than by that which proceeds of a good
conscience, of honest counsels, of upright actions, of contempt of casual
things, and of a quiet and peaceable life. But in these days many fear Plin.
their fame, but few their conscience: and yet there is not (says Saint
Augustine) a more happy thing, than the quietness of conscience. And if any
afflictions or crosses happen that thou can not avoyde, yet thou may
overcome them with patience. Fly unto God for succor, he will give it thee;
that is the only way to make thee safe, secure and happy.

Friendship was wont to be accounted a help to happiness of life: but we
may now rightly say with the Poet: Illud amicitia quondam venerabile nomen,
Prostat and in questu pro meretrice sedet:
That name of friendship venerable of yore,
Is prostrate now complaining like a whore.


The time is so changed, and men's manners with Friendship.
them so corrupted, that the precepts heretofore given by wise men for the
commodity of life grounded upon virtue and honesty, will not now serve the
turn. Friendship is grown cold; faith is foolishness; honesty is in exile;
and dissimulation has gotten the upper hand. That is effectually done which is
commonly spoken, he that cannot dissemble cannot live. Machiavels rules are
better followed in these days, than those ^.
of Plato, Aristotle or Cicero: whose scholars have so well profited under
him, that many are able to teach their master. Profess (says he) love and
friendship to thine enemy: and if he fall into the water up to the knees,
give him thine hand to help him out. And if he fall in up to the waste help
him likewise; but if he fall into the water up to the chinne, then lay thy
hand upon his head and ducke him under the water, and never suffer him to rise
again. Men have changed the inward habites of their minds, as they have done
the outward habites of their bodies. Every age, nay rather every year brings
forth new fashions; so likewise that friendship and honesty, which in our
forefathers times was wont to be performed with faith and plain meaning, is
now out of the fashion, and therefore not esteemed: cunning dissimulation with
fair words, and large offers with little performance, is now all the fashion.
Join thy self therefore in friendship with very few, and be circumspect and
curious in thy choice: and if it be possible, be beholding to no man, more
than he is beholding to thee; for a faithful friend is hard to be found: the
bare name only remains, the thing is obsolet and grown out of use. So long
as thou have no need, thou shall find friends ready to offertheeal mnner of
courtesies: but if fortune begin to frown upon thee, and a tempest chance to
arise, they will find quarrels to leave thee, and cover their infidelity with
thy fault, and give thee cause to say with Ovid: In mediis lacera puppe
relinquor aquis.
I am in a torn ship left in the midst of the Sea.


It is a hard matter for him that is in poverty to find out a kinsman or
friend: for no man will confess that he appertains in any sort to him, that
needs any help, fearing lest he will by and by ask something of him: David
calls such men table friends. And that is one commodity which poverty
brings, that it shows The commodity of poverty.
who loves thee. But to him thou meanest to perform the part of a faithful
frieud, thou must observe these two things: to help his necessities; and to
comfort him in adversity. But the manner of friends in these days, is to
deliver words by the pottle, and deeds by the pint. They that call themselves
thy friends, will look for performance of friendship at thy hands, though they
will perform none to thee. For every man looks for honest dealing in another,
though he mean to use none himself. To this declination, the greatest comfort
to the life of man is come by the general depravation of manners: for where
can a man find greater comfort in adversity, than in faithful friends? who
also double the joys and pleasures of prosperity. That was never more
commonly in use which Latimer spoke True friendship doubles prosperity.
in his Sermon to reprehend the want of love, and charity: Ye have a common
saying (said he) every man for himself, and God for us all; but ye might more
truly proverbs.
say, every man for himself, and the Devil for us all; one for another, and
God for us all. Martial finding the infidelity and inconstancy of love and
friendship, gives this counsel: Si vitare velis acerba quadam,
Et tristes animi cavere morsus,
Nulli te facias nimis sodalem,
Guadebis minus (...) minus dolebis:
If thou will bitter accidents avoyde,
Nor let thy mind with sad things be annoyd;
No man too near unto thy breast retain,
So shall thou more rejoy^e, and less complain.


Prosperity wins friends, but adversity proves them, as the touchstone
tries Gold. And overgreat friendship, not considerately united, is many times
the cause of great hatred. Men cannot be better warned to trust to themselves,
than by Aesops fable of a Lark, which discovers the common coldness of
friendship in their friends causes. A Lark (says he) that bred in the corn
went forth to seek meat for her young birds, ^sops fable of the Lark.
that had feathers, when the corn was ripe, and willed them to hearken what
was said in her absence, and tell her at her return. The master of the corn
perceiving it ripe, willed his son to desire his friends the next day early in
the morning to come reap down his corn. The son did as he was commanded:
and when the Lark returned, her little ones trembling for fear, told her what
news they had heard, desiring to be removed to another place: but she bid
them be quiet and fear nothing, and went forth the next day again to seek
for meat: the master looks for his friends, and when he saw that none came,
he willed his son to go to his kinsfolks, and desire their help to cut
down his corn the next day: when the Lark returned, she found her young ones
in the like fear again, but understanding what they had heard, she willed
them to have no fear, for kindred (said she) will not be so hasty to help
with their labor at the first call, and departed from them again. The day
following when the master had in vain expected the performance of his
kinsfolks promise also; Away (quoth he) with friends an^ kin, fetch two
hooks, to morrow early in the morning, one for me, another for thee, and we
will reap the corn our selves. Which when the Lark understood of her young;
Now it is time to be gone (said she) and removed her nest. By which fable men
are warned not to stay for their friends help in that they can do themselves.
And hereof springs a common error, that men consider not rightly of the
nature of friendship, which can be perfect but between two, and those virtuous
persons. And where is no conformity of manners, there can be no perfection of
friendship; for contraries can hold no consent nor unity together: because
their affections must be joined together, and his friend must be preferred
before all others, and as it were two bodies made one: which moved Alexander
the Great to say to Darius mother, that desired pardon upon her knees, for
mistaking Ephestion Alexander and Ephestion.
for the king, that he was also Alexander. For if a man have many friends, it
may chance, that one may have cause of joy by some great good fortune happened
to him, and another at the same time may have cause of sorrow by some evil
accident or fortune. Both which contrary passions cannot be in him together;
and therefore he cannot be like friend to them both. But one may be a friend
to many by degrees, according to the merit or estimation he has of them:
which he may also with honesty dissolve, if by their demerites he shall find
just cause, and be not bound to continue it by some good turn received and
not requited. Many by acquaintance only, or by some courtesy showed for
civilities sake, are more ready to challenge a further friendship never
promised or professed, as due to them by his voluntary kindness, than
forwardly to requite that already received. Yet nevertheless true love and
friendship has respect only to his friends necessity, without merchandise or
feneration: as one says, Charitas non quaerit suum. But seeing the affected
name of a friend is so common, and the act or matter so rare, I wish thee to
make choice of a few companions, with whom thou will pass thy time, to avoid
the tediousnes of a solitary life, such as be inclined to honest conversation,
as near as thou may; and let them go under the name of welwillers rather
than of friends, except Choose welwillers rathe than friends.
thou be assured of their fidelity. So shall not honesty bind thee to
perform more to them to whom a common custom, and the malignity of this time
has given a Supersedeas to discharge the duty of friendship, then thou shall
see cause, or they will perform to thee: for in so great pennury of friends,
and corruption of manners, thy fortune must be very good if thou chance upon a
faithful friend: for in these days men hold friendship by indenture. And that
thou may be better instructed in thy choice, hearken to Guevarra his
counsel, to one that asked how one man may know another, to the end he may be
either accepted or eschewed. First, observe what affairs he takes in hand,
what works he does, what words he speaks, and what company How to choose or
retuse.
he keeps; for the man that by nature is proud, in his business negligent,
in his word a liar, and makes choice of evil men for his companions, deserves
not to be embraced, much less to be trusted: for that in men in whom is laid
no foundaton of virtue, is no expectation of faith or honesty. And one of the
things (says he) that men think they have, when they have them not, is many
friends; yea (say I) one faithful friend. For by my experience, if thou will
believe me, I know not any thing wherein thou may sooner be deceived. Forty
years and more I may with some judgment remember the world; in which little
time I have found such a metamorphosis and alteration in men's minds and
manners, that if they should decline so fast from evil to worse after forty
years more, it will be a hard matter any where to find out a faithful
friend, or an honest man. For (as the same Author further says) that which
one friend does for another in these days, is either to excuse, or hide
himself when there is need of him, being more ready to lend him his
conscience than his money. And he that will compare the number that profess
friendship unto him, with them that have performed the true office and part of
friends, for one faithful, he shall discover an hundred dissemblers. Of such
friends, as they are most common, so we may esteem it no small felicity to be
divided from them, being more prodigal of their conscience, than liberal of
their goods, or ready to perform any other duty of friendship. Isocrates
counsels us to choose that friend which has been faithful to his former
friends; for he is like to prove constant in friendship: and if thou will
follow No friendship to be made with the covetous man.
mine advice, enter not into friendship with a covetous man, for his mind is so
possessed and overcome with the love of money, and greedy desire to increase
his riches and possessions, that there is no hope of performance either of
friendship or honesty at his hands. Plautus says: Vt cuique homini res parata
est, firmi anuci sunt: Si res lassae labant, itidem amici collabascunt: As our
substance is, so are our friends; if that fail, they fall from us.

The minds and manners of men in these latter days, are much like to the
manners used by the old Romans, when they triumphed: the Romans, as they were
very politic in all their government, so did they well consider that there was
no better means to excite their young men to virtue, than by rewarding their
noble acts with honor. Therefore they had a custom, when Custom amongst the
Romans.
any General of their Armies had won any notable victory, to suffer him at
his return to Rome to triumph, which was done with very great pomp and
solemnity and when the triumph was ended, the triumpher had prepared a
sumptuous feast, and invited the chief men of the city to supper, and among
the rest the Consuls also, which were the principal Magistrates of Rome, yet
meaning nothing less than to have their company: for they were no sooner
returned to their houses, but the Triumpher would send a messenger presently to
desire the Consuls not to come to supper, that there might be no man to whom he
might give place. So, many invite The application.
men to their friendship, with fair words and friendly offers, when they mean
nothing less, that they may seem to give place to none in humanity and
courtesy; but his back is no sooner turned, but they revoke within themselves
their friendly offers, and are ready, if they think he look for performance,
to forbid him to make trial of their friendship, being done for form, and not
with plain meaning, as the triumphers manner was.

This time seems to resemble that whereof Galen complains, that he happened
into a most wicked age, in which he thought them only wise, and of a sincere
mind, that having espied the general infidelity, subtlety, dissimulation, and
dishonestie of men, withdrew themselves speedily from the assemblies and
company of people, as from a vehement storm and tempest into the safe port of
a solitary life: which agrees with the Poet: -- Been qui latuit, been vixit.
He lives well that lives warily.


There have bin times when he that knew most, was esteemed best, but now
reputation grows not by knowledge, nor is measured by the worthiness of
virtue, but by the abundance of riches and possessions. Heu Romae, nunc sola
pecunia regnat. Manutan.

Alas, now only money reigns in Rome.


One of the things that Ecclesiasticus said grieved his heart, was; That men of
understanding are not set by. In time past learned men were sent for out of
far countries, but now if they knock at our doors, we will not let them in.
Unfruitful pastimes and vain toys draws our delights. None was advanced to
honor but such as deserved it: but now none climb so fast to high dignities,
as those that be least worthy. In that The change of times.
golden age no Senate or Council was established, but there was resident some
excellent Philosopher; but now in stead of them and of learned Divines (who
should supply their rooms among Christians) are brought in some excellent
Machiavellians, as the meetest counselors for this corrupt time. Kings and
Emperors were wont to be singularly learned, and thought learning a great
ornament to their dignity. Alexander Learned Emperors.
the great, and Julius Caesar were well learned, and also the Emperor Adrian:
which Julius in the midst of his camp would have his spear in his left
hand, and his pen in his right hand: he never unarmed himself but he would
presently fall to his book. The title of Philosopher was given to the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius for his excellent learning: who would say, that he would not
leave the knowledge he might learn in one hour, for all the gold he
possessed: and I (says he) receive more glory of the books I have read and
written, than of the battles I have won, and of the kingdoms which I have
conquered. Ptolomy King of Egypt, and Hermes before him, and of latter years,
Alphonsus king of Arragon, who would say, that he had rather lose his pearls
and precious stones, than any book. And diverse other Kings and Emperors were
excellently learned: among which number I account by a rare example the noble
Queen of England, my gracious Sovereign. The Mathematicallsciences were had
in such Queen Elizabeth.
estimation for their excellency, that none might study them but Kings, that
they might excel others as well in worthiness and singularity of knowledge,
as in dignity of estate: but now Kings children be brought up in Machiavels:
school; ^s an Author sufficient for their instruction.

He that will compare this time with that of former ages, shall find a
wonderful Metamorphosis in men's minds and manners. Virtue was never less in
use, and vice did never more abound: the truth was never more known, and never
less regarded: never better taught, and never worse followed: men were never
less idle, and never worse occupied: worldly (...) were never more carefully
sought for, and heavenly (...) ^ever less effectually thought of. Men were
never mo^ religious in words, and never more profane i^deeds. The devil never
bestirred himself with more diligence to allure men to all manner of vice;
and men were never more negligent to make resistance, nor more ready to further
his labor: and though he cannot stop the utterance of the word, yet he
prevails in that which is next to it, to hinder his bringing forth of
condign fruits. It happens to us as it did to Tantalus, that Simile.
though the water ran by his mouth, yet none would enter in to quench his
thirst: so the sound of Gods word beats continually against our ears, but it
enters not in to cool the heat of the wicked motions of our inordinate
desires, and to quench our thirst after worldly vanities. In every place is
talk of divinity, even among them that know not what belongs to humanity.
Many are with their tongues blazers and talkers of virtue, but all their other
members they suffer to administer to vice. Few men are so covetous of their
own good fame and honor, as they are greedy of other men's goods, and envious
of others virtue. Most men seem to hate pride, and yet few follow humility:
all condemn dissoluteness, and yet who is continent? All blame intemperancie
and yet none lives in order. All praise patience, and yet who resists the
sweet passion of revenge? He that possesses much, oppresses him that has
little: and he that has but little One thing spoke another practi^ed.
envyeth him that has much. We condemn Papists for their superstition and
confidence in their good works and we blame Puritanes for their affected
singularity and formal preciseness; and in the mean time that we may be
unlike the one in grossness, and not much resemble the other in preciseness,
we neither have sufficient regard to the true devout service of God, and to
Christian charity, nor sufficiently show the zeal of true Christians to the
sincerity of religion, and least of all express it in our lives and
conversations: as though godliness consisted in a theoricall kind of
believing, without any respect to the exercise of Christian charity and
virtue. And when we go about to shake off the clogges wherewith our consciences
are burdened by superstition, to enjoy the true and Christian liberty, we
fall into such a licentiousness of life, and dissoluteness of manners, that
the Poets saying may be aptly applied to many: Dum stulti vitant vitia, in
contraria currunt.


Whilst fools shun vices, they run into contraries. Profane (...).
Some hold, that God may be better served in ^eir ^ber than in the Church;
others pre^ a (...) or a barn before any of them both. Thus do^ (...) old
Serpent labor (...) sow division in men's min^s and manners, to (...) ^nour of
true religion, that whilst the Magistrates be occupied in reforming these new
schisms, the professed enemy to the Gospel may multiply and increase his
flock under hand. But in the midst of this general wickedness and
depravation of manners, being almost (as we may conjecture) at the highest,
this comfort remains to the well-minded, that the day of deliverance cannot
be far off. When Dionysius, at the time that Christ was crucified, beheld
with admiration the Sun eclipsed contrary to nature, the Moon being at the
full, and opposite to the Sun, he pronouneed these words; Either the God of
nature suffers now, or else the whole frame of the world shall be dissolved.
And as Dionysius divined rightly in the one, so may he do in the other, that
will behold the generality of all manner of vice and wickedness of this time, A
fearful eclipse.
contrary to the nature of Christianity, and opposite to the word of God which
was never more plentifully taught; and boldly pronounce, that this general and
unnatural eclipse of Christian manners, does presage the destruction of the
world to be at hand.

He that will look into the manners of this time; shall he not find cause,
with trembling and fear, to think that the time is at hand, that the Prophet
Jonas spoke of to the Ninivites? There be yet forty days and the world shall
be destroyed: but our hearts be so hardened with worldly desires, that we will
believe nothing that feeds not our humors, and is not plausible to our
inclinations. And nothing is more dangerous to a Christian than to accustom
himself to harden his Guev.
conscience. For in such unhappy people there is no will to be amended, nor
means to be remedied. The Affricans had a Prophecy, that when the Romans sent
an Army into Africa, Mundus cum tota sua prole periret: the signification of
which words is, The world with all his issue shall perish: which made them
think that the world with all the people should be destroyed. But afterward
the Romans sent an Army thither, under the conduct of a General, whose name
was Mundus, who in battle with his sons were slain by the Affricanes, ^
and fulfilled the effect of the Prophecy, and discovered the illusion of the
Devil. But these Heathens were not so easy to be delud^d by the Devil, as we
are hard to be persuaded by the true Prophets of God, and Preachers of his
word, that the destruction of the world cannot be far off: for the minds
and manners of men are so transformed and changed, and declineth daily from
evil to worse, that if the men of former ages were to walk again a while
upon the earth, they would think that this world were not the same which
before it was, but rather another substitute in his place. Horace found this
fault in his time, that the age of their parents was worse than that of their
grandfathers, and themselves more wicked than their fathers, and their children
would be more vicious than they. And as we are worse than our fathers, so our
posterity is like to be worse than we be, if vice be not now at the highest,
and the world almost at an end. The Poets observed diligently, and with great
The four Ages.
consideration, the mutations of the world, and divided it into four parts.
The first age they likened to gold, and called it the golden age: the next so
decayed, that they compared it unto silver: the third, abased to brass: the
fourth worst of all, was become like iron, of less value and price than any of
the rest: and if there were a more base metal, we might compare our age to
it. In consideration whereof, they with other writers in these latter ages,
both divine and profane, do bewail the decay of virtue, of true faith, of
charity, of mutual love and fidelity, of good conscience, of honesty, yea of
devotion and prayer, and of the love and fear of God, and of heavenly
contemplation: whereof, as from his proper root should spring all the rest. For
how many do we see live as though they had no need of God; and hoped for no
better, nor mistrust no worse than they find here? As though God were not the
rewarder of virtue, and punisher of vice; nay rather as though there were no
God at all, no resurrection, no heaven, nor hell. Who fears to offend God, or
spares to blaspheme his holy name? Who The wickedness of these times.
takes any pain to please him? Who forbeareth to hate, envy, and to slander?
Who labors to subdue his flesh to the spirit; sensuality to reason; reason
to faith; and faith to the service of God? Who lets not loose the reins to
his affections, and suffers not his will and wicked inventions to take the
bitte in the teeth, and runs away against the rule of reason? Subjects
rebel against their Prince and Gods anointed, and are sometime excited unto it
by them that should set forth obedience by word and example of life. Children
disobey their parents, contemn them, and laugh them to scorn. Servants make
small estimation of the trust committed unto them by their masters. Laborers
hunt after idleness. Artificers are deceiptfull in their words and works.
Merchants and others in uttering the wares that they sell. No man lends
without hire. Usury was never so general, nor so extreme. And if we should
after this sort run over the other estates of life, we should find all sorts
of men degenerate from the simplicity and goodness of their forefathers. No
man seeks after virtue, nor labors to reform or amend, much less to
mortify himself. So as we might never more truly pronounce these old verses:
Heu, vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Et velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Alas men live, as they should never dye,
And Hell were a mere tale and fantasy.


To do these things what is it, but as though there were no Gospel to forbid
it, nor God to punish it, nor laws, nor authority to reform it? We have small
regard and compassion to the relief of the poor, and less conscience we
make to deceive or oppress our neighbors. And this is a thing to be marvelled
at, that if the ^e.
Merchant be taken with a counterfeit measure, the Gold smith with a false
weight, the measure shall be burnt, the balance broken, and the offender
delivered to public justice: but if a man be known to be a blasphemer, a
drunkard, an adulterer, yea, an atheist, whereof Sin in the height ^punubed.
(it may be doubted) there be over many in these days, he shall be so far from
being punished, that he shall be rather of many favored and supported, and
regarded as a jolly fellow that will be commanded of none: which encourages
him to offend further, to the evil example of others: for wicked acts and
misdemeanors are allured by impunity, as it were by rewards: and he hurts
the good that spares the wicked. If we hear of any sinful or wicked act
committed, we sigh and groan, and look up to heaven, as though it pierced our
hearts, with detestation both of the man and the fact: whereas if the like
occasion were offered, we are as ready every day to doc the same or worse. We
are notable censurers of other men's faults, and cunning dissemblers of our
own. We behold our own faults with spectacles that make things show less,
and other men's faults we behold in the water, where things show greater. We
follow sermons like Saints, with great show of devotion, as though we were very
religious: but that we practice in our life, rather resembles infernal
spirits. And thus we dissemble with God, and play the hypocrites (...).
with men. When our life is seen to be contrary unto our profession, we are a
slander to the Gospel. And it may be said to us, as I heard a plain man of
the Lowcountrie say to a Gentleman that commended the Spaniards for their
devotion, and often blessing and crossing themselves: No doubt (quoth he) they
are holy men: Cruzes de fuera, and diabl^ de dentr^: Crosses without, and the
devil within. The iniquity of this time is almost grown to this, that a man
godly and honestly given is laughed to scorn, and had in contempt, and the
wicked is had in estimation and reverenced, as though it were a shame to do
well, and a commendable thing to live unhonestly: so as nothing is more common
in these days among us than false friendship, dissembled honesty, manifest
iniquity, and counterfeit holiness. And who is he, if he separate his mind, a
while from worldly cogitations, that he may the better look into the general
wickedness of these days, that will not say with Saint Paul: Cupio dissolvi,
and esse cum Christo: I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: when he
shall see in use and daily practice every where all kinds of vice, but almost
no where any kind of virtue? When he shall see no wisdom without craft, no
justice without corruption, no faith without dissimulation, no godliness
without hypocrisy, no friendship wiehout gain, no lending without hire, no
promise without suspicion, and all things corrupted with covetousness and
sensuality, shall he not find cause to cry out with Policarpus; Deus, ad quae
nos (...)? God, to what times have thou reserved us? But they that by word or
writing shall go about to reprove the generality of vice lately crept into men's
manners, may look for that answer that king Antigonus made to one that
presented to him a book written of Justice: Thou art a fool (said the King)
to present a book to me of An Atheistical answer.
Justice, when thou see me besieging and making war upon other men's cities:
so shall they be accounted fools, that so far out of season in this common
exercise and generality of all manner of vice, will persuade or speak of
virtue, of godliness, of honesty, and reformation of manners: they shall but
sing to the dease (as the proverb is.) O wicked age and ungrateful people^
Has God dispersed the dark clouds from our understanding, and sent us the
light of his Gospel, to the end we should run into the dirt and mire, and
soil our selves with all manner of vices? Has he bestowed so many benefits
upon us, and yet cannot find us thankful? Has he offered us his grace so
plentifully, and yet will we not receive it? He that stands in a high place
lets down a rope, to help him up that stands beneath: so God has let
down his grace to us to lift us up to him, but we will not take hold of it:
and therefore it may be feared, if we be not more circumspect, lest our
common adversary entangle us with his rope, that he may pluck us down to
him. We may be wondered at, not without cause, as the Emperor Constantius
marvelled at his people that were newly become Christians: I marvel (said he)
how it comes to pass, that many of my people are worse now, than before they
were Christians. The best we can hope for, if we amend not our manners, is, that
God will chastise us: and the most we can desire at his hands, is, that
Chastisement necessary.
if he punish us by some of his ordinary means, he will use a fatherly
correction upon us; and when he has beaten his children, cast the rod in the
fire. We have beheld these many years in great tranquillity under the
flourishing reign of a most happy Prince, the troubles and afflictions of our
neighbors, by which we have been warned to reform our lives, and to be
thankful: but with how small effect, is too apparent: and therefore it may be
feared, lest the time will come, that we shall have cause to say to our
neighbors; Vivite felices, quibus est fortuna per^cta,
I am sua, nos alia ex al^is in fata vocamur:
Live happy you, whose fortunes are full grown,
We have no fate to look to but our own.
Petrarks saying could to no time be more aptly applied, that hunters and
fowlers used not their endeavor with greater diligence to lay nets and snares
for wild beasts and birds, than crafty men laid for the simple and plain
meaning. And therefore (said he) if thou will not be deceived, either dye or
deal not with men: which agrees with Pionano his country man: Con art, and
con inganno,
Si vive mezzo l'anno,
Con inganno and con art,
Si vive l'altraparte.
He therefore that would enjoy that happiness which The way to enjoy
happiness.
may be found in this life, must live in the fear and service of God, and
always lift up his mind to the true felicity, which cannot be enjoyed in this
world, but in the life to come. He must desire God to bestow his benefits and
graces upon him, by which he may eschew, and be free from those things that are
hindrance to felicity: and that he will bless his labors and endeavors that
are taken in hand, and leads the right way to the attaining of happiness.
He must arm himself with patience, quietly to receive such afflictions and
crosses, as it shall please God to send and lay upon him; and persuade himself
he does all for his good, to draw his love from these worldly vanities, to the
contemplation and desire of God and his heavenly kingdom, which is our end,
and sovereigne good and beatitude. He must purge and cleanse his mind from
those impure motions and affections, that entice and allure men to the
deceivable lusts and brutish pleasures of the flesh: than which pleasure (after
Demosthenes) there is not a more capital enemy given of nature to man: and
(after Demosthenes) no evil can happen to that man, which has laid temperance
and continency for a foundation of wisdom. He must also beware, and be very
circumspect that he be not overcom with inordinate desire of riches, nor with
ambition and desire of honor and glory; whereunto, for want of due
consideration, the most part of men are commonly carried headlong, by a false
and flattering show of happiness. And if it shall please God to bless him
with worldly wealth and honorable estate (for they are his blessings to them
that come rightly and justly to them) he must use them to that purpose for
which they were ordained and given him: for the estimation of things, and their
use and abuse makes them helpefull or hurtful to happiness of life. He that
knows how to esteem and use riches and honorable estate as he ought, neither
will desire them, if he have them not, nor fear their loss, if he possess
them: knowing that he may live well and happily without them; as things not
necessary to felicity. For the greedy desire of riches and possessions, and the
ambitious passions, common almost to all men in aspiring to honorable estate,
and the continual fear of their loss, does so torment and unquiet our minds,
that whereas by the due estimation of riches and honor, and such like delights
of men, with an upright judgment, we might lead a pleasant and happy life;
we contrariwise by a sinister opinion, heap upon our selves grievous
torments, manifold cares and vexations; so as we seem to seek of purpose for
the causes, and means how to bring our selves into an unhappie and miserable
estate: for all the troubles and perplexities that travel our frail bodies,
our selves are the cause of them, and for the most part we go out to seek
them. For thus fares it with men of all estates, first to desire one thing, and
then another, without end or measure, never satisfied or contented, and
therefore never happy. He must estimate these things that will live happily,
not after the common custom and opinion of men, but by a right and reasonable
censure, and content himself with his estate, to which God has called him,
whereunto he shall the more easily be persuaded, that will compare the dangers
and troubles of high dignities and honorable estate, with the security and
quietness of mean callings, and bestow some time in reading the monuments of
wise and learned authors, whose counsel he shall find to contemn the things
(wherein by an erroneous opinion men set their felicity) as mere vanities, and
the frumpes of fortune, and that a little is sufficient to the happiness of
life. Yet providence is to be used by a wise and ^rugall man, after Isocrates
counsel: To remember things past, to do things present, What providence is to
be used.
and to beware of things to come. For he is no less worthy of blame, that
provideth not that which is necessary, than he that never cease to get more
than is sufficient. And though no estate of life be excluded from felicity, for
that the chief part and cause thereof proceeds from the mind, yet abundance of
riches, honorable estate, and hie dignities, are more subject to those things
that are hinderance to happiness, than the mean and inferior estates are
which, whosoever will attentively observe, will be the more readily induced to
believe with Saint Paul, that Godliness is great riches; and sufficient to
lead us to the felicity and happiness we seek for. For that brings with it
a contempt of worldly vanities, so much esteemed of the multitude, peace of
conscience, and a contentation of mind, wherein felicity consists: Which was
rightly espied by the Poet, that the vanities of this world, as riches,
pleasures, honors, and such like, brings not felicity, but the service of
God. Iugera non faciunt felicem plurima, frater,
Non Tergestini dulcia musta soli.
Non Tyriae vestes, Aur^ non pondera flavi;
Non ebur, aut gemma, non juvenile decus.
Non dulcis nati soboles, non bellula conjux,
Non tenuisse su^ sceptra superbamanu.
Noveris and rerum causas licet, astra, polique,
Et nostro quicquid sub Jove mundus habet.
At mea, si quaeris, quae sit sententia, Frater,
Dicam; vis felix vivere? vive Deo.
(Brother) not many acres make thee blessed,
Nor the sweet grapes in Tergestine pressed:
Not Tyrian garments, not thy golden treasure,
Not Ivory gemmes, nor all thy youthful pleasure:
Not thy fair issue, not thy beauteous bride,
Not a proud scepter with thine hand to guide:
To natures secrets though thy skill extend,
And thou the stars and poles do apprehend,
With all, the world does (beneath Jove) contain:
Yet if thou ask'st of me what thou shall gain
By these? I Will speak, if thou would make thy 'boad
In heaven: so live that thou may live to God.


The end of the fifth book.
THE FELICITY OF MAN, OR, HIS SUMMUM BONUM. THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Creation of Man, and the estate he was in at the beginning, before his
fall: Man's alteration after his fall: how he participates with the nature of
brute beasts: All things made to serve man rebel against him: Man only of all
other Creatures declineth from his original nature: The reason why God
suffers evil to be committed: The means that God has given to man, by which
to escape the dangers into which he is fallen: Of the three faculties of the
soul, vegetative, sensitive, and understanding, etc.

IT appears by that which has bin said, what manner of felicity men may
enjoy in this life, which is rather an usurped name, and improperly so called,
than so indeed. Now rests to discourse upon the true end and felicity of man,
or beatitude and Summum bonum.

When God had created this goodly frame of the world, being so called of his
excellent and beautiful form, replenished with such variety of creatures,
and placed the earth in the midst; last of all, he made man after his own
image, which St. Paul interprets to be justi^ and holiness of truth, who
was after called A^am, of the vein of red earth, whereof he was made. And
when God had finished this work, and made man, ^
h^ ceased from creating any more things, and rested in him, in whom he
delighted, and would for ever after communicate himself, his wisdom, his
justice, and his joy, and gave unto him a companion, for his greater comfort
and pleasure. This man he adorned with many goodly gifts, and placed him in
Paradise, which signifies the best part of the earth, and that estate of men,
in which they should have lived without sin and death. In which place appointed
for their habitation, are the four fountains of the goodly rivers of
Euphrates, Tigris, Ganges and Nilus, which they water and pass through, and
contains almost a third part of the earth. But when this man by the
temptation and subtle practices of the Serpent, tasted of the forbidden fruit,
and withdrew himself from the due obedience of his Creator, he lost many of
those goodly ornaments wherewith God had endowed him, and fell into the
punishment appointed for his transgression, eternal death and damnation. But
the son of God bearing a singular favor to man, pacified Man^ regeneration.
his father, and to satisfy his justice, which was immutable, he took upon him
to fulfill all that obedience (...) God required of man; and restored him into
Gods favor again, though not with recovery of all his lost ornaments: and
revealed the promise of God, which he had also procured, to send him to be a
protector of mankind against the tyranny of the Devil, and therefore he is
called the word, because he revealed this secret decree out of the breast of
the eternal Father. And this was the first miracle that God wrought after his
creation of the world, and the creatures therein contained, staying them that
were to dye without the second causes, and without that ordinary course of
life, which before he had established. Josephus writes that Adam set up two
tables of stone, in which he wrote the beginning of the creation, the fall of
man, and the promise.

Now if we consider what a worthy and beautiful Man before his fall.
creature man was before his fall, the very habitation and temple of God,
without sin, and without death, we may easily judge what an ungrateful and
unhappy creature he was to revolt from God, to the Devil, whereby he and his
posterity became subject to sin and death. For first God made him after his
own image and likeness, that is, he made him most good, incorrupt, holy,
righteous, and immortal, and furnished him with most excellent gifts, that
nothing might be wanting unto him to all blessedness in God. His
understanding was wholly divine, his will most free and most holy: he had power
of doing good and evil: a law was given him of God, which showed him what he
should do, or what he should not do. For the Lord said, Thou shall not eat
of the tree of knowledge both of good and evil. God simply required of him
obedience and faith, and that whole Adam should depend upon him, and that not
constrained by necessity, but should do it freely: he told him also the peril,
and willed him not to touch the tree, lest he dye. So that he left him in his
own counsel, whose will was then free, and might have chosen whether he would
have broken Gods commandment or not. Neither did ^atan in the serpent compel
him to eat, but persuaded the woman, with hope of a more excellent wisdom,
who drew on her husband willingly to be partaker of the same, by the false and
lying persuasion and promise of the devil, and by the delectable show and
sightliness of the tree, the fruit whereof after the woman had first tasted,
she gave to her husband also to eat: By means whereof he lost those goodly
Man's fall.
gifts and ornaments, which God had bestowed upon him: which gifts he gave to
Adam upon condition, that he would also give them to his posterity, if
himself did keep them: but would not give them, if he by his unthankfulnes
would cast them away: so that by his transgression and disobedience, he was
cast out of Paradise, that is, out of that happy estate, and found all the
elements less favorable. His nature and condition was altered from goodness and
holiness, to sin and wickedness: from sincerity to corruption: the influences
that descend from the stars and planets, which are of themselves simply good,
through our sins and corruption turn to evil: so as all things made for our
use, rebel and conspire together against us, and our sins are the cause of
all our evil.

Which fall and alteration of man's nature, and his ingratitude Man's alteration
after his fall.
toward God, will manifestly appear to him that will look into his own
estate, and the things which God has created. To man alone (at least in this
lower part) he has given understanding, by which he may know what al other
things have, and what they be, which the things themselves know not. An
infallible argument that whatsoever they have or be, the same they have or be,
not for themselves, but for man. For to what purpose serves the virtues and
properties that be in them, if they know them not? To man only in all the world
it is given to know these things, and to have the ^ruition of them. For the
world knows not it self, nor the things in i^ and therefore the world and all
things there in contained, were given to man, and created for him only: for
the Angels had no need of it: nor brute beasts could use a thing of such
excellency; but to man that has a bodily substance, it was necessary; who
only, because he was endued with a reasonable soul, could use it. And Man of
more dignity than the world.
seeing the possessor far surmounteth the thing that is possessed, man is of
much greater dignity than the world, which is his possession and habitation.
But the more excellent his nature was, the more filthy is his corruption: the
greater benefits he received of his Creator, the more ungrateful he was to
offend him. And if we call our selves to account, and examine the whole course
of our life, we shall see how small a part thereof we bestow in the cogitations
and service of him that has given us all that we have, and be: And how far
we are from giving him his own, that is, our selves, and all that we have,
which we possess, and ought to apply to the glory of God. But contrariwise,
we convert The corruption of man's nature.
all things to our own commodity as his proper end, and us only to our
selves. How few hours, nay rather how few parts of one hour do we bestow in
a whole day and night, in thinking upon God, as though it were the least care
we have? And when we pray, what do we but commit sin upon sin? In the very
heat of our prayers, how cold are we? yea when we seem most vehement and
devout, what vain and idle thoughts and fancies falls into our heads? So
that our minds in our prayers (...) to be carried away further from God, than
the space is between heaven and earth. And whereof comes this, but that we are
not the same we were? He that kills a man, though he were his mortal
enemy, his soul by and by is tormented, his conscience sharply accuses him,
and tells him, he has not done well: for the biting of no beast is more
grievous, than that of the conscience: which argues, that there is some little
spark left of that divine light of the soul, which seems presently to awake
as it were out of a fleepe, and a^esteth him, and reproves the fact, and is
offended with his own offense, and goes about to revenge our wickedness in
our own persons. As appears by Theodoricus King of the The terror of the
conscience.
Goths; who after he had killed Symmachu^ his Father in law, thought he saw,
as he was at supper, Symmachus face, in a fish head that was set before him,
with other meat to cate: who seemed to grind his teeth, and to look sowrely
upon him, which put the King in such fear, that he fell sick, and dyed
shortly after. Plutar^ in his Book de sera numinis vindicta, reports a
strange history of a man that killed his father. This man, of all other was
least suspected, being so rare A Parricide.
and unnatural a thing for the son to kill his father: and therefore the
murder could never be discovered, until this man, long after the murder
committed, went on a time forth to supper, and espying (as he walked) a
swallows nest, he with his staff threw down the nest, and killed the young
swallows; and being reprehended of some that beheld him, for killing so
cruelly the harmless little birds: They have (quoth he) followed me long
enough; they cry every day, that I have killed my father. The men that were
present, marvelling to hear so strange a thing, informed the King, who caused
him to be apprehended, and being examined, he confessed the matter.

Which example confirms that which has been said, that though our nature
be corrupt, yet the soul detesteth his own wickedness, and our conscience,
that The soul opposite to the sinner of the flesh.
repineth against our misdeeds, tormenteth and secretly admonishes us; which
could not be, if there were not some little image of God, and of our former
divine nature left in us. And whereof comes it, that seeing we know and
confess, that God is our Creator, and has so liberally given us all that we
have, and made the world for us, and that he is good, and goodness it self,
that we put so little confidence in him, or rather mistrust his help, saving
that we seem to have some sense and feeling imprinted in our conscience, that
we have grievously offended him, and are justly disinherited and unworthy of
his favor? Our prayers be as full of distrust, as our hearts be void of faith.
God has advanced us far above stones, plants, brute beasts, and all other
unreasonable creatures, and above the world it self. He has set us upright,
and given us eyes to look up toward heaven, and with our eyes to behold his
magnificence. But we contrariwise look down to the earth, and tumble in the
ground, like swine in the dirt. How many give themselves wholly, and have
almost no other th ought, but in getting and heaping together gold and silver,
the scurffe of the earth, which they seek after as their greatest good and
felicity? Whereof rises all our contention, and suits, but for earth and
earthly things? Which is a plain demonstration, that we are thrown down
headlong from that honorable estate and throne wherein we were by the
bountiful goodness of God first placed. If a man should see one with a crown
or diadem upon his head, all soyled with dirt, or delving the ground, or
holding the plough, would not he think him either mad, or else cast out of
his chair of estate, Comparison.
and deposed from his royal dignity? What do men but dig and turmoyle in
the earth, occupy themselves wholly in base things, as though God had given
immortality to the soul, to bestow our labor and cogitations in dung and
dirt? A scepter is not given to a King to play the dizzard. But if a man had
held himself in his first estate that God made him, our divine nature would
have bin occupied in divine things, and heavenly contemplation. We should not
have set our felicity in these transitory things, as though our inheritance
were in this world.

The consideration of these things will enforce us to confess, that the soul
lives not properly, but the body only: and that his actions and motions are
not free and at his own liberty. Proclus could say, that the natural life
properly of the soul, is not in this earthly body, but above. And Plato
likeneth the soul, when he is in generation, to men that dwell in a pestilent
air: and the soul that is without generation, to them that dwell in a fair
green meadow. And as they that dwell in an unwholesome country, are for the
most part, sickely, and few continue in their natural health: so the soul as
long as it lives in this elementary body, as in a prison, and both together in
this world, will be subject as it were to sickness, that is, to sin, to
passions, to corruption and uncleanness. For among so many men that are endued
with a mind, who uses it? that is, (as Morney further says) in men how many
beasts? and among men what is more rare than a man? And of these that use their
mind, how few use it well? That is, (says he) in men how many Devils? And if
from among men, beasts and devils should be taken away, what marvel is it
that the Philosopher sought for a man at noone day with a lincke, in the
midst of a great assembly of men? Some in condition resemble a Wolf, M^
(...) of the nature of beast^.
others a Fox; some a Swine; others this or that kind of Beast: but few
resemble a man, in that he is a man: and more few, in that he is the image of
God. God created man to his own glory, but as he is now, he is continually
a dishonor to God: whereby it appears, man is not now the same he was at
the beginning: That he is deprived of that high dignity, and divine nature
that was first given him: That he is fallen from being the Temple and
habitation of God, to be the dungeon of sin and wickedness. Which
alteration of his estate and condition is not to be imputed to God, who is the
author of all good, and goodness it self; but to his own fault, that would
not persist in the same estate wherein God had placed him; but would be equal
with his Creator: Whereby he grievously offended God, and procured his severe
sentence and curse; By mean whereof, he is not only bereaved of those goodly
gifts and ornaments, which before by his contemplation and glorifying of God,
he enjoyed at the full, but he is also become subject to those things, which
for his sake and use were created: As Ch^yfippus truly said; Qudm falso
accusant superos, stulteque queruntur,
Martales? etenim nostrorum causa malorum
Ipsi nos su^: and sua quemque vecordia ladit:
How falsely, and how foolishly do men
Accuse and rail upon high powers? when
We all of our own evils are the ground,
And each man's madness does himself confound.
Order required, that reason should obey God, and our senses and desires should
be obedient to reason: But now contrariwise the senses overruled reason, Man's
senses overruled hi^reason.
and desires lead our will: the body commands the soul, and the cart is
before the horse. So that we must confess, we be most justly punished, even
by the same means, by which our first parent committed the offense. For as by
his disobedience he rebelled against his Lord and Creator, so by a just
punishment, the things which he made to serve man's use, rebel against him.

The defects of the soul, and the motions we seele of anger, of lust, and
such like, besides reason, proceeds not from our original nature, nor from
our first creation, but from the contagion of the flesh, and enticements of the
world, being become corrupt and unclean, which is come upon our good nature,
as Mor.
rust comes upon iron. And those things which be now common unto us and brute
beasts, by the corruption of our nature, we are ashamed nevertheless, if we
be seen to do them. When we are angry, if a man given to virtue and honesty
come the while, it stays it self presently, as though vice durst not abide
the sight of virtue. And if a man be e^pied in the act of Venus, though
lawful, he will be ashamed, Note.
and blush as if his blood labored to hide and cover him. By which Repentance
following those affections, nature does sharply admonish us (being ashamed to
do like brute Beasts) of the difference between us and them: which she
would not do, if she had been created brutish from the beginning. But
contrariwise, brute beasts forbear not to follow their motions openly;
because it was their nature at the beginning, wherein they continue. Man only
of all other Creatures of the earth, d^lineth from his original nature, in
whom alone all Man only ^
things are corrupted. If we commit any vicious act, though secretly being
alone, our Conscience by and by shows it self to be our companion, and does
not only witness against us, but condemns us, and punishes the fact. For
though the soul be a spiritual ^ffence, such as the elements and bodily
substances can do^ nothing against it, and had it self in his own power, and
was ruler and commander of the body, which before the fall suffered nothing of
the body, yet the objects and filthiness of the flesh, environing, and as it
were cleaving to the soul, does corrupt and defile her: as good Wine receives
an evil taste of a fustie vessel. For the body is enclosed within the
Elements, the blood within the body, the spirits within the blood, the soul
within the spirits, the mind within the soul; and Hermes further adds, God
within the mind. Fire covered with ashes shines not: the Sun hidden with a
thick black cloud, casts forth less light; so the Soul being drowned in
moist and foul matter, receives a certain mist, which shadoweth and covers
the mind, and darkeneth the light of reason. This power that God gave to these
things, over the substance of the Soul, besides his nature, which otherwise of
their own nature they could not have done, argues the greatness of the
offense, which man committed against God, and his high justice in his
punishment. Our wisdom Needful con^.
is ignorance, our knowledge is vanity, our godliness is hypocrisy, our
virtue is nothing but a cloak to cover our vice. For if it were possible to see
into a man, how many salvage beasts should we see lurking in a man's heart, as
in a forest or thick wood? Our imagination and thoughts, what are they but
mere wickedness and vanity? These evils we have received by propagation from
our first parent.

Sentit adhuc proles, quod commisere parents: The children are yet sensible of
what their parents have committed. For the sins we commit is a punishment of
his offense. And though they are come to us by Gods permission, yet it is not
to be imputed to him as an author of it, because he could by his absolute
power hinder and let evil. For he proponeth laws, to man with rewards and
punishments. He wills him to embrace good and fly evil. To the doing
whereof he denies not his grace, without which we can do nothing, nor
refuses our diligence and labor. Here if we cease and give over, the sin and
negligence is attributed to man, and not to God, though he could have hindered
it, and did not, because he ought not to hinder it, lest he should disturb
his appointed and settled order, and destroy his own work. God therefore is
not the Author of evil and sin, for all things which he made are good. It is
no efficient, but a deficient cause. Evil is no substance nor nature but an
accident that comes to the substance, when it is void of those good
qualities that ought naturally to be in them, and supplieth the others absence
with his presence. And that he suffers evil to be done, agreeeth with his
great justice and mercy. For if God should suffer no evil to be done, men
could not finne: which agrees not with his nature; the Creator of all things
having given him in the beginning free will. And except Why God suffers evil.
there should be sinners, how should God show mercy? But because all men
commit sin many ways, God finds every where matter to forgive, every
whereupon whom to show mercy. Saint Augustine says, If the disease were light,
the Physician would be contemned and not sought; and if the Physician should
not be sought, the disease would have no end. Therefore where sin abounded,
there also grace abounded, which only divides the redeemed from the damned.
All which things are sufficient testimony against us, that God made all things
good, and the evil that is happened to us, is come upon us by our own fault,
that disobeied God to obey the Devil.

We must confess therefore, that God made man good, and a divine creature,
after his own image; that he endued him with many goodly gifts and ornaments;
that he made the world and all things therein to serve man, as he made man to
serve him: and as man is the end of the world, so God is the end of man; that
he esteemed him in place of his son, and opened his mind to him: But because
man preferred his own appetite before Pride the fall of man.
the will of his Creator, and became as a bastard and degenerate, not only by
breaking Gods commandment, but by affecting an equality with him, he fell out
of his favor, and lost those gifts he first gave him, and is justly punished
by him, that is most just, with the alteration of his estate and condition, as
a rebel against his Sovereigne and Creator; because he would not continue and
rest in his felicity, wherein God had first placed him; that is, in the
contemplation of his Creator: but would needs seek his felicity some other
where. For the end of man is to glorify God, having made him for his own
glory; and the end, felicity, beatitude and Sum^ b^num of man, is all one by
the Philosophers confession, as has been showed before. Therefore God, that
has made all things good, and is most good, and goodness it self, is the
felicity or beatitude and Summum God the only Summum bonum.
bonum of man. And though man by his ungrateful revolting from God, that had
bestowed such innumerable benefits upon him, deserved justly to be utterly
destroyed; yet he dealt mercisully with him, that he took not away all, as
his demerits required, and left him a means to return into his grace again.
For by taking away the things he first gave us, he would make us humble by the
fall of our first parent, lest by the like presumptuousnesse we should fall
again. A King builds a new city and endoweth it, as the manner is, with many
privileges and liberties: it happens the citizens to rebel; the king takes
away from them many of their liberties and privileges. Which punishment of
rebellion descends to all their posterity, though the city was begun with a
few families, it grows at length to be very populous. His giving those
privileges to the first inhabitants, was to be imputed to his bounteousnesse
and liberality: that he took them away, was his justice: that he denied
restitution of them to their posterity, was his clemency, lest they being of
the same disposition, should procure again their own destruction. So God gave
unto man liberty, a great privilege; and adorned him with many goodly gifts
both of body and mind, for the which he ought to praise his goodness. And
because by abusing his gifts, he has taken them away, or diminished them, is
to be attributed to his justice; which he has done, lest by example of the
first man, his posterity being of the same condition, should commit again the
like offense, and fall into the like punishment. Thus it pleased God of his
goodness to chastise his people, and to suffer them to be governed by his
laws, but not utterly destroy them. And that mankind might feel and know how
great miseries follow their sin, and fall, and thereby learn humility and
godliness, and to call for his great mercy, apparent in the midst of his high
justice, that notwithstanding man's grievous offense and ingratitude, he would
not utterly destroy his posterity, whom he had made to his glory, but raised up
one out of that rebellious stock, that should satisfy his justice whereby they
might live, and be received into grace again: hereby it is evident that man's
nature is corrupted, not so created at the first by God: but by abusing his
gifts and graces, is fallen from goodness into wickedness, from his special
favor, into his just indignation. And as we are of the nature of that man our
first parent, in whom humane nature was universally polluted; so do we
receive from him his nature, and draw to us the corruption thereof, from whence
is derived by propagation, the cause of our miserable estate and condition. Now
that we have showed how and by what me^es we fell out of Gods favor into this
stinking pit and dunge. on: let us see how we may wade out of it again.

God, all men confess to be Creator of all things, and The means to escape
these dangers into which we are fallen.
as he is good and goodness it self, all that he has made, must needs be
also good as proceeding from the fountain of goodness. And because God is
wisdom, all his creations we must needs acknowledge, were made to some end;
For nature (say the Philosophers) does nothing in vain, but all things well;
much more God the Creator of nature does all things to an end. And as God is
the beginning, middle, and end of all things, so has he none other end of his
works, but himself. For he made all things to his own glory; and therefore
we that be the creatures of God, of whom we have our beginning and life, can
have no other end but God. So God the end of his own Works.
that God is our Summum bonum, or Sovereign good; our beatitude and felicity.
To that end therefore, to the attaining of that good, which is the proper
action and true felicity of man, all our studies and desires, all our labors
and diligence, ought to be directed and employed. If man's first nature had
remained whole and uncorrupted, there would not have needed any great search to
be made to find out his felicity. For our end or felicity did then shine in
our understanding; and the same end or good, which is God, by whom and for whom
we were created, did allure and draw our will. But now by our pride and
presumptuousnesse, and fall of our first parent, our matters be brought to this
pass, that in earthly things we have Lynces eyes, but in spiritual things we
are as blind as beetles. In seeking for the true light, the true God, and the
right way to felicity, or Summum bonum, our eyes do not only twinkle as an Owl
against the Sun, but are shut close together. Yet notwithstanding there
remains to us some signs or tokens by which we may know these things:
specially if we call continually to mind our fall. For then we should not
wallow in the dirt like swine, and desire these earthly things, that appertain
nothing to us, nor to our end and felicity: nor stand like men amazed with the
greatness of our fall: but we should seek our end, or sovereign good or
beatitude, in the grace of God, and in the face of our Creator: from which by
our own fault we are fallen and cast away. To make the matter more plain, we
will use Morneyes similitude. He that desires to know the use of any
instrument, as of A Si^tude.
a saw, he must not judge of it by the rust that has eaten into it, or that it
is defaced, or broken by some chance but by the whole teeth, scowred clean,
and fit to cut, even as it came out of the artificers shop. So likewise must we
judge of a man; not estimating his end, and greatest good, of his blindness,
of his ignorance, of his wickedness, and such like, that are come upon him;
but of the excellency, of the goodness, of the brightness, wherewith he was
at the first endued of the Creator. Neither may we apply the use of a saw to
that it is of Iron, and has a handle, and will cut; for these things be in
every sword, and yet a sword is not a saw: but because it has teeth, and is
of a peculiar form: by which a saw di^ereth not only from a sword, or knife
that has no teeth, but also from a file that has teeth also. In like sort we
must examine a man (if we shall judge of a man's use or end) by his life or
senses. To what purpose The application.
was a man made, seeing these things be also in plants and beasts? But God made
man not in vain: wherefore his end and good must be estimated by that peculiar
and proper part, by which he does excel and is a man, by which he surmounteth
all things, that be, that live, that have sense, that is, by the principal
part of his soul, which is his understanding; for what is more excellent than
that? And as this particular form, which gives the particular use to a saw,
is common to all sawes, so likewise that special form of man, by which the end
of man differs from that of all other creatures, is so proper to him, as
nevertheless it is common to all mankind. For as this property is engendered by
nature in all men, so all men ought to level and direct their course to that
end, as their greatest or fove^aigne good and beatitude. For the same which was
the end and good of the first man, is also the end and good of all men;
although our understanding is become dull, our will foolish, and our nature
corrupted. And as our first parent, whilst he was in his perfect estate, did
aspire and lift himself up to God, as to his end and beatitude, so must we
climb up to God, as much as by our minds we are able. And as to cleave unto
God, was his sovereign good and beatitude; so cannot we attain to our
greatest good and felicity, except we return to God again from whom we are
fallen away.

Seeing then that understanding was given to man, by a singular privilege,
clear at the first, without spot or blemish, that he might behold the end and
good, for which he was created, we must use the help thereof to discern
between the true end to which we ought to direct A necessary distinction.
the course of our life, and the false reputed ends and felicity, which
diverteth and leads us astray from our greatest good and happiness or
beatitude, which is God. By nature every man wishes well to himself, and
directs his course to some end, which he thinks to be good for him. But
though this desire or appetite of good be common to all, yet there is great
diversity in their taste, which (as in them that have the green sickness, or
a woman with child, that longs to eat coals, An apt similitude.
and ashes or other evil things greedily as good meat) shows plainly a
great distemperance of their nature: which makes men propone to themselves
diverse ends, to which they direct the course of their life. Some give
themselves to pleasures, others to covetousnes and getting of riches, and
possessions; some to ambition, and desire of honor and glory; all which has
been showed before, to divert men from their true end, and sovereign good.
Which blindness and corruption of our nature and understanding is happened to
us by our disobedience and fall. For when man's understanding was clear and
unspo^ed, he saw apparently that God was his true end and sovereign good, in
whom only all our desires were fixed and settled. But because our nature is
now corrupted and our understa^ding deformed, having nothing left in us of that
good we had before our fall, but a variable and vain desire of that we have
lost and have not, if we consider our own estate and ability, and an
uncertain kind of knowledge, or rather an imagination of God: and that also
being confused and grown out of use: either we take not God for our true end
and sovereign good, though he offer himself every where unto us, or if we
desire to go to him, we go astray, and fall either to wickedness, or to
superstition, or else (as the most part of men do) take that which comes next
to hand, addict our selves to the world and sensible matters, tumbling in these
excrements of the earth, like swine in the dirt. But these be not the things
for which man was created, nor wherein his end or sovereign good or felicity
must be sought: for man consists of a body and soul; the body mortal, the
soul immortal: if we seek the felicity of man in the body only, men shall do
great injury to the soul and to our selves. For if it be in the body, it dies
and putrifieth with the body, which were a miserable estate. But we seek
after the felicity of the whole man, and of his whole life, which cannot be in
the body, except we take form and beauty for it; that rather delights him
that beholds it, than himself that has it; which is also many ways defaced
and lost, with sickness, with a wound, or with the heat only of the Sun.
But in the soul that is annexed to the body, there are three faculties, The
facu^ of the soul.
vegetative or increasing, sensitive, and understanding. Now let us see in
which of these we may lay the end or felicity of man. The soul gives life to
the body, and the perfection of life is health. If we respect nothing else in
this life, then he that was first created healthful, had The Vegera^ve.
nothing wherewith to occupy himself. But if sithence our corruption, our
principal care ought to be of our health, what thing is more unhappy than a
man, whose felicity stands upon so false and feeble a ground? Seeing the body
is subject to an infinite number of perils, of hurts, of mischances, weak and
frail, always uncertain of life, and most certain of death, which comes
to him by many means, and ways: who is he that is so sound of body, or so
feeble of mind, that if his choice be given him, will not rather choose a sound
mind in a sickely body, than a little frenzy or imperfection of mind in a very
healthful body? In the mind therefore our chief good must be, seeing we be
willing to redeem the perfect estate of our mindswth the miseries of our bodies.

Next unto this is the sensitive part, whose felicity The sensitive.
seems to be in pleasure; but then were beasts more happy than men, that
feel pleasures more sweetly and fully. And how soon are these pleasures ended
with repentance also? It pleased the gods, (said Plautus) that sorrow should
follow pleasure as a companion. But we seek for the greatest or sovereign
good, and if it be good, it will amend men and make them better. But what does
more weaken and corrupt men, than pleasures? and what does less satisfy men,
and more weary them? But we look not for that which does finish, but that
continues our delight: whereas these pleasures contrariwise soon decay and
quickly spoil us: As Petrarke says; Extrema gaudii luctus occupat: The
extremity of joy and pleasure, sorrow does possess. The delight of the mind is
greater and more meet for a man, and more agreeable to his end than the
pleasures of the senses. And if choice be given to him that has passed all his
life in pleasures, and has but a few hours to come, either to enjoy the
fairest curtisan in Rome, or else to deliver his country, who is so beastly or
barbarous, that will not presently choose rather to delight his mind with so
noble an act, than to satisfy his senses with pleasure? And to conclude, the
place of pleasures is in the senses; which are decayed and taken away, by
sickness, by wounds, by old age. And if these pleasures that be exercised by
the sensitive part, will not sooner be abated, yet death will utterly
extinguish them. But seeing man has two kinds of life, mortal and immortal,
the one of which he prefers as far the better, before the other, we must
not seek for such an end or good as perish both together, but such as makes
men happy indeed, everlasting and immortal, which cannot be found in these
transitory things.

Now follows the third part of the soul which is understanding, which is
occupied sometimes in it self, The understanding.
sometimes in the matters of the world, and other while in the contemplation
and study of divine things. Of these three operatio^s springs three habits;
virtue, prudence, and sapience. And seeing that understanding is the most
excellent thing in man; let us see in which of these we may place our
sovereign good. For in this part of the soul the end and beatitude of man must
needs consist: for what thing can be imagined beyond man, beyond the world, and
beyond the Creator of both? That virtue cannot be his end or sovereign good
has bin showed before. For virtue is nothing but the tranquillity and quietness
of the affections: and what be affections, but a sudden tempest in the soul,
that are raised by a very small wind, which overthrow the mightiest ship that is
in a moment, and makes the most skillful mariners to strike sail, and reason
it self to give over the stern. And if our end of felicity should be in
virtue, what were more miserable than man, that must fight continually against
his affections, which nevertheless will not be overcome, as the mariners
labor to save themselves in a tempest from the raging of the sea, that gapeth
every moment to devour them. So that in this life virtue cannot bring us to
felicity; and in the other life it can stand us in no stead, where we shall
have no affections. Therefore virtue cannot be our end, or Sovereign good.

Neither is prudence the thing we seek for, which is nothing but the right use
of reason in exercising the affairs of this world. And what be the affairs
of this world, but contention, strifes, suits, wars, bloodshed, spoil,
murders, burnings, and sackings of towns and countries, with an infinite
number of such like stuff? Neither can they that have the charge of government
in commonwealths (which are all subject to these things) be accounted happy,
but they rather are happy, that are defended from them by their cares and
unqui^nesse: (for the Physicians care is more profitable to the f^che body than
to himself.) Besides that, men are turned to dust, and the world will be
destroyed; but the soul lives, and forsakes these kind of affairs.
Therefore prudence cannot be the end and felicity of man, that is included
within the limits of this world.

CHAP. II.
Divine co^ the best wisdom: That our greatest knowledge is ^eere ignorance:
Of wonderful and strange secrets in nature: The excellency of faith: Religion
our reconciliation to God: All nations acknowledge a supreme Deity: That no
virtues are virtues, that swerve from religion and godliness: Of the only true
religion: Salvation of man the only true beatitude: Marks by which the true
religion is known: The necessity of a Mediator: Who, and what our Mediator
is: And that the sovereign beatitude is only to be attained unto by our
blessed Savior, Christ Jesus the Righteous.

LEt us now examine sapience (after Morney) as we have done the rest, or that
part of wisdom, which is conversant in the contemplation of God, and divine
matters; for that in all men's judgments, seems to be a mostexcellent thing.
By instinct of nature every man knows that there is a God; for the works of
God do present him continually to us. But how should we enter thoroughly into
the knowledge of the Creator of all things, when we know not the things before
our eyes? Socrates confessed freely, that he knew this one thing, That he knew
nothing. Which confession, as himself thought, was the cause he was by the
Oracle called the wisest man of his time. And Porphyrius said, that all Nothing
certain in philosophy.
Philosophy was but a conjecture or light persuasion, delivered from one to
another, and nothing in it that was not doubtful, and disputable. But he that
knows God in this, wherein is he the more happy? Reason shows us that God
is good, that he is just: that he loves the good, and hates the evil. Our
conscience whispereth us in the ear, that we do no good thing, but much
evil: and that good we do, we do it badly. What felicity is in this
knowledge, when it Wa^th us continually of our wickedness? But he that gives
himself to contemplation, climbeth higher: God is immortal, immutable,
impassible; that God dies not like a man; nor is altered or moved. And when he
is come thither, he is at the wall, his mind can go no further. And what kind
of knowledge is this? What madness is it to take upon us to know a thing by
that it is not? Shall we persuade our selves that we know what thing a Camel
is, because we know it is not a Frogge? So that our highest knowledge, we must
confess to be mere ignorance. And who will place man's Our greatest knowledge
mere ignorance.
end or sovereign good and felicity in ignorance? But those that climb
highest to search for knowledge, fall into such errors, and entangle themselves
in such labyrinthes, that they know not how to wind themselves out: But as men
that look steadfastly upon the Sun, the more they behold the brightness
thereof, the more their eyes dazell, until they become stark blind: so
happens it to them that aspire to the knowledge of God and divine things,
th^more they search, the less they know by their own wisdom: which
peradventure moved one to say, Simple ignorance is better than arrogant
knowledge. We are forbidden by Saint Paul to be over curious in seeking the
knowledge of things above our reach, Nolt altum Sapere. The want of ability in
us, to know the causes of natural things here in earth, the effects whereof we
see daily before our eyes, argues plainly, that God would not have us aspire
too high in knowledge, when he has hidden these base things from us. Who
knows the cause why the Lodestone draws iron to it, which being there with
rubbed, points toward the North pole; Secrets in nature.
and garlike and a Diamond hinders his operation; though some take upon them
to draw reasons thereof from their own conceit, to feed their own humors? And
who knows the cause why the fish called Echeneis or Remora, no bigger than a
Carpe, will stay the greatest ship or galley that is, if he cleave to his
side, notwithstanding any force of wind or o^res And who knows the cause why
the fish called T^rpedo, having touched one end of a pyke or spear, casts
the man into a trance that touches the other end? The beast called Catoblepa
kills a man a mile from him with his sight only. A Wolf seeing a man first,
makes him unable to speak: with an infinite number of like things, which
shows that God will not have us enter into his secrets of these base things,
much less of divine A minore ad man.
things, further than he has given us power. Where of if his meaning had been
to have given us knowledge, he would have given us another sense, and a deeper
reason, by which we might have known these and the like hidden properties of
his creatures. Therefore our only refuge is to attain to that by faith, which
we cannot attain by our mind and understanding, that by a lively faith we may
be lifted up above our mind, that what by the sharpness thereof we cannot
reach and comprehend, by faith we may pierce and see thorough. And what is it
Faith.
to have faith in God, but to look for all our good from him? to believe that
all refterh with God? And seeing that to have faith, continually to hope, to
expect, is to de^re that we have not already, it is evident that we can never
here see and possess the thing we look for, but the greater a man's faith is,
the more he despises worldly things: the more fervent his desire is to
heavenly things, the greater is his mislike of himself, and the more ^hement
is his love to God. Plato says, that what course The Philosophers concerning
beatitude.
soever men take, they cannot be happy, or enjoy the sovereign good in this
life, but in the other life; without doubt (says he) they that follow virtue,
shall be rewarded with beatitude. And Pythagoras says, that man as it were
banished from the face of God, walks as a stranger in this world. And Hermes
says, that the end of man is to live by his mind, and the life of the mind is
God. Thus far the Philosophers knowledge did reach, that the end of man is to
live by his mind, that his sovereign good or beatitude is not to be enjoyed
in this life, but is to be found in the other life with God. But they wanted
faith to carry them whither their wisdom could not reach. For that knowledge
of God we attain unto in this life by natural wisdom, is ignorance; by
supernatural, faith. In vain therefore we seek here either by action or
contemplation, the thing that is not here to be found. For Pl^tinus always
affirms, that beati^de and eternity goes ever together: which beatitude
(says Plat^) is, that we be joined and made like to God, who is the top, the
bo^de, and the end of all blessedness. In seeking then for this end and
sovereign good of man, Christian considerations.
we find that the world was made for man, man for the soul, the soul for the
mind, the mind for some higher cause, which is God. For the world was not of it
self; nor for it self b^t was made of some and for some. So man not having
his being of himself, cannot be the end of himself. He that m^eth any thing,
makes it not for it, but for himself, so that he is the end thereof: neither
is the thing good in it self, but to him that made it, as touching that he
made it to his own use. He therefore is the good of that thing, by whom and for
whom it is called good. And seeing man is made by God, and for God, he must
needs be his end, and the greatest good. So (says Pl^tinus) the sovereign
end of man is mere good, that is God. Other things appertain to the end, but
they be not the end.

By this it appears, that after the ancient wise men, and better sort of
Philosophers that were guided by reason only, the felicity or beatitude and
sovereign good of man, must not be sought for in this life, but in the other
life. And that man ought to employ his time in this life, to the knowledge and
worshipping of God, as to his only end, that he may with God, and in God have
the fruition of all good things perp^tually in the other world. By the
authority all^grd of the le^d Heathens, and by the reasons and arguments, and
grnerall consent of the learned Divines (among which number I account the Lord
Ple^s, whom in this Part, I chiefly follow) it is manifest, that as the body of
(...) is to the soul, so is this morra^ life to the imm^ll. And that the end
of man in this world, is the knowledge and worshipping of God; and his
foveraigne good (...) to that end, is the fruition and possession of God in
heaven: but by reason of our fall, our knowledge being turned into igno^nce,
though we have some fight of our end and beatitude, yet we are notable about
selves to attain to it. And as the cause of our misery is our separation from
God, so our felicity is to be joined with The way to recover our loss.
God again. And seeing the same which was the sovereign good of the firstman,
is also (...), which by his revolt from God he lost from himself and from his
posterity, and the way to recover the same, is to re^ to God ^ine. Let us see
whether God of his great me^y has not left us some means by which we may be
(...) the right way to him again: whether (...) does ^each forth his fatherly
hand to us thorough the clouds and (...), to call and draw us to him, though
like bastards and rebels, we be altogether unworthy of his favor and mercy.

All men acknowledge one God, the parent and Creator of mankind: that he made
the world for man of nothing: and that he governs both the world and man by
his providence. Then must it needs follow, that obedience is due to the Father,
faith and invocation, and all Invocation.
manner of duty belongs to so bountiful a Lord and governor. And seeing man
is by nature immortal, he ought with all his mind to aspire to immortal
things. And because by sin he is fallen from God and from himself, he ought
to ask pardon, that he may pacify the wrath of God which he purchased by his
pride and love of himself. It is requisite therefore that he acknowledge his
frailty and misery, that he may with all humility submit himself to God. And
what betoken all Humility.
these things, but that there is one God, one man, one religion, that is, a
duty of man toward God, a reconciliation of the degenerate children to their
father, of the rebellious subjects to their Lord, whose favor we lost by our
fall? For all the exercises of religion proceed hereof, that men know, God made
and rules the world: that man is immortal, that he fell by transgression out
of Gods favor, that created him to worship and glorify God, which is his end
and soveragne good. And (...) comes all our sacrifices, our adorations, our
ceremonies, our singing of Psalms, and ^hankesgiving, and such like: So that
religion, which is a reconciliation Religion.
to God, is the way that (...) us to out felicity and Summum bonum, or
sov^raigne good: But not every religion, but the true religion, by which God is
rightly served, as he himself has appointed, and not as is grounded upon the
inventions and fantastical devices of men. For the Heathens and (...) and
barbarous people have their several religion, of their own invention, some
adoring the Sun; some the Moon; others the first thing they meet in the
morning; some a red cloth hanging at the end of a long staff; others images of
men, and other creatures. For there is no people so brutish, or void of All
^tion acknowledge a God.
humanity, but by instinct of nature he knows there is a divine power above
man, whereupon he groo^deth some religion. The ancient wise men and
Philosophers highly exalted religion above all things, as the only way to lead
them to the sovereign good, which is God. Plato says, the beatitude of man,
is to be made like God: that is, if he be just and holy, which must come by
godliness and the love of God, which is the greatest virtue among men. And
Aristotle says, that in godliness all our felicity consists. And (...)
says, If we be of any judgment, what shall we do but continually worship
God, sing Psalms, and give thanks unto him, whether we dig or plough the
ground, whether we labor or rest? Simplicius says, He can do nothing
diligently, how necessary soever it be, that is ^othfull and negligent in the
service of God. Religion (says Hier^cles) is the chief and leader of all
virtues, which is referred to Gods cause; to which all other virtues have
relation, as to their end. For virtues are not virtues, if they swerve from
religion and godliness. Fortitude referred All true virtue grounded on
religion and godliness.
to any other thing, than to godliness, falls into temerity or rashness:
prudence into fraud and subtilty, and so like wise of the rest. But all other
religions, saving the true religion, do lead men to the brinke of hell, or at
least show them Paradise afar off; but between them and it, is a great deep
gulf, over which no man is able to pass, nor all the world is able to fill it
up: yet there must needs be a passage over somwhere: for the end of man is
certain, to be joined with God. And that he may be joined with him in heaven,
it is requisite that he be reconciled to him in earth. And the only way to be
reconciled is, that God pay our debts: and until they be paid he does not
absolve us. That therefore is the only true religion, that leads us directly
to that passage, by whose conduction we find out the right way over it: which
only leads us to the end of religion, that is, man's salvation: for true
religion is the right way to reconcile us to God, whereof True religion, to
what it (...).
ensues the salvation of man. And that the true religion may be discerned from
those that be the inventions of men, it has three marks by which it is made
apparent. But first this foundation must be taken for certain and immovable,
as laid upon a rock, that true religion is a rule of the worshipping of God,
by which man is reconciled and tied to God for his own salvation. This
salvation of man is his beatitude, his beatitude is to be joined with God. For
neither the world, nor any thing in it, makes a man happy or blessed, but God
only that made man, makes him happy. And seeing it is manifest that he and no
other must be worshipped in the earth, that will make us happy or blessed in
heaven, what religion soever, though it show to be very singular and very holy,
diverteth and draws our minds and prayers from the Creator, to the creature,
is idolatry and wickedness. And what religion shall persuade us, to seek our
sovereign good and beatitude any other where, than with him that is only
good, and the only author of good, is not only vanity and erroneous, but it
leads out of the way to kill, and throws down head long to destroy. And
though they have offerings and thankesgiving, sacrifices, prayers, and other
observances, they are vain and blasphemous, if we attribute that to a
creature, how excellent soever he be, which we received of God: and desire
pardon of creatures, for the sins and offenses we commit against A against
prayer (...) to (...).
the Creator. Let this therefore be the first mark of true religion, that it
does direct us, and our prayers and advocations to one God, the Creator of
heaven and earth, who only searches men's hearts, with which he will be
chiefly worshipped. But this is not sufficient, to worship the true God, but he
must be rightly worshipped. But who is so arrogant to take upon him to enter
into the knowledge and secrets of God, as to prescribe a rule, by which God is
to be worshipped? We must fly unto God for his help, poor wretches as we
are, to whom we are not able to go, except he vouchsafe to come down unto
us. The Sun cannot be seen without the Sun; no more can God be known
without his help and light. No man can worship God except he know him, and no
man can know him, except he discover himself to him. And therefore what
worship is meet for him can be known of none, except he vouchsafe to reveal
himself in his word and oracles. For, that God cannot be worshipped but by the
prescript of his own will, both the consciences of all men, and God himself
in his holy word does testify. Esaias and Matthew. In vain do they worship me,
who teach the doctrines and commandments of men. And this therefore is the
second mark, A second mark of true religion.
that the religion teaches the worshipping of God, leaning upon the word of
God, and revealed of God himself. But this neither is sufficient, that the
religion we seek for, teaches us to worship the true God, and that by Gods
word and appointment: for God gave us a law out of his own mouth, according to
his holiness and justice, that we might be holy like him. But if we cannot of
our selves know God, nor how to worship him, how can we, after he revealed
himself to us, and gave us a law to worship him, perform our duty to God, and
fulfill the law? We ought to love God above all things, and for his sake
whatsoever bears his image, though we never knew or saw him before: But who
dare arrogate to himself such a perfect charity, to love his neighbor as he
ought, and for his sake that he ought? that is, no otherwise than for
himself, and for God. But if we examine our coldness in the love of God, we
shall perceive the reflection thereof to our neighbor to be frozen. And
therefore, the third mark is, that the religion we seek, must help us to a A
third mark.
means whereby Gods justice must be satisfied; without which not only all other
religions are vain and of none effect, but that also which seems to have the
keeping of the worshipping of God. So that the Heathens saw by instinct of
nature, and by reason, that there is a God, and that man's sovereign good is to
be joined with God, and that some way to the same was necessary, which they
thought to be any religion which they had invented to worship and adore him.
And hereof came their magic, and idolatry, and superstitious ceremonies of
their own invention. But the right way is beyond their reach, and a great
deal higher than it can be found out by men: for there is a great difference
between, to know that God must be worshipped, and to know how he should
rightly be worshipped. Hierocles says, that religion is the study of
wisdom, consisting in the purgation and perfection of life: by which we are
joined again and made like to God. And the way (says he) to that purgation,
is to enter into our conscience, to search out our sins, and confess them to
God. But here they are all gravelled and at a stand: for of the confession of
our sins follows death and damnation, except God that is Justice it self,
and most good, and to evil most contrary, be pacified, and made merciful to
us sinners. But we seek for the true and everlasting life in religion, and not
immortal death.

Seeing then that the end of man in this life is to return to God, that he may
be joined with him in the other life which is his sovereign good and felicity
or beatitude; and that the way to return to God is religion, and that as there
is one true God, so there can be but one true religion: whose marks be to
worship the true God, and that by the appointment of his own word; and such as
reconcileth man to God: let us see what religion has the same marks, and
means. That the Israelites worshipped the true God the Creator of heaven, is
apparent by the confession also of some of the learned Heathens. Seneca said,
the basest people (meaning the Jews) gave laws unto all the world: that is,
they only worshipped the true God, the The (...) worshipped the true God.
Creator of all things: for the Israelites only of all the world worshipped
the true God, the knowledge of whom they received from hand to hand, even from
the first man, and how he would be worshipped, among which people he wrought
wonderful matters. But the Painims worshipped gods of their own making,
sometimes men, and sometimes devils, that are enemies to God. Such was the
blindness of man in the matters of God, and his vanity and negligence in the
matters pertaining to his salvation, after the corruption received by his fall.
But it is certain and manifest by that which has been said, that man was
placed in this world to worship God his Creator, which worship we call
religion: and therefore as soon as man was in the world, there was without
doubt, also religion: for man's band and covenant toward God, was made even
with man, the very same day that he was created; that is, the duty of man
toward God, which is religion or godliness. And because it is not doubted,
but that the first habitation of men was in the country about Damasco, Damasco
the (...) habitation of (...).
we may also with reason believe, that there the first man was created: which
Countries thereabout have been of great antiquity, the habitation of the
Israelites; and even from the beginning of them from whom they descended: who
always (...) from age to age certain books (those which we call the Bible
or old Testament) which they followed, and had in great reverence, as the true
word of the true God: in which he did vouchsafe to reveal himself to men,
and to give them a law how to be worshipped: which books be continued
without intermission from the creation of the world, and by little and little
leads us even to Christ: which have always been of such authority with the
true (...), that they have given no credit to any other books, neither could
they be drawn from their beleese in them by no wars, calamities, exiles,
torments, nor slaughter, which cannot be said of any other people. All the
books, histories, or chronicles of the Romans, Grecians, Egyptians, or of any
other nations, be as yesterday in respect of the antiquity of the Bible.
Therefore we are assured in that book is contained the true religion, The
Bible (...) the true (...) of God.
that is, the true worshipping of the true God and Creator of the world, in
which he has revealed unto us himself by his own word. In the religion also
contained in that book, is the third mark, that is, the means by which men may
be reconciled to God. And because this is the principal part of religion; to
make it more plain, we must make a repetition of some thing that has been
said. Man is immortal and his sovereign good or beatitude is not to be had
in this life; but it is to be joined with God in heaven: to which he shall
attain, if whilst he is here upon the earth, he love and worship God with all
his heart, and be obedient continually to his will. But our first parent, that
was by nature free and capable of goodness, revolted from God; that is, from
his sovereign good; and by his rebellion was made a flave to sin; by means
whereof he fell from God, and from his beatitude. And therefore, except he find
pardon by grace, he is fallen into extreme misery, which we call hell. From
this man we derive our pedigree, whose (...) has begotten our flesh, and made
us the servants of sin, as he was made himself: so that naturally we are to
expect the reward of sin, that is, death: for we are heirs to our father,
whose inheritance is death only and damnation. And we heap daily more coals
upon our heads: For no man performs that to God, which the law most justly
requires: and therefore every one daily offends God many ways in thought,
word, and deed: so as they sink continually deeper. And against whom do we
commit these offenses? Against our Father, our Creator, that has bestowed so
many things upon us, from whom we revolt to the devil his enemy. And as the
offense does multiply and increase, according to the respect of him against
whom it is committed; so does the offense against his divine Majesty, that is
infinite, deserve punishment. In what case then are we miserable creatures,
that daily commit sin upon sin, except God himself discover some way how his
justice may by satisfied, and how we may come into his favor again? In this
distress religion presents it self to us, which shows us the true God.
But what is that but to present the guilty before the Judge? What does religion
then avail us? It leads Religion leads us to the scripture.
us to the Scripture, which shows the express will of God to be, that we
should love him with all our heart, and our neighbor as our self: and to them
that obey his will he pronounces eternal life; to the disobedient eternal
death: Seeing the same Scripture shows, that mankind is corrupted from the
beginning, and that all our imaginations and (...) are wicked, and seeing we
all feel in our selves, and in our members, motions contrary to the will of
God; and therefore we detest with horror, the botomelesse pit of hell. But as
this Scripture pronounces against us our condemnation, and a severe sentence
of death; so does it also show us a Mediator, by whose help and means we may
obtain pardon and grace, and be reconciled to God again. In which conjunction
that beatitude and felicity may be restored to us, for which we were created
at the first. And this is the third mark of the true religion: for it is
certain, that the religion which God has so deeply engraven in our hearts,
is not in vain.

Now he that will enter into himself, and duly consider his own
insufficiency to perform the justice (...).
of the Law, shall easily see how necessary it was for us to have a Media^our
to pacific Gods wrath, and to satisfy The necessity of a Mediatiur.
his justice; and how greatly we are bound to our Creator, that would not
reject or utterly destroy us, as our demerits required, but rather would leave
us a means to return into his favor again; without which we must have all
suffered eternal death and damnation; which favor shows us plainly, that
as God is just, so he is merciful. This Mediator therefore must be such as
will not only (...) his wrath by fulfilling our obedience due to our Creator,
and purchase his grace, and procure us his mercy, but also satisfy his
justice, which is immutable. And for as much as the offense is infinite, and
the punishment likewise, being committed against the Creator, which is
infinite, the satisfaction of the punishment must also be infinite. If man
should offer the world to God, he received it of God, and by his own fault
has lost it again. And seeing God made the world of nothing, which must also
have an end, the world can be no sufficient satisfaction for the offense that
is infinite. If man offer himself, what does he offer but an unthankful and
rebellious mind, blasphemous words, and perverse deeds, by which he shall
provoke the wrath of God, and incense him the more against us? If an Angel
should entreat for us, a creature will be no sufficient Intercessor to
pacifiethe the Creator: and though he be good, yet not being infinite, he
cannot cover an infinite evil: So that we must needs say, that God must set
himself between his justice and his mercy: and that as he created us at the
first, so he must new make us again: and as he created us in his favor, so
he must absolve us from his wrath: and as he declared hi wisdom in creating
us, so he must show the same in restoring us. But who then is that Mediator?
God against God? Infinite against Infinite, Who and what the Mediator is.
that can both cancel that infinite obligation, and satisfy that infinite
punishment? It is even Jesus Christ the only Son and wisdom of the eternal
Father, both God and man. A man, that he may be borne under the law; God, that
he may fulfill the law: a man, that he may serve, God, that he may redeem: a
man, that he may submit himself with all humility; God, that he may submit
himself above all things: a man, that he may suffer; God, that he may overcome
a man, that he may die God, (...) he may truimph over death. It is also
necessary to our salvation, that our Mediator be a man, that he may suffer
punishment for our sins, and reconcile mankind to God again. For except he
were descended of the same kind we are, we could not be partakers in any
sort of him, nor he of us; and so should his satisfaction and merits appertain
nothing unto us: therefore it is requisite that he should be borne of our
progeny, that he may be flesh of our flesh, bones of our bones: that as we be
all in Adam the servants of sin, so we may be in the Mediator free and
discharged of the reward of sin, that is, from death: and again, he must
overcom sin, he must be without sin; and because he must make us clean, he
must be without spo^ for we are conceived in iniquity, and borne in filthiness
and corruption: insomuch that as it is necessary he should be a man, so it is
requisite he should be conceived in another sort, than after the manner of
men. And after so many great miracles which God has wrought, we need not
wonder at this, that (...) was conceived of the holy Ghost, and brought forth
by a Virgin. He that could draw out a woman from a man without a man, could
also bring forth a man from a woman without a man. Many things seem unpossible
if we consider only the works of nature: which, if we consider, the power of
God, are not only possible, but also very easy by him to be done. All these
things concur together in Christ Jesus only. He is the seed of the woman
that crusheth the Serpents head. He it is that ^filleth the promise made to
Abraham. All nations shall be blessed in thy seed. He is the Mediator that
pacifieth his father, and (...) himself between his justice and our injustice,
that reconc^ us to God again. He is the very (...) promised to be the Savior
of mankind, and his Redeemer from spiritual servitude, not only by the mouth
of the Prophets, and testimony of holy Scripture, but also by the confession of
the devils, whose mouths he stopped, that had long before seduced the world:
For at his coming all Oracles ceased through the whole world: their Temples
with their Idols in some places fell down together: Apollo being asked the
cause, answered, That place must be given to the more mighty. And the same
Spirit being demanded in the time of the Emperor Augustus, in whose reign
Christ was borne, who should succeed him, answered; that an Hebrew boy, which
had power over the godds, commanded him to leave that house, and to go into
hell. But (quoth he to the Priest) depart thou with silence from our altars.
plutarch recites a notable history of this matter. I remember (says he) I
have heard, upon the death of the Spirits, of Emilian the Orator, a wise and a
mild man, known to some of you, that his father coming on a time toward
Italy, by sea, and passing in the night, by an Island not inhabited, called
(...), as all they (...) the ship were quiet and at rest, they heard a great
and terrible voice, which came from the Island, that is called (...) or (...),
which was the name of the Pilot of the ship an Egyptian born. And although he
and some others heard the voice once or twice, yet they durst not answer until
the third time, when Tamus said, Who is he that calls me? What will ye?
Then the voice pronounces more loud than before these words: Ataman, I will
that when thou come before the Gulf, called Laguna, thou cry out aloud, and
say, that the great god (...) is dead. When they within the ship heard these
things, they were in a great fear, and consulting upon the matter, they
determined to proceed, and not to say, as the Pilot was commanded. When the
morning was come, they had a merry wind, and sailed pleasantly until they came
before the Gulf, where he was appointed to speak the words by the voice: and
suddenly the wind ceased, and the sea became calm, so as they could go no
further: by mean whereof they all agreed that Tamus should do his message; for
which purpose he (...) up to the top of the ship, and cried as loud as he
could: I give you to understand that the great God Pan is dead. Which words
were no sooner out of his mouth, but they heard such a number of voices cry
out, and such wonderful lamentation, that the sea rang withal, which
continued a long space, the men being greatly amazed; and having presently a
merry wind again, went on (...), and reported this history at Rome: which
being come to the (...) of Tiber^s the Emperor, in whose time Christ was
crucified, he examined the matter, and found it to be true. This Pan was one
of the principal Spirits among the Gentiles, and had in great reputation. It
is reported that Tiberins having some intelligence of Christ by the Christians,
upon the occasion of this matter, consulted with the Senators of Rome to erect
a Temple to Christ: but they dissuaded him, and said, that then Christ would
take away all the credit and (...) from their gods. And because the Gentiles
held Pan for a God, it is evident that the death of this Pan was the spiritual
death of the devil or Prince of devils, for the destruction of his kingdom,
and the ruin of his errors, by the which he has kept captive all mankind,
who were redeemed out of that thraldom by the merits and passion of Christ
Jesus. The same Author affirms, that about the same time one (...), passing
by Islands called Orcades near England, was told that not long (...), there was
heard great whispering and howlings in the (...), and many (...).
fearful things seen: the wisemen of those Islands construing those
prodigious things to the death of some great God. Josephus writes that about
the same time, there was in the Temple of Hiresalem, where was then no living
creature, a voice heard saying: Let us forsake and avoid this Country quickly.
These and a great many more were the confessions of the devils, that knew by
Christ's coming, their reign was at an end, their power by which they had long
abused the world, was abrogated, and their mouths stopped. For these strange
sights and significations in diverse parts of the world are the very true
testimonies of the strangeness of the death of our Savior Jesus Christ, and
of the victories which he has obtained together with his triumphant glory.

Seeing then the Justice of God, and the wickedness of men, by our own reason
has brought us to the necessity of a Mediator between God, and man, who by
his own strength is able with God to deliver man from the bonds of eternal
death: and purchase to man felicity and (...): and that the way to the fame is
true religion, by which we know God, and how to worship him, and our
Mediator and Savior Jesus (...), by whom we must be reconciled to God, and
attain to our sovereign good: Letus frame our selves to come before God after
Saint Paul's counsel, with such fear and holiness, as we may be like poor
offenders with halters about their necks, so as we should go to hell, if he
plucked us not back of his infinite goodness, Submission the only way to
obtain pardon.
and to live like true Christians, by whose Help, if we call upon him as we
ought, we shall obtain Gods grace to our endeavors, that we may be able to
make resistance to those intemperate motions that allure us to the desire of
those things that divert us from our felicity and beatitude, and to withstand
the temptations and subtle practices of the old Serpent our common adversary,
who (...) continually for opportunity to draw us, from the true worship and
service of God, which is the way to our sovereign good, to the inventions and
traditions of men; that is, to superstition and idolatry, which casts us
down headlong to extreme infelicitie and misery. He is not borne in vain
(says one) that dies well: nor he has lived unprofitably, that has ended
his race happily. And though we find our selves prone to sin, through the
frailty of the flesh, and every hour ready to fall, yet we must endeavor to
lift our selves up again, and call for Gods grace, and not despair, though
our sins be great and many: following Saint Augustines counsel: let no man
(says he) after an hundred (...), nor after a thousand, despair of Gods
mercy, but yet so let him not despair, as he seek presently without all stay
to reconcile hunselfe to God by amendment of life: ^ Custom of sin takes away
the sense of sin;) he be not able to deliver himself from the (...) of the
devil although he would. This life is a (...) of (...), in which we are (...)
by the world, the (...), and the (...): and when we see (...) so hardly
charged, ^ himself, and not only (...) them that do fight like valiant men,
that is, like true Christians; but also after the end of the battle (...) them
with a victorious crown: and those that faint, and (...) themselves to the
fury of their enemies, he suffers to be led captive and perish with them.
(...) says, Virtue cannot be virtue, except it have some equal: in
overcomming of whom, it may either exercise or show his force and valor. For
as victory cannot be without fight, no more can virtue be without an enemy.
Therefore as soon as our Creator had endued us with virtue, he (...) gave us
an enemy; left virtue languishing by idleness, should lose his nature. And a
man cannot otherwise attain to the highest degree of felicity, except he
provide for his own safety by continual fighting, like a man of waire. For
God would not have a mortal man attain to immortal beatitude by a delicate
and smooth way, but that he should wrestle and strive with all his might and
strength against the author of errors, and deviser of all mischief, who
works exccrable and miraculous things to deceive us. For our adversary
looks (says Gregory) into every man's complexion and manners, and thereafter
he lays snares to take and tempt them: which he brings the better to
pass, because certain qualities of men's manners are near to certain vices.
For rough and sharp manners are commonly joined with cruelty or pride; smooth
manners and some thing more given to (...) than is comely, are sometimes joined
with (...) and dissolutenes. The temptations of the Devil.
The devil therefore beholds every man's manners to what vice they are near,
and then he sets before their eyes those things, to which he (...) their
minds will most willingly be inclined; (...), before them that be merrily
disposed, he sets oftentimes luxuriousness, sometimes vain glory; to rough
and hard dispositions, anger, pride, and crueky; to those that be sad he
proponeth the sin of discord and sedition. And because he sees that lofty
minds are puffed up with praises, he draws them on, with flattering favors
to what they will. And thus he lays snares for every man, according to the
vices, to which he is inclined. We must labor therefore and watch like good
soldiers, and not pass our time in idleness, lest our enemy come suddenly,
and find us unprovided. We must not only be occupied in doing good to our
selves, but also to others: For he deserves not the name of a good man, that
forbeareth to do evil, though it be a common custom so to call him, as though
good were a privation, and a defect only from evil; but we must proceed
further, we must give, help, and ^rofit others: as the Poet says. Quo te
cunque die nil sancti egisse videbis:
(...) vel (...) deperiisse puta.
What day thou of no holy deed can bost:
Account that day unto thy self quite lost.


For good is not a defect, but an effect: not placed in All goodness (...) in
Action.
idleness, but in doing: not in hurting but in profiting; (...) not for gain,
or for ostentation, or for vain (...): but for it self, and for the duty we
owe unto God. This rule is not sufficient, what thou will not have done to
thee, that do not thou to another: but rather what thou would have done to
thee, that do thou to another. And this agrees with Christian charity, which
is indivisibly joined with true Religion. For though charity be not religion
it self, not the mark of true religion (to speak properly and plainly) but
rather the marks of a religious man: yet it is so great a virtue, and so fast
joined to true religion, that religion cannot stand rightly without it: as heat
is not the proper mark of fire, because many other things are also hot, but
heat is so joined with fire, that so soon as we see fire, we may presently
affirm, that there is also heat, but not contrariwise: so charity, though it
be not true Charity allied to Religion.
religion it self, yet it is a virtue so joined to religion, that we cannot
say, this man has religion, but it follows necessarily that he has also
charity.

We must in all our actions, in the whole course of our life, in every estate,
high or low, rich or poor, set before us, as a mark, the end for which God
created us, and for what cause he sent us hither, that woe may employ our
labor and study upon that business, lest by our negligence, we do not only
defraud our selves of the reward appointed to that service, but also receive
punishment due to remissness. If a man have suits in law, and send his
servant up to the Term to follow them, and he bestow his time in Tennis
courts, in the danncing and fencing schools, or in banqueting and carowsing,
neglecting his masters business, does not this A (...).
servant deserve to be severely punished, when he has yielded up his account,
how vainly he has bestowed his time, and neglected his masters affairs,
(...) he was sent? So will the time come when we shall be called to account,
how we have employed our time here; how we have done the business for which we
were sent hither, that is, the service of God, whereof ensues the enjoying of
his heavenly kingdom; which is our end and beatitude: which service if we
neglect, and bestow our study and labor, apply our minds and cogitations upon
any other (...), than upon that, for which we were sent (...), as upon
advancement, honor, riches, pleasures, gorgeous apparel, (...) buildings,
favor of Princes, or any other worldly vani^ that appertains not to this
end: If (I say) we spend our time about these (...), and set our care and
minds more upon these things, than upon the great and (...) affairs for which
we were sent hither, that is, the service of God, and enjoying his heavenly
kingdom, for which he made us, and placed us in this world, then are we in
the way to perdition, except we alter and change our course. For we may be
sure that whosoever shall not attend upon the service he came for, shall not
attain the reward assigned and promised to that service. But he that
considers with himself, who made him, and the world, and all things therein
for him, and to what end; that he should serve him here, and participate his
glory with him in heaven, and that (...) his mind, and imployeth his time and
labor, either wholly or principally to this end and service of God, making no
more account of honor, riches, and such like worldly things than is necessary,
to this end and purpose: the same (no doubt) is a happy man, and in the right
way to salvation, and shall at length attain to that Sovereign good, perfect
felicity and beatitude, which (...) so long sought for: but if he hunt after
plea^, and passes his (...) in gathering (...); in (...) to highestate and
(...) of the world; for getting or neglecting the end for which he was sent
hither, that man goes awry, and is unhappy, and in danger of (...) infelicity.
Of such (...) that so lead their life, these be their lamentations, and their
own wisdom
words recorded by Scripture: we are wearied out in the way of iniquity and
perdition, and the way of God have we not know^ what profit have we received of
all our pomp and pride, and (...) what good have they done us? They are now
past away as a shadow, and as a messenger that (...) in post, and we are
consumed in our own iniqui^ We (...) men (...) in the way of truth. These were
the ^ifull lamentations and confessions of such men as followed a wrong course
of life; that labored for riches, honor, pomp and such like worldly
vanities, forgetting the weighty business and end for which they were (...)
were they who Make you friends of (...).
were esteemed happy men, that were thought to run a most fortunate course;
that were wondered at of all men, as they that were placed in highest degree of
felicity: because they heaped together great abundance of riches; advanced
themselves and their families to great dignities; that became gorgeous,
glorious, and dreadful to others, and obtained whatsoever their lust and
concupiscence desired. These seemed to the world to be most happy men. And
(without doubt) they that be in the like estate in these days, are so
esteemed of the multitude, and are envied of many burn in desire to be in the
same fortune. Such is our blindness, such is the corruption of our nature,
never to see, for the most part, nor to direct our course to the right path
that leads to felicity, until it be too late, (...) to these men: for the
Scripture adds, (...) in (...): They spoke these things when they were in
hell. But how hardly we can perform our duty to God and men, and do the
business for which we were sent hither, he shall easily perceive, that will
enter into the due consideration of his own disposition and (...). We need
therefore a mediator with the eternal father, that has given us a law
according to his justice, to be an intercessor for us; whose fullness must
supply our defects, whose merits must make satisfaction for our demerits: in
him therefore, that is, in Christ Jesus, we must have a strong and lively
faith, and call continually upon him that he will of his great mercy join his
grace with our endeavors, without which we can do nothing that is good: by
whose grace we may lead a godly life, and employ our labor in the exercise of
virtue; which God requires even of the heathens; whom he rewards with
temporal gifts, to excite others to virtue. Brute beasts are moved by an
appetite and desire to these things which their senses show them, to be good
and profitable for them: But men follow that with all their endeavor, that
has the show of good: some pleasures, others riches, the rest honor, and the
more they have of those things, the more they give themselves to them. And in
this they are deceived, that their minds being as it were enchanted with
diverse sorts of charms of this world, prefer evil before good; whereby their
will does altogether degenerate into a beastly appetite and desire, which ought
to obey the understanding, and by nature should be reasonable. By which
appears our imbecility or corruption The weakness of man's nature.
of nature, which needs so greatly Gods grace, to give us a mind to discern
between good and evil; and between those things which are good in show only,
and those that are good in deed: and a will to desire and follow the one, and
eschew the other, that by embracing and following the good here in this life,
we may attain to the sovereign good in the other life: where only our wills
shall be thoroughly satisfied with the satiety and fullness of heavenly
pleasures, which is perfect felicity and beatitude. For in this life how
plentifully soever worldly things happen to us, our minds will never be fully
satisfied, which moved Plato to say, That the mind of man is so unquiet and
unsatiable, because he being sent from God, is not satisfied, nor in quiet,
until he return thither from whence he came. He that is in love Gregory.
with worldly things, delights nothing in God. The soul can never be
without delight: for it either delights in base things here beneath, or else
in high matters above: and by how much the more earnestly he is lifted up to
the exercise of the highest things, by so much the more lothsomnesse he is
weary of the baseft things: and by how much the more earnest care, he is
enflamed to the lowest things, so much the more damnably he (...) cold from
the highest things. One says; It is unpossible to look with one eye up to
heaven, and with the other down to (...) earth. And if thou suffer (...), or
be are a heavy cross, be not dismayed, but use patience, and be thankful,
though thou find not presently remedy of those things that trouble thee. And
compare the many graces God has bestowed upon thee before, with the small
things he seems now to deny thee; and thou shall find cause to accuse thy
self of unthankfulness, to forget so many great blessings before received,
and now to complain of small matters: for it is expedient that God lay his
hand upon us to teach us humility, and to enter into consideration of our
selves. And the reward which God gives them that obey and serve him, is to
suffer them in this world to be exercised in afflictions, knowing there is no
better passage to the felicity of heaven, than to bear No greater temptation
than not to be tempted.
the cross of tribulation here on earth. For there is not a greater temptation
than not to be tempted: and his salvation is very suspicious, that bears no
cross in the whole course of his life. Nay rather it may be holden for
certain, that such are of him lost, who in this world are privileged from
adversities: for the devil does carefully labor, that all those which he
has registered for his own, may live in great wealth and ease. To have a
thankful mind to God, and to attribute all to his providence, and nothing to
fortune, is one of the greatest benefits we can enjoy in this life. And
therefore if thou see thy self subject to evil speech and disgrace, praise
the judgment of God, says Ambrose: If thou be afflicted with sickness, impute
it to the judgment of God. Neither let poverty and want withdraw thee from
praising the justice of God. Neither let us despair nor torment our selves, and
much less complain and murmur at (...), if forthwith he give us not what we
desire: For he refuses not to hear us, that he disliketh us: but because he
will convert it into a better cause. He knows what he does, and we
understand it not. He knows what he does deny, but we know not what we ask:
he measures all things with reason, and we but with appetite. He denies
that which is hurtful to us, and grants that which is profitable: we ought
on him only to depend: ^, (...).

Q^icquid facimus venit ex also:
To whatsoever we our selves apply,
Or do or suffer, all comes from on high. (...).



A young sick child sees an Apple in another man's hand and desires it: but
the parents denies it him, or takes it from him; knowing it hurtful. A far
greater, or rather incomparable proportion is there between the wisdom of
God, and that of men, than is between the reason and knowledge of a child, and
that of a man. For we are as young children, and sick, our nature being
corrupt, in respect of the exact knowledge, and perfect wisdom of God. And
therefore he only knows what is good and meet for us. A learned Heathen
says: I see that my self oftentimes do things wherein my servants are blind,
and conceive no reason, and little children will cast into the fire (...) of
great price; and their fathers writings of great learning and wisdom: for
that they are not of capacity, to understand the value and worthiness of the
thing. Let us leave then to set our joy in vanities, and unsatiably to desire
these worldly things that men have in such estimation: and if they happen to
us, let us apply them to such uses, for which they were of God ordained to
serve our necessity; and lift up our minds, and (...) by Christ to those
heavenly joys where our minds will be fully satisfied. Non habit at templis
manuum molimine factis,
Omnipotens: The Omnipotent dwells not in temples made with hands.
And not to fear the loss of worldly things, which unquieteth the wisest, nor
death it self, which is terrible to all, seeing death is not the destruction of
the body, but a renewing of it; nor the extinguishing of nature, but a step
and gate toward the other life, and the first passage to the heavenly
Kingdom, and entrance to eternity. For he that made all the world of nothing,
without the help of any matter, can easily repair and renew that which is
fallen to decay. He that made the body of man without any labor, of nothing,
it is much easier for him to raise him from death, and give him life again:
not of nothing, but of the like matter, that is agreeable with his substance,
which is turned into ashes, or by some other means is resolved into the air.
For as the Artificer that casts m^all, can repair A comparison.
or new make his work that is broken or bruised, of the same matter, and give
it a better form: so God will raise up the resolved into dust, in his due
time, and call him to life again in the very same form he was before: but
without any earthly mixture, and uncleanness. And if we marvel at an
Artificer for some notable painted table, or any other thing that is
excellently well handled, as was that of Gaditan, wherein he set forth exactly
the history of Livie; how much more ought we to wonder and reverence him,
that has set before our eyes, and presented to our minds so many mavelous
things, which can neither be numbered, nor by reason comprehended. For to prove
the renewing of man's body by the least things of nature. A Grasse-hopper when
he is old, casts his Examples to confirm our (...).
skin, and becomes new and lusty again. A Canker becomes a flying
Butterfly. An Ant, a Fly with wings: A Silke-worme reviveth again being dead.
The Phoenix that rises again out of his ashes, shows an example of our
resurrection. That which is in nature to lay the corn which men sow, covered
in the ground; the same is in the resurrection to bury the body: that which is
there to spring up again, and grow into a lively stem; the same is a man, to
revive again. And as the seed or corn laid in the ground, putrusieth, and
is turned into another form or thing, than it was before, and afterward being
sprung up, becomes the same thing again; so happens it to man, that being
buried, putrifieth, and is turned into another thing: and yet afterward rises
again, and becomes the same he was before. And though the body be put into
the ground, diversely affected, and subject to putrefaction, yet he shall
revive and rise again with a lively countenance, cleansed from all the defects
and corruptions of nature. A sick man that is v^xed with a grievous disease,
his color is gone, he looks pale, sallow, and wanne: his body is become so
lean and bare, like a dead carcass, and the vital moisture of his body so
consumed, that he cannot be known to be the same man: but after he has
received apt and appropriate medicines, and used a wholesome diet, he
receives his health again, his color is come to him, he is fair and fat,
and lusty as at any time before. So in the resurrection, the same body shall
rise again, but more gorgeously, in whom shall appear nospot nor sign of the
former corruption. This example was first begun in Christ, who in nothing
showed his divinity more effectually, than by the triumph of his resurrection:
the same things by his virtue shall happen to all men. As St. Paul says, They
that fall asleep in Christ, shall be raised again by the word of God, and
shall with him for ever and ever have the fruition of him and his joys. And as
by the opinion of learned men, one star is more bright than another, so will
there be like difference in men's minds, and one (...) will be more glorious
than another. For as much then as our felicity and sovereign good or
beatitude, is, to be joined with God in heaven, from whence we are fallen by
the transgression of our first parent; and the way to return to him again, is
true Religion, which teaches us to worship and serve the true God, by his
own word and appointment, and shows us our The Son only can reconcile us
to the (...).
Mediator Christ Jesus, who only can reconcile us to God again: let us
reject all other religions and inventions of men, as superstitious and
idolatrous, and all other mediations and means of reputed reconciliations, and
submit our selves wholly to the mercy of God, by our Savior Christ Jesus, and
cleave only to him, who is able and will bring all them that with a right faith
believe in him, into Gods favor again, with him to enjoy our (...) good and
beatitude in his heavenly kingdom, to which place God grant we may all come.

Now to conclude this discourse with a brief repetition The Conclusion of the
work.
of the sum of that which has bin said. It appears by many reasons and
examples that the felicity of man we seek for, consists not in pleasures
which is common to brute beasts, neither in riches, which are sought for some
other thing, rather than for it self; as reputation, honor, and such like:
nor in honor and glory, which is but a vain admiration of the people, by whom
it is many times given and taken away: and is also desired for an opinion of
virtue: but that wherein felicity consists, is the last end to which all other
ends are referred: to which end whosoever has attained, he proceeds no
further, but rests settled. And it is peculiar and proper to men alone:
neither is it in virtue, nor in the action of virtue, after the Academickes,
and Peripa^tikes, nor in the power of a wise man. But virtue may be a help to
the attaining of felicity, especially that of this life: for no man is able to
endure the things that happen to men, though he be armed with all manner of
virtues, with that mind that he may nevertheless be accounted happy. For
felicity in one part and contentation may not be dissevered: and the end or
true felicity of man, which is all one, consists not in moral virtues, as
has been said: but his end and proper action is the glory of God, to know and
worship him. We showed before, that in seeking for felicity respect must be had
to the body and soul, to this life, and to the life to come. For Christ says,
What avayleth it a man to have all the world, and to lose his soul? And
because there seems to be a kind of happiness in the world, and men are said
to live happily; we called the happiness of this life, felicity; and that of
the heavenly life, beatitude or blessedness, and sovereign good. But when we
had examined all the estates of life, and could find none worthy to be called
felicity, all being subject to troubles and unquietness, and full of misery,
we were driven to use violence to the word, and to call that happiness of
life, felicity, wherein is least infelicity: in the managing of which
discourse, it appears how little power is in men, to the attaining of
felicity, and that all comes from God: and therefore we call Felicity, the
contentation of a faithful mind in a godly life and death, which comes by
the enjoying of Gods benefits and graces: yet nevertheless our own endeavor
must be thereto employed with the means which he has given us, and
continual prayers, that he will bless our labors according to his good will
and pleasure: which if it succeed not to the happiness we look for in this
life, yet to take all things patiently, and be thankful, and say with the
Poet: Forti animo mala fer, nec bis miser esto dolare:
Nec cito ventur is pramoriare bonis:
Bear evils boldly, let not grief
Twice wretched make thee:
Nor in despair of future good,
Death overtake thee.
And think that he does all for our good, and has reserved for us the true
felicity and blessedness of the life to come; in respect whereof all the
pleasures that can happen to men in this world are nothing: and therefore all
our actions and labors to the attaining of felicity in this life, must have
relation to the true felicity and beatitude in the life to come; whereof this
is but a shadow, and the way to come by the other: for the right way that
leads to the happiness of this life, is also the way to the happiness and
blessedness of the heavenly life; that is, to live in the fear of God, and
return to him again, from whom we are fallen, by faith in Jesus Christ our
Mediator and Redeemer, whereof ensues peace of conscience and quietness of
mind; and call with humility to him for his graces; to contemn honor and
glory, riches, reputation, with all the pride, and pomp, and vanities of the
world, which men so greedily hunt after, that are as pins and pibble stones,
with such like toys, for children to play with; to purge his mind of all
manner p^rrurbations and unquietness; to think nothing greatly to be esteemed
but a clear conscience and undefiled soul; to be content with that which is
sufficient, and to measure that sufficiency with a sound and upright judgment,
not after the common custom of men, whose minds are corrupted and overcome
with covetousnes, ambition, and unsatiable desires. So that none can attain to
this felicity, but he upon whom God bestows his graces, as faith, health and
liberty of body, a sufficiency of worldly goods, to sustain his life with a
quiet possession of them, and a mind inclined to virtue, with such like good
things necessary to happiness of life, And if men would advisedly consider of
this matter, and suffer themselves to be persuaded, as the truth is, that the
way to the happiness of this life is not contrary to the true felicity and
happiness of the life to come; nor any hinderance, but rather a ^urtherance,
and the way to the same: they would be more carefullin following the right path
that leads to the felicity of this life, and not so negligent in seeking for
the blessedness of the other life. But so long as they hold this erronous
opinion, that they can hardly enjoy the felicity of this life, and that of the
life to come, as repugnant one to the other, because the things wherein they
put their felicity, as riches, pleasures, honor and glory, puffs them up in
pride and vain glory, and ministers much occasion to the increase of fin:
and the happiness of the other life is promised to the meek and poor in
spirit. Many rather than they wil^orsake and leave to hunt after things wherein
consists their false reputed (...), to which men are by the corruption of
their nature strongly addicted, will hazard the loss of the true felicity and
happiness of the heavenly life. But if they were persuaded that they mistake
the mark they shoot at, when they (...) for felicity or happiness among riches,
pleasure, honor, or reputation of the world, which are rather hindrances to
felicity, and have brought many to infelicity and extreme misery: and that the
end and ^rue felicity of man is in this world the knowledge and worship of God,
to which is joined the fruition of him in heaven, and that such happiness as
is in this life, which we improperly call felicity, consists in a contented
mind, which must come by the enjoying of Gods graces and gi^es joined without
endeavor, in cleansing our minds from all manner of perturbations and
passions, that bring forth unquietness, and are hinderance to felicity; these
worldly vanities and false shows of happiness would not withdraw men from the
true felicity of the life to come, nor from the happiness that may be found in
this life. Plato could say to one that asked him, who was happy; He that
knows God, and loves him: so that the felicity of both worlds dependth upon
Gods grace; in this life to be of a godly mind, to have sufficient to the
necessity of nature, to be content without estate: in the life to come, to be
joined with God, and to have the ^uition of the joys of heaven, which is our
beatitude and sovereign good.

That we may attain to the same, it behooveth us The meanc^ to attain to
this felicity.
daily to pray to him, that he will give us his grace, to do the things that
are pleasing and acceptable in his sight: that as the only means we have to be
restored to our felicity and sovereign good, is to return to God again,
(from whom by the disobedience of our first parent we are fallen) by the way of
true Religion, which teaches us our duty toward God, and assures ^s of his
favor by the mediation and merits of his only Son Christ Jesus our Savior
and Redeemer: so he will not suffer us to be drawn and led astray from him by
the deceitful allurements and unbridled lusts, after volpruousnes^e and
worldly pleasures, which like a violent torrent carries us away from our true
felicity and beatitude, into the bottomless pit and gulf of miseries: and
that he^ will not suffer us to be overcome with the intemperare and inordinate
desire of riches and possessions, which puffs us up in pride and vain glory
(a grievous sin and odious in his sight) and chaseth out of us his humility
and meekness in spirit, for which his son Jesus pronounces men blessed; and
which diverteth us from the love of him, and our Savior, to the love and
desire of earthly things, which riches prepare for us. But if it please him to
bless our labors, or estate with plenty of riches and possessions, that it will
also please him so plentifully to endue us with his grace, that we abuse not
his liberality and blessings to the hurt of our selves, or prejudice of any
other; but rather that we employ them to the uses for which they were ordained,
to our own necessity, and to the benefit and profit of our neighbor. And if
it please God not to bless us with riches (as except they come by his
blessing, it were better to be without them) then that he will vouchsafe to
grant us a contented mind with tolerable poverty, without grudge or disdain,
seeing much quietness and security always attends upon that estate, which
is also free from many evils that commonly accompany riches, and especially,
seeing it pleased our Savior Christ to make choice to walk upon the earth, in
a poor estate, that was master of the whole world. And also that it will
please him by his grace to extinguish or suppress in us the furious passion of
ambition, and inordinate desire of honor and vain glory, which was the
original cause of all our woe and misery; that we may be contented with our
calling and estate, to which he has appointed us, and the same to perform
according to the talent he has given us. That he will endue us with virtues
both Moral and Christian, that by the one we may be the better able to bridle
and moderate the intemperate affections, and violent motions of our corrupt
minds, which throws us down headlong from the quietness and happiness of
this life, into a sea of troubles and calamities: and in a civil life, the
better to know how to perform the duty of a man; and by the other to live in
the love and fear of God, and in the faith of Christ; to use patience in
adversity and afflictions if they happen; and to be humble in prosperity: to
worship and glorify God in this life, that we may be joined with him in the
life to come; which is our beatitude and summum bonnm or sovereign good: and
all this for his Son Jesus Christ his sa^e, our only Savior and Redeemer: to
whom be all honor and glory. Amen.

Thus have I ended (God be thanked) this Discourse The Authors Apology.
of the felicity of man; which I trust will be hurtful to no man, except there
be any that will take that with the left hand which I deliver with the right
hand. The Be and the Spider go both to one flower, the one gathers honey,
the other poison. Evil minds through their corrupt disposition may turn that
good thing to their own harm, which the virtuous and well disposed receive
simply to their benefit. Many precepts and good lessons I have gathered our of
the Philosophers and Divines, medicinable to qualify the corruption of our
nature, and to moderate the rigor of unruly affections, which draw the mind
to worldly desires, and subjecteth it unto peftilent passions, that are great,
hindrances unto happiness: And it is truly said, that which way soever we
do turn our eyes, whether unto divine or profane Histories, to (...) of our
own Country, or those of other Nations, we shall find all full of ^ours,
wicked acts, deceries, lies, (...), (...), and (...): by which we may not only
be taught advisedly to beware that we be not intrapped by them: but also that
we leave to wonder at honors, riches, pleasures and the vanities of a
delicate life; which the common sort does most marvel at. For seeing for the
most part they are bestowed upon those that are unworthy, and have never any
certain place, nor sure ground, they ought to be called very cares, and
painful labors, and the frumps of fortune, rather than the instruments of
felicity. And if it be true, as Cicero says; That Philosophy heals men's
minds, drives away carfulness, delivers from cupidities or desires,
expels fearfulness: then of much more force is divine Philosiphie, joined
with it, to bring these things to pass. But (says he) this power of
Philosophy is not of like validity with all men; yet it prevails greatly,
where it has gotten an ant nature. Our minds have their diseases, as the
(...) has, which must be cured with (...) and appropriate medicines. They that
are circumvented and seduced by a common and inveterate custom, grounded upon
false opinions and estimation of things, and fallen to the ground, where they
(...) muzzling like swine in the earth, must by true sentences and persuasions,
with examples of life, be raised again, and reduced to the right path that
leads to felicity. And thought the inordinate desires of pleasures, riches
honor and pomp of the world, has taken so deep root in the multitude or
greater part of men, that it will be as hard a matter and great a labor to
purge them of those evil humors, as it was for Hercules to draw Cerber^ out of
hell: yet as some bodies are of such constitution, that medicines will more
easily work in them, than in (...); so some minds are so tractable, and apt by
a natural inclination, to receive and embrace reasonable and fruitful
persuasions, that they digest them into a good nutriment and habit, and reap
thereby many times great comfort and profit. And if the counsels or sayings of
the ancient Philosophers and other learned men seem to any (in some part) too
severe or hard to be observed, let them consider, that a staff that is warpt
and grown crooked, must be bent as much to the contrary side, that at last he
may come to the mean, be made straight, and brought to his right place. This
fruit men may reap by this discourse, that are not wholly drowned in worldly
desires: When they have compared the counsels and sayings of wise and learned
men, with those of the vulgar sort, they shall perceive themselves, as it were
awaked out of a long slumber, and plainly see, that by corrupt judgment,
following the trace and course of the world, yielding to their own motions and
desires, and suffering themselves to be overcome with their affections and
cupidities, they fall from happiness they seek after into felicity and misrie.
But in so great diversities of men's inelmations, it is not possible that any
one thing can please or profit all men. As some are given altogether to serious
matters; so others delight in pleasant fables, and Poetical figments: every
man according to his humor, as the Poet says; ^
Digna suo quaris: ^
^ond things please fools, men for such junquets call,
As taste them best: one pleasure likes not all.
I took the matter in hand for my own exercise and pasttime, and have handled
the same according to my talent; but not with that diligence (I must confess)
as I ought: intending to have it seen only of my self, and some of mine. And
if I have written any thing overmuch philosophically, that dissenteth from the
true professed Religion, as in so spacious a field, and such insufficiency of
my self, I may easily wander out of the right path, I submit my self, and
that I have written, (as becomes a Christian) to the censure of the Church of
England, which I acknowledge and assure my self to be a member of the true
Church of Christ.

FINIS.
The Contents of the first book, of the Treatise called Summum bonum, OR, The
Felicity of Man.
CHAP. IIII.
THe assertions of sundry he^ Philosophers concerning the (...) page 1. Since
(...) fall all things (made to obey us) rebel against us 3. No (...) felicity
is in man's power to (...) unto ibid. The (...) Angles (...) men 4. The fall of
Lucifer and his Angels ^ 5. The ^ 6. (...) Catena, or the golden chain ^ ibid.
The great mercy of the sohne of God ^ ibid. Christ (...) the Father concerning
man 7. The malice of the Devil ibid. No felicity but in the Son of God 8.
How good men differ from the wicked 9. Three things wherein moral men imagine
true felicity to (...) 10. ^ No felicity in pleasure (...) A (...) observed
(...) the (...) The Story of (...) the (...) Monarch of the (...). Of ^ 13. ^
rain of the first (...) 15. The (...) of (...), (...) of Rome ibid. ^, pride
(...). ^ 17. His prodigality, vanity, folly, (...) 18. His (...)-(...) 19. Of
the Tyrant (...) ibid. His wonderful Palace 20. His ridiculous prodigality
ibid. His Luxury, and too late Repen^ (...) The power of fate according to
(...) 22. His (...). ^ 24. The Riots of (...), Emperor of Rome Cap. 2. page
24. The excess of Peter Raure, first a Friar, and after Cardinal 25. Of
Muleasses King of Tunis ibid. Against voracitie, and immoderate drinking ibid.
King Edgars limitation for drinking 26. Of three quaffers in Germany ib. Of a
drunkard in the City of G^unt 27. The Iearffe a beast of ^utela, an emblem of
gluttony 28. Of (...) 29. A (...) amongst the ^gyptians 30. A (...) spirit,
repeated of by (...) ibid. (...) to Alexander 31. ^ ibid. His murder 32. Of
King (...) and Proxaspa^ his Secretary. ibid The miserable death of K. (...),
who dyed in wine 33. Drunkennesse^xed ibid. Mischiefs (...) from drunkenesse
34. The Temperance of Cyrus 34. (...) of the former times 35. The delicacie of
Roman (...) ^ ^. The Bishop of Magdeburg dyed dancing ibid. Rape, the
subversion of Kingdoms ibid. The death of Lucretia the Roman Lady 42. Appius
Claudius and Virginius 43. The end of the (...) 45. Of A^hony and Cleopatra 46.
The death of (...) (...). The death of Cleopatra 50. Of (...) King of Spain
and (...) (...) ibid. The lust of (...) Cardinal of Este Cap. 4 page 51. (...)
of (...) foolish (...) 52. Of Pyramus and Thisbe ibid. The folly of a French
Gentleman (...). The strange death of a young man in (...). Of (...) King of
(...) ibid. Of two Gentlemen (...) alive ib. (...) love to (...) 54. King (...)
love unto a Plane tree 55. Of lecherous (...), their holes and (...) ibid. A
strange thing of Sir (...) Priest, and one Lysetta page 57. The shameful lust
of (...), favorite to the Tyrant (...) 59. Incestuous love in (...) son to
King (...) 61. A cunning Physician 62. A godly meditation of St. Bernard ibid.
A strange accident happening to the French King Charles the sixth 63. V^ine
curiosity in the Emperor (...) 64. Three things that change (...) and
conditions 65. A prudent law amongst the Romans ibid. Three things that hasten
a (...) end ibid. A dehortatory from taking delight in pleasure ibid. That in
pleasure can be no felicity 66.
The Contents of the second Book.
CHAPTER I.
Man's felicity cannot consist in Riches page 68. Lycurgus banished coin out of
his Kingdom ibid. Iron more useful than gold 69. Sufficiency preffered before
excess ibid. The Temperance of King (...) 70. Of ptolomy King of Egypt ibid.
Health preferred before wealth ibid. Riches an hinderance to felicity 71.
Content, not to be purchased with coin ibid. Socrates, Diogenes, and (...)
opinion of riches and rich men 72. Of rich Gyg^s King of Lydia, and poor (...)
ibid. The situation of Delphos, and who first dedicated the Temple to Apollo
73. Their death 74. The oracle told many things truly (...) The Devil defends
his Temple against (...) and (...) (...) of Persia 75. The sacrilege of King
(...) 76. The rich Church of Tholosa, with the defeat of Cepio's Army ibid. Of
a Temple in Morocco 77. The inhumanity of (...) to purchase gold ibid. Queen
Dido casts her gold into the sea 75. The building of Cartiage, and the death of
Queen Dido 79. The death of (...) Q of (...) ib. A strange stratagem of Helena
Queen of Russia page 79. Of the Emperor Trojan, and King Decebal 80. The
death of Henry the seventh, Emperor ibid. A rich Citizen of Venice, and (...)
King of Gothland, slaineby their sons to possess their gold ibid. Strange
Tyranny of Vespitians Soldiers, practiced upon the Jews 81. A strange plot to
kill the great Turk in his Tent to gain his treasure Cap. 2. page 82. The
death of (...), Captain of the enterprise ibid. Of Casar Borgias, who poisoned
the Pope his father with wine prepared for others 83. King Croesus of Lydia
deluded by the Oracle 84. No man happy till after his death 85. The honor
which Gyrus did to Croesus 86. Of King (...) of Lydia, and (...) 87. Gyges
murthereth the King, and marries the Queen 88. The death of Crassus the rich
Roman ibid. St. Bernards invective against the pride of the Clergy ibid.
Their pride paralleled with the (...) of Peter and Iobn 89. Of Pope sixtus the
fourth, and a Friar 89. Of a (...) husbandman, and the Archbishop of Cullen
90. The great humility of Origin, and his entertainment by Alexander Severus
91. His learned Sermon 92. Contempt of riches oftener found amongst Heathen than
Christians cap. 3.97. Of (...) a Senator of Abderita ibid. His excellent
apprehensions 98. Diogones against rich men and riches 99. Bias his contempt of
riches 100. A golden table drawn out of the Sea by fishermen ibid. The modesty
of the Sages 101. Ferdinando King of Spain against Lawyers ibid. The modesty
of Agasbooles King of Sicilia 102. Of Philip King of (...) ibid. (...) her
report of covetousness ibid. The covetousness of Cardinal Angelos 103. (...)
Maria Duke of Millaine, and a Priest ibid. Of the envious and the covetous man
104. An excellent Law made by (...) King of Egypt ibid. Alexander severms
against usurie ibid. The story of an Advocate of Venice, and his Father 106 Of
money bestowed as it ought to be 107 How king (...) dealt with a rich man ibid.
A Caliph of Persia slain in his treasure house 108 Renown better than riches
ibid. Wisdom the greatest riches, and ignorance the worst poverty 109 A
strange story of (...) a covetous Emperor ibid. The first supremacy of the
Church of Rome given by (...) Emperor 110 Gonstantine first enriched the
Church of Rome ibid. Riches first kindled the fire of purgatory ibid. None can
be truly good, and very rich at one time 111 Riches and honesty seldom dwell
together ibid. The Philosophers and Sages concerning poverty and riches 112
The great temperance of pbocion^ and Diogenes 113 The bold answer of Diomedes
the Pyrate, to king Alexander 114 Of (...) and king philip 115. Magicians
punished in seeking hidden gold 116 Of Mark (...), his Concubin (...) Caura and
his death 117
CHAP. IIII.
The bounty of one (...) 118 The (...) against riches 119 A rich Cardinal of
England, His death ibid. Of men (...) for their (...), (...), Cardinal ^, etc.
120 Examples of continent men, (...) the Philosopher, (...) a Theban: A knight
of Malta. (...), etc. 121 A character of Pope (...) the fifth, His Charity,
with the great (...) of (...) 122 Charity liberally rewarded ibid. An Epigram
of (...) and (...) 123 Observable Answers of (...) 124 A rich man compared to a
Peacocke ibid. Contempt of riches in (...) the Philosopher: (...), etc. 125
(...) the cause of (...) ruin ib. (...) accuses (...) before (...) 126 (...)
apology and submission to Nero 127 The admirable continence of Roman (...) 128
Of the Emperor (...): the proverb verified in him, Honors (...) manners 129
(...) censure of the rich (...) of (...) ibid. (...) the great Turks justice
upon (...) 130 Usurers compared to the fish fifth page 131 An excellent
discourse drawn from Sir Thomas (...) Vtopia, reproving pride 132 The
covetousness of the French and Portugal Nations reproved 133 The
covertousnesse of the Spainard ibid. The great cruelty of (...) a Spaniard 134
His barbarous cruelty reproved by a Prince of Florida ibid. No felicity can
consist (...) in riches 135
The Contents of the third Book.
Honor and glory no part of true felicity Cap. 1 page 137. Honor follows
those which fly it 138 Alexanders ambition being a child ibid. Cyncas
excellently reproves the ambition of King (...) 139 Ambition the ruin of king
Pyrrbus 140 Ambition the subversion of Kingdoms and Commonweals ib. Ambition
without limit 141 The unnaturalness of Adolphbus Duke of Geldria ibid. (...),
Henry the fifth Emperor, Frederick, (...), (...), all bloody murderers and
parricides 142 A strange history betwixt (...) K. of Denmark, and (...) K. of
Succia and Gothland 143 The inhumanities of (...), (...) Queen of Naples,
(...), (...), (...), the Cardinal of Valentia, etc. 144 Examples in the same
kind of Richard the third, (...) of Egypt, (...), etc. 145 ^he nature of the
water of the (...) Styx ibid. The Church of Millaine opposed against Rome 200.
years ibid. The a^bition of Henry King of France, after slain by count
Montgomery 146 Strange predictions before his death 147 Seventie Emperors of
Rome came to untimely ends ibid. The rising of (...) from a slave to the Empire
148 (...) slain by (...) 150 The Empire set to sale by the (...) soldiers
ibid. (...) buyeth the Empire, his wretched death 151 The noble (...) of King
(...) of France, being presented a Prisoner to King (...) the third 152 The
like of (...) King of the (...), presented before the Emperor (...) page 153
The ambition of King (...) modestly (...) 154 The modesty of (...) in his (...)
and (...) life ibid. Men in great place rather to be (...) than envied 155 Of
many miseries that seem happy 156 (...) King of (...), reproves greatness
ibid. (...) does the like to (...) 157 The (...) that (...) (...) the tyrant
ib. (...) (...) him in his poverty 158 The modesty of (...) the Roman Emperor
ibid A speech to the like purpose of (...) to (...) 159 The modesty of (...)
ibid. The (...) of a Prince 166 The Emperor Trajan concerning Empire and
government Cap. 2 page 162 The (...) (...) his letter to a friend concerning
the (...) 163 The Emperor (...) slain by (...) (...) Of (...) the dictator,
and (...) 167 (...) being (...) private (...) to be (...) 168 His retired life
170 (...) the second deposed by (...) 172 (...) deposed by (...) 173 (...)
deposed by the former (...) ibid. (...) slain by (...) ibid. (...) deposed by
(...) 174 (...) deposed by (...) ibid. Contention betwixt (...) and (...) for
the (...) ib. The inhumane tyranny of Pope (...) the 13th, His death 175 Three
Popes at one time (...) the Popedom equally together 176 Of (...) and (...)
ibid. Of Alexander and King (...) ibid. Of Alexander and k. (...) 178 The
horrible treason of (...) and (...) ibid. The observable death of (...) and
Alexanders (...) over him 180 The horrible death of (...) 181 The horrid death
of Abraham k. of Marocco, with his wife ibid. Of (...) Cossa Pope, deposed and
cast in prison 182 The (...) ends of (...), (...) and (...) 183 Of (...) who
(...) Asia 184 (...) against flattery ibid. The ridiculous (...) of king (...)
185 Of diverse strange Tenants held by the Pope 186 Of Popes that have been
professed Magicians 188 Pope Clements Ball ibid. A parish Priests Sermon 189 A
notable trick put upon the Cardinal of Lorreine 190 Of one (...) a Necromancer
191 The speech of Erasmus (...) (...) 192
CHAP. III.
Paulus Iovins, of the Council of Trent 194 The strange death of Benedict the
ninth 195 The miserable end of Sylvester the second 196 A (...) of Bonicasius
the eighth to become Pope 197 Of Cornelius Agrippa concerning the Augustine
(...) 198 Examples of insuffrable pride in the Clergy 199 The proud letters of
Pope (...) to Philip K. of France 201 The kings Answer 202 The witty answer of
Henry the second, who summoned him before the Tribunal seat in heaven 203 A
contention betwixt the Abbot of Fulda, and the Bishop of Hildeseme ibid. Of
Pope (...) a woman 204 Of the Popes scrutiny 205 The pride of king Herod, and
(...) 205 Diverse examples of the Devils (...) answers, to the ruin of those
that trust in him 206 A worthy example in one (...) 207 The insuffrable
ambition of (...) Magus 208 Of a (...) in Constantinople 209 Of the Magician
(...) ibid. The Abbot (...) a great Nocromancer 210 His Art showed before the
Emperor Maximilian 211 Albertus (...) a Monk, and Necromancer 212 Pope
Gragory the seventh a Magician 213 A letter of (...) to the Clergy 214 The
Earl of Mascon a Magician ibid. A strange story of a Spanish woman of Corduba
called (...) 215 Her hypocrisy disclosed and confessed 218 The history of the
false Prophet (...) 219 His miserable and wretched end 226 An Epitaph of a
tyrannous Viceroy in Sicilia 227 Of Salmoxes 228 The strange ambition of an
Hermit in Africa [229 Who in three years became Monarch of six Kingdoms page
230 The miserable ends of him and his Council 232 Of (...) Adella son to the
Hermit 233 The resolute end of those Turks which starved the Hermit ibid. Of a
blasphemous Jew 234 Of George (...) a new Prophet 235 A strange history of a
child borne in Babylon 236 A strange history extracted out of (...) 237 Of the
instigation of evil (...) 241
(...). IIII.
A curious policy prosecuted by the King of France against the Duke of Guise
242 The Sacrament made a color for murder 244 The death of the Duke of Guise
(...). The death of the Cardinal, the brother to the Guise 245 The complaint of
the (...) of Guise 246 A great justice upon (...) of Genoway 248 Philip King of
Macedon (...) by (...) 249 Of Herostratus that burnt the Temple of (...), and
others ib. The great ambition of the Duke of Alva 250 The old Duke of Guise
(...) by (...) 251 Of (...) who would have slain the Prince of (...) 252 Of
(...), who slew the Prince of Orange: His (...) 255 Of (...) Clement a
Dominican Monk, who slew the (...) King Henry the (...) 256 Of Pope (...) his
(...) after the French Kings death 258 A Friar canonized for a Saint, because
he was a (...) 259 The story of a Spanish Priest 260 Of the Lady Mary de (...)
261 That all glory is but vanity 263 Of (...) a Portugal 264 Of (...) ibid. Of
Arsaces, (...), (...), Probus, (...), Agelmund, (...), (...), etc. (...) Of
(...) of Leyden 266 The original of the Amazons 267 Of (...) King of (...) 268
Of ^, etc. 269 (...), Q (...). 270 A custom in the Indies 273 Of true nobility
ibid. The rich are of true (...) 274 (...) 276 Of Beauty ibid. Of vanity in
apparel 277 Of the (...) (...), and (...) Bernard 278 The excellency of
learning 279 The modesty of Alexander (...), and Philip k. of Macedon page 280
Of Queen (...) ib.d. (...) and Heliogabalus 281 Of Proculus a Roman Emp. 282
The fable of the Boycs and the Ass 283 Envy attends honor 284 The frailty
of glory 285
The Contents of the fourth Book.
Wherein the felicity of man does consist, according to the ancient
Philosophers Cap. 1. page 188 Three things required to attain to true
felicity 289 Of virtue, wisdom, and knowledge 290 How a man may fall from
blessedness to infelicity 291 The Gordian knot dissolved by Alexander 292
Wherein true felicity consists 293 Of Sydrach, Mysach, and (...) 294 The
effects of virtue 295 Temples crected to virtue and honor 296 Detraction and
murder punished 297 Vainglory derided in (...) by (...) king of Sparta 298 Of
Roman Regulus 299 Of diverse who preferred their Countries before their own
lives 300 Of (...) and (...) king of Sparta 302 (...) Justice in (...) Cap. 2.
304 A remarkable Act in Charondes 305 Severe Justice in (...) casar ibid.
Great justice in (...) 306 Examples of Justice and Policy in Trajan, (...),
and Alexander (...) ibid. (...) and (...) 307 Marous (...) concerning the
choice of Magistrates 308 Gregory (...) concerning the same 310 Of Favorites to
Princes 311 The counsel of Vegetius and vegetins to Princes 312 Good Laws,
(...) and Peace, the three daughters of Honesty 313 Duties belonging to a
Prince ibid. An Invective against (...) 314 Of Alexander (...) and (...) 315
The remarkable death of (...) ibid. Of three observable (...) 316 Diverse (...)
reformed by Henry the 3d, of France Cap. 3. page 318 The French nation reproved
for many vices page 319 Miseries attending the neglect of (...) 318 The rare
Temperance of Scipio^ 319 The Temperance of Alexander 320 (...) the Tyrant
against adultery 321 Agapete to (...) ibid. The rare friendship of (...) and
Everitus 324 The rare friendship of (...) and Everitus ibid. Friendship without
wisdom in Hading and Hunding, two kings of Denmark and (...) 325 How vices
apparel themselves like virtues 326 Of Duke Valentine the Popes son 327
Italianisme deciphered, with the danger of travel 328 The finnes of ancient
times 329 In new Count eyes are learned new fashions 330 What Rome was, and
what it now is ibid. Marcus (...) concerning the vices of Rome and Italy 331
King Memon an inventer of delicacy 333 An history out of plutarch to the fame
purpose ibid Strange justice done upon Lueius (...) by the Roman senate 334
Against drunkenness ibid. Of the (...) and (...) 336 Against pride in apparel
337 The (...) that carried the Image of (...) 338 A taxation of vanity in
attire and (...) gesture 339 Due praises conferred upon (...) and (...) 340
Gain gets friendship 341 A discourse of friendship 342 The Story of a Bear
ibid. Another of a Dog 343 A french dog, the dog of (...): and the dog
of (...) 344 The Horse of (...) 345 Of an Ox ibid. The history of Androcles,
and a Lion 346 Of a Boy and an Eagle Cap. 4 p. 349 Of a Boy and a Dolphin ibid.
A witty and ingenious Host 350 Of riches 352 An aspersion laid upon
dice-players 353 A custom in China: and against new fashions 354 A Law amongst
the Thebans 355 Foreign manners interdicted with perfumes, etc. ibid. Against
excess in (...) and garments 356 The rare modesty of the ancient times 357 Of
Regulus, and (...) the Dictator, etc. ibid. The Magnanimity of (...) the
Philosopher page 358 The manners of this age compared with the former 359
Artaxerxes to Teribarus the Persian 360 To think our selves wise, the greatest
folly 362 The life contemplative preferred before the civil 363 Fortune has
no power over the life contemplative 365 3. bodily worlds concatinated 366
Examples of diverse who forsook the world for a life contemplative 367 Of Paul
an Hermit, etc. 368
The Contents of the fifth Book.
CHAPTER I.
Simonides the Poet unto King Cyrus page 368 The true property of Felicity 369
Distinction betwixt the felicity of this life and the future 371 The first
step to felicity 372 Timon of Athens, and (...) 373 Timons death and Epitaph,
etc. 374 A meditation of Marcus Aurelius, etc. 375 David, Esaias and Solomon upon
the same 376 Plato of the estate of man's life 377 The estate of a seafaring man
378 The estate of an husbandman 379 The condition of a Merchant 380 The estate
of a Soldier 381 Of sundry calamities incident to the wars 382 Of the famine
in Jerusalem 383 Inhumane cruelty in the ^ews 384 Barbarous cruelty in the
Numantians 385 (...) conquered by Scipio 386 Of Hading King of Danes, and vsfo
King of Suecia ibid. The miserable extremities of famine, etc. 387 The
insolences of war, etc. 388 The siege of Sanserra 389 The siege of Paris 390
Barbarous inhumanity in soldiers 391 Blasphemy and inhumanity against God 392
The estate of a soldier truly deciphered 393 The estate of the Lawyer 394 A
difficult Law-case 395 The miseries of the Client, etc. 397 Lawyers and
Physicians banished 399 Lawyers and Physicians have one common aim 400 Lawyers
are necessary evils 401 The Lawyers penance, etc. 402
CHAP. II.
The estate of ^udges and of Magistrates page 403 The poverty of (...) general
to the (...) (...) 404 Charg that belongs to (...) 405 A dialogue betwixt a
Philosopher and Justice 409 The Senators of Athens heard causes only in the
nights 410 The estate of a Courtier 411 How far their estate differs from
felicity 412 The manner and fashion of the Court and what is cheap in it 413
Queen Zenobia's answer unto Marcus Aurelius Emperor 414 The estate of Princes
415 Their supposed Felicity cause of their unhappiness 416 The history of
Cleandor under the Emperor Commodus 417 The history of Planitanus under the
Emperor (...) 419 Too much grace often begets ingratitude 420 The great
care that belongs to Princes 421
CHAP. III.
The estate of Prelates 422 Pope Adrian concerning Popes and Bishops 423 A
Citizen of Romes bold speech to Pope Innocent 424 The Archbishop of Salisburg
of the government of the Popes 426 St. (...), (...), and St. (...), of their
pride and avarice 427 Of the ambition and (...) of (...) 430 Gregory the great
432 The charge of the Clergy, with the estate of Friars, etc. 433 Diversity of
sects begets Atheism 434 The estate of marriage 435 A loving Husband expressed
in a Neapolitan 436 Examples of conjugal love, etc. 437 A man that had had 20.
wives, marries one that had had 22. husbands 438 Of a most remarkable
pieticibid. Inconveniences that belong unto marriage 439 (...) concerning women
ibid. (...) of marriage 440 The trouble of children 441 A disputation betwixt
Tbales and (...) concerning marriage 442 Of needless jealousy 443 Pleasant and
witty husbands ibid. The time seems tedious spent with a bad wife ibid.
Xantippe the wife of Socrates 446 Of a Law observed amongst the Massagates
ibid. The witty answer of woman (...) to his mother 448 The counsel of (...)
in the choice of a wife 449 Metellus the (...) concerning marriage 450 The witty
answer of a woman to her jealous husband 451 The opinions of diverse concerning
marriage 452 Felicity consists not in marriage 452 The effects of peace, the
mother of idleness 453 Peace the mother of persecution 454 Of calamities
happening by diseases and other accidents 455
CHAP. IIII.
Of sundry kinds of pestilences 456 Three hundred several diseases belonging
unto man 457 Gods judgment on Popielus 457 Upon the Emperor Arnolphus, and
Hatto Bishop of Mentz 458 Of Harold king of Denmark and (...) 459 The history
of an Archbishop of Mentz, called Henry 460 Three fearful judgments and strange
stories to the same purpose 461 The dream of Atterius (...) 462 Examples of
fear and joy ib. Examples of sorrow and the strange effects of joy 463 Of
barbarous cruelty and extreme tyranny 464 Necessary considerations of the
miserable condition of man 465 Of the general judgment, and the account of
Lawyers, Judges, and Soldiers 466 The account of Usurers 467 Of imaginary
felicity 469 All Felicity depends upon God 472 Of two sorts of ends, precedent
and subsequent 473 Earthly felicity is only in name 474 Four things that are
not to be bought with gold 475 That no man lives contented with his own
estate 476 No prosperity but attended by adversity 477 Of Amasis King of Egypt,
and Polycrates King of Samos ibid. No man happy before his death 479 Four sure
Anchors to trust unto 480 The joys of the future life, the true beatitude 482
The contrariety of men's inclinations 483 The use of Gods afflictions 484 What
gratitude we owe unto God 486 The counsel of David to solomon, and Tobit to
his son 487 How to examine ones self to find whether we be happy or not 488
The vanity of fear 489 Diogenes concerning patience 490 The benefit of a quiet
and contented mind 491 Of a limitation for pleasures 492 Riches in poverty and
poverty in riches 493 The Avarice of King (...) and Pitbens 495 Richest men
the greatest slaves 497 No true Felicity can consist in riches 498 Saint
Gregory and others of riches, and poverty page 499
CHAP. V.
The modesty of ^, etc. 500 The contempt of honor in (...). pompus, agesilans
King of Sparta, etc. 501 Honor an hinderance unto Felicity 502 The best
riches not to fall into poverty 503 The great moderation of King Calvicius 504
Three kinds of men in every commonwealth 505 Plato's dialogue of Socrates and
another 507 Death no way terrible unto a godly Christian 508 Of the women of
Narsinga and India 509 The contempt of death in the people of the mountain
called (...) 510 Charles the fifth his preparation to death 511 Things above
the power of fortune 513 Pride and vainglory beget confusion 515 The greatest
part of felicity consists in the mind 516 Our life compared by Plato to
table-play 517 Moderation to be used in prosperity, and patience in adversity
518 False felicity consists in 5. things 519. The gifts of God (...) they are
used or (...) The necessity of industry industry Of wisdom and a wise man 603
The ignorant live with (...) 604 Empire makes men monstres 606 The Princes
Court a Theater 607 The expression of a good King 608 The counsel of a good
King 609 Truth necessary to be whispered in Princes cares 611 The education of
the Persian Princes 612 The Courts of good Princes are schools of virtue 613
Whom good Princes should (...) their familiars 614 Gifts ought to be given
only to the worthy 615 The Majesty of God honored in the Prince 617 The
office of a Prince 618
CHAP. VI.
The felicity of the mean estate 619 Good fortune the greatest riches 621
Concerning law-suites 623 Three things to be avoided 624 Three things to be
practiced 625 To beget commendable envy 626 Who it is that may be esteemed
happy in this world 629 Man participates both of the Angelical and brutish
nature 631 Of friendship, and diverse tenants held by (...) 634 The Commodities
of poverty 635 True friendship doubleth prosperity 636 (...) fable of the Lark
637 No friendship to be made with covetous men 640 Corruption of these times
641 Of learned Emperors, and of Q. Emperors 642 These times compared with the
former 643 Profane Schismatics 644 A fearful eclipse 645 Equivocation of
the Devil 646 The wickedness of these times 647 Of Hypocrisy 649 Chasticement
necessary 650 The way to enjoy happiness 651 The counsel of (...) 653 Gods
service brings felicity 654
The Contents of the sixth Book.
(...)
MAn the (...) of Gods Creation page 656 Man's estate before his fall 657 (...)
alteration after his fall 658 The soul opposite to the flesh 661 Man only
declineth from his original nature 665 Why God suffers evil 666 God the
only (...) 668 Man's (...) to escape the (...) into which he is fallen 669 God
the end of his own work 670 Two Simitirudes 671, 672 Of the vegetive and
sensible faculty and of the understanding 674, 675 Of the dangerous effects
which the world breeds 676
CHAP. II.
Man's greatest knowledge mere ignorance 678 Opinions of beatitude 679
Christian considerations 680 Of invocation, etc. 682 All nations acknowledge a
Ged 683 3. marks of true Religion 684. etc, One true God, and one true Religion
687 Religion (...) all men to the reading of the Scriptures 690 The necessity
of a (...) 691 Who that Mediator is 692 All Oracles struck dumb (...) the
coming of Christ 693 T^erins would have erected a Temple unto Christ 694
Strange prodigies happening at the birth of Christ 695 The means to get pardon
696 Custom of sin takes away the sense of sin 697 Crosses the way to
Heaven 704 Examples to confirm our Resurrection 706 The conclusion of the
work work The Authors Apology 714
FINIS.

