OF THE EXPRESS WORD OF GOD.

A SHORT, BUT A MOST EXCELLENT TREATISE AND very necessary for this time.

Written in Latin, by the right Reverend, Learned, and virtuous Father
Stanislaus Hosius, Bishop of VVarmia, Cardinal of the Holy Apostolyke See of
Rome, and one of the Presidents in the late General Council holden at Trent.

Newly translated in to English.

Behold I come to these Prophets (says our Lord) which take their own
sayings, and say. The Lord says it.

Ierem, 23. Hilarious lib. 2. de Trinitate. Of understanding not of Scripture
ryseth haeresy:
And the meaning, not the word is blamed.
Imprinted in Louayne, by John Bogard at the sign of the golden Bible: with
Privilege. An. 1567.

PRIVILEGIVM.
REgiae Maiestatis Gratia Speciali permissum et concessum est Ioanni Bogardo
Typographo iurato Academiae Louaniensis, tuto ac libere imprimere libellum
Anglico sermon scriptum, and inscriptum: A Treatise of the express word of
God: ac public distrahere nullo prohibente.

Datum Bruxellis. 4. Nouemb. Anno. 1566. Subsign. De la Torre.

THE TRANSLATOVR TO THE READER.
Seeing the Iniquyte of the present time to be such, that the mouths of al
Catholyks being stopped, the adversaries only of Christ and his Cross are
suffered to cry and crow with open mouth against our common mother the
Catholyke Church, seeing the faith of our Fathers assalted with heresy, Truth
ouercraked with falsehood, Religion turned in to opinions, Unite in to sects, I
could not but think it high time for every honest and faithful Chrystian, in
such sort as he were able, to step to the susteining, and repayring the
Ra^pars of the Church, being daily both by secret vndermyninges and such
open shot, so fiercely assaulted and shaken by Satan and his Ministres.

And being upon these and other just respects entered in to that mind and
determynacion, fynding yet my self (in mine own conceyte) unable to yield of
mine own, any thing worth the reading, I thought not amiss (for a
beginning) to Imparte by the co^modyte of our vulgar tou^ge to my unlearned
countreme^ (in which sort I think the greatest number of the deceived to
consiste) some worthy work of some other man's.

Among the which, fynding (in mine opinion) none more leekly to induce
reasonable men, to see their own fault, and by what means they have been,
and daily be deceived, I have selected out of the notable works of the light
of this our age, that most virtuous and learned Father, Hosius, now Cardinal,
and one of the Preside^tes in the late general Counsel holden at Trident, that
discourse and treatise, which he made and intytuled, Of the express word of
God, a work already translated in to diverse vulgar tounges, set forth in
sundry editions, distracted and sold by great numbers, for the singular and
evident co^modyte thereof. And this piece the rather among the rest I have
selected, for that I have by experyence noted, that there is no one deceyte
used by Satan, that does so much enlarge his kingedome, or so much
withdraw the members of Christ from his Mystical body, the Church, as does
that glorious show, which by his Ministres he makes of his own word, under
the plausible name of the Word of God.

For well ye wot, nothing is in the mowthes of these new and sedytious
Ministers, and promoters of the v. Ghospel, more rise and common then the
scripture, the Gospel, and the word of the Lord.

The word of the Lord, the word of the Lord, is ever in their mouth. Of
this they ia^gle. This they ringe allwaies in our ears. But the Catholic
church, of who^ we should learn what in deed the word of God is, of whose
mouth only we must harken for this word, and by whom only we know, which is
the true written word of God, and what the true sense of that word is, this
Catholyke Church they speak not of. We profess in our Creed, that we believe
in the Catholyke Church. If we did in the Creed, so expressly profess, we
believe in the word of God, how vehemently should that Article have been
beaten into our heads? What vauntes, what exclamations, what repetityo^s
would here have suffised? Now the Church, not the word being expressed, the
Master and teacher, not the lesson it self being professed, they crake of the
lesson, and forget their teacher: they babble, the word. And no word of the
Church.

The part of learned and plain dealing me^, had been first to define, and make
plain unto the world, what that is which they call the clear and express
word of God, and which they make as it were, their shooteanker, their
touchestone and their common refuge, whensoever they be by the Catholics
pressed with sou^de and invincible Authorite of the Churches doctrine. In deed
Epicure (out of whose schole Lib. 2. de sinibus bo norum and malorum
this voluptuous gospel may seem to have issued) did not leeke to have
things plainly defined. But Cicero says, that without definition it can not
be that they which contend about any thing, can agree what is the thing in
question. These men therefore seeking to keep in store blind and unknown
Angles to flee unto, when they be chased, will not orderly define what is that
their Gods word, of which they triumph so much, nor allow any exposition
thereof, but their own: or any judge but the unlearned multitude.

Sins therefore that is the sweet bayte, wherewith the mortal hook is
coouered, and the soft flese wherein the wolf is wrapped (who gladly will not
discover him self) this grave, virtuous and learned Father, Hosius the Auctor
of this treatise, moved with Christian pietye will herein manifestly open and
displaye unto thee, what is hidden under the glorious show of Gods word: how
far the bare and dark letter of the scriptures, where in they only
comprehend their Gods word (at the lest if they lymit it within any compass)
is from being so clear and plain as they suppose it. And farther that the same
being by them perverted and delivered to thee, with a wrong sense and a wrye
heretical exposition, differing from the Church (which is the sure ground
and pillar of al truth, the faitheful interpreter 1. Tim. 3.
of Gods word, and the storehowse of al right knowkeadge) is in deed so far
from being the express word of God, as that thou shallt plainly perceive it
to be the express word of the devil.

Finally thou shall (besides many other notable things by the way, whereof in
the Table to this Book annexed thou shall see great Copy) learn also herein
the true definition of Gods word, and which is the very true, express, and
(as they call it) the lively word of the Lord, that is, the quickening and
lifegiuing word of God. Which in deed is open and clear: Yea so clear, short
and easy, as it may of all persons, of all sorts, ages and capacytees be
learned, even without ever reading the Scriptures. And that is this word. Love
or 1. Tim. 1. Romans 13. Galat. 5. Leuit. 19. Matthew. 22.
Charity: The only scope of al scriptures. The end of all the Commandments:
The co^summatio^ and acco^plisheme^t of the whole law. From the knowleadge and
sight of which true, clear, and express word of God, containing in it the
sum and effect of all the words that ever God uttered in the law, and the
prophets, thou shall perceive in the discourse hereof, how far these men
be, that yett think the^ selves of such sharp wit, and quick sight, that
they see beyond all the grave and learned Fathers that have been, or be at this
day. And do with their forged Gods word (which is in very deed but their
own word) labor and te^de to none other end, but to the dissoluing of
unite, and ma^gling the mystical body of Christ, the Church.

This true word of God therefore, this Love, I say and Charity which on the
other side does not dissolve, but unity, not mangle, but amend: not rent and
wound, but join and heal, and is ever occupied, in doi^g good, has now
moved me to bestow this trauayl in imparting to thee (my dear Country man)
this godly and learned Treatise most necessary for thy health and sauegarde in
this perilous time.

Read therefore with humilyte, and suspe^d, I pray thee, thy partial
foreiudgeme^t, (if thou be of the number of the seduced) until thou have read
it to the end. And then if thou find thy self to have received good thereby
(as I beseech God thou may, and needs thou must, if thou have any spark of
grace left, unquenched in thee:) then give the honor and glory thereof to
almighty God: And for recompense both to the Auctor, and Translatour, afford
them in thy devout prayers a place among thy friends. Fare well. From
Louayne: The 3. of January.

TO THE RIGHT, FORTVNAT AND RENOWNED PRINCE SIGISMOND BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING
of Polonia, Mighty Duke of Lithuania, Russia, Prussia, Lord and heir of
Masouia, and Samogitia, his most gracious Lord: STANISLAVS HOSIV'S Bisshopp of
VVarmia, his prayer and service Reverently commends.
OF THE EXPRESS WORD OF GOD.
THAT Somewhat I should write unto your highness of the express word of God,
(Right mighty king Sigismond) the unbridled bouldnes of the heretics of our
age has moved me. Who albeit among them selves they be wonderfully divided,
yet does each sect of them, so contentiously challenge the same unto
themselves, yea so usurp it unto them selves alone, that from the possession
thereof, they labor to exclude, not only all such sects, as dissent from
every of them, but even the very Catholics and right beleuers. For such is
the arroga^cy of these men, so great the forgetfulness of the^ selves, that they
take all others, to be but fools, doultes, and blocks, that ca^ see nothing
in the scriptures and persuade them selves to be the only persons, that have
attained to the true understanding thereof.

But is it leekly, where so great pride rests, where so great inflation of
the mind is, that there can be that Spirit, which [resteth not but over the
humble and meek, and Esa 66.
such as fearfully tremble at his word?] Very Prouer. 11
notably said the wise man. [VVher is humillite, there is wisdo: where is pride
and swelling of the mind, there is follye. For calling the^ selves Romans 1.
wise men, they are become fools. In the low valleys (says that holly King
and Psalm. 103.
Prophet) not in the high hills, does God send forth the springes and
fou^taynes of his grace: he hydeth his mysteries from the wise and Matthew. 11.
reueleth them unto the humble and meek.] Therefore none do less understand
what is the express word of God, then they which most glory thereof, and which
do so arrogat unto the^ selves alone the vndersta^dig thereof that (as the
Proverb says) they will seem to They are said to pryck out the choughs eyes
which condemn and out of those things which with great consent has been
allowed of old time by their forfathers Hiere. 28.
prick out the choughs eyes. But this is no new practys. It has always
been the property of heretics to glory of the clear and express word of God,
and to challe^ge it unto the^ selves alone. With what other show or pretense
did the false prophettes, eue^ before the birth of Christ, deceive the people,
but with this, of the word of God? When the prophet Hieremy did foretell many
heavy thigs, we read he used to begin with these words, as other the
prophets of God did. [Thus says our lord:] And did not the false prophet
Ananias also use the same words, when falsely he prophesied far contrary
things? who our lord denied to have bee^ sent from him? VVho^ in an other
place we hear thus speaking of these false prophets: [Falsly do prophets
prophecy in Hie. 14. 29
my name, I sent the^ not, I commanded them not, neither spoke I unto the^.
They prophecy unto you a false vision, a deceiuable prophecy, and the wrong
co^ceyte of their own heart.] And in an other place. [Harken not Hier. 23.
(says he) unto the words of prophets, which prophecy unto you and deceive
you. They tell you the vision of their own heart, and not out of our lord his
mowthe. They say un to them which blaspheme me. [The lord Ibidem.
has said: peace shall be with you] and a little after, he says, [they steal
his words.]

Which place S. Hierome does thus interprett: A lie (says he) does always
counterfeit, Hieron in co^menta. ibidem.
and borowe the likeness of a truth. For how could it otherwise abuse and
deceive the simple? Even so therefore as false prophets did lie unto the
people before the coming of Christ, saying, [Thus says the lord I have seen
the lord, and the word of the lord was showed to him, or to him:] so do
heretics take unto the^ the testimonies of scriptures out of the owld and new
testament, and steal the words of our Savior, every one, of that which
comes next to hand: of the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, and take
unto the^ their tounges, that therewith they may utter out of their mowthes, the
poison of their hearts. Very aptly does S. Hierom compare heretics with those
lying prophets, and right well (said he) does a lie always imitat, and
counterfeit a trowthe. For as the prophets of God said: [The word of our lord,
The mowthe of our lord has spoken it. Thus says our lord] the same phrase
and terms used also the false prophettes.

But what they both prophesied let us mark a little. The prophettes of God
rebuked The prophets of God.
the sins of the people, exhorted them to amendment, and for showed unto
them, the heavy wrath of God to ha^g over their heads, that he would consume
them with sword, famyn, and pestilence: That he would oppress them with most
hard bondage, yea and utterly destroy them with an universal slaughter.

On the other side, those lying prophettes False prophets. Hiere. 14.
(whom our lord had not sent nor commanded) said [yowe shall not see the
sword, and hunger shall not be among you, but the lord will give you, true and
sure peace. They cured (says the prophett) the co^tritio^ of the Hiere. 6.
dowghter of my people slenderly saying peace, peace, yet was there no peace]
And as one other prophet says of those liars, who said, [Thus says the lord]
when the lord had not Ezech. 13.
spoken it, [they sowde together cusshins for the elbowe of every hand, and
made pillowes to lay under the heads of every age, the more easily to entrape
their souls.]

How contrary was the preaching of these The difference between true and false
prophetts.
ij. sorts of prophets? They thretned, to save: These lulled, to destroy:
Yet in the mean time both prophezied in the name of God: both gloried in the
word of the lord.

But is not the trade and manner of the prophets of our age even leeke to this?
What do they else which be laufully sent of the Catholic Church, but denou^ce
unto the people the same which Esaie, Hieremie, Ezechiel, Esa. 58.
Daniel, Joel, Jonas, and other the prophets of God, did in those days
denounce? They rebuked the wickedness of the people, they exhorted the^, that
being dronke, they would awake, weep, and howl. Fearful things they
fortolde the^. And being so put in fear, they exhorted the^, that they should
turn unto Ioell 1.
our lord, that they should yield worthy fruits of penance, that so being
thoroughly correctyd thy might happily escape the pains wherewith the lord had
threatened the^. And being so turned ageine unto our lord [yn fasting, Ioell 2.
weeping, and mourning] then at the last, did they discover unto the^, the
mercy of our lord and did forbid that no person throwgh the greatness of his
sins, should despair of pardon. [For our lord is gentle and Ezech* 33.
mercyful: pacye^t and of much mercy, and one that will be intreatid, to remitt
his displeasure. He will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
convert and live:] He follows not man's impatience, but [loge looks for our
repentaunce] so as if we Hiere. 26.
yield worthy fruictz of penance he also repents him of his threats, and
forbearith to let faull upon us the plages which he denounced, and with our
change, is also changed him self.

Thus the minds of mortal me^ being lift up into a better hope, lest perhaps
the preaching of the greatness of Gods mercy might make them again negligent,
and careless, behold how he tempered his speech. [VVho Joel. 2.
knowyth (says Joel) if he shall turn? if he shall forbear and leave behynd
him his blessing.] As though he would say (says S. Hierome) we, truly do
exhort so myche as Hiero* in co^menta. ibidem.
in us is, to repentance, because we know the mercy of God to be
unspeakable: but because we can not know the bottom of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, we temper our speech, and wish rather then presume our
sins to be forgeuen us. And Remigius the Bisshopp of Auxerre, Remigius
Altisiodo re^sis Episcopus.
about 700. years past or there about, following herein S. Hiero^: They might
(says he) have answered, because the lord is pacye^t and of myche mercy, as
thou say, it is not needful that we afflict our selves and do penance, for
he will have mercy on us, what so ever we do. But the prophett to mete with
this, says: what man living knows if Joel. 2.
God be turned from the fury of his wrath to mercy? It is not possible for
any man to know it. It is better that doing penance we meryt to atteyne
pardon of our sins, and after penance done having obtained remission
thereof, then we offer sacrifice unto our lord.

After the same sort more then 400. years past Rupertus Abbat of Tuitia (by
Colle^) Rupertus Abbas Tu^tie^sis.
reporting the same words. Eue^ in penance it self (says he) the Prophett
wissheth us to be ware, and takes away surety. Of the same opinion also nere
300. years past was Albertus (not without cause named the great) whoo
expownding the same words. Although (says he) it be certain that God
pardons Albertus magnus
the co^tryte, yett is it uncertain whither any man be truly contryte: he
shall see that he ca^ not be correctyd whom God has Eccl. 7.
despised. The wicked man prayed to the lord, 2. Match. 9.
of whom yet he did not obtain mercy. Cain made oblation, yett God had no
regard Gene. 4. Nume. 16
to his sacrifyce. Moises said of some: behold not o lord their oblations.
Thus far Albert. Behold how Joel preached and how ever since by the space of
one Thousand ij. hundred years by long succession of Priests and Bisshops,
even to this our age these words of his, have been understood.

Yet did not Iohel alone so preach, but Daniel Daniell. 4
also. When he expownded to the king Nabugodonosor his dream, did he not in
the beginning terribly fear him, when he declared what mischieffs should
happen unto him? yet did he not by and by will him to dispayr: but showed him
the way where by he might escape the pains which were thretnyd unto him. [Let
my council (says he) (O king) please the: Redeem thy sins with alms, and
thy iniquitees with mercy toward the poor.] With these words he brought some
comfort to the king, being before stryken with a wonderful fear. Yett would
he not set him in a carelesnes or surety. He said not, be sure thy sins
shall be forgeeue^ thee, but thus. [God will perhaps forgeeue thy sins.] Of
which words S. Hierom Hiero^ in Danie.
treating: when Daniel (says he) forknowing things to come doubts of Gods
determination, full rashely do they which bouldly promise forgeuenes to
sins. And the ordinary Gloss says. This their temerytee is intolerable.
Thus the^ prophesied Ioell, and thus Daniell.

But what did the king of Niniue when Jonas the prophett fortolde him, it
should Ion. 3. The penance of the king of Niniuee.
come to pass, that with in xl. days Niniue should be destroyed? did not he
(being clothed him self in sackcloth and sitting i^ ashes) exhort the people
to penance, that men and beasts should be covered with sackes, that they
should strongly cry unto our lord, that men might be turned from their evil
way, and from the iniquitees which they had in hand? But did he after such
conversion bidd them stand by and by in surety of pardon? No: but as Joel and
Daniel did, so did he: [who knows (says he) if godd will be turned, and
forgive us?] which words S. Hiero^ Hieronymus ibide^
expou^ding says. Therefore this (forgeuenes) is made doutfull and uncertain,
that while men stand in doubt of their salvation, they should the more
earnestly do penance and more stir God unto mercy. which words are in like
terms repeted of Remigius and Rupertus and in the ordinary gloss. In such
sort that never any one man in the Church of God seems otherwise to have
understood the words of those prophettes. Whose manner of preaching in this
point, we read the Apostles also to have followed. For so did Peter Act. 8.
speak unto Simon Magus, who thought the gift of God might be possessed for
moony: [Doo penance (says he) for this thy wickedness, No man ought to stand
assured of his salvation
and pray to God, to see if happily this nawghty thought of thy heart may be
forgeuen.] If happily (says he:) he does not bid him to be certain and sure
thereof.

This doctrine of the prophettes and Apostles, does the Catholyke Church yett
howlde, geeuing Terror to sinners, that thereby she may the more effectually
stir them to repe^tawnce, which when they have done, she does not therefore
command them by and by to be out of fear, but rather by all means does
fear them from perillows securite, and well commawndeth Psalm. 36.
them, [to hope in our lord and to do good]. But assurednes of forgiveness of
their sins, and certain knowledge thereof to brag of, and in that suertye
rechlesse to rest, she forbyddeth. For albeit of the mercy of God, of his
promyses, of the merytt of Christ his death, of the virtue and efficacye of the
sacraments no good man ought to doubt, yet when anny man respectyth himself,
and his own infirmitee, he may well fear and stand in doubt of Gods grace in
his own part. This is the preaching of the Catholyke Church, well and
rightly agreyng with the doctrine of Esaias, Hieremie, Ezechiell, Daniel, Joel,
Jonas, yea and of S. Peter the Apostle.

But do these men which not much more then. xxx. years passed, departed from
us agree therewith? Nay: rather they seem, to stand clean square from this
doctrine. For what other thing say these teachers, The doctryn of he retikes.
but that which Ananias, Semeias, and the rest of the faulse prophets said,
to whom our lord had not spoken? [you shall not see the sword (say they) there
shall be no famyn among you, but sure peace will the lord geeue you.] Peace,
Peace, they cry, when peace is not, and denouncyng a sownde sleep securyte,
deceive the sowles of many.

For they teach what so ever our works So Luther in lib. de fide Christiana.
be, so our faith be fyrme and steadfast, we are sure of our salvation, for
that God regards not works: Where yet the plain words of the scripture
be manifest to the contrary. Namely where it speakyth of the Ninevites their
appeasing of God. [God saw their works and because they were turned from
their evil way, he had mercy of them.] God saw Ion. 3.
their works (says the Prophet:) These fellows on the other side say, God
regards no works [Behould lord, (says the prophet Dauyd) my humillite and
trauayll, and pardon Psalm. 24.
all my synnes] And in an other psalm, [Regard my humillitee, and deliver me,
because Psalm. 118.
I have not forgotten thy law. Behold (lord) because I have looued thy
commandementes, Quicken me in thy mercy.

Which words S. Hilary expounding. The Hilarious super psalm 118.
prophett (says he) reseruyng all to the judgment of God, desires to be
delivered, for Ambrosi'
the meryt of his humillitee. whom S. Ambrose following, says. As he which
has humbled his heart, As he, which has labored much there he desires his
sins may be forgiven, and here he prays to be delivered. And after a few
words he thus says farther. A good wrestlar shows his lymmes, that the well
orderyng of him self for that feate, may be allowed: he also then shewyth his
lymmes, when after hard tugging, and paynfull grypes, he is ageyn provoked to
the wrestlyng place: to the end, the Judge, seeing his weary and trauayled body,
compel him not eft soones to wrestle. She we thou therefore the humillitee of
thy heart, that the tokens of thy virtue may appear. Show also the paynfull
stryfes thy body has Endured, that thou may say, I have wrestled a good
pulle. I have endyd 1. Tim. 4.
my race, and the spiritual Judge beholding, thy striving for the game, may
adiudge unto thee, the Crown of justice, because thou have accomplisshed the
law of the game. The prophett prays godd that he would regard his humilyte,
his trauayll, and that he was not forgetful of his law, that he looued his
Commandementes, which Saint Ambrose commanded also we should show unto Godd.

But the false prophets and false Ghospellers The fauls prophets of this our
age deny that God, has any regard to our works.
of our age, deny that God regardith our works. They deny that he has any
care of them, and teach, that how so ever our works be, yett must every man
stand assured here of, that freely for Christ's sake, his sins be forgeeuen
him. That he is in the favor of God, and heir of the life ever lasting, for
so much as all our Justice, and all our holiness, is but This is the clear
doctrine of Luther in his Articles ad Leon* 10. Art. 1. and 6 10. 11. 12. and
31. 32.
mere sin, and a thing Condemned. As for Contrition that it is a thing so
far from profytyng that it makyth a man the greater sinner. That yff remorse
of sin do gnawe any man's conscience, him do they commawnd thus to awnswer.

What is sin but Sin? I am notwithstanding The wicked saienges of
heretics
holly, or if I be not, yett Christ is God, As though it were lausull for every
man to be wicked, because Christ is God? By his Justice (teach they) we are
Just, by his goodness we are good, yea thowgh we have not in us so much as
one spark of his goodness. Yea althowgh we be over whelmed in all kinds of
Iniquitee. Look how much the more wicked thou art (says one of these new
Ghospellers) so much the sooner does God geeue his grace unto thee. Yea he
Commawndeth his followers, thus to say, My sins do burden Christ, not my
conscience.

But what? may not we say with Hieremie the prophett? [VVoonders are happened
Hie. cap. 5.
upon the earth to the astonning of men. Prophets prophesied lies, Priests
clapped their hands, and my people leeked such things.] In deed the people
has leeked such things. For so may we see men rauisshed with the smothe
words of these lyeng prophets, even as it were with the sweet songs of
meremaydes, that if a man will go about to preach unto them rather true and
holsom things, then those which are sweet and pleasant to the ears, he shall
be hissed out of the place. And rude vnlearnyd asses, will not styck sometime
to prescribe unto the prophettes, what they shall preach, and to teach them
of whom they shoold be taught. [See not (say they) look not out for us those
things which are right: Speak unto us pleasing things, Look out errors for
us.] Preach unto us Esaie 30. S. Hiero^. in commentar. ibidem
only faith. Threaten not hell fire, but promise us the kingdom of heaven. that
after our ryott, and delycaces, after our incestuous wedlockes, we may yett
look to find paradyse open unto us. what show you unto us the way of the
lord which we are not willing to enter in to? what do you recyte to us the
name of the holly one of Israel, which does not enter ynto the secrettes of
our hearts?

Thou see (most vertuows king) of what sort is the preaching of those, which
in this our age call them selves Gospellers, (where in deed they have no
agreement with the Gospel,) and what is again the doctrine of the catholykes.
Those men commawnd nawght else, but that each man steadfastly believe, and rest
well assured that he stands in the state of grace, and is an Luthers doctrine
word for word in lib. de Christi ana liberate and in cap. Baby lonica* The
manner of pre achi^g and uniform doctrine of the catholics
undoubted heir of the kingdom of heaven, how so ever his works be, And with
this their vain surety they lead men hedlong to the everlasting pains of
hell.

Our men on the other side, albeit they command us to hope, for mercy at our
lord his hands, yett do they forbydde men, rechelesse to live in securite,
and farther warn them, that they think it not Enough to amend, except they
yield also worthy fruictes of penance, and show forth by their works, the
faith which they profess: That when we shall appear at the last Judgment, it
shall not be asked of us what we believed, but (believing) what good or evil
we have done here in this liffe.

But seem they not on both sides armed with the words of the law of godd?
Truly The scriptures of the catholics against Only faith. Matt. 3.
both parts glory of his express word. Both cry* the word of the lord.
The mouth of the lord has spoken it. Thus says the lord. The Catholics
bring forth these scriptures. [Shewe forth good fruictes of penance. Except
ye repent Luke. 1^
ye shall all perish. We must suffer, with Christ, if we will be glorified
with him, we must dye with him, if we will Romans 8. 2. Tim. 2
live with him, we must endure with him, if we will reign with him.

If thou wilt enter ynto life, keep the Matt. 19 loan. 3.
commawndementes. If you know these things, ye are happy so that ye do
them. Thou lord wilt geeue to every man according Romans 2.
to his works.

We must all be browght before the 2. Cor. 5.
judgment seat of Crist, that each man may carry away according as he has
done in the flleshe either good, or evil. Mercy shall make a place to each man
according Eccles. 16. Apoc. 22
to the merytt of his works. I comme quickly, and my reward is with me, to
yield to every man according to his works.

They which have done good shall coome Joan. 5.
forth to the Resurrection of lyffe and they which have done evil to the
Resurrection of Judgment. Man knowyth Eccl. 9. Psalm. 18.
not whither he be worthy of love or hatred. Who understands his
offenses? From my secret and hidden sins lord cleanse me. who can say my
heart is clean, Prou. 20 Job. 9.
I am pure from sins? I fearid all my works knowing that thou wooldest not
spare an offender. My conscience does 1. Cor. 4.
not accuse me of any thing, yet am I not Justified thereby. Of sin pardoned,
yett stand not clearly without fear. Say not Eccl. 5.
the mercy of the lord is great, he will have mercy on the multitude of our
sins: For his mercy, and wrath are soon at hand, and wrath is bent upon
sin.

With fear and trembling work your salvation. Philip. 2.
Blessed is the man* that is all ways Prou. 28.
fearful: He that is without fear can not be justified.]

These and many others which were to Eccl. 1.
long to recyte, are the scriptures whereby the Catholykes and right believers,
as by the express word of God, Endeavor to prove, that it is not Enough for a
man to believe, his sins be, thorowgh Christ, forgeuen him, that he stands
in good grace, and is an heir of the life everlasting, how so ever the matter
go with his works, but even as [It behooved Christ first to suffer Luke 24.
and so to enter ynto his glory,] so must we also suffer before we come to
that glory, and [as he walked so must we also walke] That we must [by our
good works make 2. Io. 2. 2. Pet. 1.
strong or sure our vocation,] and yett when we have all done, we must not
stand assured, or Careless, but mistrust all our Job. 9. Luc. 17. Eccle. 5.
works, and [say we be unprofitable servants,] so far forth as we [be
not without fear even of that sin which is forgeeuen us.]

They on the other side which have divided them selves from the Church, bring
forth also their scriptures and defend the contrary opinion. [Hee that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. So God looued Mark 16. Joan. 3.
the world that he gave his only begotten son, that every man that believes
in him should not peris he, but have life everlasting. Do manfully, and fear
not at the sight of them. Do manfully and thy heart shall be Deuteronomy. 31.
comfortyd. Say ye unto the cowardes, Psalm 26 Esai. 35. Ephesians. 6. 1. Pet. 5
be ye of good chere, fear not. Putt on you all the armor of God, that ye
may resist in the evil day. Whom resist you being strong in faith. He has
sent his son in 1. Joan. 4.
to the world that we should live throwgh Romans 5.
him. Godd showed forth his love toward us in that, that when we were yet
sinners, Christ was done to death for us.

The lord governs me and I shall want nothing, Psalm. 22 Ibidem
If I walk in the mids of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
because Psalm. 26
thou art with me. The lord is the protector of my lyffe, of whom should I be
Psalm. 30
affrayed? In thee (lord) have I trusted, I shall never be Confownded. Sure I
am that Romans 8.
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor anny other creature can seperatt me
from the love of God.

All that my father geeueth me, shall Joan. 6
come unto me, and him that comes to me, I will not cast forth. VVhoo so
ever callyth Romans 10
on the name of the lord shall be sauyd. All that is borne of God, ouercometh
the 1. Joan. 5.
world, and this is our victory which ouercometh the world, Our faith.] These
be the Brentius ^n his 2. pericope of his apology against Peter A soto.
scriptures which Brentius brings to confirm his assurednes and vain suerty
by. Yett they be such, as you shall sooner draw forth milk of a poomisse
stone, then out of the^, the thing which Bre^tius seeks.

You see now how owld a practys this has been of heretics to glory in the
word of God, sins it was used even in the days of Hieremy and Ezechiel. But
what? Even soon after the coomyng of Christ was not that deuyse also putt in
ure? Well known is that Storye of the Gospel, Matt. 4
where in it is written how Christ so soon as he was baptized, was ledd by the
spiryt ynto the wilderness, and was there tempted of the devil. But with what
other weapons, did he assault Christ, but with the very scriptures?

The Euangelyst Matthew says. [The Mat. 4.
devil set him on the pinnacle, of the Temple, and said unto him. If thou be
the son of God, throw thy self down. For it is written, he has geeuen his
Angels Psalm. 90
charge of thee, that they shall take thee in their hands, lest thou hurt thy
foot against soome stone,] which place S. Ambrose treating of prouidently
warnyth Lib. 4. in Lucan^
us, saying, Learn here also for the devil transsormyth him self in to an
Angel of light, and of the divine scriptures the^ selves, makyth often times
snares, to inta^gle the faith full. So does the heretic, so does he
Heretics tra^sformed ynto Aungells of ligh.
ripp up the faith, so does he assault the laws of pietye. Therefore let not
the heretic deceive thee because he can bring forth some examples of
scripture: Let hi^ not stand much in his own conceyte because he has some
show of Learning: for the devil also uses the testimonye of the scriptures,
not to teach, but to cumpas, and deceive.

Very excellenty also does Vincentius Vincentius Lyri nensis
Lirynensis a writer also in the days of S. Ambrose handle that place, in
that his goulden book which he intitules, For the antiquitee, and
vniuersalyte of the Catholyke faith. I will the more at large repete his
words, because they are worthy not only to be read, but to be lernyd without
book.

Here (says he) some man will, perhaps Heretics use the restimonyes of
scriptures to confirm their doctrine
ask, whither heretics do also use the testimony of the scriptures. They
do sure, and that vehemently, for you shall see the^ fllee throwgh every
volume of the holly law, Throwgh Moses, the books of the kings, the
psalms, Apostles, Euangelystes, and prophettes. For be it among their
famyliers, or strangers in priuatt, or in publyke, in their Sermons or books,
at feasts, or in the streates, they never utter anny thing, of their own, but
they seek to over shadow it with some words of the scripture. Read the
works of Paulus Samosatenus, Priscillianus, The wor kes of old heretics
full of Scriptures
Eunomius, Iouinianus, and the rest of the pestilent heretics, and thou shallt
find there, an infynitt heap of examples, and almost no one half leaf
omitted which is not painted, and colored, with sentences of the new and old
Testament. But look now myche the more covertly they lurk under the shadow
of Gods word, so myche the more must thou fear and be ware of them. For they
know their unsavory fylthe, would hardly at the first, please any man:
therefore do they sprinckle it over as with a certain sweet spyce of Gods word,
to the end that he which easily would find, and reject the errors of men, may
yett forbear to contemn that, which seems to be drawn out of the word of
God. Therefore as they which give unto children some bitter drynckes do first
annoint the brimmes of the cups with hunny whereby their unskillful
childishenes having fore tasted the sweett, fears not the bitter. And as
they, which utter unwholesome drogges of seeds and liquors, under color and
names of medicynes, whereby he that fyndeth written thereon the name of a
medicyne suspectyth not the poison: even so do heretics.

And heerof did also our Savior him self forewarne us, Crieng out unto the
people. Matthew. 7.
[Beeye ware of faulse prophetts, which come unto you in sheep clothing, and
are with in raueni^g wolves.] What other thing is this sheps clothi^g, but the
words vtteryd by the Prophets and the Apostles, which they with plain and
simple sinceryte, did work (as it were, fleses) to that unspotted la^be, which
takes away the sins of the world?

And what other be those ravening Raueni^g wolves.
wolves, but the fell and greedy wits of heretics, which do always
trouble, and assaylle the foulde of his church, and tear in pieces his flock
by all means they can? But the more craftily to steal upon the selly sheep,
keeping still their woluish feersenes, they lay aside their woluishe shape, and
wrap them selves in the sentences of Gods word, as it were in certain fleeses,
that when one feelyth the softnes of their woll, he should not fear the
sharpnes of their teethe.

But what says our savior? By their fruicts you shall know them. That is to
say when they begin not only to utter the divine words, but also to lay them
abroad, not only to vawnt thereof, but also to interprett and expownd the
same, then lo is perceived that Bitter, that sower, that Rage: then does the
air of the nue poison breathe forth, then are opened profane noueltyes.
Then may thou behowld the hedge cut down, the awncyent bowndes of the
fathers carried away, the Catholyke faith trodden down, and the doctrine of the
Church torn in pieces.

Such are they whom the Apostle Pawll streeketh at, in his second Epistle to
the Corinthians, saying: [Suche false Apostles 2. Cor. 11. Heretics
transfigured into the Apostles of Christ.
leeke subtle workmen transformed them selves into the leeknes of the Apostles
of Christ.] what meanyth that? How did they transform them selves in to the
Apostles of Christ? The Apostles browght forth examples out of the law of
God. So did they also. The Apostles vouched the saienges of the Prophettes, So
did they to.

But when they began to expound leeke textes, with vnleeke, and far
contrary interpretations, then were the plain dealers, discernyd from the
crafty, the natural from the painted, the right from the peruers, and finally
the true Apostles from the false [and 2* Cor. 11. Satan transformid in to an
Angel of light.
no maruaill (says he) for Satan transformyth him self into an Angel of
light, then is it no great matter for his ministers to transform them selves
into the leeknes of the ministres of justice.] Therefore according to the
teaching of the Apostle Pawll when so ever false prophettes, or false doctors
vouche the sentences of the law of God, by the wrong interpretation whereof,
they labor The devil can find no easier way to deceive me^ with, then by
pretense of the word of God.
to buyld up their errors, it is not to be doubted, but they follow the
subtle devises of their auctor the devil, which doubtless he would never have
inuentyd, had he not found that same of all other, to be the easyest way to
deceive. That where he would induce covertly a wicked and pernicious error,
there to hold forth the authority of Gods word.

But some man perchance will ask me, how prove you that the devil uses to
vouche the scriptures. Let him (I say) read the Gospel wherein it is
written. [Then Matthew. 4.
the devil took him vp] (that is to say our lord and Savior) [and set him
upon apynnacle of the temple, and said unto him. If thou be the son of God,
Throw thy self down. For it is written, he has given his aungells charge of
thee, that they keep thee in all thy ways. They shall take thee in their
hands, lest thou happ to dashe thy foot against some stone.] What will this
fellow do to us wretchyd men, who did with testimonies of scriptures, give the
onsett even to the very lord of Majesty him self? [If thou be (says he) the
son of God, Throw thy self down:] why? [For it is written] says he.

The doctrine of this place, is especially to Note.
be marked and remembered, that when we see any man with such an example of
evangelical auctorite, bring forth the words of the Apostles, and
Prophettes, against the Catholyke faith, we need not to doubt, but it is the
devil that speakyth by him. For eue^ as then the head spoke unto the head,
even so do now the lymmes, speak unto the lymmes, that is to say, the lymmes
of the devil, to the lymmes, and me^bres of Christ, the Traytorous to the
faithful, Church robbers, to the Religious, and finally heretics to
Catholics.

But what says he? [If thou be the son of God, throw thy self down.] That
is: will thou be the son of God and receive the inheritance of the heavenly
kingdom? then throw thy self down: that is from this high church, which is
reputed the church of God and from the doctrine and tradition thereof, throw
thy self down. And if you ask one of these heretics that persuades such
things to himself, how prove you, or how will you teach us, that we ought to
forsake and let go the universal and au^cie^t faith of the Catholic
Church? By and by [for it is written] says he. And therewith all he presently
gets him a Thowza^d witnesses, examples, and auctorities, out of the law,
the Psalms, the Apostles, and Prophettes, wherewith being expounded after a
new and lewd sort, the unhappy soul is thrown down headlong from the high
Tower of the catholic Church, into the bottomless pit of heresies. Then, with
syche promises as follow, do heretics use wonderfully to abuse, such as be
not heedfull, and ware. For they will not stick to promise, and teach, that
in their church, that is in the conuenticles of Co^gregations of heretics.
their communion, the great and especial grace of God is, personally present,
yea so as without any labor, study, or industry, although they never ask,
seek, or knock, if they be of their number and sect, it is so from God him
self dispe^sed unto them, that they being holden up with the hands of
Aungells, that is, kept with angelical protection, can never hurt their foot
against any stone, can never offend or fall into any error. Thus far
Vincentius.

And could he possibly with more notable marks have painted forth the
heretics of our age, the^ in this place we see he has done? For what does
Satan more earnestly attempt by the^, then to persuade me^ to throw
themselves down? to let themselves fawll, from the doctrine and tradition of
this high Church, (which Christ callyth the City Matthew. 5.
builded on a hill)? Which thing so soon as he has once persuaded, the^ has
he atteynid, the undoubted victory. For until a The first and principal
attempt of Satan to bring a man to heresy.
man throw him selffrom that high Cite, in vayn are all the attemptes of
Satan. But so soon as he lets him self fawll down from thence, so soon
as he is departed from the fowld, and seuerith him self from the rest of the
flock, then is he immediately becoome a pray to the wolf. To this one end
therefore does the devil bend all his force, that he may lead men, to throw
them selves down, from the high and infallible doctrine of the church. To set
nowght by the traditions thereof, to follow and esteem rather the priuatt
spirit of them selves, or of any one man, then the interpretation and consent
of the Catholic and universal Church, where unto is promised the spirit of
truth.

Neither is he without scripture, whereby he indeuoureth to persuade the same.
For it is written (says he) [walke not in the Ezech. 20 Math. 16.
precepts of your fathers. In vain do they worship me teaching the doctrines
and commandments Ezech. 20* Marth. 15.
of men.] That if in any one thing he may persuade a man to throw him self
down, to depart, from the precepts, and ordonau^ces of his forefathers, and
from the doctrine and traditions of the Church, then has he won him within
his reach, then does he easily find the means, that he shall daily throw him
self down deeper. Neither is there any doctrine the^ so far wide from all
pietye, or godlynes, wherein he does not easily stayne and infect his mind. In
this one thing therefore does he spend his whole study and trauaill, to
accustom men to throw them selves down, and not to make any account of the
sense and general consent of the whole church, but especyally to resist and
withstand the ordonaunces thereof.

Which thing, as of all other heretics, Martine Luther The ensign bearar of
Satan.
so Martiu Luther their captain and standard bearer in this our age, we see
dillige^tly and very handsomely practysed. For what other thing sounds he in
all his wrytings, but that men should throw them selves down? That they
should cut them selves from the church, resist the decrees thereof, and what
so ever she commands, in despite Precepts of the Church.
to do the contrary.

As for example. The Church commands thee to fast in the lent, and toward
the feast of Easter, to confess thy sins, and to come to the receiving of
the sacrament: But Prece ptes of Luther
what says Luther to this? Thus he says.

Because it is so appointed by the church, Vide Roffens. in^^ theru^. A^t 28.
ad Leo nem.
for the self same cause will I not do it, and if it had not commanded me, I
would have done it, but I will now do it at some other time, which the Church
has not appointed: at what time, and in what sort so ever mine own free will
shall move me.

Likewise, The elevation of the Saerame^t he thinks a thing indifferent: But
because the Church has thowght good it should be lift up, therefore in despite
of the Church he teaches it must be forborne. Ageyn to receive the sacrament
in one, or both kinds, in many places he writes to be indifferent, for that
nothing is commanded thereof by any precept of God, as of necessitee: yet in
his book which he entitled of the foorme of the mass, he says.

If by chawnce the council should so Lutherus
decree, then would we not receive yt in i^ libro de formula Missae.
both kinds, but in despite of the counsel, use only the one kind, or
neither of both, and not both, and hold them for accursed that by the
auctoritee of the council should use both.

But what does a Council represent, but the Church? Satan therefore by this
his not obscure member, commands to do all things contrary to the decrees
thereof, yea and that in despite of the same, and by that his worthy lymme yet
cries. [Throwe thy self down.] And does not he throw him self down who
follows not that, which is universal, catholyke, received, and allowed, by
general consent of the whole world, which professes the name of Christ, but
more willingly reposeth him self in that which some one fantastycall man has
better leekyd? Who albeit he be perhapps reputed circumspect and discrete,
yett when he speakyth of hi^ self, utters nowght else (as John 8.
the Truth it self bearyth witness) but a very lie. For may a man more throw
him self down, then to slip from that sense and vndersta^nding, which is
universal, and common to all, unto that which is but priuatt? that is, from
trowth to fashed, which man vtterith when so ever he speaks of himself?

The very same song therefore which the devil himself song unto Christ in the
desert, the same does he even now sing by his members to Christians. Neither
does he urge any thing more, then that they should throw themselves down, and
let go the What Satan promesyth and persuadeth to heretics.
universal and ancient faith of the catholyke Church. He promyseth by his
members and yet still teaches, that in the congregations of his communion,
there is a certain great, peculiar, and personal grace of God.

He persuadeth the unlearned if a man So did Eunomius the Archeheretike persuade
his scolers also August. ad Quodnu^tdeum haeres. 54
embrace the priuatt and especyall faith, of his members, that he (though he be
not only utterly void of good works, but also drowned in all kind of
wickedness) must yett be well assured, he is in state of grace, and that the
Aungells shall one day take him up in their hands, and lead him straight to
heaven: That being preserved by their protection, he shall not once hurt his
foot against any stone, but stands highly in Gods favor, if he continewe to
the end. This he will have his members, to make so full and assured account of,
that they must think there can be no greater sin or wickedness committed,
then once to doubt never so little thereof. which persuasion is common to all
heretics. For the Lutherans do no less What the Luthera^s, Svvi^ghans, A
nabaptists and al other sects, of heretics do all a leeke promise to their
followers.
carnestly exact this of their followers, then do the Zwinglians and
Anabaptists of theirs: when in the mean time fire and water do not more
disagree, then the doctrines of these men do one from an other: so as it cannot
be, by any reason, but some of them are leekly, rather by the hands of devils
to be thrown into the bottomless pyt of hell* then that the aungells of heaven
will vouchfafe, to help them up to heaven. Who when they have all a leeke, cut
them selves of voluntarely from the body of Christ, that the heavenly Aungells
have then nothing to do with them, it is more certain, then that it may be
doubted of. Now therefore have we seen how Satan assaulted Christ with the
express word of God.

And has he not done the same also by his lymmes and members against the same
Christ the son of God? Did he not labor by the express word of God, to show
that Christ was not only no prophett, but also worthy to dye? we read in the
Gospel, that when the Jews heard the word of Christ, some said, Joan* 7. An
other testimony vouched by the devil out of holy scripture.
[this is a prophet] some others [this is Christ] yett were there not some
among them that said? [What? Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Does not the
scripture say, Christ comes of the seed of David, and forth of the Castle of
Bethleem, where David was?

The Phariseys also said to Nicodemus: [Searche the scriptures, and see, that
out of Galilee shall arise no prophette.] Yett not Joan. 7.
content therewith, by the scriptures, which they browght forth to deny him to
be a prophett, they cried out farther saying: [VVe Joan. 19.
have a law, and by that law he owght to dye, because he has made himself
the son of God.]

Who will not be astonyed when he reads these things? The members of the
devil browght forth the law, and the prophetts against the very auctor and
lord of the law and the prophetts. And (as to them it seemed) proved by the
express word of God, he was not only not a prophett, but one worthy of death
as a wicked transgressor of the law. So that if against Christ him self, when
he yett walked among men, there was so earnest fyghting not only by the devil
him self, but by his members also, and that with the very sword of the
scriptures, what shall we think may not be done against us selly men? Or what
will not Satan presume, and not hope to compass, which thought assuredly he
could even by the very scriptures teach that Christ not only was no prophett,
but also worthy of death?

Now therefore is this made plain, that the devil feared not even with the
weapons of scripture to assault Christ the son of God living here on earth:
and look what sense he drew forth thereof, that would he have to be taken for
the express word of God.

But what? did he not even with the same tools set on the Apostles? yes* and
that very sore. For what else show these words of Satan assalted the
Apostles even as he had before assailed Christ him self
of S. Pawll? [Suche fauls Apostles, are subtle workmen, tra^sfiguring
themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marueill. For even Satan
transfigurith him self in to an angel of light. It is not myche therefore if
his ministers transform them selves, in to the leeknes of the ministers of
Justice.] How properly S. Pawll here paynteth out the fauls Apostles of his
time? They woldyn no wise seem to preach, ay other thing, then Christ and the
Gospel. But as the heretics of our age woold pull from the Church, The
Crafty practis of the fauls Apostles in the primative Church, renewed at this
day by the heretics of our age* Galath 1.
the Catholic doctryn, so woold they have done the name of the Gospel from
Pawlls preaching, and woold seem to arrogat the same unto them selves.

Does not S. Pawll openly signify this, when he thus writes unto the
Galathians? [I marueyll you are so sone carried away from him which caullyd you
unto the grace of Christ, in to an other Gospel, which is but one, not diverse.
Only some there be which trooble you, and woold turn the Gospel of Christ.]
Which place John Chrisostom (the true and faithful Interpreter of S. Pawll)
Chrysostom in co^me^ tar. ibide^
expownding says. Such is the slaight of the devil, not to lay open the
snares wherein he seekyth to cache and entangle men. For if they had said,
depart from Christ ye Galathians, they would have avoided the^ as wicked and
corrupt deceauers: But now suffering them as it were to remain in their faith,
and in the mean time covering their frawd with the name of the Gospel, the
underminers without any danger with great bouldnes undermined the house, whil
by the spreding of these veyls, their right names were covered. Sins therefore
they termyd their fraud, the Gospel, S. Pawl also strives against the name,
etc. You see now how eue^ at that The deceitful pretense of heretics in all
ages.
time, as in this our age, some cloked their deceyt with the name of the
Gospel, and called their frawde, the Gospel. That which they taught, and not
which Pawll preached, they would have to seem the Gospel, and with this
honest pretense, casting a color before men, they labored to crepe into their
minds: So does Satan to snare me^, always use some shroud, and does not
straight way (to use the: phrase of the common people) show Satan uses to
shrovvd him self under the name of the Gospel,
his horns, but lays the forth name of holly scripture, of the word of God,
of the Gospel, that he may the more easily draw men before they beware, in to
his nets. But it becomyth not faithful folcke by and by to be moved with
such, masked Sprittes, nor if a man call his own treachery the Gospel,
straight way for such to repute it. 2 Thessalonians. 2.


The same Pawll also remembryth writing unto the Thessalonia^s, that there
were some, which feared men by an Epistle sent as it were from him, as though
the day of the lord were eue^ then at hand, when yett by S. Pawll no such thing
had been written. But where as he, in his former epistle to the^ had thus
written, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
[VVe which live, which remain to the coming of our lord shall not come before
them which have slept,] to those his words they fastened that strange sense,
which he never me^t. So also eue^ while Pawll yet lived, some were not affrayd
to misconster his words. For thus S. Peter the Apostle writes of 2. Peter 3
Pawlls Epistles. [That some things therein be hard to be understood, which
vnlernyd Unlearned and lightheadde persons deprave the scriptures.
and wavering persons do deprave, as they do also some other scriptures to
their own damnation.] If then while Pawll yet lived on the earth, there were
some found which turned and misconstrued his words, what wonder is it if after
so many ages past sins his death, they have been, and yet be handled in like
sort?

But what that was, which vnlernyd and wavering persons sowght in Pawlls
epistles August. de fide and operibus Cap. 14.
to pervert, S. Augustine teachith, in that his book, which he entitled of
faith and works. For where Pawll had written, we think Romans 3.
man to be justified by faith, without the works of the law, some lewd and
vnlernyd persons (says he) so took these words, that with a certain wicked
securitee, and carelesnes, they cast away both them selves and others, while
they gathered heerby, that The heresy of iustisicacio^ by faith only spra^g
eue^ vvhill the Apostels yet lived and was by them selves impugned.
to obteyn Salvation only faith suffised: which thing (he says) was the
cause, that the other Apostolical Epistles of Peter, John, James, and Judah,
are chieffly bent and directyd against that opinion, so, as they very strongly
buyld and mayntayn the contrary. Which is, that faith without works
proffitteth nothing.

As S. Pawll him self also teaches. Who defyneth not every faith whereby we
believe in God, but that only to be the helthsome, and true eua^gelical faith,
[which workyth Galat. 5
by love.] VVherby how little or nothing that faith avails which some think
sufficient to salvation, he so far forth shewyth, that he says: [If I have
never so 1. Cor. 13
myche faith, so as I be able to remove mountains out of their places, and yet
have not charitee, I am nothing.] But where this faith full charitee, works,
there no doubt is good life. For [the fulness of the law is Charitee.] Romans 13.
Thus far S. Augustyn.

Behold I pray you how owld this heresy is which says: Only faith is
sufficient to salvation. For it sprang even whill Pawll yet leeuyd, and was
sought to be prouyd and mayntened, eue^ by the express word of God, vtteryd by
that his elect vessel Pawll the Apostle, when yett this was never the mind of
S. Pawll, but as Saint Peter 1. Pet. 3.
writes, [some vnlernyd and unconstant heads peruertyd the meaning of his
words.] And what (for Gods love) does Satan else now also more earnestly
seek by his members to beat into the ears and minds of men, but that they
should hold for suertye, that only faith suffiseth both to justification, and
to salvation?

If Peter then at that time complaynyd of the peruertyng of Pawl his words,
How myche more would he now complain, when this most pestilent doctrine, is
with syche vehemencye set forth, when it is obtruded to the ears and eyes of
men, with these most pernicious words?

That the Gospel may not suffer to hear Amost pestilent doctrine of
protestants.
any preaching of good works. That the sheep of Christ quakyth, when he
hearyth them named of the preacher. That faith may not abide any good works
to stand nere her: That they which are coueryd, as it were with good works,
can hardly enter into heaven, for that works following after justification are
unclean. Luther defends this proposition stoutely against Pope Leo Art 31.
and 32. Vide Roffen.
Yea and the best good work is very sin. That they are pestylent teachers,
and that it is a Root budding nowght but Gawll, out of the new Testament to
vex consciences with works, and that there can not be together in the
Church, a teacher of faith and of works?

This so vnpure and wicked doctrine, if Peter should hear cloked with the name
of the Gospel, if Pawl should hear these wicked men vawnt them selves that
they had drawn this doctrine out of his Epistles, wherein it appearyth he did
so carefully recommend unto us good works, and stir up all faithful me^, to
use and embrace them, what think we, would they both, say, and do thereunto?

But herofinowgh. For in this place we minded no more, but to show that even
in the Apostles time, also, there wanted not some, which shrouded their lewd
deceytes under the name of the Gospel, and which of the very words of S.
Pawll, by perverting the sense thereof fearyd not to profess, and set forward
a contrary doctrine. So that if first against Christ, the very auctor of the
scriptures, Satan feared not to bring the scriptures, and against Pawl him
self, to bring by his members, Pawll his own words wrestyd into a reprobat
sense, who can myche merueil if in thies latter days, he hathwith more
impudence, attemptyd the same?

Tertullian is a very owld writer not long Tertullia^. lived in the year of our
lord. 230.
after the Apostles time. He wrote a notable book, of prescriptions against
heretics, wherein he shewyth that this was a great word in their mouth. [Seeke
and ye shall find, Search the Scriptures.] And therein he exhorts the
faithful, that they would yet make some end of their seeking, and therewith all
preferryth faith, before trauail in the scriptures. In the end he uses these
words.

Of the scriptures do heretics taulk very Tertullia^. i prescrip. Cap. 15.
myche. To the scriptures they counsel us, as though they could not otherwise
give advise touching matters of faith, but out of the lettres and words of
faith. Now therefore come we to the purpose. For to this end, did we direct and
bend the entree of our taulke, that even here, we may Join upon that point,
where unto our adversaries so earnestly call us. Scripture they pretend, and
with this their bowld countenance, they move some, very much. But in the very
conflict they weary the strong, they take the weak, and the indifferent they
send away with scruple of mind.

Then by and by he adds, what is to be The end of disputi^g* with heretics.
done to them, when they shroud them selves under the scriptures. Thus (says
he) do we at the first encownter stop them, that in deed they are not to be
admitted, to any disputation at all of the scriptures. That if their force lie
in scripture, we must know how they come by it. Therefore must we see to
whom of right apperteyneth the possession of the scriptures, to the end, he be
not allowed thereunto to whom in no sort it belongs. And lest any should
think he wrote thus as having mistrust in his cause he forthwith goes
forward in this sort.

This would I not have browght forth, for giving suspicion of diffidence, or
of desire to have any other the state of the cause, if the case stood not so,
as heerin we owght obedience Tit. 3. Three causes why heretics ought not to
be disputed with by scriptures
to the Apostle* who forbids to enter into questions, or to lend our ears
to new and strange voices. For an heretic (says the Apostle) must be
taulked with after one Reprehension, not after disputation. For in this did the
Apostle forbid disputation, in that he appointed an heretic to be rebuked, and
in that respect only to be taulked with, and that but once because he is The. 1.
not to be esteemed as a Christian. Nor should be rebuked after the manner of a
Christian, 1. Tim* 6 Matthew. 18.
once or twyse, or by testimony of ij. or iij. witnesses, but is a man therefore
and in that respect to be rebuked, for that he is such a person, as owght not
to be disputed with. And The: 2.
because also conference of scriptures with such a one profitteth nothing,
but only stirs The. 3. So heretics reiecte now a days some the
Machabees, some S. James Epistle etc.
choler, and troubles the brain.

Again this heresy admits not some scriptures, and if it allow some, yet
does it pervert the same by some addition, or detraction, to the defending of
that it would prove, or if it receive some scriptures, yet will it not receive
them full, and whole. And if it do, yet will it turn them by inue^ting some
new and contrary exposition. No less ouerthwarteth the Truth a bastard
Gloss, then a corrupted text. Variable preiudices must needs refuse to
acknowledge those things whereby they are overthrown. To those things they
lean, which either faulsly they have patched together, or have been occasioned
of ambiguous words, and doubtful texts.

What shall thou profit, thowe that art best excersised in the scriptures,
when, what so ever thou defendyst he shall deny, and what so ever thou
denyest, he shall defend? Thou losest but thy voice in contending with him, and
gainest nowght but unquietness of mind, in hearing his blasphemies.

The party (if any such be) for whose sake thou entrest into disputation by
the scriptures, to the end thou may confirm him in the trowthe ha^ging yet
doubtful, is leeke inowgh to faull deeper in to heresies, when he shall see
thou have profitted nothing, the matter remaining in eue^ terms of defense,
and denial. Surely of this arguing to and fro, he shall depart more uncertain
then he was before, not knowing whether of the two is the heresy. But this
argument may they also again return unto us. For it is necessary for them
also to say, that by us the scripture is falsefyed, that we do wrongely
expound them, and they therefore will needs take upon them, to defend the
trowth.

We must not therefore appeal to the scriptures, wherein the victory is none at
all, or else uncertain, or not very manifest. For albeit we supposed the
conference of scriptures should not so faull out (between Catholics and
heretics) that it should set up both sides a leeke, yet the order of things
required, that this point, should first be propownded, which now lies only in
After this very sort discourses S. August. lib* de vtilit. cred cap. 14.
question. As, to whom the very faith belongs? whose be the scriptures? from
whom, by whom, when, and to what teachers that doctrine was delivered whereby
we are made Christians?

After the same sort writes Clemens Alexandrinus, one that lived about that
Clemens Alexa^drin' against heretics.
time also. If (says he) they which follow heresies dare at any time use the
scriptures, first they will never use them all, nor wholle, nor as the very
body and text of the scripture speaks, but choosing forth those things which
are ambiguous and doubtful, they turn them into their own private opinion
gathering here and there a few words as it were flowers, and not considering
what is signified by them, but only abusing the bare and naked terms. In every
word almost which they bring forth, you shall find them stickyng in the only
names and terms, and quyte swaruyng from the signification thereof.

What could be written better, or what more aptly to the matter now in hand,
then that which we find written by that most lernyd man Tertullia^? He shows
us that the usage of heretics was to talk much of the scripture, to persuade
by scripture, and to hold forth the scripture. But in the mean time, he
admonissheth us, to stop them at that step, and that they be not admitted to
any disputation of the scriptures, for that they have no interest, or
possession theryn, sins the Catholics do prescribe in the possession thereof.

He also brings for proof hereof, the testimony of S. Pawll who forbids
us to wast time in co^tending with heretics. For that, always debate
breedyth debate, and of argument grows argument: so as there is like to be no
end of brauling and co^te^tio^, where a man hops to overcome obstinat persons
by disputation. For neither want they words at any time, and their
frowardness gives the^ courage never to be tyered with contention. So as it
is far better to avoid all occasions of co^tending with them (which is the
thing they seek) and to refrain brawlyng with them by disputation, for so
myche as thereby is that owld proverb often verefyed: By to myche altercation
the trowth is lost.

But see whether those words written by Tertullian that this heresy admits
not some scriptures, and so forth as before, be not very truly spoken of the
heretics of our time? The first fownder where of did he The lewd practys of
the ovvld here^tike, Marcion renved in our days by Martin Luther In lib. de
Christ. libert. and in Art ad Leone^ 10 Vide Reg. Angl. de sacram co^-Lutheru^
not (I pray you) openly use the same hatchet to cut of the scriptures which
were contrary to his purpose, which Tertullian says, Marcio^ the heretic did
at that time use?

He taught only faith to suffice both to our salvation, and justification. And
seeing that this his doctrine could not stand, if the canonical Epistle of
Saint James remained in forse, straight way taking his hatchet in his hand, he
cut the same of from his book, saying: This shall have no place in my Bibles.
Lo the imperious auctoritee of the man. He caullyth them his Bibles, whereby he
shewyth they have no fellowship with the Bibles of the Catholyke Church.

He tawght also prayers and sacrifice for the dead to be superfluous, and
herunto seeing that part of the scriptures, to be directly contrary, which for
the more part all the owld catholyke writers bring forth of the Machabees, he
katcheth again his hatchet and cutetth of also that book.

He tawght farther that all things came to pass by a certain absolute
necessitee, and that we owght to be certain, and sure of grace, and salvation.
Against this his opinion makes that which is written in the book of wisdom,
and in Ecclesiasticus. He therefore with his hatchet cut of also these books.
So we see that those scriptures which served not his purpose, he received not,
but taking his hatchet in hand, cut them out of his Bibles.

Now those scriptures which he did receive and allow, did he not by his
additio^s, and detractions pervert them to his own private purposes, making of
good Latyne, lewd high Dutche? Which is laid to his charge not only by the
Catholics, but also by the By the Bre thern of Zurich
sectaryes them selves. And if he did receive any scriptures whole and sound,
did he not devise thereunto strange or rather mere contrary expositions? which
thing we also see done by the rest of the heretics, who be no less diverse
among them selves, then contrary to the catholics in expounding the
scriptures: which thing to have likewise been done by the heretics of his time
Tertullian remembers.

From their own rules (says he) them selves In praescript. haeret.
do varye: whilst every of them do pype after his own volu^tary, those things
which he has received: even as he that first delivered the^, framed the same
by his own fancye. With such therefore as receive no scriptures, but such as
they leeke, and those which they do receive, wreast, by addition and
detraction to their own purpose, or else deuyse thereunto new and strange
expositions, Tertullian wills us in no wise to enter into disputation of the
scriptures: but commands them to be set over to the Ecclesiastical
tradition.

Which his mind eue^ Luther him self seems to allow when he has to do with
sacrame^taries and Anabaptists. But you shall hear his own words. he says:

We have read what the holy fathers did Mar. Luther upon the. 28. psalm
in the council of Nice: so sone as they heard the heresy of Arius read, they
hissed it out with one voice, and would not vouchesase to hear them that
presented it, nor suffer them to defend it, but presently condemned them
withowt any disputation, as manifest blasphemers. Moses also in his law,
commanded Leuit. 24.
that such false teachers should be stoned to death. Even so in this case there
is no disputation to be used, but such manifest blasphemers are to be
condemned withowt pleading their cause.

As Pawle also commands, in the third Tit. 3.
chapter of his Epistle to Titus that an heretic should be avoided after one
or two warnings. He also forbids to Timothee all 2. Tim. 2.
contentions and disputations, as things which do nothing else but trouble the
hearers. For such common articles of all Christendom be now sufficiently
heard, declared, and concluded, by the writings and general confession of all
Christendom. They are confirmed by many miracles sealed up with myche blood of
many martyrs, defended by the books of al learned men, and not now needing any
man's conning or devise to enlarge them.

Yet is it not in all points true that this hyperbolicall doctor reports,
the holy fathers to have done in that Council of Nice, as though they had
condemned Arrius unheard, or his cause unexamined. For albeit there be extant
in Socrates and Nicephorus an epistle of the counsel of Nice to the church of
Alexandria, and to them which were in Egypt, Libia, and Pe^tapolis, in which
they write: that they would not endure so much li. 1. ca. 9. li. 8. cap. 14.
as to hear the wicked opinion of Arrius, the madness of his mind, or his
blasphemous words: yet is it manifest enough by the epistle of Consta^tyne the
Emperor, which even there follows fast after, that his doctrine was
dilligently viewed and considered. For The wor des of Co^stantin the Empour
tooching the conde^nacio^ of the Arrian heresy.
the Emperor uses these words: All his sayings and writings were diligently
examined which by their dowbtfulnes or disagreement seemed to bread any
pretense or color.

If all things were so diligently examined, how was it then, that Arrius was
not heard? Wherefore that the fathers write, they would not vouchesafe so myche
as to hear his blasphemous words, may be more rightly wnderstanded in this
sense, that after his doctrine was once thoroughly examined, and yet he
proceeded in redoubling his blasphemous talk, the fathers would not then
vouchesafe to hear him any more, but struck him with the sentence of curse and
condemnation.

For, that he was heard, Socrates plainly shewyth when in the same place he
writes that the Emperor signified to the people of Socrates lib. 1. aap.
Alexandria, the determination of the faith not to have been simply or rashly
made, but with great examination and deliberation to have been set forth. Not
that some things only were spoken, and some things past in silence, but that
what so ever was needful to be set forth for the confirmation of the
doctrine, were laid open: and that it was not barely determined, but first
exactly enquired of, and what so ever might give occasion of dissencio^ or
debate were so rejected, that nothing cowld be said against them. Therefore
(says he) the Emperor calls The agrei^g sentence of Bisshops in general
covvncel is the sentence of Godd.
this concord and agreing sentence of the Bisshopps in that Synod, the
sentence of God: and yeldeth thanks to the holy Ghost for so great concord and
unite of mind among so many fathers.

Sozomenus also, when he tells us that the Bisshops there dillige^tly
assembling themselves called forth Arrius, and advisedly li. 2. ca. 19.
searched his propositions: (For they were very ware not to geeue an headlo^g
or rash sentence on either part) does sufficiently declare unto us, that
Arrius was heard: but in deed after his cause was thorowghly examined, it is
leekly he was not the^ suffered to prate or talk any more.

But this in the mean time is very true, that as heretics always provoked
to disputacion The duty of Catholics when herely springs up.
and browght in new faythes, so the Catholykes lightly, avoided arguments,
and gladly reposed them selves in the faith of their fathers, as among the
writers of the Ecclesiastical story, lib. 5. cap. 10.
Socrates, lib. 5. cap. 12.
Sozomenus, lib. 2. de perse.
Victor, and lib. 12. cap. 15.
Nicephorus, we may plainly see. Look in what matter so ever the decree of a
council had once taken order, that would the catholics never permyt to be
browght again in question.

Athanasius writes that Germinius, Auxentius, Valens, Vrsacius, Demophilus and
Gaius, exhibited a certain paper of their confession which they would have had
to be preferred before all the ancient counsels. But what answer theru^to
made the Catholic fathers assembled at Arimino? We In epist: de synodis
Arimini and Seleuciae congregatis.
(said they) assembled our selves hither not because we lacked a faith (for
that we have both pure and sownde) but to confound the^ which gaynesaye the
troth, and attempt new things. If therefore you now beginning as it were to
believe, have thus written, you are not to be accounted as any of the clergy,
but such as now begin to learn the first principles of the faith. And if
you came hither, with that mind, as we did, then let us all agree, let us with
curse condemn these heresies, and hold fast that we have received of our
fathers, to the end we may cut of Understand of this Arria^ heresy.
all occasions hereafter of keeping councels, since the fathers once already
assembled in the counsel of Nice have by sure establisheme^t and sound
determination preuentyd all farther questions,

It seemed an absurd thing to those fathers that any new faith, or confession
of faith should then be brought forth, and that called back into question,
which they had received of their fathers: for which cause also in the Epistle
which they wrote to Constantius the Emperor he reports them to have used
these words.

We humbly beseech your clemency with Nieephorus lib. 9. cap. 14.
benign ears and favorable countenance, to behold our imbassadors: and that
you admit not to the reproach of the dead, any nouelty, but suffer us to
remain in the rules and decrees of our forefathers, who^ we affirm to have
doo^ althinges, with great wisedo^, foresight and direction of the holy Ghost.
Soothely these new things which these men, attempt, do make the believers to
faynte in belefe, and do stir unbelievers to contempt of belefe. What would
these fathers do if they saw now almost every City of Germany bring forth
their several faith or confession thereof: and co^te^d to have them allowed,
rejecting the faith of the fathers, as though they were no Christians? Can any
thing be imagined more absurd or more wicked? As though forsooth our fathers
were ignorant of the Christian faith, and now at the last Christ were to be
known unto us by the means of some few such as be in deed traitors unto
Christ? Wherefore the opinion of Luther in this point is to be commended, to
wit, that such men are not to be heard, but meet to be condemned without
pleading their cause.

Yet look what law he gave to the Sacramentaries and Anabaptists, the same
must him self stand unto: Namely since him self is he, whom those men profess
them selves to follow as their guide and captain, as the first auctor of
this their departure from the Church, and father of so many sects as are now
hard to be nombred: for look Augustinus de Agone christiano. cap 29.
what S. Augustine writes to have happened unto Donatus, that as he sought to
deuyde Christ, so was him self daily divided in peecemeles, by his disciples,
the very same do we now also see happened unto Luther.

He labored to deuyde the Church being Christ's mystical body. And is not
he him self leek wise divided os his followers by daily hacking and mangling?
But to say nothing of the sacramentaryes, Anabaptists and Campanes (whom
perhapps Luther will deny to apperteyne to him,) are not Melancthon, Brentius,
Osiander and Illyricus professed Lutherans? But what spiteful enmitye is there
among them? what bitter dissensions in matters of weight?

Do we not hear Melanctho^ complain The enmity and dissension which is
bevveen the heretics the^ selves.
that where he wrote the confession of Augspurg, they now goo about to take
from him the name and honor thereof? For the Illyricans do gredely challenge
that to them selves, and labor to exclude from the same the Mela^cthonists
with their master: whom as in diverse other things they show to have gone from
the mind of his master Luther, so do they lowdly charge him in the doctryn of
the sacrament to have joined him self to Calvin his lore. Of which thing Calvin
him self also does not a little glory.

Now in that matter which they will have to be the sum of the Gospel, which
is os Justification, Lord, how sore Melancthon See the Apology of Frid.
Staphylus. par. 3.
and Bre^tius dissent the one from the other, while Brentius defends
Osianders opinion, which the Melancthonistes think most execrable? So among
the disciples of Luther there is little agreement of the principal doctrines of
our religion, whereof very contenciously they quarrel among them selves, and be
as it were heretics one to an other: so as they need not to be better
blasoned then them selves blasone one an other. By Luther his own sentence
there must no disputacions be heclde with heretics.


Wherefore of right Luther must suffer by the law which him self gave to
others, that there be no disputation allowed to the followers of his doctrine,
but that so sone as it apperith they be of that sort, they be presently
condemned unheard. For it is no more true of the Zuinglians, then of the
Lutherans, which is said by the disciples of Luther that they are to be
restrained not by writing, but by the Mace and power of the magistrate:
especially since neither these The heretics of this age bring almost nothing
but that which was a M* years past condemned for heresy.
bring almost any thing, that was not more then a thousand years past
condemned for heresy.

But we may seem to have wandered somewhat from our purpose. Wherefore let us
return to the matter from whence we have by occasion a little declyned. We
have showed you before, that eue^ at that time when that most ancient doctor
Tertullian floorisshed, heretics used to vau^t, to talk, and to hold forth
before them the scriptures, and that Tertullian does utterly forbid all
disputation with them, or trial of the controversies to be referred to the
scriptures, but would have the^ putt over to the tradition of the Church.

But does not S. Cyprian also complain of the deceyts of the devil, who
transfigureth De simplicitate prae latorum
him self as it were in to an angel of light, and suborneth his ministers
leeke unto the ministers of justice teaching night for day, damnation for
salvation, desperation under the veyll of hoape, infidellite under pretense of
faith, and finally Antechrist, under the name of Christ, that while they falsely
report things not all together vnleekly, they may by their subteltie chase and
drive away the very truth it self?

Nothing could be said more trewly then Cyrillus Epist 28. Note wherein heresy
consists.
that which we find to be written by Cyrill: All heretics gather the
occasions of their error out of the scripture inspired by God corrupting those
things by their own malice, which by the holy Ghost were well given, and
uttered, and so kendling upon their own heddes an unquenchable fire.

S. Augustine also says that heresies and Augustinus tract. 18. in 10.
peruers doctrine intangling and throwing down headlong the sowles of men in
to h^^^ comes of none other grownd, but when things well written in the
scriptures, are not well understood and when that which is not well
understood, is rashely and bouldly vtteryd for a truth.

And therefore S. Ambrose did think Ambrosi in cap. 3. ad Titum
good in this sort to describe heretics: Heretics (says he) are they which
by the very words of the law do impugn the law: for they add unto the
words of the law their own sense and understanding, that by the authorite of
the law they may set forth the shrowdnes and malice of their own mind. For
wickedness knowing authorite to weygh much, works her snares under the name
thereof, to the end that sythens an ill thing by it self can not be acceptable,
it may be commended to the world under the name of a good thing.

When they which in the Council of Carthage, were by Agrippinus assembled,
said, it was no true baptism which was Augustde baptis contra do natistas
lib. 5. ca. 2.
given by Schismatikes and heretics, did they not say, they so found it in
the holy scriptures, and seemed to confirm that their sentence by the express
word of God? This council yet afterward by the auctoritte of the Church was
disanulled.

But let us hear Vincentius Lirinensis Vince^tius Lyren. in lib. aduersus
hereses.
talk of that matter: So great excellency of wit (says he) was in those
fathers, such flowing veins of eloquence, such a number of them that
affirmed it, so great leeklyhood of truth in so many texts of the scripture,
(but after a new and ill sort understood) that me think all their great
agreement conspiring in one, could never have been overthrown, if only the
profession of nouelty, which was the only cause of all that great stir, so
much then mayntayned, defended and extolled, had not discredyted the whole
matter. They therefore were destitute not of textes, and authoritees of
scripture, but of the true understanding of them. Wherefore S. Hilary does
very well Hilariu^ in lib. ad Co^stantiquem ipse ei obtulit.
warn us.

Remember (says he) that there is no heretic, but faulsly affirms that all
the blasphemies he utters are warrantyd by the auctoritee of scripture. For
hereof Marcion, Marcion.
when he reads the word of God understands it not. Hereof Photinus could
Photinus
not find by his doctrine Jesus Christ to be a man: Hereof Sabellius when he
could not understand Sabellius.
this text: My father and I be all one: could not find God the father, nor God
the son: Hereof Montanus by his mad Mo^tanus.
weemen went about to maynteyn a new holy Ghost. Hereof Maniche and Marcion
hated Maniche
the law because they found it written: the letter kylleth, and the Prince of
the world is the devil. They utter all the scriptures without sense, and
pretend faith withowt faith. For the scriptures consist not in reading, but in
understanding, not in thwarting, but in charitable consent, and unity.

Whom S. Hierom following in his book Hieron. contra Luciferianos and in ep
is. ad Gal.
against the Luciferians, says: Let not heretics flatter them selves if they
seem to find somewhat in some chapiters of the scripture, which they think
confirms their heresies: since the devil him self has also alleged places
out of the scripture: and the scriptures consist not in reading, but in
understanding. In leeke sort writes also Athanasius In orat. contra Arrianos.
of the Arria^s. If (says he) me^ reading some goodwordes of the holy
scripture written in these fellows books, will therefore by and by take
blasphemies for blessings, it will also come to pass that when they see Iues
of this our time diligently to read the law, and the prophets, they will also
with the Iues deny Christ. Perhapps also hearing the Maniches vouche certain
places of the Gospells, they will with them deny the law and the prophets.
But if throwgh ignorance they do so boyll, and babble, let them learn out of
the scriptures how the devil him self the inuentour and deviser of heresies,
for fear of being bewrayed by his strong air, usurps also thies words of
the scripture, to the end that shrouded therein, he may deceive the simple, so
infectyd with his poison. For so deceived he Eve: so also lead he other
heretics into error, and even so does he now persuade Arrius, that, as it
were under color of talking leeke an adversary against heresies, he might the
better deceive him in foysting in his own.

Chrysostom also following Athanasius Chrysos. in sermo ne aduer sus
hereticos. To. 3.
Open o Arrius (says he) the sepulcher of thy throat filled with dead words
for thou have not yet that living and quickening word, which thou seek to
frame to the mayntenau^ce of thy reasons: but he so soon as he is called,
makes the entree of his talk with scriptures. But thou that art the
faithful, fear not when thou hear him bring in scripture, for even the
devil him self when he came to Christ and tempted him, bourded him with
scripture saying: If Math. 4. Psalm. 90
thou be the son of God throw thy self down, for it is written, he has
given commandment to his Aungells that they shall keep thee in all thy ways,
and shall hold thee up with their hands.

And it is well known that Arrius Arrius produced xl. texts of the scripture
to mayntein his heresye.
browght forth fowrty places of the scripture to prove that the son was not
of one substance with the father. And what did he and his followers crake ever
of, but of the scriptures, the Gospel, and the express word of God? To the
scriptures he appealed and would not otherwise be dealt with, but only with the
scriptures.

Maximinus when he should enter in August li. 1 contra Maximinum.
to disputation with S. Augustine prescribed this law unto him that he should
of necessite yield to what so ever he should bring out of the scriptures. For
thus he says.

Those words which are taken out of the scripture faull not to us by chance,
since the lord him self has thus warned us saying: in vain do they worship me
teaching the precepts Matthew. 18.
and commandments of men.

S. Augustine also writes even the leeke of the Donatistes: As the devil
(says he) against the very lawemaker, browght out the very words of the law,
so ye by the words of the law accuse the men ye know not, and withstand the
promises of God which are given by the very words of the law.

And a little after. You speak (says he) the words of the law, but against
whom you speak them you mark not: No more did the devil when he vtteryd the
words of the law, know him to who^ he spoke them. He would have thrown
down our head which was ascending upward, but ye would contract to one little
part, the body of that head, which is dispersed throwgh the whole earth.

In leeke sort also dealt Macedonius as Macedonius.
may be gathered by the sermon which Gregory Nazeanzen wrote of the holy
Ghost. And so played Nestorius: for he thowght he Nestorius
was able by the express word of God, to show that Mary the moother of Ihesu
was delivered but of a bare man, because in the Canonical scriptures she was
sometimes called the moother of Ihesu, but never the mother of God.

Leekwyse Eutiches, when he denied ij. natures Eutiches
to be in Christ, seemed therein to lean to the express word of God, and
asked of the Catholykes. In what scripture those ij. natures appeared: I have
not learnyd out of the Council. Chalde. Act 1. fol 776. In qua scriptura iacent
duae naturae?
holy scriptures any such ii. natures: And of such things must we make
search only in the holy scriptures, which are of more force then the doctrines
and expositions of the fathers.

But what needyth in a manifest thing to use more words? when nothing can be
August.
more truly said, then is written by S. Augustine. Error could not spring
cloked under the name of Christ, but of the scriptures not well understood:
Neither dare the devil attempt any other way, but by the divine scriptures as
we read in Orige^. Who when he had brought forth the devil alleging those
words of the Psalm: [They shall hold the up with their hands, etc. Psalm. 90


How comith it to pass Satan (says he) Origin. Hom. 31. in Luca.
that thou know thies things to be written? have thou read the prophets?
or know thou the scriptures? though thou hold thy peace I will answer for
the: thou have read them, not that, by the reading of holy things thy self
would become better, but that by the bare letter thou might kill the
fre^des thereof. Thou know that if thowe should speak out of any other
books, thou coul dest not deceive, neither could thy allegations have any
authoritee. So did Marcion read the scriptures, as did the devil, so Basilides,
so Valentinus, that with the devil they Math. 4.
might say unto our savior, it is written etc. If any time therefore thou
here testimonies browght out of the scripture, take heed thou do not by and by
repose thy self on the speaker, but consider him well what he is, of what mind
and disposition: lest happily he feign him self holy, and be not so in deed,
and lest the woulse infectyd with the poison of heresy, lie shrowdyd under a
ships skin, or lest the devil speak scripture out of him.

This admonition of Origin is so depely to be laid up in our mind that at no
time it go out thereof, that when we hear one bring forth the scriptures, or
glory of the express word of God, we do not by and by beleaue every such
kind of sprite. Be the Lutherans only they in this our age (trow ye?) which
so confidently beat our ears with their continual boasting of the word of
God? Do not the Sacramentaries with as great or greater assurednes arrogat the
same unto themselves? Whereunto does Calvin appeal but unto the scriptures,
when he has to do with the Lutherans? What can he bear more vnpacyently then
when both by the Christians and Lutherans he sees objected against him the
auctoritee of the fathers and Councels?

When the Magdeburgenses wrote, we are coo^mawnded from God to hear the
son of God, Calvin ansvereth them in this sort.

Maliciously, and wickedly do they object to us the auctoritee of Christ, as
though Calvin.
our mind were one jot to declyne from his pure and sincere doctrine, whoo
have always showed our selves in very deed with no less reverence to
receive, what so ever has issued out of the divine mowth of the lord, then
they in words do boast on their part. Let therefore the son of God be unto
us without all co^trouersy the chieff, most perfytt, and only master: in whose
doctrine it may not be laufull to alter one word or syllable. But the
obedience of the faith does not let but that we may be attentive to the
sownd understanding of his words.

Loo as wicked and blasphemous as Calvin is, yet may he endure nothing worse
then to be charged that he gives not ear to the son of God, or declyneth
any thing from his pure and sincere doctrine. But what? Do the Anabaptists
with any less courage stand also upon that point? No truly. For behold how
one of them (as we have read) talked unto the heavenly father in this sort? The
wor des of an Anabap. Lutheralso says. I am sure, my doctrine is from heaven
In principio lib co^ tra Reg. Henr.


Certainly I can not herin be deceived. Thy word o heavenly father have I
believed: that received I of the holy Ghost, as the sure word of truth: And a
little after: I know assuredly (said he) that this my doctrine which is the
word of God in the day of upright judgment shall not only judge lords,
kings, and the whole world, but also the Angels them selves.

Does not this honest man think him self as sure that his doctrine is the
express word of God as Luther or Calvin? and yett for all that, both his,
Luthers, and Caluines, are in deed the express word of the devil. But
whereto in the end comes this gear? Strawnge and wonderful it is. For lo:
while in this sort, every sect seeks to usurp unto it self alone the word of
God, and the true understanding thereof, there is sprung up a certain new kind
of prophets, which A nue kid of prophets, spro^g up, upon sight of the dissen
sio^ among the protestants
fear not eue^ by the auctoritee of the scriptures, to withdraw all auctoritee
from the scriptures. Lo where to at last Satan has brought this reckening.
Forsooth to this that he has drawn wretched men to that pass, that look
what doctrine every of the^ has by chance imbracyd, the same should he firmly
persuade him self to be the express word of God, and not suffer him self by
any reasons to be drawn from it. Now therefore this is apparent that never
almost was there any heretic, which did not confirm his error by the
scripture, and which affirmed not his opinion to be the very word of God. The
thing it self so she with this, that farther demonstration needith not: but yet
the chief of all heretics of this our age does also testify the same: who
writes: That the holy scripture has now at the last obteynid this name to be
caullyd the heretics book: because all heresies deryue their course and origi
nal spring from thence. But to what end is this will some man say? Do you go
about to extenuat the word of God, and to withdraw auctoritee from it? Have
you browght us forth so many things to the end to show that who so ever
uses the testimony of the scripture is an heretic? No: God forbid that we
should so myche as think a thing so strange and unsitting for any Christian
man: No we rather say as S. Hillary whilom Lib 2. de Trinitate. Note,
vvherihe resie consistcth
did: Heresye is in the understanding, not in the scripture. The sense not the
text is blamed.

Nothing is more holy then the scripture nothing of more auctorite, nothing
(next God) more worthy of all honor. But what thing ca^ be so holy, which the
enemy of man kind abuses not to the destruction of man? We must not think
that God always opens their mowthes who^ we hear talk of the word of God,
and allege the words of the scripture. The most learned Origin did well
Origin. hom 3. in Exodum.
note to us that not seldo^ the devil also opens the mowth of syche as utter
the word of god: [who speaks alye (says he) it is cer Ioh. 8.
tayne the devil opens his mowth to utter a lie:] But thou wilt say how may
he lie that brings forth the testimony of the scriptures, which no good man
doubts to have proceeded from the holy Ghost the spirit of truth, and from
whom flows all truth? Short and ready is the answer hereunto: In the
scriptures themselves which we know to have been inspired from God above, there
can in deed be no lie. But in the sense which man brings (of whom it is
written: [euery man is a lyar] he that will say there can Psalm. 115.
not be a lie, what does he else but deny the saying of God, and as it were
charge the holy Ghost of Untruth?

What then, will soome man say? if every man be a liar, does it therefore
follow that what so ever a man speaks, what so ever he brings out of the
holy scripture should therefore be a lie? God forbidd: I say not so.

How shall I then know when he vtteryth a lie? This will the very Truth
teach us, which can not lie. For that says, [whoo Joan. 8.
so ever vtteryth a lie, vtteryth of his own.] No man has of his own but
sin and untruth: But if a man have any point of troth or righteousness, that
has he of God. He therefore speakyth the truth, which vtteryth not that is of
him self, but of God.

But thou wilt say again: Speakyth he not from God which recyteth the very
words of God? and the testimonies of the scriptures? You have heard now not
only once, but often opened unto you by me, that the devil also alleges
testimonies of the scriptures, and yet does he not therefore speak the truth,
because he speaks of his own. What is this speaking of his own? It is when
he brings his own sense of the scripture, and not the sense and meaning of
God. For this is, to bean heretic (as before we taught out of S. Ambrose) to
buyld his own sense upon the words of the law: and so by the words of the
law to impugn the law.

But how shall I discern when a man brings his own sense, and when the true
sense and meaning of God? This will that notable August. li. 12. Confess. ca. 25.
doctor of the Church, S. Augustine teach us: who in this sort speaks unto
God: Thy truth (lord) is neither mine, nor Truth is not ptiuat ot psonal but
common to al.
his, or his, but common to us all, whom thou do openly call to the
communion thereof, terribly warning us that we presume not to make the same
private, lest we be deprived thereof. For who so ever does challenge as proper
to him self that, which thou have geeuen forth to be enjoyed of all, and will
make that his own peculiar which is common to all, he is thrown down from
that which is common, to his own: that is to say from truth to untruth, for
he that makes a lie speaks of his own.

Do thou now understand whoo speaks Joan. 8.
of his own? that is to say whoo speaks vntrought? Truth (thou see) is
not his or his, but is common to all. All has God caullyd publicly to the
communion thereof. Who so ever therefore makes priuatt, that is publyke, whoo
so ever challengith to him self, and co^tenciously will make his own proper,
that which by charitee is common to all, he speakith of him self, he speakith
an untruth. For truth is not any where else but among Throuth is only in the
Catho like Chur che.
all: that is to say in the Catholic or universal Church.

Therefore whoo so ever seekith out any singular understanding or inuenteth any
strange and unknown expositions, or brings to the world any new and
singular opinions, though he show six hundredth testimonies of the scriptures,
because he understands them not with that sense which is received of the
Catholic Church, but joins thereunto his own proper and private exposition,
he speaks of him self, and therefore speaks an untruth, for the truth is
not with any one, but with all, that is to say in the Catholic Church,
whereunto the light of sownd and true understanding of the scriptures is
promised of almighty God.

So as there can be no surer argument, that a man speaks his own, that is, a
lie, then when he departs from the sense, exposition and consent, of the
Church: For the^ althowgh he bring never so many texts of the scripture, he
may utter in deed the express word of the devil: but never can he in that
sort bring forth the express and pure word of God. For it is as certain
that the devil opens the mowth of them, which teach Gods word, being out of
the Church, as that God him self opens the mowthes of them, which being of
and with in the church, do utter the same. And this is the cause that when so
ever there is in the Church memory made of an Evangelist, or any other notable
doctor, that both in the entry of the Mass, and in the Canonical hours,
this text of Ecclesiasticus is read: Eccles. 15.
[In the middle of the Church he opened his mowth:] VVherby is signified that
God opens the mowth to no man unless he be with in the Church. From the
true sense and understanding whereof who so ever differs, his mowth, not God,
but the devil does open.

How famous so ever any doctor of the Church be, yet if he be not with in
the Church, if he consent not with the sense of the Church, it is certain
that God opened not his mowth. But if any man speak contrary to the sense and
consent thereof, we need not doubt to say that the devil opened his mowth.
Who so ever therefore utters his own, utters a lie, and he that speaks
of God, speaks the truth: but he speaks of God which utters the
scriptures not at adventure, or by his own private sense, but with the sense
that is common to all, that is, with the sense of the catholyke Church.

And that is it which is truly and properly What is the true word of God.
caullyd the word of God, when to the words of the scripture, not our owr own
sense, but the common sense, that is, the sense of the Catholic Church is
applied: which to be the very true sense and meaning of God, is not to be
doubted.

For thus we read noted by Socrates that the Emperor Constantine calls the
sentence of all them which were assembled in li. r. hist. Eccl. ca. 9.
the council of Nice, the sentence of God. For the voice of the Church, is the
voice of God The voice of the church is the voy ce of God vtterid by her.
Ezech. 13.
speaking by her. He therefore is a Catholic, and a right beleuer, and syche as
can by no means utter untruth, which (being mindful of that is written, [woo
be unto foolish prophetts which follow their own spirit, and see nothing]
follows not his own, but the spirit of the Church, not his own imagination
or conceyte, but the sense and consent of the Church. Yea thowgh the words of
the scripture should seem not very open and plain, which syche a one brings
forth, yet because he produces them with the sentence of the Church, he
utters the very word of God.

But if a man will apply thereunto his What is the vvorof the devil.
own proper conceyte, if he will temper the scriptures with his own
imagination, (for he ioineth his own sense to the scriptures, which contendeth
so earnestly not for the true understanding of the divine scriptures, but for
his own) that he will have that to be the scriptures which is his, when he
owght rather to make that his, which is the scriptures, if I say he obstinatly
defend Who is an heretic.
syche his sentence against the common sense and consent of the whole Church,
he is an heretic and a schismatike: And bring he never so many testimonies of
the scriptures, yet he utters not the pure word of God, but the express
word of the devil. There is therefore no authoritee taken from the scriptures,
when it is said, that heresies spring not so myche of them, as of the lewd and
faulse understanding of them.

This is an owld complaynte made by S. Basilius in Hexamerum. hom. 2.
Basil that the deprauers of the truth do not apply their understanding to
the scripture, but violentlye draw the mind of the scriptures to their own
will. But notable is the counsel of S. Clement, that when the law of God is
read, it be not read or tawght Lib. 10. Recongnitionu^ and epi. 5*
according to the understanding of a man's own brain: for there are many
things in the divine scriptures, which may (with force) be drawn to syche
sense as each man shall fancye to him self. And therefore (says he) must we
learn the understanding of the scriptures, of him which keeps them being
orderly deliured unto him, by his forefathers according to the truth.

Which counsel Rufinus writes, those Li. 2. hist. Eccles. cap. 9. An example
most worthy to be noted and followed.
ij. lights of Greece, Basil the Great, and Gregory Nazia^zene, to have
followed. Who when they gave them selves to the only study of the scriptures,
removing from them al other secular books of Greek writers, they followed not
in seeking the true understanding thereof, their own fanceys, but the writings
and authoritee of the fathers, whom they also knew to have learnyd that rule
of true understanding, from the Apostolic succession.

But how far do they differ from the dealing of these fathers, who rashly
faull them selves to the wayghing of every scripture, and believe it according
to their own judgment, not passing at al upon the sense and exposition of the
fathers, to wbom they think it injurious to be put over? But what may be said
more rightly to these men by us, then that which we read to have been said
to the Manichees by S. Augustine? August li. 32. contra faustum cap. 19.


You see (says he) your dealing tendith to this end that all auctoritee be
taken from the scriptures, and that every man's private mind should tell him
what were in each scripture to be allowed, and what to be disallowed. That is
in effect: that the mind should not by faith, be subject to the auctoritee of
the scriptures, but should make the scriptures subject to the fancye of the
mind. So as nothing pleases him because it is found written and received with
high and great auctoritee, but therefore it seems well written, because in
some respect it pleases his fancye. Whereunto do thou commit thy self
thou wretched and frail soul, all wrapped in clouds of the flesh? Whereunto
do thou commit thy self?

May we not well say also to these men, where bestowest thou thy self thou
miserable and wretchyd sowlle, wrapped in clouds of flesh? Where bestowest
thou thy self? VVilt thou have, that what so ever pleases thee, we should
take for scripture and howld that for the pure and express word of God? And
why not that which has seemed good to al, that is, to the universal Church?

What an intolerable pride is this? What an arrogance and swelling of the
mind? The extreme arroga^ce of heretics.
VVilt thou so challenge to thy self alone, the spirit of God, and so pull it
from all others, that what so ever sense thou wilt bring out of the scriptures,
we showld be bound to believe that, neglecting the sense and understanding of
the whole church? can there be a greater arrogance, or a greater tyranny then
this?

It pleased friar Luther, it leekyd him, that Luther his decree
this or that scripture shoold have this or that sense: What so ever therefore
has been delivered from the fathers, what so ever has been establisshed by
aucthorite of counsels, what so ever has been received and allowed by the
continual practice of the whole Church, all that must we despise, reject,
and howld for vain. These be Luthers own words in his book. De seruo
Arbitrio.
Neither must such a multitude, greatness, depthe, largeness, miracles, or
hollinesse of so many Saints of the Church, move a man one jot: But that
sense which he interprets, we must not dowbt to have been the very sense
and meaning of the holly Ghost.

And that which the Catholics have tawght, which the auctoritee of the Church
has delivered, which all Christian people Luthers words, as before
have so many hundredth years imbracyd, which schools defend and mainteyne,
all that we must think to be the deadly poison of Satan.

How trewly is it said of S. Pawll, [Knowledge 1. Cor. 8.
puffith up and Charitee edifieth?] Thowgh in deed opinyo^ of knowledge rather
puffith up, then knowledge it self. For if these fellows had but one cromme of
charitee in them, could they so swell with pride to think all men in respect
of them selves to be blind, foolish, blockish, and ignorant?

But eue^ as wine if it be not delayed with water, does trouble the mind, eue^
so knowledge if it be not temperyd with charitee, does with a certain pride
and ouerturning make a man, as it were drunk, or rather stark madde-VVherfere
S. Pawll does very well add thus: [but if a man think him 1. Cor. 8.
self to know myche, he has not yett learned in what sort he should know.]
For if he had, he would never with the opinion of his own knowleage have
grown so insolent, to prefer him self before all others: and as it were from
an high to look down upon them. For, the beginning of true knowleage, is the
knowleage of God, which breeds in us humillitie and submission, and does
rather deiect, then by pride erect, the mind of man. And where so great pride
is, as we see is in these men, what can there be else in them, then in deed a
very ignorance, and not knowing of God?

But S. Pawll teaches us in an other 1. Cor. 3.
place by what mean we should learn rightly to know: [Lett no man (says
he) seduce you. if any man among you seem wise in this world, let him becoome
a fool, that he may be made wise.] So then by the judgment of Saint Pawll, a
man may become wise, if he lean not to his own fancye, if he condescend to
seem in his own sight a fool, if he examine him self. And if he seem to have
any wysedom, that he reduce and submitt the same to the service and obedience
of Christ, the Head, and his mystical body, to believe what he teaches and
rather with fear and reverence to embrace the same, then to follow that which
seems probable to himself. Which thing where it is not done what else
follows then that (as S. Augustine writes) all Augus. li. 32. cap. 19. co^tra
fau. stum. The race andissevv of heretics in our age.
auctoritee be taken from the scriptures?

And do we not see it even now thus come to pass? There is sproong up in
this our unhappy age Martin Luther, who has with violence broken into the
scriptures, and shouldering out all others co^tentiously bearyth me^ in hand,
that the sense of the scriptures is even such, as he will have it, and as may
best accord with his doctrine: In fine he so handles the matter, that he
sowght to be reputed not a dispensor, but a lord over the holy scripture. He
required obedience of Luth de Seruo Arbitrio. Non volo Iudicium: sed obsequium
requiro.
all in embracing that sense of the scripture, which he him self has browght
forth*

After that spra^ge Carolstadius, and after him Zwinglius, Oecolampadius and
Calvin, and as Luther had reiectyd all the catholykes, and right beleuers, so
did this man together with the rest, remove also Luther Carolstadius.
himself. And with great exclamations Zvvingli' Calvin.
contenciously affirms that the scriptures do not mean as Luther says, but
as he him self teaches.

Then brake out in an other corner not Pacimontanus.
long after one Balthazar Pacimontanus: He in interpreting certain places of
the scriptures dissenteth both from Luther and Zuinglius, and will needs have
the scriptures to mean as he does interpret the^, and not as they will have it.

The heavenly prophets, so called, (whereof Svve^cksel dius
Swenckfeldius is now the ryngeleader) espied this, that these fellows thus
tempered the scriptures to their own sense, and conte^ded so earnestly not for
the scriptures, but for the maintenance of their own priuatt and peruers
opinions and that (for ensample) they set forth to the people for the pure and
express word of God, not that which Mark or Matthew thought, but that which
them selves had imagined. So as while every ma^s mind was to him self an
author, and teacher what was in every scripture to be allowed, or disallowed,
they did not submit them selves to the authoritee of the scriptures, but
thrall the scriptures to them selves, and as it were usurp a rule and maistry
over them: then (I say) began these divine prophetts thus to think with
them selves.

How long in the end shall we endure the The Svve^cfel dia^s words
tyranny of these vnhooded and rennagat friars? How long shall we be driven
to adore as the express word of God; what so ever has lyked them to sprinckle
with a few words of the scripture? When yett in the mean time we see them
so fight and disagree among them selves, while every of them labors that his
followers should esteem and receive, not the mind of the Apostle, or the
Evangelist, but his own proper exposition, for the express word of God?
What? will these fellows now be worshipped as Gods? what remains the^, but
that we should kneel down to this, or that Archheretike? and presently
worship as the very voice of God, what so ever shall be spoken by any of them?

Nay: we will for our parts rather harken for the mind of God out of heaven
and These are the words with which the Apology of England i^ the first
editio^ ignorantly, in the later obstinatly and maliciously charge Hosius
vvithal as his own words, and as generally defended of al Catholics. Thou
see here (Good reader) they are the Svve^cfeldia^s words tomtrolled by
Hosius. Psalm. 93. Matt. 23. Jacob 3.
will bid away both with these fellows thus striving for the understanding
of the scriptures, yea and with the scriptures them selves, whereof we now see
so many not only diverse, but also mere contrary expositions daily browght
forth. And look what it shall please that heavenly teacher to reveal unto
us, that will we receive with due reverence as the very express word of God:
and will rather hear him self speak, (according to the saying of the
prophett: I will hear what the lord speaks with in me) then turn our selves
to those bare elements and naked letters, and in them, (which we see to be
turned this way and that way) to set our salvation.

It is not needful to be cunning in the law or the scripture, but to be
tawght of God. Vain is the labor which is bestowed on the study of the
scripture. For the scripture is but a creature, and a certain bare letter. It
is not meet for a Christian to be to much addicted to the creature. You must
hear God: his voice is to be expected from heaven to teach us: blessed is the
man (says David) whom thou teach. He does as well teach us now, as in the
owld time he did the Patriarchs and Prophettes. Christ forbadde that we should
have any more master, for that we have our only master in heaven.

Thou see heerby (most virtuous king) where unto at last the matter is come,
and how truly it was said by S. Augustine that all Augustine lib. 32 co^tra
faustu^ ca. 19.
auctoritee is taken from the scripture, when a man will not only not be
subject to the authoritee of the scriptures in matters of faith, but make them
thrall, and subject unto him, neither will contend for the mind of the
scriptures, but for his own. For what so ever him self thinks, that will he
have reputed for the true and express word of God, though all other men
think the contrary. By to much altercation (says one) the truth is lost. And
I pray you is not* the truth now in manner lost? Is not with some men the
authoritee of the scriptures taken away Mark here, you Authors of the
Apology, whether Hosius de rogateth from the Scriptures or you are found
manifest Slaunderers, Pride and selfeloue the cause of all this garboyle in
religion
in the which only, lies all undoubted truth? Namely since every man has
sowght to arrogat to him self the judgment of the scriptures, and removing the
sentence of all others, has sought to have his own being wide and straieng
from the Church, to be worshipped as the very express word of God?

But could this matter ever have come to this pass, if these fellows
remembering them selves to be men, would rather have chosen to follow the
judgment of the Church, and thereunto reverently have submitted themselves,
then thus insolently to command men to embrace the visions of their hearts,
for the word of God? When in deed no man living can be of so excellent
learning, or of so singular holiness of life, that it can be lawful for us to
receive his opinion, for the express word of God.

But on the other side where as is a consenting The voice of the Church.
voice of the whole Church, if a man dowbt that, to be the express word of
God, and a most certain truth, what does he else, but dowbt whether God be true
or no? VVho^ it is most certain and undoubted to speak by the mowth of his
Church?

Thou perceauest now (most fortunat king Sigismond) that it is not by and by
the express and pure word of God what so ever is browght out of the
scriptures: From the peruers understanding whereof, we see all heresies have
sproong. Namely that the devil him self did also say: [for it is written etc.]
Math. 4.
When yet the sense wherewith he browght those words, was the devils own,
and not the pure word of God.

Mark again ye Authors of the Apology. Heresy is in the understanding not
in the scripture. Hilarious lib. 2. de Trinitate.
The scriptures (no doubt) are sacred and holy: and in them is contained the
very word of God, if the sownd meaning and understanding thereof be applied
thereunto. But heresy is in the understanding, not in the scripture, the sense
not the text is in the fault. We contend not for the scripture with those
that have departed from us, which boasting them selves so myche of Gods word,
do usurp the same unto them selves alone. For they them selves confess, they
have received the scriptures from none other but from us, from whom they be
departed: who do also with reverence receive all the Canonical scriptures.
They on the other side, because they will not in matters of faith, be subject
to the aucthoritee of the scripture, do receive only that in the^, which by
wrestyng may be framyd to serve to their doctrine.

The controversy therefore between us is What is the co^trouersy between
Cathoikes and protestants
not of the scriptures, but of the sense and understanding of the scriptures.
Brefely the self same varyance we read to have been in all ages betwee^
Catholics and heretics. Arius brought forth this scripture: [my father is
greatter then I:] by which text as by the express word of God he sought to
persuade A manifest example of the present controversies.
to the ignorant people, that Christ the son of God was inferior to his
father, and was not of the same substance with him. And in deed if an unlearned
man come to the wayghing of those naked words, Arrius may seem to have said
somewhat unto him. But what did hereunto the Catholics and rightbeleuers? They
reverently acknowleged the text. But that which Arrius gathered thereof, they
constantly affirmed not to be the pure word of God, since Christ never spoke
them in that sense, as to teach him self not to be equally God, or in any
thing unequal to his father. For in that he was the son of God, he was of
the same substance with his father, but in that he was the son of man, he
was inferior unto him. And allthowgh the sectaryes and followers of Arrius,
took that for the express word of God, yet the Catholics* doubted not to
affirm it to be the express word of the devil.

Even like to this is the contention at this day of the contrary doctrines
between the Catholics and the heretics: For we strive not with them that have
departed from us, about the scripture, but about the understanding thereof. And
to make the matter the playner, let us consider but this one place of scripture
which is now a days commonly alleged: It is said to be the express word of
God: [Drinke you all of this.] And do we deny this to be the express Matthew.
26. What word of God protestants have for communion in both kinds.
word of God? No: but do willingly grawnt it: Yet that it is the express
word of God in that sense, which they that be departed from us do gather of
that text, that is it which we do utterly deny. For what do they (trow
you) gather of this place of scripture? forsooth that all which communicate, ye
eue^ the lay people should be bownd by the commandment of God to receive the
sacrament of the altar under both kinds. But that Christ spoke those words
in that sense, we grant not. But eue^ as Luther Against the Bohe^s in his
resolutions
him self once said, the same in this case say we also. That Christ
commanded nothing in this matter as necessary to the lay people: because
these words were spoken to none other, but to the Apostles.

You see that here we differ not about the text, but about the understanding
thereof. For with no less, yea and with more reverence, then they which have
divided them selves from us, do we Catholics receive this text, as the very
word of God.

But they would intrude their own new The difference between catholics and
protestants.
sense forged thereunto. And we seek to defend the sense received in the
Church. They love and leeke the sense which them selves bring, not becaase it
is true, but because it is their own, and will needs defend that with toothe
and nail: We love and leeke the sense browght by the Church, not because
it is our own, but for that we steadfastly believe it to be the very true
sense of the scripture: Which to be so, not one priuatt Note.
man, but the Church (being as S. Pawl. 1. Tim. 3. Joan. 14.
calls it, the pillar and sure grownd of truth, and whereunto the spirit of
truth was promised and sent) has tawght us.

But let us yet a little more diligently wayghe the very text it self. They
say the Matthew. 26.
express word of God is: [Drynke ye all of this.] Ergo it is necessary that
all persons The protestants argument
should drink of the cup: and if any do other wise they are giltye (say they)
of breaking the institution of Christ. We will here a little nerer join foot
to foot with them.

I pray thee, what caliest thou the word of God? The scripture. And what
meanest What the express word of God is.
thou by this word, lively and express? Clear, plain, and that which is so
laid open to all men's eyes, that no man is so dull of sight, which may not
plainly see it. But if it be so plain and clear, how comes it to pass that
there is now such a do about it? Of thin ges which are clear and manifest is
there any man that will move argument? As for example. Whether it be day or
no, when we see the son up and shinyng upon the earth? Of necessite therefore
it must needs follow that this is not so express and plain a word, as to
thee it seems, since there ryseth so much question upon it. And if it be so
plain and express, it is a great marueill that in all these 600. years, since
Polonia first received, and has imbracyd the Gospel of Christ, and these
words of Christ having ben commonly read and rehearsed in the Church, that no
man has been found not only in Polonia, but neither in the whole world beside,
wherein the name of Christ is professed, who could think it in that sense that
you now bring forth, to be the express word of God. That is to say, that
thereby the lay people should be bound as by the commandment of God of
necessite, to receive the sacrament of the altar in both kinds.

The Greeks themselves, albeit the lay The schismatic greeks better then
protestants.
people were with them admitted to the cup, did yet never so interprette these
words: Who when in the Council of Florence more then an hundredth years past
they assembled them selves with the Latynes, and contendyd with them about some
other matters, yet did they not bestow iij. words in altercation with them
about the use of the Challyce, because they knew there was no precept of
Christ whereby the laitye were of necessite bound so to receive the same. Do
you then think all men to have been blind, and such blockheades, and stocks
that in so many ages, yea eue^ since the time that the Gospel was written,
they could never see this so plain and express a word of God? But wayghe well
with thyself whether this be a point of Christian pietye and modesty so to
think of the fathers, whereof a See to what point the protestat is driven by
his private sense of holy scripture.
great number never being acquaynted with the use of the cup to other the^ to
the Priests themselves in the sacrifice of the Mass, did yet leave unto us
the Gospel of Christ sealed with their blood: VVilt thou so condemn them all
of blyndnes or impiete, that either they saw not this so plain a place of
Gods word, or else that seeing it (which were more intolerable) they would
wittingly have gone against it?

But thou say what so ever is become of Objection Matthew. 26.
the fathers, the words be clear: [Drinke ye all of this:] he that says
[all] excludes none.

With what impudency then do thou Answer.
make of [all] not all? But if he exclude none, whic says [All] wilt thou
then have infidels also to drink of the cup? God forbid thou say, for the
participatio^ of the sacraments pertayneth only to the faithful. Why? But a
little before, thou saydest, he that says [All] excludes no man. With what
face then do thou now exclude the infidels? and so of [All] make [not All?]
But in this point (since thou think rightly) we will gladly agree with thee,
and will not be unwilling to allow this thy restraynt.

But now tell me of good fellowshipp: whether think thou children that be
christened to be of the number of the faythfuii or All and not all, is as it
pleases protestants
no? Thou say, yea: How the^? VVilt thou command them also to drink of
the cupp? no: why? but a little before thou saydst that all the faithful must
of necessite drink of the cupp. Wherefore do thou now again of (al) make
(not all?) Why do thou allow to thy self that, which thou wilt not allow
laufull to the church of God? Thou think it laufull to keep children from
all sacramental participatio^ of the body and blood of Christ: and if to lay
persons being past their childhood, the one kind be not given (when yet in that
other which is given, all and whole Christ is received) then complaynest thou
that great sacrilege is committed.

But here thou wilt say. As touching infantes, that I think them well kept
from Reply.
the communion of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the auctorite
of S. Pawll moves me, whoo writes: [lett every man try himself and so eat
of that bread 1. Cor. 11.
and drink of the cupp.] But how shall an infant try him self? and how shall
he judge our lord his body which is not yett come to reason and understanding?

But what (I pray the) if it be superfluous Reyondre.
that they shoold try themselves, whom we know to be clean, being purified
by the holy sacrament of baptism, and newly entryd ynto the howsehold of
Christ? What if little ones can judge the body of our lord which they receive,
by their God fathers and God mothers, who before they be baptized, do in their
name profess to beleaue, yea and that the child him self beleaueth and
renounceth Satan? If the faith of the suertyes, and of the church suffice the
infant to the receiui^g of baptism, why should not their trial and judgment
also suffice him to the receiving of the sacrament? Verily Ruardus Tapper a
learned man, brings none other cause, why children are kept from the
sacramental participation of the body and blood of Christ, but only that they
do not always swallowe that is put into their mowth, or if they do, yet do
they often putt it up again.

But God forbid, I should reprehend, that you do therein also, farther
restrain this word [All] and deny also the communion to infantes.

For this is in deed the mind of the church, althowgh we read it was
otherwise in the In the time of S. Cyprian and S. Augustine expressly. Cypr. in
ser. de lapsis. August. de peccat. mer* and re. li. 1. ca. 20.
primitive church. But if thou think it is with good reason done that the
church keeps infantes from all sacramental participation of the body and
blood of Christ, why do thou not also persuade thy self that in forbearing
to give the cupp to the lay people it was leekewyse led thereunto by just
reasons, and weighty considerations?

But let us yet wayghe and examine farther these words of Christ: which if we
will rightly understand, it behooves us to have regard to those which went
before, to the end we may thereby know to whom these Matthew. 26.
words were spoken. S. Matthew descrybing the supper of our lord, speaks
thus: [But when evening was come he sat down with his twelve disciples.] S.
Mark thus: [But Cap. 14.
when the evening was come he came with Cap. 22.
his twelve.] And S. Luke thus: [And when the hour was come, he sat down and
his twelve Apostles with him.] In the former place, the word [All] seemyd to
you very plain and clear: How comes it then to pass, that this word (
Twelve) should not seem unto you as plain and clear? Would there be any
matter of strife if you would as sharply behold this word, as you do that
which went before? Is not either of them the word of one and the same God? both
(All) and (twelve)?

This therefore is the true sense of Christ The true sense of Christ's words
his words: [Drinke ye of this all ye twelve which are set down with me] It
is well known there were diverse others in the house of Simon the Lepre, where
the supper was made, yet only the twelve Apostles sat down: 1. Cor. 11 Luke
22.
VVho^ after he had instituted new priests of the new sacrifice, saying:
[Make or do this thing for remembrance of me,] He commanded them only to
drink of the cup, which they did as S. Mark writes saying: [And they
dra^ke all thereof.] Might Mar. 14
you not as laufully gather herby, that albeit the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, pertayne unto al, yet these words [Drinke ye Matt. 26 Mar. 14.
all of this] pertayne only to the Apostles, and to syche as succeed them, to
wit, bisshopps and Priests? And so the express word of God in that point to be
this, that so often as Priests make that, which Christ then made and commanded
them to make, that is to say, when so ever they consecrate the body of Christ,
and offer the same in the remembrance of his passion, it is necessary for them
to use both kinds, both in conseerating, offering, and receiving: so as if
therein they leave out that one kind, they may justly seem to commit great
sacrilege?

But show us now one word, I will not The heretics ca^nnot shevve one word
to prove, that it was at any time commanded, that the laytee; should of
necessitee receive the Sacra me^t in both forms Manna and the paschall lab
were the figures of the Sacrament.
say clear and plain, but how dark so ever it be, whereof we may with any
reason conjecture, that ever Christ commanded the lay people to drink of the
cup, or at the lest where Christ gave them his blood to drink. And yet ye
object against us the express word of God, and with open mowth charge us
therewith, when ye can not find so myche as any shadow thereof in the
scriptures. But we, whether ye will regard the shadow and figure, or the
troth and thing it self, can out of the very scriptures, show you the
contrary of your doctrine.

Ye are not ignorant that Manna given to the jews from heaven, was the shadow
and figure of this sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: So was the
pascall la^be also: Of these all did eat, but lyquors never came to the use
of any others, then of the Priests, neither did the lay people usurp Note.
to themselves any porcyon thereof,

Let us now come to the truth and the thing it self. Christ drawing nere
unto Luke 24
those ij. which went to Emaus went with them, when they came to the Castle,
he tarried with the^, and sitting down with the^, took bread, blessed it,
brake it, and gave it unto them. And their eyes were opened and they knew him:
and then he vanysshed out of their sight. This bread the holly August. lib. 3
de co^ sen. Euangel. cap. 25 Beda lib. 6 in Lucam Chrysostom. hom. 17 in Matthew.
Theophilact. in Lucam 24.
fathers interprett to have been the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ:
Here is no me^cyon made of the Cupp. Do ye now see this express word of God
that Christ gave the Sacrament under form of bread alone to them, which were
no Apostles? But that he commanded to give, or that him self gave to the lay
people his blood to be drunk out of the challyce, that is so far from being
the express word of God, that ye can not so myche as find any shadow thereof in
the scriptures.

This did the Boemians well understand that of these places of the Gospel,
where the Supper of our Lord is described, they could not defend their error
whereby they had with private auctoritee usurped to them selves the Challyce:
Wherefore this text of S. John seemed to them a playner word of God, to buyld
their error upon: [Except ye eat the flesh of the son of John. 6.
man, and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you.] Which word they
which in this our age have divided themselves from the Church, deny to
appertain any thing to the supper of our lord, but will have them understood
not of the sacramental, but of the spiritual eating. So, that, which seemed
to the Boemians the plain and clear word of God, to the Luthera^s was not so
clear. Who when they had taken away out of the Church both priesthod and
sacrifice, which yet the Boemians did not: (for these will have all men
Priests) they will also have these words to be spoken unto all: [Drinke ye
all of this.] But to this which the Bohemians bring out of the sixth of John, a
good and learnyd man has very well answered more then an C: years past.

No faithful Catholic says, that the saying of S. John: [Except ye eat etc.]
or else that any other the commandments of Christ owght not to be kept: but
the Catholic says, that the universal Church of Christ, better
understands which be the commaundeme^ts of Christ, and how they owght to be
kept, then Husse or his followers: The Hussitani
varyance therefore is not of the words of Christ (which every good man does
receive with all reverence) but of the sense and understanding of his words.

But the heretics of our time (as we said The heretics of this age.
before) deny those words to be rightly taken of the sacramental eating of
the body and blood of Christ, for which cause also they forbear to use the
authoritee of this text to the affirming of the use of the challyce. Tho
Catholics
But we (who do willingly follow the mind of the fathers) do not deny, but
they may be well understood of both kinds, and yet do constantly affirm
that when the only form of bread is received, both the body of Christ is
eaten, and his blood is drunk. They did eat (says S. Cypriane) and dra^ke In
sermon de Coena domini.
of one self bread, according to the visible form. Here thou see it
reported, they did not only eat, but also drink of one bread: yea and in the
scriptures we read, that blood was also eaten. The body of Christ is Leu. ^.
17.
therefore eaten, and his blood is drunk, when the only form of bread is
received: yea thowgh nothing be powered out of the challyce into the mowthes of
the faithful. For allthowgh it be neither grinded with the teethe, nor
swallowyd, yet is it eaten and drunk by faith and charitee,

But it is a wonder to see that the Bohemians labored to prove their purpose
by The folly of the Bohemians. Joan. 6.
that place of the Gospel, where no mention is made either of the cup or of
the wine, but only of bread, which also alone to suffice unto salvation the
words of Christ do declare, saying: [If a man eat of this bread he shall live
for ever: and the bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the
world. He that eats this bread shall live for ever.] You see how the
promise of eternal life was made to the bread and not to the cup. And in
all that sixth chapter of S. John, is made no mention in any one word, either
of the cup, or of the wine.

Why do thou therefore complain O Satan, why do thou so often dull our
ears, with thy vain boasting of the express word of God? When, what so
ever is browght forth of the scriptures, if it be rightly understood,
seems much more to make to the allowing of the received order of the
Church, then to the maintenance of this. thine error?

But there is no cause why a Christian man should think that Satan passes so
much for the cup. For he knows well inowgh, it is no whyt material to
salvation, whether a man use the cup or no: since by his lymmes, Luther,
Bucer, and Philipp Melancthon he does manifestly confess, nothing touching the
use of the cup, to be commanded by Christ as necessary to salvation. Full
well (knows he) that it was very true which by the fathers in the Counsel
of Basil (which The decre of the council of Basil
council we know in this matter to be received, and allowed) was fully
decreed, that, whether a man communicate in one or both kinds, so it be done
by the ordinance and obseruaunce of the Church, it profits the worthy
receyuer to salvation. Therefore this offends him not, that a man should
communicate under one form, neither does he force to have him communicate
under both. But that it should be done according Why Satan requires so
earnestly the communion under both kinds.
to the ordinance and obseruaunce of the Church, because in that sort (and
none otherwise) it profitteth the receyuers to salvation, that is it Lo, that
chiefflly offends Satan. And that they should not co^municat in that sort,
that is to say, according to the ordinance and obseruaunce of the Church,
that, is it which he is so earnest about.

Well: Satan will be Satan: for in the Hebrew Satan is as myche to say as
an adversary. He therefore will still be an adversary both to Christ the head,
and to his body. It is an ordinance and obseruaunce of the Church, which is
the mystical body of Christ, that we should communicate under one form: he
will have it done under both.

But suppose the ordinance and obseruaunce of the Church (which is the
mystical body of Christ) were so, that we should communicatt under both
forms? Then will you have it done either under one alone, or under neither of
both. But will you hear the beast utter his own words? We recited them
before, but it shall not be a mysse to hear him again: Thus he speaks by
his chosen vessel Luther.

If perhapps the council should so decree, The words of Satan by the
movvthe of his chosen vessel Martyn Luther. in lib. de formul. missae
then would we not receive in both kinds, but then chieffly in despite of
the council, would we use either the one, or neither of both, and not both:
and playnlie hold the^ accursed which by auctoritee of syche council should
use both.

See you now, to what end Satan te^deth? He seeks not so myche to have the
use of the cup permitted to the layetie, but that all things in despite of
the Church should be done contrary to the decrees thereof. He is a right
Satan. He is the enemy of Christ Sathanas in the hebrew tou^g signifies an
adversary.
the head, and of his body. He is Antichrist. VVherfor what so ever it has
pleased Christ to decree by the mowth of his church, allbeit he knows the
same to be right and agreeable with the word of God, yet does he all ways
with toothe and nail earnestly withstand it. And look what song he being the
head of his body and lymmes, did once sing to our head and master Christ, the
same by his members, does he now record to us being the members of Christ:
[Throwe What is meant by thise words, Throvve thy self down
thy self down.] That is to say (as we have before heard Vincentius
Lirinensis interprett it,) Let thy selffawll down from the doctrine and
tradition of this high church, which is reputed the church of God. Follow not
that which seemed good to the church, but that which leeketh me: Embrace the
understanding of some priuatt man, who being inspired with my spirit shall not
doubt to arrogat any thing to him self, and to derogatt all things from
others, and follow not the sense and consent of the whole christian world,
whereunto it is certain the Spirit of Christ wants not.

Therefore so often as you shall hear Satan say out of the Gospel: [For it
is written, Drink ye all of this,] so often think you hear him say nothing
else, but that which he said to Christ. [Throwe thy self What Satan's intent is
by heretics his ministres.
down.] For this is it which he seeks to persuade wnto men that they should
despise the church which is the grownde and pillar of truth: that in the
interpreting of the scriptures they should give more auctoritee to their own
priuatt judgment, then to the decree of the church. That they should howld
for nawght her ordinances and cut them selves of from the body of the
church. Wherefore as touching the use of the sacrament we may well say to
these men as S. Augustine sometime said to the Donatistes. Augustine
The fault is not in the sacraments, but in the separation. The fault is not
in communicating under one or both forms: but if thou communicate contrary to
the ordinance and obseruaunce of the church, in that only is the fault: And
doubtless so great a fault, as that all wickedness compared with this, is as a
straw in respect of a beam.

Then what a kind of religion is this of some men, that say they are moved
with the fear of God and love of his lively word (for that is their manner of
speech) to think it necessary for them to receive the cup? As who should
say that in the space of this 600. years (wherein Polonia with the countries
adjoining has received and held the faith of Christ) there has been no man
that has feared God, no man that loved The odious arrogance of protestants.
his lively word, no nor is at this day in the whole Christian world, but
only syche as has been inspired with the spiryt of Luther.

What an arroga^cy? what a deuilif he and odious pride is this, so to arrogat
unto thy self alone the fear of God, and the love of his lively word, that
thou wilt utterly pull the same from all others, were they of never so singular
pietye and godly life? What be these men else then degenerated children and as
the prophett caullyth them: [the seed of Esai. 57.
the harlott and adulteress,] that dare thus charge their holy elders and
blessed forefathers, of so extreme impietye, as that none of them should fear
God or love his word, and that syche fathers, from whom they have received both
the rules of well living, and the doctrine of true belefe? Which many of them
also have left unto us sealed with their blood, by whose trauayll it came to
pass that we first heard the name of Christ, that being drawn out of most
thick clouds and darkness of idolatry, we are set in the bright and shinyng
light of the truth. These are they forsothe, which so religiously embrace the
express word of God, saying unto Exodus 20 Matthew. 15.
us [honour thy father and thy mother.]

But let us waygh a little what fear of God this is, wherewith they say they
are so stryke^ that they may not forbear the cup. Sure this is syche an
other fear as the Iues What kind of fear it is that protestants be streeke^
with. loan. 18
seemed to be in, when they doubted to enter into the place of judgment, lest
they should be defiled. They had a great conscience to enter into the place of
judgment, thinking that by entering therinto, they were grievously defiled: but
to deliver up Christ to the gentills to be scornyd, whipped, and crucified,
therein had they no religion or conscience at all: but rather thought it an
offense of conscience and religion to have done otherwise. For they persuaded
them selves that they fulfilled the commandment of God in delivering the
son of God to the Ge^tills to be done to death. [VVe have a law Joan. 19
(said they) and by that law he owght to dye, because he made him self the
son of God.] They seemyd to them selves, by the express word of God to show
that they rightfully delivered Christ to the Gentills to be put to death: and
theryn were so little troubled with any scruple of conscience, that they thowght
they should have committed a wicked act, if they had done otherwise. But what?
should they not with myche less fault for any cause have entered in to the
judgment place, then have crucified Christ the son of God?

But even syche is their religion, which say they are forbidden by their
conscience to content them selves with receiving the sacrament in one kind:
Very rightly are they touched with the place of the Psalm: [They Psalm. 13.
trembled for fear, where was no cause of fear,] and that which Christ him
self says in the Gospel [They strain a gnat, and swallowe Matthew. 23*
down a camel.] They will seem to fear God: They know the church by the
express word and precept of God, is to be Matthew. 18. 1. Cor. 11. 2. These. 2.
heard, and that the custom received and allowed by the same, is to be
received and kept: yet when the holly catholic Church the mystical body of
Christ, which he so loved that he gave his true and living body to death for
the same, when that (I say) is in danger to be divided in to many parts, and
to be no less cruelly torn and re^t, then the true and lively body of Christ
was of the Iues, there show they no fear or scruple of conscience at all.

But even as the Iues when they delivered the true body of Christ to be rent of
the tormentors, affirmed they did it according to the express word of God,
saying: [VVe Joan. 19.
have a law and by that law he owght to Note.
dye:] Even so these men when they are entered into the leeke council, against
the mystical body of Christ, when they seek all the ways and means they can
to divide, and cut the same into many parts, which their attemptes (great is
the pittye) have had to speedy success, taking their entry with the matter of
the cup, will needs seems to do it according to the express word of God,
still cryeng also. We have a law, drink ye all Note.
of this: and by this law the mystical body of Christ the Church must be
divided and cut in soonder. How wonderful are these VVo^derfull are the
sloughetes of Satha^n.
sleightes of Satan? How great is the subteltie of his crafty devises? Of that
very thing which Christ would have to be a sacrament of pietye, a toke^ of
unity, a bond of charity, he seeks to make a cause of dissencion, a matter
of deuisio^, and a fyrestone of hatred. For what else is there done in this
sacrament, 1. Cor. 11
but (as S. Pawll says) [the death of our lord is showed?] And for what cause
dyed he? Verily [to gather in to one (as s. John says) Joan. 11
the children of Israel which were dispersid.] Christ therefore dyed that he
might gather together unite, and make us one body, of which matter he also
would this sacrament to be a token. [For we which be many, be 1. Cot. 10
one bread and one body, in that we participate of one bread.] But here Satan
the true Antichrist not only in word, but in deed, the very enemy of Christ,
did therefore cast in this contention about the cup, to separat, deuyde,
disperse and cut in pieces the church, which Christ by the sheading of his
precious blood, has gathered together, so as thereby he might make void the
benefitt of the cross and death of Christ, to them that should follow this
wicked and sacrilegious counsel of separation.

Our lord (says S. Augustine) did in this Augustine
sacrament mark and seal us: by this he would us to appertain unto him: in
this table did he consecrate the mystery of peace and unity: he that receives
this mystery of unity, and howldeth not the bond of peace, he takes not a
mystery for him self, but a witness against him self.

But will you know how great a wickedness he commits? then harken to S.
Pawll, 1. Cor. 11
who tells the, [that he is giltye of the body and blood of our lord:] that
is to say he has committed no less wickedness, and shall be gilty of no less
crime, then even they who with their own hands, whipped Christ, shed his
blood, crucified his body, and put him to grievous death. And this is the thing
which Satan seeks, that division may be wrought in this sacrament of Unity,
so as thereby Christ may be crucified again, and as it were scornyd and mockyd
at. But shall it be thus even with him which calls it the saving word?
Deserves this to be called the saving word which co^de^neth to ever lasting
death? Verily, this is no saving word: Drink of the cup: for Judas drank of
the cup and was condemned: many heretics, many false brethren, many
confessing Christ, and yet denying his power have drunk of the cup. But how?
To death, and everlasting damnation: not to life and eternal salvation.

But wilt thou know what is this saving Nore. Charitee is the very lively, and
sawing wor de,
word? It is a short word and an easy: Love. Charity is this saving word,
which who so has not, let him drink of the cup so myche as he will, yett
shall he gain everlasting death: eternal salvation he shall never atteyn
thereby. For it is true that is written, [he that loves not, dwells in
death, but 1. Joan. 3.
he that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled Romans 13.
the law.]

And can he possibly seem to love his neighbor which does so judge of them
that have auctoritee over him, and whom he is commanded to obey, that they
neither have nor ever had, any fear of God, or love to his saving word? but
always endeavored them selves to oppugn and withstand the same? Surely these
are not signs of love, but Heretics void of charitee
of hatred. Seems he to love his neighbor which does not only separat him
self from one person, but from all which truly profess Christ, and from the
universal catholyke church, condemning his fathers and elders of impiety as
men that had resisted the holy Ghost, and would not embrace a known truth?

The property of charitee and (Love) is to unity and knytte together, and not
to separatt and deuyde. This word therefore, Drink ye of the cup, is not that
saving or lively word. But the saving word is Love: That is to say. Separatt
not thy self from the unity and knot of the body of Christ, from the agreement
of his church, but obediently and reverently hear the same: humble gladly thy
sense and conceyte, to the sense and consent thereof: and never arrogat so myche
to thy self, as to prefer thine own judgment before the judgment thereof.

It is very well written by S. Augustine. Aug. tractatu 7. in epistolam Job. 1.
Love and do what thou will. Whether thou drink, or drink not of the cup,
(so thy drinking or absteyning be in love and unity according to the
ordinance and obseruau^ce of the church) it proffiteth thee unto salvation:
And contrary wise whether thou drink, or drink not of the cup, standing in
division, thou shall be gilty of the body and blood of our lord: because there
thou seek discord where Christ chieffly commended unto us unity and concord.

Which things being so (most fortunatt King Sygismond) who can sufficiently
commend this your Act, that when to your self it has also been often said,
[Throwe thy self down,] that is to say, let thy self fall from the doctrine
and tradition of this high church, or at the lest in this only communion of
the sacrament of the altar, suffer that to be done which is contrary to the
decrees of the church, and differing from the rest of Christendom: yet could
your highness never be induced to yield to these sedicious counsels of
separation.

But when more then once or twyse you The answer of the king of polonia to
the ambassadors of the protestants.
had openly professyd, it appertayned not to your person to determyne any thing
in matters tooching religion, (for so myche as the Emperor being also a
child of the Church, and within the Church, not above the Church, is bound
reverently and obediently to hear his most holy moother, and not to prescribe
unto her:) your highness therefore thought meet to refer the matter to the
next general council, or to the judgment of the holy Apostolyke See. VVherin
suerly you did a thing which was well sitting to your woorthines, and to the
virtue and pietye of your renoumed Auncetors. For what thing is there that can
worse become a christian and Catholyke king, then to take upon him to meddle
in those things which are proper and peculiar to Priests and Bisshopps? which
wickedness when so ever any Prince has committed, we read that God has most
grievously punisshed him.

But I do not deny that the use of the cup upon just causes showed and
appering to a general counsel may by the same be permitted to the lay
people: But if any one kingdom will vsurp the same unto it self, dividing it
self therein from the rest of the christyan world, what does it else, but
willingly and wittingly spott it self with most wicked schism?

And that is it whereunto Satan tendith. Satan passes not on the cupp so he
may Induce the schism.
He passes not for the Cup, but seeks to work the schism. For if the
cup shoold by an agreing consent of the church be permitted, the^ would he
(as before by the words of Luther his member does appear) think meet utterly
to refuse it. So seeks he none other thing, but separation and division in
that sacrament, which is the pledge and knot of unity: for it is he (of whom
the prophet spoke) which sets discord among Ose 13* Matt. 12.
brethern, of whom Christ him self also said: [He that gathers not with me;
shattereth.] And on the other side: [Our God is 1. Cor. 14*
not a God of division or dissensio^, but a God of peace, love, and charitee:]
so as no good man ought to doubt, but that it is the express word of the
devil, wherein nothing is sought, but discord and division.

Yet are there some which labor to persuade The subtelt ie of Satan.
unto the people, that this is the way and only mean to stay the dissensio^
in matters of religion, and that herby only, it might come to pass that in
your highness kingdom, consent and unity of doctrine and faith might be
retained, if the cup, might be permitted to the lay people. But these men
seem not as yet to have sufficiently learned to know the sleightes of Satan.
Can any wise and good man believe, that by The way to auoy de errors, is not
by per missio^ of any.
permitting an error, errors be taken away: or that separation being
granted, unity can be retained? I call it an error, if the cup be
challenged as necessary to salvation: And a separation I mean, if it be
permitted to any one country apart from the rest of the Christian world.

And suerly to me this way seems contrary to reason and common sense. The
fathers have been of far contrary opinion: They thought not the mean to
que^che heresies, Note, how heresies have been quenched by the old Fathers
to be permission, but by making of contrary decrees, and constitutions.

What iniquitee seemed to be in that matter that Nestorius would have our lady
to be called the mother of Christ? Did not she in deed bear Christ? Do we
not find her in the scriptures commonly called the mother of Jesus, and never
termed directly the mother of God?

Yet seemed it good to the holy fathers assembled in the council holden at
Ephesus to Council. Ephesians* Can. 2.
make this decree, that if any man should call her the mother of Christ, and
not the mother of God, he should be accursed.

And little did it move them that Nestorius still cried out, he leaned to the
express word of God, or that in all the canonical scriptures it could not be
found that ever she were termed the mother of God, and that they owght to
receive nothing which were not expressly contained therein: for they saw well
enough that the heresy of Nestorius (whereby he labored to prove that our lady
when she bare Christ was delivered but of a bare man only) could not any other
way be sooner quenched then by a decree and general constitution to the
contrary. Neither was their opinion frustrat therein. For so deep a root in
the minds of men, did this decree of the holy fathers take, that even to this
day ( In the year of our lord 435.
as long as it is since that council) there is no nation found (where the
Gospel of Christ is received) in whose vulgar tongue the virgin Mary is not more
commonly called the mother of God, then the mother of Christ.

Again we know there is a Canon of Cano^. Apost. 50.
the Apostles that such as be Christened should be thryse dypped. Yet for
avoiding the sclaunder of schism, and the use or allowing of heretical
doctrine, we read it was decreed in the iiij. Council holden at Tolledo,
Council. Tolet. 4 Cap. 5.
they should be but once dipped, lest by thryse dipping, following the manner
and custom of heretics, they should seem to allow their assertion.

Neither are we ignorant that Christ made the sacrament of his body and blood
in unleavened bread, which custom was also a while observed in the church,
and is again at this day. But so sone as the Hebionytes began to spring
(who would needs Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 26. and Epiphan. lib. 1. haer. 30.
have all the ceremonies of the law also, as precysely observed and kept, as
the very Gospel, and therefore utterly denied that this sacrament might be made
in leauened bread, because all oblation offered to our lord ought by the law to
be with out leaue^:) the contrary was decreed: that is to say: That the
sacrament should be made of leauened bread: When yet the thing in his own
nature is indifferent, neither seems it much materyall whether you make it
in unleavened or in leauened bread. But after the heresy of the Hebionites
ceased, the Latin church thought good to return again to their intermitted
manner of consecrating in unleavened bread. Thus we see our holy fathers
thought not good by permission to noorishe heresies, but by mere contrary
decrees to suppress them.

But somewhat they say is to be granted to the multitude which require this.
What if the multitude should propound this point of doctrine: that only God
the father A truth received by the church is not to be abolished for
satisfie^g the fond request of a multitud.
were to be adored, and called upon, but Christ to be holden only for an
advocate? Shall we say that this is straight ways to be granted, because the
multitude required it? The matter goes ill, when we shall rather chose to
follow the unlearned multitude, then the judgment of those, who are properly
called to this office: Namely since it is truly said: that the multitude is the
Chrysostom. ho. 1. oper. imperfect* in Matt.
mother of sedition and contumacye, and the small number the mistrese of
discipline. The multitude ought to be governed, and not to govern: ought to
obey, but not to prescribe laws: That kingdom is in an hard and pittefull
case, where the Rule and government stands in the multitude. As in all other
things, so chieffly in matters of religion it is diligently to be considered,
not who, or how many, do require, but what the thing is, that is required.

The multitude required of the Apostles and their followers that they should
deny Christ, and offer incense to idols: The power and auctoritee did also
earnestly advise the^ thereunto. But what did they to this? [VVee Act. 5.
must (said they) obey God rather then men.] And so they were ready to endure
al kind of punisheme^t, yea and to lay down their necks unto the^, rather
the^ they would do that they required: yea and by their martyr dome they
performed in deed that they had spoken.

What your part is to do (most virtuous king) in the suppressing of heresies
you are not ignorant: You are taught this also by the laws of your country, to
the keeping whereof you bound your self by an oath, when you Note*
were invested in this your kingdom. Verily all men which will be accounted
Christians, especially we that be bisshops and guides of religion, must rather
desire a thousand deaths, then once to deny Christ.

But he denies Christ, not only which confesses him not to be God, and
acknowlegeth him only for an aduocat, or he which does not believe every point
and article, which the infallible auctoritee of the canonical scriptures
prescribes unto us, either of his divinity or of his humanite: but also he,
which does not in all points communicatt with the unity of his church. For
Christ is both the head and the body: The head is the only begotten son of
God, and his body is the Church: they be as husband What is to deny Christ.
and wife two in one flesh. Wherefore he does as myche deny Christ which
does so dissent from his body the Church, that he thinks the communion
thereof not to be spread over all, but to be found separat in De vnita te
ecclesiae ca. 4. in 1. Ca. nonic. Ioha^nis. tract. 6. and setmone 31. de verbis
a. post. Li. 6. Eccles. hist. Cap. 45.
some one part: as he which dissenteth from the holly scriptures in any point
touching Christ him self the head thereof: as S. Augugustine teaches us in many
places.

There is extant in Eusebius an epistle of Dionysius Alexa^drinus to Nouatus,
wherein he writes that martyrdom endured for not deuyding the Church, is as
glorious, as that which is endured for refusing to commit idolatry: Yea and
surely in my judgment (says Dionysius) it is so myche more glory. For there
he suffers martyrdom, but for his own soul: but here for the whole church.
VVherby we may see it is no less grievous offense to divide the Church, or
Note.
by assent to allow a schism, then to offer incense to idols.

Let it therefore be far from a christian man, and namely from a Bisshopp, by
and by to give his assent when a multitude or power requires a separation from
the Church of God. It is to be wished that it may please The devtye of a good
Bishop.
God to give us this mind, rather to suffer our bodies to be divided from our
souls, then by our assent to allow any sacrilegious devise of separation from
Christ or his body the church. Of this mind as it becomes all Christians to
be, so chieffly us that be bisshopps, if we will duly execute the office of
good pastors.

It is well remembered (most virtuous king) how when your highness came first to
the gouuernement of this Realm, and that some thing was then required of you,
which partly tended to separation: your highness courteously (as your manner is)
and yet well and flatly denied their request, saying you could not without
offense of your conscience grant the same: using farther in the presence of
your council, and a very notable assembly of the people, this saying of
Christ. Matthew. 16.
[VVhat avails it a man if he gain the whole word, and suffer his soul to
perish? or what exchange may a man make for his soul?]

Your princely crown, the empire of your large and populous kingdom and of so
many Note.
dominions adjoining thereunto, were not so dear unto you, that the loss, or
hazard of any of them could once move you to do any thing, that should seem to
be against your faith and religion. And why should not the like words now
also serve for answer? Unless perhapps this separation seem of less
importance then the other, being now required to permit a deuisio^ to be made
from the holly Catholic Church being the body of Christ?

But some what is to be granted (say they) in respect of a publyke
tranquillity. And (I pray you) was not then also the publyke tranquillite of
the kingdom pretended? Was it not said that great troubles would rise, if the
request were not granted? Yet God did forsee and provide for the tranquillity
of your kingdom. And if tranquillite and quiet be to be bought with so great
loss of such a number of sowlls: it were better (as the Proverb says) that
heaven and earth should meet, and a thousand times to endure the loss of this
mortal life, then being divided from the body of Christ to lead a while a
happy life hear in earth (in the judgment of common men) and soon after to
change the same with everlasting death, and hell tourments that never shall
have end. Lighter is the loss of goods and life, then of the soul, the loss
whereof is not to be recovered.

I reason not as though it were true which they seek to persuade, that it
should myche perteyne to the preservation of the tranquillite of your Realm,
if the use of the cup were granted to those which require it: to whom it may
well be said, [you wotc not what ye ask.] But it is in deed most Matthew. 10
certain, and undoubted, that if the thing they require be granted, that
shall bring to your kingdom mycbe greater troubles.

The wise and pollityke men of this world Plato li. 7. de legibus
which have written of common welthes, have taught us how perilous to every
commonwealth is innovation, and change: Namely of laws or ancient manners.
Which they have proved by a similitude taken of the body of man: In so myche
as they which leave their accustomed manner of diet, and chose unto them selves
a new, hardly and Arist. li. 2. poli. 6.
very seldom do it without hazard of their health. Wherefore they think it
better to tollerat some faults of the law makers, and magistrates. For that
it is often seen that in diverse cases there comes not so myche good of
correcting an error unorderly, as hurt, in that thereby, men are by little and
little accustomed What harm comes of innovation and change of laws.
not to obey the magistrate: So as often to change laws seems to be none
other thing, but to withdraw all the force and credit from the laws: and to
accustom men by little and little to the attempting of more, and greater
alterations: And often we see that things which in them selves seem small, do
prove causes of great mischieffes.

And do we not even presently before our eyes see, those things thus to have
happened; both among our neighbors, and even among them also which in this
your realm applied their minds to innouatio^s? I could touch soome by name
which at the beginning required but the cup, which also soon after, they
usurped to them selves. But did they rest there? No: but after received and
imbracyd the whole confession of Augspurg. The variable alteration of Polonian
he retikes
And within a while rejecting that, took the Picardican religion: And after
that the Gehennian (I woold have said Geneuian, but that Gehennian and Geneuian
be all one) which Lysmaninus the Apostata, ba^nyshed by your highness (king
Sigismo^d) does now openly profess. What they will do in the end I know
not: perhapps they Our co^tre is fallen by such schism from lutheranisme to
Caluinisme
will faull to Suenckfeldius. I woold any man could show me, any one country
where the cup has by priuatt aucthoritee been begoonne to be usurped, where
very sone after many other and most horrible heresies have not followed.

Within the memory of our Grandfathers, in the kingdom of Bohemia our next
neighbor first fell this co^tentyon about the cup, which soome Cittyes of
their own aucthoritee usurped to themselves. But what monstrous heresies did
not presently ensue? How few towns coold ye find in Morauia or Bohemia (where
the use of the cup was received) in which you might not see six or seven
sects at once, and all miserably divided How he resy has creped on in
Germany.
one from an other? But in Germany (which with out great sorrow and woo^der
we cannot behold) whereof did this Sathanisme take beginning but of the cup?

These sleyghtes which by the members of A very proper and apt similitude.
Satan are used and framyd against true pietye, seem myche like, unto a
wedge: which being very thi^ne at the edge, seems scarce entryd into the wood,
when soon after it throwghly cleaves and deuydeth the same in soonder. But
albeit the first edge be but thin, yet makes it a way to the growing
thicknes that follows, so as when the first part is received, and edge
entryd, of necessitee the rest follows until at the last the whole piece be
soondered. And if a man would say the cup to be the thin and sharp edge
of this destroying wedge, he shall no whit err from the truth. For where the
same has been received we see the thick part of the wedge has followed.

First the Augustane confession, which took The Augusta^ Confession.
away both priesthood and sacrifice, and brought God him self as it were in to
an equallite of degree, so as he should have no more honor doo^ unto him, then
to mortal men. The^ entryd by and by a thicker part, which was the Tigurin and
Lascan confession: The Tigurin and Lascan confession
which took away those ij sacraments, to wit of the supper of our lord and
of baptism, which yett the Augustane confession had of courtesy left unto us:
to the end that as that confession had left their followers with out priesthood
or sacrifice: so this, would farther also leave theirs, withowt sacraments.
And this sect finds no less fault with the Lutherans, then it does with us
that be Christians. But condemns both of idolatry: because we both are
persuaded (though after a diverse sort) that the very body and blood of Christ
is contained in the sacrament: And therefore as by their judgment we made of
that a certain ydoll, so do we also (as they say) of the sacrament of
baptism, in that we attribute thereunto remission of sins and believe our
selves to be saved thorowgh the font of regeneration. Look therefore what we
seem to the Luthe rans, the same do the Luthera^s seem to the Sacramentaryes,
that is to say, idolaters. Suenkfeldius


At last forth comes Suenckfeldius, who takes away not only the whole
scripture, but also all outward ministry of the word, and makes the
Sacramentaryes, Lutherans, Note.
and us Christians, idolaters all a leeke: who having regard to the bare letter
(meaning the canonical scriptures) seek there in to find our salvation. And
this was the last but, or end of the wedge, whose first part being entered and
received, how thin so ever the edge thereof seemed, we see how by little and
little all the In the hachet of he resyes
rest of this Sathanisme brake in, as more largely we have opened in an other
book.

Thus do you see (most virtuous king) whereunto the matter is now brought: How
after that in despite of the church the cup in the beginning had encroched,
how great a forwardnes, and swaye grew thereby to the rest of the Sathanisme.
Who so ever is a Christian man, at the lest if he be of any pietye, can not
easily be induced to depart from the sense and consent of the Principijs obsta.
universal church. But so soon as a beginning of departure in any one thing
is made, now is it more hard to find the end, then it was to see the beginning:
So as not without cause it has been taken for an old proverb, the beginning is
more the^ the half of the whole: which we may see manifestly verefyed in them
which at the first by the only use of the cup wowned the^ selves out from the
knot of the church, who sone after received if not all other sects, yet at
the lest the whole Luthera^ heresy out of hand,

Have we not to good proof of this matter The disordered Alteration of
Germany
in Germany? There was set forth a certain Interim religion (as much to say,
as religion put to daying) how well I will not say, but at the lest by
auctoritee suffered, and received almost of all, saving only a few: But I pray
you with them that received it, was the lawful priesthood and sacrifice
restored again according to the form prescribed in that book? No. Nothing
less. But the Interimistes be, and were a like with the other Lutherans, but
that some where they absteyned from flesh in the lent, and on the fridaye: and
in their divine service, or rather profane, (to forbear the calling of it by
the right name, Sacrilegious:) they use in some places surplises, and other
priestlyke vestiments.

But in your own kingdom do we not see the like, where the cupp by great
sacrilege is usurped? Is not there both the priesthood and sacrifice leekewyse
abrogated? Do not How many mere lay me^ commit this sacrilege in England?
lay men arrogat to them selves the office of Priests? Do they not take on
them power, which they have not, to make the body of Christ? and so give unto
the communicantes mere bakers bread? For how can he make the body of Christ to
whom power is not given so to do?

In fine Satan says nothing else (when contrary to the ordinance and
obseruaunce of the church he commands the layety to drink of the cup)
but even that which he sometime said to Christ him self: [Throwe thy self
downe] that is to say. Leave the tradition of the church. Cast away all
obedience thereunto: Make none account of the auctoritee of the counsels. But a
Christian man fears yet to throw him self down, because he sees great
peril therein, and therefore long deliberateth with him self, whether he were
best so to do or no. But if he have once bego^ne to throw him self down,
then is it not in his own power to stay him self, but that without recovery he
falls hedlong down to the bottom. August. in Psalm. 103.


S. Augustine writing upon that text of the Psalm: [He builded the earth on a
sure foundation, which shall never be removed, but continue from generation to
generation:] Interprets the earth to be the church, and the water which
runs by Psalm. 77.
and comes to nothing, in an other Psalm, he expounds to be heresies. And
for provision Decrees of councils the Bakes of the Church,
that waters flow not in to the church, that is to say, that heresies may
not drown the same, great cliffes and ba^kes are set against the said floudes.
Which banks may well be interpreted to be the decrees of counsels. But
though the banks be never so strong, yet if there be never so little a hole
made into the same, straight An apt similitude
way the whole weight of the waters lies there upon, and soon breaking
down the bank far and wide ouerfloweth whole fields, pastures and
villages, so as nothing may then stay the violent course thereof.

This hole therefore is then opened, when against the ordinance and obseruaunce
of the church the cup is permitted to the laytie. For who may let why, by
this hole (how small so ever it be) all kind of heresies breaking down the
banks, that is to say, violating the decrees of counsels may not violently
break into the church? Which considered, it is a wonder to see that there
want not some, which are not asshamed to promise tranquillite unto the church,
and to your highness kingdom: if against the ordinance and obseruaunce of the
church the cup Note.
might be granted unto the lay people.

If the piece of wood may be preserved whole and sound, which the first part of
the wedge (seem the edge thereof never so thin) is driven and entered into: if
it may be provided that the thick part thereof driven with many blows shall not
yet at all cleave the piece: if the corn fields and meddowes Note.
may be preserved where into the flouddes, by breach made in the banckes, do
with great force flow in, and can not easily find a way out again: if a man
may be preserved who has thrown him self down hedlong from an high tower: if
he may stay him self in the midst of his faull so as coming hedlo^g to the
ground he break not his neck, or bruise some other part of his body: the^ may
in deed that kingdom be safe, sownd and quiet, wherein the cup is usurped in
despite of the church and counsels.

Many there be which require a council, but to what end? or to what effect may
it be, if after things therein well determined, it be laufull to the most
abject kind of men, to do all things contrary in despite thereof? Will the
auctoritee of counsels be more regarded and feared then dyettes and
parlamentes? But have not we seen before our Councels and parliamentes in
like regard with heretics.
eyes in despite of the king and the parliament, many things done contrary to
that, which has in those assemblies been decreed? yea and syche things as
before the decrees made, they durst not have done? And shall we there hoape
for tranquillite and quietness, where no auctorite of counsels, assemblies,
Bisshopps, or princes is regarded? Where it is sought that we should be
without law, without king, without priesthood, sacrifice, sacraments, yea
and without a God to? Where it is so earnestly labored to buyld and make of
that City, which hitherto has been of one tou^ge and one language, a new
found Babylon, wherein Genesis 11. The building of Babylon that is to say of
co^fusio^
is so great confusion of tounges that no man can hear the voice of his
neighbor?

But what needs more? Your self know (most virtuous king) how when some
thought good to grant the cup to some clamorous persons, so that they would
rest there, they refused to accept it, with that condition. Few there are in
your kingdom that will be contented only with the cup: no not many which will
stay upon the confession of Auspurge. Most of them that are departed from us,
are either Picardines, Caluinistes, Laskanistes, Nestorians, or Seruetia^s, of
which sects no one will be satisfied with the only permission of the cup.
Who so reads the The Apology of picardes
Apology of the Picardines, shall therein find that they seem only to follow
the Boemians, being willing to rest only upon having the communion in both
kinds, and in all other things show them selves in manner as catholyke, as
they which are in deed true and perfyt catholics in all points.

Again Petrus Paulus Vergerius who the last year came into your kingdom for
none other cause, but only to stir sedition therein, brought forth letters
written to certain persons, which letters he also caused to be Malice the
mother of he resy, makes her children forget common humanyte.
printed. But was this first the part of an honest man? Verily if he had had
any shame, if any sperk of honesty had been in him, he would never have
attempted any syche matter. But herein he showed him self a man void of all
humanitee, and ignorant of the honest course and trade of life among men, since
to publishe letters privately written, is none other thing, but (as Cicero said)
to Cicero. 2. Philip.
take from this life the societye of life, and the commodite of secret and
familyar talk between absent friends. He publisshed also in print ij. letters
of Paulus Quartus the Bishop of Rome, and not content therewith he wonderfully
darkened and deformed with his own Gloses, and wrong interpretations, those
things which were therein godly and virtuously written. Hear what he writes
in his notes upon the first epistle.

Some man will say thus: if we might Note the Sacrilegius words of this
Gospeller.
drive the Pope to this, that he would but assent that the ministres of the
churches might have wives, use the vulgar tongue in the administration of the
sacraments, and give the sacrament under both forms to the lay people, and in
all other articles and doctrines to consent with the Church of Rome, as
hitherto we have done, would ye not think good we should there rest for a
time? And laying up that gain in store, by little and little in process of time
devise for the winning of the other points?

I answer, says Vergerius.

I like it not: For the matter consists not The answer of Vergerius to his
own objection.
only in that the minister should have a wife, use his vulgar tongue in the
Church, and deliver the sacrament in both kinds: but in that he have a lively
faith, that he be a member of Christ's Church, and be of a right judgment,
showing unto the people that pure doctrine which our lord Jesus Christ the
son of God brought out of his fathers bosom. What a defyling of our
doctrine, what a strange thing should it be, if we should give our consent
that the pastor of our souls should be a massing priest, anointed and allowed
by some Bishop and member of Antechrist? etc.

Here Satan by this his champion goes to his matter more openly, then by the^
which contend so earnestly for the cup, and syche other things as seem of
less weight: Whose wily deceytes also herein he discloseth, and thinkyng it
superfluous to use any more circumstances, he flees even straight to the
throat: to the end that withowt any more delay God may be brought in order and
The heretics go about to bring God i^ to order.
equallite of degree, with mortal men, having left unto him neither any
priesthood, nor externe sacrifice, whereby he should be acknowledged to be God.
This is the thing which Satan by his lymme and trusty servant Vergerius
thought good eue^ at the first brunt to attempt: And suerly it has been truly
said: In vain is that done by many, which Arist. in Phys. li. 1.
may be done by few. For what should a man go about the bus he if he may
easily get thorowgh?

But hear what after a few words he adds farther: For after that this man
(being over curious of the state of forreyn common welthes, whereunto he is a
stranger, and even borne (as it seems) to stir up seditions) had exhorted
the Polonians, that if these iij. things were granted them, they should
constantly refuse them, he has these words.

VVote thou well Polonia, this matter Behold here an open and plain pro
testing protestant.
which now lies in controversy touching religion may endure no moderation or
concord. Mark well what I say and lay it in thy remembrance. For there be
some that say, were it not trow we possible that some mean migt be found to
appease this controversy? I answer (says he) that none can possibly be fownd.
For if the papacy remain in force, the doctrine of Jesus Christ can not be
free. And again if the doctrine of Jesus Christ which we profess do
prevail, then of necessitee must the whole papacy be rooted up, so as there is
none other mean of concord or establisshing of the true church of Christ, but
that the whole papacy with all the tyranny and wicked doctrine thereof, be
clearly taken away.

And sure as for that Vergerius writes that the state of religion may endure
no moderation, or concord, I can not well deny, but he writes truly. For
either a man must be a whole Christian or a whole Lutheran. There is no haltyng
on either side. As well shall thou be damned if thou be a half Christian or a
half Lutheran as if thou were a whole Lutheran.

I call him an half Christian, which believing Who is a demye Christian.
all things as he ought to do of Christ the head, does yet by his own
private fancye in certain rytes deuyde him self from the body. He thinks he
houldeth fast the head and yet deuideth him self from the body. Therefore he
will be half a Christian and half a Lutheran: that is to say a Sathanist: For
Christ him self says, [No man can serve ij. Matt. 6. Luke 16. 2. Cor. 6.
masters: what participation can there be between righteousness and iniquitee? or
what society (says Pawll) betwee^ light and darcknes? or what agreement
between Christ and Belial?] And in the Apocalips we read: [I Apoc. 3.
know thy works that thou art neither hot nor cold. I would thou were either
hot or cold: but since thou art luke warm, and neither hott nor cold, I will
by vomit cast the out of my mowth:] The luke warm is even in like sort cast
forth, in like sort vomyted out of the mowth of God, as he which sins in
the contrary part. Therefore they are in deed very much deceived which think
to contriue a concord by mediocrite Esai. 28.
in matters of religion. [The bed is straight (says the prophet) so as the one
must needs fall out, and a scant cloak ca^ not cover both.] They can not be
together in one bed, that is to say Christ and Luther may not join in one man's
heart, the one of them must needs faull out: they can not be both covered with
one cloak. Wherefore in some part of rytes and ordinances to profess Christ,
and in an other part Luther, is nothing else, but to deny whole Christ. That
is therefore so true as may be, that matters of religion admyt no concord by
that mean.

We profess in our creed that we believe the holly catholyke Church. From
her who so ever departs, and harkeneth not to her teaching and precepts, but
gives more credit to his own judgment, then to hers, though he believe all
the rest which is contained in the creed, though he believe and receive all the
scriptures: though he honor them as the very word of God, (as in deed they are
being rightly understood) yet has he nothing to do with Christ the head,
which has separated him self from the body He ca^ not be accounted a christian
that divides him self from the mistical body of Christ.
of Christ. He is an Ethnik and a Publican not deserving in any part the name
of a Christian.

How often did the Arians attempt to come to soome agreement with the
Catholics? VVheru^to to show them selves willing, they said they woold not
stick to permytt that (...) should be believed to be the son of the father, so
he were not called (...). There was but one poor letter Iota (.i.) in There
was only one letter in question betvveen the Christians and the Arrianes.
question or difference between the Christians and the Arrians. Yet could not
the Christians think meet to grant it unto them. For under this one letter
they saw them hyde their heresy, whereby they were content to allow the son
to be leeke unto the father in fulness of grace, but not in propriete of nature.

With what sleightes did the goouernour of Cesaria seek to persuade unto S.
Basil, that he should yield to the time and not bring so many Churches in
danger, by standing upon the sifting of so nyce a point of doctrine?
Theodotet lib 4 ca. 19. hist.
But what said S. Basil thereunto? Such taulke (says he) may serve young men:
for they and syche like gape after sych toys. But they which have been trained
up in the holly scriptures, can not suffer to have one syllable thereof brought
in question or hasard. But use rather to offer them selves to any kind of
death, if the case so require. And therein Basil seemed to the heretics to be
froward, as before him Athanasius and Hilary were also reputed. But that which
the heretics Consta^cy of the Catholic fathers.
judged frowardnes, that the Catholics and right beleuers, esteemed for great
consta^cy.

VVherby I find my self also the less grieved, if to soome I seem stubborn
in saying there can be no concord between Catholics and heretics, onles they
which have departed from us return again to the place they went from, that
is, to the lap of our mother the holly Church: onles they believe her, commytt
them selves to her, and submytt their judgments to hers. I had rather be
counted styffe and stubborn with Athanasius, Hilary and Basil, the^ like a
vain reed to wave with every wynd: But these procedinges which I have
remembryd, were of long time past.

Let us see how often in this our age there has been practyse for concord,
between the Lutherans and the Suinglians. But how hansoomly fell that out to
the Lutherans? What a concord was it that was made between Martin Luther and
Martin Bucer? The gentle agreement betvveen Bucer and Luther. In Synod.
Constant. habita* An. 1534 and iterum Isenaci. An. 36.
Martyn Bucer in favor of Luther was content to grant the body and blood of
Christ to be substancially in the sacrament, so that Luther would again to
pleasure him, grant that the body and blood of Christ was not there, but at
the very instant when it was receyuid.

Which of these Martyns (I pray you) drew the other to his opinyon? Whether
became Martyn Luther a sacramentary, or Martyn Bucer of a sacramentary a
Lutheran? Verily John Calvin does not any other way make a more effectual
argument that Calvin his chief argument of denie^g the real presence in the
sacrament.
the body of Christ is not substancially in the sacrament, then of that grant
of Luther confessing a real presence only, when it is received. VVherof also
he gathers that the body and blood of our lord are given unto us only by
virtue and efficacy, but not by their substa^cial presence: and none otherwise
then they be present and given unto us in baptism and penance, or when so
ever the death of Christ works any effect in us. Of which opinion he
gloriously says Phillip Melancthon also was.

Is not this a proper concord whereby they which are allredy heretics become
greater heretics? And by their sacrilegious bouldnes growing stronger in
blasphemies and errors, wexe daily worse, and worse, not 2. Tim. 3.
only erring them selves, but drawing also others into errors? But let us
pass over the Sacramentaryes: whose impietye the Lutherans them selves though
they differ not myche from them, do yet so abhor and 2. John. ^
detest as they may not afoord any of them, so myche as a good morrow, or
endure their Note, the state of protestants in the free Cytes of Germany.
fellowship or company, or once to receive or harbor them: but so sone as it
is known that there is a sacramentary among them, they straight way bannish
him out of their Cittyes.

How often has there been concord entreated between the Lutherans and the
Christians? VVhereupon was the Interim Religion agreed unto, but that there
were some gave great hope that concord by this means might grow between the
Christians and Lutherans? But has that succeeded according to their
expectation? No God wot: But look what was with full judgment of all (except
only a few) allowed at the dyetts of the Empire, and with their good wills
there determined, that, soon after was not observed by them selves, which had
received it.

They of Lipsia lest they should seem not The Lypsians.
to be wyser then the rest of the whole Empire, though at those assemblyes they
had agreed to many things, touching the Interim religion, which was there
prescribed, yet thought they many things of their own and of their master
Martin Luthers devise meet to be kept: and therefore set forth a Interim upon
interim. i. daying upon daying.
dooble Interim which in some things agreed, and in some disagreed from the
former Interim agreed on at the assemblyes.

But they of Wittenberg though they The Wit te^bergers.
were near neighbors to them of Lipsia and subjects to the same Prince, who
had subscribed to the Interim religion, set out also in writing an other
devise of theirs, wherein they would not be caulled Interimistes, but
Adiaphoristes, and therein departed from the Adiaphoristes, as ye vvoulde say:
indifferents.
doctrine of their master, Luther, in fewer things then the Lipsians hadd
done.

But the Cittyes of Saxony when Mathias Flaccus the Illyrican had kindled
fyrebrands The Zealous or Rigorous Lutheranes.
amongst them, would not goo one hear breadth from the deuyses of their M.
Martin Luther: but thought what so ever was spoken or written by him, meet to
be received and adored as the express word of God.

We see therefore that after concord attempted and thought to have been in
manner brought to pass, there is grown greater discord then before. For as
the Lutherans most wickedly divided them selves from the Catholic unity and
the mystical body of our Savior Christ, so did they soon disperse their own
unity, with hellish discordes among them selves. What a revel was there, The
revel that was among the Luthera^s about the surplesse
how many and how bitter contentions between the Zealous Lutherans (for so they
would be accounted that follow Flaccus Illyricus) and between the degenerat
disciples of Luther, whom Flaccus calls Adiaphoristes and Interimistes: of
which sort they be that follow Melancthon, what a do (I say) has there been
between these only about the surplesse which of ancient time the Priests have
used to wear in the churches? But what was the cause that they thus pursued
one an other in syche small matters? Sure none other but for that the These are
the Zealous or Rigorous Lutheranes.
Germayne Lutherans feared lest if any of the ancient customs and ceremonies
were restoryd again to the church, it might seem in part an inclinyng from
Luther to Christ and doubted lest they might seem thereby to open a wyndow
again to the papacy.

If they then which rejoice to be caulled true Lutherans, took syche ware and
careful heed, leest by restoring the ancient ceremonies of the church, they
should open a wyndow to the papacy, with how myche more diligence ought we
that glory in no name, but in the name of Christ, to forsee that there be none
opened for Satan to enter at? To whom without doubt they are opened, when men
are accustomed not to give ear to the church, and to set at naught her
ordinances preferring their own private judgments before the judgment
thereof.

It is most certain and undoubted that The Original of this great schism and
heresy grevve only of contempt of the church
this whole Sathanisme which now (with tears I speak it) florissheth in
Germany and buddeth even in your kingdom (most virtuous Prince) has chieffly
grown heerby, that every man dispising the judgment of the church, has
thought it lawful for him self to interprett the scriptures and of his own
head to alter the rytes and ceremonies thereof. Wherefore we are not unwilling
in this point to agree in opinion with Vergerius that the matter of religion
now in controversy may not admyt any moderation or concord: namely syche as
they would have, since it is so truly written of the blessed martyr S. Cyprian:
There can be no socyetee Cypr. Lib. 1* epist. 3.
between faith and infidelitee. He that is not with Christ is against Christ.
He that is enemy to his unity and peace can not join with us: If they come
with submission and satisfaction let them be heard. If they come with curses
and threats, let them be refused.

But where that lewd fellow Vergerius writes there is none other mean or
hope of concord, except the universal papacy be suppressed, see for Gods sake
what sleyghtes these be of Satan: and to what end he tends in seeking so
earnestly to overthrow the papacy: But that our saying may be the better
believed, we will rather bring forth his testimony of the papacy, who so long
as he lived, held mortal war against the same: and whose word Vergerius
adoreth as the very word of God, then use our own words. For thus writes
Luther in a certain Epistle to ij. parish priests of the Anabaptisme.

I hear (says he) and see rebaptising taken The words of Luther touching
the papacye x* years after he was strayed from the church
in hand of some, upon this grownd that they would do it in the despite of
the Pope, as men that will have nothing of Antechrist. Even as the
sacramentaries will have in the sacrament, but mere bread and wine in despite
of the Pope thinkyng them selves able by this means to suppress the papacy.
Verily this fou^datio^ is frivolous and vain, whereupon they can build no good
thing: For by that reason we must deny all the holy scriptures, and the office
of preaching: For all this have we from the Pope. And then must we make also
a new scripture. Then must we forsake also the old Testament, lest we should
seem to have any thing from the infidel Iues. All this is but foolishnes. For
Christ also found in the Iuishe nation abuse among the Scribes and Pharisees,
yet did he not therefore reject al things which they held and tawght. But we
confess that under the papacy is See what Luther grants to Papists.
myche good Christianitee, yea and all good Christianitee. And that from thence
it has come unto us. Yea truly we grant that under the papacy is the true
scripture, the true baptism, the true sacrament of the altar, the true keys
of remission of sins, the true office of preaching, the true Cathechisme
which is the lords prayer, the x. Commandments, and the Articles of the
Creed. I say farther that under the papacy is the true Note.
Christianitee: yea and the very true kernel of Christianitee.

And lest any man should think that An objection putt of.
Luther wrote this when as yet the light of the Evangelical veritee (whereof he
so myche vaunteth) had not shyned upon him, let him know that this Epistle was
written An. 1528.
by him the x. year after he had cut him self of, from the Church of God, at
what time his name was very far spread by the fame of his heresies. Thus ye
see how the truth brake forth from him against his will, even as it did
thorowgh the throat of Balaam Nume. 22.
the prophet, all be it he were an enemy of the truth.

See you now (most virtuous king) whereunto the deuyses of Satan tend, when by
his sowldyar Vergerius and by others of that kind he seeks to have the
universal papacy taken away? For he seeks therein (by the verdit of Luther)
to have taken away the true scripture, true Baptism, the true Sacrament of the
Altar, the true keys of remission of sins, the true office of preaching,
the true Catechism, true Christianitee, yea and the very true kernel of
Christianitee. And have not these his devises succeeded as he would have them?

First Luther sowght to take away the papacy, The foundacio^ laid by Luther
and thereunto he laid certain foundations as we have before showed. For first
in despite of the Pope and the council, he granted the cup to the lay
people. Then he abrogated ancient rytes and ceremonies, and instituted new.
Not long after of the Luthers procedinges.
number of the vy. sacraments he took away v. And last of all, he overthrew
together both sacrifice and priesthood. But what came hereof? With in a short
time after, up sprang Sacrame^taryes, and Anaptistes, who took from us those
ij. sacraments also, of the altar, and baptism, which ij. Luther had yet
(of his curtesy) left unto us: And that did they not, more in hatred or
desspight of the Pope, then of Luther him self, if we may believe Philip
Melancthon. For The success thereof.
they seeing Luther thus to play the Pope, yea and more then a Pope, could not
broke this intolerable tyranny of the man.

After this, forth came the heavenly prophets The heavenly prophets.
which took from us both the scriptures, and all externe ministry of
preaching. At the last (out of what dark caves I know not) issued Campanus and
Seruetus, Ca^panus and Seruetus he retikes
which sowght to pull from us our Savior Christ speaking very blasphemously of
his diuinitee. This end at the last they attained which labored to overthrow
the papacy, and to do all things in despite of the Pope.

I use sometime (most virtuous king) to read the triffles of those heretics
which are of no great name, that I may know the better how things go amongst
them. My hap was (among others) to hit upon a certain Germayne Luther an
named Erasmus, and not only by sir name, but in deed rightly caulled ( Albertus.
All beer) who wrote a book against Carolstadius and other Sacramentaries,
Anabaptists, and image breakers. Therein he tells of one James Sche^ck, how
The Impietee of a Lutheran only for that he vvoold contrary and ouerth vvart
the order of the church. One other of the same bacche.
when at Berlin he preached to the people the word of Luther for the word of
God, he could not by any means be induced upon the solemn feast day of Easter
to preach of the Resurrection of our Lord, but upon Easter day he would needs
preach of the Passion. And of an other at Francfort that would in no wise keep
the feast of Christmas day. And why I pray you? Forsooth in despite of the
Pope: lest they should seem in any thing to impart with the papacy, that is to
say with Christianitee: they had rather all the memory of Christ his benefits,
were extinguisshed, then they would celebrat the same with those Christians
that acknowledge the Pope.

You see (most virtuous King) what things have followed where the papacy has
been taken away. And this very state of things Vergerius or rather the devil
by Vergerius his solliciter seeks now to bring also into your kingdom: For
this has always been an owld practyse of Satan: as we read written by the
holy martyr. S. Cyprian to infest Li. 1. epi. 3.
and persecute, in all he may the head ruler of the church to the end that
having taken away the master he might with the more violence, and owtrage,
spoil and ransacke the church.

Neither have heresies or schisms (says S. Cyprian) risen of any other
occasion then Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 3*
of that, the priest of God is not obeyed, and that one Priest for the time in
the church, and one judge for the time in stead of Christ, is not thought
upon. To whom if the whole brotherhood would be obedient according to Gods
teachinges, no man would make a do against the College of Priests: No man
would make him self judge not of the Bisshopp now, but of God after Gods
judgment, after the favor of the people declared by their voices at the
election, after the consent of his fellow Bisshopps: no man thorough breach of
unity, and strife would deuyde the church of Christ. No man standing in his
own conceyte and swelling with pride would apart erect abroad a new church.
Whom S. Hierome following teaches Hiero. co^tr: Luciferianos.
us, that the saftye of the church depends of the dignitee of the high
Priest, to whom if there be not given a certain peerlesse power, and
supereminent over all others, there will become in the church so many schisms
as there be Priests.

Heerby may you gather (most virtuous King) wherabout Vergerius goes when he
would have the papacy taken away: For he would have taken away what so ever
remains of Christianitee with in your kingdom or dominions: he would have
schisms brovght in, heresies spread abroad, Christ ba^nished out of all your
dominions, and that far and wide thorowgh out all the same, might creep,
this whole Sathanisme, which we see has taken syche deep root among your
neighbors of Germany to the great hurt and spoil of that nation. And to stop
that this his enterprise take not effect, nothing more avails, then Unity.
This Unity therefore, does he assaut with all his ingense and deuyses and
earnestly labors to displace him, by whose authoryte it comes to pass that
unity is retained in the church of God. For he sees that so long as his
dignitee and auctoritee remains in force, he can proffit nothing.

But weygh with your self (Right renoumed King) how after some had taken away
the papacy, whether the same men did not soon after deuyse and attempt also
to remove the Emperor. Where we see that among them it is no less reproach
to be caulled a Caesarist then a Papist. What has passed not many years since
in Germany your VVheru^to thedeuises of heretics tend.
highness is not ignorant. But those odious matters I had rather pass over with
syle^ce. It shall be expedient for you to remember always this verse which is
so common in every man's mowth.

Happy is he, that takes good vewe,
By other men's harm, his own to eschew.
Take heed therefore lest shortly it come to pass that it be counted no less
ignominious to be called a That is. to hold of the king then to hold of the
pope
Regist, then a Papist. For to this tends all their deuyse to take away all
order, to bring the auctoritee of princes in hatred and contempt, and so to
induce a confuse popular government without a Prince. VVher of since Vergerius
is a certain brand, and kindles nothing, but Paulus Vergerius a fierbra^d of
sedition.
seditions and broils, and for that he caulleth him self an exile of Jesus
Christ, and that truly, for he has in deed nothing to do with Christ, even as
he has made him self, an exile of Jesus Christ, so shall it be very well that
your highness make him an exile and bannisshed man out of your whole kingdom and
dominions.

He says, this doctrine of Ihesu Christ which he professes can not stand in
surety, if the papacy remain in force: as though there were any one of all the
heretics of this our age (who yet in this one thing do maruelously agree that
the papacy must be taken away) which did not as stoutly vaunt him self to
profess the doctrine of Ihesu Christ, not withstanding that all and every of
the^ do both disagree among them selves and stand in a mere opposite, of the
doctrine of Ihesu Christ. And if you seek narrowly in his pack, which doctrine
of Ihesu Christ it is, that he professes, such is the ignorance and
unskillfulness of the man, that I believe he woold be myche to seek of a
direct awnswer.

For so far as we may gather of his other The inco^sta^cy and Incertainty of
vergerius his doctrine.
writings, he is soo^tyme with the Swinglia^s, soomtyme with the Lutherans,
and soomtyme with the Picardines. As for the confession of Ausburge no man can
well judge him to be of, in so myche as he prefers the confession of
Brentius (whoom he has in especyall admiration) before all other confessio^s.
And that Brentius does allow the doctrine The doctrine of Osiander.
of Osiandre touching justification (which is the sum of the whole Gospel)
it is well known. But how myche they which would be accomptyd of the
confession of Ausburge do detest that doctrine, it is also clear, both by the
censure of the doctors of VVitte^berg and by the writings and dooinges of
Mathias Flaccus and Ioachimus Merlinus.

For what reckening Merlinus made of them whoo being of his flock harkened to
Osianders doctrine, it is not unknown: for The impiety and cruelty of
Merlinus the heretic against the follouers of Osiader his doctri^.
neither woold he allow them buryall when they were dead, nor be persuadyd to
afford Baptysme to their children. And can there be any man found that will
suffer him self to be persuadyd that this doctrine of Vergerius is the doctrine
of Jesus Christ, which not only the Christyans detest, but also the Germayne
Luthera^s do so excedingly abhor, that with syche as profess the same they
will neither whill they be alive nor after, have any communion or fellowship.

But I will taulke no more of Vergerius: whoom in this place I thought not
amysse to remember, to the end that each man may perceive how myche more openly
Satan has Satan did more openly bevvraye himself by Vergerius, then by any
of the other heretics.
laid forth his mind by him, then by those which by certain vnderminynges,
labor to blow up and overthrow the unity of the church, in seeming at the
first to require nothing but the cup: And that they are far wide which
think that concord may grow between the Christians and Lutherans if the cup
might be granted to the laytee, and wives to the Priests. A goodly concord
suerly wherein not the vices of the papacy (which men would leeke well ynowgh)
but the whole papacy shall be taken away, that is to say, all Christianitee
abolisshed. But because we have now spoken sufficiently of these things, let
us return to our principal matter. Epilogus.


Our purpose was to write chieffly of the 1.
express word of God. VVherof we have showed you that the heretykes do as
myche, or more glory and vawnt as do the catholykes and right beleuers.

We have also showed that we contend 2.
not with them about the express word of God, or the Gospel, but about the
interpretations and expositio^s of them, which are departed from us, to whom we
may well use the same words, which S. Augustine sometime August. epist. 62.
used against the Donatistes: that against Christ, they bear the enseigne of
Christ, and against the Gospel they glory of the Gospel which they understand
not.

We have also showed this, that wereuerently 3.
receive all the canonical scriptures: and that they on the other side for so
much as they will not in faith be subject to Heretics will not be subject to
the scriptures but thravvll them unto their own minds
the auctoritee of the scriptures, but seek to make the same thrawl unto them,
do not receive in the^, but that which seems to accord with their own
doctrine: that they frame to the words of the scripture their own private
sense: And that they contend not with us about the sense and mind of the
scripture, but about their own sense and understanding thereof, which rather
the^ we would adore as the pure word of God, against the co^uio^ sense and
consent of the whole church, we are ready to do and suffer all things. For we
are persuaded that so to do were right idolatry. Since therefore we have at
large showed why we can not agree with the enemies of the Gospel which by the
words of the Gospel assault the same, and contend with us about their own
mind, and not the mind of the scripture, we will brieffly discourse the cause
why we can not so do.

First the most severe commandments The cause why the catholics may not
consent to the heretics. Galat. 1. Matt. 12. Ezeeh. 14. 1. Cor. 10.
of God, forbid us to give ear or consent unto them according to these words:
[If any man preach unto you any other Gospel then that which ye have received,
let him be accursed: If any man speak blasphemy against the holy Ghost it
shall not be remitted unto him. Flee from idols.] Seeing therefore these men be
syche as preach unto us a Gospel which we have not received: and syche as
speak blasphemy against the holy Ghost: and seek to be adored of us as
certain idols: we obeying the commandments of God are justly feared from
consenting with them.

And lest any man think we apply these scriptures to our own proper sense,
we will in few, show, how the ancient catholyke fathers have expounded them,
to the end every man may plainly perceive, that we do very truly use them
against these enemies of the Gospel.

And first who is there to who^ the name of Athanasius is not known and well
thowght of? Who (as S. Cyrill writes) adorned heaven Cyrill. ad Reginas de
recta fide.
it self with the works he. wrote as it were with a most fragrant ointment:
This father therefore in his book which he entitled of the incarnation of
Christ (as it is by Cyrill cited) uses these words: Who so ever beside these
things teaches out of the holy scripture, that there is one son of God, and
an other son borne of the virgin Mary: and adopted for a son only in such
sort, as we men be, so that there be two sons etc. Or if any man say that
the flesh of our lord came from above, and not of the virgin Mary, or the
whole diuinitee to have been confounded or changed into the flesh: or the
deity of our lord to be passible: or that the flesh of our lord as of man, is
not to be adored: this man does the holy and Catholyke church accurse,
following therein the holy Apostles saying: If any man preach Galat. 1.
unto you any other Gospel the^ that which ye have received, let him be
accursed.

Behold this good Father (whose memory in the church is holy and immortal)
says, he is accursed of the catholyke church, who so ever should go about to
teach (yea though it were out of the holy scriptures) any of these points.
But (o holy father) by what auctoritee think thou that may be done, if he
teach the same out of the scriptures? For sooth (says he) by the auctoritee
of S. Pawll, who said: [If any man preach Galat. 1.
unto you any other Gospel, then that which ye have received, let him be
accursed.

A marvelous matter: The same sentence which the heretics of our age have
always in their mowthe, whereby they think as with a ram of Iron to
assault, and overthrow the whole auctoritee of the fathers and cou^cells, thou
bring forth on the contrary side. To wit, if any man shall go about to say
(yea though it be out of the scriptures) the contrary of that, which has been
defyned in lawful counsels, of the fathers, especially general, and by them
delivered to us, from hand, to hand, thou think him not only, not to be
harkened unto, but also to be accursed: and that we must firmly remain in
that, which we have received: though a man bring never so many textes of
scripture in appearance to the contrary.

Athanasius will not that the children Athanasius.
should judge of the decrees of the fathers. He will not that syche things as
has once been tried by the rule of the scriptures, should again be caulled
back to the same, unless they will show them selves not to Esai. 57. Osee. 3.
be laufull children, but the seed of the harlot and adulteress, which if they
dare do, let them cry till they be hoarse, [For it is writte^] (as the father
of heretics attempting Christ once did) yet makes he no doubt by the doctrine
of S. Pawll to hold them accursed: because they preach a contrary Gospel to
that, which they received.

But did holy Athanasius when he wrote thus, teach us to contemn and hold
for nawght, the express word of God? No: God forbid: It was never any part of
his thought, but he would have taken for the pure and express word of God
that, which the Catholics, and not which the heretics browght forth: that
sense (I say) which the Catholics, not which the heretics drew forth of
the scriptures.

We find notably written by S. Hierome Hier. in c. 1. ad Gala.
that the Gospel stands not in the words of the scripture, but in the
sense, not in the superficial face or show, but in the marye: not in the
leaves full of words, but in the root of reason. You see now how the most
earnest defender of the Catholyke and right faith, produced these words of S.
Pawl: with whose only auctoritee (namely since he stands in place of many) we
will for this time be content lest we seem to long.

But yet again (though perhapps we may herein do otherwise then becomes
us) to the end the truth may the more plainly appear, we think it not amysse
to bring forth even an heretics exposition of these words of S. Pawl, and
of that heretic whose Note.
mind touching the sacrament, Melancthon is said to have followed. He therefore
speaks in this sort, entreating upon those very words of S. Pawll.

Note this word of the Apostle: Accepistis, Calvin in comme^t. ad Gala. 1.
Ye have received: For still the Apostle labors to this end that they should
not hang as it were in the air upon an unknown Gospel only by way of
imagination, but should hold for a certain and sure definition thereof that,
that was the true Gospel of Note how Calvin defines the Gospel: Quod
accepistis.
Christ which was delivered unto them, and which they had received. He
commands therefore that they should be reputed for devils, which would
presUme to bring any other Gospel, differing from his: calling that another
Gospel, whereunto other men's inventions are joined.

And surely this his sentence (though he were an heretic) we can not but in
this point very well allow. For he will not have any unknown Gospel
received, but that which has been delivered unto us, and which we have
already before received. But now, that which is of these men termed the
Gospel: and the express word of God, came to light in manner but yesterday,
and was to our fathers utterly unknown. May we not therefore with S. Hierom
aptly say thus unto these fellows that so earnestly labor to obtrude this new
fownd Gospel unto us?

What so ever thou be, thou teacher of Hiero. in Epist ad Pamachiu^ and
Oceanum.
new doctrynes, I pray the forbear the Roman ears, forbear the faith which
has been recommended unto us from the mouth of the Apostles. Why do thou
seek after iiijc. years (but we may now say after fourtene c. years and more)
to teach us now that we knew not before? Why do thou bring forth that
which Peter and Pawll would not show? The Christian world has been withowt
this doctrine until this day. I will for my part being now an owld man, hold
that faith wherein being a child I was borne and bred. What a madness then were
this if we should now receive a strange unknown Gospel, and reject that
which we hold by delivery unto us from those holy fathers? For if they mean
the name of the Gospel those books which we have written by the Evangelists
and Apostles, and before them by the Prophettes, that Gospel has Polonia had
and received And we English men almost these M. years.
almost this vic. years past: neither is there any among us that doubts, but
that in the same is the express word of God: Wherefore as touching the
scripture, it is none other Gospel which the heretics would at this day
obtrude unto us, but the same which we profess allredy. Yea (and that is more)
they openly confess that they have received the whole Canonical scripture
from us.

What Gospel then (I pray you) is that, which they preach unto us? Forsooth
such What nue Gospel it is by Caluins fentence which heretics seek to
obtrude unto us. Galat 1.
a Gospel, whereunto (as Calvin writes) other men's inuentio^s and deuyses are
joined, whereof they bring a strange sense hitherto unheard of in the church
of God. And this is it, whereof S. Pawll gives warning saying: [Yf any man
preach unto you any other Gospel then that which you have received, let him
be accursed.] That is as myche to say: If Luther, Calvin, or Melancthon, come
unto you, and preach the Gospel to any other sense or meaning, then that
which you have received of the blessed fathers: if he tell you any thing
contrary to that, which they have delivered unto you: let him be accursed.

Be we not think you by these words of S. Pawll justly fearyd from taking
the inventions and deuyses of these men for the true word of God? Namely since
this is truly said to be a sin against the holy Ghost, and to blaspheme the
same, when by contempt we violat those things which have been delivered unto
us, by the fathers. Which thing that blessed Bishop Damasus teaches us
Damasus in epist. ad Aureliu^ Cartha. Epis.
in these words.

Voluntary breakers of the Canons (says he) are grievously judged of the holy
fathers and condemned by the holy Ghost, by whose instinct and gift they were
decreed. For Rightly seem they to blaspheme the holy Ghost which against those
holy Canons do any thing voluntarely, or frowardly not compelled by necessitee:
or presume to speak against them: or willingly consent to any, that attempt so
to do. For syche presumption is manifestly The breach of the Canons is one
kind of blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
one kind of blasphemy against the holy Ghost. You see how this holy man
tells us, it is one kind of blasphemy against the holy Ghost, if a man
presume to do or speak frowardly or malapertly against those things which are
deliured unto us from the fathers. Therefore lest we should become giltye of
this kind of blasphemy, we dare by no means consent to these men, who think
it a matter to be fled from, as a pestilent poison of Satan, which the
Catholics and right beleuers have taught by the space of so many hundredth
years, which the ouctoritee of the church has delivered, all Christian people
embraced, and the schools of the divines mayntayned: And on the other side
would have us to esteem the dreams of their own brain as the very pure and
express word of God: especially since we are twyse warned by these words of
S. Pawll in one epistle that if any man preach unto you Galat. 1.
any other Gospel then that which ye have received, let him be accursed.

But chieffly that fears us which is Ezec. 14. 1. Cor. 10.
spoken by the prophet [depart ye from idols:] Which thing also S. Pawll
does itterate unto us cryeng out, [Flee from the worshipping of idols,] which
S. John the Evangelist 1. Joan. 5.
does also repete unto us: Concluding that his notable Epistle with these
words: [My children keep ye from idols.] But what? be Note who be the idols
we must flee from.
not trow you Luther, Calvin, Melancthon and Brencius very idols? Is there not
in these men, a wonderful heygth, lifting it self up against the knowledge
of God? Do they not resist and withstand? And (which 2. Cor. 10
is the property of Satan) do they not extol themselves above all, which is
said or 2. These. 2.
worshipped as God, showing them selves as it were God, and seek to have
worshipped of all men as the express word of God, what so ever they write, or
say?

But here lest we seem to apply these things according to the vision of our
own heart (as heretics use to do) let us in few, lay open what the holy
fathers have taught to be signified in the scriptures under the names of
idols. S. Hierome expounding that place of Zachary: [I will destroy the names
Hier. in 13. Zachari.
of idols from of the earth:] says that by these words are signified not
only those idols whereof we read in the Psalms: [The Psalm. 113.
images of the Gentills made of silver and gould being the works of men's
handes] but also those whereof Pawll speaks saying. 1. Tim. 4.
[But the spirit tells us manifestly that in the latter days some shall
depart from the faith giving ear to seducing spirits, and to the doctrine of
devils, teaching faulse under hipocrisy, having their consciences marked with
an hot iron.]

For even as idols (says he) are made by the hand of the work man, so the
perverse doctrine of heretics what so ever it self deuyseth it turns into an
idol, and makes Antechrist to be worshipped for Christ. Leekewyse entreating
upon that place of the Cap 2.
Prophet Esaias: [Their land is full of idols: The works of their own hands
have they worshipped, and that which their own fyngers have made, has man
bowed unto, and Idols are doctrines contrary to the truth Cap. 8.
humbled him self:] Idols he interprets to be doctrines contrary to the
truth. Neither will he have otherwise understood that which is written by
the prophett Osee: [They made their silver and gowld idols to them selves that
they might perish.]

S. Augustine also after he had spoken many August. de v^^a religione. Cap. 38.
things of idols made with hands: There is (says he) a worse and more base
worshipping of idols when men worship their own fancyes, and honor with the
name of Religion what so ever they have imagined, in their erring minds puffed
up with pride and vayn glory. Of which kind of fanceys, and vain visions, he
interprets Iosue also to speak in that place, where he says: [Take 1*
Reg. 7.
away strange Gods from among you and enclyne your hearts to the lord your
God.] Ezech. 16
Leekewyse that place of Ezechiell: [of my gould and of my silver have thou
made to thy self images.] But the images of their fanceys Aug q 25. super Iosue
cap. 23
(says he) wherein their carnal souls delight to wallowe, ouerturne both all
the sacraments, and all the words of the holy books. But yet it follows
not, because those images be faulse, that therefore the sacraments and
scriptures should be so myche dishonored, that they should be thowght to be
theirs, because our lord said, of my gowld and of my silver, etc.

Vincentius Lirinensis also a writer of that time says that the owld
Testament caulleth strange Gods, syche doctrines as are strange and diverse
from the church: because heretics make no less a do to the mayntenance of
their own opinions, then the Gentills did for their Gods, where also it is
written in the Deuteronomy: [If there Deuter. 13
rise among you a prophet that foretell you any sign or wonder which comes to
pass as he has spoken, and he says unto you: Let us go after strange gods,
whom you know not: thou shall not harken to the words of that prophet, for
the lord your God proves you that it may appear whether you love him with all
your heart, and with all your soul or no.]

Here (says he) by strange Gods are signified, Strange Gods Vince^tius
expounds to be nevve doctrines* 1. Cor. 11.
strange, new, and unknown errors, which God sometime suffers to be spread
that he may try our constancy in loving of him, and in cleaving to his sound
doctrine: according as it is also written by S. Pawll: [there must be
heresies:] For this cause (says Vincentius) the auctors of heresies are not by
and by rooted up, to the end that they which are tried may be seen how
faithful, and constant, and how steadfast a lover he is of the catholic faith.
And in deed (says he) when any nouelty boyleth up, by and by is seen the
wayght of the Corn from the lightness of the chafe. Then very easily is blown
away with the air that, which by no wayght was kept in our lords barn
flower. For some are blown quyte away, some only streeken, and being wounded
as persons half dead, and half a live, are affrayed to perish, and asshamed
to return, as men which had only received syche quantite of poison as neither
would kill, nor be digested: nor force them to dye, nor suffer them to live.

Heerby, it may easily appear what the ancient fathers thowght to be signified
in the scriptures, by the name of idols: to wit heretics and their faulse
doctrine. For to embrace as the very word of God, the saying of any one man,
teaching in manner all things contrary to the received doctrine of the whole
Church, and to adore and inclyne unto what so ever he has said, or written,
what can be a kindly idolatry, if this be not? Which who so does, what does
he else, but adore Antechrist for Christ?

Luther says: that which I teach is the word of God, and the pure Gospel. By
and by they adore and inclyne unto it, as before an idol. The same says
Zuinglius, and Calvin, the Anabaptists, and the Picardines, Suenckfeldius,
Seruetus, Campanus, and diverse other heretics: They bring forth certain
textes of the scripture wrested into a Note.
wrong sense, and by and by, this word of men or rather of the devil speaking
by men, simple persons do embrace, and adore as the word of God, and the very
Gospel of Christ. Horrible is this idolatry and to be Heretics are to be
fledd from as the vvorst kind of Idolles. Ezech 14. 1. Cor. 10
fled from, with full sail (as they say) according to the warning given us by
the Prophets and Apostles. For what other thing can follow hereof, but that,
while every sect vaunteth his own word to be the express word of God, their
sectaryes and followers must needs have so many Gods as there be archheretikes?

Do you now mark (most virtuous king) to what end Satan does by so many his
diverse members, make so great vaunt and bragging of the express word of God?
There is no one heretic of this our age, which has not always that in his
mouth, which does not glory thereof, and so particularly challenge the same
unto himself alone, as that he will exclude all others from the possession
thereof. The mind therefore of Satan Satan's full intent and final perpose.
is, that we should bow down, now before this man, and now before that, and
that we should embrace now his word, and now an other man's as the very word of
God, and so instead of one God, worship many idols, and in place of one
Christ, bow down to many Antechristes.

But let us harken to the voice of the Prophets and Apostles crying unto us:
[Flee from idols, flee from idols:] Flee from the peruers doctrines of Luther,
Calvin, Melancthon, and Brentius, flee as many, as be of them, which will have
their own fanceys worshipped for idols, and labor to have what so ever they
say or think to be adored as the pure word of God, and the very Gospel.

But see (most gracious king) how these Germayne Gods can not abide one an
other, but even like Homer his Gods make war among them selves. I speak not
in this place, of those deadly bataylles and innumerable slaughters wherewith
unhappy Germany has been miserably afflicted, since they began to worship
these Gods, and to receive what so ever was by them said or written as the
express word of God. But harken how the Gods them selves (which do thus set
to sale to the unlearned multitude their own word for Gods word) do quarrel
and braule among them selves. The civil war among the heretics the^ selves


Did not Luther as an enemy invade and set upon Zuinglius and his followers?
And leekwyse upon the Anabaptists? Did he not labor as myche as he could, to
cut the throtes of both those wicked sects? Whom he thought meet not only to
be brydeled by his writings, but also to be kept under, by the mace of the
magistrate. Therefore not only among Christians, but also among the Lutherans
Luthera^s against Zuinglia^s etc.
them selves is so sore detested the name of Zuinglians, and Anabaptists, that
they are (as the Proverb says) forbidden fire and water among them, and if
any Lutheran Note.
receive or harbor any of them, he is by order grievously punisshed.

And I pray you be the Zuinglians any Zuinglia^t against Lutheranes.
more mylde to the Lutherans? In deed they do not persecute them with the like
cruelty. Not, that they lack any good will thereto, but because they find them
selves unable. For they well perceive their strength is not yet syche that they
be able to match them. But of what mind they be toward the Lutherans, it is by
their wrytings manifest to all men: for they make even the like account of the
Lutherans, as the Lutherans Calvin and Alasco against VVestphalus.
do of them. The wrytinges of John Calvin and John Alasco against Ioachimus
VVestphalus and against the Cities of Saxony do well witness this. Bucer
also wrote that Luther was accused of all men to be a man to full of words,
very imperious, and over bitter, not having the pacyence to be contraryed by
any man: which fault the Tigurins also charge him with. If he look (says
Bucer speaking of Luther) that no man should in any one thing dissent from him,
then let him prove him self to be a God: Covertly meaning thereby, that he
sought to be reverenced as a God, and to have his word adored of all men as the
word of God: brefly that it were no more laufull for any man to dissent from
his mind then from the sentence of god. Thus you see his very fellows thought
intolerable this his exceeding pride, whereby he presumed to sytte in the temple
of God, even as he were god himself.

But does not Calvin also compain that Calvin his complaynt of Luther.
the church of god is to imperiously bownd to the deuyses of Luther? How
grievously does he take it, that they dress him up with the spoil of S. John
Baptist, and call him Helias by whom all things were to be restored? With
which falshed they did no less distayne the name of Luther (says he) then the
Egyptians did the body of Hieremy, by worshipping his sepulcher.

And if (says he) the name of Helias were to be granted to Luther, yet was it
a point of sacrilegious temeritee to affirm him to be the last Helias: as
though the hand of God were shortnyd, that he could not hereafter, send a
better, or at the lest an other as good as he. For by what oracle was it
oppened unto them that the treasures of the mighty power of God were so myche
diminisshed and wasted, in the person of one man, that out of so great, and
incomprehensible a number, the like of him might not be found?

Here Calvin could not dissemble the grudge he had conceived, in that Luther
was thus caulled the last Helias: whereby no place was now left for him, who
thought himself in no point inferior, but rather superior to Luther.

But Ioannes Alasco who does seem almost Ioannes Alasco
to consent with Calvin, beside that in many places he shewyth himself to
think very ill of Luther (as it is noted by Erasmus Albere) he writes thus
also of the Lutherans, that when all their stuff is spent, then they use to
flee to the Confession of Augspurg, as to their shooteanker, and make (says
he) so myche a do of that, that there want not among them (yea and not of the
meanest sort) which say they had rather Some Luthera^s profess that they will
sooner dought of S. Pavvl his doctri then of their M. Luthers.
dowbt of the doctrine of the Apostle Pawll, then of Luthers, or of that which
is contained in that Confession.

You see how the sacramentaryes themselves can not bear, that the contents of
Luthers books, or of the Augustan confession should be received as the word of
God: though with some for all that, it be of more pryse then the word of God.
And shall we Christians bear that, which the lewd Zuinglians can not bear?
And shall we suffer that to be obtruded unto us for the express word of God,
which we most certainly know, and have proved to be the express word of the
devil?

But some there be perhapps that will in this case give the less credyt to the
judgment of the Zuinglians, for that the world sees they dissent from the
doctrine of Luther. Let us see therefore what judgment the Lutherans them
selves have one of an other. I think no man will deny, but the
Confessionistes be Luthera^s: VVherof though The Confessionistes.
Andreas Osiander were himself one, yet does he not complain, that with his
followers the Confession of Augspurg is more regarded then the word of God? And
that they which proceed masters of art and professors of diuinitee at
VVittemberge, abjure the word of God, and swear to be subject to the word of
Melancthon? Mark ye how this fellow condemns the disciples of Melancthon of
idolatry, and warns them to flee from this idol.

But to come to Melancthon himself, did Mela^ctho^ him self against* Luther.
not he at the first, with tooth and nail, defend and esteem no less then
the very word of God, these doctrines of Luther? That man has no free will:
that all things happen by absolute necessitee: that man feelith no more what
God does within him then the Anuyll feelith what the hammer does: that works
are not necessary to salvation: that no rytes or ceremonies owght to be
admitted into the Church. Mela^ctho^ co^playneth that he hade follovved Luther
to seruilly.


Yet afterward complainyng that he had been to seruilly bond to Luther, he
rejected these his toys, and came to a better mind. For which cause yet he
bred to him self so great hatred yea even of his own disciples, that they
pittefully reuyled him, and sought to exclude him from the Confession of
Augspurg, whereof it is known he was the Author.

But Mathias Flaccus is not affrayed to arrogat yet more unto him self, and
sticks not to pronounce his master Melancthon (to who^ he was behoulding) and
all the adherentes Matthias Flaccus condemns his M Melancthon and his
followers.
of his doctrine, unworthy to be accounted other then very Ethnikes and
Publicans: And to make his meaning plain he thus interprets him self, that
no good ma^ought to have any familiaritee, freendship, or company, with them:
And to him (which not being especially bound to them by necessitee of law)
should do any of these things, he pronounces the contagion of their lepre:
and so without all doubt the wrath of God. And that (I think) was the cause
that iiij Luthera^ doctors against Mela^ctho^ Luthers own der linge.
at the last conference at Worms, Schneppius, Merlinus, Strigellius,
Sa^^erius, and certain other Illiricans departed thence without doing any
thing, for that they thought the fellowship of Melancthon and Brentius (both
whom Flaccus had excommunicated from his congregation) was of them to be
avoided. Namely since none of them gave any show of inclination to any syche
return or amendment, as they required.

Who therefore is there, which does not now see as clear as the day light,
that these be the idols which the Prophets and Apostles so earnestly exhort
us to flee from? The heretics I say of this our age, Luther, Calvin,
Melancthon, Bre^tius, Flaccus, they command us to flee, as from the vyper and
Cockatryce: for so do they among them selves and by their own judgment one
of an other, condemn them selves. But may not we myche the more justly
account them for syche as they are become, not only by the judgment of the
Catholic Church (which Matthew. 18.
we are commanded to harken unto) but also by their own judgment one of an
other? And shall there now be any man that may persuade us (which acknowledge
and honor only one God) to adore the word of these heretics as the express
word of God?

O Christ which have almost this 600. years shyned over this country, with
the light Note the virtuous and godly prayer of the Author.
of thy Gospel, rather take from us all our worldly goods, the sweet fruition
of this light, yea all things which are in this world most dear to mortal
men, then once to suffer us to be removed from this mind, wherein we are
determined rather to do and suffer all things, then to depart from that thy
holly word, which almost. 600. yers past was by thy goodness delivered and
impartid to our nation: and in stead thereof to receive their word, which set
them selves in the Temple as Gods, and so thrall our selves to the most grievous
crime of horrible idolatry.

But to return where we leeft: I trust we have sufficiently showed that the
word which is now by heretics set to sale to the unlearned multitude for the
express word of God, is not in deed the word of God, but the word of the
devil, from the which the minds of all good men ought to abhor and to flee
from, as a deadly poison, according to the words of the Prophets, and
Apostles, which still cry unto us [Flee from idols.] Now Ezec 12. 1. Cor. 10
is it time to blow the retraict, but that we mean first a little to discuss
unto you what is the express word of God: to the end that when you know the
same, the express word of the devil may the better be discerned.

There are truly in the scriptures many Here the Author teaches in fevve what
is in deed the express and lively word of god Gal. 5. Matt. 22. Romans 13. 1.
Tim. 1. Aug. in prologo Psalm. 140
words of God, but they all make, but one word of God: which is (Love:) for
[al the law (says the Apostle) is fulfilled in this one word.] And in this
depends not only the whole law, but also the prophets: as Christ him self
witnesses: The fulness of the law therefore, and the end of all the
commandments, is Charity. For thereunto is referred every one of the
commandments.

Seek none other thing (says S. Augustine) in any of the scriptures: let no
man give you any other precept. What so ever is dark in the scripture,
Charity lies hidden theri^: and what so ever is plain in the scripture, there
also is Charity open and plain. This In Psalm. 130. sermon. 1.
precept of Charitee is above and over all the heavens, and over al books: All
books are subject, and under this: every tongue of holly men, and every mocyon
of the dispensors of God, and of the mind and body* serves under this
onsigne: what so ever thou have, and have not this, it proffiteth thee nothing:
Other things if thou have not, yet have The force of Charitee.
this, and thou have fulfilled the law. If this alone be absent, all is
emptye* if this alone be present, all is full. This only it is which suffiseth
to salvation, and is so necessary to salvation, as there is no mean, whereby a
man may hope to atteyne the same without charitee.

This word therefore which does consummat Romans 9.
and abbreuiat, this lively and saving word, this word of Charitee and Love is
so express, and plain, that Clemens Alexandrinus Li. 3. pedagogi. ca. 21
says. It may be learned even without the scriptures: for that it is a certain
law of the spirit written in the hearts of the faithful, be they never so
simple and unlearned. No man therefore can be so dull, as not to understand this
word, neither shall any man be excused thorough ignorance thereof. This is that
word whereof the Psalmist speaks saying: [Thy word is a candle Psalm. 11S.
to my feet, and a light unto my paths.] VVherof he also speaks where he
says: [Thy precept is clear giving light to the Psalm. 18.
eyes.]

In deed the eyes of our heart are lightened by Charitee, as on the other side
they be blinded by coouetousnesse. VVhither the coouet ousnesse or desyer be of
the flesh, or of the eyes, or of praise and glory: VVher that is, there is
nothing, but mere darcknesse, nothing but a fowll dimnesse. On the other side,
where Charity is, there is a shining light, yea so clear and bright, that nothing
can be dark to him that has charity: Therefore it is very well said of S.
Augustine: Let him August.
love and have charity that will come to the knowledge of God: In vain comes
he to reading, meditation, preaching, or praying, which loves not: But because
love and charity can not be perfect in any other place, then in that heavenly
country of the blessed saints, therefore the knowledge of him shall in the end
there also, and no where else, become perfaict. Here in the mean time in 1.
Cor. 13
part we know: and in part we prophecy.

Wherefore if any man marueyll why (as among other heretics) so also among
the Confessionistes them selves, there is so great a mist and darcknes, that
after the manner of the Andabates they fight wyncking, or in the dark, and can
not atteyne to the knowledge of the truth: let him now cease wondering, since he
has learned this to be the cause Why there is such a miste before the eyes of
heretics that they see not the* troth. Ephe. 4. Coloss. 3.
thereof, that they be destitute of that Charitee which only gives light to the
faithful. For they would never have divided unity, if they had not first lost
Charity which is the bond of peace and unity. But for this cause are they
destitute of Charity, for that they be full of covetous desire, as of many
other things, so chieffly of praise and vain glory. According to that is
written by the Poet: he is a rare man that can give over and renounce his own
wit.

Nothing so myche hinders the fynding Pride is the greatest hind rance to the
attchi uing of knowledge. Prouer. 13.
out of the truth, as pride, which is the moother of all heresies: For there are
ever brawles among proud men. But to attain to the truth, there is none other
way but humillite, by the which Charitee is noorisshed, and unity retained.
And that humillitee is (says S. Augustine) the first, second, and Epistol. 56
third virtue, and so forth, how often so ever you should ask of me, that
answer would I still make, as it is written, Demosthenes sometime spoke of
pronunciation. By this way since heretics walk not, who can myche marueil
though they can not atteyne to the knowledge of the clear truth? What a revel
keep they both with us, and among themselves about the express word of God?
Yet in the mean time can they not see that, which is the most express, clear
and plain thing in all the scriptures and as clear as Charity is the scope and
end of the holy scripture.
the sun shinyng, and which alone to have learned does abundantly suffice us
to salvation: to wit Charitee. For that is the sum and end of the whole
scripture, as is very well written by S. Augustine saying.

Who so ever thinking him self to understand Li. 1. de doctrina christiana ca.
36. t. Tim. 1.
the holy scriptures, and every part thereof, and yet by that understanding does
not buyld up this dooble Charitee, toward God, and his neighbor, he
understands nothing. But who so ever draws out thereof syche an
understanding as is proffitable to the building up and working of Charitee,
though he speak not the very same, which he whom he reads may be proved to
have meant in that place: yet for so myche as he is deceived by syche an
understanding as yet works Charitee, he is not hurtfully deceived: neither
does he therein altogether lie: but he is so deceived, as a man which (having
lost his way) does yett by coasting, co me to that place, whereunto that
direct way would have brought him. S. Augustine aduyseth in reading of the
scriptures so to understand them, as Charitee be wrought thereby, if we will
not err to destruction.

But do these men (which now a days have nothing more in their mowth then the
scriptures, and the express word of God) apply their understanding to this
end, that they labor to work and buyld up nothing, but Charitee? Nay: whoo
sees not that they do utterly all that ever they do, to the contrary? Which
may well appear by these their words, then the which none are more common
among them. Trotz, a name of uncleanness and fylthe.
Trotz, Trotz, in despite of the Pope, and in despite of the Council. Is
this to buyld up Charitee?

But whereof grow there among us so many debates, contentions, seditions,
wars, heresies, and sects, whereby we see the church myserably torn and
divided, but of this only, that whiles every priuatt man cacheth unto him self
the express word of God, and seeks to usurp and appropriatt unto him self
the right understanding thereof, nothing is less sought in reading the
scriptures, then the edifying of (Love) The intolerable pride of the unlearned
multitude and of some vain vveem^n also.
and Charitee? We see the rude and unlearned multitude, with an intolerable
pride, and without wasshing their hands or feet (as they say) come unto the
reading of the holy scriptures: Yea we see foolish and fond woomen arrogat so
myche unto them selves, that condemning their fathers, dispising their
bisshops, and teachers, setting at naught the sense, and consent of the whole
Church, they are not affrayed to prefer their own expositions, before all
others: Whom yet they know to have been conversant in the scriptures many
years Psalm. 1.
both day and night, and to have omitted no study, labor or diligence, to
atteyne unto the true understanding thereof: whom they also know to be set
over them, and that they owght in those matters to be subject unto them, in so
myche as they have Heb. 13.
the Carke and care to make a just and good account of their souls. Is this to
buyld up Charitee? Yet thus has it seemed good to the Archeheretyke of our
age, who first presumed to give that was holly unto dogs, and to throw
pearls before swyne, under Matt. 7.
whose feet how filthily they be trodden, who can without tears behold.

Notable is that saying of Gregory Nazianzen: Li. 1. Theologiae.
that it is not for all men to talk of divine matters, no nor lauful at all
times, and in all companyes to dispute of all things. But good regard is to be
had, when, to whom, and to what end, that is to be done: which matter he
pursues at large.

Nothing is better, then the reading of the scriptures: nothing more
proffitable. But there is a certain tree caullyd Rhododaphne Dioscorides li. 4.
Plinius li. 24. cap. 11.
(in English Osiander) whose leaves are to beasts poison, and to men
medicynable, against serpents. Even leeke unto this, is the scripture, which
as to sober and wise men it gives wholesome nouriture, so to foolish and wicked
persons, it ministers occasion of heresy and of more wickedness. But were it
not better to keep these brute beasts (to whom Christ forbadde to give that
which was holy) from the reading of the holy scriptures, then to suffer them
like spyders to draw nothing thereof, but deadly poison?

But as for women how myche better should they be occuped in spinning on their
distaff, at syche time as they take on them to dispute of the word of God? [Be
all Apostles, be all Prophets? be al pastors and teachers?] says the Apostle.
But now all will be Apostles, 1. Cor. 12.
all Prophets, al Pastors and teachers, yea women and all. Christ would not
that his [body should be only one member, but that there should be theru^to many
members:] Now these folk on the other side will have that all, should be one
member and one gross substance, all of a facyo^, not distincted with any
varietee, but a certain vnfrutful heap and confused Chaos, without apt
proportion or measure. By which means not only the body is weakened and the
order of nature perverted, but the auctoritee of God is also manifestly
shaken, while every man usurps to him self more then is given him.

Hereof grows the dissencion, sects and quarrelles, wherewith the Christian
world is now tormoyled, while neither the hand nor the foot will vouchesaff to
do his duty, but every member will take on him the office of the eye, and the
tongue, and so neglecting his own, impudently intrude him self into Note.
the office of an other.

But these perhapps may seem soo^what from the matter which I have now taken
in hand. Yet is it not altogether from my purpose and matter. But now to
return to my especyall point, will you know (most virtuous King) what is the
express word of God, and what is One self scripture taken with the right
sense may be the word of Godd, and being perverted may be the word of the
devil.
the express word of the devil? For both (as I have before sufficiently,
showed at large) may be drawn out of one, and the self same scripture: But yet
learn in a few the difference.

If a man so understand the scripture as he do thereby, edifye and buyld up
Charity, then is it the word of God. But if by his understanding thereof, he
buyld that which is contrary to Charitee, then is it become the word of the
devil. Yea and that is more, mark this. If a man out of the holy scriptures
The difference between the word of God and of the devil.
draw that sense which may be proffitable to the increase and edifying of
Charitee, all be it he say not the very same, which ^e whom he reads as
Mathewe, Mark, Luke or Pawll, may be proved in that place to have meant, yet is
he not hurtfully deceived, neither does he err from the word of God: but he
is so deceived as a man which strayeth somewhat out of his direct way, and yet
by coasting in a fair plain champion comes to the same place where unto that
other way would have brought him.

As therefore they which by sailyng cut the foming seas, have especial regard
to the The word of God aptly compared to the lode star.
Pole, and the lode star, called Cynosura and Vrsa minor, so they that
trauayll in reading of the scriptures must direct the eyes of their minds to
none other thing, but only to Charitee, where unto if they bend their
understanding, they can never swerve from the word of God: seeing (as I said a
little before) all the words of God, are but one word of God: which is, Love.
Then the which word nothing is, or can be in the scriptures more plain and
clear.

What a fury therefore is this? what a madness? What a blyndnes of mind? The
express word of God is sought: Myche stryuing there is about the same: and yet
when the same so The marvelous blindness of heretics.
express and clear word of God does offer it self before our eyes, it is not
seen. When it does inculcate, it self into our ears, it is not heard. When
it offers it self willingly as it were to be handled with our hands, yet is
it not acknowledged or received. But wretched men they suffer the same lightly
to pass away, from their eyes, ears, hands, and hearts, while they falsely
persuade them selves, that their salvation consists in knowing and reasoning,
and not rather in loving and believing. Does not that place of Psalm. 113.
the Psalm rightly tooche those men. [Eyes have they and shall not see, ears
and shall not hear, hands and shall not feel?] Charitee, Charitee, Charity,
does in every place of the scriptures come toward us, and offreth it self unto
our eyes: it is of al other the cleerest word of God: and without that, who so
ever thinks knowledge will bring him to salvation, he is far wide.

Very truly says a virtuous and learned Hugo de S. Victore li. 1. par 10 ca. 6.
de saciamentis
man. The Clemency of God regards not, with how great knowledge we believe,
but with how great devotion we love that which we believe. And an other virtuous
man also Gerson in li. an Monachus pro studiis, neglige re possit diuina co^
siderat. 9.
says: In the last day we shall not be asked how myche, how sharp and how
learned our understanding was, but how great our affection and zeal to our lord
God: that is, how simple, how right, how virtuous, humble, and devout, and how
willing and faithful our service toward him has been.

Which things being so, why do we not rather spend our whole study and
labor in this point, which only and alone we know to be necessary to our
salvation, to reteyne among our selves mutual love and brotherly charitee,
which is the very proper mark of the children of God? In so myche as the
understanding of the scriptures is not to all men a leeke necessary. The
simplicitee of believing, August. contra Epist. Mani chaei qua^ voca^t fun
damenti li. r. ca. 39. de doctrina Christiana.
not the quicknes of understanding, keeps safe the unlearned multitude. And as
the same S. Augustine says. The man which trusts to faith, hope, and
charitee, and fast reteyneth them, has no need of the scriptures, unless it
be to teach others. And therefore by these three many live well in deserts,
and solitary places without books.

Now contrarely all men will search the scriptures and dispute of the sense and
understanding thereof. But that where unto as to a certain mark all the
scriptures are referred: and that which those scriptures labor to inculcate in
every place into the eyes, ears, and minds of men: that Charitee (I say)
which only brings salvation, no ma^careth to reteyne. And verily look how
myche the oftener and more fervent disputation is made of the scriptures, and
of the express word of God, so myche the more does Charitee (which all the
scriptures do with one voice sound out unto us) wexe could in the minds of
men.

And is it leekly that the sound understanding of the scriptures, and the
express word of God is there, where Charity is wexen Heretics can not possibly
have the express word of Godd.
so could, and hatred so hot? Where besides railing, reuyling, skofing, and
contumelyes, a man can almost read or hear nothing? And where they them
selves, which are departed from us (who had rather be called Gospellers, then
Christians) do not only fight against us, but also one against an other, with
syche infest, ra^ckorous, and unchristian minds, that no cruel Barbarians or
enemies of Christ his Cross, could deal more leeke enemies?

Truly before this Gospel sprang up (which is proceeded from none less then
from Christ) we never saw any syche bitterness of minds, or cruel
contentions. Namely among those, whose office was to teach, and open the
Gospel of Christ. And shall we call this the Gospel? shall we call this the
express word of God, from the which all Charitee, the thing most expressly
commanded in the Gospel is so vanished, that even they (which glory to have
been the Note this well
first, which (as them selves say) have of late brought to light the buried
Gospel) do so hatefully contend among them selves, burn with syche mutual
envy, and so byte one an other that Gal. 5.
it can not be long, but we must needs see them consumed one of an other?

This is sure the express word of the devil, not the express word of God,
seeing as I have allredy so often said, the express word of God is only Love
and Charitee. That is it that imbraceth Unity, that joins us all Ambros. in
Ca. 3. ad Coloss.
in one body, that gives peace, and with pure heart keeps the same. And
Christian charitee can not be kept, but in the Unity of the church: so that
in vain does he vaunt him self to have charity, which does not embrace
Unity. But if this express word of God, Charitee, be not kept any where but
in the unity of the church, who is there that can think that the express
word of God can be found any where out of this unity?

And this is it that in this treatyce I showed before, that sometime when two
men bring forth one self text of scripture, yet God opens the mouth of one,
and the devil of the other. For he which having divided him self from the
church, alleges it not with the common sense and understanding of the
Church, but with his own private and wrested interpretation: (for so myche as
S. John says [VVho so ever speaks of him How to know when the true
word of God is uttered Joan. 8.
self, (yea though he speak scripture) yet utters he a lie) the mouth of
that man does the devil open, and that which he speaks is the word of the
devil.

But allthough following S. Ambrose we said, that Charity is the thing which
imbra cyth, and conteyneth unity and which makyth us all one body, we would
not be understood in that sense as though we me^t thereby, that evil and
unjust men were excludyd from the body of Christ, which is the church. For
allthough Charitee which the scripture chieffly commendyth unto us, be the
proper mark of them which do truly honor God, whereby the children of God are
discernyd, from the children of the devil, and that those be only they, which
appertain to the coompany of the Elect: yet is there a certain De vnita te
Ecclesiae ca. 2. 1. Cor. 13. vbi supra ca. 5.
other congregacyon or church of the^ that are called, from the which they be
not excluded which are destitute of true charity, so they reteyne that, which
S. Augustine calls, the love of unite: by the which he says the members of
Crist are couppled unto him. The working whereof is to suffer al thing. That
there may be (as the same S. Augustine writes) a certain force of suffering,
houlding the sure handfast of unity, which was signified by the pytche,
wherewith the Genesis 6.
Arc (being a figure of the church) was fastened and sodred, both within, and
without: for evil men are to be suffered both with in and without, lest the
knot of peace be dissolved.

Of which charity also S. Augustine writes Li. 1. contra Cres. ca. 29.
in an other place saying: I do not think any man to be so unwise, as to
believe that he, which has no charity, does appertain to the unite of the
church, when it is certain that they do belong to the unity of the
church, so long as they be not cut of from the same: yea though they be
destitute of the other effects of charitee, so that reteyning that force or
virtue of suffering they be among them of whom S. Pawll writes: [supporting
Ephesians. 4.
one an other in charity: careful to preserve the unity of the spirit, in
the bond of peace.]

But here these fellows will deny that to be the church of God which we
profess, and whereof we glory and rejoice to be the humble children, and will go
about to challenge that name to their congregation. But I would feign have them
show us their church. I speak not now of the Sacrame^taries, Anabaptists,
heavenly prophets, nor of the Campanians, or Seruetians (all which sects they
have allredy thrown out of their congregation:) but let the Confessionistes or
Lutherans show us their Church.

Melancthon and his followers, Brentius also with his band, are thrown forth
of that Church, which would be counted of the Augustan (not Christian)
confession: as we may plainly see by the writings of Mathias Flaccus, and
Ioachimus Merlinus, who glory themselves to be upright perfect Lutherans. But
if any man will give more credyt to the judgment of Melancthon, or of his
disciple Iustus Menius, then shall he find that they give the like iudgeme^nt of
Flaccus, as Flaccus does of them.

Where then shall we now find this The Conflict among heretics about their
private churches
church of Luther? Melancthon will not grant it to be among the Illiricans:
The Illiricans on the other side, say it is not among the Melancthonistes or
Brentia^s, whom they have allredy thrown out from the communion of their
Church. And have not thus the very followers of Luther by hellis he discord
divided also their own unity, even as their master before did by most
impious sacrilege divide and separat him self from the catholyke unity, as
from our lords barn flower? Where then shall we seek this church of
theirs, which neither of themselves will grant to the other? Who is there so
destitute of all reason, that will not rather chose to remain in that Church
wherein he was borne, and also regenerat in Christ (which was the greater
benefyt) then forsaking this, to betake him self unto that, which to them
selves is so uncertain, and unknown?

But God forbid that a Christian catholyke The true church of Godd.
and right believing man, should have any doubt, whether that church, wherein
not only him self, but his parents, his graundfathers, and great
grau^dfathers, have been entered into the faith of Christ be the true church of
God or no. For what were this else, but to doubt whether he be a Christian man,
or borne of christian parents, and (as it is written by the Prophet) [to
stumble at none Esai. 59. Psalm. 18. Matt. 8.
day: as in the dark?] God has placed his tabernacle in the sun. He has
planted his church as a city upon an hill, which can not be hidden.

But of that matter our purpose is not to taulke any more in this place, for
that it apperteyneth not properly to this treatise, and for that as well in our
christian confession, as in our writing which we have late pubblisshed against
the prolegomena of Bre^tius, we have at large treated of that matter: where we
have taught you which be the marks of the true church: To wit, that it be
one, holy, catholyke and Apostolyke church, whereof except one have the
chiefrule whose auctoritee all do acknowledge, it can not be caulled the
church of God.

Now therefore we will not tarry any longer upon this matter: For that I trust
we have sufficiently showed that the express word of God, whereof those me^
brag so myche, is not the word of God, but the express word of the devil. For
the clear and express word of God is Charity. Which that it may please God by
his holy spirit to power into our hearts, and once to give end to thies
schisms and heresies, and to restore to his church the desired tranquillite,
we humbly beseech his infinite mercy. Which no doubt he will do, not for our
merits (whereunto most grievous punishementes are dew) but of his own exceeding
great goodness, so that we amend our lives, and with confidence adressing our
selves to the throne of his grace, incessantly contine we in fervent prayer.

THE CONCLUSION.
THis myche I had to write unto your highness (most virtuous King) of the
express word of God, at what time I was preparing to take my journey to Rome,
and by that occasion let with myche and mani fold busynes. How be it the
faithful heart I bear your grace, enforced me to bestow this trauayll in
writing of this matter. The great benefytes also, which without my desert, you
have heaped upon me (being so great as I doubt whether any man have received
the like of any king of Polonia) has driven me theru^to. Wherefore how myche
the more I profess and acknowledge my self bound unto you, so myche* the more
careful am I of your safety, and namely of the everlasting salvation of your
soul. For the defense whereof, I will not only not flee any pain and trauail,
but most willingly adventure my life. For it is possible there want not some,
which do also beat upon your ears with thies words: [Throw thy self down:
for it is written.] But I have so great a confidence in your constancy, and in
the mercy of God, that assisted therewith, you will never embrace their wicked
counsels of separation, or suffer their pestilent persuasions to have any
place with you.

For mine own part if I should see your The godly Zele of this learned praelat
highness (which God of his mercy forbid) slipping down from that high tower of
the church, I would not fail (God giving me stre^ghth) yea though I should
presently dye therefore, but with my body receive you faulling down, and with
the death thereof, redeem the safeguard of your sowll.

You know (most worthy King) how often I have employed my trauaill in the
defense of the sound and holly doctrine of the church. You know how since the
time your highness pleasure was to have me called to the office of a Bishop, I
have not spared any charges, The great pains and Care of Hosius in susteyni^g
the church so sore assaulted and shaken by heretics.
labors, or peril, to stay the declyning religion within this your kingdom
and dominions, and to the utter most of my power, to sustain and shore up the
same, seeming ready to faull. Who can be a better witness then your highness,
what study, labor and diligence, I have employed, in auowing, defending, and
proouing, our ancient Christian, Catholic, and right religion? But for that
God is justly angry with our sins, how little good has yet followed thereof, I
see to my great grief.

This Sathanisme does daily increase more The cause why heresies spri^g and
increase.
and more. For when men have once begone to throw them selves down, then are
they carried daily down hedlong more and more, into the bottomless dungio^ of
errors. For as it was in their power to let them selves fall, so when they be
once going, it is not then in their power to stay them selves. What is now the
state of your kingdom, your highness sees. While every man almost has none
The state of cou^tres where he resy takes place
other thing to dispute of, but of the express word of God. While each man
arrogateth unto him self the knowledge thereof, and will have his own fancy
adored, as the express word of God: Yea and often is it seen that how myche
the more unlearned a man is, with so myche the more bouldnes he will take on him
to taulke, and dispute of that which he understands not.

But lord how myche I fear lest while every man will have what so ever him self
says, or deuiseth to be houlden for the express word of God, we shall
shortly reckon among us so many Polonian Gods, as allredy we see of Germayne
Gods? Would God your highness would be induced (most virtuous Prince) to harken
to the Prophets, and Apostles, which still cry unto you [Auoyde idols.] For
what Ezech 14. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Joan. 5. Sap. 14. Eccle. 30. Esa. 1. Hiere. 2.
Ezech. 14 18 20. Osee 8. Amos 2. Miche. 1.
can they be else, but idols, which transfer divine honor unto them selves?
and will have what so ever they say or invent, to be houlden and reputed for
the very word of God? This so horrible an idolatry your highness must drive and
beat back far from all the borders of your kingdom, and dominions: Neither
must you permit any man to set him self up as a God, or to command any person
to bow down and inclyne before his Zacha. 13. Act. 21.
word as before the word of God.

What is in deed the express and clear word of God you have now learned of me:
and yet though nothing be more clear and express, yet is it utterly
extinguisshed, when every man shall take on him power, and skill to dispute and
reason of Gods word. I trust I have done that was my part to do. For A
co^pendious collection of the cheef matters treated of in this book.
though not learnedly enough, yet have I plainly and openly showed, how great
danger it brings to the church, when every man be he never so unlearned is
suffered to take upon him the judgment of the express word of God. I have also
oppened what is that word of God which is so clear, perspicuous, and
express, that even without scriptures it may be lernyd by the symplest, and
that it is not needful for them that believe in Christ to dispute thereof: but
that it behooves the^ firmly to retain the same in their hearts, and not to
suffer it to depart from thence.

Now your part (Right mighty king) seemyth to be this, that you forbidd to all
your subjects this reasoning and contencious arguing of the word of God: And
if any be curious to know what is the express word of God, that you command
the^ (according to the Malach. 2.
words of the scripture) [to learn the law at the mouth of the priest.] And
that you take especial heed and regard that you suffer not your ears to be
beaten upon with these sayings of heretics: [If thou be the son of god,
throw thy self down: for it is written.] It is the Matt. 4.
express word of God etc. These be the words of Satan speaking by his lymmes
and members, whom you ought to hate more then any venomous beast.

That which the church teaches is the express word of God: and that which is
taught against the sense and consent of the church is the express word of the
devil. Therefore you must stop your ears against the doctrines of syche men,
as Ulysses did against the singyng of the meremaydes, and when so ever your hap
shall be to hear any syche, to give some manifest show, and toke^, how myche
your highness misleeketh it.

So did your noble progenitors our kings, your blessed father, grandfather,
and great grandfather, all not only notable by the worthy The great piety,
religion, and co^sta^cy of the kings of Polonia
praise of their other virtues, but also for their singular pyete, and
constancy, in houlding and mainteyni^g the catholyck and right faith: Yea they
so abhorred the socyetee, and company of heretics, that some of them (as we
read in our Chronicles) did willingly Vladislaus king of Polonia refused the
kingdom of Bohem in this respect.
refuse kingdoms being offered them of heretics, because they had a conscience
to make or meddle with them. These their virtuous steps if you will follow
(which we trust and hope your highness will) the state of things in your kingdom
are not yet so desperate or past recovery, but that (God fauori^g) the
tra^quillite of the Church may be again restored. Which happy day that it
may once shine upon us, we most humbly and earnestly beseech almighty God.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS: BY THE ORDER of the Alphabet. The number
notes the leaf: a. and b. the first and second side.
A
THE presumptuous words of an Anabaptiste. Fol. 38 a The Apology of England
slaundereth Hosius. Fol. 47. a The devil assaulteth the Apostles as he did
Christ. Fol. 20. a Only one letter in question between the Catholics and the
Arrians. Fol. 77. b The Augustane Confession. 70. b. 72. a
B
The folly of the Bohemians. 56. a Bucer against Luther. 96. b The gentle
agreement between Bucer and Luther. 78. b
C
Calvin and Alasco against VVestphalus. 96. a Caluins complaynt of Luther. 96.
b The breach of the Canons is one kind of blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
91. b The preaching of Catholics and of the old true Prophets agrees. 6.
and 7. The duty of Catholics when heresy springs up. 30. a What is the
whole controversy between Catholics and Protestants. 48. b. 49. a The
difference between Catholics and Protestants. 50. a The force of Charity. 100.
b Charity is the scope and end of all Scripture. 102. a Charity is the lively
and saving word of God. 62. a Who is a demi Christian. 76. b He is no
Christian that is divided from the Church. 77. b A truth received in the
Church is not to be abolisshed for satisfying the multitude. 66. a Truth is
only in the catholic church. 40. b The voice of the church is the voice of
God. 42. a The true church of God. 109. b The voice of the church. 48. a
Contempt of the church, the original of these present heresies. 81. a
Communion under both kinds, grounded upon no scripture at all. 49 50. 51.
Such communion not necessary for the Layete. 54. a The Sentence of general
council, the Sentence of God. 29. b What religion moves Protestants to not
forbear the cup. 59. b
D
Dissension among the protestants, raised up the Swenckfeldian sect. 38. b
Three causes, why heretics ought not to be disputed with by scriptures. 24. b
What is the word of the devil. 42. a How the devil speaks by his
ministers at this day. 15. See more in the word, Satan. Strange Gods are
new doctrines. 93. 94. a The true sense of Christ his words: Drink ye all
of this. 53. b
E
The way to avoid errors, is not by permissio^ of any. 64. b
F
Consta^cy of the Catholic Fathers against the Arria^s. 78. a Flaccus
Illyricus condemns his master, Melancthon. 98. b
G
How heresy has creped on, and multiplied in Germany. 70. a The disordered
alteration in Germany. 71. b The state of protestants in the free Cytes of
Germany. 79. b What the Gospel is by Caluins definition. 90. a Satan
shrowdeth himself under the name of the gospel. 21. a The schismatical Greeks
better then protestants. 51. a
H
Heresy is in the understanding, not in the scripture. 48. b Where in heresy
consists. 33. a. and 39. a The deceitefull pretense of heretics in all ages.
21. a The end of disputing with heretics. 24. a The extreme arrogance of
heretics. 44. a Whereunto their devises do tend. 85. a Heretics thr all the
scriptures to their own minds. 87. a Heretics are idols to be fled from.
92. a. and 95. a Why Catholics may not consent to heretics. 87. b Heretics
void of Charity. 62. a Heresies have been quenched by contrary decrees, not by
tolerations. 64. b. 65. a* and b Councils and parliame^ts in likeregarde with
heretics. 73. b Heretics will bring God in to Order. 75. b. Heretics differ
from Catholics no we, as the faulse prophets did from the true. 3. b. and 4.
a. Heretics transfigured into the Apostles of Christ. 14. a. Heretics now
like to heretics in the primitive Church. 21. b. Why heretics see not the
Truth. 101. b. The marvelous blindness of heretics. 105. a Heretics ca^ not
possibly have the express word of god. 106. b The conflict among heretics
about their private churches. 109. The cause why heresies spring and increase.
111. b. The state of countres where heresy takes place. Ibidem. The first and
principal attempt of Satan to bring a man to heresy. 16. b Hosius slau^dered
extremely by the apology of England. 47. a Hosius the pattern of a good
Bishop. 67. b The Godly zele of Hosius. 111. a. His virtuous prayer. Ibid. His
great trauail in defending the Catholic faith. 111. b 69. a
I
What harm comes of innovation and change of laws. The heresy of
lustificatio^ by only faith, an old heresy. 22. a
L
How Luther ouerthwarteth the Church. 17. and 18. Luther a sworen enemy to
good works. 23. a The lewd practyse of Marcion renewed by Luther. 27. a
Luther belyeth the Nicene council. 28. b. 29. a Luther will not have the
Sacrame^taryes disputed with. 28. Luther cast in his own turn. 32. a The
extreme pride of Luther. 44. a. and b Luther a right minister of Satan. 57. b.
The foundation, procedinges, and success of Luthers Gospel. 82. and 83.
Bitter dissensions between the Luthera^s them selves. 32. The zealous and
rigorous Lutheranes. 80. a The impiete of a Luther an in ouerthwarting the
order of the church, 83. b. An other of the same batche. Ibidem. Lutherans
against the Zuinglians. 96. a. Alasco his complaynte of the Lutheranes. 97. a.
Certain Lutheranes will rather doubt of S. Paul, then of the Augustane
confession. 97. b
M
Melancthon against Luther. 98. a. Melancthon co^playned that he had followed
Luther to seruilly. Ibidem. Four Lutheran Doctors against Mela^ctho^, Luthers
own derling. 98. b The cruelty of Merlinus against the Osiandrines: of one
Protestant against an other. 86. a
O
The doctrine of Osiander. 86. a
P
Luther grants all right Christianite to Papists. 82. a Pride lets from
true knowleadge. 1. b. 75. a The intolerable pride of the unlearned multitude.
77. a Pride and selfeloue the cause of all this garboyle in religion. 47. b The
answer of the king of Polonia to the protestants ambassadors. 63. a The
great pyete and religion of the kings of Polonia. 113. b The variable
alteration of Polonian heretics. 69. b False prophets pretended Gods word
among the Jews. 3. a The difference between the false prophets and true, as
now between protestants and catholics. 3. b Securite and looseness of life
preached by the false prophets as now by protestants. 6. b. 7. a and b The
race and issew of protestants. 45. b All and not All in Scripture as it
pleases protestants. 52. a The odious arrogance of Protestants. 58 b A most
pestilent doctrine of Protestants. 23. a Much of the Protestants doctrine
condemned a M. years past for heresy. 32. b Protestants like to Manichees. 44.
a The civil war among the Protestants them selves. 95. b
S
The wonderful sleightes of Satan. 61. a Satan passes not on the cup, so
he may induce the schism. 64. a. 57. a The subtelty of Satan. 65. a Satan
transformed in to an angel of light. 14. b Who throw them selves down, now
a days, at Satha^s word. 13. What Satan's intent is by heretics his
ministers. 42. a Satan's full intent and final purpose. 95. a An old
complaint of 10 ancient fathers, against heretics for alleging of scriptures
in their private sense. 32 b. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. A not able example how to
read holy scriptures. 43. a The devil alleges Scripture against Christ. 12.
Heretics allege scriptures against the church. 12. b The works of old
heretics full of scriptures. 13. a The devil by his ministers alleges
Scriptures against Christ. 19. b One self Scripture may be the word of God,
and the word of the devil. 104. b What all present sects promise to their
folowers. 19. a Very proper and apt similitudes. 50. b. 53. and 105. How the
sixth of S. John belongs to the Supper. 55. The revel among Lutheranes about
the Surplesse. 80. a. The Swenckfeldians being protestants, will no more the
Scriptures. 46. b Scriptures depraved by unlearned and light persons. 21. b
T
Tertullian against heretics. 24. 25. and 26. What is meant by these words:
Throw thy self down. 58. a The Tigurin and Laskane Confession. 70. b Truth
is not private or personal, but common to all. 40. a
V
Paulus Vergerius a firebrande of sedition. 85. b The inconstancy of his
doctrine. 86. a The sacrilegious words of Paulus Vergerius. 75. a A most
evident displaying of present Protestants by Vincentius Lirinensis. 12. b. 13.
14. 15. and 16.
VV
Ravening wolves. 13. b The pretense of Gods word a most easy pretense of
Satan to deceive withal. 14. b What is the true word of God. 41. b What
the express word of God is. 50. b What is the express and true quickening
word of God, commonly now called, The lively word of the lord. 100. a The word
of God aptly compared to the Lode star. 105. How to know when the true word
of God is uttered. 107. b Scriptures alleged for good works. 9. b. 10. a and
b
Z
Zwinglius against the Lutherans. 96. a
Ego Cornelius Tansenius testor me certo intellexisse a doctis viris, fide
dignis and Anglice peritis, hunc D. Cardinalis Hosij librum, De Expresso Verbo
Dei, hic fideliter versum esse in linguam Anglicam, ac proinde ad Anglorum
vtilitatem iudico eum typis excudendum.

Ita esse testor Cornelius Iansenius Sacrae Theolog. Prosessor.


