A CHRISTIAN ENCHIRIDION: Wherein are briefly handled these three points
following; 1. That above all things in the world, man should be most careful
of his salvation. 2. That in this life a man be assured of his salvation. 3.
The way how, or means whereby a man may come to be assured of his salvation.


By THOMAS HOVVES Preacher of the word at Kings-Linne in Norfolk.

Bernard. in Cantic. Ea prius ampliusque curanda, quae sunt viciniora saluti.

Printed by C. L. And are to be sold by WILLIAM WELBIE in Paul's Church yard at
the sign of the Swan. 1615.

To the right Worsh. M. Doct. BRANTHVVAIT, Master of Goneuill and Caius
College in Cambridge: And to the Fellows and Students in the same: Grace,
mercy, peace, and abundance of all blessings accompanying salvation.
SIR, It pleased God by his providence to draw me to preach at Stepney nigh
London in Easter term 1613. where Sir Anthony Cope being one of my auditors,
a man to whom I was unknown, after the ending of that business sent for me,
and entreated that I would enlarge the two last points of this tractate,
being part of my sermon at that time, and to send them unto him; which at my
return I speedily undertook: and having added as herein is expressed, I
endeavored two several times to have communicated the^ unto him, but I failed
of my purpose, and he stood disappointed of my labors. Now as I am informed,
he is gone the way of all flesh: a man in his life time well commended for his
piety and zeal, with whom I am not willing to bury that which he for his
private comfort desired, but to commend it to the Church, leaving the blessing
of it to him that is the God of all grace and father of all mercies. And for
that it has pleased God of his great mercy to make me both scholar and
fellow of your College, where through the Lords goodness I obtained that
small portion of learning I have: And in as much as since that time I have found
you very kind and willing to yield such favors unto me in preferring such as I
desired, I have always, and now must ingeniously confess, that I stand in
these respects greatly obliged unto you; and not having wherewith to make any
recompense for so great benefit, I have presumed to offer unto your judicious
view this poor Tractate, and to publish it under your protection, as a
testimony of my thankful heart; humbly praying you to accept these my first
fruits with that affection with which I commend them. And thus commending you
to him that is able to keep you that you fall not, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy, I humbly take my leave.

Kings-Lynne in Norfolk: September. 29. 1615. Your Worships to be THOMAS HOVVES.

A friendly provocation to the Author of this work, that he would publish it.
SIR, as my leisure would permit, I have perused your Enchiridion: The subject
is divine, and considering our Saviors precept, Matthew. 6.33. the work is
seasonable; why should you then suppress it? Say not, the method is
preposterous, the best affected look more to the truth delivered, then manner
of delivery: Or that it is too plain, where men only desire, that that which
is shut, may be opened; what good does the golden key, if it will not open? or
what hurt does the wooden key, if it do open? Or that it ever stood with your
nature to be more obscure: the laws of God and nature say, we are not our
own, but what we are, we are it to God and to his Church. Should I then in way
of approbation speak of the author? I must say as Seneca, non quis, sed quid:
or of the work, because privy to my self how insufficient all my sufficiency
is, no more but this; vino vendibili suspensa haedera, nihil est opus. And for
your self, let Momus mutter; and such as never learned to speak well, speak
what themselves are wont; I will conclude with that of Persius, Non si quid
turbida Roma, Persius l. 1. Satyr. 1.

Eleuet accedas, examenue improbum in illa,
Castiget trutina, nec te quaesineris extra.


Your loving Friend,

Another letter to the Author.
MY reverend and beloved friend, I have perused this your necessary and
comfortable treatise: And if I might be bold to say what I conceive thereof,
you have herein made chose of the best part, which as most willingly you would
impart unto others, so shall it never be taken from your self: It is such a
gracious point, being rightly thought of, as will easily affoard unto any of
Gods children all content, though it comes alone: it is that which we are borne
for, and dye unto: howsoever there be many, which are ready to go out of the
world, before they either know, or are once desirous to learn to what end they
came into the world. Some such as these may by Gods providence light upon this,
and finding by Gods mercy, the comfortable fruit thereof, may bless his sacred
Majesty for you, and for this Christian pains of yours, so happily undertaken
for the further building up, and settled comfort of his Saints. And thus humbly
praying, that the Church of God may receive as great a benefit in reading this
heavenly direction, as upon my knowledge, you often wished, and aimed at in the
publishing it, I take my leave, and heartily commend you and it to the gracious
providence of God all-sufficient in Christ Jesus.

Yours in the Lord ever assured,

The contents and order of this Treatise.
The first principal point; viz.
THat above all things in the world, man should be most careful of his
salvation: is set down, page 1. 2. 3. In this carefullnesse, that the event
may fall out to have success; it is necessary that the right way be discerned
and made choice of, to walk in it: page 4. In walking the right way, 2. things
are to be practiced: 1. That we use all means of goodness, not one but all, not
neglecting the means of our salvation, page 5. 6. 2. That we use this world,
and all things therein, as though we used them not, page 7. 8. 9. That our care
and desire of salvation be not weakened, and so we faint in the midway, 3.
things there are we must take heed of. 1. That we turn not back again. page
10. 2. That we turn neither to the right hand nor to the left. page 12. 3.
That we stand not still in the way, but go forward. page 13. 14. 15.
To set an edge upon our desires, and make men lust after the life, that
endures for ever, there is commended a twofold consideration. page 16. 1. The
former respecting man's misery and woeful estate by nature. page 17. 18. 2. The
other respecting that happiness, which shall be enjoyed in the world to come. page
19
Concerning this happiness, the time of enjoying it, is not all wholly at once,
but 1. begun at the day of our separation. page 20. 2. Consummate and
perfected at the last day of judgment. page 21. The greatness of this blessing
amplified. page 22. 23. 24. The wonderful madness of the world in over lightly
valuing it, bewailed. page 25. 26. 27. To know whether, as it becomes
Christians, this care of our salvation above all things in the world possesses
our hearts, yea or no, respect must be had to those worthy fruits, which
through the whole course of a man's life in that case will manifest themselves.
p. 28. Of such worthy fruits there are expressly mentioned in number, p. 29. 1.
A moderation of the eager cares of this life. p. 29. 2. A making of the mind to
rest content with any present condition. p. 30. 3. A strengthening of the heart
in the enduring of chastisements and corrections. p. 31. 4. A denial of a man's
own self. p. 32. 33. 34.

The second principal point; viz.
The Protestants position, and doctrine of the reformed churches, agreeable to
the word of God is; That a man mry be assured of his salvation p. 35. What
manner of assurance this is, how shaken it may be with many difficulties, yet
an assurance: That faith is the guide of it, and that it is either greater or
less, according as our faith is either greater or less. p. 36. Against the
doctrine of popery, see this assurance freed from the imputation of vain
presumption. p. 39. Both by Testimonies and Phrases, or the manner of speaking
in the word of God, it is proved at large, that a man may be assured of his
salvation, a page 40. ad page 48. The popish assertion disabled, their outcry
answered, and the same our assurance showed to be, (if presumption) certainly
not damnable, but a commendable presumption. p. 48. Dangerous temptations
tending to the overthrow of this our assurance, there are especially two: The
one suggested by Satan; the other proceeding from our own corruption. p. 50.
The former temptation proceeding from Satan, what it is, and how it may be
repelled. p. 51. The other temptation proceeding from our own corruption, how
it stands, and how it may be repelled. p. 53. ad 66.
The third principal point; viz.
How a man may come to be assured of his salvation in Christ. p. 66. By signs
and testimonies in himself a man may be assured of his own salvation. p. 66
These testimonies in our selves are two: viz. The testimony of 1. Gods spirit.
2. our spirit. p. 66. That the testimony which the spirit of God gives is
true and infallible, is proved two ways. First, from this that all the
conditions required in a true witness, as 1. knowledge, 2. truth, 3.
faithfulness, do therein concur and meet together, in the highest degree.
p. 67. Secondly, the same is also proved from the end of the holy Ghosts
coming into the hearts of the children of God. p. 68. How the spirit of God
gives testimony, and therein are these three points. p. 68. 1. That he does
testify in the heart and conscience of every believer that he is the son
of God. p. 69. 2. That the spirit of God does not only give this bare
testimony, but further also does fully persuade us hereof, as being a thing
most certain and without question. p. 70. 3. That more then so, he further
also confirms the same unto the children of God, in regard whereof the spirit
is sometimes termed a seal, sometimes an earnest. p. 77.
Touching the testimony of Gods spirit, three questions are moved. p. 79. 1.
Whether a man may be assured he has Gods spirit. p. 79. 2. How a man may
discern between the illusion of the devil, and the testimony of the spirit
of God. p. 84. 3. By what means the spirit of God gives a particular
testimony in a man's own conscience of his adoption. p. 95.
Concerning the means whereby the spirit of God gives a particular testimony
in a man's own conscience of his adoption, they are three: 1. The word of God.
p. 96. 2. The Sacraments. p. 105. 3. The fruits of the spirit. p. 109.
Thus far concerning the testimony of the spirit of God, and how there by a
man may be assured of his salvation. The other testimony, viz. of our own
spirit follows. p. 116. The testimony of our spirit is the testimony of the
heart and conscience purified and sanctified in the blood of Christ. p. 116.
Now this heart of ours testifies two ways, partly by inward tokens in it
self, partly by outward fruits. p. 116. Inward tokens what they are is
declared, and also that they be of two sorts, viz. either as they respect, 1.
Our sins past, present, to come: 2. Gods mercies in Christ. p. 116. I. And
first in respect of sins past, a godly sorrow for sin is declared to be
such an inward token. p. 116. And it is further showed that the same diversely
bewrayes it self. p. 117. In feeling of this godly sorrow for sin, two
things are to be remembered. p. 120. Sorrow for sin, 1. Legal and worldly. 2.
Evangelical and godly: and both these distinguished. p. 121. 122. 123. Signs
by which this godly sorrow may be discerned. p. 123. 124. 125. The danger of
wanting this godly sorrow, and on the contrary the profit of having it, as
also what an acceptable thing it is to almighty God. p. 126. 127. Helps of
getting this holy affection of sorrow into our hearts, are numbered six. p.
128. to p. 136. II. In respect of sins present. The combat between the
flesh and the spirit is declared to be a second inward token: for the better
understanding whereof four points are handled. p. 137. 1. The first is
concerning the parties between whom the combat is, viz. the flesh and the
spirit. p. 137. What these two words, Flesh and Spirit do signify. p. 138.
139. The spirit so signifying, is showed to have certain obseruable
properties, of which are expressly mentioned five. p. 139. 140. 141 Concerning
the operation of the spirit in this sense understood, three things are to be
known, set down, p. 142. 2. The second point handled in this combat between
the flesh and the spirit, is the means whereby this combat is made, viz. by
the means of a twofold concupiscence. p. 143. 3. The third point is the cause
of this combat, which is the contrarictie of the flesh and the spirit. p. 144.
The fourth point is, that this combat shows it self in all the actions of
men regenerate. p. 145. Here be inserted 2. great conflicts. 1. beweene faith
and reason. 2. hope and despair. p. 148. But in the midst of this combat and
fight is declared how the Christian may gather to himself sound comfort and
certain assurance, and that four manner of ways, p. 135. etc. whereupon
arises this conclusion, that who does not so fight, is none of Christ's
soldiour. p. 153. 154. 155. 156. III. In respect of sin to come: A care to
prevent sin, is showed to be an inward token, by the which our spirit
testifies the same assurance. p. 157. This care to prevent sin is maintained
in the practice of these three things, 1. watchfulness: 2. Sobriety: 3.
Prayer. p. 158. 1. Concerning such manner of watchfulnes. p. 158. That this
watchfulness stands in two points: and which they be. p. 159. as also the
means to make men watchful, which are four in number. p. 160. 2. Concerning
sobriety, it stands in things outward and inward. p. 162.
In the inward gifts of the mind, and so it teaches a man, 1. To know
himself: 2. Not to despise another. p. 162. Touching the knowledge of a man's
self, two things are taught. p. 162. 163. Touching the not despising of
others. See p. 163. Again, sobriety in outward things, is a moderatour in
outward things, as may appear in things concerning a man's calling, p. 164.
estate, 165. pleasures and delights, p. 166. and last of all concerning things
indifferent. p. 166. The practice of sobriety as it is a moderatour in outward
things, is showed to be a fruit of our redemption, and consequently the
neglect thereof in these our days so much the more lamentable. p. 167. 3.
Concerning prayer, the practice whereof is a third means to maintain a care
to prevent sin. see p. 169.
Inward tokens in respect of Gods mercies in Christ, are especially two: 1. a
spiritual hungring after Christ: 2. our special valewing and loving of Christ
above all things. p. 171. 1. Concerning our spiritual hungring after Christ,
is showed, what it is: and the same seconded with inducements and motives
thereunto. p. 171.
Means to be used for the obtaining of this spiritual appetite, are numbered
five. p. 175 2. Concerning our valuing and loving of Christ above all things,
follows. p. 188.
Signs by the which a man may come to discern this special valuing and
loving of Christ above all things, are in number six. p. 193. 1. The first
sign is love to the members of Christ: The benefits of this love are two.
The undoubted signs of Christian charity are two: 1. Giving to those that
want. 2. Forgiving those that offend. Hereunto that a man deceive not himself
in his love unto his brethren are added three rules for trial. p. 195. 2. The
second sign is love to the Ministers of Christ. p. 198. 3. The third sign is
the keeping of Gods commandments. p. 203. 4. The fourth sign is to hate all
things whereby God is openly dishonored. p. 205. 5. The fifth sign is willingly
to be drawn into the field for the defense of his Majesty. p. 206. 6. The last
sign is to have an earnest desire that Christ should come to judgment. p. 207.
Thus far concerning inward tokens by the which our spirit witnesses to us
the assurance of our salvation. Outward fruits be the last testimony of our
spirit. Outward fruits, whereby our spirit witnesses the assurance of our
salvation, are comprehended under the title of new obedience: whereof see page
212. That this assurance of our salvation proceeds not from every kind of
holiness or obedience, but only from that which is true: where see rehearsed a
catologue of holinesses, none of all which can assure a man of his salvation.
p. 215. What this new obedience must be. page 217. That it may be rightly
qualified, there are 3. things required. 1. That it be performed unto all Gods
precepts. 2. That it proceed from the whole man. 3. That it be perpetual. p.
218. etc.
SECT. I. Our principal care to be saved.
THERE is nothing in this present evil world, wherein we are strangers and
pilgrims, (1. Chr. 29.15.) walking in it as it were in a wilderness, that we
ought so to affect and desire, as to have our souls saved in the day of
judgment. It is said, that when John Baptist first preached, Matthew. 11.12.
that the kingdom of heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it by
force; that is, there was such forwardness and zeal in them that heard John
preach, to procure themselves the kingdom of heaven, that they strove most
earnestly to get in. And this affection our Savior requires, when he says,
Luke 13.24. Sriue to enter in at the strait gate. Some men set their
affections upon honors, and will put their lives in their hands to obtain
them, as did Absalom, and his brother Adoniah. And some men hunt after
pleasures, and the fulfilling of their beastly lusts most eagerly: So the
drunkard rises early to follow drunkenness, Isa. 5.11. So the unclean person
goes to the whoore-house in the twilight, in the evening, when the night
begins to be black and dark, Prou. 7.9. So there is one alone, and there is
not a second, which has neither son nor brother, yet there is no end of all
his travel; neither can his eye be satisfied with riches, neither does he
think, for whom do I travel and defraud my soul of pleasure? Eccles. 4.8.
If these men take such pains, and are carried with so violent a stream to
effect their carnal desires; how ought we to enforce our affections to wait
with Jacob, Genesis 49.18. for the salvation of the Lord; and to desire with
David, Psalm. 35.3. that God would say unto us, that he is our salvation? The
looking of Daniel out of the captivity of Babylon toward Jerusalem, Dan.
6.10. may admonish us, that we being set in this world, as in the captivity of
Babel, should cast our eyes toward the heavenly Jerusalem. Paradise is our
country, which Adam lost by transgression, and we are here as men banished:
if we have the natural affection which every man ought to have to his own
country, then let us look for the city having a foundation, Heb. 11.10.
whose builder and maker is God. David the man after Gods own heart, swear unto
the Lord, and vowed unto the Almighty God of Jacob, saying, Psalm. 132.23. I
will not enter into the tabernacle of my house, nor suffer my eyes to sleep,
nor my eyelids to slumber, until I find out a place for the Lord, etc. In
like manner let us make a solemn vow, that we will give no rest unto our
selves, nor be quiet in our minds, until we have gotten some comfortable
assurance of that immortal and undefiled inheritance, which fades not away,
but is reserved in heaven for us, 1. Pet. 1.4. If we loose the life of our
body, we may find it again, Mat. 16.25. but the loss of the soul is
irrecouerable, Luke 16.26. He that has ears to hear let him hear: Mat. 19.9.
In going to our country, we must as the Israelites did, go through a
wilderness wherein are many ways, but they may be reduced to two; Matthew.
7.13.14. The one is the broad way, that leads to destruction; the other is
the narrow way that leads unto life: and these may fitly be called the
ways of life and of death, Ier. 21.8. Now the first of these ways, is the
right way, whereof David speaks, Psalm. 119.32. I will run the way of thy
commandments. This way is called the old way, and the good way, wherein if we
walk, we shall find rest for our souls, Ier. 6.16. and every man of God
ought to teach us this good and right way, 1. Sam. 12.23. for this way the Lord
approoueth, Psalm. 1.6. being the way of the righteous. The other way, is the
way of our own hearts, Eccles. 11.9. If we mind to come to paradise, we must
leave this way, Ier. 18.11. being the way of sinners, Psa. 1.1. which is the
way of darkness, Prou. 2.13. And this way will lead us unto judgment, Eccl.
11.9. for the way of the wicked shall perish, Psalm. 1.6. In walking in the
right way, it behooves us to practice two things.

First, we must use all means of goodness: exercises, and resort to Gods
house; that as the poor creeple at the poole Bethesda waited for the moving
of the water by the Angel, that his impotencie might be cured, Ioh. 5.7. so
ought we to wait for the first moving of the spiritual waters of life, that
our spiritual impotencie may be helped. For the ministry of the Gospel is
the golden pipe, whereby and where-through, the water of life, all the
sweetness of Christ, and all heavenly graces whatsoever, are derived unto us.
Therefore if we desire to be saved, we may not neglect the means of salvation.

And here two things are to be known. them, and in so doing, we may easily know
whether we go. Secondly, that the guide

The other thing to be practiced of us in as his staff is an help and stay
for him in his journey, he is content to carry it in his hand, but so soon as
it begins to trouble him, he casts it away: So all Gods Saints that are
gone before us, in comparison of heavenly things, have contemned the worldly
vanities: for no sooner were they made partakers of the gifts and graces of
Gods holy spirit, and had but some little taste of the heavenly happiness, but
presently they contemned the world, and the vanities thereof: they were ready
to leave all, and to follow Christ, and even to lay down their lives for the
profession of the Gospel. Abraham at Gods commandment, left his own country,
and contemned all the profits, pleasures, and preferments, which it might have
yielded unto him, in comparison of the land of promise, though he dwelt there
but as a stranger, and had little joy and comfort in it, but only as it was a
type of the heavenly Canaan, Heb. 11.9.10. So Moses refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the rebuke
of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward: Chap. 11.23.24. And if it were a sufficient
reason to move Jacob, Genesis 45.20. to neglect his stuff in the land of Canaan,
because King Pharaoh promised him the best things of Egypt when he came into
his kingdom, how much more should it be available to persuade us unto the
contempt of these worldly and worthless vanities, seeing we have the assured
promise of God himself, that we shall enjoy the best things of his heavenly
kingdom, when we come unto him. But alas, these earthly things, (though they
be small and contemptible) do hide these superexceeding ioies of gods
kingdom, from the eyes of those who spend their thoughts upon their worldly
affairs. For as a small dish being held near the eyes, hides from our sight
a great mountain; so these earthly trifles being placed near our sight, do
so shadow and ouercloud these great and shining excellencies, that we cannot
truly behold them, not rightly judge of their greatness: Therefore let us
remove them further from us, and then they will seem small, and smally to be
regarded, in comparison of the incomparable joys in heaven.

Furthermore, that our care and desire after salvation be not weakened, and we
faint in the mid way, we must beware of three points.

First, and so to draw them into everlasting damnation: An example in Job, Cap.
1.1. who was a just man, etc. and so walked in the way to heaven: but Satan
would withstand him, and therefore commenced war against his soul: he
seems as if he would have fought against his goods, in causing them to be
taken away, against his children, in procuring their death, and against his
body in vexing it most cruelly; yet was it properly the soul, that he
assaulted. Job. 1.9.10.11. And he fought against it, seeking by outward
tribulation to induce the same, by blaspheming to offend God. If we consider
our own weakness to withstand our mighty enemies, it may breed some cause of
fear in us; but as God in old time commanded Joshua, cap. 1.9. that he
should not fear the Canaanites, and assured him that he would be with him,
and that by ouercomming them, he would bring his people into the land of
promise; so likewise let us give care unto God, that calls us to this
battle, with assurance that he will stand with us, and for us, to the end
that courageously fighting under his banner against our enemies, we may by his
grace and power obtain perfect victory, and consequently the possession of
our celestial country.

Secondly, the left hand, we understand such as do think to come to heaven
by the path of men's traditions, and services, or voluntary devotions, not
commanded by God, Coloss. 2.21. as touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. And
this Christ objected to the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 15.8.9. Therefore
because God has taught us the way wherein we should walk to heaven, let us
beware we turn not either to the right hand, or to the left.

Thirdly, that we stand not still in the to stand still in the way and not to go
forward. The Apostle Paul although be had proceeded very far in this way,
thought it not his duty to surcease, but the nearer he came to the mark, the
more he strives toward it, forgetting those things which be behind, Phil.
3.14.15. And thereupon infers, whosoever are perfect, let them be thus
minded. Must those that are perfect be of this mind? how much more behooves it
us, who are but of small growth in comparison, to give all diligence, that we
may increase and grow up in grace, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. being provoked also thereto
by that exhortation of Saint Peter, grow in grace and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3.18.

If we rest contented with a little quantity of faith, and never labor after
increase, it is a shrewd presumption, that such a faith is false and
counterfeit. For as soon as the seed of true faith is sown in us, and has
taken root, it sprowteth up until it come to full ripenes; in which respect
Christ compares it to a grain of mustard seed, which though it be one of the
least seeds of the garden, yet it grows to a great tree, Matthew. 13.31.32. It
is not possible that any, who have tasted of true faith, and of those
inestimable benefits which it assures us of, should content themselves with a
small pittance, and never labor after more. For who is it that having tasted
and eaten a little bit of some delicious meats, does not with an hungring
appetite desire more, till he be filled and satisfied? or who is it that having
any weak title and assurance of some goodly inheritance, does not earnestly
desire, and use all good and lawful means, whereby his title may be
strengthened, and his assurance confirmed? So if any have truly tasted of
faith, and the excellent benefits that accompany it, (which are assurance of
Gods love, remission of sins, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost)
they cannot content themselves with a little modicum, and never hunger after
more: for can we imagine, that we have any final title or true assurance of
those unspeakable joys of Gods kingdom, if we never use means to confirm
our title and strengthen our assurance? surely it is impossible.

To conclude, Satan if he cannot make us worse, will labor to make us not to
be better, nor to go forward in religion. Have thou not more zeal now then
thou had when the gospel was first brought thee? then fear, least the spirit
be much quenched: wherefore as Satan endeuoreth to make thee stand at a stay
in christianity, so let the spirit of God in thee strive for the contrary, that
he that is righteous, may be more righteous, Apoc. 22.11. For we may not be
worse then the ground, which by the rain is made more fruitful; nor then the
herbs, which by the sun are made more flourishing.

Having thus far (Christian Reader) persuaded thee to desire above all things
the kingdom of heaven, and the happiness of the life to come; now to quicken
and to spur on thy affection, let me propound unto thee some grounds and
motives wherewith we cannot but be whetted on, and have a sharp edge set on our
desires. And albeit many things here might be delivered, yet I will only rest
contented to have commended unto thee these two;

First, man's misery, and secondly the happiness promised by the Lord in the
Gospel. If neither of these can prevail with men, to make them lust after the
life that endures for ever, I must conclude they are no better then dead
persons, whose end is to be burned in unquenchable fire.

Touching man's misery, we are to consider they are contemners of Gods
ordinances; if they do come, they are profaners of the same, and so shall be
further hardened to their final perdition. In a word, unto them that are
defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and
consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15.

Here the Apostle sets out the miserable state of a wicked man thus; 1. he
is one that is unclean, 2. an unbeliever, 3. one to whom nothing is pure, 4.
his mind, 5. his conscience is polluted. In all which respects he is a most
odious person, in who^ is nothing but filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2. Cor.
7.1. the which the pure eyes of the Lord cannot abide, Abac. 1.13. If the
wicked man be thus unclean, then hate his company; Psalm. 119.115. the vile
person is to be contemned, Psalm. 15.4. come not near him, Psalm. 26.4.5. touch
him and thou will be defiled, he is filthy within and without, and with the
Leper must be thrust out of the camp for fear of infection, Leuit. 13.14.

And is not this a wretched case if then we consider our misery, and the woeful
fruit of our sin, which has debarred us from all comfort in heaven and
earth, from God, or any of his creatures; and if we remember that sin has
wrapped us under condemnation; has set God and his creatures, as hosts and
armies against us; has made nothing ours but hell and damnation; even the sole
representation of this misery is sufficiently able to ravish a man with an
insatiable desire to be freed from this grievous estate, and to be possessed of
everlasting happiness.

Touching the happiness, which shall be of Gods kingdom, in which Jesus Christ
(that great Solomon) reigns, which is the wisdom of God, and he in whom all
the treasures of knowledge and wisdom, and of all the blessings of God are
hidden, for to bestow them to his subjects, and to make them all partakers of
them; in as much as that kingdom of Salomons was not but the figure and shadow
of our true Salomons kingdom, the true peace, who has made peace between God
and us, and has delivered us from all our enemies.

Now this happiness we shall enjoy, at the last day of our separation, and at
the last judgment.

The first of these has two parts.

First,

Secondly, the body sleeping in the

But the glory of the last day is far greater, and rests in three

First, in the resurrection, and waking

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Much more might be spoken of the excellency of this estate, and yet when all
has been said that can be, it is nothing in comparison of that which the
thing is in it self, and we shall find it to be, when we shall lay down this
body of corruption, and be clothed upon with perfect glory.

Learn therefore what a wonderful blessing we have obtained by Christ. By
nature we are wrapped in the guilt of sin, subject to the stipend of sin,
subdued under the curse of the law, and lie right under the whole wrath and
displeasure of God. Our sins proclaimed us Rebels to God through heaven and
earth, banished us out of our country, set hell gates open for us, and gave us
into the hands of Satan, as an hangman to execute Gods sentence of eternal
death passed against us, yea further, hopeles we were in this woeful
condition; for Gods displeasure was so kindled against us, as men and angels
could not reconcile him; the law was so transgressed, that all men and angels
could never satisfy, nor make up the breach; the sentence was so severe, as
all men and angels could never have stood under i^ the execution so certain, as
the very gybbet was ever standing in our sight; in the horrors of our souls,
and terrors of our accusing consciences, we seemed to walk and be left in
the midst of ten thousand deaths but now, when no means was left to pacify
God offended, to satisfy the law transgressed to remake the sentence
denounced, the Son of God must come from the bosom of his father, and become
obedient both to the performing of the whole will of his Father, as also to the
ignominious death of the cross; that so becoming a curse for us, (as that
execrable kind of death betokened) we might have God well pleased with us, as
he is with him; we might present him his law perfectly fulfilled, not in our
persons, but in our nature, and in his own person for us; we might plead the
payment of all our debts, and by this our surety, sue out our full discharge,
(because the utmost farthing is fully paid;) have our right in the tree of
life, and might enter in thorough the gates into the city, Apoc. 22.14. This
blessed tree is in the midst of the Paradise of God, the leaves of the tree,
are not only for shadow, but also to heal the nations with, and it has both
leaves, and fruits to satisfy our hunger, and twelve manner of fruits every
month brought forth to satisfy our pleasure, and it grows by a river side,
clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, so that it cannot
possibly wither, Apoc. 22. Let us beseech God, who has planted is with his
own right hand, that we may live to (...), how wholesome and pleasant that t^
is. And considering that we look for life everlasting after this life, let us
not deceive our selves, lingering and deferring the time to the last gasp, but
let us lay the foundation of life eternal in our selves in this world, and
have the earnest thereof laid up in our hearts?

Now this is done, if we repent us heartily of all our sins, and seek to be
assured in conscience, that God the father of Christ is our father, God the
son our redeemer, and God the holy Ghost our comforter: Ioh. 17.3. this is
eternal life, that they know thee to be the only God, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ: yea let us proceed further yet, endeavoring to say with Paul,
Gal. 2.20. Thus I live, yes not I now, but Christ lives in me; and in that I
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the son of God, who has loved
me, and has given himself for me: when we can thus say in truth of heart, we
have in us the very seed of eternal life.

Lastly, here we may consider the wonderful madness of worldly men, who only
have regard to the state of this life, and cast all their care on the world,
and never so much as life up their hearts and thoughts unto heaven. The end of
Christ coming in the flesh was principally for our souls, by taking away the
sins of the world, and after for our bodies, by remoouing corporal
infirmities, Matthew. 9.2.6. but it is not thus with the sons of men now: they
neglect the care of their souls, but they make provision for the lusts of the
flesh with all possible diligence. As the prodigal son forsook his fathers
house for a strange country, his fathers favor and inheritance for a bag of
money; father, kindred, and friends, for dishonest and discourteous harlots, and
the bread in his fathers house, for the husks of beans, which the swine
abroad fed upon, and his soul desired; So the worldlings forsake God for this
present world, heaven for earth, everlasting pleasure at Gods right hand, for
the pleasures of sin for a season. It is a just judgment that earthly riches
do deceive our hearts, when heavenly riches do not delight us; that the outward
things should carry us away, when heavenly things cannot so much prevail with
us. If a man having two houses, the one but an homely cottage, and the other a
princely palace, should leave the better, and take all the care for the
dressing and beautifying of the first, would not every man say he were a mad
man: now God has prepared for us two houses, the one is this our body, which
we bear about us, which is an house of clay, Job. 4.19. the other house is
the third heaven, Job. 14.2. which is the dwelling place of the holy Saints and
Angels: therefore what spiritual madness is it, to employ all our cares for
the maintenance of this house of clay, which is but dust, and to have no regard
of the blessed estate of the second house, which is prepared for us in heaven?
The three Apostles, when they had seen some part of the glory of Christ in his
transfiguration upon the mount Tabor, were so moved, that they said, Matthew.
17.4. Master, it is good for us to be here: What then would we do, if we
should converse in heaven, and there behold the Majesty of God, and the glory
of Christ? would not even the apprehension thereof allure us, to wish to dwell
there, and to forget and despise the earth? But our earthly talk and
communication, our worldly course of life, and the corruptions of the flesh;
that bear so much sway in us, due manifestly show how little we are
conversant in heaven, and consequently do testify, that we are burgesses of
earth, and not of heaven.

All faithful believers do know and are assured that at the separation of the
soul and the body, the soul shall be exalted to heaven with Christ: now as this
separation daily does by death draw nearer and nearer to the faithful, so does
the kingdom also come upon them. Therefore how careful should we be to amend
our lives, to despise these earthly vanities, and to prepare ourselves to make
our entry into heaven.

Now in that we have bin sufficiently stirred and provoked to desire, and long
after that inheritance which is immortal, undefiled; and fades not away, but
is reserved in the heavens for us it should not be a fruitles labor, to show
how we may try the soundnes of this our desire after the paradise of God, a
place of all delight and pleasure, yea where the Saints enjoy fulness of
pleasures at Gods right hand. To which end be assured, that if this desire to
be in the Lords joy, with filled thy heart, these worthy fruits of it will
manifest themselves through thy life.

It will moderate the eager cares of this from heaven they looked for a
Savior, who would change their vile body, and make it like his own glorious
body.

It an inheritance, but rather in this that we cannot loose this inheritance.
Thou may loose thy liberty, thy friends, thy life, but thine inheritance is
reserved in the heavens: when others by death loose all, thou shall by it, be
in thy full estate. This expectation of a durable substance, caused the Saints
to endure the spoiling of their goods with joy, Heb. 10.34.

Thirdly, it will strengthen the heart which is but for a moment, causes unto
us a far more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17. In the
enduring therefore of affliction, comfort thy self herein: thy father may
frown, chide, buffer, and scourge thee, but he will never disinherite thee:
other fathers sometimes out of their own displeasure, and sometimes out of
their sons misdemeanors, do disinherite their heirs; but the Lord cannot
grow into such displeasure with his children, as ever to cast them out whom in
his Christ he has once admitted into his house. If his sons sin against him,
he will visit their sins, and scourge them with the rods of men, but his
mercy and truth will he never take from them. Psalm. 89.32.33.

Lastly, commander, as he willingly both undertakes, and deuoureth any travel
for it. To Jacob it was a sufficient reason to neglect his stuff in the land
of Canaan, because king Pharaoh promised him the best things of Egypt, Genesis
45.20. So let the believing heart once be possessed with assurance of reigning
with Christ, it will easily be brought to hate father and mother, and wife and
children, brethren and sisters, yea and his own life, Luke 14.26. The
disciples desirous to know what recompense their Lord would make them for
leaving all to follow him, Christ presently tells them of twelve seats, on
which they shall fit, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, at the appearance
of the Son of man: well knowing, that if this promise were once well digested,
it would so feed their hearts, as they should not after think themselves, as
ouershot in leaving all things for his sake, Matthew. 19.28.

So then, set thy heart upon this inheritance; A man that has any possibility
to befall him, cannot keep his mind, but it will be running after it; in so
much as many wicked children, in regard of their patrimony, will enquire into
their fathers years, and grow sick of their Mothers; and it is ordinary that
such as look for windefals by decease of others, will be feeding their hearts
with unnatural hopes: so should it be with us, who may without injury to our
father, long after our inheritance in heaven. And as we see men take no content
in any part of the earth, no nor in the whole, comparable to that piece or
portion, which is their own; even so should we not suffer our hearts so to
wander after earth or earthly things, as that we should settle our contentment
any where, but where our own inheritance and treasure is; being assured that
there is laid up for us the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give us at that day; and not to us only, but unto all
them also, which love his appearing. Beware of profane Esaus speech; what is
this birthright to me? Genesis 25.32. No, rather take up Naboths answer to king
Ahab, who would have gone beyond him for his patrimony; God forbid, that I
should sell the inheritance of my fathers, 1. Kin. 21.3. God forbid, that I
should for this or that sinful pleasure, this or that mess of pottage, or
trifling commodity, or whatsoever coin having Satan's superscription upon it,
sell mine inheritance.

And thus much shall suffice to have persuaded to expect and long after the
blessing of eternal life. Now to the assurance of the same life.

SECT. II. Assurance of Salvation.
WE teach and profess, that a Christian man may be assured of his salvation,
which assurance is not such, as whereby a man is merely secure, and made free
from all doubting at any time; but such as many times is assaulted, and shaken
with many difficulties, fears, and doubts, which oftentimes do much perplex
the souls of such as be faithful; as Psalm. 22.1. David complains, saying,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And Jonas, Ion. 2.4. I am cast out
of thy sight.

Now these fears and doubts arise not from the nature of faith, but from the
frailty and corruption of our evil nature, and from the weakness of our
faith. In nature it self, is a voluntary shrinking and relinquishing of the
comfort of faith, thorough the seeds of unbelief, that originally are sown
in us, so that the ground of our own hearts is ever and anon casting
objections and questions. The effects of grace do not always appear the
same, yea sometimes they seem to be quite overwhelmed with contrary effects.
By these occasions it comes to pass, that the dayas of faith, are like the
days of the year, whereof some are fair, some foul; so faith seems one
while cast down as it were to hell, an other while to be as it were in the
courts of heaven. Neither does this sildome fall out, but even daily is there a
change by turns. And this God does, to the intent that being in some sort for
the time put from him, we may take the faster hold when we return again,
that the taste of his love may be the sweeter, and our joy thereof the greater,
when out of the floods of temptations we ariue unto it.

But the true and proper work of faith is, to give to the believer a steadfast
and immovable assurance of the love of God, that he may fully enjoy the
comfort thereof without interruption and let. Therefore it is not the office of
faith to cherish and maintain such fears and doubts, but to resist them, to
fight against them, and so much as is possible to expel them, and to drive
them out. And as a child afrighted runs to the father, looking for defense
and help from him; even so, in the midst of all fears and temptation, faith
is still running unto God, still importuning of him, calling upon him, casting
it self upon him, depending upon his aid, and expecting from him, that things
become otherwise then presently they are, and sildome going so far, but that
it sees a glimpse (at least) of light in darkness, of hope in despair, of
comfort in distress, of life in death; or if it loose the sight thereof, it
recouereth it soon again. Of all which we see pregnant examples in the
distresses and temptations of the Saints, which for our instruction and comfort
are recommended unto us in the word of God, whereof many shall be set down in
the sequel of this discourse.

So then, it is now manifest what manner of certainty and assurance it is we
hold and teach; that it is the property of true faith to guide this assurance,
and that our assurance is the greater, by how much our faith is greater, and
the weakness of our assurance, the weakness of our faith, at the feeling whereof
we must be humbled with sorrow to repentance, and yet with confidence pray as
the Apostles did, Luke 17.5.9. Lord increase our faith: which faith that it may
be strong, must have grace and means to grow; yet happily it may seem weak to
us, when it is strong to God.

The Papists are of an other mind, teaching that no man can have any certainty
of his salvation, without some special revelation from God, as they affirm of
S. Paul, Romans 8.38. where they style our asurance, a most damnable false
illusion, and presumption; Rhem. in Romans 8. sect. 9. And elsewhere teach, that
the heretics unhappy security, presumption, and faithles persuasion of their
salvation, (for so they deride our assurance,) is not the faith of the
Apostles, but the faith of devils; Rhem. in 1. Cor. 9. sect. 9.

But our security of salvation is no vain presumption, but an assurance
grounded upon the word and promise of God, that thorough faith in Gods promises
manifested by walking in the way that God has appointed us, we shall
undoubtedly come to eternal life: which certainly depends not upon our will
or works, as the Rhemists would have it, 2. Cor. 3. sect. but upon the promise
of God confirmed to us in Christ: therefore we shall not miss of the
performance of his promises, which he will undoubtedly perform unto all that
truly believe in him: for to doubt of salvation in respect of the promiser, is
indeed to deny that he is true in all his sayings. And therefore though the
godly be assaulted of their own concupiscences, and of Satan's temptations, to
doubt oftentimes of their salvation, yet they must oppose the infalibilitie of
Gods truth, against such assaults, and holding fast the promises of God, assure
themselves of the effect of them.

So then, every Christian man, which is endued with faith and hope, may and
ought to be constantly assured, that being justified, he shall be saved,
because the word of God, and his promise (to all that believe in him, and in
faith call upon him) cannot fail, but must be most certainly fulfilled.

When the disciples of Christ returned from preaching, whereto he had sent the^,
and declared what wonders they had done, the text says, they rejoiced greatly:
but Christ said unto them, Luke 10.20. rejoice not, that the spirits are
subdued unto you; but rejoice in this, that your names are written in heaven:
whereby our Savior signifies, that they believed that their names were
written in heaven: why else should he bid them therein rejoice, seeing none can
rejoice in any felicity who does not enjoy it, or undoubtedly believe it: and
we cannot, neither do we rejoice in things either unknown, vnbeleeued, or
uncertain: and if there be ioying and glorying, it must therefore arise from
certainty and assurance: Romans 5.2. we rejoice, or glory, under the hope of the
glory of God: because the hope of the things to come, is as sure and certain
as the things already given, Chrysostom. in Romans homil. 9. Paul does not teach us
so to rejoice, as if there were no further dangers to be feared, no further
opposition to be expected, no further temptation to be endured, no further
enemies to be resisted; but imports, that there is much fighting and
wrestling, much care and sorrow, many perplexities and troubles yet to be
forecast and looked for: we may not then be secure, as if there were nothing
any more to trouble us, but we may be secure and without doubt of an happy
issue and deliverance from all troubles: and this is the hope that we rejoice
in. Therefore Saint Augustine says upon Psalm. 37. Joy that thou art redeemed,
but yet not in real effect; as touching hope, be secure: 2. Pet. 1.10. here
the Apostle gives us counsel rather to give diligence to make our calling and
election sure by good works; but it were idle and vain to use diligence, if
the assurance of our election and vocation could not be attained unto, without
any extraordinary revelation. And this place shows, that the election of God
(which is most certain in him, and in it self) is made known and certain to
us by good works, whereunto God has appointed us; not that it is grounded upon
our will or works (which are good,) but upon his gracious decree, by which
before the world was made, he chose us and in time called us, and has given
his spirit, by which we are made not only willing, but most thankefully to
embrace his grace, and to know his fatherly love toward us: for if by his
spirit we know that God is our father as Paul teaches, (Romans 8.15.16.) we know
also that we are predestinate to his inheritance in Christ: which knowledge is
confirmed by the works of obedience, which are the fruits of the spirit of
adoption. But if we cannot know it (as the Papists say,) but only hope with
such hope as is uncertain and may be confounded, in vain should the Apostle
exhort us to make our election sure by good works. 2. Cor. 13.5. prove your
selves, whether you are in the faith, examine your selves: know you not your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? here the
Apostle takes it for granted, that he which has faith, may know that he has
faith, and shows, that to prove a man's self whether he be in the faith, is
to prove whether Christ be in him, because the faith of which he speaks, is
that lively faith whereby Christ dwells in our hearts. And if Christ be in you
(says Paul, Romans 8.10) the body is dead as touching sin, but the spirit is
life for righteousness sake; which cannot be without repentance, hope, charity,
and such other spiritual graces, wherewith the spirit of Christ endueth them
in whom Christ does dwell. He therefore that knows himself to be in the
faith, as the Apostle means it, knows Christ to be in himself: he knows
himself to be dead to sin, and alive to righteousness, and that he is not
without repentance, hope, charity, and other virtues, wrought in him by the
spirit of Christ; and consequently he knows and is assured of his election
and salvation: for faith is the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1. and Act. 13.48.
so many believed as were ordained to salvation. Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, that
neither death not life: etc. therefore the Apostle was fully persuaded of his
salvation in Christ; otherwise, to speak as if the Apostle were in doubt, is a
blasphemous untruth: for in many places he protests his assured hope and
confidence; as Philip. 1.23. desiring to be loosed, and to be with Christ: here
he doubts not but after his dissolution to be with Christ. We have the like
confidence notably expressed, 2. Tim. 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me the
crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at
that day, etc. this particle (for me) is the speech and language of faith. So
the Virgin Mary does call Christ her Savior, Luke 1.47. and the thief upon
the cross said, Lord remember me, etc. Cap. 23.43. The like also Paul says,
Gal. 2.20. that Christ gave himself for me: and in that it is repeated again,
it shows the strength of his confidence. Neither is this any singular
privilege and prerogative in Paul, but it is the common confidence of all the
faithful: Ephesians. 3.12. by whom we have boldness, and entrance with confidence by
faith in him; here the Apostle speaks not only as a teacher of the Church, as
an Apostle, as a man of experience, in which respect we ought to give him
credit; but he joins himself with many others; as if he should say, we have
boldness, (meaning the rest of the Apostles, the Ministers, and all the
faithful.) When a word is confirmed by the mouth of two or three witnesses, we
ought to give credit; but having here so great a cloud of witnesses, we ought
to believe it without all gaine-saying, that a man may be assured of his
salvation: for entranae with boldness is a fruit of justification, Romans 5.1.2.
1. Ioh. 3.14. We know we are translated from death to life, that is to say, we
are free from death, the wrath of God, sin and damnation; translated unto the
favor of God, righteousness, and eternal life. The certain, infallible, and
undoubted assurance thereof is expressed by the verb of the tense fully past;
for he does not say, we know that we shall pass, but that we have passed from
death to life. The like place is Ioh. 5.24. shall not come into condemnation,
but has passed from death to life: and again, Ephesians. 2.6. has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. 1.
Ioh. 5.19. we know that we are of God; therefore we may be assured of the
favor of God, and that we are in the state of grace. The Apostle speaks not
in the third or second person, but in the first person (we know) putting
himself in the number; now the Apostle was sure he had the spirit of God, for
if the Apostles Paul and John could pronounce certainly of others, 1. Ioh.
2.14. that they knew the Father, that they were strong, and the word of God did
abide in them, and that they had overcome the wicked: and blessed Paul, 1.
These. 4.8. of the Thessalonians, that God had given unto them his holy spirit,
as also 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. that God had chosen them to salvation; much more were
they certain of themselves: 1. Ioh. 5.10. he that believes in the son of
God has the witness in himself.

Saint John penned his first Epistle, that he might show unto the Church of God
a way, how they might ordinarily and fully be assured of the love of God, and
of eternal life; and therefore he affoards us many pregnant testimonies for
this purpose. Ioh. 2.3. Hereby we know that we have known him, if we keep
his commandments, v. 5. he that has his word, in him is the love of God
perfect indeed; hereby we know that we are in him, 1. Ioh. 3.10. in this are
the children of God known, and the children of the devil, whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother, c. 4.13.
hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit, Cap. 5.1. whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of
God. Now this knowledge here spoken of, is not coniecturall, but infallible, as
1. Ioh. 1.4. these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full; now it
is but an uncertain joy that rises upon coniecturall knowledge. Again, this
knowledge brings forth confidence and boldness even before God; 1. Ioh. 3.21.
If our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God; and therefore
it cannot but include an infallible knowledge: as further appears, Cap. 4.16.
where the Apostle says, We have known and believed the love that God has in
us. If I be demanded, whether I know how long I may be assured? I must tell
you that my assured trust and confidence is, that God will never forsake the
work which he has begun, because he has said, Romans 9.33. that he that
believes in Christ, shall never be confounded or ashamed; that is, his hope
shall not be deceived. And Christ has taught me, Ioh. 10.28. that his sheep
which hear his voice (of which I am one) shall never perish, but that he will
give unto them eternal life. And howsoever I know that the wickedness and the
cor^tion of mine own heart is such, that being left unto my self, I should
soon fall away from God, yet I look unto that promise, that God has made to
all his faithful servants; Ier. 3(...) I will put my fear into their hearts,
^y shall not depart from me: resting my^e not only in this, that I have
apprehended Christ, Phil. 3.12. but much more in that, that he has apprehended
me; not only in this that I know God, but much more in this, that I am known
of God, Gal. 4.9. And because the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, Romans 11.29. therefore I rest undoubted, that if I live, I shall
live unto the Lord; and if I die, I shall die unto the Lord: and whether I live
or die, I am the Lords: Romans 14.8. neither shall any thing separate me from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, cap. 8.39.

Lastly, to answer that Popish out-crie, wherein they charge us, that our
assurance of salvation, grounded upon the promise of God, is a vain and
faithless presumption. We say, that to hope for salvation (as they do) by
virtue of our own doings, is a wicked and damnable presumption; but our
presumption, which grows of faith, is a commendable presumption: as Amb. de
Sacr. lib. 5. c. 4. says, It is a good presumption, to presume not upon thine
own work (...) upon the grace of Christ.

Such a (...)tion, August. in Psalm. 88. teaches; saying, Whatsoever there is
about thee, or in thee to presume of, cast it from thee, and let God be thy
whole presumption, or presume wholly upon God: namely, in that sort Ambr.
teaches by occasion of David's words, Psalm. 119.116. Receive me according to
thy word: It were a matter of intolerable presumption (says he) to say to
God, Receive me, but that he adds the promise of God, as if he should say,
thou have caused us to presume, we challenge thee upon thine own bond.

This is the presumption of true faith, whereby we withdraw our eyes from our
selves, and cast them wholly upon God, assuredly believing that we shall
receive, because we believe in him that promises. Wherefore Greg. magn. in
Ezeck. homil. 22. says, by presuming of grace and life, the righteous sing of
that judgment, which all the unrighteous are afraid of.

So then there is a godly presumption of salvation and of eternal life, which
because it cannot arise of any sufficiency of our works, must necessarily be
grounded upon faith alone; wh^ yet notwithstanding faith receives comfort and
strength by the good fruits and effects of grace; in the fear and love of
God, in faithful care and conscience of duty toward God and men: because
albeit of themselves they cannot be presumed of, yet being fruits of faith,
even in their beginnings and imperfections, they are tokens of Gods secret
election, and foreshewings of future happiness; as says Bernard, lib. de gra.
and libero arbitrio. Occultae predestinationis indicia futurae foelicitatis
praesagia.

Here we are to meet with two great and dangerous temptations, the one
suggested by Satan, the other proceeding from our own corruption.

The first temptation.
Satan will say that we have no faith, Paul speaks of himself; 2. Tim.
1.12. I know whom I have believed: and to like purpose is that, 1. Ioh. 3.24.
By this we know that he dwells in us, even by the spirit which he has given
us: where he makes no question of it but that he which has the spirit,
knows that he has the same. So then such as have received the gift of true
faith, have also an other gift of discerning, whereby they see and know their
own faith. But as for the devil, we do the rather persuade our selves of
faith, because he says we believe not; knowing, Ioh. 8.44. that he is a liar,
and the father thereof. Now he that was neither ashamed nor afraid to charge
God himself with untruth, Genesis 3.4. will make less scruple to deal falsely
with men; and that therefore we utterly reject his witness, as the witness of
a notorious and treacherous deceiuer, unworthy all credit, and whom we cannot
believe, though he speak truth, without danger. For which cause he was so
oftentimes silenced by Christ and his Apostles, even then, when after his
deceivable manner, he bare witness unto the truth, as Mark. 1.24.25. when the
devil said to Christ, I know thee what thou art, even that holy one of God;
Jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace: And when the spirit said, Act.
16.17.18. these are the servants of the most high God, etc. Paul being
greiued, said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ, that
thou come out of her.

The second temption.
I cannot feel in my self any good

Answ. When the question is of our the ground.

It sense of Gods love and favor, apprehending nothing but present misery;
and in stead of faith and affiance in God, he bewraieth his doubting,
diffidence, and impatience, cursing the day of his birth, etc. Ier. 20.14, 15.
Christ Jesus (though he were the Son of God, in whom the Father was
welpleased, Matthew. 3.17.) yet in his own sense and feeling, he apprehended
Gods wrath, and greiuous displeasure, and lamentably complains, as a man
abandoned, and cast out of all love and favor, Matthew. 27.48. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? which words show both Christ's affiance in God, and
his present apprehension in his sense and feeling: for in respect of his
affiance and trust in God, he calls him still his God, but in respect of his
sense and feeling, he complains that he is forsaken. It is therefore
manifest that a man may be dearly beloved of God, and yet for a time deeply
apprehend his wrath and displeasure toward him.

It is an uncomfortable and unsound thereof.

We must distinguish between Gods spirit, and his graces; for his spirit may
live in us, when he (for our good) does not work in us, nor communicate our
former saving comfort: for even in many diseases of the body, it is so with
men, that they seem little better then dead corpses, and yet then is life in
them, which hidden for a time, after is recovered, and raised up again; so it
is many times with the children of God, that being distressed and ouerborne
with extremity of affliction and temptation, they seem for a time, both to
themselves and to others, to have lost the life which they once enjoyed: But
when the tempest is ouerblown, and the gracious countenance of the Lord again
begins to shine upon them, then the faith which was as then hid for the
time, takes life and shows forth it self. As the trees when they bud in
the spring time, and bring forth their fruit, were not dead as they seemed to
be in the winter; so the faith of Gods children, springing afresh after the
stormy winter of temptation, declares manifestly that it was not dead, when it
seemed so to be, but was only dulled or respited for the time, that afterward
it might bring forth more fruit. The sun shines not in the night season, nor
when it is obscured with clouds; shall we say therefore that there is no sun,
or that it has vttterly no operation? The Sun and Moon do not perish in
their eclipses, nor loose their light for ever; so in this eclipse which
happens (for a time) unto our faith, the same shall not perish or loose his
virtue for ever, but shall in good time be restored to her former vigor and
strength again, unto our further and more assured comfort.

Again, true faith does not rest it self upon our sense and feeling; for Heb.
11.1. Faith is the ground of things (not presently enjoyed, but) which are
hoped for: and the evidence or demonstration of things, (not which are subject
to the senses, and sensibly discerned, but) which are not seen: we believe
such joys are prepared us, as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
neither can enter into man's heart. It is a kind of infidelity to believe only
those things which are subject to our senses and understandings; and therefore
when Thomas would not believe, that Christ was risen, Ioh. 20.25. before it was
made manifest to his senses, he is reproved for infidelity; be not, says
Christ, ver. 27. and 29 faithles, but faithful.

The most excellent faith shows not it self most glorious, when we have
sense or feeling, but rather when we feel and discern the contrary. Holy Job
when he apprehended nothing but Gods wrath and displeasure, even then showed a
most victorious faith, (Chap. 13.15.) Lo though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him. The son of God appearing in the form of a mortal man, did wrestle
with Jacob, (Genesis 32.24.) showing himself as an adversary to him: where we
may conjecture what a fearful conflict, Jacob endured both in body and soul:
whereto also the circumstance of the time, does sensibly lead us, this conflict
being in the night: Now the terrors of the night are described to be most
fearful, (Ps. 91.5.) which the devils the princes of darkness, (Ephe. 6.12.)
do (by Gods permission) especially in the night strike into us: now in this
grievous and tedious conflict (it continuing all night) Jacob showed a most
victorious faith, saying, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me, Genesis
32.26.

Another worthy example, is the woman of Canaan, who (though she) received
diverse rep^ and earnest denialls, yet continued her suite, Matthew. 15.28. and is
commended for her faith by the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2.

To this effect makes excellently that worthy speech of Christ, Matthew. 11.12.
saying, that the violent take the kingdom of heaven by force, that is, the true
Israelites, though they endure bitter conflicts, yet by faith hold fast God,
apprehended in his word, and through the same faith and patience obtain the
promises, Heb. 6.12.

To conclude therefore, we are not to build our assurance upon our own sense
and feeling, but upon Gods unchangeable and gracious promises made unto us in
Christ Jesus. And if at any time our sense and feeling tells one thing, that
is that God has withdrawn his love from us, Ps. 77.7.8.9. and forsaken us,
Esa. 54.7. and the word of God assure us of an other thing, that is, that God
will never forsake us, Heb. 13.5. but continue his love unto us unto the end,
Esa. 49.8. we are not to trust our own feeling, but unto Gods promise; for
otherwise what do we else, but prefer our deceiving sense before Gods
infallible truth, and make God a lier, because we believe not the truth of his
written promise? 1. Ioh. 5.10.

After that we have attained to faith, and have felt some effectual working of
Gods spirit in us, commonly in many of Gods children succeed (not long after)
some deadnes and dulnes, and they think in themselves that they have lost the
spirit of God, as we have before showed,

Here

To which purpose the Lord commands us to take knowledge of our sins, (Ier.
3.13.) and to remember from whence we are fallen, Apoc. 2.5. The means to
attain to a sight of sin, is a diligent examination of a man's own self,
Lament. 3.40. and David gives the same counsel to Saul's courtiers, Psalm. 4.4.
examine your hearts. This examination must be made principally by the law of
God, and namely by the ten Commandments, which ransaketh the heart to the very
quick, Romans 3.20. for by the law comes the knowledge of sin; this was the
means of Paul's better knowledge of himself, Romans 7.7. I knew not sin but by
the law. And as this comparing the life with the law of God made the
unbeliever, 1. Cor. 14.24.25. to fall down on his face, and to worship God;
and the Psalmist, being a man after Gods own heart, to say, Psalm. 130.3. if
thou O Lord straightly markest iniquities, who shall stand? and therefore to
beg of God, saying, Psalm. 143.2. O Lord enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for in thy sight shall none that live be justified: So will it be the
means to work in us a sight of our sin, and to repent of the same: as we have
example, Acts. 2.37. who upon Peter's sermon, being pricked in their hearts,
said, Men and brethren, what shall we do? To whom Peter prescribed the remedy,
ver. 38. requiring them to amend their lives. Thus by his repentance did David
recover, Psalm. 52.5. and thus Peter recovered weeping bitterly after the Lord
looked upon him, Luke 22.61.62. for if we repent, God will forgive, Ier. 18.8.
who after he has spoiled us will heal us, and having wounded us will bind us
up. Heb. 6.1. for he came to seek and to save that which was lost, Luc. 19.10.
and he came not to call the righteous, but the sinners unto repentance, Math.
9.13. to whom he promises ease and comfort, Cap. 11.28. To him therefore let us
pray and say, Hos. 14.3. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so
will we render the calves of our lips.

Another

David being grievously afflicted, could not receive in his soul any true
comfort, Psalm. 77.3.4. for howsoever he did think upon the Lord, yet he was
still troubled: what help did he then find in this his present distress? he
tells us (ver. 5.6.) that he considered the days of old, and the years of
ancient times, he communed with his own heart, and his spirit searched
diligently, he remembered the works of the Lord, and his wonders of old.

Job apprehending and conceuing of God as of his enemy, in respect of his
present sense, and feeling, and being moved by his friends to doubt of his
grace which he had received, and also to condemn himself for an hypocrite,
comfort himself, and strengthens his faith in the midst of all these
greiuous temptations, by calling to his remembrance his fruits of faith and
works of sanctification, which he had discerned in himself informer times,
Job. 31.1. etc.

Thus we see that the faithful fear for a time, but they gather their spirits
again, and recover warm'th at the sunshine of Gods mercies: their feet were
almost gone, Psalm. 73.2. but not altogether: they went into the sanctuary of
the Lord, (ver. 17.) (a proppe to keep them up) at length they confess against
themselves, This is my infirmity; they reprove themselves for their
diffidence: and howsoever they say in their have that all men are liars, and
perhaps God himself not true; yet by leisure they repent it, and remembering
Gods mercies receive comfort, Psalm. 119.52. The Apostle does pithily express
my meaning, 2. Cor. 4.8. Staggering, but not wholly sticking: Jonah was a
prisoner in a strange dungeon, without light, without company, without
comfort, in a whales belly, where he accounts himself as cast out of Gods
sight, Ion. 2.4. saying, I am cast away out of thy sight; but behold presently
he gives the check to himself, he recouereth in the instant, when he was
in the pits mouth ready to sink eternally, and said, that he would look
again toward the Lords holy Temple.

This then is the fruit of believing and calling to remembrance the sweet
mercies of our Savior; that in the day of sorest trial, it is able to keep
us upright, who else should fall down groueling unto death. This dullness, and
deadnes, and doubtfulnesse is commonly incident unto Gods children, being at
the same time in the estate of grace, and is a part of that inbred corruption,
and fleshly old man, which before our calling, wholly possessed and ouerruled
us, and after also bears some sway in us, even when we are regenerate, till
with all other corruptions we lay this aside also by death.

But worldly and carnal men do never discern how dull and drowsy they are in
Gods service, nor feel the huge mass of inbred corruption; but fondly flatter
themselves, imagining that they are in exceeding good case, and very devout in
Gods service, which indeed (as they perform it) is mere formal, customable,
but not conscionable. Now then when the Lord by the ministry of his word,
made effectual by the inward operation of his spirit, does pull off the thick
skin of carnal security, from off the hearts of Gods children, and cause
the scales of ignorance to fall from their eyes, so as they plainly discern
and feel this their dulnes, drowsiness, etc. let them not be dismayed, nor
debar their souls of that consolation, which of right belongs unto them:
for flesh and blood does not reveal this their corruption, deadness, and
dullness in Gods service, but the spirit of God, which has begun already to
work in them, showing them their corruptions, and moving them to an unfeigned
dislike of them; and therefore they may assure themselves, that he who has
begun this good work in them, will also bring it (in his good time) to
perfection, Phil. 6. only (as the Psalmist exhorts) let them carry the
Lords leisure, wait upon, and trust in him, and he shall comfort their hearts.

Senondly, how a man may be assured of his Salvation.
A man may gather the knowledge of his own faith and election, and stand
assured of his salvation, by signs and testimonies in himself.

These testimonies are two, the testimony of Gods spirit, and the testimony
of our spirit, Romans 8.16.

First, the testimony of Gods spirit.
1. Gods spirit bears witness to our spirit that we are the children of
God, Romans 8.16. But the testimony of the spirit is most certain, for the
spirit cannot be deceived, neither deceive any; for Romans 8.15. the spirit of
adoption expels all fear; and where no fear is, there love is perfect, 1.
Ioh. 4.18. and where no fear is, there is no painfulnesse, and therefore
neither doubtfulnesse nor mistrust.

Again, what more certain truth can be imagined, then that which the Spirit
of God witnesses to our spirit, seeing all the conditions required as true
witness, do concur in him in the highest degree, which are knowledge, truth,
and faithfulness.

Touching knowledge, he is a God of knowledge, 1. Sam. 2.3. who knows all
things, even the eternal counsel and decree of God concerning our election:
1. Cor. 2.10. The spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.
And this spirit do we receive, v. 12. that we may know the things that are
given to us of God, as our election, justification, adoption, etc.

2. Touching truth, he is most true, yea truth it self; and in regard hereof
he is called the spirit of truth, which leads us into all truth, Ioh. 16.13.
as therefore touching his knowledge he cannot be deceived, so in respect of his
truth he cannot deceive.

3. Touching faithfulness, he is most faithful, 1. Cor. 1.9. God, says the
Apostle, is faithful, by whom you are called: 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Faithful is he
which has called you, especially in his word: Psalm. 19.7. for his testimony
is sure, and therefore he cannot err; neither will he conceal the truth for
any respect of persons: and therefore whatsoever this al-knowing, true, and
faithful witness testifies, we are vndoubtely to beleeeue, as being most
sure and certain.

The end why the holy Ghost comes into the heart as a witness of adoption, is
that the truth in this case hidden, and therefore doubtful, might be cleared,
and made manifest. Now if God himself have appointed, that a doubtful truth
among men shall be confirmed and put out of doubt, by the mouth of two or
three witnesses; it is absurd to think, that the testimony of God himself,
knowing all things, and taking upon him to be a witness, should be doubtful
and coniecturall.

Having thus proved, that the testimony which the spirit gives is true and
infallible, next we are to speak, that the spirit gives testimony, where
three points are to be taught.

1. First, that he does testify in the hearts and consciences of every
believer, that he is the Son of God: as is proved, Romans 8.15.16. Gal. 4.6.
Here first he excludes the spirit of bondage, which like the Papists faith,
causes us to fear and doubt of our election and salvation: and Romans 8.16. he
tells us, that the spirit bears witness to our spirits, etc. Now we have
received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things which are given to us of God, 1. Cor. 2.12. that is, not
only his spiritual graces in this life, as election, faith, justification,
etc. but also those excellent joys in Gods kingdom in the life to come, of
which also we have some knowledge and taste, by the illumination of the same
spirit, Romans 5.2. and Cap. 14.17.

Extraordinary Revelations are ceased, and yet the holy Ghost in and by the
word, reueales some things unto men: for which cause he is called truly, the
spirit of revelation, Ephesians. 3.5. Again, the holy Ghost gives testimony, by
applying the promises of the remission of sins, and life everlasting by
Christ, particularly to the heart of man, when the same is generally propounded
in the ministry of the word.

2. Secondly, the spirit of God does not only give this bare testimony, that
we are elected, and adopted, and shall be saved; but also does fully persuade
us hereof, as being a thing most certain and without question: 1. Ioh. 3.24.
Hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given
us. And blessed Paul, by the spirit of God, was so steadfastly assured of Gods
love, that he was firmly persuaded, that nothing could separate him from it,
Romans 8.38.39. and prayed for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.17.18. that God would give
them the spirit of wisdom and revelation, that the eyes of their
understanding might be lightened, that they might know what the hope is of his
calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints. Gods
spirit then does thoroughly persuade the faithful that they are elected, and
shall be saved, but it does not this at all times. For when we are like new
borne babes in Christ, the motions of the spirit are but weak in us, and we
are not as yet skillful to discern the heavenly language of the spirit: Such
as these are not said to have no faith, but to be of little faith, Matthew. 8.27.

All men (in this natural life) have their degrees to proceed in, which they
never change. As first they be children, then afterward grow to a more
understanding, which was even true of Christ in this flesh, Luke 2.52. who is
said, to have increased in wisdom and stature: Even so the spiritual birth
is not perfect the first day, but it has as it were a childhood, and we are
babes to be fed with milk, 1. Pet. 2.2. and then afterward we grow from faith
to faith, and from one degree of grace to another: 2. Pet. 3.18. grow in grace
and knowledge, says the Apostle.

Now as Paul says, 1. Cor. 13.11. when he was a child, he understood as a
child: but when he became a man, he put away childish things: so when we were
young in Christ, then we did understand and discern the testimony of the
spirit, as children, that is, in great weakness. A weak faith is, when a man
of an humble heart, does not yet feel the assurance of the forgiveness of his
own sins, and yet he is persuaded they are pardonable, desiring that they
might be pardoned, and therefore prays to God that he would pardon them, and
give him strength to leave them.

Now

Or

David having a long time continued in his two great sins, 2. Sam. 12.7. was
admonished thereof by Nathan, and being admonished he confessed his sins,
and straightway Nathan declared unto him from the Lord, the forgiveness of
them: yet afterward David humbled himself, Psalm. 51.1. etc. prays most
earnestly for the forgiveness of those, and all other his sins, even as
though it had not been true that they were forgiven already, as Nathan told
him. The reason is, because he was not so fully persuaded of pardon, as his
heart desired to be, nor so resolved thereof as God requires those to be, who
depend upon him and his promises by faith.

SECT. III. Marks of salvation.
AS the corn which is cast into the ground, is for a time covered, and after
springs up the blade, and then the ear; so faith being sown in our hearts
(which first are broken up with the threatenings of the law, and apprehension
of Gods anger due unto our sins) does in the time of our humiliation and
contrition lie covered, so as we cannot discern it, till being more and more
watered with the water of the spirit, and the heavenly promises of the Gospel
offered in the preaching thereof, it sends forth an holy desire, and earnest
endeavor to serve God.

But it is otherwise, when we are in Christ; as in Abraham, Romans 4.20. and yet
even old men, and that are of tall stature in the faith, cannot always hear
the testimony of the spirit, and sensibly see the same in themselves: for if
they wax proud, grow secure, and fall into sin, the graces and gifts of the
spirit will decay in them, their clear understanding, their feeling, their
affection, and all may be so darkened, that in their own judgment, and in the
judgment of others, it may seem that they have quenched the spirit.

The Galatians were truly called and effectually regenerated by the spirit, as
may appear by this, that for the words sake they reverenced the Apostle, as
the Angel of God, Gal. 4.9. and in that the Apostle calls them the sons of
God by faith in Christ, (Cap. 3.26.) yet they were snared with false doctrine,
and sell very dangerously, to the choking and quenching of the graces of Gods
spirit in them. The spirit was not taken from the^, nay Christ did still
continue in their hearts; but yet for want of godly graces, he was as it were
without form and fashion: so that the Apostle did as it were travel again,
until Christ was fashioned a new in them, Gal. 4.19.

David also, after the committing of his sin, was brought into the like case,
therefore he prays, Psalm. 51.10. that God would create in him a clean heart;
what? was the spirit quite gone? no for he prays, v. 11. that God would not
take away his holy spirit. But how can these two stand together? first to pray
that God would create in him a clean spirit, ver. 10. and then to pray, ver.
11. that the spirit might not be taken from him: Surely the spirit it self was
still in him, amd therefore he prays that it may not be taken from him, but
the cleanness of his heart was defiled with his unclean thoughts, and
therefore he prays that they may be cleansed and renewed in him.

A mother that loves her child most tenderly sets it down in the floor, lets
it stand and fall, and break the face, and all this while she hides her self,
not because her purpose is to leave her child quite; but that when she takes
it up again, it may love her the better, and hold her more fast; so deals
the holy Ghost with men, to make the sea their own frailties, he hides himself
as it were in some corner of the heart for a season, that they may more
earnestly hunger after grace, the want whereof they felt: Satan endeavors to
quench the spirit by this, if we will not be worse, he will make us to be no
better, nor to go forward in religion, but to stand at a stay: so let the
spirit of God in us strive for the contrary, that he that is righteous may be
more righteous, (Apoc. 22.11.) for we may not be worse then the ground, which
by the rain is made more fruitful, nor then the herbs, which by the sun are
made more flourishing.

To conclude then, as it fares with women with child, so it happens to Gods
children: we know that a woman with child feels no life nor motion of the
child diverse months together; and after the time of her conception, and after
she has felt it strive and move, oftentimes there is an intermission wherein
she feels not the motion thereof a good space together: so the child of god,
after that by the word, faith is begotten and conceived in his heart, feels no
life, motion, nor undoubted sign of the spirit a long while, that is, of the
pardon of his sins, and of reconciliation unto God: and when afterward he
has a feeling of faith, and other spiritual graces, by their motions and
fruits, oft-times he is again deprived of it, either because he has wounded
his conscience by falling into some known sin, as David did, (2. Sam. 12.) or
for that the Lord will exercise his faith and manifest his power in his
weakness, Deuteronomy. 8.2. 2. Cor. 12.9.

Thirdly, the spirit of God does not waighed.

First, the spirit is called a seal, Ephesians. 1.13. Cap. 4.30. As writings which
pass to and fro among men, when the seal is put to them, are made out of
question: so the promises of God propounded generally to all, are said by the
spirit of God to be sealed in the heart of every particular believer, which
signifies, that he gives unto them evident assurance that the promise of life
belongs unto them. Secondly, the spirit is called an earnest, or pledge, 2.
Cor. 1.22. Cap. 5.5. for as in a bargain, when part of the price is paid in
earnest, then assurance is made that men will pay the whole: so when the child
of God has received thus much from the holy Ghost, to be persuaded that he is
adopted and chosen in Christ, he is put in good hope, and is already put in
good assurance fully to enjoy eternal life. God does never take his earnest
back again, because it is so the earnest of our inheritance, (Ephesians. 1.13.)
until the redemption of possession, as that it is an earnest also that in the
mean time God stablisheth us in Christ: (2. Cor. 1.21.22. and that he has
created us even for this thing, namely to cloth us with immortality and
eternal life at the last.

So then, let not the tempter draw us to waver and doubt, but let us boldly
with the Apostle say, 2. Tim. 1.12. we know whom we have believed.

Touching the testimony of the spirit, three questions may be demanded.

First, whether a man may be assured

Secondly, how a man may discern between

Thirdly, by what means the spirit of

First, whether a man may be assured that he has the spirit of God.
This point is already glaunced at in the words immediately going before, and
now for the better satisfaction of our hearts, shall be through Gods gracious
assistance further declared; namely, that a man having the spirit of God, may
know that he has it.

1. These. 8.19. Quench not the spirit.

Here the Apostle gives us to understand, that the spirit in some respect is
like unto fire, it will burn up and consume

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

When

Secondly, dwell in.

Thirdly, it is a shining light ever burning,

Fourthly, it does set us on heat, and inflameth

Now as truly and as certainly as we may say that there is fire, when we see
straw and such like things consumed, or gold or silver finely purged out, or
great light in dark places, or great heat in bodies that were benumbed before:
even so truly and certainly, we may say and persuade our selves, that the
spirit of God is in us, when we see our corruption consumed, our souls purged
from the dross of sin, our hearts enlightened and made hot in walking and
working according to that light.

So then, if the spirit of God be a fire that inflameth our cold frozen hearts
with a zeal of Gods glory, and love of our brethren, Matthew. 3.11. Act. 2.3.
how can the fire that is carried in our breasts be hidden from us? The spirit of
God is an earnest, 2. Cor. 1.22. and who receiving an earnest, cannot know
whether he has received it or no? for otherwise how can it assure us of our
bargain, if of it self we have no assurance? it is a pledge of Gods love and
of our salvation, and who having a pawn in his custody, cannot know that he
possesses it?

It is a heavenly light, (Ephesians. 1.17.18.) which does illuminate our
understandings, which were blind and ignorant in the knowledge of Gods truth,
and who cannot discern between blindness and sight, light and darkness.

It is water, which purges us from our corruptions, Isa. 44.3. Ezech. 26.9.
and who that is thus washed and cleansed, can doubt that this water has touched
him? It is a precious oil, (1. Ioh. 2.20.27.) which mollifieth our hard stony
hearts, and makes them pliable to Gods will, which before were so stiff and
obdurate, that they would rather have broken, then bowed to obedience: it
suppleth also our stiff joints, and makes them active and nimble in the works
of holiness and righteousness; and who finding these strange alterations in
himself, may not be assured that he is anointed with this oil? And thus it is
manifest that we may be assured that we have Gods spirit.

But if through frailty we have fallen, (for who is he that falls not) how
may we know then, that we still retain the spirit of God?

To this end let us search our hearts and try them by these Rules; namely,

First, by our liking and misliking of sin:

Seccondly, by our sorrow; for so long

Thirdly, by our care; for if we grow in sin, although it be great, has not
hethereto prevailed against those few and small graces, which the good spirit
of God has bestowed upon us. Again by our care; If thou be careful to
redeem that which by thy fall thou have lost, and have a care to run so much
faster forward, by how much more thou have been let by thy fall; then it
does appear that the spirit is in thee, yea it is lively and mighty in
operation.

Secondly, how a man may discern between the illusion of the devil, and the
testimony of the Spirit.
Whereas presumption and the illusion of Satan will as well tell a man that he
is the child of God, as the true testimony of the spirit, the way to put
difference between them is this, as follows.

First, of the Gospel are called by Christ, spirit and life, Ioh. 6.63. because
it is the ministry of the spirit which quickneth us. And (Gal. 3.2.) the
Apostle says, that we have received the spirit by the hearing of faith, that
is, by the doctrine of faith preached in the ministry of the Gospel. If
therefore the testimony of salvation in the mind of the faithful, be
conceived by the preaching of the Gospel, applied unto them by faith: then it
is most certainly the testimony of Gods spirit, which seals in us the full
assurance of that we believe, (Ephesians. 1.13.) for the inward testimony of Gods
spirit is not different from the outward testimony of the word: and therefore
it does bear no witness, nor give any assurance, that they are saved, whom
Gods word pronounces to be in the state of damnation.

Now if this persuasion of theirs be not grounded upon Gods word, who persuade
themselves that they are elected, adopted, and shall be saved, notwithstanding
that they live in their sins without repentance, making no conscience of
their ways, nor endeavoring to serve the Lord in vprightnes of life; then it
is not the testimony of Gods spirit, but a presumptuous fantasy, and a
secure and carnal imagination.

Those

That this earnest desire is a note of Gods children, and a testimony of the
spirit, appears by these testimonies following; Ioh. 10.27. my sheep hear
my voice; Cap. 8.47. he that is of God hears Gods word; 1. Ioh. 4.6. he that
knows God hears us; Ier. 15.16. thy words were found by me, and I did eat
them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. Chrysostom. homil.
4. in Genes. Sicut esurire, etc. as to hunger after meat is a token of bodily
health, so to have our hearts to braye after the word of God, (Psalm. 119.20.)
is a sign of spiritual health: for Solomon says, Pro. 18.1. that for the
desire thereof a man will separate himself to seek it: so as neither oxen, nor
farms, nor wife, shall stop the way against him, Luke 14.8. A true member of
Christ is therefore well compared to a wise merchant, Matthew. 13.45. who rather
then he would want the precious pearl of Gods word, sells all he has to buy
it.

Whosoever therefore labors to purchase this precious pearl; whosoever
hungreth after this heavenly Manna, as well in time of adversity, as in time
of prosperity; and carefully, diligently, and attentively hear it, may to
their comfort assure themselves, that they have an undoubted sign of their
election. But yet it may be that sometimes we find no heart in the word, but
that it is irksome to us; which if we feel at any time, let us not exclude our
selves from hearing; for oftentimes a stomach is gotten by eating. As in
general diseases of the body (as in an ague) all parts are weak, but
principally the stomach, yet it receives a medicine, and the disease it self
provoke us to that: so if Satan have weakened thy stomach so much that thou
have no list to hear the word, let this dulnes be so far from discouraging
thee, as it make thee to lust and desire the more after it: For as a man's
desire to any thing grows or decreaseth, so does his endeavor and labor for
the means: if thy desire be strong, then shall not light occasions withdraw
thee from the means, but it must be a violent occasion and let, that shall
stop the passage of thine endeavor, and seeking after the means. This is a
worthy rule to examine our love to Gods word by.

Therefore let us remember with what desire and affection we have heard the
word of God, how precious it has it bin unto us, above gold, even the fine
gold, how sweet and comfortable, even above the honey and the honey comb: and
remember further with what fruit of knowledge in the will of God, increase of
faith in his promises, purpose and endeavor of amendment of life, we have
oftentimes heard the same: and in the truth of these things we may comfort our
selves.

But presumption arises not from the use of these means, but from carnal
security: for the less that the presumptuous man hears the word, and
performs the duties of Gods service, the more confidently does he boast of
his faith and full assurance.

Therefore they who had rather be without the means of salvation, then enjoy
them, who will be at no cost to obtain them, nor forgo any pleasure or
commodity, that they may have them, nor when they hear, are affected with any
delight, these can have no assurance of their election and salvation.

Thirdly, the testimony of the spirit is

Christ reprehended Peter for his doubting, Matthew. 14.31. the virgin Mary
doubted, Luke 1.34. how can this thing be? This is the lot of all the members
of Christ, they totter and reele in their souls. Look upon Abraham the father
of the faithful, distrusting the providence of God, as unwilling to defend him
and his wife from Pharaoh and Abimelech, unless she would follow that way
that seemed best to him; namely to call him brother, and her self sister,
(Genesis 12.20.) Look upon Moses also when he was called to go to Pharaoh, Exodus
3.11. etc. who am I that should go unto Pharaoh, etc. And Samuel when he was
willed to anoint David, feared the malice of Saul, 1. Sam. 16.2.

Undoubtedly he that never doubted, never believed; for whosoever in truth
believes, feels sometimes doubtings and wauerings of his faith. Even as the
sound body feels oftentimes the grudgings of a fever and distemperature of
the body, which if he had not health, he could never find and feel: so the
faithful soul feels oftentimes sundry doubtings, which if his faith were
not found, he could not discern: for we feel not corruption by corruption,
because when the strong man possesses the house, all things are in peace, Luke
11.21.22. but we perceive corruption in us by a contrary grace of Gods spirit.

But yet though our faith be assaulted with doubtings, it may be certain. The
fun always shines in the firmament, though the clouds have covered it, and
the light appear not: the tree has life in it, though it be not in winter
discerned; so faith has some assurance and persuasion, though it be shaken
with doubtings, and assaulted with temptations.

And when we feel those doubtings and imperfections, let us set against them
the certainty of Gods truth, and the unchangeableness of Gods promises; let us
draw near to the holy Sacraments, and thereby seek strength and increase of
faith.

But presumption is confident, and never doubts nor makes any question of
his election and salvation, but says with the proud Pharisie, Luke 18.11. I
was never troubled (I thank God) as touching my election and salvation, as
many are, but always have had a strong belief that I am in Gods love, and
shall undoubtedly be saved. This is the voice of presumption, and not that
testimony of Gods spirit.

Fourthly, those who have the testimony heart and makes it fit to pray, Romans
8.26. For imploring God grace, and mercy, is a notable fruit of Gods spirit
working in us: as is further declared (Romans 8.16. in that he says) that the
spirit makes us cry Abba, father; unto whom we pray so earnestly with groans
and sighs, as though a man would even fill heaven and earth with the cry, not
of his lips, but of his heart, touched with sense and feeling of his manifold
sins and offenses.

Object. Bellarmine says, there be many that call God their father, as the
Jews, Job. 8.41. and many say in the Lords prayer, O our father, who are not
assured that they are the sons of God.

Ans. Touching the calling of God father, we must understand, that the Apostle
speaks not of crying with the mouth, but of a crying in the heart, Gal. 4.6.
for though all utter the same voice, yet it is not the same crying. The
unclean spirit made the same confession of Christ outwardly, Mat. 5.7.
acknowledging him to be the son of God, which Peter did make, Math. 16.16.
yet were not both one kind of confession; the belief in the heart which was in
Peter, did discern their confessions, and distinguish them either from other.

Supplication and prayer is an ordinary work of the holy Ghost in all that
believe, Romans 10.14. and he that would know whether he has the spirit truly
dwelling in his heart, shall know it by this: Romans 10.13. whosoever calls
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But this prayer must be the prayer of
faith, Iam. 1.5. Matthew. 21.22. and must be performed in spirit and in truth, 1.
Ioh. 4.24. and not with deceitful lips: for it is to no purpose to draw
near unto God with our mouths, if our hearts be far from him, Isa. 29.13.

But presumption is in them that use not to call upon the name of God, which is
a sign of a worker of iniquirie, Psalm. 14.4. Psalm. 53.4. who happily I deny
not to speak prayers, but do not pray indeed: whose speaking prayers God
answers with silence, Isa. 1.15.

Fifthly, that which makes the last difference loving father, and his affection
makes a man stand in fear of the Majesty of God wheresoever he is, and to
make conscience of every evil way.

The wise man says, Pro. 28.14. that blessed is the man, that fears always;
where he does not understand a doubtful fear of our election, but a fear to
sin, and a conscionable care to avoid those things which are displeasing to
Gods sight: Phil. 2.12. make an end of your own salvation with fear and
trembling: here also the Apostle would not have us fear, least we should be
rejected and damned, after we are truly committed unto God, but least we fall
into sin, and neglect that duty, which we owe to our heavenly father.

There by no means incur; not because we fear so much his wrath, as
because we would not do any thing which might cause him to look upon us with a
frowning countenance. And this sonne-like fear is commended unto us in the
Scriptures, as being a part of the honor and service which we owe unto God;
Mal. 1.6. If I be a Master, where is my fear? Psalm. 2.11. serve the Lord in
fear: 1. Pet. 1.17. pass the time of your dwelling here in fear: Psalm.
112.1. blessed is the man that fears the Lord. But presumption fears not to
displease God: Pro. 28.14. he that hardneth his heart shall fall into evil;
here fear is opposed to carnal security, and hardness of heart: for he that
hardneth his heart and continues in carnal security, runs headlong into
the evil of sin, and consequently of everlasting damnation.

Thirdly, by what means the Spirit
The means by which the spirit of God gives a particular testimony to a man's
conscience of his adoption, comes now to be considered.

The means are three, 1. the word: 2. the Sacraments: 3. the fruits of the
spirit.

1. First, the word of God.
As touching the word of God, the spirit of God persuades us of our adoption
and salvation, with arguments grounded upon Gods word. To which purpose here is
required a double work; the first of the Minister, the second of the hearer.

The Minister is to make particular application of the word generally preached
to the special use of the hearer: As Nathan to David, 2. Sam. 12.7. thou art
the man; as Peter to the Jews, Act. 2.23. him have you taken by the hands of
the wicked, etc. And as all the prophets to their several peoples, to whom
they were sent.

The Minister speaks not to every man particularly one by one, but speaking
to the assembly, he labors to make every man conceive of that, that is
spoken as particularly spoken to himself: for the word of God being as a
proclamation in writing common to all, the Minister is as the voice of the
crier, to give notice to that congregation, that the matter of the proclamation
concerns them and every of them, saying in effect, Act. 13.26. Ye men and
brethren children of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever among you fears
God, to you is this word of salvation sent: Act. 3.26. First, unto you has God
raised up his son Jesus, and him he has sent to bless you, in turning every
one of you from your iniquities. Now as every man conceiueth the proclamation
(according to the matter of it,) no less to concern him, then as if it had
been spoken in particular to him alone: so does the Minister leave every man a
like interessed in the message of salvation; what he says to all in general,
that be says in part to every man; what to believers, to every believer; what
to sinners, to every sinner. Therefore sometimes he speaks in the singular
number, as to one, that it may be known that he speaks to any or every one:
Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light: Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God raised him up from the
dead, thou shall be saved, even thou, or thou, or whosoever it be amongst you.

Thus God gave his law to all Israel, speaking to all as if he had spoken
namely and particularly to every one: Exodus 20.34.7. thou shall have no other
Gods before me, etc. every man was therein to conceive that he himself was
spoken to.

Again, the Minister sometimes has occasion to speak to some one man alone,
and then he himself out of the general, deduceth a particular to that one
man: as Paul does to the Iaylor, Act. 16.31. believe thou in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved: for by what authority Paul spoke this to the
Iaylor, by the same authority does the Minister in like case, speak the same
to any other man in particular. Thus much of the Ministers application: The
next is the work of the hearer, who is to apply the word of God, heard by him,
to himself.

A man duly hearing the word of God, and receiving it not as the word of the
Minister, 1. These. 2.13. not as the word of man, but as it is in deed, the word
of God, and accordingly believing in it as from God: for that which he
believes generally, frames a conclusion to be believed particularly as
touching himself. The Minister says, Luke 13.3. except you repent, you shall
perish; this he believes, and therefore concludes as touching himself; except
I repent, I shall perish. The Minister says, Mar. 1.15. Cap. 16.15.16. Repent
and believe the Gospel, and you shall be saved; this he believes, and therefore
concludes also of himself, if I repent and believe the Gospel, I shall be
saved. This whether spoken publicly or privately, the conscience of the hearer
apprehends this, he believes it, and therein believes not only the
Minister, but the word of Christ; and because he believes in Jesus Christ, and
that by the word of Christ, that whosoever believes in him shall be saved,
therefore he believes that himself shall be saved.

Thus then, both the Minister makes such application to the hearer, and the
hearer again does apply the same to himself, as has bin showed, and then
the holy Ghost opens our deaf ears, Psalm. 40.6. inlighteneth our blind
understandings, Luke 24.45. and powerfully inclines our will, Psalm. 119.36. so
that we may attentively hear, truly understand, and be fully assured of the
truth, which is delivered, not only in respect of the whole Church, but also
in respect of our selves particularly; so as we may say, I believe that these
promises of God are true, and that they belong to all the faithful, and
consequently unto me, who do believe, and am assured of them: 1. Tim. 1.15. so
did Paul say, that Jesus Christ was come into the world to save sinners,
whereof I am chief.

But yet when we have the word preached, the holy Ghost does not always
presently beget faith and repentance in Gods children; for howsoever Paul
plant, and Apollos water, yet God alone gives the increase, 1. Cor. 3.6. so
that the word may long sound in our ears, before it pierce the heart, and
beget faith in us, unless the Lord open our hearts and make the seed of his
word fruitful. And though we do after not long hearing of, the word, feel
this assurance of Gods love and our election; yet let us not give over the
hearing of the word, but expect Gods blessing upon it, and wait his pleasure,
with prayer for his grace, assuring our selves that in the end he will make this
his own ordinance effectual; whereas those who neglect and contemn Gods
word, have no such assurance, because it is the means and instrument, which is
ordained of God for this purpose, without which the spirit of God does not
ordinarily beget faith, or any saving grace in us. So then, the principal
agent and beginner hereof is the holy Ghost, enlightening the mind and
conscience with spiritual and divine light: but the instrument to this action
is the ministry of the Gospel; whereby the word of life is applied in the name
of God, to the person of every believer.

And this is done and conceived in a form of reasoning, framed in the mind by
the holy Ghost, applying the promises of the Gospel in this manner;

Every one that believes in Christ, is the child of God, Romans 8.30. and
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. This proposition is made by the minister
of the word in the public congregation, and it is nothing else, but the
promise of eternal life applied to the particular hearer: now while the
hearers of Gods word give themselves to meditate, and consider of the same
promise, comes the spirit of God, and enlightens the eyes, and opens the
heart, and gives them power both to will to believe, and to believe indeed;
so as a man shall with freedom of spirit make an assumption, saying, but I
believe in Christ, I renounce my self, and all my joy and comfort is in him;
(flesh and blood cannot say this, Matthew. 16.17. it is the operation of the holy
Ghost) cap. 11.25. hence arises this blessed conclusion, which is the
testimony of the spirit, Therefore I am the child of God.

Thus does Paul conclude, 1. Tim. 1.15. This is a true saying, and by all means
worthy to be received, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners,
whereof I am chief: and propounds himself herein an example, ver. 16. to
all that shall in time to come believe unto eternal life. Thus when God says,
Psalm. 27.8. Seek my face, the faithful soul answers, Thy face will I
seek: when God says, Zach. 13.9. Thou art my people; the answer is again,
Thou art the Lord my God: when Christ says, Mar. 9.22. If thou believe, all
things are possible to him that believes; the answer is, I believe, Lord help
my unbelief.

Thus therefore to apply the word of the Gospel, is the fruit and effect of the
spirit of adoption, which bears witness to our spirits that we are the
sons of God, Romans 8.16. our own heart could not minister such comfort unto
us, but God gives us an heart to hearken to the voice of Christ, delivered by
the minister out of the Gospel. Seeing then the spirit of God does witness by
the word unto us, our adoption and salvation, we may learn from hence, that
it is a work of a man out of Christ, not to believe and assent unto the word,
but rather to stand out in reasoning against the evidence of it. For so soon
as a man is become the sheep of Christ, he cannot but presently hear his
voiyce; Ioh. 10.27. and hence Christ himself proves the carping Pharisees
not to be of God, because they could not abide to here his sayings, Ioh. 8.43.
and who be they to whom the Gospel is hid? even they that perish, 2. Cor. 4.3.
If we would have a more evident mark to know them by, it is added, that they
be such, as the eyes of whose minds the God of the world has blinded; wherein
is implied a wilful joining with Satan to blind themselves further by their
malice, then they were by corrupted nature.

And if we would look to our congregations, we shall find many such of who^
we may pronounce that which Steven did of the Jews, that they were resisters
of the holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. For whose words be these to the Almighty, Job
21.14. Depart from us, we will not the knowledge of thy ways; and who is the
Almighty that we should serve him? For how many of us that hear the word,
receive the Sacraments, and go for Christians, resolve yet not to leave our
sins, till they leave us? nay the obstinate purpose of our hearts, is to
practice them still; and what is this else, but with the servants in the parable,
Luke 19.14. to send word into a far country after the king, that we will not
have him to rule over us, but our own lusts shall still prescribe laws unto
us?

Again, when we call the people as God did his, Ier. 6.16. to walk in the
old way, that they may find rest to their souls: they answer us with them, we
will not walk in that way; the sound of the thing, if not of the voice,
speaks: for we call from swearing, lying, covetousness which is idolatry,
from Sabboth-breaking, intemperance, drinkings, uncleanness, but men's hearts
speak by their lives, we will swear, we will drink to drunkenness, the
ways of God are too straight and unequal, a man had as good be in prison, as
in these bonds.

By these instances we may see as in a glass, that many are tainted (amongst
us) with this fearful sin of rising up, and reasoning against that light
which shines out in the word.

Secondly, the Sacraments.
The second means, whereby the spirit gives us assurance of our salvation, is
in the frequent use of the sacraments, which are added to the covenant of grace
as seals, not to confirm Gods promises in themselves, which are so
undoubtedly true that they need no confirmation; but to strengthen our faith in
this assurance, that they belong particularly unto us. For whereas in the word
the promises of life and salvation are generally propounded to all believers,
in the use of the Sacraments, they are particularly applied to every worthy
receiver, to the end, that doubting being removed, they may be certainly
assured, that all the promises of the Gospel do belong particularly to
themselves. To this end, the Sacrament of circumcision is called the seal of
the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. because thereby, as by a seal, Abraham
was confirmed in the truth of Gods promises, and assured that the righteousness
of faith, that is, the righteousness of Christ, did belong unto him.

And answerable to this Sacrament is Baptism; wherein Christ and all the
gracious promises of life, and salvation, made in him, are particularly applied
to the party baptized; Gal. 3.27. all that are baptized into Christ have put on
Christ. The Apostle here compares Christ to a garment, which by the hand of
faith is put on by every particular believer.

So in the administration of the Lords supper, the bread and wine is
particularly delivered unto all the communicants, to signify unto them, that
every one who stretches forth the hand of faith, does receive Christ and all
his benefits, whereby his soul is nourished unto everlasting life.

Whosoever therefore has faith, he may be assured, that he receives Christ,
he may be assured of his election and salvation, Ioh. 1.12. (for to as many as
received him, he gives power to be the sons of God.) And who are these? even
those that believe in his name, Ioh. 6.54. and whosoever eats his flesh, and
drinks his blood, has eternal life.

Now if we would know how we feed upon him, it is by the mouth of faith, Ioh.
6.47. The spirit of God properly (as the efficient cause) does seal, (Ephesians.
4.30.) because it does confirm and stablish in our hearts the assurance of
everlasting life and salvation by his testimony: but it does it by the
ministry of the word and sacraments: so that in one blessing of God, we may
consider three things: 1. that by his word God teaches us: 2. by his
sacraments be confirms us: 3. by the holy Ghost he illuminateth our minds,
that the word and sacraments may obtain their proper end and use.

When God gives any blessing to man, it is to be received by man, as God gives
it; now God gives Christ, or at the least offreth him, not generally to
mankind, but to the several and particular members of the church. In the Lords
supper (as in every sacrament,) there is a relation or analogy between the
outward signs, and the thing signified. The action of the Minister giving the
bread and wine, representing Gods action, in giving Christ with his benefits to
the particular communicants: Again, the action of receiving the bread and the
wine severally, represents another spiritual action of the believing heart,
which applies Christ unto it self for the pardon of sin, and life everlasting.

So then, thus speaks the spirit to the soul; as sure as the water does wash
away the filth of thy body, so does the blood of Christ sprinkled upon thy
soul by the hand of faith, and by the holy Ghost, wash thee from all thy
sins, Ioh. 1.7. And as the bread and wine received into into thy body,
becomes wholly thine, so thy believing soul receives withal Jesus Christ,
with his death and righteousness, to the sealing up of thy everlasting
salvation. For 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is made of God unto us wisdom,
righteousness, etc. 2. Cor. 5.21. aad he was made sin, that knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him.

And thus we have heard the testimony of the spirit in the use of the
sacraments.

Thirdly, the fruits of the spirit.
A third means whereby we may be assured that Gods spirit witnesses unto us
our election and salvation, are the fruits and effects of the spirit: for the
effects argue the cause, as the cause the effects; and that not only in
natuaall things, but also in those which are supernatural and spiritual:
neither are these fruits bare signs only of our election and salvation, but
also manifest seals, which by their plain impression do evidently assure us
thereof.

First, God knows us, Ioh. 10.27. and and then he adds, that he is also
known of them: As if he should say, whilst I know and acknowledge them for my
sheep, hereby I bring to pass that they in like manner, by the participation
of this my light and knowledge, do acknowledge me for their true pastor: If
therefore we know and acknowledge God for our gracious God, and loving father
in Christ, (Ioh. 6.69. we know and believe, says Peter, etc.) it is a most
certain sign that he also by his foreknowledge does know and acknowledge us
for his children; but if we remain in our ignorance, without the knowledge of
God, and his son Christ, we can gather no assurance of our election and
salvation: Ioh. 17.3. For this is eternal life, to know thee to be the true
God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Secondly, 19. where it is said, we love God, because he loved us first: and
hence it is, that the Apostle says, ver. 7. that love comes of God, because
we can neither love God nor our neighbor aright, till his love toward us,
having shined upon us, has inflamed our hearts. So also S. Paul says, Romans
5.5. that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost,
which is given unto us; whereby love toward God is begotten in us. If therefore
the love of God be in our hearts, we may be assured, that it is made by the
seal of his love toward us.

And thus we have heard of a second effect of the spirit, which may put us out
of all doubt of Gods love toward us: But for our further satisfaction, let us
consider the special fruits of the spirit: as he best knows that he has
life, which feels it in himself; so he best knows that he has the spirit
of God, that feels the spirit working in him.

Now the fruits of the spirit are set down, Gal. 5.22.23. as follows,

First, love respects both God and a man's heart is set and disposed to seek
the honor and glory of God in all things: Secondly, when a man by all means
endeauours himself to please God in every thing, counting it a most miserable
estate to live in the displeasure of God: by these two signs, a man may know
whether he love God or no.

Our love to man is a fruit of this love to God; for God is to be loved for
himself, and man is loved for God. This love must be in deed and in truth, 1.
Ioh. 3.18. and is showed in giving and forgiving, as afterward shall more
appear.

Secondly,

Thirdly, 18. The prophet Esaias speaking of the Gospel says, c. 11.6. that the
wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the Leopard shall be with the kidde, etc.
showing hereby that in the estate of grace, Christians (howsoever by nature
cruel) shall become gentle, and live peaceable with all men, yea with those
that hate peace, so far forth as may stand with a good conscience, Psalm.
120.7.

Fourthly, long suffering, whose property is to keep the affection of anger in
moderation and compass. It stands in two points: first, when a man deferreth
his anger; and is hardly brought to it: secondly, when being angry, he
stays the whotnesse of that affection, Colos. 3.12.13.

Fifthly, gentleness, whereby a man behaueth and shows himself friendly and
courteous to every man: Tit. 3.2. Sof^, showing all meekness to all men.
This gentleness stands in three points: first, to speak to every man
friendly and lovingly: secondly, to salute friendly and courteously: thirdly,
to be ready upon any occasion to give reverence, and honor to every man in
his place.

Sixthly,

Seventhly,

Eighthly, with the railing of Shemei, was not moved unto wrath, but did
Christianly bear his reuilings, and did forbid any to hurt him, 2. Sam. 16.10.
The same virtue was in Moses, Numb. 12.3. of whom it is recorded, that he was a
very meek man, above all the men that were upon the earth. And the like grace
was in Paul, Romans 9.3. who notwithstanding the Jews sought to kill him, yet he
wished to be separated from Christ for them.

Ninthly, temperance; whereby a man brideleth his appetite or lust, in meat,
drink, or apparel, 2. Pet. 1.6. this is a fruit of faith, and Dan. 1.8.11.
practiced by Daniel. Now to conclude, where these fruits of the spirit are to
be found, there is also the spirit of God: for as certainly as we know that
there is fire, because it easteth forth heat, and the sun by casting forth
his bright beams, whereby the world is lightened; and that a tree is good by
the good fruits it brings forth; so also may we as certainly be assured, that
we have the spirit of God, when we find in our selves these effects and
undoubted fruits of the spirit.

Secondly, the Testimony of our spirit.
Now we are to speak of the testimony of our spirit, which is the testimony
of the heart and conscience, purified and sanctified in the blood of Christ.

This heart of ours testifies two ways, 1. by inward tokens in it self: 2.
by outward fruits.

Inward tokens are certain special graces of God, imprinted in the spirit,
whereby a man may certainly be assured of his adoption. These tokens are of two
sorts, which respect either our sins past, present, or to come; or else, Gods
mercies in Christ.

First, godly sorrow for sin.
The first sign in our spirit which concerns sins past, is godly sorrow;
which is a pain and pricking in the heart, arising from the displeasure of
God, from the acknowledgement and sense of sin, and fear of the just
damnation which follows after the same; as is expressed in those conuerts,
Act. 2.27. whose hearts were pricked. So David complains, Psalm. 119.28. that
his soul melted with heaviness: and the Prophet Habacuk, cap. 3.16. when he
heard Gods judgments, his belly trembled.

This inward sorrow is expressed, sometimes in the consumption of the body;
Job. 30.30. my bones are burnt with heat. David complains, that his raynes
are full of burning, Psalm. 38.7. that his moisture is turned into the drought
of summer, Psalm. 32.4. As in the heat of summer all things are parcht and
dried, so our natural moisture, which should moisten and cheer the body, is
consumed by the anger of God: Job. 6.4. The arrows of the Almighty were in
him, and the venom of them did drink up his spirit: Proverb. 17.22. a
sorrowful spirit dries up the bones.

Now this inward consumption is bewrayed: 1. In the decay of strength, Psalm.
38.8. I am weakened, and sore broken: Job. 6.13. my strength is taken from me:
Psalm. 22.14. All my bones are out of joint, my strength is dried up like a
potsheard. 2. In the hollownesse and dimnesse of the sight of the eyes: Psalm.
38.10. The light of mine eyes, even they are not mine own; that is, my sight
fails me for very sorrow: for as the eyes of a man that rejoices do more
peircingly behold the light, because the spirits are then more pure; so
darkness does as it were dazzle the eyes of a sorrowful man, and darkeneth
them, because the spirits are then more gross and feeble.

Secondly, sometimes in tears: Matthew. 26.75. Peter wept bitterly: the sinner
washed Christ's feet with her tears, Luke 7.37. the Church, Lament. 2.11.
says, her eyes failed with tears.

Thirdly, sometimes in a heavy and sad gesture, with apparel answerable:
Psalm. 38.6. I go mourning all the day long. The Publican, Luke 18.13. would
not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven: in this condition, men clothed
themselves with sackecloth, and covered their heads with ashes: So did Ahab in
his counterfeit repentance, 1. Kin. 21.27. and so did the Nineuites, Ion. 3.5.
and this custom is not misliked by Christ, Matthew. 11.21. who says, that if
the great works which were done in Corazin and Bethsaida, had been done in
Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented long ago in sackecloth and ashes.

Fourthly, sometimes they groan grievously, and cry vehemently, desiring above
all things reconciliation with God in Christ, for the pardon of their sins:
Psalm. 38.8. I roar for the very grief of my heart: v. 9. and sigh: Psalm.
32.3. I roared all the day long.

Quest. Whether have all men that are humbled, the like measure of sorrow?

Answ. No; but some more, some less: Job (c. 6.2.3.) felt the hand of God in
exceeding great measure, when he cried, O that my grief were well waighed,
etc. the same did Hezekias, when on his sick bed he said, Isa. 38.13, 14. O
Lord, it has oppressed me; comfort me. Contrariwise the theife upon the
cross, Luke 23.40. and Lydia, Act. 16.14. in their conuersions, never felt any
such measure of grief: and of Lydia it is said, that presenly upon the Lords
opening her heart, she entertained Paul and Silas cheerfully into her house;
which she could not have done, if she had been pressed down with any great
measure of sorrow. Neither are we to dislike our selves, because we are not so
much humbled as we see some others; for God in his great wisdom gives to
every one which are to be saved, that which is convenient for their estate: and
it is often seen in a festred sore, that the corruption is let out, as well
with the pricking of a small pin, as with the wide lance of a rasor: for
remission of sins depends not upon the greatness, sufficiency, and worth of
our sorrow; but upon the obedience and satisfaction of Christ, apprehended by
faith.

Further, upon feeling of this sorrow, two things are to be observed;

First, all men must look that it be soundly and seriously wrought in their
hearts: for as men use to break hard stones into many small pieces, and not
into dust; so must the feeling of Gods anger for sin, break the heart of a
poor sinner. This sorrow must not be felt for a brunt, but very often before
the end of a man's life. David from his youth, Psalm. 88.15.16. Jacob wrastled,
and halted upon his thigh, Genesis 32.25.31. The Paschal lamb must be eaten with
sour herbs, Exodus 12.8. to signify, that they which will be free from the
wrath of God by Jesus Christ, must feel continually the smart of their own
sins.

Secondly, all men must take heed, least Cain, Saul, Judas, Achitophel. And
Paul's counsel is to be followed for the moderating of this sorrow; that is,
that such are to be comforted, 2. Cor. 2.6, 7. and further he gives a
sufficient reason, v. 11. least Satan should circumuent us.

There is a twofold sorrow for sin: 1. Legal and worldly: 2. Evangelical
and godly.

First, a legal sorrow for sin, is in respect of the punishment, and it is
wrought by the law.

Secondly, Evangelical sorrow is sorrow for sin, because it is sin; this
indeed is a grace of God, but it is not wrought by the law, but by the
preaching of mercy and reconciliation, and it follows in us upon the
apprehension of Gods mercy by faith. Now the nature of this sorrow may be
better conceived, if we compare it with worldly sorrow.

1. First, worldly sorrow springs of sin, and it is nothing else but the
horror of conscience, and apprehension of the wrath of God for the same: Now
godly sorrow indeed may be occasioned by our sins, but it springs properly of
the apprehension of the grace and goodness of God in Christ Jesus.

2. Worldly sorrow is a grief for sin only in respect of the punishment;
but godly sorrow is a lively touch, and grief of heart for sin, because it
is sin, though there were no punishment for it.

3. This is godly sorrow, when we love the man that rebukes us; Act. 2.37.
and reverence the word the more, being by it reproved in our conscience; but
this is worldly sorrow, when we hate him that reprooueth in the gate.

4. If our sorrow do drive us to prayer, or to seek comfort in the word of
God, it is good: but when men to put away sorrow, will go sleep, will go
play, will go sport themselves, get to merry company, and pass away the
time, and so as they term it, will purge and drive away the rage of
melancholy: never go to preacher, never respect prayer, nor seek comfort in
the word of God: this sorrow is not good.

To conclude, S. Paul has set down seven signs whereby this godly sorrow may
be discerned, 2. Cor. 7.10.11. which when a man does find in himself, he has
no doubt godly sorrow in him.

Signs of godly sorrow.
A care to avoid evil past, and not to

A confession of our sins to God, and shall have mercy.

A

A

A

A my zeal has even consumed me: ver. 135. I saw the transgressors, and was
greiued, because they kept nor thy word: ver. 136. mine eyes gush out with
rivers of water, because they keep not thy law.

A revenge, or punishing of our selves, Bethelem: and thus having offended in
gluttony and drunkenesse, let us revenge our selves by fasting and abstinence.

Now have thou found these worthy fruits in thy self? then certtainly, as
they said unto Peter, Math. 26.73. that his speech bewrayed him to be a
Galilean; so these gracious signs will assure thee, that thou have sorrowed
with a godly sorrow for thy sins.

Unto these things I may add the judgment of that reverend Divine Mr.
Grenham, whose speech was, that the oftener sin, and the less grief, is a
note of the child of the devil: but contrariwise, the oftener sin, and the
more grief, is a note of the child of God. If a man be not troubled for sin
here, it is the way to hell: if he troubled here, it is the way to heaven. And
as they which have not been troubled, having had a little joy shall have
eternal pain: so they which here have had a little pain, shall afterward
have everlasting joy, Luke 16.25. They that are corrected here, and profited by
it, are afflicted of the Lord in mercy; but they that be vexed and amend not,
receive a token of Gods further wrath. Therefore we must not look to feel
comfort in the remission of our sins, unless we also have sorrow for commiting
of out sins. For never were any of Gods children comforted thoroughly, but
they were first humbled for their sins; Deuteronomy. 32.39. I kill and give life, I
wound and make whole, says the Lord. For shall Christ have his heart pricked
with a spear? and shall not we have ours pricked with sorrow? we can never
without the knowledge and feeling of sorrow for our sins heartily long for
Christ. In all their sacrifices of the law, wherein Christ was perfigured, was
also manifested under dark signs the contrition of the heart, and
acknowledgement of their unworthiness: Psalm. 4.5. Tremble and sin not, says
David: where he shows that this is an effectual thing to true repentance, to
quake and tremble for fear of Gods judgments. Therefore we must fear and
humble our selves, because before terror and quakeing at the judgments of God,
we will never be brought to offer our selves to Christ alone. David, Psalm. 32.
(entitled, a Psalm of instruction concerning the free remission of sins)
teaches how we shall find the same; where he shows, until trouble of mind
did drive him to God, he found no comfort. Manasses, 2. Chron. 33.12.13. which
did eat the bread of sorrow, and drink the water of grief, until he had
lamented and sorrowed, felt no rest nor peace in his soul. This godly sorrow
is well pleasing to God: Psalm. 51.18.19. the sacrifices of God are a contrite
spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Isa. 66.2.
To him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit.
Matthew. 9.13. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance:
not every sinner, but that sinner which condemns sin in himself, and is
weary and laden with his sins, Mal. 11.28. Christ prefers the harlotts and
publicanes, before the Pharisees, Matthew. 21.32. for they being pricked for their
sins, and convicted, did sorrow. So then, Christ gives righteousness to
them that feel themselves sinners, ease to them which are burdened, light to
them which are in darkness, life to them which are dead, and salvation to them
that condemn themselves.

To conclude, that we may the better get this holy affection of sorrow into our
hearts, we must use all helps needful for this purpose.

And them, that they have to do with the Lord, then they are touched with
sorrow and begin to fear, and to come to the knowledge and feeling of that,
whereof before they were ignorant. Ioh. 16.8. For he reproves the world of
sin: that is, the spirit of God by the word awaketh our consciences, that
those sins which before were hid, should be made manifest. It was a good
while before David openly confessed his cruel sins to Nathan, or to God,
neither did he find comfort of conscience until he had thus confessed, 2. Sam.
12. Joseph's brethren were thirteen years, and never remembered their sin,
until after such time as the Lord laid it out before them, Genesis 42.21. The
woman of Samaria was pleasant, and iested with our Savior Christ, until her
sins were opened, and then she began to answer with more reverence: for
until she was willed to call her husband, she thought all was safe; but after
she was told she had played the Adultres, she acknowledged him that he was a
prophet. The Jews cared not for the Apostles, nor made any conscience of their
sins; but after they had heard Peter preaching against their sins, then
they left off mocking, and were pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37. Paul, 1.
Cor. 14.24.25. says, If all do prophecy, and there come in one that
believes not, or one unlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and is judged of all
men, and so are the secrets of the heart made manifest, and so will he fall
down on his face, and worship God, and say plainly, that God is in you in
deed; where he shows, that the word of God cites and sommoneth our
consciences before the tribunal of God, and wounds us with a lively feeling
of Gods judgments and sense of our sins.

Because partaking of the holy Sacraments, and by faithful and fervent
prayer,) and then he says that God will draw near unto us, namely in his
mercy and goodness, and in all the fruits and effects thereof. Now ver. 9.
mark what the Apostle adds: Afflict your selves; sorrow and weep, etc. The
grief signifies that heaviness which is joined with a certain shamefastness,
as appears in the countenance: And if we thus begin to cast down our selves
before the Lord, he will assuredly raise us up, ver. 10.

We must aggrauate our sins, by calling to others: how many we have poisoned
by them, of whose recovery we are altogether uncertain, some of them (for
ought we know to the contrary) being already in torments in hell fire, for
the sins whereinto we have drawn them: and others (perchance) likely enough
to go the same way after them, if the Lord do not in mercy prevent them by
his grace. These and the like meditations, will cause our hearts (if they be
not past sense and feeling) somewhat to relent.

Thus Nehemiah aggrauateth their sins that lived in his time, Neh. 6.7. etc.
And so did David his own corruptions, endeavoring in many words to make them
odious in his own eyes, Psalm. 51.5. acknowledging that he was conceived in
sin, (which was the fountain of all) and brought forth in iniquity: that
God required truth in the inward parts, ver. 9. but he had been hypocritical,
and false-hearted: that God had taught him wisdom in the secret of his heart,
but he had put that out of his consideration, and cast it behind his back,
when it should have restrained him from all those ill courses that he took.
Thus holy David labors to set out the haniousnes of his offenses, that his
own soul might abhor them, and all the world might see his utter
detestation of them.

We must not only with patience endure,

When we by our own searching and admonitions of others, have found out our
manifold corruptions and sins; then in the next place let us inwardly and
seriously meditate upon the infinite mercy of God, in giving us his Son, and
also consider the incomparable love of the Son, in submitting himself to
become a ransom for us, 1. Ioh. 4.10. Romans 5.8. when as we never entreated or
desired it on our part; nay even then when we were children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. and his mortal enemies, Romans 5.10. This was the thing that caused the
Jews (Zach. 12.10.) so to mourn and lament, because they considered what
Christ had suffered in their behalf. And this should break and bruise our
hearts (as it did others) that we wounded and pierced Christ our Savior by our
transgressions. For the chastisment of our peace was upon him, and by his
stripes we were healed, Isa. 53.5. Look as the blood followed the nails, that
were stricken through the blessed hands and feet of Christ; so should the
meditation of the cross and passion of our Redeemer, be as it were nails and
spears to pierce us, that our hearts might bleed for our sins: and we are
not to think more hardly of the Jews for crucifying him, then of our selves,
because our sins also crucified him. For the loss of a little worldly pelf,
how are we grieved? but seeing our transgressions are the weapons whereby the
Son of God was crucified, let us learn to be grieved for them above all
things. Thus then the meditations of the manifold sufferings of Christ, should
cause our hearts to be dissolved into tears.

We must (as often as fit occasion is offered) go unto the house o mourning,
where we may be put in mind of our woeful estate, by reason of our wicked
nature, and sinful carriage in violating the Lords holy commandments. And this
is commended as the part of a godly wise man, Eccles. 7.6. where it is said,
The heart of wisemen is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in
the house of mirth. And the reason why this is a part of wisdom is rendered,
ver. 4. It is better to go into the house of mourning, then to the house of
feasting; because this is the end of all men, and the living shall lay it to
his heart.

And if others chastisments should affect us, much more should Gods correcting
hand move us; and when he smites us, we should join with him and take his
part, and rend our own hearts, Joel. 2.13. and then if Gods strokes on others,
or on our selves, do make us grieve for our wickedness, happy are we: for so
says David, Psalm. 94.12. blessed is the man, O Lord, whom thou chastisest, and
teach in thy law: and our blessed Savior also says, Matthew. 5.4. blessed
are those that mourn, etc. Therefore when we find our selves inclined to
heaviness, in respect of any outward rod that lies on us, or on our friends,
let us take hold of the occasion, and turn the course of our grief an other
way: which if we can perform, so making our sins our greatest sorrow, Christ
Jesus shall be our greatest joy, and we being mourners in Sion, shall be comforted
in due season, Matthew. 11.28. our iniquities shall be covered, and not imputed,
Psalm. 32.1. scattered as a mist, taken a way as a cloud, Isa. 44.22. and we
received into everlasting happiness.

Secondly, the combat between the flesh and the spirit.
The second token which is in regard of sin present, is the combat between
the flesh and the spirit, proper to them which are regenerate, who are partly
flesh, and partly spirit. For the better conceiving of this point, four things
must be handled.

First, the parties here by whom the the first sin of Adam, is spread over
his posterity) does poison his whole nature, so that no sound part is found in
him, from the crown of the head to the sole of his foot. Isa. 1.6.

In this corrupt flesh are two things: Affections, and Lusts, Gal. 5.24.

First,

Secondly,

By this we see what a carnal man is, namely one that is carried a way with
some inordinate affection, or some inordinate lust. Herod did many things at the
motion of John Baptist, yet was he a carnal man: for he was possessed with an
inordinate love of his brothers wife, Mar. 6.20. Judas a disciple of Christ,
yet he a carnal man, carried a way with the inordinate desire of money, Ioh.
12.6.

The spirit is the gift of regeneration, Joseph's chastity is a part of
regeneration, and proceeds from the spirit here mentioned: but the chastity of
Scipio is not so, proceeding only from nature, and the general providence of
God, and not from the spirit of sanctification.

More plainly, the spirit is a divine nature, quality, or condition, 2. Pet.
1.4. whereby we are made conformable to Christ in righteousness and holiness. And
this spirit has certain properties.

First, that it is a rich and liberal grace of God: for it contains in it the
seed of all virtues, and all necessary graces of God, because it comes in the
name of original sin, which contains in it the seeds of all vices and
sins.

The second,

The third, is much falsehood in their mourning; because they mourn for sin,
only in respect of the punishment thereof. Lastly, there are that pretend a
love to God, and yet want the spirit; for they love God only in respect of his
benefits; as Saul loved God for a kingdom: such love is mercenarie, and a
work of nature: whereas the love which is from the spirit, makes us love God
for himself, and for his honor.

The fourth, is excellency: for the spirit

The fifth, is liuelines, whereby the spirit the operation of the spirit, three
things are to be known.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly, hearts, Ier. 31.33. and that is done by putting a new light of
knowledge into the mind, and new inclinations into the will and affections.

Secondly, the means whereby this lust of the spirit has two actions: first,
to curb and restrain the flesh. Thus S. John says, That the seed of grace
keeps the regenerate that they cannot sin, 1. Ioh. 3.9. Secondly, to engender
inclinations agreeable to the will of God. Thus David says, that his reins
did teach him in the night season, Psalm. 16.7. and the Prophet says, Isa.
30.21. Thine ear shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is the way,
walk in it. This voice no doubt is not only the voice of such as be teachers,
but also the inward voice of the spirit of God in us. And thus by the
concurrance of those contrary actions in one and the same man, is this combat
made.

Thirdly,

Quest. It may be demanded how these twain (being but qualities) can fight
together?

Answ. The flesh and the spirit are in the whole man regenerate, and all the
powers of the foul of man; fire and water are said to be in compound bodies;
light and darkness are in the air at the dawning of the day; In a vessel of
lukewarm water, heat and cold are in it; we cannot say that the water is in
one part hot, and in an other cold; but the whole quantity of water is hot in
part, and cold in part: even so the man regenerate, is not in one part flesh,
and in an other part spirit; but the whole mind is partly flesh, and partly
spirit, and so are the will and affections throughout, partly spiritual and
partly carnal. Now upon this it comes to pass, that the powers of the soul
are carried and disposed diverse ways, and hereupon follows the combat.

Fourthly, this combat shows it self

This combat as it is in all the actions of the godly, so especially in good
actions: thus much Paul teaches, Romans 7.21. When I would do good, evil is
present with me: v. 19. for I do not the thing which I would, but the evil
which I would not, that do I. This combat of the flesh and the spirit, is
when the mind is carried against it self, and the affections against
themselves, by reason that they are partly spiritual, and partly carnal;
because our regeneration is in part, therefore it is opposed by the contrary
corruption, which we have by nature; so that what the spirit loves, the flesh
hates; what the spirit imbraceth, the flesh abhors; what the spirit would
have us to do, the flesh would have us to leave undone; whatsoever the spirit
is delighted, with that the flesh is vexed and displeased. Satan does not
fight against the flesh, nor the flesh against Satan, nor either of them
against themselves: for so their kingdom being divided, could not possibly
stand, Matthew. 12.25.26. And therefore it must needs be some other force,
which causes this opposition, which can proceed from nothing else, but from
this spiritual fight.

Consider therefore the contrary affections and actions, which plainly show
themselves in this battle: for we find our faith assaulted with doubting, and
infidelity, and these also again beaten back. after they have gotten some
ground, and subdued with the spirit of faith: we discern also our affiance in
God, showed by shaken with diffidence and distrust, and afterward this
distrust vanquished again by affiance, so as after we have uttered through the
violence of temptation diffident and impacient speeches, yet at length we grow
to Jobs resolution, Job. 13.15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in
him. We may also discern our zeal, sometime so hot in Gods service, that it
expels coldness and the fruit thereof, dullnes and drowzines of spirit, and
sometimes by them it is cooled, and in outward appearance quenched. The like
may be said of all other fruits of the flesh and the spirit. This conflict
Christ noted in Peter, Ioh. 21.18. when thou wast young, thou girdest thy
self, and walk whether thou would; but when thou shall be old, thou
shall stretch forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and lead thee
whether thou would not. Out of doubt Peter was lead to death willingly in
the spirit, but in the flesh against his wll; he would and he would not dye:
The spirit was willing, but the flesh would not, for death was never welcome to
the flesh.

In one and the self same man converted to God so long as he lives here, there
is the old and the new man; the spirit is the new man, he to be put on, this to
be put off, Ephesians. 4.22.24. between these two there can be no peace; what peace
says Iehu, 2. King. 9.22. so here what peace? because their wills are diverse,
their desires and endeauours diverse, and their purpose diverse.

Here we may insert two great conflicts, 1. between faith and reason. 2.
between hope and despair.

First, 14.11. Have thou brought us to die in the wilderness, says reason:
ver. 13. fear ye not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, says
faith: Numb. 11.21.22. Six hundred thousand men are there of the people among
whom I am, and thou say I will give them flesh that they may eat a month
long, shall the sheep and the beeues be slain for them to find them, etc.
says reason: ver. 23. is the Lords hand shortened, says faith: 2. Kin. 7.3.
Though the Lord would make windows in heaven, could this thing come to pass,
says reason: behold thou shall see it with thine eyes, says faith. The like
places to this effect be these, Hest. 4.11.13.14. Dan. 3.14.1. Cor. 1.13.24.

Secondly, this combat between and filthiness of our sins, so hope by the
counsel and advise of the spirit and faith obiecteth unto despair the
greatness and multitude of Gods mercies, and the price of Christ's sacrifice,
whereby we are purged from the filthiness of our sins, and sanctified by the
spirit: Psalm. 42.11. why art thou cast down my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? wait on God. Romans 7.24.25. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus
Christ, etc. To this effect are these testimonies, Psalm. 77.7.8.9.10. Psalm.
130.3.4. Ioh. 2.4.7. Now whence does all this opposition and contrariety
proceed? shall I say from the flesh? nay it is against all reason: for as Saint
James disputes, Iam. 3.11. does a fountain send forth at one place sweet
water and bitter; or rather as Christ Jesus reasons, Matthew. 7.16. do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? so may I demand, can the
flesh in the which (as Saint Paul affirms, Romans 7.8.) dwells no good thing,
bring forth the fruits of the spirit, which are quite contrary to the nature
thereof? namely, sorrow for sin, hatred of it self and the corruptions
thereof, and an earnest desire of sanctification? it is impossible.

So long as we are destitute of the spirit, and a lively faith, we are wholly
ouerswaied with the flesh; and Satan like a mighty Tyrant holds us captive
peaceably, and without any resistance.

There is a combat I confess in the natural man, but it is between the
natural conscience and the rebellious affections, which is incident to all
men, that have in them any conscience or light of reason; but this is the
check of conscience which all men find in themselves both good and badde, so
often as they offend God: But this combat whereof we speak, is a fighting and a
striving of the mind, will, and affections with themselves, whereby so far
forth as they are renewed, they carry the man one way, and as they still remain
incorrupt, they carry him flat contrary.

So then the persons in who^ this combat is to be found are the believers, and
they only. Hieron. Statim vt oues, etc. As soon as ever the devil shall see
his sheep to be willing to forsake his flock, he is angry and rages,
esteeming that he has lost whatsoever Christ has gained. Greg. Mag. Hosts
noster, etc. Our enemy by how much the more he sees we rebel against him, by
so much the more he stirs to prevail: for he neglects whom he quietly
possesses: Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow you as
wheat: Apoc. 12.17. The dragon was wrath with the woman, and went and made
war with the remnant of her seed which keept the commandments of God. The
blind man, (Ioh. 9.) so long as he continued in his blindness, was never called
in question, but so soon as his eyes were opened, not only himself, but also
his parents were presently conuented: The Pirates while they know the ship to
be empty, let it quietly pass, but when it returns laden with rich
merchandise, their manner is to assault it with violence. So says Chrysostom: in
Genesis homil: 31. while men are void of virtue, the devil lets not their
voyage; but when grace is given once, then he strives to rob us of that
grace.

The Apostle in the first three chapters of the Epistle to the Ephesians,
shows the mystery of our salvation, and the causes thereof, for the
confirmation of our faith. And in the next three chapters, he sets down diverse
duties, both generally belonging to all Christians, and also particulary
appertaining to men of sundry conditions, that he might move them to
repentance: But in the next place cap. 6.10.11. he does give warning of the
approach of mighty enemies, willing us to arm our selves in our own defense:
where further observe, that Paul enrolleth himself in the number of Christian
soldiers: Therefore it hence follows, that when we have received the spirit
of God, and have faith wrought in our hearts, and endeavor to serve the Lord
in a Christian life, then begins a fierce battle, which never ends till
by death our spiritual enemies get a final overthrow.

Now though this fight be exceeding sharp, and most troublesome to the poor
Christian, yet he may thereby gather unto himself a certain assurance, that
he is endued with the spirit of God, and a lively faith: for when he discerns
that he is assaulted with Satan and his own corrupt flesh, he may be assured
that Satan is diseased of his quiet possession, by a superior power, which is
no other but the power of Gods spirit.

Secondly, by his assaulting, it manifestly appears, that he finds some
resistance, so that he cannot peaceably re-enter.

Thirdly, that howsoever our faith seems unto us never so weak, yet it is so
strengthened continually by virtue of Gods spirit, that Satan and all the
power of hell, cannot prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18. and 2. Cor. 12.9.
Christ says, My power is made perfect through weakness; for otherwise how
should such weakness, withstand such might?

Lastly, being assured that it is the spirit of God which assisteth and
enableth us to withstand Satan, we may also be assured, that in the end we
shall obtain victory: 1. Ioh. 4.4. Little children, ye are of God, and have
overcome them: for greater is he that is within you, then he that is in the
world. In us is Christ, in the world is the devil: Luke 11.21.22 When the
strong man armed keeps his palace, the things that he possesses are in
peace; but when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he
takes from him his armor; for as fire when it wrastleth with the water
thrown upon it, cease not til it has overcome; so the resistance of the
spirit against the flesh, will not cease til the full victory be obtained, and
Satan himself trodden under our feet, Romans 16.20.

Here then is consolation for Gods children, who feeling the burden of their
sins, and being vexed with the continual assaults of their spiritual
enemies, may comfort themselves with assurance that they are the members of the
Church militant, into which none but soldiers are entertained; and that now
they become to be Gods servants and Saints, when as Satan opposes himself
against them.

Here also is instruction, to teach that who does not fight, is none of Christ's
soldier: thou art not servant of Jesus Christ, because to be his servant is to
be his soldier.

Therefore if thou art not skilled in this spiritual battle, if thou be not
daily exercised to resist the devil, and to resist sin, if there be not in
thee a daily controlling of thine own ways, and checking of thine heart, a
resisting of thine own desires, a subduing of thy own affections, that thou
may bring every thought to the obedience of Christ; if all be at peace
within thee, and thou find no division, no contradiction between the flesh and
the spirit, betwixt the old man and the new man, what do thou in the Lords
tents? Many there are that say they are Christ's, and take his name in their
mouths, who yet never drew sword, nor gave stroke in Christ's behalf, who
defy the devil with their mouths, but wrestle not against his works; who
have renounced the world, and yet live in league with the world, and continue
deeply entangled in the corruptions thereof. They would feign live with Christ
in heaven, but yet would live in themselves here on earth; they would be
blessed in the world to come, but yet would not be crossed in the pleasures of
this world: but this cannot be, for he that has called us to eternal life,
has told us that we must strive, Luke 13.24. he that has set before us an
incorruptible crown, has withal warned us that we must fight for it, 2.
Cor. 9.25.26. 2. Tim. 2.5.

Thirdly, a care to prevent sin.
The third token that respects sin to come, is a care to prevent it: 1. Cor.
9.27. I bear down my body, and bring it in subjection, least by any means
after that I have preached unto others, I my self be reproved. This care was
in David, Psalm. 39.1. I thought I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not
with my tongue: and Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee. Of this care Joseph is a notable pattern, Genesis
39.12. in that he left his garment, and fled from his Mistress.

This care shows it self not only in ordering the outward actions, but even
in the very thoughts of the heart: for where the Gospel is, of force it brings
every thought into captivity, 2. Cor. 10.5. and the Apostles Rule is to be
followed, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, etc. if there be any virtue,
or if there be any praise, think on these things.

This care must be maintained in the practice of three things, 1.
watchfulness: 2. sobriety: 3. prayer.

First, of Watchfulness.
Here first is required watchfulness: where there is no fear of danger, as in
heaven, there needs no watchfulness, but there we may live in great
security; but where there is nothing but snares laid, and nets pitched to take
us, where there may be many enemies gaping after our ruin, there must not be
carelessness, but circumspect vigilance: Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray, that you
enter not into temptation: Luke 31.36. Watch therefore and pray continually,
that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to
pass.

As valiant and careful soldiers, who are still in danger to be assaulted by
their enemies, will be very watchful to prevent dangers, so must we be;
because being assured that Satan knowing his time is but short, will redouble
his forces to work our destruction: 1. Pet. 5.8. as a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour: Apoc. 12.22. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of
the sea; for the devil is come down, which has great wrath, knowing that his
time is but short: Even as soldiers will most fiercely assault a town, when
they cannot lie long at the siege, either by reason of winter drawing on, or
the approaching of new forces to releife the town or raise the siege.

To be watchful is a most excellent and Christian duty: Apoc. 3.2. Be awake,
says Christ, to the Angel of the Church of Sardi. It is not bodily but
spiritual, and it is practiced, when a man has a circumspect care in respect
of the salvation of his soul. Now this duty of watchfulness concerns
sin, which watchfulness against sin, stands in two points.

First, a man must daily and continually bethink himself beforehand of all
sins and vices, into which he may happily fall. And for the doing of this, he
must consider in himself two things: 1. his nature; 2. his calling. Touching
his nature, he must consider, that in him remains the seeds and root of all
sin, and therefore that he may fall into any sin whatsoever. Again, a man
considering his nature, shall find himself more inclined to some sins then
to others; and those he must specially mark and observe.

Touching his calling, a man must mark the sins thereof: for since the fall
of man, every calling has his special sins, whereto men that walk therein
are more incident. The Magistrate his sins, the Minister his, the Lawyer his,
the Physician his, and the tradesman his. And as touching these, 1. A man must
consider into what vices and abuses men are most subject that walk in that
calling wherein he lives, and so shall he have a foresight of the sins, that
he may fall into. Secondly, after this foresight of sin, he must watch in
his heart with all diligence, that though it be tempted and assaulted, yet it
be not tainted with any one sin; as the wise man councelleth, Prou. 4.21.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, that so the fountain of all thy actions
may be kept holy and pure. The means to make us circumspect and watchful be
these,

First,

Secondly, day of our life, and therefore that we do all things no otherwise,
then if that day or night following we were to stand before the tribunal of
Christ, to render an account of our life.

Thirdly, to know our selves to be always in Gods presence, as a witness and
judge of our actions: Act. 10.33. we are all, says Cornelius, here in Gods
presence, etc.

Fourthly, to remember what a multitude of enemies seek our confusion: Ephesians.
12. we wrestle against powers, etc.

To conclude then, consider with what great care a man bears any vessel brim
full of any precious liquor or oil, least it should be spilled; consider also
with what great care a man goes over any narrow piece of timber, or some
ruinous bridge, under which a very swift and deep river runs, least he
should fall into it and be drowned: consider also what great wariness they use
that go upon ropes, least they declining to this hand or that fall down: with
the same care and wariness ought we to walk in our thoughts, words, and
actions. This care is commended, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self, and keep
thy self diligently.

Secondly, Sobriety.
The proper work of sobriety, is to moderate the mind, and contain it in
due compass, both in all the affections of the soul, and the actions of life,
which it turns it self unto.

This sobriety is in things, 1. inward: 2. outward.

First, in the inward gifts of the mind, it teaches a man, 1. to know
himself: 2. not to despise another.

Touching the knowledge of a man's self: first, it teaches a man to be wise
unto sobriety, and not to presume above that which is written, Romans 12.3. The
secret things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Be not careful in the night (says
Elihu) how he destroies the people out of their place, Job. 36.20. That is, be
not curious in seeking the cause of Gods judgments when he destroys any.
Mary Magdalen is forbidden to touch Christ after his resurrection, Ioh. 20.17.
by which we are restrained from curiosity. It is a learned ignorance not to
know that which God would have us be ignorant of, but it is a pernicious
contempt, not to be willing to know that which God would teach us. True
wisdom and modesty in the children of God, consists in opening the ears
to learn, when Christ opens his mouth to teach, and in not desiring to
learn that which he is unwilling to reveal unto us. The holy scripture is the
school of the holy ghost, wherein as there is nothing omitted, that is
necessary to salvation, so is there nothing taught but what is requisite for
us to know.

Secondly, it teaches man to contain and content himself within the limits
of his own measure of gifts, with thankfulness to acknowledge them, and not
to arrogate that which he has not.

Of this sobriety we have a singular president in the Apostles themselves, 2.
Cor. 10.13.14. we rejoice not in things without our measure; nor stretch our
selves beyond our measure, nor boast of things without our measure.

Touching other men, Sobriety teaches not to despise an other, although, he
has received not the like measure of gifts; it swells not against another,
seeing it self has nothing, but what it has received, 1. Cor. 4.7. It was
Joshua his fault to envy that Eldad and Medad prophesied, Numb. 11.27. etc.
And Saul's sin to be David's enemy, because the Lord was with him, 1. Sam.
18.28.29. but sobriety has not an evil eye, because of the gifts which other
have. The churches of Judea glorified God that Paul which had persecuted, now
preached the Gospel, Gal. 2.22.23. And the believing Jews glorified God who
had given repentance unto life unto the Gentiles, Act. 11.18. so that then it
is the practice of sobriety, to rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15.

Secondly, sobriety in outward things is a moderator, as may appear in things
concerning, 1. A man's calling, estate, pleasure, and delights: 2. Things
indifferent.

First, it forces man to abide in his calling, but not as a drudge unto it. It
was Vzzia his pride to pass the bonds of his calling, by usurping the Priests
office, 2. Chr. 26.16. but Christ's sobriety to keep him to his calling, Luke
12.14. Paul's rule therefore is to be followed, 1. Cor. 7.20. let every man
abide in the same vocation wherein he is called; by which precept, the Apostle
means not so to tie a man to his vocation, as not at any time to change it:
for it were very hard if a merchant might not become a husbandman, nor a Tailor
a merchant, etc. This is not then the Apostles meaning, but rather to correct
that unadvised and rash desire, that some have to change their condition of
life, having no just cause to do it.

Secondly, it setleth a man in a quiet contentment in his estate. Jacob desired
but bread to eat, and clothes to put on, Genesis 28.20. And Paul wills us,
having food and raiment, there with to be content, 1. Tim. 6.8. Solomon prayed,
Pro. 30.7. to be fed but with convenient food for him. There is a man that
makes himself rich that has nothing, Pro. 13.7. And this is the sober man,
who with Paul, Phil. 4.11.12. has learned to want, and to a bound, and has
the benefit of contentation in all estates. So that if want come, he that was
rich can rejoice in being made low, as well as the brother of low degree in
that he is exalted, Iam. 9.10. Again, if a prosperous estate befall him, his
prosperity puffs him not up; but he can use the world as not using it, 1.
Cor. 7.31. And if the Lord keep Manna sweet but for the day, he is well
contented, yea heartily thankful.

Thirdly,

Lastly, in things indifferent, as meat, drink, apparel, sleep, buildings,
marriage, etc. it keeps within compass, it puts the knife to the throat,
Pro. 23.2. it takes heed least at any time the heart be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenes, Luke 31.34. It walks honestly as in the day, not
with drunkenness and gluttony, Romans 13.14. Gods children have been always in
the way of restraining: 1. Kin. 19.6. Elias did so eat and drink, as the
Angel was sent to bid him ear more: Timothy abstained from wine, 1. Tim.
5.23. Daniel durst not adventure on the Kings fare, but put up a supplication
to eat nothing but gruell, Dan. 1.8. we must walk soberly in all things, that
by fulness of bread (which was the sin of Sodom, Ezech. 16.49.) we neither
benumme our senses, nor disable the members of our body from their special
duties. And thus in the other things we are to moderate our selves, and to live
within compass.

Now the practice of this virtue is a fruit of our redemption, 1. Pet. 1.13.14.
etc. to the which seeing the Gospel calls us, how ought we to open our cares
and hearts to entertain this voice? The sons of Ionadab the son of Rechab
obeyed their father when he called them to sobriety, they neither drank wine,
nor built houses, nor planted vinyards, but obeyed their father in these
straight commandments; and for that the Lord blessed them exceedingly. Now the
Lord comes not with such a strait charge, not such a one as strippes us from
these comforts of our lives, but only restores the right and comfortable use
of them unto us: and may he not much more say unto us as he did to the Jews,
Ier. 35.13. should you not here my word also? If they obeyed their earthly
father, depriving them of the things themselves, ought not we much more to obey
our heavenly father, who prohibiteth not the things, but only the abuse of
them? Alas the gross and ungrateful abuse of Gods creatures in our days,
more reigns then it has done in former ages. I confess, the Israelites,
Isa. 22.13. reuelled and carowzed, slaying oxen, killing sheep, eating flesh,
and drinking wine, eating and drinking: yea and in the time of the Prophet
Amos, cap. 6.4.5.6. they did eat and drink without all fear of God, or pity
to his afflicted members. Jude v. 12. calls such rocks in their feasts of
charity; that is, such as behaved themselves impudently, without reverence to
God or man, like unreasonable creatures, giving themselves to all sensuality,
and so were as rocks of offense. But our men of these times, are vnmeasurably
addicted to this vice, spending the greatest part of their time in carouzing,
as though they did not drink to live, but lived to drink; or as if from men
they were transformed into flies, which live wholly by sucking: they drink not
only for thirst, but also for company; they draw one another to excessive
quaffing by making challenges, who can express most love to their absent
friends by largest drinking. To this purpose they use all sorts of salt meats,
and also Tobacco, that by drunkenness they may expel drunkenness. So that this
vice which in this land (in my remembrance) durst not show it face for shame,
and lurked in secret corners, is now grown to impudent boldness, so as it
dare stagger abroad at noon days in the open streets. It is therefore high
time that the Magistrates with the word, and the Ministers with the word, join
together to beat down this sin.

Thirdly, Prayer.
Here lastly is required earnest Prayer: 1. Pet. 4.7. Be watching in prayer:
Phil. 4.6. In all things let your requests be showed unto God in prayer: Matthew.
26.41. Watch and pray, says our Savior Christ. Many are the temptations and
spiritual invasions which in this life do befall us, while the enemy of
mankind does often assail us, by himself and by the world, and by the flesh
that domestical foe: now the readiest help in Gods children against these
enemies, is earnest and hearty prayer, Matthew. 17.21. Ephesians. 6.18. here prayer is
made a principal piece of armor against our enemies.

Where prayer wants, the action of sin is as ready as the temptation; we
may account it as one of our sins, that when inward and outward sorrow
oftentimes do lay hold upon us, we do not use this remedy; we go on like
insensible men, and frantic ones, being most sick, and yet we understand it
note and if we find that we need help, we coast of all require it by prayer;
and he who should first be thought of, that is, God the judge of all, does
come last in the reckoning. Daniel the man beloved of God, would not forbear
prayer thirty days, but used to pray every day, though it had cost him his
life, Dan. 6.10.

Men now are not terrified from prayer, but encouraged to pray, yet I am
afraid, that many pass days, weeks, and months, and never humble themselves
in private prayer unto God: is it then any marvel that many are barren in
grace, when as they are barren in prayer? we cannot be dry in the grace of
God, so long as we resort to Christ by prayer, who has the seven vialls of
gold, full of seuenfold mercies. Therefore let us ask, seek, and knock, that
we may have and find mercy to help in the time of need, Matthew. 7.7.

To conclude, this care of preventing sin, practiced in watchfulnes,
sobriety, and prayer, is a special mark of Gods children: 1. Ioh. 5.18. he
that is borne of God, sins not: for the regenerate part sins not, but his
corrupt flesh that is in him.

Secondly, Gods mercies.
The tokens which concern Gods mercies are especially two: First, spiritual
hungring after Christ: Secondly, a special valuing and loving of Christ above
all things.

First, Spiritual hungring after Christ.
When a man feels himself distressed with the burden of his sins, Psalm.
38.4. or when he apprehends the heavy displeasure of God in his conscience for
them, Psalm. 32.3. then further to feel how he stands in need of Christ being
utterly lost in regard of himself, Luke 9.10. and withal heartily to desire,
yea to hunger and thirst after reconciliation with God in the merit of Christ,
and that above all other things in the world, is not only a beginning of
grace, but even grace it self, by which we may be assured of our adoption and
salvation. This was in Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! Even as Jacob when as he and his
family were pinched with famine, was glad to send and to go into Egypt for
food to relieve him and his: so will those that are spiritually hungry and
thirsty, be at any pains, and break through any difficulties, for the
satisfying and refreshing of their fainting souls.

This desire of grace (I say) is not only the beginning of grace, for how can
we desire it, till in some measure it be wrought in us; but also our desire of
grace, as of faith and repentance, are the graces themselves which we desire
of God, who accepts the will for the deed, where there is no power or
ability to do the deed; and our affections for the actions, according to
that we have, not according to that we have not, 2. Cor. 8.12. And therefore
if we earnestly desire to repent and believe, it is accepted in Gods sight, 2.
Cor. 8.12. So then our hungring desire after grace, is not only to be made
partakers of Gods mercies, and Christ's merits and righteousness, (by which we
are justified, reconciled to god, and receive the pardon of our sins) but
also our desire is after the means and isntrumental causes, whereby the
assurance of Gods mercy and Christ's merits is derived unto us, namely true
faith, and after unfeigned repentance, and the rest of the graces of Gods
sanctifying spirit. This desire in the Scriptures is resembled to hunger and
thirst: Psalm. 42.1. Isa. 51.1. Psalm. 143.6. Psalm. 63.1. notes two things unto
us; First, a sense of our want: and secondly, an appetite or earnest desire to
be satisfied, and have our want supplied. And in these spiritual things, first
we feel the want of Gods graces and Christ's righteousness, and then we
earnestly desire, that we may be filled and satisfied therewith.

So that to hunger and thirst after the grace of God and righteousness of
Christ, and to be weary and heavy laden, Math. 11.28. are much alike, and
both are blessed of the Lord: for as those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness are blessed, because that they shall be satisfied, Matthew. 5.6. so
they are blessed who are weary and heavy laden with the burden of their sins:
for such Christ calls unto him, and has promised to ease them, that is, to
give unto them the remission of their sins, and to release them of this
burden, by taking it upon his own shoulders.

Further, to this earnest desire of grace, the Lord has made the like gracious
promises, which he has to those, who do find themselves plentifully endued
with the graces themselves, Luke 1.53. And calls unto him such as thus hunger
and thirst, promising that he will satisfy them, Ioh. 7.37. Apoc. 21.6. Cap.
22.17.

Lastly, whosouer finds and feels this desire in himself, joined with a
careful and continual use of the means of salvation, whereby his desire may
be satisfied, he may assure himself that the Lord who has wrought in him the
will to desire, will also in his good time work in him the graces which he so
earnestly desires: Psalm. 145.19. he will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him, etc. And therefore if in the midst of our afflictions and greuious
temptations, we can cry out with David, Psalm. 38.9. Lord I powered out my whole
desire before thee, we may be assured how miserable soever we are in out own
sense and feeling, that we are in the state of grace, and shall have our desires
satisfied, Phil. 16. yea whosoever hungreth and thirsts after the grace of
God, and righteousness of Christ; whosoever is weary and heavy laden, that
is, whosoever has a true sense and feeling of his sins, and is vexed and
grieved with the burden thereof, and with all his heart desires to be cased
of his load, though he think himself in a most miserable estate; yet if he
come unto Christ, and with blind Bartimeus cry out, O Son of David have mercy
on me; I may answer him as it was said unto this blind man, Be of good comfort,
for Christ calls thee, Mark. 10.46, 47. and if Christ calls us, he will
give us to drink of the water of life, whereof whosoever drinks shall never
be more a thirst, Ioh. 4.14. but it shall be in him a well of water, springing
up unto everlasting life.

When David would persuade God to bring him again to the assembly of the
Saints, where he might enjoy the means of comfort and salvation, he uses this
as a forcible argument; Psalm. 42.2. My soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God: when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? Psalm.
48.2. My soul longs, yea and faints for the Courts of the Lord. As none
are bidden guests to feast with Christ, but such as have thirsty souls, Isa.
55.1. so every one that thirsts come ye to the waters; Apo. 22.17. Let him
that is a thirst come; so none else have any promise of speeding well if they
should come: for thus goes the promise, Isa. 43.3. I will power waters upon the
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: Ioh. 7.37.38. If any man thirst, let
him come unto me and drink.

So then if we once come with a longing heart, that does as it were gape and
enlarge it self to take in the rain of grace, as the dry ground does to
receive the showers that fall upon it; through we be never so thirsty, we
shall be fully satisfied: 1. Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere
milk of the word of God, that you may grow thereby; that is, if you be as
sharp set for the food of your souls, as little children are for their mothers
milk, you shall get inward growth of grace thereby, and still increase in the
inward man, as children do in the outward, and find a progress in grace as
they do in nature.

Now to the end we may have this spiritual appetite, let us use all good means
for the obtaining of it; which are as follows:

First, for as much as sin does annoy

This we are taught, 1. Pet. 2.12. Wherefore laying aside all maliciousnes,
and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy and evil speaking, as newborn
babes, desire the sincere milk of the word of God, etc. Whence observe, how we
are required to put a way a bitter and envious mind against our brethren, a
dessembling heart toward God, and not to suffer our evil affections to break
forth into evil speeches.

And in the next place, follows a desire, and an hungry appetite after grace
to be embraced of us: Isa. 55.1. Come, buy and eat: come I say, buy milk and
wine, without silver, and without money. 1. Here are two things signified: 1.
As in bargains betwixt man and man, he that buyeth a thing of another, must
part with something that formerly was his own; so must we in this purchase of
ours. And what is that we must part withal? with nothing but our own sins
(which will do us no good, but infinite hurt if we retain them still.) To
this purpose it is said, Matthew. 13.44. That the kingdom of heaven is like unto
a Treasure hidden in the field, which when a man finds, he hides it, and
for joy thereof departs, and sells all that he has: meaning all that he
has from his own corrupt nature, and renounceth all his carnal affections:
so that as the price we pay for any thing is altogether alienated from us, so
must sin be, though never so much esteemed and beloved beforetime: And thus
are the words to be expounded, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and
the unrighteous his own imaginations, etc. Many forsake some evil ways, but
not their own; or if they do leave their old ways and works, yet they do
not forsake their own imaginations; but we must forsake the one and the other.

Now in the second place, we must sin works on our hearts, as ill humors do
in our stomachs, it makes us to loath all spiritual food, and all means of
refreshing. And take this for an undoubted truth, which though our mouths will
not confess, yet our hearts must needs acknowledge; when we have no desire to
hear the word preached, or to receive the sacraments when it is to be
administered, there is some sin or other not thoroughly repented of, which so
cloyeth the soul, that it cannot delight in those holy exercises: And as our
hearts are more purged by godly sorrow for sin, so will our hunger and thirst
after righteousness and the means thereof, be still increased in us.

Secondly,

This course was even taken by those, who labored to induce and bring
offenders to repentance, to set before their eyes, and to make them see the
condition wherein they were.

So Christ dealt with the Church of Laodicea, to the end he might make her
seek for reconciliation with God; he labored to make her see that she was
wretched and miserable, and blind, and poor, and naked, Apoc. 3.17. This also
Ephraim speaking of her self, shows that it was the cause of her running to
the throne of grace: Ier. 31.19. when I was instructed, I repented, that is,
when my eyes were open, that I saw mine own condition and estate, then I
repented. Peter in his first Sermon after the ascension of Christ, endeauored
to make the Jews (his Auditors) to see their sins in crucifying the Lord of
life, and their wretched estate for that fact, that he might (as the success
was) draw them to repentance, Act. 2.36.

When nothing is more irksome unto us, nor more feared of us then sin, then
nothing is more desirable with us, nor more desired of us then grace. For as
those who are oppressed with a heavy burden, desire above al things to be freed
from it: and as those that feel greiuous and dangerous diseases and
distemperatures in their body, desire nothing more then the help of the
physician, that so their sickness may be cured: In like manner those who feel
the weight of sin pressing them down, and are weary and tired in bearing of
it, and deserying the loathsome noisome corruptions wherewith their souls are
infected and endangered, will earnestly desire to be eased of this intolerable
burden, and will never be at rest, till they be healed of their sins.

So then, let us have recourse unto God by earnest and seruent prayer,
entreating that he will annoint the blind eyes of our understanding, with the
precious eye-salue of his holy spirit, Apoc. 3.17.18. that we may know, and
well understand our miserable condition. For it is Gods spirit that detecteth
the thoughts of many hearts, Luke 2.25. Again, to this end let us oftentimes
set the law as a glass before us, by which we may see our deformities, and
examine our lives, as it were by a rule and square. Thus did the holy ones in
times past attain unto the sight of their woeful condition, and so were
driven to seek after Christ and his salvation.

Thirdly, we must labor to have a lively sense and feeling of our sins, and
of our miserable wretched estate, in which we are by reason of them; yea we
must be weary in bearing this heavy burden, being most grievous unto us: and
this is an other means to make us hunger and thirst after salvation, and the
means thereof.

To this end let us upon all just occasions, with good Josias, have our hearts
melt within us, 2. Kin. 21.19. and rend them with true compunction, Joel. 2.13.
and be pricked with the Jews, Act. 2.37. And all this not so much in regard of
the punishment we have deserved, as that by our sins we have displeased our
good God: And have caused our Savior Christ who is the Lord of life, to be put
to shameful and painful death, Zach. 12.10. Christ only calls such as be
we ary and heavy laden with the burden of sin, Matthew. 11.28. and God only
hearkneth unto those, who from their hearts cry out with David, Psalm. 38.4.
That their iniquities are gone over their head, and as a weighty burden too
heavy for them to bear; yea the Lord respects those who are of a broken
heart, and contrite spirit, Isa. 66.2. To these Christ preached the glad
tidings of the Gospel; to these he will give liberty, and true comfort, Isa.
61.1. If therefore we be lost in our selves, we shall be found in Christ, who
comforts none but the abiects, seeks none but the lost, makes wise none but
fools, iustifies none but sinners: so as unless we find these wantes in our
selves, the Gospel was never preached to our comfort.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly, sin, Romans 7.24. Now, none of these sorts can thirst and hunger for
any benefit to their souls, to be given them out of the treasure of Christ's
salvation.

Fourthly, and lastly, wicked and profane them, and presses them down to the
bottom of hell, as it did Caine, Judas, and the rest.

The reason hereof is, because they are wholly plunged, yea drowned and dead in
their sins: and therefore as those who being diued to the bottom of some deep
water, do not feel the weight of that which is all on them, whereas if they
were pulled out of the waters they would be overwhelmed with the burden of one
tun; so those who are deeply plunged into the gulf of sin, do not feel
the weight of this intolerable burden, but if once they come out of their
sins by unfeigned repentance, the weight of some few of them would press them
down unto the gates of hell, if they be not supported, and freed from this
burden by Christ.

Fourthly, to make a man truly hunger and thirst after Christ, etc. is the
knowledge of a man's own inability, either to free himself from sin, or from
the punishment due unto it.

First, change his skin, or the Leopard his spotts? then may you also do
good, that are accustomed to do evil: Cap. 4.22. we are wise to do evil,
but to do well we have no knowledge: we may by the gracious power of Christ
repress the rage of our corruption, and mortify our members which are on
earth, as fornication, and uncleanness, etc. Col. 3.5. yet the root and the
whole body will remain still in our hearts and souls, and will as occasion
is offered, break forth: This was it that made holy David to pray so earnestly
to the Lord, to purge him, Psalm. 51.27. Wherein he acknowledges that there is
no power in us to free our selves from sin, either actual, or original, but
it is a supernatural, nay and a divine work of Christ Jesus, to cleanse us
from all our sins.

Secondly, touching freedom from into judgment with him.

So then, seeing there is no help in our selves to be found, neither do we
know what to do, our eyes must be toward Christ Jesus, who is the mighty God
and our blessed Savior, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity.

The weight of one sin would press us down into hell, but Christ is able to
bear the burden of our sins, nay he has already borne them in his body on
the tree, that we might be delivered from them, 1. Pet. 2.14.

To whom therefore should we go in this our sickness, but to this our heavenly
physician? whose help should we seek for the curing of our wounds, but the
help of this our blessed surgeon, who cures all with the balm of his
precious blood?

For Esa. 53.8. he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. There is no salvation in any other, neither any other name given
under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. 12. To this Jesus therefore who
is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, be praise
in the church throughout all generations, Ephesians. 3.20, 21.

Lastly, there is no one thing that can

For this salvation brings with it freedom from all evil, both from the
guilt of sin, and from the power and punishment of sin: And withal the
enioyment of all blessings needful for body or soul, for this life and that
which is to come. Now that men's affections and desires are so weak, cold, and
dull, it is because they have not tasted how good the Lords is.

On the otherside, if we have never so exquisite a sight and sense of our
sins, yet if they seem unto us a sweet burden which we are content still to
bear without any great wearines, nay with pleasure and delight, then Christ
does not pronounce ease to such, Matthew. 9.13. herein we resemble the rich
miser, who though his back should be almost broken with the weight of his own
gold, yet does he not think it any trouble, but rather is well contented,
because his burden pleases him: so if we feeling that our sins are a massy
burden, are nevertheless not troubled nor weary by bearing them, but rather
esteem this burden sweet and delightful we may assure our selves we are not
in the number of those who Christ calls: and therefore nothing remains for
us, but a fearful expectation of wrath and vengeance to be powered out upon us
in full measure.

And thus much may suffice to have bin spoken of the means of getting a
spiritituall hunger after Christ.

The love of Christ.
The Second is a divine affection wrought in the heart by the spirit of God,
whereby a man does so esteem and value, and as it were set so high a price of
Christ and his righteousness, that he accounts even the most precious things
that are, to be but as dunge in regard thereof.

This affection was notably in Paul, Phil. 3.8. who did think all things but
loss for the excellent knowledge fake of Christ Jesus, etc. And the same we
read to have been in Moses; Heb. 11.24.25. who refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the
people of God, etc. Christ commends this affection to all that shall in time
to come believe in him: Luke 14.26. If any man come to me and hate not his
father and mother, wife and children, etc. that is, does not prefer me before
father and mother, etc. he cannot be my disciple. Which affection also is
significantly expressed in the parable of the precious pearl, Matthew. 13.45.
etc. which when a man has found, he sells all that he has to buy it: what
faith Christ Jesus to Martha, Luke 10.41.42. Martha, Martha, thou art cumbred
about many things, but this one thing is needful; Marie has chosen the good
part, which shall never be taken away from her: so the men of this world are
entangled with many things, but this one thing is needful above all things,
Matthew. 6.33. seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.

The love of Gods children to Christ is so firmly rooted in their hearts, as
that it is Cant. 8.6. strong as death, which overcomes all things; deep as
the grave, which swalloweth all things: yea such as we will not depart with for
any money; and such and so great, as it is true that nothing can separate us
from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.38.39. Let us then so love Christ, that
it may be as hot as the flame, that whole floods of waters may not quench it;
and so strong, that neither terrors in persecution, nor pleasures in life, nor
the anguish of death, may make us forsake our anchor Christ Jesus; but that we
may hold our confidence in a hope sure and steadfast, which shall at the last
give us entrance into the veil, whether Christ our forerunner is for us entered
in, Heb. 9.20. Now every man will say of himself, that he is thus affected to
Christ, and that he more highly esteems the least drop of his blood, then all
things in the world: when as in truth, such and so vehement are their natural
and earthly affections, and so great their greedines to enjoy the pleasures and
profits of this life, that the marriage of a wife, or the trial of a yoke of
oxen, shall easily keep them from Christ, Matt. 22.5. Luke 14.17. And are
herein like the Israelites, who liked better the onions and fleshpots of
Egypt, then the blessings of God in the land of promise. Therefore that no man
may deceive himself, this affecton may be discerned by these signs.

1. To love and like a Christian man, because he is a Christian: for he that
does aright esteem of Christ, does in like manner esteem of the members of
Christ, to love them as being Christ's friends, 1. Ioh. 3.14. and such as are
his members, because they are so; for this commandment have we of God, that he
that loves God should love his brother also, 1. Ioh. 4.21. he which loves him
which begat, loves him which is begotten, 1. Ioh. 5.1. And Christ sets
down a plentiful reward for a cup of cold water given to a distressed
brother, Matthew. 10.41.42. Cap. 25.34. now who these brethren be, Christ
shows to be such, as do the will of his father, Matthew. 12.50. so as it is
not the affinity in the flesh, but the bond of the spirit that must unite us.
If we love good men because they are so, it is a good sign we do much more
love God who is goodness it self: as if the father love the schoolmaster for
the sons sake, it is a sign he loves his son much more: 1. Ioh. 3.10. He
that loves not his brother is not of God; therefore he that loves his brother
is of God, 1, Ioh. 3.18. Here is a double love; the one idle, which consists
only in word, and is proper to hypocrites and flatterers: the other is active,
which shows it self in the affection, and the work, and is proper to the
godly. Therefore the perfectest love consists in the affection of the heart,
purified by faith, in the testification of the tongue, and in the performance
of the work. And ver. 19. there be set down two benefits of love; one, that
thereby we know that we are of the truth, that is, that we are no counterfeit
Christians: the other, that herehence we shall persuade our hearts, that is,
shall make our hearts secure of our adoption by faith.

Therefore to conclude, 1. Ioh. 4.7. Beloved, let us love one another, for love
comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of God, and knows God.

Now the undoubted signs of Christian charity are two. First, giving to those
that want. Secondly, forgiving those that offend.

1. First, it is the property of love to be bountiful; 1. Cor. 13.4. as to
all, so especially to those that are of the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. On
the other side, he that has this worldly goods, 1. Ioh. 3.17 and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the
love of God in him? and consequently the love of his brethren; which is but a
stream issuing from this fountain.

To do good, and to distribute is a sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased:
Heb. 13.16. and the high way and beaten path to heaven: 1. Tim. 6.18.19. for
they that do good, and be rich in good works, and are ready to distribute and
communicate, do lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may obtain everlasting life.

The Apostle also would this way try and make experience of the naturalnesse
of the love of the Corinths in their bounty and liberality toward the Saints
in want, 2. Cor. 8.8.

2. Secondly, it is the property also of true love to forgive, that is, when
we are ready for Gods sake, and in obedience to his commandment, to remit and
pardon those injuries which are offered us; for love is not provoked to anger,
1. Cor. 13. much less therefore to revenge. 1. Cor. 13.7. Love suffers all
things, it endures all things; nay it does not only not render evil for
evil, but it overcomes evil with goodness, Romans 12.19.21. leaving the
revenge unto God, and to his deputies and vicegerents, the Magistrates, as we
see in the examples of Christ, Luke 23.34. and of Steven, Act. 7.60. who prayed
for their persecutors; whose example we are to imitate, as Paul exhorts, Romans
12.14. Bless I say, and curse not.

Naturally we are wolves, lions, leopards, etc. Isa. 11.6.7.8. like brute
beasts willing to offer all injuries, but impatient to suffer any, as the
Proverb goes, we will do no right, nor suffer no wrong; and therefore when
our savage cruelty is turned into charity, and we become as meek and
harmless as the lamb, calfe, or little child, it is a manifest sign, that
we are borne anew, and quickened by Gods spirit, and are elected unto
salvation.

So also hereby we are assured of the forgiveness of our sins, when we
find our selves ready and willing to forgive our neighbors, Matthew. 6.12. For
this facility and kindness wherewith we are moved to pardon those that have
hurt us in word or deed, is an argument that we are the sons of God. For
whereas by nature we are violently carried with desire of revenge, it comes to
pass we never do forgive injuries received, except Gods spirit do correct
the corruptions of our nature, extinguish in us the heat of revenge, and
kindle in us the fervent heat of charity: and in whom this is done, it is
certain they are guided by the spirit of God, and are the children of God, and
consequently do love their brethren. Moreover, that a man deceive not himself
in the love of his brother, S. John gives three Rules:

1. First, that christian brotherly love should not be for outward respects or
considerations, but principally because they are the sons of God, and members
of Christ, 1. Ioh. 5.1.

2. Secondly, that it must not be outward in show only, but inward in the
heart; 1. Ioh. 3.18. Let us not love in word or in tongue only, but in deed
and in truth.

3. Thirdly, that it be not only in time of prosperity, but when he stands in
most need of our love: 1. Ioh. 3.18. For whosoever has this worlds good, and
sees his brother have need, and shuts up the bowels of compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him?

By trial of this that has been said, both young and old may see, how far
they are from soundnes in this grace, contenting themselves with a shadow of
it. For the most of men's love is grown dead either upon receipt or hope of
benefit, or upon flesh or fleshly respects, and is not begun in nor for God,
nor knit by the spirit of God: the least part of it is set upon the Saints that
are upon earth excelling in virtue: it generally determines it self in
selfe-louing and selfe-seeking, not seeking the things of others, as well as
their own, or not loving the souls of men as well as their bodies; or
respecting persons, and not embracing the poor as well as the rich; or not
blessing their enemies as well as their friends. The love of men for the most
part is a lip-loue, a counterfeit and fruitless love, divorced from inward
hearty affection: or else a vanishing and flitting love, flinching in
adversity when most need is, and ready upon the least occasion to be
overcome with evil, and changed into bitter hatred.

This crazy love every where argues a riuen and cracked faith: such counterfeit
love is the daughter of counterfeit faith; and unsoundness of love is a sure
token of unsoundness of faith. Furthermore we shall be to them, that wrong by
word or deed, or writing, the least of Gods little ones, who are so dear to
the Lord as the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8.

Let the scorners and enemies of good men remember, Ier. 2.3. that Israel is as
a thing hallowed to the Lord, all they that eat it shall offend; evil shall
come upon them, says the Lord: men may dip their tongues in venom, and their
pens in poison, and keep the garments of such as stone Steven, but the Lord
will avenge the cause of his poor ones, he will not always hold his peace, nor
hide his face.

Secondly, dear for them, as the Galathians did love Paul, Gal. 4.15. it is
because by them the blind eyes of our understanding are enlightened with the
knowledge of God and Christ, we are reconciled unto God and have peace of
conscience, and so consequently are assured of our adoption. And this is it
that S. Paul presses the Thessalonians withal, that they have the Ministers
(which turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God,
Act. 26.18.) in singular love for their work sake, 1. These. 5.12.13. And the
very approaching of such Ministers unto us seems beautiful and delightful,
from whom we have received the glad tidings of peace to our great comfort, Romans
10.13.14.15.

If any Ambassador were sent from a mighty Prince who was our enemy in times
past, and able at his pleasure to destroy us, not only to conclude a peace,
but to offer us the free use of all the commodities of his kingdom; who being
hereof assured and persuaded, would not receive him with joy, and give him
royal entertainment? but this is our case, our sins had made our heavenly
King our enemy, who is able in a moment, with the very breath of his nostrils,
to destroy us. Now it has pleased him to send his Ambassadors, not only to
offer peace, but to beseech us that we would be reconciled to him, 2. Cor.
5.20. and upon this reconciliation to assure us of the riches of his kingdom:
who therefore would not love those Ambassadors, that bring these glad tidings,
and show some token of thankfulness to them?

Of this love we have a singular example in Lidia the purple seller, who as
soon as the Lord had opened her heart, and that she was baptized, did presently
invite the Apostles to her house, Act. 16.14.15. wherein she bewrayed her
faith, burning with love unfeigned to Gods Ministers, whose love shines in
this, that she is desirous to give them entertainment, who had given the
doctrine of salvation to her. The like example to the like purpose we have in
the converted Iaylor, ver. 32.33.34. But the great and general contempt of the
Ministry is a manifest sign that there be few, in this respect, which can
assure themselves of the spirit of adoption: The number is exceeding small who
love and respect the Lords Ministers, in regard of their message and
Ministry: nay the most (even for their Ministry sake) do contemn them, so
that their divine calling (which above all things should commend them) does
above all things make them base and contemptible.

And can such think that they are spirit and not flesh; that they are the
children of God, and not the children of Belial; when the things of God seem
foolishnes unto them, and the preachers of peace fools?

But let such know, that God has hid heavenly mysteries from the wise and men
of understanding, and has opened them unto babes, Math. 11.25. and has chosen
the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, 1. Cor. 1.27. let them
further know, that this their contempt, or at least small regard of Gods
Ministers, is a most manifest sign that they never received good by their
Ministry. For if they had received spiritual things from them, they would
never grudge to bestow on them their carnal things, Romans 15.27. 1. Cor. 9.11.
which in the true Christians estimation are not to be compared with them, and
much less would they (against their own conscience) defraud them of their own
right, which by the laws of God and man is due unto them. It cannot be but a
great sin, to despise the Ministers sent of God.

First,

Secondly, preserve his Ministers from contempt, when he affirms that such as
despise them, despise himself that sent them, Luke 10.16. In which sense we
read that the posterity of Cain, contemning the preaching of Noah, despised and
contemped against Gods spirit, Genesis 6.3. so Israel murmuring against Moses and
Aaron, Exodus 16.7. Moses says, he has heard your grudgings against the Lord,
and what are we that you have murmured against us? your murmurings are not
against us, but against the Lord.

Thirdly, how unnatural a part were it Onesimus, Phile. 1. yea and Titus, Cap.
1. who were begotten by him unto the faith, he calls his sons. Therefore
let no cursed Cham presume to scorn them, which is not so hurtful to them as
dangerous to themselves, being the next way to bring themselves under the curse.

Thirdly, to have care to keep Gods of Christ: Ioh. 14.15. if thou love me,
keep my commandments; ver. 21. for he that keeps my commandments loves
me, etc. Now this we must do so much the rather, because the Lord has given
and forgiven us much, having made us of enemies friends, as Abraham was termed
to be the friend of God, 2. Chron. 20.7. having brought us home when we
wandered in the wilderness of sin, as he did the lost son, Luke 15.24.
having fed us when we wanted, and had no means to succout us, as he did
Eliah, 1. Kin. 17.6. having clearly set off the debt which we did owe, and
cancelled the handwriting, which was against us.

If we should not perform obedience to such a God, and wear his
commandments, as a frontlet before our eyes, our condemnation could never be
too heavy, nor our stripes too many: howbeit every blasphemer lies against his
own soul that dare say (even in the height of his wickedness) he loves God.
For can a woman prostitute her body to a varlot, and mingle her flesh with his
strange flesh, and yet truly say, she loves her husband? it is not possibe. No
more can any man truly call himself the child of Abraham, if he do and
perform the works of the devil, Ioh. 8.44. but of this point more shall be said
afterward.

Fourthly, to hate all things whereby

But here note, we must hate none in respect of his creation, but in respect he
peruerteth the use of his creation; for they bear the image of God, which is
lovely, but they deface and scratch it out to their own damnation: So that we
must hate not virum, but vitium, that is, the wickedness of the man, and not the
wicked as he is a man.

Fifthly, Canaan or no, if we ask where it lies in the wilderness, and if our
blood rise to hear Jerusalem evil spoken of, and to hear the Lord (who is
the keeper of that City) reviled on and blasphemed. Such were the spirits of
Eliakim, and Ioah, 2. Kin. 18.37. that they rent their clothes, when they
heard Rabsaketh rail upon the living God: And Ezechiah also when he heard it,
was greiued at it, and spread himself before the Lord, to call for a holy
revenge of that fury. And so must every true hearted Christian esteem the
name and credit of God, far more tender then his own; and learn of Moses,
to be meek in over looking an injury done to our selves, but to be zealous in
recompencing seuenfold to them that tear in pieces the glorious name of our
Lord Jesus.

This sin of abusing Gods glorious name, is now grown to be most common,
every second word being an oath, and he no gentleman that cannot swear and
pollute Gods name by his blasphemies. It is capital among the Turks to
blaspheme Christ, ( Beza in Pa. homil. 31.) but not regarded among Christians.
The Israelites (who were notorious Idolaters) proclaimed a fast, to show how
they detested the blasphemy which was objected to Naboth, 1. Kin. 21. but we
that hate Idolatry, do not hate blasphemy, nay rather we glory in our abusing
the holy name of our God. Iam. 2.19. The devils fear and tremble. Pilate when
he heard that Christ was the son of God, Ioh. 19.8. was afraid: but many are
worse then Pilate, nay worse then the devils themselves, customably and
securely without all fear and regard of Gods Majesty, blaspheme and revile
the living God.

The land mourns because of oaths, Ier. 23.10. but many laugh it out, and
make but a pastime to take the name of God in vain: If a mortal man be held
dear unto us, we take not his name in vain, we will not endure that any make
a scorn of him, and when a matter of play and mockery is proposed, we cannot
suffer with patience that he be brought in as on the stage; for we take this to
be his infamy and discredit: And shall he have greater privilege then the
living God, whose name comes in our mouths in our bargains and pastimes?
etc.

It is a vice which ill beseems those that make profession of christianity:
for a Christians speech should be powdered with salt, Col. 4.6. and not with
blasphemies; it should minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. and not be
as a contagious leptosie to infect the weak, nor like thorns and swords to
vex and grieve the strong, Psalm. 55.21. for howsoever evil men make nothing
of it to here Gods name dishonored, yet if those who truly feared the Lord,
and be zealous of his glory, hear these blasphemies, their heart quaketh,
their joints tremble, and their hair stands up an end, Ecclus. 27.14.
Solomon, Eccles. 9.2. makes it a true note of a faithful man, to have a
reverent respect of an oath: so he pinneth it as a badge upon a wicked man's
sleeue, that he makes no conscience of customable swearing.

Sixthly, to have an earnest desire that

Christ has told us, that his children at his coming shall look up and lift
up their heads, Luke 21.28. And on the other side, that the kingdoms of the
earth shall mourn, Matthew. 24.30. and that the profane worldlings shall say to
the mountains, Fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits
upon the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, Apoc. 6.16.

Naturally we abhor to think of this fearful day, and tremble with fear
when mention is made thereof, as Felix did, Act. 24.26. because by our sins
we have deserved everlasting death, Romans 6.23. but when the spirit of God by
the ministry of the word, has begotten faith in us, whereby we apply unto
our selves Christ with all his merits, by whom we are reconciled unto God; then
do we earnestly desire the coming of Christ our Savior to judgment, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. You know, says blessed Paul, what entering we had, and how we
turned you from idols unto God, and to look for his son from heaven: no
sooner were they turned to God, but they waited for his son. Hereby the
faithful are marked as by their property, even such as with the good servants
expect their Masters coming, Matthew. 24.45. such as look for him, Heb. 9.28.
such as love his appearing, 2. Tim. 4.8. such as being wise virgins and loving
spouses, prepare themselves and every thing needful for the bridegromes
coming, Matthew. 25.4. and such as being strangers and pilgrims upon earth,
have their eyes still toward their country: who while they live on earth, yet
have their conversation in heaven, from whence they look for a Savior,
Philip. 3.20.

The sons of the Church begotten by the Gospel, cannot but wait for the
adoption of sons, Romans 8.19.23. The Church is sick of love after him whom
her soul loves, Can. 2.5. The common voice of the spouse is Amen, unto the
promise of Christ's coming, Apoc. 22.21. The bride says come, and doubleth her
desire and ardencie, saying, Amen, Amen.

Never think then that the heart is right affected, until thou find in it
this desire and breathing after Christ thy life: for this is a special note of
discerning between the godly and the wicked, the one has the spirit which
says, Come; the other shake at the mention of his coming: the one longs
that these shadows fly away, and that day break on them, Cant. 2.17. the
other can no more desire his coming, then the guilty fellon can desire the
coming and presence of the Judge.

Some there are that believe not, nor wait not for the day of Christ, but deal
as the Israelites did with Caleb and Joshua, Numb. 14.7 concerning the promised
land: who when they told the people that it was a good and a fat land, and that
if the Lord loved them, he would give it them, and seat them in it, they
rebelliously bad stone them with stones; but behold presently Gods sentence
passed upon them, that they should never see that land, ver. 23. Such live like
the Sadduces, who said that there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit,
Acts. 23.8.

Such was that Cardinal of Burbon, who professed that he would not give his
part in Paris, for his part in Paradise. Such was that Pope, who all his life
could not be persuaded whether there was an heaven or hell; and therefore at
his death blasphemously uttered these words, Now shall I know whether there be
a God, a^ hell, or any immortality of the soul; and shortly after knew it to
his cost.

Others are fallen asleep with the evil servant while their master makes
stay of his coming, and in one dead sleep of sin or other (out of which
they will not be awakened) wast out their days, as though their souls should
for ever sleep after death.

Others call on the Lord Jesus to come, but never till they be cast on their
death bed, their hearts nor mouths never harbor such requests in their life
time, and therefore in all likelihood they are unsound.

Therefore call to mind the commandment of God, Luke 12.36. Be ye like men
that wait for their master, when he will return from the wedding: herein is
put a difference between the godly and the wicked.

It was ever a mark of good men to wait for Christ's appearance. The ancient
believers of the old Testament did wait for his coming in the flesh in
humility. So Simeon, Luke 2.25. Anna, v. 38. Joseph of Arimathea, Mar. 15.43.
And how much more should we wait for this glorious appearance of this mighty
God and of our Savior Jesus Christ, which brings not only grace with it,
but fullness of glory.

On the contrary, the ungodly person is described to be such an one, as whose
master comes in an hour when he looks not, and in a day when he thinks
not, Luke 12.46. The danger of those whom this day shall oppress unawares
shall be very great, Matthew. 24.51. For such servants shall be cut in pieces,
and have their portions with unbelievers and hypocrites: cap. 25.10.12. Such
foolish virgins shall have the gate of the marriage chamber shut against them;
for Christ appears not the second time to the salvation of any, but of such
as as wait for him. The Lord guide our hearts, 2. These. 3.5. to the waiting
for of Christ, that is, to endure in waiting for Christ. And hereunto we have
need of patience, Heb. 10.36. that after we have fulfilled the will of God,
we may obtain the promise. So be it.

New Obedience.
Having thus declared the inward special graces of God imprinted in the
spirit, whereby a man may be certainly assured of his adoption: Now it
follows in the last place, to speak of the outward token of adoption, which
is new obedience, whereby a man endeauours to obey Gods commandments in his
life and conversation: 1. Ioh. 2.3. Hereby we are sure to know him, if we keep
his commandments: ver. 29. And if ye know that he is righteous, know ye that
he that does righteousness is borne of him: 1. Ioh. 3.10. In this are the
children of God known, and the children of the devil: whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother: 2. Pet.
1.10. Give rather diligence to make your calling and election sure: Ioh. 14.21.
He that has my commandments and keeps them, is he that loves me.

Hereby then we may certainly know whether we be the children of God or no:
for if we be separated from the world, then do we not set our minds upon
worldly things, but have our conversation in heaven: Phil. 3.20. If we be
ingrafed into the body of Christ, who is the true Vine, then do we bring forth
the sweet grapes of holiness and righteousness in our conuersations: Ioh.
15.5. If we have by a true faith the assurance of the remission of our sins,
then we will love God, who has forgiven us so great a debt: Luke 7.47. If we
be not holy, nor make conscience of serving the Lord in the duties of piety
and christianity, we have no assurance that we are the sons of God. For
though the foundation of God remain sure on Gods part, being sealed and
confirmed in his eternal counsel, yet it is not assured on our parts, nor
sealed in our hearts, until we depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.19. for without
holiness no man shall ever see God, Heb. 12.14. If then we walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit, we may be assured that we are in Christ Jesus, and
therefore no condemnation belongs unto us, Romans 8.1. And if we bring forth the
fruits of good life, we may be assured that we are righteous trees, Isa. 61.3.
and good trees of Gods own planting, Matthew. 7.17. Now that that we may not
deceive our selves with a counterfeit holiness in stead of true sanctification,
we are to know that the assurance of salvation does not proceed from every
kind of holiness, but from that which is true and unfeigned.

First, there is a holiness of the tongue severed

Secondly, there is a holiness in performing

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

But none of those, nor yet all these joined together, will ever give unto us
any sound assurance of our adoption; but it is the true sanctification in deed,
which begins not in the mouth, but in the heart, and sanctifies our will
and affections, making us to love and embrace to our uttermost power virtue and
godliness, and to abhor and fly from sin and iniquity. And this new
obedience is a sign of the child of God, and the neglect thereof a mark of
the child of darkness, 1. Ioh. 3.10. But yet this new obedience must not be
judged by the rigor of the moral law, which requires exact obedience: for
then it can be no token of grace, but rather a means of damnation: but it is
to be understood of an Evangelical obedience, which consists in an holy
desire and earnest endeavor in keeping all Gods commandments, (Psalm.
119.60.) with which the children of God are so wholly possessed, that after
their true conversion, it is never or seldom seen that they should fall into
any known sin, with full consent of will, and with their whole hearts: and
this is the obedience which the Gospel requires: and thus we never sin, but
keep all Gods commandments so far as our frayltie does permit, 1. Ioh. 2.5.

This righteousness must be esteemed and considered, as it is in the acceptance
of God, who spares us as he spares his sons whom he tenderly loves, Mal.
3.17. and therefore measures our obedience not only according to our actions,
but according to our affections, and accepts of the will according to that we
have, 2. Cor. 8.9. But least any man may be deceived, here we must know, that
the obedience which is an infallible mark of the child of God, must be thus
qualified.

First, for Satan. I do not speak of infirmities, but of presumptuous and
crying sins, that we do not bless our souls in any such sin; for if we
do, it is Satan's ladder to climb up again by, and it will open a door to
let in more, when we are tempted unto them; as we may see in the examples of
Judas and Herod: Herod harboring incest, and Judas covetousness.

Secondly, it must proceed from the from the whole man, body and soul, because
regeneration from which it proceeds, is not of any part alone, but of the
whole man, 1. Cor. 6.10. and of every part in their several measure. For as it
is to no purpose for Citizens (being beseiged) to fortify one place of the
wall, and leave an other part unfortified; or to keep straight watch at some of
the gates, and to leave others open; so it does not avail to fortify some
parts against the power of sin, and to leave others weak and naked; but we
must look to every part and faculty of our body and souls.

Thirdly, esteemed of God, although he seem to himself and others religious
by fits, and performs many excellent duties and good works.

It is not sufficient that we begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, Gal.
3.3. to profess and practice godliness in our youth, if we break off in our
age: Col. 3.12. put on the bowels of mercy, etc. when thou have put on this
Christian raiment, thou may not put it off again, as thou will do with thy
coat at night when thou go to bed, which thou will cast off, and on the
morrow put it on again; but thou must go in this clothing, walk in it, lie
down with it, and rise with it. Psalm. 15.2. It is to be noted that the holy
Ghost speaks in the present tense, (he that walks uprightly) thereby
signifying a continual act: he does not say who has wrought, but he which
works: for it is not one action that makes a virtuous man, but it behooves a
man in his whole life to keep a constant course of well-doing. Godliness is a
journey, there must be no fainting in it: it is not enough if we enter into the
christian (...) run well in the beginning, if we stand still in the midst,
or before we come to the goal: Math. 24.13. he that endures unto the end, he
shall be saved: Luke 9.62. but he that puteth his hand unto the plough, and
looks back, is not apt for the kingdom of God.

Therefore we must not judge of our obedience by some particular actions, but
by the whole tenor of a man's life.

And thus we have heard the testimonies and tokens whereby a man may be
certified in his conscience, that he is the adopted child of God, and an
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. Now the God of peace that brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus the great shepherd of the sheep, through the
blood of his everlasting covenant, sanctify us throughout both in body, and
soul, and spirit; make us perfect in all good works, to do his will, working
in us that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be
praise in the Churches throughout all generations for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

