A MOST EXCELLENT TREATISE OF THE beginning of heresies in our time, compyled
by the Reverend Father in God STANISLAVS HOSIVS Bishop of Worms in Prussia.

To the most renomed Prince Lord Sigismund myghtie King of Poole, great Duke
of Luten and Russia, Lord and Heir of all Prussia, Masouia, Samogitia etc.

Translated out of Laten in to English by Richard Shacklock M. of Art, and
student of the Civil laws, and entitled by him: The hatchet of heresies.

Haereses ad suam originem reuocasse, est refutasse,
Of heresies to show the spryng,
Is them unto an end to bring.
Imprinted at Antwerp by Aeg. Die. Anno. 1565. the.10. of August. CVM
PRIVILEGIO.

THE TRANSLATOVRE upon the figure following.
Satan the sower of sinful doctrine
For pastyme of late did pepe out of hell
Being weary of whipping Luther and Calvin
To see if his seeds did prosper here well:
And seeing bigg trees which no man did fell,
To be sprung of his seeds, for joy he did spryng,
That with sound of his chains all hell he made ryng.
But when with more head about he did look
Fixing his eye on Prussian ground,
He saw holy Hosius making this book
Myndyng all Satan's crafts to confound:
An hater of heretykes which falsely expound
Gods word: which book so sone as he spyde,
An hachet, an hachet, oh me, he cryde.
An hachet I see in Hosius hand
Which felleth my trees, which else might have stand.
Then having so said, biting his lypp,
He ran again, Luther and Calvin to whypp.
depiction of Bishop Hosius chopping tree of heresy with Satan looking on
INSIGNE FALSITATIS

INSIGNE VERITATIS

SATAN

RAILING

REBELLION

BLODSHED ATHEISM LIES

HOSIVS

DE ORIGIN HERESIVM



THE TRANSLATOVRE upon the figure before going.
Who planted this tree, which there is set out?
Satan the sower of syn without doubt.
The rote is railing: but can you tell why?
Take away railing and heretykes die.
Sampson Humfrey Cole. with others.
The body is rebellion: wherefore can you tell?
For a cap they be ready their Prince to expel.
The braunces is blodshed: know you the cause?
They would kyl (if they could) al without laws.
But why with lies arre so laden the leaves?
Ah heresy with lies all the world deceaues.
The apples be atheism: what does that mean?
Heresy remoueth religion clean.
wherefore does Satan so sowrely look?
Oh he is angry at Hosius book.
what means the cross, which here you do carue?
The badge of truth which never does swerve.
what means the cock which here I do find?
The badge of heretykes which wave with the wind.
But what does the ape under the cock?
Signifies heretykes, which holy things mock*
TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND GRATIOVSE Pryncesse Elyzabeth by the grace of God
Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defendoure of the faith: your most
humble and obedient subject Richard Schacklock heartily wysheth all grace and
peace from God with long reign, honor, health, and prosperity.
ALTHOVGHE my faythefull and obedient heart toward your Royal May. (most
sovereign and gracious Lady) be so well known to God and all good men, that
it may seem neadeles to declare any outward testimonial of it, yet because
(as S. Chrysostom says) God would never have made the mouth, if it had been
enough in heart to thynck well, I could not at this time content my conscience,
onles I did give an open and evident signification of my secret fidelity,
loyalty, and humble obedience toward your most excellent May.

The which, because I was not able to witness unto the world, either by famous
feats of arms, for lack of experience: either in bryngyng golden gifts, for
lack of ability, either in writing works of nue invention, for fault
peradventure of learning and knowledge, I thought, I might declare no small
token of a true subjects heart toward your gracious hyghenes, in trauaylyng
to translate some godly work of some worthy writer: and when I had translated
it, The education of our noble Queen.
to dedicate it to your excellent Majesty: specially seeing your hyghnes even
from your tender age, has been trained up in the treasure house of learning,
not so much bewtyfyed with byllementes and precyouse pearls, as garnyshed
with maruaylouse gifts of grace and godlynes, and even with the increase of
years, has had an increasyng desire of true science and knowledge: in so
much that I here it reported credibly, and believe it verily, that every night
calling your self to an account according to Pythagoras council, how you
have spent the day, if by reason of consulting and caryng for your common
wealth, any day escape without learning of one lesson out of some godly
author, you be wont to say unto them, which be about your noble grace:
Friends, this day have I lost, A golden sentence of our excellent Queen.
for I have learned never a lesson. O sentence worthy to be pronounced of so
excellent a Prince, O saying worthy to be translated in to all languages, and
to be written in letters of gold.

Truly (most noble Queen) this one saying, The cause of our English Louanians
wrytinges
does encorage many of your graces faithful and learned subjects on this
side of the sea to writing: some to make nue works never seen before, some to
translate books, which have been made of other. Some to write in Late^, some in
English, some in verse, and other some in prose. All whose diligence and
study intends nothing less, then to write one word wyllingly, which might
displease your Majesty, which may sow any seeds of sedition, A difference
between the writing of the Catholics now, and the heretykes in Q. Mary's days
look knokes his books and others.
which may disquyet the peace of our natyue country (as in your graces dear
systers days diverse sedityouse sectaryes did) but only to further and to
prefer as much as is possible, this pryncely desire of knowing the truth,
which we hear with great joy to be reported of your Majesty.

This is the cause most redoubted Princess, why I am bold to present this my
translacyon unto your noble grace. Not that I did thynk any such lack of Latten
to be in your grace, that your grace could not understand it in the tongue in
the which the first author did write it (for God has made your grace as it
were his treasure house of tounges, your fame florysheth for the French, your
renome spreads far for the Italian, your glory glystreth for the Greek, and
many other laudable languages) but that, The cause of dedicatyng this book in
English to our reedoubted Queen.
for as much as I have learned by experyence, that no man is so well endued with
the knowledge of foreign tongues, but when a matter of great importance is
told him, the truth of the which he is desyrouse to know certainly, and to
the which he is minded to make an answer wisely, had rather have it declared
in his natural and mother tongue be it never so barbarouse, then in a strange
language be it never so eloque^t, I thought that this book intreatyng of so
weyghtye and necessari an argument for all Christian men to know, should be
better welcome to your grace in our own contrye speech for profyt, then in
any fyner foreign language for pleasure. The which book, although some men
thynck that I might more boldly have dedicated to some other, yet in my
judgment I know certaynely, I can not exhibit it to any other more worthily
then to your excellent Majesty. Our sovereign Lady of al other most worthy
to have this book dedicated to her grace.
For who is more worthy to have books dedicated to them of verity, which is
lykened to sincere and pure virginity, then your grace a most clear, bright,
and unspotted virgin? who is more mete to receive that precyouse iuel which was
presented to the wise, virtuous and Catholyke King of Poole, then you one of
the best learned, graciouse, victoriouse, merciful, Princes under the Pole?
Therefore most excellent and pearls Pryncesse if I have any thing offended in
boldness, by reason of dedicatyng this my little labor unto your hyghnes,
your learning, your wisdom, your mercy, and all other your Quenely qualities,
which make your grace as it were a mark for all learned men to direct their
books to, our gracious Queen a mark for all learned me^nes books to be
directed to
are the causes of mine offense.

But my trust is, that nether I have offended any good man in dedicatyng this
to your hyghenes, nether that your grace shall displease God in readyng it. A
true praise of the reverend Father Hosius.
For who is the Auctour of this book, but Hosius? who, for his prudence in
polityke affairs, has of the myghtie king of Poland been sent of long time
in most weyghtye and honorable Embassages: who, for his divine knowledge and
incomparable learning, was made president of the most Catholyke and Christian
Council lately holde^ at Trent: who, for his sincere and godly life, is
worthily called Hosius, which after the Greek Etymology signifies holy.
Although some, (...)
whose heart is rotten at the rote with rancor, whose manner is to reprove good
men with railing, when they arre not able to do it by reason, labor to
drown the dignity of such a pearlesse Prelate, of such a blessed Byshope, of
such a famous father, in saying that he will be overcome with his Polonyshe
pottes. But no maruayle if Hosius be called a dro^kard, for even so was his
Master Christ before him called a wine bybber, which is all one to say a
quasser, a toss pot.

As for his book, that your grace neade not to fear the displeasure of God in
readyng it, what is it else but a true treatise intytuled by the author him
selffe of the beginning of heresies, in our time, and by me the translatour,
named the hatchet of heresies? for so much as to show the beginning of
heresies, The cause why this book is named the hatchet of heresies.
is to bring heresye unto an end, and to cut it down none other wise then an
hatchet in man his hand laid to the root of a plant, sone suppla^teth and
overthrows it. Even so truly (most souereyne Lady) this book is the hatchet
which supplanteth that euel plant which Satan has sowed in God his ground,
what manner of pla^t this hatchet heweth down.
whose root is raylyng, whose body is rebellion, whose branches be
bloodshedde, whose leaves be lies, whose fruit be the aples of Atheism, that
is to be of no Religion, or to thynck that there is no God at all.

Wherefore most humbly upon my knees I desire your grace not only to read
this excellent treatise your selffe, but also to be contented that my dearly
beloved country men your graces most faithful subjects may do the same,
that they may receive this sovereign salve of their souls, without any harm
of their bodies: that they may here gather the everlasting treasures of their
minds, witoute any loss of their temporal possessions: that they may here
see, that it is not the express word of God, which our Brita^nical Bre^tians
teach, but the pressed and wrested word of God, not the holy Scriptures, but
profane scrapinges of diverse old and nue heresies, not the traditions of the
Apostles, but rather (I desire pardon of your majesty to speak reason
somewhat rowghly) the trayterouse additio^s of Apostates. Finally, that in
reading of this notable book, they standing as it were in the Castle of
co^templation, and seeing how heretykes march maliciously on toward the other
in the medowe of madness, The battle of heretykes.
fight one with the other in the field of al folly, how they one against the
other bend the ordinance of all disorder, cast the darts of deadly
displeasure, shote with the cross bows of cursed speaking, and to be short,
leave nothing undone to undo one an other, I say that your faithful
subjects my dearly beloved countrymen seeing in this book quietly all their
disquyetnes, may loathe deuydyng discord, and return to Catholyke concord of
Christ his holy Church: unto which, no doubt Christ returnyng to his Father,
said these words, Pacem meam do vobis, pacem meam relinquo vobis etc. My peace
I give you, my peace I leave unto you. which peace God grant, we may seek
ernestly, find spedily, and hold steadfastly. This (I say) most humbly and
ernestly desyring your grace, beseching also, that it will please your
hyghenes to take me, as I am, your sure and sound hearted subject in all
service that I can, I desire God to be your graces buckler in battle, your
pillar in peace, your leader in all the slyppery ways of this lyff, and your
crowner in the blessed Kingdom which is to come. Amen.

Your graces faithful and obedient subject Richard Shacklock.

THE TRANSLATOVRE upon the holy writer Hosius.
Semely Susanna was judged to dye
By perverse judges which did her oppress:
But godly Daniel her cause true did try,
when contrary things he herd them confess.
So sorrowful Susan he did ryghtly redress:
Her which seemd sinful he proved to be sound,
And them which seemd godly, full gylty he found.
Even so holy Hosius in our doleful days
Seeing the truth to be trodden with might
Of misshapt Ministers, which with wyly ways
Labor to rob the truth of her right,
Ragyng and railing and spyttyng their spyte,
One at an other, full far from consent,
Here tries the truth against which they be bent.
The truth being tryde, the truth let us hold,
Praying to God to give us his grace,
To hate all heretykes, so blind and so bold,
which under fair visardes do hide their foul face,
And pray we devoutly for our noble Queen's grace,
That the spryng of heresies to her being known,
She may root up the seeds which Satan has sowe^.
TO THE MOST REDOVBTED AND MOST CHRISTIAN Prince, his renomed Lord, Lord
Sigismund, by the grace of God King of Poole, great Duke of Luten, Lord and
Heir of Russia, Prussia, Masouia, Samogitia. etc. his gratiouse Lord:
Stanislaus Hosius Bishop of Worms, profereth his lowly service.
I CAME to the sight (most excellent King) of a certain book co^pyled by Ihon
Brentius, which Petrus Paulus Vergerius feared not to dedicate unto your
grace: and I have readen it over not without great troble and vexation of
mind. He calls it a golden book, but I can not easyly be persuaded, that the
A Proverb which had this beginning, when Quintus Cepio took by assault the
city of Tolosa in Italy: there was found in the temples great plenty of
gold, which being taken away, all that had any part thereof, dyed myserably:
whereof happened this proverb, when any man fynished his lyffe miserably,
men would say, that he had gold of Tolosa.
gold of Tolosa, which is a proverb in every man his mouth, Aurum Tolosanu^.
did work more harm to them which did handle it, then this book may bring to
vncircircumspect and simple souls, which shall take in hand to read it: so
that if it deserve to be called golden, in this respect it shall be so called,
because it seems to be made of the gold of Tolosa. For why? does he not in
that book ouerthrouwe all order? does not he destroy all polytyke government?
does he leave any thing undone, which helps to disquiet the peace and
tranquillitye of the Church? If it be true, which a certain holy father did
say, that the peace of al things, did consist in the quiet maynetenaunce of an
uniform order, what place can be there left for peace, where this is only
intended, that nothing may be done in order? where labor is spent in nothing
more, then that the Church which is described terrible, set in battle ray
like an host of warryars, which also in the scripture is often times called,
the Kingdom of heaven, should be made that most pestilent place, where no
order does remain, but everlasting horror does dwell? And that Vergerius
procured that book to come abroad in prynt, I maruayle nothing: but in that he
had the face to dedicate it to you a Catholyke, Christyan, and right ruled
King, and by such means to stayne the name of your Majesty, which through
the whole world, as it is for other virtues, so for the praise of true
godlynes, is notable and famous even with the chiefest, that is the thing,
which I can never wunder inoughe at.

But what can he fear to do, Vergerius his blind boldness.
which not contented to deface as much as lay in him, your Majesty, by
dedicatyng that book unto you, durst presume also to abuse a man far unlike
unto him, named Aloysius Lipomanus Bishop of Verone, then the which man, for
the space almost of six hundred years, since what time our country received
the Gospel of Christ, we have seen in Poole not one of the Apostolical
legates, either a better liver, either better learned: notwithstanding this
sckyppe Jack durst take upon him with more impudencye then Auxentius the
heretyke once used toward the most grave, learned, and holy man Saint
Ambrose, to provoke this worthy Prelate to dispute with him upon the principal
points contained in this golden book (as he calls it) before your Majesty,
whom he would have to set as a Judge in that controuersye. I say, what can
he be afearde to do, whom we see to have grown so far past grace, after
that denying Christ his faith, and embrasyng Luther his Lore, he has lept
from one sect to an other, that he boasts of his beastlynes like unto Sodoma,
nether is ashamed to glory in his maliciouse manners, whilst he openly makes
his vaunte, Vergerius twyse perjured.
that he has broken that promise, which he twyse had made unto God: the
form of the which, he caused to be prynted, that he might make all the world
witness, what manner of merchaunt he was. But I maruayle the less at his
blind and beastly boldness, whom those writings only, if there were nothing
else, which he caused to be scattred among the common people at the last
Parliament holden at Varcauia, do planely prove that he has shaken of all
shamefastnes, and that there is not one sparcke of the fear of God left in
him. But I can not chose but maruayle greatly, that notwithstanding his
naughtynes, there be some which read, and in reading, give credit to this
fellow his fancies: which seems to have framed him selffe so to false
fordgyng, that he has had regard to nothing more, then that never a true
word should escape out of his mouth. I will not speak of all his other
mischeuouse doings, for it were to long for me to write, and for your grace
to read.

Only this his epistle, Vergerius his lying epistle.
which he did write to your Majesty, how is it laden with lies? He fayneth
that your grace at the first called a Parliament to set an order in religion,
whereas in very deed nether in the letters, which you commanded to be sent to
your Councelloures, nether in the message, which was given to them, which, as
the manner is, went to the lower Sessions, there was so much as one word
spoken of religion: moreover this is well known, in many of your Majesty's
dominions, that straight charge was given to them, which were appointed
messengers to the higher Sessions, that they should not make any mention of
religion, nether that they should suffer any change to be made in it, because
they would wyllingly rest in the ancient Religion. Of the which charge and
co^maundime^t, when they came to the higher Sessions, some of them were
admonyshed. Yea that is not hid from common knowledge, that your Majesty
would have consultation to be had of no other thing in the Sessions by the
Messangers of your dominions, then such consultation as properly should
appartayne to the Sessions, that is, to debate and to consider how the Realm
might be mayntayned and defended: because you did very well judge, Reformation
in religion to whom it belongs.
that the handlyng and ordryng of Religion, did belong to the Synodes and
co^uocations of Bishops, not to the Sessions of your Realm and Empire.
Wherefore when the matter required, that there should be some mention made of
religion, so your grace caused the thing to be proponed by Ihon Oczieski Lord
Chauncelloure of your Realm, a man endued not only with a syngular wit and
prudence, and a maruaylouse grace of vtteraunce, but also with special
constancye in the Catholyke and true faith, that you gave in commaundiment,
that it should be declared in evident words, that it was not your Majesty's
pleasure, that they should speak their minds, concerning the reforming of
religion, which was wellinoughe reformed before: but that they should say, what
they thought of this, how in your Majesty's absence from your Realm,
provision might be made, that peace and tranquillity might never the less be
preserved: and at the length with the consent of all your Senators, you did
decree, that if hereafter any man should be so hardy to make any innovation in
Religion, that he should be accounted as a breaker of common peace, and should
be punished after the same sort, as an ennimie of his country is wont to be.

Now and please your grace, do not these things differ as much as chalcke
and chese, from those things which Vergerius does tell? Who also blushed not
to coin this lie in his Epistle, An other lie of Vergerius.
when that a reformation should be made of certain abuses, which be brought in
to the Church, that some certaynelye did report, that the pears of the
Realm did deny that thing to appartayne to the knowledge and determination of
the Bishop of Rome and other Bishops: whereas by the decree of the
Parlementes, which above to years agone were holden at Petricouia, a messenger
was sent of your grace to the Pope, which not only as it is the accustomed
manner of Catholyke Kings and Princes, should promise that you would allway
be under his authority, but also should desire him to send an Embassadoure, by
whose authority those hurleburleis might be appeased, which were raised up in
your Realm about Religion. Of decreing which Embassage, the chief in the
Senate was the noble man Ihon Earl of Tarnow, most famous for many noble
feats done both in war and peace, A saying worthy for a Senatoure.
with great praise and prosperouse success: which also did not styck to say
that, which a Catholyke Senatoure ought for to say: that if any change were
brought in of any customs, what so ever they were, without consent of the
holy Apostolyke sea, it would come to pass, that our Realm should run in
infamye of Schism, and of wicked division. Therefore seeing this message unto
the Pope, was decreed no more of your graces pleasure, then of the agreeable
consent of your whole Council, the which, this man who is so curiouse in a
foreign Common wealth, could not but know, what a brazen browe has he, that
he dare write, that the Pears denied the amendment of abuses and erroures to
appertain to the knowledge of the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops? Why
would they so ernestly have desired an Embassadoure to be sent from the Sea
Apostolyke, if they had thought that it had nothing to do with such things?

Vergerius his railing on the Pope.
But now as concerning that reproach, with the which he calls the Pope and
Bishops ennimies of the truth, whom it is no doubt to be and ever to have
been the defendours and patrones of the truth, did it not proceed from the
open ennimie of the truth? But how many more books of his I did read written
very impudentlye, so much the more I did perceive, that he was all together
patched and clouted of guyle, decepte, and lies, Vergerius how he was a
banyshed man of Jesus Christ.
who never seems to have spoken a truer word, then when he calls hymselffe
a banished man of Jesus Christ: forsomuche as since the time he translated him
selffe unto an other Gospel, and cut him selffe of from the body of Christ,
he has left of to be a citezin and howseholde servant of God, and made an
aliaunt from Christ, he has bequethed him selffe to the power of the dyuell,
with whose spyrit for so much as he is guyded, he can not chose but utter
such things as he does. Nether can it be false, which the truth does say.
How can you speak good things, when you your selves be evil? He seems to
be of their number, whom S. Ihon calls Antichrists, of whom he says:
They have gone out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of
us, they would surely have remained with us. For this man, was once in the body
of Christ, How evil men be in the church of Christ.
as evil humors be in the body of man, the which when they be purged, the
body is lyghtned: even so this fellow, after he once departed, the body of
Christ, the Church, was much eased, in so much that it is to be reioysed,
that such an one went out of it. For he was not cut from the flesh of
Christ, of the which he was never a member, but only he leaned heavily on his
breast, so long as he was in the body, so that great lyghtnes and easement of
Christ his body is followed, after that this evil humor is gone out of it.
We truly arre well contented, that such be called to the defense of this fifth
nue gotten Gospel, that it may be as says the Proverb, Dignu^ patella
operculum.
A mete cover for such a cup. But now I have spoken inoughe as concerning the
man, and that otherwise then I did propose. Now brefely, your grace shall
hear the causes, which moved me to bend my selffe to confute with my contrary
writings, these books of Brentius, which Vergerius does set so much by.

The causes moving Hosius to write against Brentius.
I took it very heauely, when I did see that man which not only for his
learning, and godly living, but also for that authority which he did bear,
ought to be had in great reverence of all men, should be so provoked as it were
to a combat of such a tryfelyng fellow. But that did nypp me nearer the
heart, that the saucy face sir durst presume to write to you of such a matter,
to make your grace his judge, to dedicate this Brentian book to you a
Christian and truly taught king. The which thing, when I perceived to be
interprised of other heretykes diverse times, that they brought you in to an
euel name by dedicating their works unto you, and would raise a suspicion of
your grace, as who say, that you were of one mind with them which desire
Christian Religion either to be changed, or else to be clean rased, I was
trobled in mind, that the Catholykes did not bestow like labor and study
in remouyng that suspicion, which these perverse persons did go about to
bring you into. For although you so behave your selffe in defendyng and
mayntaynyng, that Catholyke and true Religion which you have received of your
auncetours, that you be nothing to be suspected of such a crime, yet
notwithstanding, for so much as they which know you not, and see books
stuffed with all kind of wyckednes to be dedicated to you, and as it is the
manner of this fyft Gospel, do here false rumors to be reported of your
majesty, occasion is given them to thynk and suspect the wurste. Which thing,
how much grefe it is wont to graft in my heart, it passes the common credit
of all men. For it behooves your so excellent Majesty, not only to be
withowte fault, but also to be far from all suspicion of fault. Therefore I
have taken willingly upon me this travail, that I might deliver you of this
suspision, and that I might witness it to the whole world, that you allway
have purely and vndefyledly defended the Catholyke Religion. Nether am I
ignorant, how malipert, and ready these men be to railing, which would seem to
be the defendoures of any other Gospel, then of the Gospel of Christ, with
what reproaches they rail on them which differ from their opinion, and will
not at a beck bow to that religion, which they worshipp as the word of God.
But I weighe not those men's malitiouse scoldynges, so that I may purge your
grace of that suspicion, which they labor to load, or rather oppress your
good name and estimation. But rather I take my selffe to be hyghely commended,
so often as I am slaundred of such filthy backbyters: and on the other side,
I account my self defamed, if I be praised of such, as be not worthy them
selves of any praise. I beseech God to keep your Majesty long in health and
prosperity.

Out of my Castle of Heilsbergk, in the Ides of Octobre. M.D.LVII.

MICHAEL SCRINIVS DANTISCANVS Prussiae, Lectori.
Volue Stanislai, Lector studiose, libellum,
Nobilis eloquio Praesulis atque fide.
Detegit hic primos errores temporis huius,
Et tua ab haereticis pectora tuta facit.
The Translatoure his paraphrase upon those verses.
With markyng mind peruse this book
Of holy Hosius here
To whom, though very far thou look
Thou scant shaltfynde a pere,
In learning and in lyffe:
For golden words to found
In heaven the like perchaunse be ryffe,
But few in yearthe be found.
Of heresies he does detect
The roots here and the sprynges:
To hearts with heresies infect,
A sovereign salve he brynges.
R. S.

A treatise of the beginning of heresies in our time.
BEfore I lay Brentius his arguments to the touchestone, I think it mete to
speak something of the manyfolde heresies of this our time, which I judge shall
be nothing disagreing from the purpose which I have taken in hand. For this
Sathanisme, Four fou^dations of Brentius doctrine or sathanisme
which I will make mention of in this my preface, seems to have taken the
begynnyg of none other thing, then of these four foundacions, which Brentius
buyldeth upon in this his little treatise. For whilst every man takes upon
for every congregation in corners to challenge the name of a church, who sees
not that out of these branches of Brentius his doctrine, of ye which Martyn
Luther was the first founder, this Sathanisme is sprung, which now prevayleth
in many parts of Germanye, which also by little and little does labor to
crepe in to the kingdom of Poland, and the countries bordring near unto it.
Wherefore I shall not go any thing a wry from my purpose, if I shall first
speak something of that Sathanisme. The consent of Christe^dom in religion
above forty years past. Genesis 11.


Before these forty years last past, such was the state of the whole world,
so far as Christian faith took any force, that the sentence which we read in
Genesis, might well be reported of it: It was a land of one lypp, and one
communication. and that which is written in the Acts of the Apostles of them
which first were converted to the faith of Christ: Act. 4.
The assemble of the^ which beleved, was of one heart, and of one soul: like as
they all worshipped one God, so they held one faith. There was one and the
selff same manner in ministryng the Sacraments, there was almost one and the
selff same use of ceremonies in every place, all they spoke one thing, they
thought one thing, they agreed upon one thing, so that you might easily
acknowledge it to be ye city, Psalm. 121.
whose fellowshipp is one consent and agreement. Wherefore seeing they all were
of one and the selff same mind, they would not be called but by one and the
selff same name. Some of them were not called Gnosticall, other Apostolical,
other Evangelical, or by any other such like tytles of diuisyon, but they
were all named Christians of Christ, whom they did all confess with one
consent, in whom only they did believe it to be lawful for them to glory, or
to advaunce them selves. then the which name, they judged none other could be
given them more excellent or honorable. For they were men vpryght, well
meaning, and fearyng God, which believed yt the kingdom of God did not consist
in contention of words, but in simplicity of belefe, neither knew any other
Gospel, but yt which procedyng from the spyrit of Christ, was written of
Christ even by the disciples of Christ.

This agreement of faith, and uniform doctrine of all men among them selves, as
it prevayled among other nations, so a great contynuaunce of time it floryshed
among our next neighbors the Germans: but specially among all those people,
which be under your Majesty's obedience, whether they be Polonians, either
Litvanians, either Catholyke Russians, Prussians, or Masouians: since the time
that all these countries did once receive the Gospel of Christ, this steadfast
agreement of faith, has continued unspotted and unstained almost this six
hundred years. And that, which will make you more to mervayle, it is not far
under or over an hundred and forty year, since the leprouse learning of the
Waldenses has infected Boeme, which bordereth near upon your Majesty's
dominions. Since that time it is come to pass, that a great part of it has
cut it selff of from the residue of Christendom. Which Scisme and diuisyon
how many plagues it has heaped upon ye head of that country, it is not
neadefull in this place to make relation. This only is worthy to be marked,
that whereas they and we speak one language commonly, yet our country could
not be intysed with any dyuelish deceiptes, that leaving the assent and consent
of the whole church, it would take part with the Bohemians.

In the which doing, The vigilancie of the Bishopes, and devotion of the kings
of Pole.
what shall I principally praise? either the carefullnes of our Bishops, or
else the special devotion of your virtuous auncetoures, which at that time
ordered the common wealth? surely both the Bishops and the Princes deserved
to be decked with the praises of all men. For the Bishops remembryng, in what
a watch tower God had plased them, spared no study, carefullnes, or pains,
that they might provyde for the health of their flock committed to them of
Christ. Such an one was the holy father fysher Bishop of Rochester.
Neither feared they any man his force, but did set them selves as a wall for
the house of Israel: nether did they abide, that any point of a good pastor
should be wantyng in them. And these most godly Princes the one your
grandfather Wladislaus King of Poland, the other his brother Vitoldus, at what
time the Kingdom was offered them of ye Bohemians, A wonderful example for all
Christian kings.
which a little before had parted and divided them selves from the body of
Christ, which is the Church, with a mervaylouse coragiousnes of mind, did thynk
it better to refuse ye Kingdom, then that they should commyt any thing not
comely for Chrystian Princes. Yea, they made a flat answer to the Embassadoures
of Boheme, that they thought it to be high treason to God, to reign among
heretykes. But if they would return in to the way of right religyon, and to
the fellowship of the Catholyke Church, for the love and the commodity of
Christendom, one of them with out nay would take upon him ye charge and
regiment of their Kingdom. Now, I pray you, is there at this present, or has
there been these many years any Prince, whose Religyon may be compared with
the Religion of these Princes? As for me truly, I judge these our forsayde
Kings to be nothing inferioure to them, whom we read to have spoken unto
Christ in this wise: Matthew. 19.
Behold, we have forsaken all things, and have followed the. For what did
they forgo but only little ships and fyshers nets? But these did rather
chose to refuse a Kingdom voluntarily offered to them, then yt for hope of
inioying of it, they would suffer them selves so to be shackled, yt they should
have less liberty to follow Christ: then yt they would be disseuered from
Christ his body, from one, holy, and Catholyke church.

Without doubt, that voice of Christ did ever sownde in their ears, which
also we have hard proceed of your mouth (most virtuous Prince) in the noble
assemble of your Lords, and co^munaltye. what advauntage has a man, though
he gain the whole world, Matthew. 16.
if he sustain the loss of his own soul? or what exchange shall a man make
for his soul? They thought nothing less, the^ to chop or change heavenly
kingdoms for yearthly, everlasting Kingdoms for transitory: but if at any
time the Religyon of Christ came in questyon, so far of was it, that any reward
or gift was sweet, that their life seemed sour unto them, which they were all
way pressed and ready to lose, rather then they would shrynck from mayntayning
religyous quarrel. Therefore, by reason, of this circumspectnes of our
Bishops, and singular godlynes of our Princes, which for the defense of God
his cause thought, that they ought not to stand in awe of any man, or prefer
any thing before his charity, it came to pass that the Christian, Catholyke,
and right religiouse faith, has continued in your Majesty's dominions pure
and uncorrupted now almost these six hundred years.

For what occasion Luther did sow new discord.
Notwithstanding, this is the fourtieth year, since Martin Luther did leap in
to the light, who was the first in this owre unhappy age, which kyndled a fyar
brand of discord in the Church of God. of so little a sparkle, which at the
beginning might easily have been quenched, oh what a furiouse fyar is raised?
at the first men began to reason and dispute of the forgyuenes of sins, which
we commonly call Indulgences or pardones. Those did Luther first inveygh
against, not that he did utterly condemn ye right use of them, but because he
thought, that ye abuse was not to be borne withal. and that he did come to
this combat, he was not led with any feruency of a right zeal, or with any
love or desire of godlynes, but whereas he took pepper in the nose, that the
office of preaching the pardonnes committed before to the brethren of his
Order, that is the Augustine friars, by reason of yt which they felt no small
profyt, was from them translated to the Dominicanes, and so his brethern
disapointed of that commodity, he thought this to be a just cause to march
out of his monkery, and bid the whole church of God battle, wherefore this his
first skyrmishyng was for his belly sake, which he made a god of. the which
thing he him self could not keep close. For when at one time he joined in
disputation with Eckius, Luther being set on fyar with fury, and ouershoting
all ye marks of modesty, when certain did admonyshe him to behave himself
more quyetly with the spiryt of mekenes, for so much as it was God his cause,
which was the^ debated, he burst out in to these words: Luther his confession.
This busynes began not for God his cause, nor for God his cause shall it be
fynished. So unable was he, long to cover or cloak the disease of his mind.
Now, mark you diligently, August. in the.44. Sermon de tempore.
that which S. Augustine writes, that there be ij. rotes set in.ij. feldes,
of.ij. husband men, ye one Christ planteth in ye hearts of good men, the other
ye dyuell sets in the hearts of evil men. That which is planted of the
dyuell, is couetousenes, the root of all mischefe. but that which is planted
by Christ, is charity, the root of all goodness. of which the Apostle
speaks, 1. Tim. 6. Ephesians. 3.
rooted and founded in charity. Neither can any evil spryng out of the root
of charity, neither any good out of the root of covetousness. Now, count
well with your self, out of which of these roots the cause of Luthers pyking
quarells against pardones did grow, that you may understand, The fruit of a
new sect did spring out of the rote of covetousnes planted in Luther.
who was the planter. Be it yt you be mervaylousely inamored with ye man, yet
will you nyl you, you must grant that it budded out not of ye root of
charity, but of avarice, which the dyuel planted in his heart. For this is
certain and out of all doubt, that he would not have once mutterd against
pardones, if the preferment of preaching of them, had been given to his order:
but when he perceived, yt to be bestowed upon others, which he whished rather
to be given to his brethern, he thought it to be a good cause, why he should
play such pevishe pageauntes.

what by little and little made Luther wurse and wurse.
Now we have learned, out of what root the first assault of Luther against ye
church proceeded, namely out of ye root of covetousenes, which with often
co^tentions is daily more and more increased. For ye beginning of this broyle,
was covetousnes of money, afterward came desire of glory, next to that followed
a more pernitiouse affection to revenge, which at ye last did burst out to a
deadly displeasure and hatred. It is well inoughe known, that at the beginning
Luther was not so lewd and so far past grace, for so much as he thought not
skorne to submytt his wrightynges to the judgment of them, whose judgments
in deed he ought to reverence. In a certain epistle written to Pope Leo, there
are these words to be seen, which he wrote above eight and thirty years a
gone: Most blyssed father, Luther his submission to the Pope
I offer my selffe flatt upon the ground before your holy fere, with all that
I am worth. Quicken me, slay me, call me hither, call me thither, approve me,
reprove me, as it pleases you: I will acknowledge your voice, to be ye voice
of Christ rulyng you and speaking in you. But it is true, that Philo does
write, Philo in the second book of allegories of the law.
that contention is the norishme^t of anger, and therefore they which be given
most to contention, in all disputations and other conferencies, be sone moved
to anger. And this is the property of anger, that it easyly is deceived it
selffe, and deceaueth others, so that you shall not easily find one angry man
of a true judgment, as being ouercomed with dronckennes of the mind, though
not of the body. Look with how much more contention things were handled,
which at the first seemed to be of no great importance, so much the more did
the contenders go wide of the true way.

And this is so provided of nature, that almost never any error does rise,
One error for the most part draws many other after it.
but it draws many other after it, so that you shall scantly find any which
is fallen in to any one error, which does not every day stray further and
further from the beaton pathe of verity. Like as in syngyng, if in any one
point the harmony be trobled, there is a certain unpleasant iarryng in all
the other parts: so uniform doctrine being wrested a wrye by means of some
heresye, or strange opinion, disagreing from the sweet melodye of truth,
sometimes opens a wyder wyndow to greater disordre and confusion: and like as
in the body of man, when the just proportion of those qualities is
distempered, wherein the health of all parts, and the sowndnes of all the
powers consists, many maladyes and infirmityes follow one after an other: so
if the mind be once diseased, or not well established, it decays every day
more and more, and is subject to more daungerouse syknes. His disease was
curable at the first, but in continuance of time, the infection did spread it
self so far, that it was past all remedy.

And first he took that upon him, which all heretykes use to do, that is,
Luther began his sect at rebelli^g against the Pope.
to disanul the popes authority, and to prescribe him rules of reformation:
against him he bent all his bedlembrayne, and labored with to the and nail to
withdraw from him the good wylles of so many as he could, and to dashe him
quyte out of conceyt, that the ruler of the church being so disgraced and
displaced, Cyprian first book epist. 3.
he might (as S. Cyprian says) more cruelly and violently wreake his wrath
with the spoils and shyppwrackes of the Church. Therefore taking upon him a
saucye enterprise, he cast all his books of the Cano^ law in to the fyar, with
many other of ye Pope his writings commonly called Bulls: and not long after,
he did write a book of the captivity of Babylon, in the which not sparing ye
Sacraments one inche, he did his endevoure to turn every thing up side down.
when Pope Leo had borne with these his presumptuouse pranckes ye space of three
years, Leo his long sufferaunce.
and had many times and often warned him to return home to the Church, but all
in vain, at the last, as his duty required, he condemned him of heresye, he
excommunicated, and cast him out of the Congregation, out of yt which he had
thrown him self before. Luther condemned of the Pope, myndeth nothing but to
deface the supremacy.
Then began he to rage more and more, and to seek all means how he might utter
all his malicious mind against ye Pope, whom he wyshed in his heart to be set
beside his seat, and to be bereaved of all his authority. In this one point
did he vestowe all his care, study, and travayle. so yt afterward in writing
his books, he thought it not to appertain unto him to have regard, what was
godly or what was ungodly, but what thing might most deface the papacy, to
the intent, what so ever he wrote, what so ever he sayue, what so ever he did,
he might do it in despyte of the Pope, Counsels, and Bishopes. This does he
him self witness in a certain epistle to ye Citizins of Strasborowe, to whom
he did write after this manner: Luther his own testimony.
Neither can I, neither will I (says he) deny this, that if Carolstadius, or
any other, could have persuaded me more then five years agone, that there had
remained nothing in the Sacrament but bread and wine, he had made me a great
debtor of his: for in boulting out this matter, I took great care, and a long
time did weary my self, I stretched all the strings of my wit, to make my
part good in this behalf, for so much as I knew well, that I by this means I
should bread great inconvenience to ye Papacy.

Does not he here plainly confess, that by beatyng this new fownde doctrine
in to the peoples heads, he intended not to further the glory of Christ, to
set abroad ye knowledge of his truth: but that as he him selff was blinded
with the mist of malice against the Pope, so he might set the hearts of other
men a fyar with the same hatred? His mind was rusted with such rancor and
spitefullnes, that he was ready wyllingly to deny Christ to be present in the
Sacrament, so that by this occasion he might hurt or hinder the supremacy.

For so much then as in all his sayings, writings, doings, Luter was lod
with a dyuellishe spyrit, to do most of those things which he did.
he used none but of all other the most perniciouse councelloures, that is
anger and hatred, is there any which as yet will doubt, that those things
which proceeded from him, have been deryued from any other then ye very devil:
If there be any such doubter, let Luther him self drive away that doubt, who
in a book which he intytled De Missa angulari, that is, of private Mass,
does evidently declare, who was the scolemaster of this his new doctrine.
Luther his devilish dream.
For there he brings in the Dyuell disputyng with him, and making stronger
obiectio^s against ye Mass, then he was able to solute. Whose voice also he
there describes to be a bygg, base, and boysterouse voice, and which does
make so terrible a noise, that it chaunseth often after conference had with ye
Dyuell by night, that men be found dead ye next day in the morning. For the
Dyuell, says he, can kill the body, beside that he smyteth such a fear in to
the mind, yt some time in the twynklyng of an eye, it is inforsed to depart
out of the body. Which thing he writes to have many times almost chaunsed to
him. Luther his dronken death.
And in deed it happened so unto him at the last. For being over night well
whittled with wine, and in his merry cups, next day early he was found dead in
his bed, after that he had for the space of nine and thirty years raised many
troblesome tempests in ye church of God. And lo, this is that word and
Gospel of God, which many do so vaunt of, not established by Christ, but
invented of Satan, as he hymselff confesses, which first did set it abroche.
For he does make his crakes, that the Dyuell did ministre him arguments, with
ye which he might clean confound both the order of Prestehode and also the
Sacrifice. The which twoe things being ouerthrouwen, does not God seem
either to be utterly denied, or at ye least to be spoiled of a great piece of
his honor: For where is no Prestehode, no Sacrifice, it follows that there
is no acknowledgyng of God. Wherefore seeing Luthers conscience did cry out
against him, that any other rather then Christ was the author of his Gospel
(if so be it be lawful to term so Dyuellishe doctrine, by so notable a name)
he would not have his followers to be called Christians, which was a common
name to al men which professed Christ before these late fourtye years, in ye
which Luthers lewd lore began to be spread abroad, but he called them
Ghospellers: that by this name he might give it to be known, that both he and
his were a suit by themselves forced and sequestered from Christ, and his body,
that is, one, holy, Catholyke, and Apostolyke Church: and that nothing
appartaynyng to Christ did belong unto him.

Thus your Majesty understands, from whens this is fetched, Why Luther his
lore can not be allowed
which some name the Gospel and the sincere word of God, yea and that by yt
own confession of ye author him selff, who, as Christ once said, Joan. 7.
My doctrine is not mine, but my fathers, which sent me, meaning his heavenly
father. So he was not ashamed to say: My doctrine is not mine own, but my
fathers the Diuelles, which sent me. Of whom he does bragg, that he borrowed
arguments, with the which he might ouerwhelme Priestehode and Sacrifice, yt so
doing he might rasse quite out of remembrance all true worshippyng of the true
God. Though Luther him selff should deny this, yet would the thing it selffe
be a sufficient proof, that it is the Dyuelles word, and not the word of God,
which he did first blase abroad in this our age. For as we read in S. Paul:
God is the God of peace and love, 2. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 14.
not of dissension and hatred. But he, which makes diuisyon between Christian
brethern, is ye Dyuell, says ye Prophet. Therefore seeing out of this word of
Luther, Osee. 13.
such great diuisyon and separatyon is grown, as we now see (more is the
pity) in ye church, for so much as so many sects sundry one from an other
are engendered of it, upon whom else shall we father this word, but eue^ upon
the Dyuell? Every spyrit, says S. Iho^, which divides Jesus, is not of God,
1. Ihon. 4.
and this is Antichrist. But he devideth Jesus, To devyde Jesus.
as we have proved at large out of S. Augustyn, in that place where we did
entreat of traditions, which divides either the church from Christ the
head, August. in the.6. treatise upon the Epistle of Ihon.
either him selffe from the church, or the church with in it selff. Christ
vouchesaffed to dye, that he might gather to gether the children of God, which
were scattered abroad: Luther did direct all his doings and wrytinges to this
end, that he might scatter those, whom Christ had united together with his
preciouse blood. Moreover, Christ did declare by the manner of his death, how
displeasaunt all kind of division is to him. Christ by the manner of his death
declared, that he loves not division.
For neither would he dye as S. Ihon Baptist, who was beheaded: neither as Esaias
the Prophet, who was cut a sundre with a saw: that in very death he might
preserve all the members of his body with out any manglyng, that so no
occasyon might be offered to them, which covet nothing more, then to make
chyppes of the church, and to my^se it in to many gobbetes. But Luther all the
days of his life (after that he fell in to heresye) applied nothing more
ernestly, then that the body of Christ which remained whole and sound upon the
cross, amyd the claws of ye persecutours, should hereafter no longer
continewe unbroken, and untorn among the hands of Christians. So then that
cruelty, Luther more cruel then the wicked soldyars which did put Christ to
death.
which ye sinful souldioure swolde not commit in breaking the body of Christ,
Luther having an outeward show of godlynes, but yet denying the virtue
thereof, feared not to put in practyse, but did as much as lay in him, to make
ma^mockes of Christ his body, which is, one, holy, Catholyke, and Apostolyke
church. And is there yet any, which will make a doubt, whether his word be
the word of the dyuell, or no? to whom it is as natural a condition, to
divide, tear, and scatter, as it is the propertye of Christ to gather those
things together which be scattered.

Luther author of sects.
And that you may not think, that I without a cause lay to Martin Luthers
charge the division and separacion which is brought in to the Church, I pray
you, hear (most virtuous Prince) in to how many sundry sects he has
hewed, and hacked the most noble body of Christ. For after yt he puffed up
with a proud conceit of him selffe, thought that it becam him well in
certain articles and opinions to depart from the uniform assent and consent
of the Church: see, I pray you, what a wide wyndowe of making division and
separacio^, he afterward opened to others. One, named Andrewe Carolstadius,
Andrewe Carolstad. his behauioure in the absence of his dear friend Luther.
was in a manner his sworn brother, he had him fastened (as he thought) with
an insoluble knot of steadfast friendship: yet for all that, did not he continue
in one judgment and opinion with Luther the term of.ij. whole years. For
whist Luther was a way from Wittenberge, Carolstadius unknowing to him
abolished ye Mass, cast of his religiouse apparel, caused the most blessed
Sacrament to be touched with lay men's hands, persuaded ye sedicious people,
that thronging as it were out of wide open gates, it should bid battle to
the Churches and Altars, and that it should whurle all images out of them.

Although Luther returning to Wittenberge, did not disalowe the thing it
selff, yet because it was done without his authority, he found great fault
with it, as being indiscreetly done and out of order. So much did he disdain
that any thing should be set up or pulled down of any man a live, except he had
first given out a commission that so it should be. Luther most gredie of
glory.
The gentleman was so gredy of glory, that he might well sing this verse which
did become his ambitiouse ielosie: Riualem possum non ego far Iouem.

I think great skorne that God above

Should fancy ye thing which I do love. He did write.ij. books, against ye
heavenly Prophets, in one of the which he warns, those preachers to be
forbidden the benefytes of water and fyar, Luther a sore ennimie to image
breakers.
which persuade ye people to throw down images, or at the least he wills
so to nypp them in the heads some other way, that they presume no more so to
prate, because after the destruction of images, commonly follows the
destruction and slaughter of men. Good Sirs (says he) the pulling down of
images, is not the mark which the dyvell shoteth at, but to make him selffe a
muse to start in and out at to shed blood, and to make one man cut an others
throat. The spiryt of imagehaters is not good, for it breathes murders and
vprores, although it bears a fair face for a while, till such time as it
spyeth any advauntage. Thus Luther and Carolstadius did burn with deadly
displeasure one against the other, they did rail so spytefully one against the
other, that they seemed wurse then heretics one to the other. And this was not
the least cause of their enimitie and contention, that both did chalaunge this
praise unto him selff, for bringing first unto light the true knowledge of the
Gospel. But it is known well inoughe, Carolstad. the first married priest in
Germany.
that Carolstadius was the first Priest yt ever married a wife in Germany, and
enterprysed those things which I made rehersall of a littell before: for which
cause he thought the praise of fynding out ye true light of the Gospel, to
be only due unto him. But when he perceived, ye more accoumpt was made of
Luther, who in deed passed him far in wit, learning, and vtteraunce, to
the intent he might make his name ryng among his posterity, he thought it good
to coin some new conceited doctrine, which being such as Luther had never
meddled with all, he should not presume to any part of ye praise, which he had
newly invented.

Luthers doctrine was an occasion of the Sacrame^taries sect.
To the uttering abroad of which doctrine, it is plain, that Luthers books did
offer occasion, who, as Calvine does record, writing against
transsubstantiatio^, seemed to sound a larum to raise up the heresy of the
Sacramentaries. For Luther did teach, that after Consecration, there remained
in the Sacrament ye substance of brade and wine. Calvin in the. 2. defense
against Ihon west.
which some did so understand, as though Luther had taught that Christ, whom
the Scriptures witness to have been incarnat, that is, to have taken upon him
our flesh, had been in the Sacrament impanate, that is, taken upon him bread,
whom also it should be idololatrie for any man to worship in the Sacrament,
onles he did communicate. As who should say, that the body of Christ were not
made in the Sacrament with the word of Christ, but with our receaueing, and
that there could not be such virtue in Christ his words to make his body
there, unless it were put to our mouth. What is this else but to falsifye
the words of the Scripture, and instead of that which Christ said, This is
my body, to say, this shall be my body when it shall be received? But in very
deed, it is above.xx. years agone since Luther being as it were caught with
Buchers wyly lyme twigges did agree unto this his opinion: for Bucer by no
means would be persuaded to confess the body and blood of Christ to be in
the Sacrament substantially, onles Luther would likewise yield thus much to
him, that the body and the blood of our Lord is not there, onles it be
received, as Ruard Tapper a man of excellent learning expounding the tenth
article of Louayne does witness in his wrytinges. Luther beguyled of Bucer
became a Sacrame^tarie
Thus Luther invegled with Bucers baytes, whylst he intended to make Bucer hold
of his side, he him selffe becam a Sacramentary. For there is nothing, which
does more strenghthen the Sacrame^taries heresye, then this opinion of Bucer,
which Luther consented to. of the which thing Ihon Calvin does make his boste
in diverse places. Thus far had Luther marched at that time. but as yet he had
not taken out his lesson so far in his Christ curse rewe, that he durst deny
the presence of Christ his body and blood in the Sacrament. The first which
had the face to deny it in our days, Carolstad. first presumed to deny the
presence of Christ in the sacrament. Melanctho^ to Friderike Miconius
was Andrewe Carolstad, to whom Philipp Melancthon, writing of this matter,
gives this commendation: Carolstade (says he) has stirred up these coals, a
savage man, void of wit, without learning, lackyng his common sense, whom as
yet we never could perceive to understand or practice any point of civility,
so far of is it, that we could believe any revelation to be made to him by the
holy ghost. Of whom also he thus writes in an other place: Even as Luther
did in spyte of the Pope, Of our Lord his supper against the Anabaptists.
so likewise Carolstade in spyte of Luther, not for any zeal or love of
godlynes, raised up this controversy of the supper of our Lord. And he
brings in there a worthy sentence, which would to God he did heartily favor:
In my judgment (says he) it is great folly to plant any new opinions
without conference and consent of the ancient church. Notwithstanding that
this fellow is so painted out in his right colors of Melanctho^, yet has
he so many to take his part in defending this his dyuellishe doctrine, yt now
you may find mo Sacramentaries then Lutherans, and among them many of
excellent learning, and singular grace of vtteraunce, which covet rather to be
counted Carolstadia^s, then Lutherans. Therefore against this kind of herisye,
he did set out many books, in one of the which entitled against Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, and other new Wicleffistes, he is meruaylouse hot against this
sort of sectaries, and writes that they have dug themselves through the
scripture almost ten shyftyng ways, and starting holes. And that he never
has readen of a more fylthie heresye the^ it is, which had even at the first
sight so many heads, so many suits of sects, although in the principal
point, that is, in tearying and tormoyling Christ, they agree together like
lambs. In that book which he named: That these words of Christ stand still in
their full force, This is my body, he recites seven: and in ye treatise
which a little before his death he termed: Eight diverse interpretatio^s upon
these words, this is my body.
A short confession of the honorable Sacrament, he rehearses eight diverse
and disagreing interpretations upon these words, This is my body. The first of
ye which interpretations, Carolstadius did hold: the second Zwinglius did
maintain, the third Oecolampadius did defend, ye fourth Swinckfeldius, whom in
derisyon he nick named Stinckfeldius, and after other interpretoures Campanus
was ye seventh, for he tells not namely who were the authoures of ye other
three expositions. But if he were now a live, he might reckon on his fyngers
ends a great number mo interpretations of those few words of Christ. For
since his time, many have been so mad, and so blindly bold, that they have not
feared in the consecration of our Lord his supper to choppe and change
Christ his own words, and instead of that which he said, This is my body,
they have made no bones at it to say, Ioach. in his book entitled, A right
faith of our Lord his supper.
this is my bread. Others have not shronck one whit, to leave out the words
of consecration, for thus they bring out their words: Take, eat, do this in
remembrance of me: as I have readen, it noted of Ioachimus Westphalus, Schnep.
in his confession of the Eucharist. Pflug i^ his epistle to ^rasm. Reterodamus
and Erardus Schneppius. Although Julius Pflug (whose Godlynes is so great
adourned with norable learning, that the very ennimyes of God his Church, be
enforced to confess, that he behaueth him selff as a Bishopp ought to do)
writes, that whilst Luther lived, there stepped forth a strange fellow, no
man knew from whence he came, (peradventure he was engendered of the slyme of
the yearthe, no fleas, and many other vermyn be) which denied that the words
of Christ were necessary to consecrate the Sacrament: more over he said, that
the kinds of bread and wine neaded not, but that it was inoughe if the
Sacrament were received with the spiritual mouth of the heart.

Behold, I pray you, The horrible fruits of this nue Gospel
what fruits this fyft Gospel has brought in among us, by reason of the
which, wicked wretches will take upon the^ either to clyppe, or else to over
hyppe Christ his own words in the consecration of this Sacrament, which of
all other is most excellent. Which missyng and minssyng of words, Thou
Brentius, who has dedicated this book to you, which I have taken in hand to
prove false, does think to be lawful, yea in the administration of the
Sacrament of Baptism, which is the only Sacrament with out ye which we can
not be saved, though Caluyn say never so much to ye contrary. For whereas
Christ has prescribed us this form in plain words, that we should Baptize
in the name of the Father, and of the Sone and of the Holy ghost he says that
he meant nothing less then to bind the efficacy of Baptism to certain
words, Brentius beaneth with the en^ng of the form of the words in Baptism.
for so much as he did not institute any inchauntment or charm, which is
bownde to an exact manner of words, and scrupulouse obseruacions. so yt he
thinks it no heyuouse offense to change yt sound, if so be there remain ye
meaning of Christ his words. this opinion held he, whom Bergerius made a God
of, and whose words and wrytinges he would have men beleve to be as true as the
Gospel. Now see you not, how fruitful heretykes be in delyueringe, and
bringing forth their monsters? for you shall scantly find one of them which
has either hatched a new heresye, or new furbushed any stale and condemned
opinion, which has not many erroures, wonders, and monsters following him
hard at his heles. And this is a common quality to all heretykes, that they
will not be co^ptroled or gain said: and if they se their fautes corrected,
Heretykes can not abide to be corrected.
which they love beyond home, and worshipp as idolles made with their own
hands, they are so far from bending or mending with such corrections, that
they be more set on fyar with hatred against them which sought to reform them:
and so they war every day wurse and wurse erring them selves, 2. Tim. 3.
and making others also to err.

A certain wicked desire to revenge does. lead them thus far, with the which
their minds be so blinded, that they can not see the truth, but embrace false
things in stead of true. Luther in his captivity Bab.
Luther may be a sufficient proof of this matter, who writes, that a friar
found fault with him, because on a time he thought, that it should be a goodly
matter, if a general Council would make a decree, that the lay people might
communicate under both kinds. Luther full of disclame and arrogantie.
Think you that he was content to set the friars correction light, for a matter
of so great weight? no mary, I warrant you. But I perceive (says he) the
Papists lean on their elbowes for leisure: and I see, that they have good
store of paper: I will do my diligence, yt they may have their hands full of
writing: for I will run so far before them, that whilst my ioly adversaries do
triumph, that they have conquered any one of mine heresies, (as they think)
in the mean time I may have advantage at them, by laying a new heresye in
their way. By and by he blaseth a new herisye abroad, and proclameth all
them traitors to God, which deny ye common people to receive ye Sacrament
under both kinds. And truly in ye same place he does only account them
devilish doctors, which keep back ye laytie from ye use of ye cup. But
hercken with in a little while after, how far he raungeth at riot in a rage,
as though he had a familiar spyrit of fury (said reverence) in his tail: That
authorite of prescribyng the laytie both kinds, which at the first he would
have to be at the appointment of a General Council, Luther in his book of
the form of the Mass.
with in a little while after, he makes of none effect, in so much that the,
shameless Sir fears not to utter these words: If a general Council at any
time should make a decree, in no case we would receive both kinds, but then
in despyte of the Counsel, we would take but one, or else none, but in no
sauce both, and them which would admit both, we would curse (as they say)
with book, bell, and candell. What might be pend more presumptuouslye? If the
Council, unto the which the most learned, ye most ancient, the most holy
men were sommoned out of all quarters of ye world to be assistauntes, would
show no cause, why the cup should be any longer kept from the laytie, that
Canon of the Council should be cancelled: but if Luther should ordain it so,
then should it prevail and take place.

But certainly after Luther began once to despise and to set at naught the
Authorities of the ancient Doctoures, the Decrees of the most holy Popes,
Luther the author of ouerthrowyng both prestehode and sacrifice
the Determinatio^s of general Councelles, that is, of the universal church:
at the last he grew so far from grace, that, as we have made mentyon a
little before, he labored to overthrow the order of Prestehode, and the
Sacrifice, beside that he excluded Christ out of the Sacrament onles he were
received, and forbadde due reverence there to be done unto him: like as also
before he had taught, that bread and wine did remain after the consecration.
Of this root did spryng afterward the Sacramentaries heresy. And eue^ as
Luther would have it lawful, for him of his own head, to put out old
ordres, and to bring in new fashions, so Calvin with his crooked Apostles
thought, he neaded not to ask leave to do the like, for so much as he did set
as much by his painted sheathe, as Luther did, and stood so much in his own
co^ceipt, that he was able to match Luther at all assayes, and to answer him
to omnia quare. Therefore he did that which Luther and all they of his lure as
yet had not done, that is, he did abolyshe holy vestimentes, Calvin in what
things he followed Luther, and in what things he ouerra^ him in wickedness.
when God his service was celebrated, the use of tapers and candelles, the
ringing of velles, yt there might be no difference between holy things and
profane, and least if that any worshipp should be given to the reverend
sacrament, men should conceive and believe, that there were more in it then
bread and wine. More over and that, he gave charge that the sacrament should
not be ministered to them which did lie a passing out of this lyffe, which not
withstanding the ancient Fathers named Viaticum, which may be Englished
costage, or comfortable prouisyon to travail by the way. He was of this mind,
that they were not to be allowed to receive the Sacrament, which were not able
to receive with the whole congregation: to them which were neither shryue^,
neither assoylde, he wylled that the sacrament should be given. Beside this he
did put down holy days, and the readyng of the Epistle and the Gospel, as
the Church was wont to use them. And lest he should be thought to take so
much upon him only in the sacrament of the altar, he did also deuyse a new
doctryn in the sacrament of Baptism. For where as he had learned this lesson
of Luther, that they make the death of Christ of none effect, and that they
seek an other Mediator beside Christ, which think good worckes necessary to
salvation, now because Baptism is a good work, he thought that they which
teach that we be saved throw Baptism, do find an other means to come to
heaven, then by the death of Christ, and that they make the blood of Christ to
be shed in vain, which seek for any soul health in the water of Baptism.
Therefore he teaches, that infantes, if so be, they be begotten of Christian
parents, Baptism is not necessary for infantes, says Calvin.
be made members of Christ, be accounted the children of God, and made heirs
of ye kingdom of heaven without Baptism. So that forasmuch as to the intent
they may be saved, it makes no great matter whether they be Christened or no,
he is well contented that they depart out of this lyffe without Baptism:
alas, what have these fond fellows left vnryfeled? To what boldness and
bedlemnes are they not grown? which have not feared to do villanye to the very
sacraments, without the which no man may be saved.

A comparison between the Lutherans and the Zuinglia^s which of them be best.
Now therefore you have.ij. Ghospelles, if so be it be lawful to term so
sinful sects, with so honorable a name, one of the Lutherans, an other of ye
Zwinglians. for both sides will take their oath upon a book, that opinion
which they defend and maintain, to be the pure and lively word of God. If you
will weygh the doctrine of both parties, the Zwinglians go far beyond the
Lutherans, or certainly come not much behind them: these allege as many
places of Scripture to serve their turn as they do, and as for their ioly
grace in vtteryng their minds, and vehementie in persuading, they stayne
them, and carry the garland from them. If you will have regard to an outeward
show, and counterfeyt color of holiness, the Lutherans grant, that the
Sacrame^taries be more Godly lyvers then them selves. For thus Nicolas
Amsdorffius a Luthera^ does write of them: Nicolas Amsdorff.
The Anabaptists and the Sacramentaries do beguyle all Germanye with their
holiness, as monckes did deceive all the world with their pretensed holiness.
If you will go by the number, the Sacrame^taries clean weyghe down the
Lutherans, seeing they have invegled many Lutherans to be of their opinion.

They them selves confess this: for one of the chief Cocks of their game
Ihon Westphalus, does crow after this sort: In his book entitled, A right
faith of the supper of our Lord.
no false doctryn is spread so far abroad, none is mayntayned so ernestly, or
covered so with the cloak of hypocrisy, none does led so many in to ye by ways
of errors, as does the deceaueable doctrine of the Sacrame^taries. who also
in an other place writing against Calvin, does call his own company for ye
smalnes of it, a weak and feeble flock in comparison of the huge number, in
which he hytteth Calvin in the tothe, that he does glory and put all his
confidence: and this every man knows, ye very few embraced Luthers
Gospel, except the cities of Saxony: all the residue, whether they be in
Helvetia or Germany, they be either Catholykes or Sacramentaries. But if you
will have an eye unto a stubbern stomach in defendyng a wrong opinion, it is so
far of, that the Zuinglians yield one jot to the Lutherans in this point,
that Calvin makes his crakes, yt they be stouter Champions a great way: for
at what time the Lutherans for proof of their doctrine did cherefully offer them
selves to terrible death, he says that his scolefellowes the Zuinglians were
much more ready to scale the truth of their doctryn as they took it, with
their blood. and to prove his saying true, read the Regester of all those
martyrs, which have stood in the defense of their herisye unto death in our
time you shall find among them mo Zuinglians then Lutherans. So then although
the Zuinglians be not one jot behind the Lutherans, and bear them selves no
less brag upon the scriptures then they do, yet each of them esteem one an
other wurse then heretykes: specially the Lutherans do so abhor the
Zuinglians, that they thynk men should stop their ears when they speak, and
that their blasphemies ought rather to be confuted with ye sword of the
Magistrate, then with the pen of a learned man in so much that the
Sacramentaries compain much of their cruelty, saying yt the Luthera^s have
not driven away the tyranny of the Pope out of the land, but rather have taken
it in to their own hand: and that in stead of shaking ye Popes woden yoke
from their necks, they have put on a yoke of iron. Ihon westphalus his answer
for the Sacramentaries.
But Iho^ Westphalus hearing of this complaynt, to excuse his brotherhoode,
says, that it is no Tyranny, to resist heretykes which be Tyrauntes of the
soul, and to hyndre them from practicing upon Christ his flock their cruelty
outewardly colored with fair words, but inwardlye kylling and destroying,
not with the material swerd, which only sleaeth the body, but with poison of
corrupt and pestilent doctrine, where with ye dyvell kylleth men's souls,
speaking them fair and feadyng them with lies. The pastor (says he) plays
not the Tyrant, which chaseth away the wolves. The Magistrate uses no tyranny,
if according to the law he cut ye combs of mysdoers, and does execution of
them which be giltye. the rulers of the Church ought not to be accused of
tyranny, because they excommunicat breakers of orde and stubbourne persons,
because with word of mouth and writing they reprove false teachers, because
they put temporal rulers in mind of their duty, because they allow the
procedinges and necessary sharpnes of Magistrates in punishing syn. If
spiritual Magistrates and Ministers would with more smarting remedies drive
away the daungerouse diseases, which infect the members of the whole body, the
Church should be less troubled with these soulesleaers, it should sustain
less damage: so many should not be seduced, as there be now: and being
seduced, should not stand so styfly in their erroures. He spoke these words
very truly against the Sacramentaries which may also sarue fytly against him,
and his fantastical fraternity.

Now as touching the Sacramentaries, Martyn Luther does give this verdict of
them: In good ernest we give sentence, that all Zwinglians and Sacrame^taries
be heretykes, and none of Christ his church, because they say, that the body
and blood of Christ is not received with the carnal mouth in the honorable
Sacrament.

Who also in a certain epistle to a noble man Albertus Marquis of Brandenburg,
Duke in Prussia, says, that no conference or disputation ought to be had with
them, for so much as even from the beginning, so far as there is any
Christian grownde, there has been one uniform belefe of all men, concerning
this Sacrament. Therefore (says he) if any man do now doubt of it, he does
as though he believed not one, holy, and catholyke church. Who also seems not
only to condemn all the whole Church of heresye, but also Christ him selff
with his Apostles and Prophets, with whose most reverend testimony this
article is confirmed, in ye which we do profess, that we believe the holy
catholyke church. For so says Christ: I am with you until the end of the
world. And Paul calls the Church the pyller and stay of the truth.
Moreover, their own opinion bears witness against them, for so much as in
the exposition of this text they so iarr and disagree, that a man may find
almost seven or eight interpretations. Here Martyn Luther pronounced a most
true sentence, making no more against the Zuinglians, then against him
selffe, and his own brood, which scamble by the cares no less among them
selves, and set no less by the consent of the Church then they do. He goes
on writing to ye forsayde duke, saying in this manner: Wherefore I advertise
and beseech your grace, that you will avoid such men, and suffer them not
with in ye precinct of your jurisdiction: for this you must needs assure your
selffe, that if you grant such sowers of sects any quiet abiding in your
territories, when you may be rydde of them, it shall be an heavy burden to
your conscience, and you shall scantly be able ever hereafter to pull out the
worm which continually shall gnawe it. Thus did Luther warn his adherentes to
grant no intertaynement to the Sacramentaries, whom he boldly did affirm to
be ministers of Satan, liars, yea very lying it self, hypocrisy, and
simulation. And in that book which he entitled De coena Christi, of the
supper of Christ, he bids all men beware of Zuinglius, as of the poison of
Satan. This is Luthers censure or verdict upon the Sacramentaries.

what the Sacrame^taries think of the Lutherans.
Now on ye othersyde hear what they thinck of Luther and all his partakers.
The Lutherans (says Oecolampadius) bring with them a blase or appearaunce of
the word of God, but not the word of God in deed, as the common trade of
heretykes is, who all will seem to have the staff of God his word to lean
upon.

Bucer also writes, that every man speaks ill of Luther for his comptrolyng
and snappishe kind of writing, In his Dialogues against Melancthon.
and for that he can not abide that any man should contrary him. If he will
bind men (says Bucer) not to gain say him in any point, let him prove him
selffe to be God. In translatyng and expoundyng the scriptures, he has
committed very gross faults, and that not in a few places. Thus you see,
that the Zuinglians thought it to become them as well to swerve from Luther, as
it did Luther to differ from the universal church. In like manner the
ministers of Surk making answer to a book, which Luther a little before he
dyed, had set out against the Zuinglians, inveyhing bytterly against them,
among other things speak in this wise: The Prophets and Apostles had always
regard to the glory of God, not to their own private preferment, not to
their own selffe will and proud conceit, but they only did seek the soul
health of sinners: but Luther seeks his own profyt, he is styff necked, he
is puffed up with pride, he straight way gives them over to the Dyuell, as
many as at a beck will not subscribe to his opinion: and in all his
reformations there appear many tokens of a malitiouse spiryt, but not one
sparck of a friendly or fatherly affection. Lo, this is the judgment of the
Sacramentaries upon Luther and his followers, and again the verdict of Luther
concerning the Sacrame^taries. And it is not to be doubted, but both verdictes
be true, since both parties came forth of one scole, and were thaught of one
scolemaster the Dyuell. Some there be which report abroad, that an agreeable
confession was made between the Zuinglians and the Lutherans, concerning the
sacrament of the altar. But lest any man should be deceived with this false
rumor, I think it good to fold up in a few words, what I know certainly of
this matter. I have already opened, what heauyng and shoueing was between
Luther, who affirmed the bread to be the body of Christ substantially and
really, and Oecolampadius and Zuinglius, which said, that it was but a sign
and bare figure only. The which contention so sone as it began to be made
hot, in co^tinuaunce of time, it grew to such a great flame, yt they
tossed the fyar brandes of this controversy one at an others head, about the
space of fyften years, because (as Calvyn writes) they could not abide to
hear one an other quietlye to speak their minds: For (says he) although
they met once together to discuss this matter, yet they so held one an other
at the staffes end, that they brake of, and left the matter in as evil a
pyckell as they found it. So that when they should have come to some agreement,
they shronke backward more and more, myndyng no thing else, then to maintain
their own opynion, and to comptroll and confute them, which said the
contrary. When Calvin spyed that, Calvin taking upon him to be a judge between
the Lutherans and the Zuinglia^s, raised up an heresy never heard of before.
he took upon him to be judge between them both, as Muncerus intermedled him
selffe between the Pope and Luther, and condemnyng as well Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius his opinyon, as Luthers, brought in a new heresye, never heard
of before, not only unknown to the ancient Fathers and Doctors, but also
strange to the late vppstart dyuellishe proctoures the Sacramentaries.

For he taught, that bread and wine used in our Lord his supper, be nothing
else then an assurance, and as it were a certain seal confirmyng all the
promises made unto us in Christ: and this did he teach without the
authority of ye scriptures, without the warrant of the holy fathers, without
the consent of his own fraternity. With which doing beside offending of
Luther, he gat great displeasure of the scole of Tigurine: the which scole,
for so much as it does reuercene Vlryke Zuinglius, as the first founder of
their doctrine, could not abide ye Caluyne should find fault with him, and
with out any warrant of scripture forge a new fangled opynion of the
sacrament: Caluyn afterward glad and feign to quench this hott displeasure
kyndled against him, did wryght an Epistle, in which he labored to show, that
he did not swerve from Zuinglius and others his good masters of that scole, in
the doctrine of the supper of our Lord, whereas in very deed he varyed
greatly from them. Calvin co^victed of a lie.
Yea he went about to bear the people in hand, yt all they which held and
believed the Confession of Ausbourch a city of the Vandales, did join with him
in his doctrine of our Lord his supper. Of ye which thing seven year before,
he set furthe a certain book entitled, A sum of the confession of the
sacraments: Called in Laten Augusta Vindelicorum.
in which he plyet it a pase to declare, that the Confessionistes of Ausbourge,
do not once wrynckell, but go smothely away with that opinion of the sacrament
of our Lords supper, which ye Confessionistes of Tigure or Surk do teach,
among whom Calvin him selffe is numbered. Now, for so much as by the space of
one year or twain, no man did wryght against that forsayde book of Calvin,
many did guess by this long silence, that Calvin his council was accepted and
allowed: and then began this to be bruted abroad, that the Confessionistes of
Ausbourch, of Lutherans were become Zuinglians. Diverse of Luthers scollers
stormed at this, that they should be reported to have been traitors to Luther,
and like runagates to have fled to Zuinglius side, for so much as it was
unknown to no man, how ernestly Luther did set against the opinion of
Zuinglius concerning the Sacrament of our Lord his supper.

Therefore there stepped forth some which with contrary books, confuted that
fornamed book of Calvin: against whom, it is now more then.ij. years agone
since Calvin did write a book, entitled A defense of the sound doctrine of
the Sacraments, which the Ministers of the Tyguryn and Geneva Church had
comprehended before in a brefe form of Confession, contayninge a confutatyon
of those reproaches, with the which unlearned and evil tonged men do slander
it. not long after, he also did set forth an other defense against ye false
accusations of Ioachim Westphalus, whose books, which he namely did wryght
against Calvin, as yet I could never come to sight of. yet for all that whylst
I was writing this work, there happened to come in to my hands a little
book of ye said Ioachim Westphalus a Lutheran, which book has this name: A
just defense against the loud lies of Ihon a Lasko, which he tells against
the Churches of Saxony, in his Epistle to the most excellent King of Poyle.
In a letter sent to ye Senatoures of Franckforde, he makes twyse mentyon ye
whylst Luther lived, there were certain at Fra^cforde upon the ryver Meyne
which taught Zuinglius his heresy and that very craftily under this cloak that
they swarued nothing from the Churches of Saxony: of whom that they should
take dilligent head, Luth. him selffe did ernestly exhort them by writing. But
after that Luther was dead, he says, that they more boldly and more
shawfully did set lies a broche, saying, that in the Sacrament of our Lord
his supper, they did agree with the Confessionistes of Ausbourgh: when in deed
(as he says) there is great difference between the Confession of Ausbourgh,
and the doctrine of the Sacramentaries: for so much as the Confessionistes of
Ausbourgh do teach, that the bread is truly the body of Christ, that the body
and blood of Christ, is truly distributed by the hands of the ministre, and
is received in this sacrament with the mouth of them which communicate:
contrariwyse the Sacramentaries do teach, that it is only a token or
signifycation of Christ his body which is absent, that the minister gives but
bare bread and wine, and that the receauer takes but bare bread and wine.
Wherefore he exhorts the Magistrates of Franckford, yt they will be ruled by
Luthers council, that they avoid such false teachers, and banyshe them
clean out of their city. A scabbed sheep (says he) is sequestered least it
infect the whole flock. Heretykes are to be handled and punyshed severely.
A putrifyed member is cut of, least it corrupt the resydue. Leprouse men be
shut out of all company, least they poison them which be hole: how much more
ought those, which be taynted with the spiritual leprosy of ye soul, be
abandoned and removed far, least they spill and infect the sheep of Christ?
The Apostle forbyddeth to receive in to house those which bring not with them
Apostolyke doctrine, least the receauers may be partakers of their evil
doings: then how shall they be intertayned in to Christian men's company,
which bring a doctryn clean contrary to the Apostolyke verity? The scripture
does oftentimes praise hospitality, it commands to use merciful and
charitable deeds toward banished men and strangers: but so that we hurt not
our faith, so that for doing good to a few, we hurt not a great many. For as
it is a deed of charity, to receive strangers in to hospitality, and to
entreat the^ courteously, if so be for their friendly intertaynement and good
turns they disquiet not the church and the common wealth, so it is an
uncharitable deed to bestow hospitality upon them which be unthankful,
busye bodies, and hurtful to the weal publyke: to pity them, to cherishe
them, is no point of Christian charity, but a mayntaynaunce of dyuell she
peruersytie, it is not mercy, but cruelty. Thus did Ioachim spoke in that
epistle which he did send to the Magistrates of Franckforde, this present
year. 57. Of ye which matter Tymanus the pastor of Bre men this year last
paste did write much to the same effect. Afterward I did see a very new book
set furthe by Calvin, which he named: The last admonition of Ihon Calvin to
Ioachimus Westphalus, unto ye which if he do not show hymselffe obedient, he
shall be so taken and handled, as Paul commands us to take and handle
obstinate heretykes. In the which book also he rayleth like a rybaulde upon
the Citizins of Meidburge, Breme, Ilhesam, Calvin rayleth against the
Lutherans spytefully.
and certain other cities of Saxony, which with common consent had condemned
his opinion: he tells them that they be so bewitched with their error,
that the ancient divines among them, be ignorant of those things, which
young children do learn in their Catechism. He says, ye these beastely
men never tasted what virtue is in the supper of the Lord, or what it meant,
that they be past all shame, that nothing comes from them but shouelles full
of slanders and false reports: whilst they tell for truth Luther his loud
lies, so that they may make their blind brotherhode and the ignorant sort
believe that the moon is made of groan chese, being contented only to be praised
of ye people, they fear neither the judgment of God, neither of his
Aungelles. He casts in their tethe their bedlem boldness, flyrtyng, and
folishe lightness, blind dronckennes, doggishe and currishe curstenes, Lucifers
loftynes, saying that pride is to them instead of Godlynes, that madness has
spoiled them of all manly and civil manners, that stubbornnes has left no
light of reason or discretion in them. He calls the^ brain sick noddies,
Cyclopes, a proud rablement taking part with those Gyauntes which the Poets
feign to have interprysed to pull Iuppiter out of heaven, barkars and bawlers,
phrantyke, beasts, peuishe, proud as peckockes, styf as stakes, and with
such other colors he paynteth them. He complayneth on them, that they cry
out of him and his, that they be not worthy to tread upon the grownde, and
that onles they be spedily dispatched out of the world, there is no other
mercy to be showed unto them, but to banishe them, and send them to live among
the fearce Scythians, and untamed Indyans: also because they accuse Kings of
sluggishnes, for not drawing out the sword straight way, to make havoc of
the Sacramentaries, and to race their name out of all remembrance. These be
the words of Calvin in his forsayde book, by ye which it is given us plainly
to understand, that it is but a tale of a tub, which is reported of the
agreement of the Luthera^s and the Zwinglians, seeing all ye Churches of Saxony
for ye most part, have condemned ye doctrine of ye Sacramentaries. Although in
ye mean season, that is not to be dissembled, how he does make his brag in
the same book, that ye two eyes of Saxony, Wittenberge, and Lipsia, did not
decree any such thing against his doctrine, neither Philipp Melancthon, whom
he says, can no more be pulled from agreing with him in this one point, then
he can be pulled from his own bowelles. But it follows not by and by that it
is true, because Calvin writes so: and we do conceive a better opinion of
Philipp Melancthon then so.

Of the third sect of the Anabaptists.
You thynk peradventure, that these.ij. sects be they only, which in this our
miserable world durst challenge unto them selves the name and authority of the
Gospel. But you be deceived, if you thynk so. For by side these, there is an
other third sect more peryllouse, the which, because it baptizeth again those
which were lawfully baptized of the Catholics, is called the sect of ye
Anabaptists: of which sort the brotherhood called, Waldenses, seemed to be,
who without peradventure of late did rebaptise, although some of them but
even ye other day, as they declare in their Apology, have given over that
manner of twice baptisyng: notwithstanding, as sure as God, they agree in many
articles with the Anabaptists. Which Anabaptists truly, Antonius Corninus
does write in his Dialogues, to have chefelye issued out of Zuinglius sect, no
otherwise then ye deceptfull Grecians did out of the woden horse, which they
did bring traitorously into Troy. But if any man will search this matter more
depely, although they be of one opinion with ye Zuinglians, concerning the
Sacrament of the altar, yet shall he find, yt they have sucked their
Anabaptisme out of Luthers pappes, that is out of Luthers books.
Anabaptistrie first sprang out of Luther his doctrine
Certaynely Balthazar Pacimontanus, which seems to have first sowed this sect,
does triumph, that Luther was of his mind: as Luther him selffe confesses
in a book which he did write to.ij. Balthazar Pacimontanus first founder of the
Anabaptists sect.
Parrishe Prestes concerning Anabaptisme. Bucer also does witness, that the
Anabaptists Gospel came, from whence Luthers doctrine did come, that is to
say, out of Saxony. At what time Luther did write to the Waldenses, among
other their articles, Bucer in the.3. chap. upon Saint Matthew.
he found great fault with this, that they baptized young children, in hope
of that faith, which they should obtain, when they came to years of
discretion. He says therefore, that it were better not to baptize young
children at all, then to baptize them without faith: because the sacraments
neither ought, neither can be received without faith. And if you receive any
sacrament without faith, you shall receive it to your great damnation. We
lay against your doctryn (says he) this saying of Christ: He which believes
and is baptized, shall be saved. Hereof did the Anabaptists take occasion of
their heresye. For whereas Luthers opinion seemed to them to be against all
reason, as in very deed it is, ye young children have faith of their own,
they thought it a more sure way to let them alone unbaptized: and not to
Christen them, till such time as they could believe for the^ selves, because
they said, this was grounded upon the word of God, which word they cried
with loud voice, should endure for ever, and against which word they did make
their boaste, that hell gates should not be able ever to prevail. Memno
Phrisius his hold brag concerning his doctrine.
Among who^ one Menno Phrisius, who seems to pass all the sort of them in
learning, says in this wise: Certaynely, o heavenly Father, I can not be
deceived in this matter with thy word: I have believed, and that have I
received by the holy Ghost, as ye word of truth. And with in few lines
after: I know certaynely and surely, that with this my doctrine, which is the
word of God, in the day of ryghtwise judgment, I shall judge not only Lords
and Princes, not only the world, but also ye Aungelles them selves. Thus does
he magnifically make his vauntes of his doctrine, as though it were God his
word, with no less confidence and corragiousnes then Luther did of his
doctrine. Notwithstanding Luther did as hottly inueyhe against this sect, as he
did against the sect of the Sacramentaries, and writing a book to two Plebanes,
as before I have made mention, among other sayings he oseth these words:
Whereas the Anabaptists say, that we find in no place of scripture, that
infantes either have faith, or ye they ought to be baptized, we grant in
deed that it can not be proved by any scripture which says plainly and
evidently in these or such like words: You ought to baptize young children.
for they do believe, if any man be ernest with us to show any such text, we
must needs give him place, Luther is feign to flee for help to traditions
against the Anabaptists.
and grant him the victory, for we find it not in the whole Bible. But good
and reasonable Christians do demand no such things of us: that is the
fashion of brablers, and obstinate persons, to the intent yt they may be
accounted wise. But they for all their Bible bablyng, and crying for
scripture, allege for them selves no scripture, which says, you ought to
baptize those which be of years of discretion, but not infantes and young
children. By and by after, by the tradition of the Apostles always observed
in the church of God, he teaches, that young children are to be baptized,
all be it no scripture does give any such commandment. And like as before
in defending the Sacrament of the altar, so now in mayntayning Christning of
young children, he does chiefly lean upon the authority of the church:
which authority for all yt he will not let us lay in his way (for fear of
gyuing him a fall) so often as he requires scripture of us, for proof of any
one thing be it that it has been received and allouwed of the church never so
many years.

The Anabaptists wurse the^ all other sectaries.
This therefore is the third Gospel, much more pestilent then ye other
twain. For beside that it takes clean away the sacrifice of the Mass, and
the order of Prestehode with the Lutherans, and denies ye real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar with the Zuinglians, it has many other
articles, both blasphemouse and also seditiouse. For it forbyddeth the publyk
ministry of God his word, it defends that Christ took not man his nature
upon him of ye blyssed virgyn, it renews the error of the Chiliastars, it
despyseth rule, and will not have men subject to laufull authority. Therefore,
where so ever this sect takes place, it rayseth up great vprores and
seditions. Examples of this we have many cities in Germany, and especially the
city of Munster. An example by the city of Munster.
For as Henry Dorpius a Lutheran, and he which translated his history out of
the Germane tongue in to Latten Ihon Sleidane a Zuinglian, have written in
their Cronicles, above four and twentye years agone, there came first thither
certain preachers, to declare unto ye people instead of Christ his Gospel,
ye doctryn of Luther, whom when the Catholyke Prestes thought in no wise to be
suffered, Bernard Rothman with his co^panyons, Heretykes manner to provoke
catholykes to dispute before a lay judge.
whom Philipp the Lantgraue of Hessia had sent to further and advaunce Luthers
learning, did yt which all heretykes use to do: that is, chosyng and appoynting
out certain chief learned men of the catholyke faith, they provoked the
Catholykes to join with them in disputation: and that before a lay Magistrate,
whom they appointed to be their judge, and before whom they promised to prove
the doctryn which the Catholykes held, to be false and erroniouse. But when the
Catholyke Prestes refused to dispute with them, they departed the city, after
yt they were forbidden to execute their office of preaching the word of God.
After this departure of the Catholykes, before a year was come^ fully to an
end, the Anabaptists likewise began in the same city to sow the seades of
their doctryn, under the name of Christ his Gospel. And when they had
provoked one an other to set foot to foot in disputation, but on ye selffe same
condition which before was offered to the Catholykes, which was, that nothing
should be alleged but Canonical scripture: behold, Bernard Rothman, the
chiefest trumpetor in all that city of Luthers Gospel, who making ye like
law a little before, had challenged the Catholykes to come to disputation, now
would admit no such condition. So it came to pass, that the Lutherans, which
not long before had thrust the Catholykes out of ye town, they themselves
fearyng to mete or encounter in disputation with the Anabaptists, were shortly
after by them banished ye same town. No marvel, though they were so
handled. For the Senators also were pulled down from their judgment seats,
the churches were spoiled and burned: and whosoever would not take part with
ye Anabaptists, perforce was driven out of the city. As for Bernard Rothma^,
Henry Roles, Godfry Stralen, sent out of Hessia, as they of Christians grew
to be Lutherans, so of Lutherans they becam Anabaptists, and with tothe and
nail furthered the Ghospel of Anabaptists, showing us the experience how
true that is which is written in the Scripture: The wicked man when he comes
in to the depthe of syn, cares not what he does. For if any man do once
forsake Christian Religion, unto what so ever sect he does afterward inclyne,
he makethe it but a pastyme to leap from one heresy to an other.

And this sect truly of the Anabaptists, Anabaptists be divided in to diverse
kinds.
is divided in to many sections. For they agree not in ye principal points of
their doctrine. In certain cities of Germany some did run about naked, as
though they had a bumble be in their breche, exhortyng the people to
repentance, seking in ye mean while busyly, how they might find any
opportunytie to set the people together by the ears. Neither did this heresy
begin yester day, or the day before, for it reigned also in saint Augustyn his
time. And as the most part of all other heresies be, so was this in the
beginning divided in to many other parts. For some were called Donatistes,
other Rogatistes, other Maximianistes, other Circenses, who at the length were
converted from the sect of the Donatistes (for their name was more famous then
the rest) to the unity and fellowshypp of the Catholic church: other some
were called Circumselliones, August. in his epistl. 50. and 30 and of heresies,
69. heresye.
which no otherwise then the Munsteria^s in our days, did go beyond all other
in myschevousnes, as saint Augustyn in sundry places records, and
Possidonius also, who did set out a book of saint Augustines life, testifies
the same. And at this day this Hydra has no fewer horns and heads, then it
had in saint Augustynes time. Possid. in the life of S. August. chap. 10.
For some be called Muncerans, some Orantes, that is to say, Prayars, some
Silentes, that is to wit, keeping silence, Somniantes, that is, sleapers, Pueris
similes, that is, like children, Synceri, that is, pure, Impeccabiles a
Baptismo, that is, not synnyng after Baptism, Liberi, that is, free,
Binderlia^s, Sabbataries, Madera^s, Hofmannikes, and other which sprung up
after them, Circumcisi: and it is like inoughe that the Adamites do pertayne to
the Anabaptists. Some authors do father the beginning of Anabaptisme rather
upon Thomas Muncer then upon Balthazar. Which Muncer above two and thirty
years agone, Thomas Muncer of an Anabaptist dyed a penitent Catholyke.
made a commotion of country men in Thuringia: for ye which fact, when he was
worthily punished, before his head was chopped of, he is reported to have
lamented pitifully, for that he had seduced ye people: more over, to have
recanted all his erroures, and confessyng his fault after the catholyke
custom, to have received ye honorable sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ under one kind. But one Philip, which writes a story of his lyffe,
does make no mention that he taught to rebaptize those which were once
baptized.

This sect of the Anabaptists, I am assured, is a pestilent and an abominable
sect, what so ever any other sect else is. And yet for all that, they which
have enbraced this sect, do steadfastly believe, and assure them selves as well
as the Lutherans, or Zuinglians do, that their sins be forgyuen them for
Christ his sake, that they be in God his favor, and that they shall inherit
the kingdom of heaven: and they be very precise that all they which follow
^^eyre race, should certaynely and steadfastly believe the same.

It is a false doctrine to teach special faith with the which every man should
assure him selffe that his sins be forgyue^
Whereby we may see, how false that principle of Luther is, that it is
necessary for every man, which will obtain forgyuenes of his sins, to believe
surely, that his sins be taken away, nothing mistrusting his own weakness,
vnaptues, or unworthiness. Which although it has allway been, and is now a
conclusion common to all heritikes, so it is flat against ye scriptures, and
the Catholic faith. What ca^ be more manifest then this text of scripture:
Eccle. 5.
For the remission of thy syn be not with out fear. All be it our sins be
pardoned, yet for all that the holy Ghost will not have us to be all together
careless. Notwithstanding this scripture, these fellows think it a deadly syn,
if a man make never so littell a doubt that his syn is forgyue^. the same
scripture says unto us: Thou shall not iustifye thye self before God, Eccle.
7.
for he searches and knows the secrets of thy heart. do not they, I pray
you, comptroll his scripture, which dare boldly seal them selves a quytaunce
from all debt of deadly syn, and warrant them selves to be in God his favor:
specially, seeing to be justified, is nothing else in their opinion, then to
have obtained forgyuenes of syn: An other scripture witnesses: the heart of man
is wicked and unsearchable for man, Hiere. 17.
and who shall be able to know it thoroughly: I your Lord, which search the
heart, and prove the reins. But do not these men take upon them to be as
conning as God almighty, which take a co^ceite that they be able to search
and try their own hearts? Which thing surely he durst not presume, which
said: Who knows all his offenses? Lord cleanse me from my secret sins?
Neither he, Psalm. 18.
which said: I feared all my works, knowing yt thou do not spare those
which work wyckednes. Job. 9.
If I be washed with snow water and my hands be as clear as cristall, yet
shall thou dypp me in my fylthines, and I shall loathe mine own garments.

Paul warns us, saying: Judge not before the time, 1. Cor. 4.
till our Lord come, who shall dyscouer the deeds of darcknes, and shall set
open the secret counsels of men's hearts. And least any man may think that he
speaks only of that judgment wherewith we judge other, and not of that
wherewt we judge our selves, those words which go a little before, make S.
Paul's meaning plain: But neither (says he) do I judge my selffe. I am
gyltie of nothing, yet for all that am not I justified: for our Lord is he
which judges me.

Lo, Paul a chosen vessel of God, did feel no pryck of conscience, yet for
all that, he durst not be so bold to judge him selffe, but he left that to
God, who is ye knower and seer of all hearts. Then, dare thou chalendge that
thing to thy selffe, which belongs to God only? Haste thou ye face to prevent
his judgment, before he have given his verdict of the? art thou so hardy as to
warrant and assure thy selffe to be justified, that is, that thy sins be
forgyuen and pardoned? Christ gives us in commaundime^t, Luc. 17.
saying. When you have done all that you are bound to do, say: We be
unprofitable servants: And make thou no bones maugre this precept of
Christ, to vaunt thy selffe to be a profitable servant? For who so ever
bears himselffe surely in hand, that his evil deeds be done away, that he is
in the favor of God, what does he else, but crake that he is a profitable
servant? The scripture says: Eccle. 9.
Man knouweth not whether he deserve to be loved of God or hated: and do
thou clean contrarily affirm, yt thou know thy selffe to be worthy to be
loved of God? For if thou boaste thy selffe, yt thou know certainly, that
thy offenses be forgyue^ and forgotten, and that thou art inroled in the book
of lyffe, what do thou else but say, Thou know thy selff worthy to be
loved (...) God, Job. 9.
and burden the holy ghost with a lie? Holy Job says: If I shall justify my
selffe, mine own mouth shall condemn me: If I shall plead that I am
innocent, it will prove me to be guilty: and although I were perfect; yet my
soul can not attain to that knowledge. Art thou more holy the^ he? Art thou
more certain of God his predestination then he? so that thou dare warrant
thy selffe, that thou doubteles know thy selffe to be perfect and innocent,
which knowledge he confesses to be kept secret from his soul? do not thou
fear least those words be spoken to the, which once were spoken to the
Pharisees, whom Christ called painted sepulchers: Matthew. 23. Luc. 16.
You be they (says he) which iustifye your selves before men, but God knows
your hearts: for that which is commendable in men's eyes, is abominable
before God? And there can be no greater abomination in the sight of God, then
this so great presumption of heretykes.

The first objection making for special faith is soluted.
But some man peradventure will say: why then? do you forbid me to believe ye
remission of sins, which we profess in our creed, God forbid: Yea I bid you
believe constantly, and to make your account certaynlye, that there is
remission of sins in the Church, and that Christ has sufficiently deserved
this forgyuenes, for me, for the, for ye traytoure Judas, for all men in ye
world, 1. Joan. 2. 1. Cor. 5.
yea to them which arre now, or here after shall be damned in hell: who
hangyng on the cross, is made a propiciation for our sins, and not for our
sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world, who by his death
has reconcyled us to his father. But yt thou sholdest believe, that al men be
partakers of this pardon, or that all do plead possession in heaven at this
present, or yt all men shall inheryt it in ye world to come, not I, Heb. 2.
but the scripture does forbydde the to believe. He tasted of the sower cupp of
death for us all, but all men do not endeavor to apply the benefit of his
death unto them: he was a cause and means of salvation to all men, but the
scripture adds to all, Heb. 5.
which were and would be obedient unto him. He did set the door of everlasting
lyff wide open to all men, but Christ puts this condition, If they shall
keep the commaundimentes. If any man refuse to obey him, if any man shall not
keep his laws, if any man shall not continue with him unto the end, he which
puts no doubt but such a man is never ye less sure to be saved, what does
he but deny ye sentence of the Ghospel, which shall be pronounced upon them
which are set on the left hand among the goats: avoid hence from me you
cursed caytyfes in to everlasting fyar, which is prepared for the dyuel and his
aungelles. So then, Matthew. 25.
to teach yt it is necessary for every man to ye attayning of salvation, to
believe certaynely and to fear nothing, that his syn-be forgyuen him for Christ
his sake, that he is God almyghtyes dear darlyng, yt without question he is
one of the heirs apparent to ye crown of glory, is nothing else then to
teach that there be no pains of hell prepared for the wicked, who doubtless as
every Christian man believes, shall taste of terrible torments: not by Christ
his default, as who should say yt his death and bitter passion auayled littell
to the saving of their souls, but by their own naughty negligence, which
labored not by worthy works of repentance, to apply the virtue of Christ
his death and passion to them selves. Wherefore, if I be not bound to believe
that all men have their sins forgyuen them, if I be not bound to believe so
of this man or that man, then truly am not I bound to believe so of my selffe,
onles it be specially reveled to me of God.

Here will these heretykes replye: you do so reason with us, The second
objection.
as though we encoraged them which still ly wallowing in their wickedness, to
believe that they be in ye favor of God, whereas we only speak of them which
be converted. I assure you, I did shoot at this mark, I longed to make you
confess so much.

Well then, you grant that there is some thing in us, which may bolden and
harten us to believe certainly and assuredly, that is, if we be auerted from
our sins and converted to God. But I pray you Sirs, what if one some in his
own fancy to be converted, which is not converted in deed? As for an example,
A perverse Lutheran thinks him selff to be a converted man, a more perverse
Zuinglian takes him seffe to a converted man, the most perverted of all the
Anabaptiste, either Seruetus, either Suenckfeldius, or any other most pestilent
heretyke does esteem him selff to be a converted man, will you therefore warrant
him to be in God his favor? like as none be more puffed up with a proud
conceyte of learning, then they which have least learning of all, in so much
that without cause it is not used in a proverb, which Chucidides writes: Tuc.
in his second book of the war of Peloponnesus.
Ignorance bredeth boldness, but knowledge causes one to doubt and fear the
wurst: so it is often seen, that such do certaynely and steadfastly believe that
they be converted, when in deed they be most shamfully perverted. The wise man
perceived this, when he said: there be wicked men so careless, and void of all
fear, Eccle. 5.
as if they lived as uprightly as the most perfect men: whilst Saul thundered
threatenings against the disciples of our Lord, Acts. 9.
and minded to murder them, and through ignorance plaged the church of God,
did not he seem thyncke you in his own conceyte to burn with a certain
syngular zeal of Godlynes? did not his mind give him that he sought after God
with all his heart? Philip. 3.
And that he did him high service in making hauock of the Christians, for so
much as what so ever he did in that case, he did yt of emulation, because he
was a meruaylouse precise follower of the tradytions of his forefathers? Gala.
2.
He had therefore a zeal and was hot of the spyryt, but not according to
knowledge, and therefore he obtained mercy, Romans 10.
because he knew not what he did. Therefore that is true which the wise man
writes: 1. Tim. 01.
there is a way which at the beginning seems as yt would lead a man to
life, Pro. 14.
but the end of it draws him to death and destruction. And in an other
place: Every man demeth the way where in he walks, to be right and straight,
but God weyeth their hearts. But let infydeles and heretykes go, Pro. 21.
although the Zuinglians and the Anabaptists think not them selves so great
heretykes as the Lutherans be.

Let us now speak of Catholykes. Yea, among them you may find, which think
them selves to be converted, when in deed they be not. Solomon has a notable
sayng: who can say truly, my heart is clean, I am not spotted with syn? Pro. 20.
in many fautes we displease God all the sort of us.

And al be it we were converted to God with all our heart, yet ought we not
certaynely to warrant our selffe, but fixing our faith in God his mercy,
leave the certain determination of our salvation to his judgment, which
searches ye hearts and the raines. Wherefore the pride of these men is to be
accursed, which whilst they pronounce them selves to be conuertes, doubt not
but that their sins be forgyuen, and that they be in the favor of God.

But you will excuse your selffe agyne saying: The third objection for special
faith.
We do not trust to our own worthynes, but to the mercy and promises of
God, and we laughe at your doltishe cauillation, when you say, that we must
doubt by reason of our unworthiness.

For therefore was the Sone of God appointed a Mediator, because we be
unworthy, and that the father should have mercy upon this wretched lump,
undeserving, and full of fylthines, for his son his sake, who has suffered
death for us, risen again, continually praying for us, dwelling in us, and
clothing our nakedness with the ornaments of his righteousness. According to
the scripture: Now is there no condemnation to them which walcke in Christ
Jesus. Romans 8.
You say well in deed, if the promysse of Christ were without all condition, if
he would voutsaffe to bestow his mercy upon them which turn not away from
their sins. But now the case so standing, that he has made his promise
in this sort: Matthew. 19.
If thou wylt enter in to lyffe, keep the commaundimentes. and that he shows
his mercy upon none, but upon them, which repent, and turn from their sins.
This your opinion is a nowne adjective, and can not stand by it selffe. Do you
think it to be a doltishe cauillation, to hold that we may well doubt by
reason of our unrighteousness? why then? think you him to be a fool, Matthew. 11.
then whom Christ witnesses none greater to have been borne of a woman, who
says: Matthew. 3.
Bring forth worthy fruits of repentance? Make you Paul also but a fool,
Act. 26.
who preached to the Gentiles, that they should do penance, and be converted
to God, practisyng worthy works of repentance? Who also writing to the
Corinthians, concerning the sacrament of our Lord his supper, says: Who so
ever shall eat this bread, and drink this cupp of our Lord unworthily,
shall be gyltie of the body and blood of our Lord. 1. Cor. 12.
For who so eats or drincketh it unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation. Lo Paul and Ihon do require of us worthy works of repentance,
and yet will not you have us careful for our worthynes? But you rather be to
be accounted not only witles, but also wicked, which dare presume to reprove
the holy Ghost of folly speaking by his chosen vessels, because he demands
worthy works of them which be penitent, and because he forbyddeth them to
receive the Sacrament unworthily. You say truth, that therefore the Sone of
God is assygned a Mediator because we were unworthy: but I pray you to that
end, that we should continue still unworthy? no I assure you: but that of
unworthy wretches, he might make us worthy, Colos. 1.
as S. Paul writes, to be partakers of the inheritance of Saints. For onles
he had been made our Mediator, onles he had given hymselffe a redemption for
us, which were unworthy, although we should have done all the good in the
world, though we should have suffered all cruel torments, though we had
offered our body so that it had burned, yet could we never have brought forth
worthy works of repentance. Therefore we must yield worthy fruits of
repentance, if we desire to have our sins forgyuen, and come in favor with
God: the which works we neither can, neither ought to warrant our selves that
we have, for he only can judge of that, who is the knower of all hearts. But
now, if we shall do that (which he must judge of, and not we our selves) then
our heavenly father for his son his sake which suffered for us, rose again
from death, prays for us, and dwells in us, not so much clothing us, as
recompensing with his own righteousness, yt which is wantyng in our
ryghteousnes given to us by him, the^ (I say) our heavenly father will be
merciful to this lump not now unworthy, and all defiled with filthynes. God
forbydd yt ever any such wyckednes should synck in to godly me^nes hearts, yt
we should think so unworthily of ye death and passion of Christ, as though he
were not able to make us worthy to be partakers of the inheritance of saints
in light, yt we might be counted worthy of that world to come: as though it
passed his pour to wash away the filthiness of the daughters of Sion, Luc. 20.
Esa. 4.
of whom the scriptures bear witness, that he has washed us from our
sins in his blood. and again: Apoca. 1. Joan. 1. Hebre. 9.
The blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all syn. And in an other place, The
blood of Christ shall cleanse our consciences. And again, The blood of Christ
shall cleanse our consciences from dead worckes, we will not derogate so much
from Christ his blood, that we will deny him to have been able to wash away
our filthynes: beside this, how shall God have a dwelling place in us, if we
be full of filthynes? seeing it is written, Sapi. 1.
wisdom shall not enter in to a malitiouse mind nether shall dwell in a body
subject to syn? what partnershipp is there between ryghteousnes and iniquity:
what felowshipp is there between light and darkness? what atonement between
Christ and Belial. Therefore, God will not dwell in the lump of syn, nether will
he be merciful to it if it be full of filthynes. But he will make his abidyng
in them, he will show his mercy to them, 1. Cor. 7.
which in time past have been greatly defiled, but after they were once
converted to God, have brought forth worthy works of repentance, being
washed so white by the benifyte of Christ his blood, that afterward ye saying
of saint Paul may be verified of them: And such ones have you been in time
paste, but now be you cleansed, now be you sanctified, now be you justified
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And because we know not surely, whether
we have done worthy works of repentance, whether that our sins be
forgyuen us, and whether we be in God his favor, or ye without peradventure
we shall posses the kingdom of heaven, those words bearyng wytnes which you
allege to make your part good: Romans 8.
no damnation is appointed to them which be in Christ Jesus, which walcke not
according to the flesh. For although we doubt not but that we be made one
body with Christ, Gal. 3.
so sone as we have put on Christ, being baptized in him through faith, and
the Sacrament of faith, yet do we doubt whether we shall continue still in
him: and those words before said do smite great fear in to us, they which
walcke not according to the flesh: because our conscience not only bears us
witness that we have often walked according to the flesh, but also at the
very same time when we seem to our selves to be converted, we can not
certaynely say, that no relikes of syn do remain in us. But this certainly we
read: Romans 8.
They which walk in the flesh, can not please God.

These men will demand this question again of me: what then? The fourth
objection of heretykes for their special faith.
do you council us to despeare? God forbydd. But as I deny constantly, that
any man is bound to believe certaynely, that his sins be forgyuen, so do I
affirm with no les stedfastnes, that every faythefull man doing his endeavor
as much as in him lies, ought of duty in this life with a strong and sure
hope to look for the forgyuenes of sins, and in the world to come life
everlasting. But this hope of ours, ought not to be fastened upon our selves,
but upon God, whom when we do behold, we be most certain, that he is
faytfull both in his promises, and also in his threatninges. But when we look
upon our selves, it can not be but we must needs tremble and quake consydering
our weakness and fraylnes, though we were gyltie of none other thing. For
seeing we know ye Lucifer the noblest Angel in heaven did fall, that Solomon
the wysest man that ever was, did commit folly, that the children of Israel
God his most dear and chosen people were forsaken, and seeing we understand
this also, that God owes us no more service continually to defend us, to aid
us with his grace, to save, co^duict us in the way of everlasting life, then he
did either them before rehearsed, either Judas called to be an Apostle, either Saul
elected King, either Nicolas appointed to be Deacon, we can not be void of all
fear: specially seeing God does warn us by his chosen vessel, Bear not thy
selffe to bold, but fear, Romans 11.
for seeing that God spared not ye natural branches, happly nether will he
spare the. Philip. 2.
Seeing by the same vessel he exhorts us, that with tremblyng and shaking we
work our own salvation. seeing also he pronounces by an other, that man to
be blessed which allway stands in awe. Pro. 28.
Yet for all that, this tremblyng must not put us clean out of comfort, but
make us more obedient to Christ, and styr up our hope toward him, yt every one
of us may say with blessed Job: Job. 13.
Although he should kill me, yet will I hope in him. But if this seem to any
man a strange opinion, because I council men not boldly to believe, and to
assure them selves, but will every man to have a sure and certain hope, that
in this world he shall obtain remission of his sins, and in the world to
come life everlasting, let him thus understand my meaning: that we can believe
nothing well, and rightly (I speak of the Catholyke belefe) which may prove
false, and be other wise then we do believe: but we may rightly hope for those
things, which many times chance clean contrary to our hope. Therefore seeing
it may be, yt a man may steadfastly believe and certaynelye bear himself in
hand that he is in the favor of God, and yet this his opinion may deceive
him, we be rather commanded to hope, then to believe. For ye cause of faith
consists in truth reveled as it were of God. But ye most sufficient cause
of hope, consists in possibility and lykelyhode of obtaining that thing,
which a man may hope for, by reason of God his commaundiment and promise.
Again, if you take and understand fidem faith, for fiducia trust or
confidence, as these men some to understand it, Calvin upon the first of tho^
ca. 5
then fiducia, that is trust, excludes all fear, and hope has fear to
wait upon her, and to carry up her train. Wherefore we be better commanded to
look for the remission of our sins, with a certain and sure hope, then with
a certain and sure faith. Although truly nether any man is forbidden to
believe, so that he be not altogether careless, Calvin in his institutio^s cap.
5.
and recheles. In this mind Calvin him selffe seems to be, when he says: God
does command us so to be certain, that we cast not of all care. and again in
an other place: When we do teach, yt faith ought to be sure and certain, we
do imagine no such faith, as is divided far from all doubt: nether any such
security, which is cut of from all care: but we say rather, that faithful men
have continual war with their own mistrust and doubtfullnes: so far of is
it, that we do lay any such soft pillowes under their consciences, yt they
should feel no disquietnes of mind at all. Again, notwithstanding how greatly
so ever they be trobled and vexed in conscience, we deny that they faynte or
fail from that trust, which we have conceued of the mercy of God. The
counsel of Trent in the fyft session. 9 cap.


But I think it good here to recite, what the Fathers assembled at ye general
council of Trent, have determined upon this matter. These be their words:
Although it be necessary to believe, that sins nether be forgyue^, nether ever
were released but freely by the mercy of God for Christ his sake, yet must not
we say, that he is quyted of his sins, which makes his boaste, and only
leaves on the certain confidence of forgiveness of his sins, seeing both of
the heritykes, and also the scismatykes, this vain and detestable confydence
may be holden hereafter, and at this present day is mayntayned and preached
most ernestly, contrary to the faith and doctrine of the Catholyke church.
Nether is this to be affirmed, that they which be truly justified, ought
without all doubt to make their account that they be made perfect, and none
other to be absolved from his sins, and to be justified, but him which
certainly does believe, that he his assoyled and made ryghteouse: and that this
only faith is cause of his absolution and justification: as though that he
which does not believe this, did doubt of God his promises, of the virtue of
Christ his death and resurrection. For as no good man ought to doubt of God
his mercy, of Christ his merytes, of the virtue and pour of the Sacraments,
so every man whilst he co^sydereth him selffe, weygheth his own weakness and
unaptness, may well fear that he is not in God his favor: Seeing no man can
know with such certaynete of faith as may not be deceived, whether he have
obtained the favor of God. The holy Fathers do not here exclude every kind
of certaynte, An explication of the words of the Synod
but the certaynete of that faith only which can not be deceived. With such
certaynte they deny yt any man can know yt he is in the favor of God. But
that a man may know after a moral and probable certaynete, or by godly
revelation, as we verily believe that ye blessed virgyn Mary, and the Apostles
did, they make no controuersye at all.

Moreover, the Fathers here do not command us to doubt, as the adversaries
belie them, but they say that every man when he looks back to him selffe, to
his own fraylete and vnfytnes, may fear that he is not in God his favor,
and yet for all that be never the farther of from God his favor, although he
be not void of all fear for his syn, which God has verily forgyuen. I
thought it good to speak more at large of this point, because in ye last
synod I heard say, that certain not understanding the matter throuly, The
article of Louaine.
found great fault with the article of ye Doctors of Louayne, which is as
follows: The faith with the which any man does steadfastly believe, and
undoubtedly hold, that his sins be forgiven for Christ his sake, and that
he shall possess everlasting life, has no witness or warrant of the
scripture, but is clean contrary to them. Although we ought with certain and
sure hope, by means of the Sacrament of Baptism and penance, look for in
this life truly remission of sins, and in ye world to come life everlasting.
Therefore in ye defense of this article, I thought good to bring in these
things by the way. Now will I come again to that point where I left.

The Anabaptists more ready to suffer torments for their faith, then any
other.
Albeit the Anabaptists be more mischeuouse then the Lutherans, or the
Zuinglians, yet do these with no les audacitie then both they steadfastly
believe, and persuade them selves surely, that for Christ his sake their sins
be forgyuen them, that they be in high favor with God, that they shall
possess the kingdom of heaven. And this they do not only bragg of in words
but also they declare in their deeds. For they be much more ready, then either
the Lutherans or the Zuinglians to suffer death, to abide most cruel
punishementes for the mayntenaunce of their faith. For they run to all kind
of horrible torments, with no less courage, then they should go to feasts and
bankettes: so if any man thereof would gather an argument, either of the truth
of there doctrine, either of the certaynete of their being in favor with God,
he might easyly be brought in to this mind, that he should believe, that there
were none other sect, which had so true faith, or were so sure of the favor
of God. But true it is, which Saint Paul faith, 1. Cor. 13.
Although I shall give my body so that I burn, and have not charity, it does
me no good. But he has not charity, which deuydeth unity. Such says Saint
Cyprian, Although they were killed for confessing the name of Christ yet ca^
they not wash out this spot with their blood: Cyp. in his third treatise of
the simplicity of prelates.
the syn of discord stayneth so depely, and is so unable to be cleansed that by
very death it may not be purged. no Martyrdom is without the church
He can not be a Martyr which is not in the church, he can not attain to the
kingdom of heaven, which forsakes her which shall reign in the kingdom of
heaven. Christ gave peace unto us, he commanded us to agree and to be all of
one mind: He charged us to keep the bonds of love and charity uncorrupted,
and unbroken. He can not offer up him selffe a Martyr, which has not
heldefast brotherly charity. Blessed are they, which suffer persecution,
says Christ, Matthew. 5.
but he adds, for righteousness sake. Not the pain, but the cause makes a
Martyr.
Therefore says Saint Augustine, they be true martyrs which suffer persecution
for righteousness sake, not they which be punished for iniquity and wicked
division of Christian unity. Our Lord him selff was crucified with thieves,
but as one passion did join them, so diversity of cause did separate them:
the punishment of the wicked may be like, but the cause of Martyrs is unlike.
And yt is it which makes Martyrs, not the punishment, as Saint Augustyne
repetyng it often in diverse places teaches us. Augustine. epist. 50.
Wherefore it is to no purpose, that Calvin does so highely praise him and his
for this cause, Calvin craketh of the chearefullnes of his brethren in
suffering for their faith.
and that in this respect he judges them to be preferred before the Lutherans,
because they be more pressed and ready to suffer all kind of punishment. For if
so be, that as every man is most ready to suffer death for ye faith of his
sect, so his faith should be judged most perfect and most sure, there shall
be no faith more certain and true, then is the Anabaptists, seeing there be
none now, or have been before time for ye space of these thousand and to
hundred years, who have been more cruelly punyshed, or that have more
stoutely, steadfastly, cherefully taken their punishment, Anabaptists their
folyshe hardines in S. Augustines time.
yea or have offered them selves of their own accord to death, were it never
so terrible and grenouse. Yea in Saint Augustyn his time, as he him selffe
says, there was a certain monstrouse desire of death in them. For at what
time the worshipping of Ydolles did as yet continue, Donatistes desyrouse to
dye for their faith
he writes that great thronges of Donatistes did come to the solemnities of
the Paganes, that they might be killed of the Ydolatours. Also he says, that
some there were which leaped among the harnessed souldioures, as they passed
by, to ye intent they might be slain of them: terribly threatening to wound
them, onles they were dispatched out of their lives by them. Some time they
did by violence compel the judges to command the tormentors and the iusticers
to kill them, in so much, that one is reported to have mocked them in this
sort, that he commanded them to be piniond and led away, as though execution
should have been done of them, that so he might escape their fury with out
blodshedde, and harmeles: more over they made it but a may game to throw them
selves down hedlong from ragged rocks, to drown and to burn them selves.
Anabaptists folishe hardynes in S. Bernard his time.
Nether was there such folyshe hardy heretykes in Saint Augustine his time
only. For four hundred years agone, at what time S. Bernard lived, there were
Anabaptists, which were no less prodigal to spend their life, then were the
Bonatistes, some (says he) did marvel that they were led to their death
not only patiently but as it seemed very frolyke and merye. False Martyrs
s^outenes not to be maruayled at.
But such meruayled at them which consider not well, what pour the dyuell
has, not only upon the bodies of men, but also upon the hearts, in ye which by
the suffrau^ce of God, he once has gotten possession. Is it not a greater
matter for a man to kill hymselffe, then to suffer that wyllingly at an other
man his hands? Experience teaches us, that the dyuell has been so strong
with many, yt they have drowned and hanged them selves. For example sake: Judas
hanged him selffe no doubt by the suggestion of the dyuell. Yet for all that I
think it a thing more to be wondered at, that he could put this in his heart to
betray his master, then to hang him selffe.

The constancy of Martyrs is one thing, and the hardenes of heart of heretykes
is an other thing.
Therefore there is no lykelyhode between the stedfastnes of Martyrs, and the
stubbornnes of these heretykes. Because godlynes in them, but hardness of heart
in these, does work contempt of death. Nether have the Anabaptists of our
time swarued from their predecessors, nether have they been less stout and
cherefull in sustayning all kind of death in the behalffe of their faith,
Iustus Menius.
as among other one Iustus Menius an eye witness of this thing has left in
writing, in that book in the which he confuteth their heresies. So by and by
even at ye beginning, the Anabaptists heresye began to be very hott of spyryt,
and after ward so often as it burned, the heat of it was nothing cooled or
abated. But so was it not with the Sacrame^taries, whose cheyfetayne and first
founder whereas one Berengaries was, about five hundred years agone so far
of is it that his disciples did offer their life with like cherefulnes to all
kind of hazard and adventure, that we read how their great Doctor him selffe
did twyse recant and forswear his error. who not long after being taken with a
deadly disease, lying on his death bed, at the point of death showed him
selffe to be meruaylously sorry, that he had led so many people in to so
foul an error: and the report is that he uttered these words depelye
syghing: O my God to day shall thou appear to me either to my salvation, as I
hope through my repentance, or else to my greuouse damnation, as I fear,
for them whom I have deceived with my perverse doctrine, whom I could not
reclame bake again to ye true way of thy Sacrament: as Ihon Gerson does
declare, writing against Romantius de Rosa. They have begone first of all in
these our days to bragg and boast of their Martyrs, whom notwithstanding
both for their number and also for the commendation of their sufferaunce and
patience in punishment, the Anabaptists of old time have excelled, and these
of our age do so far surmou^t, that if they would make a Martyrologe of their
brethern, Yet M. Fox his Martyrologe is a great book.
they might make greater volumes then ye Sacrame^taries. It is to no purpose
therefore, that Calvin bosteth of the certainete of his doctrine, because the
trust of it makes men to fear nether the terroure of death, nether the
judgment seat of God. It is not worth a straw, that he vaunteth him selffe
of ye persecutions which he suffers, and that he calls his flock sely sheape
appointed to the slaughter. For ye Anabaptists do speak more braggly, and do
more stoutely all these things, and have done it many years agone, before any
man heard tell of the Sacramentaries. Read who that lysteth the epistle of ye
Petilian, which saint Augustyn confuteth, August. in the.2. book against the
letters of Petilia^. 19. 99. chap.
he shall see, how many complayntes he made for the persecution of his
brethern: how he calls the Catholyke Prestes blody buchers, which made
means to the Emperoures, Do not our English Protestants so likewise?
to deal so cruelly with his innocent lambs, whom he glories to by and
purchase heaven with their punishments and blodesheding: Let him read also
the epistles of Gaudentius, against the which S. Augustyn wrytt two books, he
shall find there, Aug. lib. 1. 5. chap.
that he writes how his disciples reioysed, that for the faith of Christ they
suffered the persecutors, that for the comfort of their congregation they abuse
the saynges of Christ and of S. Paul: Blessed be they which suffer
persecution. Matthew. 5.3. Tim. 3.
They which will live Godlyly in Christ Jesus, do suffer persecution.

But it is to be noted, Augustine. epist. 48.
that Saint Augustyne says: If it were allway laudable to suffer
persecution, he would not add, for rigteousnes. Again: Persecution some time
necessary.
if it were always blame worthy to do persecution, it should not be written in
the holy scriptures, A slaunderer of his neighbor privily, him did I
persecute. Therefore, sometime he that does suffer it is unrighteous, and he
which does practice it is righteouse. But with out doubt, ye evil men have
allway persecuted the good, and the good have persecuted the evil men. They,
hurtyng by doing of injury, these seking amendment by disciplyne. They
outeragiously, these discretely: they gyuing place to their malitiouse
affection, these applying them selves wholly to charity. For he which murdreth,
cares not how he teareth: but he which heals takes aduyseme^t how he
launseth: for he cutteth the whole and sownde parts, but this cutteth ye
rotting and feastring parts. The wicked men killed the Prophets, and the
Prophets killed the wicked men: the Iues scourged Christ, and Christ scourged
the Iues. Men gave up the Apostles to man's pour and authority, and the
Apostles gave men up to the pour and thraldom of the dyuell. In all these
doings what is to be marked, Martyrs be made not by lykenes of punishment but
of cause.
but which of them did strive for the truth, which of them for iniquity,
which of them minded to hurt and auoy, which of them purposed to amend and
redress. Therefore not the lykenes af punishment makes Martyrs: for an
heynouse offender may have like punishment to a martyr, but yet an unlike
cause: Three hanged on the cross, one a Savior, the second to be saved, the
last to be damned. Therefore who so departs from the church to heretykes and
Scismatykes, allthoughe afterward he be killed for the name of Christ, being
out of the bounds of the church, and divided from charity, he can not,
says S. Cyprian, Cyprian in his.4. book and.2. epist.
be crowned when he dies: They can not remain with God, which would not live
agreably in ye church of God. Although they be thrown in to the fyar and
brent, Cyp. of the simplicitye of prelates.
though they be torn in peaces with wild beasts, that shall be no crown of
faith, but a punishment of infidelity. That shall be no honorable end of
religiouse virtue, but a destruction for desperation. Such an one may be
killed, but he can not be crouned. Therefore they have no right to chalendge
unto them the glory of Martyrs, which be so far from the cause and quarrel of
Martyrs, which have not doubted to suffer death for devilish division: So
then now you have three Gospelles, and them greatly disagreing among them
selves. If you behold their cherefullnes in suffering persecutions, the
Anabaptists run far before all other heretykes. If you will have regard to
the number, it is like that in multitude they would swarm above al other, if
they were not grievously plaged, and cut of with the knyfe of persecution. If
you have an eye to the outewarde appearaunce of godlynes, both the Lutherans
and the Zuinglians must needs grant, that they far pass them. If you will
be moved with the boasting of the word of God, these be no less bold the^
Calvin to preach, yt their doctrine must stand aloft above all the glory of ye
world, must stand invincible above al pour, because it is not their word,
but the word of the living God. Nether do they cry with less lowdenes then
Luther, Anabaptists not able otherwise to be ouercomed but by the authority
of the church.

the fourth sect which Suencfeld raised.


that with their doctryn which is the word of God, they shall judge the
Aungelles. And surely how many so ever have written against this heresy,
whether they were Catholykes or Heretykes, they were able to overthrow it not
so much by the testimony of the scriptures, as by the authority of the Church.

Do you think peradventure, that we be now at an end of these Gospelles? Nay,
we be yet very far from the end. For Suenckfeldius has broched a fourth
gospel, against whom I have seen five books written in the Germane tongue,
in yt which one Flaccus brauleth and scoldeth with him. When he saw the
Lutherans, the Sacramentaries, the Anabaptists, and all the heretykes, not of
our time only, but also in time past, to establyshe their errors by the
Scriptures, the which is so certain and sure, that the head carpenter of all
heresies in our time Martyn Luther could not deny it, Luther in that book
which he intytuled: that these words of Christ do as yet stand invincible
in so much that he says, that the Canonical Scripture has at last gotten
this name, that it is called the book of heretykes, because all heresies take
their beginning of it, because all heretykes do fly to the scripture for
succoure: therefore when Suenckfeldius had perceived this, and had peradventure
readen it in Luthers books, he him selffe devised a new heresy, and leaving
to the aid and help of the scripture, meant about to take away all authority
from the scripture. For this talk he was wont to have among his Disciples. It
behooves not a man to be coning in the law or in the Scripture, but to be
taught and instructed of God.

Although thou read over the Bible a thousand times, yet for all that shall
thou prove only skylfull in the Scripture, but yet never learned of God. The
labor is but lost which is bestowed on the scripture, for the scripture is
but a creature. It is not mete that a Christian man should be addicted to much
to a creature. We must give ear to God: we must look to hear his voice from
heaven, that it may teach us. Blessed is ye man, says David, whom thou
shall teach O Lord. Psalm. 43.
He teaches us now a days, as well as he taught ye prophets and ye
Patriarchs by visions. We must give head to dreams, for by them God speaks
unto us. the voice of God does teach us a right, the scripture is not the
word of God, but only a dead letter, and to be rekoned among other creatures.
Thinck not thy selffe to be learned out of the scriptures, you must look for
ye out of heaven, not out of books. The holy ghost descends down from
heaven with out any mean, not by ye outewarde hearing, and preaching by the
mouth, either reading of the scriptures. Although that one Thomas Muncerus
seems to be the first Author of visions, dreams, and revelations, who also
was the first which shronck from Luthers sect, as Philippus shows in that
story which he did write of him, so that Luther was worthy of no less
condemnation for stretching men's consciences as it were upon tentre hokes,
then the Pope was for bindyng them in. Yet among those errors which Philipp
lays to his charge, Philipp. in his history of Muncer.
he rekoneth up only these, that he prescribed these ways and rules of
enbrasing Christian godlynes: First that men should refrain from manifest
crimes, as adulteries, murders, and blasphemies: then that they should chaste^
their bodies with fastinges, vile apparel, speaking little, loking sowrely,
wearing a long bearde: then that they should go in to secret places, and that
they should often think upon God: what God is, whether he have any care of us,
whether our faith be true: and that also they should require signs of God, by
ye which he should show us, that he is careful for us, and that our faith is
right. That they should put no confidence in the written word of God. And that
they should persuade themselves verilye, dreams to be the most certain
tokens, that they have received the holy ghost. The same Muncerus did say,
that he had commaundime^t to change all secular government. Wherefore when he
was at Alstete, he made a book, in ye which he wrote the names of all them
which had co^spyred with him, to punish all Princes which were not so
Christian like as they ought to be, and to institute a Christian Magistrate.
These be ye things, which Philip ascribes unto Muncerus. As concerning
Suenckfeldius, whom in despyte he names Stenckfeldius, Philip. concerning
Stencfeld.
the same man in the preface of his commentaries, which he set furthe the last
year upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, writes ye Stencfeldius
has a hundred hands, that he has soldyoures every where, which in his name
do not only scatter libelles, but also move seditions, boste of divine
inspirations, lead men from the publyke ministerye, from reading, and from
thinking of teaching. And now also in certain papers set out against me in
the name of Stenckfeldius, is repeted that (...) a pleasant song to madd men,
that God does not make men partakers of him by any help of written doctrine,
but without all outewarde means. Nether Philipp only, but also Calvin, and
diverse others, do seem to make Suenckfeldius to be the author of these
things. For allthoughe before him there were heavenly Prophets, against whom
Luther has written two indifferent great volumes, of whom Thomas Muncerus
is believed to have been captain and ring leader, yet they did not so openly
fray men from the publyke ministre of the word, and from reading the
scriptures, as Suenckfeldies with his companions do now a days: which be not
ashamed to draw this place of S. Paul to ye mayntenaunce of their madness, 1.
Cor. 13.
where he compares the knowledge of this present life, which is by ye word,
what scriptures Ste^ckfeld. stays his sect upon.
with the perfect and reveled knowledge, which shall be in the lyffe to come.
These they wrest to this life, ascribyng yt which is imperfect to the holy
scripture, yt which is perfect to the revelations of the spyrit, to which
revelations so sone as we have attained, that which is imperfect, that is to
say, the preaching and use of the scripture, they like dreaming doctors do
think ougt to be clean abolished. To this purpose they strech that place of S.
Peter on the last, although in very deed it is contrary to this their
inspiration, where he warns us to give head to prophetical speech, 2. Pet.
1.
as to a bright burning candell in a dark place, till such time as the day
starr does rise in our hearts. They take the illusions of Satan, for the
lightning of the holy Ghost, and for the morning star: which so sone as it
is risen, then is there no more need of the candell of prophetical speaking.
They allege also those scriptures, which Luther also vouched for the
confirmation of his error in his book of abrogating the Mass. Heb. 8. Hier.
31.
No man shall teach his neighbor, or his brother, Jacob. 3.
saying: Know our Lord. For all shall know me from the least to the most
of them. Matthew. 23
There shall not be many masters among you, for you have one Master in heaven.
1. Joan. 2.
You neade not that any man should teach you, his anointing teaches you.
Therefore they command men to run to this Master for succoure, that they may
be taught of him, not of the dead scripture, or of men.

Suencfelde fynished that Gospel which Satan began by Luther.
Behold most godly Prince, to what issue they have brought the matter. After
that by the example of Luther every man took it to be lawful for him to go
from the assent and consent of the whole Church, and to expound the
scriptures after his own brain, that what so ever he imagined, should be
received as ye word of God, it came to this point at the last, that by the
authority of the scriptures, they went about to make the scriptures of no
autoritye, and men were thaught to give more credit to dreams and revelations,
then to the scriptures. Luther took away outewarde prestehode and the sacrament
thereto belongyng: when Suenckfeldius perceived, that he did this not only
without controleme^t, but also that his doing was allowed and approved of
many, he likewise took away the external minystery of the word, by the same
authority that Luther took away the sacrifice. For why should Luthers
authority be stronger then Suenckfeldius his, seeing this man has mo
scriptures on his side then he? For no scripture has given contrary
co^maundiment that mo should offer sacrifice, but that there should be mo
masters then one, it has openly been forbidden in mo places then one. For
seeing we have one Master in heaven, his honor seems to be defaced, his
dignity seems to be diminished, if any other be herd beside him: as who would
say that he is not fyt inoughe to teach us, and as though there were such
lack of ability in him, that he could not perform so much without the help
and ministry of man. So now the Gospel which Satan has begone by Luther,
he has fynished by Suenckfeldies, that after prestehod is taken away, after
the sacrifice is dispatched, after yt all holy things be brought in to utter
contempt, we may see also the outewarde ministry of the word to be taken from
us: the Canonical scriptures to be so stryped of all their dignity, that we
be charged not to believe them: that the scripture is not ye word of God, but
only a dead letter, which is to be reputed among other creatures, to ye which
to be wedded to much, is not the part of a Christian man. Nether is this
Suenckfeldius an out cast or rascal. For Philipp says, he is an hundred
handed captain, that he has soldiers in every place, which in his name do
not only spread libelles abroad, but also stir up seditions. This pestilent
heresye of Suenckfeldius, rages not only over all Germany, but also over all
Heluetia: and there is an huge number of them which boaste themselves that they
have this inspiration, so that in many great Cities by hearesay, Mo
Suenckfeldia^s, the^ Lutherans or Zuinglians.
you may find of the common sort mo Suenckfeldians, then either Lutherans or
Zuinglia^s. To say the truth, I know not the man, nether have I seen his
books: but when I went on your Majesty's Embassage to the most Christian
Emperor and very Catholyke King Charles the fyft, of certain grave persons,
and such as were worthy of al credyt I heard ye contrary of that to be affirmed
of Suenckfeldius, which Erasmus Roterodames once did write of them, which
falsely vaunt them selves to be Evangelical men, Suenckfeldians meruailouse
holy to se to.
that he knew none of them, which joined them selves to their company, and
congregation, but he proved much wurse then he was before: but how many so ever
embrased Suenckfeldies doctrine, it was told me that they were suddenly
changed, as though they had been inspyred by the holy Ghost, that they did
put of old Adam and put on new Christ, that afterward they walked no more
after the flesh, but after the spyrit, so that al men might see yt they had
crucified their flesh with their sins and concupiscences. Here many we see,
how Satan many times iuggleth him selff in to an Angel of light, that by a
color of holiness, he may deceive the simple people. Even as fowlers do set
certain intising baytes, to the intent they may take the birds with showing
them deyntie and lykersom meats, Holiness of heretykes, is the devil his
pytfall to catch souls.

Origenes.


so is there a certain holiness of the dyuell, that is a trap or pytfall of man
his soul, by ye which he may with a more subtle sleyght inuegle and snare men
with false and forged words. Even as Origenes expoundyng Ezechiel more at
lardge does declare. Such pretensed holiness was to be seen in time past in the
Psalbanes, Euchites, Anthropomorphites, Ebionites, Tacians, and other heretykes
of the same sort: the like of the which is also to be seen in the Pycardes,
and the Suenckfeldians, which is none other thing, as that most learned man
Origenes does say, then a certain trap privily set and laid for man his
soul, by the deceate and crafty conueyaunce of the Dyuell.

A conclusion of the fourth new Gosballes.
Now have you four Ghospells, but not according to Mathewe, Luke, and Ihon: but
after Luther, Zuinglius, Muncerus, and Swenkfeldius. These be strange names,
but their Ghospells be more strange, which you may rather call Goosebelles,
then Ghospells, for so much as they have brought in with them the matter of al
mischefe not proceeding from Christ, but from the dyuell the author and founder
of them: for which cause, they chose rather to be called Ghospellers, then
Christians, for that their conscience tells them that they have nothing to do
with Christ, nor Christ with them. See I pray you, how lyttel a sparcke, which
so sone as it began to kyndle might easily have been quenched, (alas the day)
in to how great a fyar is it blown: in how many places even with the dust
and all (as the proverb is) has it ouerturned al Christian godlynes? do you
suppose yt I have reckoned up all ye Ghospelles? nay. There remains yet a
rakehel rablement. For seeing suffering syn unpunished, is a great intyseme^t to
syn, when men perceived, that they had no harm, which attempted such things,
many stepped forth running as it were for ye best game, which thinkyng skorne of
old things, labored to make all things a new, and by inuentyng some strange
kind of doctrine might make their names never to be forgotten. But who is so
good in Arithmetyke, that he is able to coumpt, or who is at such leisure, yt
he is able to stand about declaring every peculiar error? For so much as it
is both a great busynes, and also not pertaining to this present purpose?
Wherefore I will stand no longer in recyting those three hundred at Apocella in
Heluetia, which after service song to God, all the lights being put out, when
they like brute beasts had defiled them selves, yet for all that ascended in
to an high hill, from whence they persuaded them selves, that they should be
carried up both body and soul. And of other conuenticles of which Erasmus
speaks, in the which ye mothers of their own accord did give their
children to be killed, Erasmus in his treatise of the amiable co^corde of the
church.
and with cheerful countenance did stand by, and look on whylst the
slaughter was done, believing verily yt their children so slain should be
numbered among the chiefest saints in heaven. Then the which thing what may be
said more horrible? Beside this there is no cause, yt I should speak much of
a certain Priest taken in Suenia, A Priest in Suethen.
which taught, that the Christian faith was now almost at an end: that seeing
the law of Moses continued but a thousand five hundred years, yt law of
Christ likewise should endure no longer: Husbandmen deceived by an heretyke.
wherefore ye time was now at hand, that an other law, and an other faith,
should be given to men. And of an other not far from Wittenberdge, which told
the husband men, that by such a certain day, and by such an hour, domes day
should be. which the sely souls believed so certaynely, that they left of all
their husbandry, loking for that hour. And after they had looked long in vain,
they were in ieopardy to peryshe for hunger, because whereas they had sowed
nothing, there was nothing for them to reap. And of ye third David, which in
ye town called Embden, renewed the heresy of ye Saduces, where as he denied
both the resurrection of the flesh, the latter judgment, Aungelles,
Dyuelles, Baptism, Matrimony, Scriptures, the kingdom of heaven. Likewise of
that Apostata of Premonstre, who taught that there was no hell, Calvin holds
that Christ did not desce^d in to hell.
that Christ did not descend in to hell, (which opinion Calvin holds in his
Institutions, or Catechism) the holy Patriarchs and Prophets not to have
been in hell. Yea that Christ him selffe, because when he said, God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? seemed to despere, and therefore was damned. Could any
man speak any greater blasphemy? Moreover I will not voutsaffe to speak of
them, which thinck it an horrible thing to call our lady the mother of God, in
whom the heresy of Nestorius, lately condemned in ye council of Ephesus,
seems to be renewed. Nether will I make mention of them, which ten times in the
day worshipp the dyuell, and there of arre called demoniacalles. Beside these
there be spronge out of Luthers scole, Ihon Campane, and among the Spaniardes,
Miles Seruet, who wrote certain books of the erroures about the Trinity,
very full of erroures and blasphemies. In the which they go about to set a
new glass upon ye old cankred erroures of Arrius and Macedonius, and to
disanull that faith, which the fathers gathered in the Council of Nece and
Constantinople, have prescribed us. For they defend ernestly, that only God ye
father and none else is to be worshipped and called upon, because he only
sees our heart, the which no creature can do. And it is a precept of the old
Law, yt he should be killed which worshippeth any other, but God alone. To the
which God they say we have none other intercessor, procurator, or mediator,
beside our only Lord Jesus Christ. What other thing else seems to be
forbidden by these words, then the adoration and invocation of the sone of
God, and of the holy ghost?

Mark, I pray you, what great wyckednes did spryng out of Luther his small
beginninges.
in to what a pickell they have brought ye world at last? Prestehode being
taken away, the sacrifice ouerturned, the Sacraments by all means trodden
under foot, many are so far grown out of grace, that they deny that there
is any heaven, any hell, any Christ. Who would ever have thought that of so
small begynnynges, there should have proceeded so many horrible blasphemies,
which we have comprehended in few words?

But that is a trym saying: Principijs obsta, sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per long as inualuere moras.
Seek physic at first, it is to late at length,
When euelles by prolonging have gotten their strength.
If the disease had been healed when it began first, the Church of God should
not now be pintched with such panges. These pestilent poisons of Seruetus be
scattred far and near. and I would to God, most noble Prince, that even as
other heresies, which I have recited for the most part, so this had not entered
in to your Kingdom and dominions: the which whereas in deed it is more wicked
then all ye other, yet of all the heresies of our time, there is not one which
is more bolstred with scriptures then this is. For it cries all the day long
nothing else, but the scripture, scripture, Gospel, Gospel. And see, I
pray you, what a confidence this man had in his own co^ceyte. Although Calvin
had written books against his error, yet durst he ventre to go to Geneua, and
confer with him face to face. Seruetus condemned and put to death by means
of Calvin.
At the length after long and sharp disputation, when he did stick styffly in
his opinion, he was condemned to dye, which no doubt was done at the earnest
suit and request of Calvin: who immediately did set furthe a book, in which he
declares his doctrine, and describes the whole matter as it was done, also he
teaches, Timmanus a Lutheran teaches, that heretykes are to be punyshed.
that it stands with right and reason, that heritykes should be punished with
the sword. The like of the which a certain Pastor of Breme named Timmanus,
in his sum of sentences, which he gathered not only of the books of the
ancient fathers which were of the christian confession, but also of them which
were of ye confession of Ausbourghe, where by plain wytnes of Luther, Philipp,
Vrbanus Regius, Nicolaus Amsdorffuis, Vitus Theodorus, he shows that Calvin
with all Sacramentaries, and Anabaptists, and other heretics, are rather to be
confuted with ye mace of the Magistrate, then with wrytinges and disputations.
Notwithstanding in ye mean season, he says nothing of him selffe and his
brethren, as though they were not in ye same case. Seeing what sentence the
Lutherans give of the Sacramentaries, the same give the Sacramentaries of the
Lutherans. For whereas Luther hereof gathers an argument, that the doctryn of
the Sacramentaries proceeds of the dyuell, because this sect even at the first
beginning did sprede in to many branches, so far disagreing on from an other,
about the interpretation of these words, This is my body, he gathers yt
reason mysely and truly, for it is most true that Gregorius Nazianzene writes:
Nazianze^
For what so ever is true, that is one: but what so ever is a lie, that is
manyfolde and diverse. Before whom also Athanasius: There is, Athan. in his
epist. of the decree of Nicene Synod against the Arria^s heresy.
says he, (as our fathers have declared) the argument of true discipline and
teaching, where all confess one thing, nether disagree among them selves one
from an other, or from their auncetoures. But they which be not of this mind,
are rather to be called wicked wretches, then true teachers and doctoures.
Certainelye the Ethnikes, for so much as they profess not all one thing, but
^arr among them selves, have not true doctryn: but holy Christians contrarywyse
be the preachers of sincere truth, because they be all of one mind, and be at
no strife or debate among them selves: who although they lived in diverse
ages, yet for all that they mete at one mark, as it becomes the Prophets of
one God, and the interpretoures of one word. Therefore this disagreing among
them selves, is an infallible argument, that they be not styrred with ye
spyrite of God, The discord of heretics among the^ selves shows with what
spyrit they be led.
but of Satan. But what now? If the Sacrame^taries also by the same reason do
prove, that the Gospel which Luther boasts yt he brought to light, proceeded
from the Dyuell? Because we may see no less variaunce between the Lutherans
and the Zuinglians, and they truly, although they interpret not the words of
Christ after the same sort, yet they agree all in this point, that they
wyckedly deny the body and blood of Christ to be present in the sacrament. But
it is a world to see, how the Luthera^s do byte and scratche one an other,
not so much about ye understanding of any one place of Scripture, as about
diverse strange opinions and articles.

But pleases it you to hear their dissentions and combats? Surely I will
not thynk much to rehearse them, not intendyng to be curiouse in obseruyng the
order of times, but that taking my beginning of things of less weight, I may
proceed to those matters, which be of greater importau^ce. Two years after
Luther departed this life, when God in a manner gyuyng sentence out of his
judgment seat, openly condemned Luthers cause, by grauntyng a meruaylouse
victory to the most Chrystian Emperor Charles, A meruailouse victory of the
Emperor.
against the favorers and followers of Luthers faction, a great army of whom
he put to flight, with a very small band, with out strykyng one stroke, aided
and assisted with the help of God alone, and not long after accompaned with a
small train, passing over the floode named Elue, In Laten Albis.
by ye guidyng of an Angel, he vanquished far greater hosts of them, and
took the cheifetayne of that faction prisoner. Therefore after this meruaylouse
victory, in the which God him selffe did fight for the Emperor fyghtyng in his
quarrel, Luthers sect was divided in to two sects. For some became
Interimistes, yt is, Time takers: other Adiaphoristes, that is, Indifferent
men, or Neuters. Moreover there were.ij. The first kind of Interemistes.
kinds of Interimistes, one sort by the permission of ye Emperoures Majesty,
which professed them selves Lutherans, in no other point, but yt they would
not agree, that lay men should be kept from receiving in both kinds, or that
married Prestes should put away there women.

As concerning all other orders and doctrine, they refused not to show them
selves conformable to all other parts of Christendom. These the Emperor by
consent of Act of parliament, thought good to wink at until the general
Council. But whereas the Decrees of whole Christendom ca^ take no place, why
should the Act of one Realm or Empire be there of any more force? Therefore
allthoughe Mauritius a Prince Elector, did show himselffe willing to obey the
procedinges of the parliament, The deuines of Lips the second sort of
Interimistes.
yet the Divines of Lipsia durst take this much upon them, that they would
correct as pleased them the parliament book, and appoynte a farther day of
conformation then the parliament had assigned. And as appartayning to orders and
ceremonies, they did not greatly strive with the Christians, but yet they
labored to retain and uphold mo points of Luthers doctrine, then the
parliament book did permit. Wherefore they subscribed in this parliament book,
as being well contented to teach, that according to S. Paul, we be justified
by faith, Luthers addition to S. Paul his words rejected.
but yet reiectyng Luthers addition to S. Paul's words, by faith only, because
they thought it a cursed thing, to add any thing to ye word of God. And this
the Church thought good to enbrace, rather then ye contrary opinion of Luther,
yt works were necessary to justification, and that we should not put all our
ryghteousnes in the righteousness of Christ alone. They granted all the parts
of penance, which the Church received: they agreed that there were seven
Sacraments of the Church, they restored the Mass which they had abolyshed,
they bannished quyte all most all the songs and ballettes, which Luther made
in the German tongue: also they showed no cause, why they were not obedient to
the jurisdiction of their superintende^tes. These be the things, which
Flaccus Illyricus in a certain exhortation, which he makes to the churches of
Misnia, writes to be contained in the book of the reformation of Lipsia.
Moreover ye neuters of Wittenberge, The Adiaphoristes of wittenberge.
although they seemed not to disagree in opinion with the neuters of Lipsia, which
thing Flaccus gesseth hereby, because they did not write against their book,
yet because Luthers Ghospel began first in their university, they thought it
treason to shrinck from it so suddenly, although many of their side, and
specially Philip Melancthon began to be werye of it. Wherefore thinkyng it as
yet to be no convenient time to change that kind of learning, which their
Master had taught them, yet they thought good to take away certain new orders,
which he had brought in and to restore most of the old orders, according to
the form prescribed in the parliament book. They called these orders or
ceremonies by a Greek name (...), in Latten you may call them indifferentia,
that is, things which of their own nature be such, what the Catholykes thynk
of outward ceremonies and how far the Adiaphorist^s do agree with them. Psalm.
44.
that it skylleth nothing to soul health, whether one leave them or receive
them. For we our selves which be Catholykes do deny, that ye cheyfe points of
Christian godlynes do rest in these things, which be done outewardly, seeing
all the glory of the Kings daughter is inwardly. Christ sees inwardly, he
loves inwardly, he speaks unto us inwardly, and he neither punishes or
rewards but those things, which be inwardly: but were Christ is truly
worshipped inwardly, it can not be almost, but that such a worshipping should
utter it selff, and appear to men's eyes, by certain signs and tokens. And
these outewarde ceremonies have this propertye, that where so ever they be
observed a like of all men, they be witnesses of a certain agreement and
consent. Therefore in these things, the neuters of Mittenberdge thought good to
consent to ye Christians, that by them they might give it out to be
understood, that they began a little to inclyne from Luther to Christ, and
that they might put the world in hope, that in continuance of time it would
come to pass, that rejecting Luthers learning, they would embrace the
Christian and Catholyke doctrine. Flaccus had this in the wind, Illiricus
vexes the Adiaphoristes.
as one that has a very nice nose of his own: therefore he resisted by all
means, that there might be no change or alteration. And when he saw that he
could not prevail with warnyng, praying, and beseching, then he spared not to
tail and scolde sometime darckly, sometime plainly upon his masters, and
especially upon Melancthon, complaining yt they forsook Christ his cause and
quarrel. For he knew none other Christ but him which was borne at Eylzleube,
Islebij.
and feared nothing to call them hogs of the Epicures kind, regarding not
the truth but their belly, as whose belly were their God. At the last, when he
perceived that nether by fair nor soul means, he could fray them from their
purpose, he gave them all up to the dyuell. Illiricus his sentence of
excommunication upon the Adiaphoristes.
And whereas before he gave them the name and title of Adiaphoristes, yet
sytting as it were on his judgment seat, he condemned them with this
sentence. For so much as I perceive that they remain in their inpenitencye,
and against their consciences further the Adiaphoricall constitutions, and not
to refrain to make wyndowes for the papacye to enter in, I give sentence, that
all unpenitent Adiaphoristes, shall be taken as Ethnikes and Publicanes: that
is, that no Godly man ought to hold any familiarity, conversation, or
frendeship with them. And especially to such, as being compelled by no order
of law, shall do other wise, I declare yt they be infected with their
leprosy, and so consequently I warrant them of God his heavy anger and
displeasure.

You see, what authority Flaccus takes upon him, which fears not to
pronunce all the University of Wittenberge (out of the which came the same
Martyn Luther, whom he makes a God of) accursed, and to forbid all good men
to have any thing to do with ye university. The which his forbydding, as I
would wyshe it to take place among all other godly people, so especially among
them which be your Maiestyes subjects, then should we se in your Realm
less disquietnes. But, I pray you, what cause moves him to condemn these
Adiaphoricall constitutions? None other, but that he smelled that wyndowes were
made to conueye in the Papacye, which should follow after them.

Alac for you Sir is it so great a fault to build windows for the Pope his
supremacy, Luther made windows for sathanisme
and not to make wyndowes for Sathanisme, that is Dyuellyshe doctrine to enter
in? which no man can deny that Luther made with these choppynges and
chaungynges, enterprysed of his own head and authority. For, whence came the
Sacramentaries? out of what rote sprang the Anabaptists? how began ye
Suenckfeldians? where had we the Seruetians? surely out of nothing else, but
of these turnynges and tossynges, which Luther has begone. Him may we thanck,
that we be taught yt Christ his body and blood is not in the sacrament, that
children be forbidden to be baptized, that all authority is taken away from the
Canonical scripture, that some believe, that there is nether heaven nor hell,
that Christ is denied to be true God, and ye Sone of God. Calvin him selffe
confesses this, and Balthazar Pacimontanus grants ye same, as I have
declared before, that they have drawn their doctrine out of his books.
Calvin writes, yt Luther taught the first principles of true doctryn, Calvin
his sentence upon Luth.
and showed the way: But in the mean season he says, he was of an overthwart
wit, which being entered in to ye right way, so sone as he had told other men
which way they should walcke, he him selffe turns a side, and pitching his
foot obstinately in one place, would not remove one inche farther. Therefore
Calvin went beyond those principles, and crooked rewes (I would a said Cross
rewes) and began to be more fine, and at all assayes better appointed, and
denied Christ to be present in the Sacrament. Yet Baltasar lept on line lenghte
farther, who as Calvin did, with the Sacrament of the altar, so he, although
not discentyng from Calvin, took all virtue from the Sacrament of Baptism,
especially as touching the baptising of young children. But for all this
great leap, yet Suenckfeldius out reached it, for he bereaved the scriptures
of all authority. at the length, look at what mark the Dyuell shot at the
beginning, ye same mark his ministers Campanus and Seruetus did hytte at ye
last in denying Christ to be very God, and the sone of God: and in so doing
finished that Gospel, whose foundation Luther did lay. So it came to pass,
that when Luther had pearsed those banks which were cast up to keep out the
rage of the floodes, the main streams of the waters did beat down the
banks, ouerflowed and drowned far and near the feldes, corn, and villages.
Aristotle gave a very wise precept, Arist. Polit. 2.
as you remember M. Flaceus, the which also before him his Master Plato did
teach in the seventh book of his laws, that chaunges of laws, and ciuiles
policies, are to be avoided, and that it is better many times to wynk at the
faults of the law makers and Magistrates. Nether comes there so much profit
many times, if one correct and change, as there grows loss and
inconvenience, for that men do learn by little and little to disobey
Magistrates. Therefore to change old laws for new, shall be no thing else,
but all to gether to weake^ the laws, and to inure men to change things of
greater weight and importance, when those things which shall appear very
tryfles, shall be causes of most great calamities and miseries. The which
thing, experience has taught in the chau^ges begone of Luther, what wyndowes
are made for this Sathanisme, which now we see in Germany. Therefore it
behooved him first, to have complained on them, and manfullye to have withstode
them. A defense of Melanctho^ against Illiricus.
And there was no cause, M. Flaccus, why vnmyndefull of your duty, you should
so dispytefully and slanderously entreat your Master, who had deserved so
well at your hands, because he, when he saw it neadefull, did all his
endeavor to bring order and disciplyne in to the church, both which things
Luther had taken away, to ye intent that men might retire again to that
perfect pathe, from the which they had erred and gone a stray. This was a good
meaning of a man not of the wurst sort, who never lyked the chau^ges brought in
by Luther. From whose tyranny that he was at last delivered, he seems to
rejoice, seeing writing to Carlouitius he grants that he had been his filthy
bond slave. And I ca^ not but praise your stedfastnes in Religion (most godly
Prince) that when diverse were suetors to your grace, that you would be
content, The constauncie and godlynes of King of Pole.
that there should be an alteration in things (as some men thought)
indifferent, you could be persuaded by no means to do it, least you might seem
to give a token of your going backward from ye Christian religion left unto
you of your forefathers, and of your bending forward to Sathanisme, which
you see at this present floryshe in many places of Germany, and to begin to
budd (more is the pity) in diverse parts of your Realm. The things which
were requested, may seem to some man to be of lesser importance, then that
any man should styck to grant the taking away of them: How peril louse it
is, to swarne from old religion in small matters.
but put ye case, there were no fault in cutting of those things, yet in
cutting of a man's his own selffe from all the rest of Christendom, is such a
great trespass, yt al other sins compared to it, seem but a more weyghing
in balaunce with a myll post. And this is ye thing, which many seek for: for
they desire division in men, and not in such things, as they know well
inoughe, pertayne nothing to soul health. This, Vergerius him selffe
confesses in certain brefe commentaries, By what degrees Sathanisme did
infect all Germany.
which he (naughty man as he was) did write upon the Pope his Epistle to the
king his councelloures. Flaccus writes very well, that these deceaptes be all
to gether like a wedge, which at the point is very thynne, and being driven in
to the wood, makes no great cleft or ryft: but yet for all that though the
forepart of it be small, yet it makes way for the thycker part of the wedge,
so yt when that part is entered in, necessarily ye other parts shall follow,
until such time as the wode be quite cloue^. We see, how Satan has
wrought these crafts in Germany. The first riuing part of this wedge was the
striving about pardones. The second part was somewhat thicker, when ye layetie
had leave to receive under both kinds, when it was granted that Prestes
might have wives. The middell part was the allowaunce of the confession of
Augusta: The last part was this universal sathanisme, of which I have spoken
before, with the which all Christendom is so cloven, that except God will look
upon us with the eyes of his mercy, it can not easyly be recovered with any
remedy. Wherefore you did both wisely and godlyly (o most worthy Prince) in
that you have taken hither to diligent head to your selffe and your Realm of
this tearyng wedge, of the which also here after you must so much beware, how
much the saffetie of your selffe and your country is dear unto you.

Now then by Flaccus rekonyng, we have three or.iiij. sects of Lutherans.
Other sects of Lutherans.
For he says, that the Interimistes or Time takers of Lipsiabe of two sorts,
one patched and pesed of others: the second made of it selffe. There must be
then.iij. Disorders of Interimistes, and one disorder of Adiaphoristes, all
whose familiaritye, Flaccus has forbidden all godly Christians. The fourth
sect is not about Adiaphorical or indifferent things, but concerning weyghtye
and ernest matters. For there were certain at Witte^berdge almost twenty
years past, which as they were taught by Luther, did reject yt law of works.
Against whom he inueyed in many disputations, and called them in dispite
Antinomos, Antinomi.
that is, men contrary to law. The sixth sect is of the Confessionistes of
Augusta, who not for wearing of a surplesse, Linea vestis.
(for which cause Flaccus styrred up such coals, the which he says was the
first part of the miserable wedge) but about the chief point of Christian
religion, Luther in a book intytuled: operetiones in Psalm.
about that which Luther thinks to be ye head point of all Euangelical
doctrine, on yt which hangs, as he says, ye knowledge of him selffe, the
knowledge and glory of God: which he thinks to be ye opinion of free will, of
the which he ever taught, Luther denies free will.
that it only suffers, and never does any thing, that it is a thing of a
bare name, or else a feigned matter in things, or a title without a thing,
because it is in no man his power, to thinck either good or evil, but as
Wycliff his article condemned at Constance teaches, all things come to pass
of necessity. So it is no doubt (says he) this name free will, to have come
in to the church from the Master thereof Satan, to seduce men from the way of
God in to their own ways: and evil works (says he) God works in the
evil men. To which doctryn also Philipp Melancthon did subscribe in those
common places which he did set out at Wittenberdge, Melanctho^ how arrogantly
he at the first denied free will.
when he was but one and twenty years of age, not without a certain youthely
arrogancy in no wise to be borne with all. For he durst take upon him to give
his censure upon the holy Doctoures. Augustine, says he, and Bernard, did
write of free will, and Augustine truly did recant diverse times in his last
books written against the Pelagians, his opinion of free will. As for Bernard,
often time he turns the cat in the pan. The Greek Doctoures did write
something of this matter, but out of order. I, for so much as I follow not
the opinions of men, I will declare the whole matter most simply and plainly,
which both old and new writers have darkened, because they did so interpret
the scriptures, as though also they would satisfy the judgment of man his
reason. They thought that it was against all polityke government, to teach yt
a man did synn of necessity: they thought it a cruel thing to find fault with
man his will, if it could not turn it selffe from sin to virtue.

Therefore they attributed more to man his strength then they ought to have
done, and they did meruaylously disagree among them selves, for so much as they
did see that in every place it was contrary to the judgment of reason: and
truly in this place, where as Christian doctrine disagreeth much from
Philosophy and man his reason, yet Philosophy by little and little crept in
to Christian doctrine, and this wicked opinion of free will is received, the
goodness of Christ is darckned by our profane and carnal wisdom. The word
of free will is usurped most contrary to the holy scripture, to the meaning and
judgment of the holy ghost, with yt which we see holy men have been often
displeased. There is added also out of Plato his philosophy this word of
reason, which is as pernitiouse and daungerouse as the other. For like as in
these last times we have embrased Aristotle in stead of Christ, so even
immediately after ye first beginning of the Church, Christian doctrine was
corrupted with Platos philosophye: so is it brought to pass, yt there be no
sincere and pure books in the Church, beside the Canonical scripture. All the
commentaries, which learned men have written, smell of Philosophy. And with in
a lyttel while after, does any man ask me, if there be any free will? I
answer, because all things which come to pass, do necessarilye come to
pass according to the predestination of God, there is no liberty or freedom
of our will. What the^ you will say, is there in things (yt I may use ye
Papists words) no casualtye? no chance? no fortune? The scriptures teach
us, how that all things come to pass necessarily. Eckius says, that Valla
would know more then ever he had learned, because he confuted ye scole men's
opinion of free will. And in the end, gathering a sum of all his saynges, he
says: If you refer man his will to the predestination of God, there is no
liberty either in outeward or inward works. But all things come to pass,
according to the predestination of God. If you refer our will to outewarde
works, to natural judgment, there seems a certain fredome: but if you
refer our will to the affections, there is no liberty even by the judgment
of nature. At the last he concludes: Thou see, Reader, that I have written
more plainly of free will, then either Bernard, or any Scole men.

And in his annotations upon S. Paul to the Romans, expoundyng that place of
Paul, according to the predestination of God, after that he has confirmed, yt
there is no casualtye in things, nor liberty of will, he says thus at the
length: We teach, that God does not only suffer his creatures to work, but
that he him selffe properly does all things: yt even as they grant ye
vocation of Paul to have been ye proper work of God, so let them grant that
all those be ye proper works of God, whether they be means, as eating and
drinkyng, which be common to men and beasts: or whether they be evil, as the
adultery of David, the seueritye of Manlius in kylling his son: seeing, it is
evident, that God does all things not suffering, but potenter, as Saint
Augustyne his word is, that is, mightily working, so that ye traytery of Judas
is as well his proper work, as the vocation of S. Paul. Thus has Melancthon
written in those books, which he did set out being as yet but a young man:
Luther how much be esteemed the wrytinges of Melancthon, notwithstanding they
were after changed and corrected.
one of the which books, Luther writing against Erasmus of servile will,
says, is a book never able to be confuted, worthy not only immortal fame,
but also to be nombred among the Ecclesiastical Canons: to the which (says
he) when I compared thy book, it seemed so vile and beggarlye, that I took
great pity of the. And making a preface to the other, he doubts not to
prefer it before the most learned Commentaries of Thomas Aquinas. And that the
Commentaries of Hierome and Origin, be but stark tryfles and fools babells,
if they be compared to his annotations. He is not far from placing him above
Paul, but certaynely he gives him the chair next to S. Paul. But Philipp
him selffe often changing his mind, has condemned both those books of
erroures in many places, and specially in this point of free will. For he
caused both of them to be afterward prynted, scraping out many things,
adding, changing, correcting, in so much that the last books were almost
nothing like the first. And in those common places which were printed in ye
year of our Lord.1536. at Straesbrughe: in ye year of our Lord.1538. at
Wittenberdge: in the year.1546. at Lips: and in the year 1555. at
Wittenberge: he openly has recanted al those things, which he did write in
those his first books, of free will for thus he speaks: Valla, and diverse
other take liberty from man his will, Melancth. confirms free will in his
later books.
because al things be done after God his determination. He adds in his
common places printed in the year.46. and.55. This imagination sprung out of
the Stoikes disputations, brings them to this point, that they take away all
casualtie of good and evil actions, yea of all motions in beasts and in the
elements. But I said before, that they must not bring in these Stoicall
opinions in to the Church of God, nether that fatal necessity is to be
defended in all things, but that we must grant some chance or casualtie. It
was not of necessity, that Alexander killed Clytus, nether must we confound
the disputation of God his determination with ye question of free will. And
again in his places printed the year.1536. and.38. or later. For so much as
in the nature of man there is left judgment, and a certain choice of things,
which be subject to reason and sense, O Melancthe^ you had not been a mete man
to be deane of divinity in Trinity College at this day in Cambridge.
there is left also a choice of outeward civil and polityke works: wherefore
ye will of man can of her proper pour without renewing, do some external
works of ye Law. This is ye fredome of will, which the Philosophers do well
attribute to man. For Paul making a difference between the spiritual and
carnal Justice, grants yt they which be not baptized, have some choice, to
refrain the hand from murder, from rapyne, from theft. and this they call the
ryghteousnes of the flesh: but God commands them which be not baptized to
keep this law: and in an other place afterward, this sentence of free will,
has no inconvenience in it, and it is ye true meaning both of other
Ecclesiastical writers and Synodes, and also of S. Augustyne him selffe, nether
does it bring good minds to desperation, nether does it discourage them from
doing their endeavor, but it aduaunceth the help of the holy ghost, and
sharpneth the care and the diligence of our will. I defye the dotyng dreams
of the Maniches, which denied yt our will did any thing at all, though it
were helped of the holy ghost, as though there were no difference between a
painted post and our will. He writes also, that three causes of a good
action do mete to gether, the word of God, the holy ghost, and man his will,
assenting and not resisting the word of God. For it may resist, as Saul
resisted of his own accord, but when the mind obeys and yeldeth, then does
it not give place to mistrust, but by the help of ye holy ghost, it
indeuoureth it selffe to consent: in this indeuouryng our will stands not by
ydely lokyng on. And again with in a few words after: I have seen many not of
ye Epicures sect, which when they were in heauynes for their syn, disputed
thus with themselves, how should I hope that I am received again in to God
his favor, seeing I perceive not a nue light, and nue virtues to be powered in
to me? More over, if my free will does nothing at all, in ye mean while till
I feel that regeneration, which you speak of, to be wrought in me, I will give
my selffe up to desperation, and other sinful affections. This imagination of
the Maniches, is an horrible lie, If this opinion of Melanctho^ be true, why
was one not long agone expulsed out of Trinity College in Cambrige, and
written in the Regestre book for a semipelagian?
and men's minds are to be dissuaded from this error, and to be taught that
our free will works and endeavors. Pharao, Saul, resisted God not
compelled, but wyllingly and freely: nether was David converted, as if so be a
stone should be turned in to a figg: but free will did some thing in David:
when he heard the rebuke and the promise, then willinglye and freely he
confessed his syn, and his will did some thing, when he comforted him selffe
with these words: Our Lord has taken away thy syn. And again a few words
after: For so much as God his promise is general to all men, and in God be
no contradictorye wylles, of necessitye there is some cause of diversity in
us, why Saul is rejected and David accepted, that is as much to say, there
must needs be some unlike action in both of them.

And in the chapter before going, which is of the cause of syn and of casualtie,
he says thus: This is a godly and a true saying, to be holde^ fast with both
hands, or rather to be prynted in our heart, ye God is not a cause of syn, and
that he would not have syn committed, that he inforceth not our wylles to syn,
or that he approves syn. But the causes of syn, be the will of the Dyuell, and
the will of man, who might abuse his will and turn him selffe from God: which
things he does there entreat upon more at large.

Melanctho^ declares playnelye that he had been a Maniche.
By the which, every man may see how Philip Melanctho^ recanteth what so ever
he wrote of free will in his common places, condemning also with his own, his
Master Luthers opynion, as wicked, and agreing with ye Manichees heresy: which
thing he also does in mo words, in his Epitome of moral Philosophy, which he
did set furthe at Straesbroughe in the year of our Lord. 1538. where he
likewise rebukes those busye brains, which styrr up many stryffes about free
will, and the folishe ymaginations of Valla, who takes away all liberty from
our will, because God rules and governs all things. More over in his later
commentaries upon the epistle of Saint Paul to ye Romans, he caused those
things to be scraped out which he wrote when he was one and twenty year
old, that evil works were as well ye proper works of God: as the adultery of
David, and yt the trayterdome of Judas, was as well the proper work of God, as
the vocation of Paul. Also expounding that place, God gave them up to the
lusts of their own hearts. God (says he) nether wills, nether allows,
nether works syn. And because the same Philipp was the author of the
confession of Augusta, this also forsook Luthers opinion, concerning the
article of free will, the which for all that he held so styffly to ye end of
his lyffe, that he offered him selffe rather to dye, then that he would revoke
it. In the which what great confidence he did put, he playnelye declared both
in the beginning, as a little before I have showed, and in the end, of that
book, which he did write against Erasmes. For allmoste at the end he thus
speaks unto him: In this I highely commend you, that you olone above all
other, have set upon the matter it selffe, that is the chief point and
ground of all our controversy: and that you have not weried me with by
questions of the papacy, pardones, purgatory, and such other tryfles rather
the^ causes, in the which other have hitherto bayted and hunted me all in
vain. You therefore and none other have espied the pythe of the matter, and
have lept lustely at my throat. Therefore Philipp with his fellows, which be
of the confession of Augusta, durst sequester him selffe from his master Luther
in openly disagreing from him about that which is the chief hinging of all
matters in co^trouersye. In doing of which thing, what did he else, but
condemn him of wyckednes and heresy? The doctrine of Luth. is founded upon
the denying of free will.
And in very deed, the chief fondation, on which the whole buylding of Luthers
learning is stayed, is the opinion of free will, which can not synck or fall
down, but even at ye same time all those things must decay and come to
ruin, which he did write especially of justification, and of other things
thereto belongyng. Calvin as yet defends the opinion of Luther in this
behalffe, Pericope, a circumcision or paring of.
and stands styfflye in it.

And Brentius does seem not utterly to disprove it in his first pericope,
which he did write against the Reverend learned man named Petrus a Soto. I have
seen also a book of a certain Frenshe man, in the which he sharply handles
his M. Melancthon, for that he swarueth from his M. Luther in such a weyghtye
matter. In the which book he also lays to his charge, that he croweth like
one of Calvin his cockrells.

Now then we have six heads of this Lutheran monster, of the which the six is
a head in deed. For it concerns ye chief ground of religion: and the
seventh head is of no lesser importance, about the which what a tossing of
bylldowe blades is there among the Lutherans? Or for weering of a Prestes cap
as our Protesta^tes do.
For they strive not for wearyng of a surples, but for that which Melancthon
calls the chiefest matter of Christian doctrine, and total sum of the
Gospel, that is to wit for the opinion of justification. In his Apology of
the Augustane confession, and in his common places.
Nether does he miss the mark much, in that he does attribute so unto it.
Notwithstanding about this point, they be at great variaunce and defiaunce
among themselves. For whereas this controversy in the Confession of Augusta
was not plainly and clearly determined, one Andrewe Osiander thought it good
for him to ryfle ye matter more near the bothome: yt which thing when he
interprysed, making not Melancthon first privy to it, and others which were
the chiefest Doctoures of the Confession of Augusta, Osiander ill handled of
the Confessionistes
they took the matter so in the snuff, that they were not far from raising an
up rore. What fault was not Osiander accused of? what raylinges, and
slanders were not uttered against him? As he him selffe writes, he was called
Herityke, Antichrist, Iue, black dyuell, dragon, a mischeuouse and abominable
man, the ennimie of Christ. This fable was also feyned of him, that wheresoever
he walked, two dyuelles followed him in the lykenes of dogs, which for all
that every man could not see, and at what time he did drynck or eat with his
scollers in his lower stue, Hypocausto, alias an hot house.
where he was accustomed to study, the dyuell was seen in his upper stue
sytting in his chair writing. And such other like tales. More over, this fame
flewe about of him, yt he should affirm, that the death and passion of Christ,
did nothing avail us: where as, to say the truth, we find in his books yt he
thought otherwise. To be short, they had him in such hatred, yt not only he
was accounted wicked, but they also which did hear his sermones, were
excommunicated out of their company, which thought them selves godly, yea
they were not thought worthy of Christian man his buryall. A commission was
sent to Wittenberg, that his doctrine might be tried and examined: it was
condemned by Melancthon, Pomeran, Forster, and other. Osiander his doctrine
condemned at wittenberge, was allowed at wirte^berge of the Confessionistes.
The same doctrine was sent to Wirtenberdge to be discussed, and it was
confirmed and allowed by Brentius, and those of the same sect. Here you see,
how much the judgment of the Doctoures of Wittenberdge and Wirtenberdge did
differ about one and the selffe same matter: notwithstanding that there was
but ye difference of one letter between them, whereas Osiander also labors
to prove plainly by alleadgeing certain places out of Luthers books, yt
Luther held that which he had written concerning justification, that is, that
the essential justice of God dwelling in us, and styrryng us to do well, is
our justice. But against that book, which Philipp and his adherentes dye set
out against him, Osiander him selffe did set out a contrary book, in the
which he shows a cause, why they did not allow this his doctrine. Therefore
he tells, that at Wittenberdge none co^menceth Doctor of diuinitye or M. of
Art, onles recityng the words of the oath, according to the form prescribed
unto him, he swear that he will hold fast, All that take degree at
wittenberge must swear to the confession of Augusta, and Melanctho^ his
judgment.
and also defend the three Credees, that is, of the Apostles, of Nice, of
Athanasius. And that if any thing happen, which is not fully determined in
those three Credes, and the Confession of Augusta, they should conclude nothing
upon it, before first they conferred and asked council of those Doctoures,
which cleave to that Confession. These Elders and Doctoures, for so much as
they be Melancthon and his mates, if any thing came in question, which was not
written in this Confession of Augusta, they which were sworn to ye Confession,
were bound to hold nothing, but that which they allowed and approved. So that
they were bound by virtue of their oath, to receive that they did allow,
allthoughe the contrary were found in the Canonical scriptures: for so much
as they took their oath yt they would continewe in the agreeable consent of the
Confession of Augusta, and not of ye holy scripture. So that they should be
gyltie of periurye if they would rather follow the scriptures. Osiander his
verdict of the Confession of Ausburge.
And who was he which penned this Confession, but Melanctho^? who had also the
power and authority to interpret and expound it?

Whereby it now follows, that all they which were sworn to ye Confession,
Joan a Lasko says, that this Confession is so honored, that there be many of
the best Lutherans which will say that they had rather doubt of the doctrine of
S. Paul him selffe, then of the doctrine of the Confession of Augusta.
were of necessity constrained to understand the scripture, so as Philipp did
understand it, so that reiectyng the scripture, they were only bound to those
three Credes, and the doctrine of Melanctho^. This good word Osiander gave
Philip Melancthon. who also diligently forwarneth all fathers and mothers, that
they take good aduisement how they send their children to Wittenberdge, there
to proceed Masters of Art, or Doctoures of any faculty. For they be
constrained (says he) to forswear the word of God, and to swear to
Melancthons sayings. For every man swears (says he) that he will determine
nothing with hymselffe of weighty matters touching faith, but by the
judgment of the Elders of the Augustane Confession, allthoughe the scripture
said the contrary: the which who so ever would follow more willingly, should
be gyltie of periurye. So there is (says he) a certain close conspiracye
among them, which has more respect to the words of men then of God, and
therefore does much indamage the Christian common wealth. Osiander his
disdein against Melancthon.
Melancthon his word is of more credyt then the word of God. I alleged six
and thirty places of scripture, by the which I showed, that God dwelled in his
us, yet was not I believed. But so sone as Philip wrote but one littell scrole
to the confirming of the same, by and by credit was given unto it. And with in
a littell while after he says: there was a voice of the Father heard from
heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.

Here him (says he) not Philip, not other men, which stopp thy mouth, and
would have the say after their council, and not after the word of God. Thus
Osiander could not abide, that men should rather be bound to the Confession
of Augusta, which was Philips word, then to ye word of God. For so much as
he would have men believe, that to be ye word of God which he did teach, and
not that which Philipp did teach, seeing he took himselffe to be as good in
every point as Philip: So that there was no cause, why his saying should not
as well be received for the word of God, as Philip his saying. Especially
seeing Philip as in many other things, Tuentie opinions of the confessionistes
concerning justification.
so in the docttyne of justification was never stayde in one opinion. He says
that there be twenty diverse opinions of Melancthon concerning this one
artcle, and he recites fouretene sundry opinions of his scollers, in that
book which he did write against one Niericorar. For (says he) so sone as they
spied one place of scripture, in the which there was any mention of Justice, by
and by of it, they made a new Justice. For an example, one did read, Abraham
believed, and it was imputed to him for ryghteousnes: by and by he gathered out
of this one place.ij. kinds of righteousness, one of this word, believed: so
that he said, that faith was our Justice, an other of the word, was
imputed, so that he said that God did impute his justice to us, to accoumpt us
just all though we were not, and that this was our ryghteousnes. An other
did read: we be justified by his blood, straight way he gathered, that the
pretiouse blood of Christ is our ryghteousnes. An other did read: as by ye
disobedience of one, we were made many sinners: so by the obedience of one,
many shall be made ryghteousne: by and by he taught yt the obedience of Christ
was our ryghteousnes. An other did read: he did rise again for our
justification: the Resurrection says he of Christ, is our justification. An
other did read, the holy ghost shall reprove the world for justice, because I
go to my father, he affirmed by and by, that the going of Christ to his father,
is our justice. An other did read: that we be made ryghteouse without
deserts by ye grace of God, he doubted not to hold that the grace and mercy
of God, was our justice. An other did read: to show his justice for ye
remission of many sins before committed. Forthewith he taught, that Remission
of sins was our justice. An other did read: by his blue stripes we be made
hole: he defended out of hand, yt the wounds of Christ was our ryghteousnes.
Now therefore he says, that he has rekoned up nine kinds of
iustifications, gathered out of the scriptures, disagreing one from an other:
and yet for all that he has not recited all. He reherseth afterward, what
every one devised of his own head. Some (says he) say, that ryghteousnes is
the work of God, the which he works in Christ. Other, that God receaueth us
to everlasting lyffe: other, that the meritte of Christ: other speak of an
other certain mean ryghteousnes, but they can not tell what it means. So
Osiander rehearses fourtene opinions of justification, and that which he him
selffe is Author of, is the fyftene. But according to the rekoning which he
makes in his confutation of ye book which Philip set out against him, they
shall be in all, one and twenty.

Now judge you (most excellent King) for so much as they do so bycker among
them selves, How perillouse a thing it is to believe sectaries stryuyng about
great matters.
not about the move shine in the water (as the common saying is) but by their
own confession about the chief article of Christian doctrine, which
contains the whole sum of ye Gospel, judge you, I say, what a perillouse
thing it is to put any of these men in trust with our souls which being start
up of late, do not only swerve from ye chief masters of their congregation, but
also disagree in them selves: as we see how many times Melancthon has turned
his cote in this one opinion of justification. Luther says it is a sure
argument, that the doctryn of the Sacrame^taries proceeded from the dyuel,
because he told seven or eight sects of them, and for because that even in
the beginning it was dispersed in to so many heads. But we have rekoned up,
not seven, but twyse seaue^ sects yt of Luthera^s, concerning one article of
justification which conteyneth ye whole sum of the Gospel. In all, there be
four time seven sects lackyng but one, contrary one to the other about
other matters. One Gespar Querchamer a lay man and Citezin of Hallis, Six and
thirtye contrary opinions about receiving under both kinds, or under one.
gathered together six and thirtye contrary places upon one only article, which
is of ye receiving under one or both kinds, in the Sacrament of the Altar. If
any man will add these six and thirty opinions to the other seven and twentye,
there shall be in all three score and three. And yet how many sects be there,
which we have not rekoned: and will any man doubt, that the dyuell was the
author of this doctrine?

Take heed, most Godly Prince, that you thinck not that these men strive for
God his cause, or that they busye their brains to further and enlarge the
word of God. There is nothing further out of their thought: Glory is the
mark which sectaries shote at.
but this is the mark the which most of them pryck at, that they may advance
their own glory, that they may utter to ye rude people their word instead
of ye word of God, they have called their names (says the prophet) upon
yearthe. Psalm. 48.


To this end they wrest all their wit, ye they may make all the world ring
with their name, that it may be said, this is ye confession of Melancthon,
this of Brentius, this of Osiander: for I will now say nothing of the
Zuinglians, whom they take to be as great heritykes as ye Anabaptists, my
talk is only of the Lutherans, whom they also judge to be heritykes: no other
verdicte do all other Christians give of them. Of them therefore speak I, that
even they, be they never so lapped in sheep skynnes, yet every one of them
has their hand on their halffe penye, not regarding the things appartayning
to Jesus Christ: The confession of Augusta pleases not all the Lutherans.
every one of them hu^teth after their own honor, and not after the glory of
Christ. Wherefore eue^ they, allthoughe chekens hatched in one nest of Luther,
yet all of them have not one confession. For it is as clear as the day, that
none received the confession of Augusta, but the churches of Saxony. No, it
was not received so much as in ye city of Augusta, where it was first
presented to the Emperor: for that city seems rather to weyghe more with the
Zuinglians, The City Augusta has mo Suenckfel feldia^s the Lutherans.
and it is said, that there be found mo of the confession of Suenefelde then
of the confession of Augusta. Which I think was a cause, (that for so much as
Philipp had written an other confession more the^ six years agone to be
presented to ye council of Trent) they gave this title to the book: Brentius
makes a new Confession.
A confession of the churches of Saxony. But Brentius although he also would
seem not to jar from Luthers doctrine, yet would not he content him selffe
with that which was written in the selffe same Town, from whence Luthers
Gospel did first proceed. But he did write a several confession, not in his
own name, but in the name of his Prince, which he also propounded to the
assemble of the Tride^tine Council. And this is worthy to be marked, that
nether Gre^tius, nether Vrbanus Regius, nether Osiander, were sworn to ye
confession of Augusta. For they thought that it should disgrace them much, to
follow any form of faith prescribed of Philip, seeing every one of them had
this conceit of hymselffe, that they had profyted more in the study of holy
scripture, then Philip had done: and therefore each of them thought him selffe
to be as able as he, to write a peculiar confession of his faith. So these
men, whylst every one of them was more careful to blase abroad his own
name, the^ to find out and further the knowledge of the truth, they
dissenting every one not only from him selffe, but also from their Master
Luther, yea in substantial points of Christian religion, thought it lawful
for every one of them, to forge a new faith, Petrus a Soto why he wrote
against the Confession of Brent.
and to devise a confession by themselves. A certain learned Spanyard named
Petres a Soto, who never had learned any other then the Catholyke faith, did
well perceive this, that Melancthon was author of one confession, Brentius of an
other: it gave him great wonder, that each of them held so diverse
co^fessions, for so much as both of them did confess Luther to be their
Master, this seemed a mo^strouse thing unto him. He would not have maruayled
halffe so much, if ye Zuinglians had severally set abroad their confession
as they did above twenty years agone, at what time the Protestants did
exhibit the confession of their faith to ye Emperor. For (as I have said
before) the Lutherans count them heretics, and they like wise the Lutherans.

But when this was done of them, which made their boaste, that they did profes
ye same Gospel, which Luther first invented, that made him stand almost in a
mase yt they which were scollers all of one scole, did not consent in one
confession of their faith. And because, many men had this opinion of the duke
of Wirtenberdge, under whose name Brentius did set out his confession, that
he suarued not from the Christian and right ruled faith, I mean from that
faith which we have left to us, from hand to hand of our forefathers, as they
have received it of the Apostles, Petrus a Soto being both a godly man, and
also bearyng an ernest zeal to Christian religion, did take it very heuily at
ye heart, that ye Prince whom all men judged to bear a singular good will to
the Catholyke faith, should suffer him selffe so to be seduced with ye
persuations of Brentius and his Brotherhode, that he would rather after a new
fashion give up to the Concell a new confession of his faith, then to rest
and settell him selffe in ye Catholyke faith, which he had learned of his
forefathers. Wherefore the aforesaid Petrus a Soto, could not refrain him
selffe, but must needs put in prynt the defense of his faith, which not
withstanding was not his own alone, but also ye faith of the Catholyke
church. Petrus a Soto his order in writing.
The which book he provided so to be written, that on the one side, it
contained the confession of the Princes preachers: on ye other side, the
confession of the Catholykes. On the one side, he did set the doctryn of the
duke: on the other side, the Doctryn of the Catholyke faith: on the one page,
yt autorities of Scripture seming to serve for them: on the other, many
autorities fortifying his faith: On ye one part, the testimonies of the
ancient Doctors making for them, on the other part, the witnesses of the same
doctoures weyghing with him against them.

The Prince of Wirtenberdge in ye book set out by Bre^tius under his name,
says that he minded to make all ye world witness of his ernest ^esyre in
raising up and furtheryng the true and godly doctrine.

Petrus a Soto his admonicyo^ to the Prince of wirtenberdge.
Petrus in his Scholies taking an aduau^tage at these words, says: that
doctrine was first to have been agreed upon, first you should have made your
rekoning, yt the doctrine which you minded to further and advance, should be
in every point godly, especially now in these days, in the which every man
may see, that it is called in to question, which is the true and
vncounterfeited doctrine. Know this for a certaynete, most worthy Prince,
that like as your ministers do judge, that doctrine to be wicked which the
Catholykes embrace, so the Catholykes esteem, that doctrine which you endeavor
to promote and aduau^ce: nether is there among them a lesser number of credible
men, then among youres, so that at least, you do not put to your helping hand
to further true and godly doctrine, but either wicked doctrine by the wytnes of
the Catholykes, either doubtful and uncertain, as your selff of necessity
must confess. Therefore, were it not more wisdom for you, either to leave of
this interpryse, or at the least, suspend your judgment, and humbly abide
till God did lyghte^ your heart with the beams of his grace, and to obtain
that at God his hands with charitable works, and devout prayers? The words
of the Prince, which he adds immediatlye to the words before rehearsed out
of his book, be these: For all be it, we be not ignorant, that there is a
certain difference between Civil and Ecclesiastical offices: yet for so much
as the kingly Prophet does most wisely exhort us, saying: Psalm. 2.
Now you Kings understand, be you learned which be judges of the earth,
serve our Lord in trembling and fear: we ought not to despise that heavenly
voice. etc. And Petrus taking aduau^tage at these words also, says in this
wise: but first you ought perfectly to have known, what difference this was.
It is very certain, that a temporal Magistrate has nothing to do with
discussing and definyng doubts in matters of faith: Civil and Ecclesiastical
gouuernement be not all one.
for this is the charge and duty of Ecclesiastical Gouernoures. Polityke
Princes ought to learn of them, to stand unto their determination, otherwise
they have cause to fear that which follows ye words before alleged in the
same place, lest our Lord be angry against them, and they peryshe from the
right way: for these threatninges does God thunder against Princes which do
not apprehend learning and knowledge. But what is more vndescrete and out of
order, then to follow doubtful doctrine, to burden subjects consciencies,
with it, before the church have given judgment of it? On the othersyde clean
contrarly after many other matters, he did wright in this sort: Nothing is
more discretely to be ruled, then the zeal of acknowledging and upholding the
truth: the which how much the more ernest and hot it is, Zeal in matters
of reagion is to be wisely considered, what manner of Zele it is.
the more it brings a man in to great perilles and dangers, as Paul
witnesses: Who being in time past a curiouse and scrupulouse follower of the
traditions of his forefathers, and afterward felyng ye very fatherly correction
of God, speaks of others, which presently were as he him selff sometime had
been: I bear them wytnes that they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge.

Galat. 1. Roma. 10.
For this cause he says, that he suffers great sorrow, and continual heart
break for them. Therefore a man must first know in what place God has
appointed him, and according to that he must follow after, and not go before:
he must be drawn, and not draw after him ye spirit and ordinance of God:
Lest it be said unto him: come behind me Satan, thou act an offense unto me:
for thou understand not the things which be of God.

What word is there here, which is not modestly, godlyly, truly, and
Catholykely spoken? Bre^tius falsely charge and raylet on vetrus a Soto.
Yet Brentius wryngyng and wresting them to a wrong sense, made such a styrr,
as though he would have thrown the house out of the wyndowe, because ye
godly man durst presume to say unto the Prince: Come by hind me Satan,
whereas in very deed he said no such word to ye Prince, but only gently
admonyshed him, that every man should consider, in what room God has placed
him, lest that if he presume to run before, and not to follow after the Spirit
of God, it may be said unto him, come behind me Satan. But mark I pray you,
the lack of discretion which was in Brenties: he which did write (says he)
this assertion of the Catholyke faith, against the syngular confession of
Brentius, his Christian name is Petrus, but his surname is a Soto. Whether that
be the name of ye place, where he was borne, or of the race where of he came, I
am not able to say. But see, shall I say, how unshamefast or how wicked a
rayler and rybalde Brentius is. He thinks scorn to call him by his surname a
Soto, but in despite he nyck names him Asotus. In Greek they be called Asoti,
Petrus a Soto his praise.
which ye Latynes call decoctores, that is, spend thryftes, men past grace,
undone with riot and revel, which have brought all their brauerye to the
beggars bagg. But what manner a man did Brentius slander, when against all
right and conscience he did call him Asotus? Surely a man as Godly as ever
sucked a womans breast in our days, which not only in words, but also in
deed has long since forsaken the world, and that he might have more leisure
to lead his life in god lines, following the rule of Saint Dominick, became
one of his order many years agone, applying him selffe to no other thing, then
to the study of holy scripture. Whose doctrine and lyffe very virtuously and
purely ledd, was so much spoken of of all men, that before all other ye most
Christian Emperor Charles the fifth did chose him to be his Confessor, to whom
he would reuele the privy pricks of his conscience, of whom he would receive
sovereign salues of the same sores, and by whose means he hoped to obtain
remission of his sins. For most myghtie Princes are wont to prefer none
other to that office, but those which be highely commended for their
excellent learning, and holiness of life. And that you may more perceive, that
the Emperor was nothing deceived in him, among many other, he gave this
outewarde proof of his inward perfection, that when a Bishopryke was wyllingly
offered him, he refused it, and rather did chose a pore kind of living, in ye
which he might pass over the rest of the race of his life, which was behind.
Surely I did see this man, at what time (most excellent King) I being sent in
embassage to ye Emperor his Majesty, did take up by the way my lodging at
Diling a with the Cardinal of Augusta, who as he is a man endued with other
goodly gifts of God, so is he a most ernest defender of the Catholyke and
right ruled faith. This worthy Cardinal was wont never to be weary in praising
ye virtues of this singular man Petrus a Soto: whom notwithstanding this
durtie Doctor Brentius was not ashamed to call Asotus. Is this any thing else,
but to call light darcknes, and darcknes light? But how should we else be able
to know him to be a scoller trained up in Luther his scole, unless he had so
shamefully slaundered this holy and virtuous man? In what thing shall we
hereafter believe him, which even in the first fotyng founderd so fowly that he
feared not openly to raunge in railing so far beyond reason? Yet for all this,
did he not think that he had spyt out venym inoughe, unless as he had rayled
upon that maruaylouse devout and religiouse man a Soto, Brentius railing on
the Ecclesiastical Magistrates.
so he should deface the whole order of Bishopes and Prestes, whom he calls
Asoticall or prodigal Prelates. As who should say, that there be not mo
prodigal protesta^tes to be pycked out among yt Lutherans, among whom many be
of such insatiable lecherye, that one wife can not content them, then among ye
Catholykes: especially countyng so many for so many, that is the littell number
of the Lutherans, with the whole church of Christians. But they can not tempre
their tongues, but they must make al ye world witness out of whose scole
they proceeded, and following the example of their Master Luther can not stay
themselves from stuffing all their books, with mockyng and mowing, iyrkyng and
yerkyng, stingyng and wrynggin far otherwise then it becomes Christians.
Brentius his poysonful proeme
But hercke^ I beseech you, how poysonfull a proeme he sets before his
book. He makes his entrance, of a certain fable of servants, which
rebelled against their masters, and murdered them as they came out of far
countries. To such he lykeneth the Catholyke Byshopes, calling them whip
stocks, wicked bond slaves, which durst make resistaunce against their
Masters, and pluck them out of their places, and well deserved dignities.

And wit you how he proves, Brentius first proof
that the Catholykes be such servants? It is written (says he) who is
Paul? who is Apollo? 1. Cor. 3.
but the ministers by whose means you believed? And I pray you may not the
Catholykes contrary wise say, what is Charles the Emperor? what is
Ferdinandus Caesar? what is king Sigismund? but ministers, by whom every man
recouereth that which is his own, by whose protection we may lead our lyffe
in quietness and saffitie? Unless peradventure you will say, that scripture is
not to be under standed of every temporal Prince: He is the minister of God to
defend that which is good: Romans 13.
The sword is not borne before him in vain, for he is ye minister of God to
punish those which be malefactoures. Zenacherib was a most myghtie King, Esa.
20.
our Lord calls him not only a ministre, but also a rod and staff of his
fury, but there is no slave so vile, but he is to be preferred before a rod, or
a staff. What then shall Kings have their heads tide under the peoples
gyrdell, and not have the people rather under their obedience? Because by
their means, God gives that to every man which is due unto him, encorageth
good men with rewards, discorageth euel men with worthy punishment? Brentius
bends an other text of scripture against us. Brentius second proof
All is ours, whether it be Paul, whether it be Apollo, whether it be Cephas,
whether it be the world. Brentius what conclude you by that scripture? Make
you this conclusion: Ergo Paul, 1. Cor. 3.
Apollo, Cephas, and the whole world was subject to the Corinthians? Why
Sigismund is ours. But I pray you, is he, as our subject and vnderlyng: God
forbid. but as one which bears lawful rule over us, as our King and our
Lord. Here every man may see, how true that is which Hilarious writes of
heretykes. They allege ye scriptures not knowing the meaning of them. And
these Burning Brentians did sound alaru^ to the country clownes, Hilarious in
his book to co^stantius.
by the which they were styrred up against their land Lords and Masters, by
crying thus in their cares: all is youres, whether it be Paul, whether it be
Apollo, whether it be Cephas, either the world, either Kings, either Princes,
all be your servants, and you the servants of Christ: so that those
things seem best to be applied to Brenties and his Brethren which he tells
of servants which did rebel against their Masters. They allege also a
third scripture: Brentius third proof.
We do not preach in our own praise, but we preach Jesus Christ, who is
our Master, and we your servants. By these three places vouched out of S.
Paul, 2. Cor 4.
Brentius proves that Paul makes ye Bishopes subject to the Church, and
sets the Church as a Mystresse over them. But as for us, we be so far from
being ashamed to be called the servants and ministers of the Church, that
he, which is the Chief of all Bishops, and the vicar of Christ in earth,
does rejoice greatly in this rytle, that he writes him selff to be the
servant of the servants of God. For so much as it is written: Genesis 25.
Let him which is highest, do him service which is lowest: and it is so in very
deed, Romans 12. 1. Cor. 9.
that no men do greater service, then they which be careful in their office,
as he was whose authority was even now recyted: who when he was free, made
him selffe servant to all that he might wyn many: 2. Cor. 11.
who was not a little trobled in mind, for so much as he was careful for all
Churches, so that he could not chose but make exclamation. Who is weak, and I
am not weak also? who is hurt in the faith, and my heart burns not? who will
deny but that Bishopes be such manner of servants? Kings be after a sort
servants.
yea Kings and Princes have the like yoke of servitude laid upon their
necks. For if they provide not for the profyt of their subjects, if they
cast away all care of their health and wealth, if they set all their mind
upon pleasure, if they look to the lyckyng of their own fyngers, with out
doubt such deserve not to be called other right kings, or right Byshopes.
Solomon gives this council: Art thou set in authority? Eccle. 32.
be not proud of it. Be among them as one of them, and be careful for them.
This then to be a servant and not a subject, is not to take those whom thou
bear rule over to be they Masters who should appoynte the, what thou
sholdest believe, but yt thou sholdest not therefore set up they peacockes
feathers: but take care for them, study to do them good, over whom God has
given the authority and preeminence.

After this sort, the Apostles and their successoures both servants and
Lords
ye Apostles were servants, and likewise be the Byshopes their successoures,
to whom S. Paul speaks after this forte: Take dilligent head to your selves,
and to your whole flock, in the which the holy Ghost has made you Bishopes
to rule the Church of God: to rule, says he, and not to be ruled, to be
above in authority, not to be under in subjection. But unto the flock, he uses
these words: Obey those which have rule over you, Act. 20.
and be ruled by them: for they so watch, as they which must give an accoumpt
for your souls. Does he say here, rule them? command and comptrole them?
appoynte them how they shall teach you to believe? nothing less. but obey,
says he, and be ordered by them. I pray you, could any thing be spoken more
plainly? could there a more manifest difference be made between shepherdes and
sheep, then that he would have them to rule, and these to be ruled: And fear
not thou to resist the holy Ghost, giuyng sentence so plainly by the mouth of
Saint Paul?

But let us see Master Brentius, what manner a servant Saint Paul was, who
when he was free, paul what manner of servant he was.
made himselffe servant to all: he writing to ye Corinthians, whose servant
he professes himselffe to be, speaks to them in this wise: What will you have
me to do? 1. Cor. 4.
will you that I come unto you with the rod of correction? I pray you Brentius,
do servants use to come to their masters to correct and punish them? And
with in few words after: I hear that there is fornication among you, yea and
such fornication, as is not among the heathen, that is, that one slepeth with
his father his wife, 1. Cor. 5.
and you have swelled and not rather sorrowed, yt he might be rydde from among
you, which has committed this shamfull act. I being absent from you in body,
but present with you in soul, as if I were bodily present among you, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ have judged him which has wrought this
wyckednes, to be given up in to the power of Satan to the destruction of his
body, that his soul may saved. Here you see, in what rod he came to them,
after what manner a sort he behaved himself like a servant toward his
Masters, and not only to them, 1. Tim. 1.
but certane other also, namely Alexander and Hymenees, whom he writes yt he
did deliver up to Satan, to teach them what it was to speak blasphemy. He
said not: Come behind me Satan. but yt which was more terrible, he delivered
him in to the hands of Satan to the destruction of the flesh. Wylt thou
therefore Brentius call him a wicked servant, Saint Petre what manner of
servant he was.
which did rebel against his Masters? You have now learned what manner a
servant S. Paul was. What kind a servant think you S. Petre was? Unlike
trow you to Saint Paul? Ananias with his wife Zaphira had sold land, Act. 5.
and kept back to his proper use a certain portion of the money which he had
received, making his wife privy of his council, and bringing the remanant, he
laid it at the Apostles fere. But Petre said unto Ananias: Ananias why have
thou given place to the tentation of Satan, to make a ly to the holy ghost,
and not to bring hither the whole sum of money, which thou have received for
thy land? Before it was sold, was it not thine own possession? and after it
was sold, was not the price in thine own power? How could thou find in
thine heart to do such a thing? Thou have not made a lie unto men, but unto ye
holy ghost. So sone as Ananias had heard these words, he fell down, and gave
up the ghost. After that, his wife came in to the place where Petre was, not
knowing what was done to her husband. Petre said unto her: Tell me truth,
sold you the land for so much? And she said: Yea, for so much. Then said
Petre unto her: Why have you agreed to gether to tempt the holy ghost? Behold
the fete of them which have buried thy husband, are at the door, and shall carry
the out. Immediately she did synck down, and yielded up the ghost. Here you
see, what manner of servant Petre was, who had power both of life and death
over his masters. Yea, and they which have succeeded the Apostles, when they
saw occasion, did use no less liberty. what manner of servants the Popes
and Byshopes of old time were.
Eusebius writes of one (by all lykelyhode it was Fabianus Bishop of Rome)
that when the Emperor Philipp, which was the first Christined Emperor, in
that day when the last vigiles of Easter were kept, desired to be admitted to
pray among ye Christians in the congregation, as being of one agreement of mind
with them, he could not obtiane his request of the Bishop, before he was
confessed, and humbled hymselffe to their company, which were brought to
examination for their faults, and appointed to a certain place to do their
penance in, otherwise he should not be received among the Christians, because
he was fautie in many points. What (think you) the Emperor did? did he
grudge or complain, Eusebius. in the.6. book 34. cap. of Ecclesiastical history
that he was put to foil of his servant? Nay. Eusebius writes that he did
redily obey, and by his outewarde deeds did declare his virtuous and
religiouse heart toward God. So did not ye Emperor Constantine, An example
of the Pope his authority over the Emperor
who did greuousely persecute the Catholyke Bishops, whilst every year
almost he would have a nue Confession of faith devised, so that Socrates
does record, that in his Reign the faith was changed nine times. Socrat in
the.2. book 41. chap. of his Ecclesiastical his story.
So was the condition of that time, not much unlike the state and manner of
these our troblesome days. But for all that, the Bishopes of that time did
worthily wrestle against his tyranny. He intysed Liberius by his Eunuche, as
Athanasius hymselffe witnesses in writing, to subscribe against Athanasius,
Athanasi. in his Epistle to the solitary livers.
promisyng him rewards if he did it, threatening punishment if he refused to do
it. What answer made Athanasius to him? We have no such rule in the Church
(says he) we have received no such tradition of our forefathers. Constant.
the Emperor, rebuked of Pope Liberi.
But if the Emperor will put to his helping hand, to maynetayne ye quyetnes
of the Church, or if he command those things to be cancelled and blotted
out which I have written in the behalffe of Athanasius, let him scrape out
those things, which he has written against him, Councils of the Clergy not
to be kept near the court.
and hereafter so often as any Convocation of the Clergy or Synod is called,
let it be kept far of from the court, where nether the Emperor be near at
hand, nether Earl may thrust in among ye Prestes, nether any judge fear them
with threatening. etc. After this was Liberius led prysonner to ye Emperor,
before whom when he came, he spoke his mind freely and boldly nothing abashed,
saying: Leave of from persecuting the Christians, thinck not to make me a mean
by which thou may bring heretical harlottye in to ye Church of God, we be
ready rather to suffer al torments then that we Christians should come to that
point, that we should be called Arrians. Enforce us not to be the enennimies
of Christ. etc. Lo such a servant was Liberius, redyar to suffer many
torments, and to be banished his country, then he should slack any thing in
doing his duty. with like fair promyses, and foul threatenings did the same
Constantinus prove Hosius Bishopp of Corduba. Hosius Bishop of Corduba his
stout answer to the Emperor co^stantius, as witnesses Athanasius in the same
places.
But Hosius writing letters unto him, did set before his eyes the example of
his brother Consta^s. What like pageaunt (says he) has your brother played?
what Bishops has he sent in to banishment? or who of his County Palatines
did profer any wrong to ye Prelates? I pray the be quiet, remember yt thou art
a mortal man, stand in awe of domes day, keep they selffe undefiled against
that day, intermedle not with Ecclesiastical matters, and in those cases
teach not us what we have to do, but rather learn them of us. God has
committed to you the rule in temporal affairs, to us he has left the charge
in Ecclesiastical matters. And as he which does envy your Imperial estate,
resists the ordinance of God, so beware you, least chalengyng unto you the
things which pertayne to the Church, you make your selffe gyltie of treason
against God. It is written: Give unto Caesar that which is Cesars: and that
unto God, which is due unto God. Hilarious in his book to Consta^tius reproves
the Emperor boldlye.
Much like to the aforesaid was Hilarious Bishop of Poycters. I proclaim unto
the (says he) the very same words, which I would have spoken unto Nero, and
the which I would not have cared if Decius and Maximianes had heard. Thou do
war against God, thou ragest against the Church, thou hate the Preachers
of God like todes, thou ouerthrowest religion, being a spoiling tyrant now not
of profane things, but of divine things. These things before said, be common
to them and to the: but these which follow, are proper to thy selffe. Thou
lie in saying, thou art a Christian, thou art a nue ennimie of Christ, thou
art yt foreru^ner of Antichrist, and thou behauest thy selff like one of his
privy council. Thou forgest a faith, leading a faytheles life, thou have
unhappy learning inoughe, but no skyl at all invertue: thou crepest in to
men's bosoms with a goodly title: thou sleast under ye pretense of religion:
thou workest nothing else but wyckednes. Being a false preacher of Christ,
thou put out the candell of Christian faith. And in a few leaves after: I
would now feign know of the Constantius, in wath faith thou art settled?
For I know not they faith, by reason, that thou have changed it so many
times, by the which chaungeable times, every man has run hedlong as it were
by stepe stares down in to the bothomelesse pyt of blasphemy. For after ye
first determination of true faith, thou dydest put out a nue faith to making,
calling together a nue Council at Antioche. But it is with you as it is with
unskillful builders, which being not able to discern a thing when it is well,
find fault allway where none is, pullyng always down, which always they
must repair and reedifie again. an in the book following. Surely it should
become your gentleness to hear the voices of them which make loud
exclamatio^s unto you. I am a Catholyke, many cry thus in England, who me
Christendom hops, that our graciouse Queen will at the last here.
I will be no heretyke: I am a Christian, not an Arrian: and it is better for
me to lose my life in this world, then by the compulsion of any one private
man, I should stayne and defyle the chaste virginity, of sincere verity.

Now you have heard, what manner of servants the Bishopes of that time
Liberius, Hosius, Athanasius, Hilaries were. How stoutely they did withstand
ye wicked entrepryses, not of any one Prince and Lord of one land, A
comparison between the old church with the church of our time in defe^ding
the ecclesiastical authority and doctrine.
but the Emperor of the whole world, how coragiously one of them durst say:
Take not upon the, o Emperor, to rule the roste in Ecclesiastical matters,
tell not us what we have to do in such cases, but rather learn those things at
us. What if they were a live in our age, which almost is no less accursed
then their age was, if they did see not only every province, but also every
city almost to have a several faith by them selves, and to prescribe, what
the council should do and determyne: I say, what would they then do? no doubt
they would say the very same things which they said before: we we be
Catholykes not heretykes, we be Christians not Lutherans or Brentians: better
were it for us to suffer death then through any private man his compulsion,
bereave the truth of her maydenhode did Ambrose in the like case behave him
selff unlikely, the younger Valentinianes Emperor when he was yet but a
child vy the inforcyng of his mother, almost took upon him to judge of matters
of faith. What said Ambrosius to this? Dalmatius, says he, the Tribune and
Notarye, brought me a message from your grace desyring me that I should chose
Judges, like as Aurentius had done. Yet he told not their names which were
required to be judges but he said thus much, yt their should be a controversy
in the Consistory, which should be determined by your judgment. to whom as, I
suppose, I shape a reasonable answer, nether any man ought to count me
obstinate in saying yt, which your father of worthy memory, has uttered not
only by word of mouth, but also has enacted by his laws. In matters of
faith or of any Ecclesiastical order, he ought to judge, which nether is
unequal in office, nor unlike in law. For these be the words of the decree:
which his meaning was that Prestes, should be judges of Prestes. Beside this,
if it happened that any Bishop were co^playned on, and that a trial or
examination should be made of his manners and behauyoure, he would also that
such a cause should be judged by an other Bishop. Therefore who does answer
your grace stubbornely, he which desires to have you like your father, or he
which would have you unlike to him? onles peradventure some man do think that
the verdict of such an Emperor is not worth a straw, whose faith was proved
by his steadfast and constant confession, whose wisdom is also praised far
and near for profyting and bettryng the common weal. have you heard most
gentle Emperor that lay men have at any time set as judges over an Bishop in
causes of faith? Therefore arre we so wone with court holy water, that is,
fair and flattring words, that we should forgette our prestly authority,
and that which God has given me, should I put it from my selff, to an other?
If a lay man must teach a Bishop, what follows? ergo let a lay man dispute,
ergo let a Bishop stand by as an auditor: ergo, let a Bishop learn his lesson
of a lay man. But truly if we will peruse either the whole course of holy
scriptures, either the Cronicles of old time, what man can deny, Bishops
judges over Emperors in matters of faith.
but that in cases of faith, I say in cases of faith, Bishopes were wont to
be judges over Emperoures, and not Emperoures over Bishopes? By God his grace
you shall live till you be an old man, and then shall you be able to judge,
what manner of Bishop he is, which can be content that the key of prestly
preemine^ce should hang at lay men's girdles. Your father being a man come to
full rypenes of years, said as God did put him in mind, it is not mine office
to be judge between Bishopes. Your grace says now, I ought to judge. Amb.
Epit. 33.
Saint Ambrose does not only write these things, but also he did utter them by
word of mouth, as he him selffe declares writing to his sister: never troble
your selff Emperor (says he) thinkyng that you have any imperial authority
over divine things. Extol not your selffe: Mat. 22.
submitt your selffe to God: it is written, Give to God that which is due unto
God, give to Caesar yt which appartayneth to Caesar. What was this to say, but
even as Petres a Soto seemed to say, come behind me Satan? and this he did,
not by letters only which blushe not, but even face to face in his presence.
Calvin prayseth Petrus a Soto.
Although that Calvin be as sworn an enemy to our side, as you Brentius for
your heart, yet both he highely commend the singular modesty and wisdom of
this holy friar Petrus a Soto, joined with a ioly couragiousnes and stoutenes
of mind. He denies (says Calvin) the Emperor to be a mete judge of so
weyghtie a controuersye which in deed was contrary both to the present
necessity of that time, and also to the continual condition and nature of the
cause.

Calvin his opinion that the Emperor cannot be judge in Ecclesiastical causes.
Lo Calvin does say, that the very nature of the thing required, that the
Emperor should be no judge of Ecclesiastical causes, especially in points
and matters of faith. As Saint Ambrose behaved him selffe toward Valentinian,
so did he toward Theodosius the Emperor, whom he did forbid to enter in to
ye church when he nuely returned from the bloody victory, which he had over
his ennimies at Thessalonies: And when he had done the pe^aunce enjoined him,
he commanded him to depart ye chauncell where ye mysteries were celebrated,
Theodore. lib. 5. ca. 8. of his Ecclesiast. hist.
saying those places of mysteries were for the Prestes only to come in to. And
that ye purple robe made Emperoures, but not Prestes. The which his doing the
Emperor did take in so good part, that he said afterward, that he knew
none which could take upon him like a Bishop, but only Ambrose. This did
Ambrose, nothing disamayde with ye cruel tyranny which before was used of a
certain Emperor to the blessed Martyr Babila, Babila a Martyr.
of whom Chrysostom does write notably, the which holy man after he had
excommunicated the Emperor, and put him out of the Church like a vile and
pernitiouse person, even as a shephard does cast out of the fold a scabbed
and infected sheep, he had his head stricken of. Whose foot steps the only
pryme rose pearlesse and singular example of holiness in our contrie,
Stanislaus a Martyr
Stanislaus Bishop of Cracouia, followed. Who when he had excommunicated the
wicked Tyrant Boleslaus, for many mischeifes committed, feared not to suffer a
gloriouse death for the name of Christ.

Now have you such a brazen face M. Brentius that you dare call them wicked
servants, whose praise is spoken of in the universal church of God, A
comparison between the Ecclesiastical Autorytye of Bishops and the temporal
authority of Princes.
who doubtless live a blyned lyffe in heaven, I say dare you call these and
such like, whom it were to long a labor to rekon up, naughty servants,
who fear not to stir sedition against their Masters, which make mo bones to
pull them out of their places? whilst either they do bequeathe them to the
dyuell, for their abominable offenses, or do not suffer them to meddle with those
matters which pertayne not to their office, some times laying these words in
their dyshe, come behind me Satan? I grant that Bishopes be servants, but
such as of whom it is written. Psalm. 44.
Thou shall make them kings over all the land. Whose preemine^ce and rule,
does so far excel all temporal regiment, Chrysostom. li. 3. of prestohod and
of the words of Esa. 4. concerning the preeminence of Byshopes.
as we read in Chrysostom, and Gregorius Nazianzene in the oration, which he
made of the words of Hierimie, before the Emperor, as it is possible that
any difference may be between the Spirit and the flesh, between heaven and
yearthe, between divine things and profane. But hear in what reverence ye
most holy martyr Ignatius has them. Ignatius epist. 7. ad Smyrnenses
concerning honoryng of Byshopes.
It is written (says he) my sone, honor God and the King. But I say,
honor in deed God as ye author and Lord of all thing but the Bishop as the
Prince of Prestes bearing the image of God principality according to God, but
prestehode according to Christ. And next unto him, thou must honor the king.
For no man is better than God, or like unto him, nether is there any more
honorable in the church then the Bishope, beryng presthode unto God, for the
health of ye world, nether to the king in battle, providing to make peace
and good will among al Princes. For he which honors the Bishop, shall be
honored of God: and who so dishonoreth him, shall be dishonored of God. How
often does he beat in to men's heads, to be obedient to the Bishope? that
they control him in no case, for it is a terrible thing to gain say such an
one. For a man despyseth not this visible man, but that invisible God in him
who can not abide to be despised of any mortal man. For such an one is
promoted not of man but of God. 1. Reg. 8.
For God says to Samuel of them which despised him. They have not contemned
the, Exodus 16.
but me. Likewise Moses spoke unto the people, which murmured against him, you
have not murmured against us, but against God. He recites the punishment
which did fall upon Core, Dathan, and Abiron: More over, what became to Osias
and Saul the kings, whilst they presumed to take the prestes office upon them?
so that there was never any nation so varbarouse and uncivil, but it thought
their prestes worthy of great honowre and reverence. The presthode of the
Iues, was but a shadow in comparison of out Christian prestehode, yet for all
that, the Bishopes of that time where had in such reverence, that not only ye
Iues them selves, but also many of the gentiles did great honor unto them.
Joseph. lib. 11. cap. 8 of the antiquity of the Jews. Origin. against Celsus
lib. 5.
Josephus writes, and Origines does report the same, and many of them, which
have cronicled the worthy Acts of Alexander, that Alexander king of the
Macedonians when he obtained not his request of Iadus ye high Bishopp of the
Iues, stormyng and stomakyng at the matter very sore, came to Jerusalem with
an army mynding to destroy the city, and especially to use all kind of
cruelty against the Bishope. But when the Bishop wearing on an holy stole
came and met him of his own accord accompaned with a great number of prestes
and lay people, behold the king which came in an anger, so sone as he spyed
the Bishope, ouercoming his furye, drue near unto the Bishop and worshipped
him. And afterward when Parmenon demanded of the king, why he which was
worshipped of all men, now hymselffe did homage unto the Bishop of ye Iues,
he made answer that he did not homage to the man, but to God whose Bishopp he
was. And I pray you, Attila his reverence toward Pape Leo.
is that unlike unto this which the Story makes mention of the Barbarouse king
Attila, who when he had invaded a great part of Italy, and had s^oyled all
with fyarr and sword, and had showed no mercy or pity of any man, when he
was almost at the city, the most holy Bishopp Leo came out and met him, and
requested him to go no farther. Attila being a fearce man otherwise, cruel and
blody, who had not so much as taken pity upon his brother germane, Paul. li.
15. of the Roman affairs.
whom he murdered, because he could not abide, that he should be partaker with
him of the kingdom, he did not only show great reverence to the Bishop, as
Paulus Diaconus writes, but also was obedient to his co^maundimentes.

See for God his sake what a thing this is? Those to whom Barbarouse kings
being very deadly ennimyes did think it their duty to do so great honor,
that they would fullfyll their commaundime^tes, no otherwise then if they had
taken them to be their Masters, the very same Brentius who in God his name
will be counted a Gospeller, would not have them in any honest and reasonable
room of servants, but be accounted bo^dslaues and pesauntes. Does not he
here go beyond all barbarians and savage people, with this his barbarousnes?
Act. 10.
I might here speak of Petre, whom Cornelius did worship, of the godly
honors given to Paul and Barnabas, but I will grant you, yt which you would
have me M. Brentius, Bishops in respect of their duty be paynefull
servants.
that we Bishops be servants: nether is there any kind of servants yt
takes greather pains, yt is more set to his task, ye suffers greater
trobles of body and mind. For what carking and caryng have not Bishops,
whilst they watch for the souls of them which be committed to their charge,
for the which they know, they shall give accoumpt, for so much as it is
said to every one of them: take heed to this man, who if he shall miscarry thy
soul, shall be punished for his: 3. of the kings cap. ^0. Ezech. 3.
And that also in Ezechiel: sone of man, I have set the in watch over the
house of Israel, if when I say unto the wicked, thou shall dye the death, and
thou neglect to tell my sayings unto him, that he may return from his wicked
way, that wicked man shall die in his own wickedness, but his blood will I
require at thy hands. Ezech. 38.
For so much as Byshopes be not ignorant of these and such like sayings,
with which God threatens evil pastoures, assuredly their labor is great,
and ye troble of the mind greater then any man can believe: for so much as
every man knows, that ye time shall once come, when it shall be said unto
him, Hiere. 13.
where is thy flock which was given ye, where is thy noble cattle? What will thou say for thy selffe, when he shall come and visit the, for thou doste
teach against thy selffe, thou doste instruct to thine own destruction. Shall
not sorrows come upon the as upon a woman trauayling of child? Believe me o
Brentius that when a good Bishop careful for his own health and the health
of the people, Heretykes do greatly increase the labor of Byshopes.
calls these things in to his mind, he feleth incredible stinges of sorrow
in his heart: specially in these days, wherein you have made this yoke of
bondage ly more heavily upon our necks, whilst one of you say, behold here is
Christ, an other, nay he is there, ye third tushe he is in the privy parlers,
Mat. 24.
ye fourth no look yonder he is in the wyldernes. With yt which your waueryng
words you have so bewitched the sely sheep, that now in many places they
know not were Christ is, especially in those places where contrary to the
plain and evident word of God, you have taught them not be ruled by their
shephardes. Whereby it is now come to pass, that many be grown to such
boldness and madness, that they say they be the Bishopes and Pastors of their
own souls that they shall give account for them, not the Bishops. what
losenes of life sectaries have brought the people unto to
So that they arre become unto them selves instead of doctoures, instead of
Pastoures, instead of cou^celles, they bind them selves, they lose their
own consciences as they please, and because you give them power to judge of
doctrine, what so ever book comes in to their hands, they follow such
faith as that book teaches them. This man is of the Confession of Augusta, an
other of Brentius belefe, an other of Ostanders, an other of Tigurine, an other
of the Anabaptists or the City of Munster an other of ye brethern Waldenses
or Picardes, an other of the Seruetian confession. To be short, Hilar. to
Constan. last book.
that which Hilarious did write of his age, may be also verified of our age.
There be now so many faythes as their be fancies: there be so many doctrines
as there be manners, there bud out so many causes of blasphemy as there be
vices, whilst faythes either be ordained as we will, or be understood as we
will. And whereas there is but one faith as there is but one God, one Lord,
one Baptism, we go a stray from that faith which is one only: and whyst many
faythes be forged, they be come from naught all, to none at all. To this point
have you brought the world Brencius, whilst every one of you study to devise
a sundry Confession of your faith: you arre cause of this miserable and
perillouse state of the Church, and if the Byshopes were laden with any
burden of bondage before, you have helped to make it weyghe much more heavy.
But look, how much more heavy ye yoke of their servitude is, the greater
their travail is, the more honor is due unto them. Therefore like as all
ways under wicked tyrauntes, whether they were such as did openly persecute
Christ, or being feigned favorers of Christ did utterly race out ye faith of
Christ, they were no better esteemed then servants, they were vexed with the
same or rather greater punishments then naughty servants were, so how many
so ever good Kings and Emperoures reyned, they did give unto them high
honor and reverence: even as among all other we read that Constantinus
worthily called great was wont to do.

FINIS.
DEO GRATIAS.
AMEN.
ORATION R. SHACKLOCKI PRO REGINA, REGNO, ET toto Christianismo.
MAGNE DEVS qui magna facis, qui pectora Regum
Flectere celsa potes, teneraeque similima caerae
Reddere, Reginam diuino flamine nostram
Imbue, flexibilemque illi concedito mentem:
Mentem quae dubiae fidei nouitate relicta
Antiquum repetat fontem, fluuiumque salubrem
Qui viua de rupe fluit, petraque perenni,
Faece carens omni: nam pura Ecclesia Christi
Virgo manet, semper Christo dignissima sponsa,
Igneus ille tuus demissus ab aethere status,
Concremet errores omnes sub tegmine very
Occultos: nostros confirma pace Britannos
Hostibus oppressis: omnes errore sepultos
Ad superos reuoca: cunctos Pax alma tumultus
Comprimat, and positis vigeat Concordia bellis.
Sacra Tridentini valiant Edicta Senatus,
Quae Patres sanxere pij, Regesque potentes
Rata volunt: optata bonis, inuisa malignis.
Sit tande^ propriae memor Anglia nostra salutis,
Partibus omissis toti consentiat orbi.
Turca tumet, iam Turca fremit, nunc Turca minatur,
Christ tuam defend fidem: fideique patronos
Prasidiis munito tuis: fac Anglia dextram
Porrigat, vt fidei communis corruat hostis.
Elizebetha, precor, longeuae stamina vitae
Protrahat: hostiles terraque marique cobortes
Dissipet: aeternis tandem satiata triumphis,
Et iusto Regni nobis haerede relicto,
Cum superis laetam ducat per saecula vitam.
AMEN.
A TABLE OF THE cheyfeist matters contained in this Book.
ANdrew Carolstad his behauyour at Wittenberge in Luther his absence. fol. 11.
page 1. Andrewe Carolstad the first married Priest in Germany. fol. 12. page 1.
Andrewe the first in our time which durst deny the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. fol. 13. page 1. A comparison between the Lutherans and the
Zwinglians, which of them be best. fol. 18. page 1. Anabaptistrie first issued
out of Luther his sect. fol. 28. page 1. Anabaptists wurse then all other
sectaries. fol. 29. page 2. Anabaptists divided in to sundry sects. fol. 31.
page 1. Anabaptists more ready to suffer all kind of torments for their
faith then any other sectaries. fol. 43. page 2. Anabaptists their folyshe
hardynes in S. Augustyne his time. fol. 44. page 2. Anabaptists their folyshe
hardynes in S. Bernad his time. fol. 45. page 1. Anabaptists never able to be
overcome of all the deuynes, that ever have been or at this present be but by
the authority of the Church. fol. 48. page 2. A strange heresye of a Priest
in Sueuia. fol. 54. page 2. Apostata Premonstratensis horrible heresy. fol.
55. page 1. A maruaylouse victory of the Emperor, against the Lutherans. fol.
58. page 1. Augusta has mo Suenckfeldiaus then Lutherans. fol. 76. page 2. A
notable Example of the Pope his authority over the Emperor fol. 86. page 1.
Alexander Magnus his reverence to the high Priest. fol. 92. page 2. Attila the
king his reverence to Pope Leo. fol. 93. page 1. Beam divided from all
Christendom by reason of the Sect of the Waldenses. fol. 2. page 2. Baptism
not necessary for infantes says Calvin. fol. 18. page 1. Balthazar
Pacimontanus first Author of the Anabaptists sect. fol. 28. page 1.
Berengarius the author of the sacrame^taries heresy his repentance. fol. 46.
page 1. By what degrees Sathanisme did infect Germany. fol. 63. page 2.
Brentius makes a new confession diffryng from the confession of Augusta. fol.
76. page 2. Brentius his railing on the Ecclesiastical magistrates. fol. 81.
page 2. Brentius his poysonfull proeme fol. 82. page 1. Bishops judges over
Emperoures in matters of faith. fol. 81. page 1. Babila his stoutenes in his
authority toward the Emperor. fol. 91. page 1. Bishops in what respect they
be servants. fol. 93. page 2. Consent of all Christendom in Religion above
fourtye years agone. fol. 1. page 2. Christ declared by the manner of his
death, that he loves not division. fol. 10. page 1. Calu. in some things he
follows, in some things he over runeth Luther in wyckednes. fol. 17. page 1.
Calvin taking upon him to be judge between the Lutherans and the Zuinglians
raised up an heresye, never known before. fol. 23. page 1. Calvin co^uicted
of a lie in that he said, that he agreed with Zuinglius about our Lord his
supper, and that the Lutherans and the Zuinglia^s differed not about that
matter. fol. 23. page 1. Calvin his spytefull railing against the Lutherans.
fol. 26. page 1. Calvin craketh but all in vain, of the cherefulnes of his
brethren in suffering for their faith. fol. 44. page 2. Calvin holds that
Christ descended not in to hell. fol. 55. page 1. Civil and Ecclesiastical
government be not all one. fol. 79. page 1. Calvin his sentence upon Luther.
fol. 62. page 1. Calvin holds that heretykes arre to be put to death. fol.
56. page 2. Constantius the Emperor rebuked of Pope Liberius fol. 86. page 2.
Counsels or Synodes of the Clergy not to be kept near the court. eod. page
2. Calvin prayseth Petrus a Soto. fol. 90. page 2. Calvin his opinion that
the Emperor can not be judge in matters Ecclesiastical. eod. page 2.
Chrysostom his sentence concerning the preemine^ce of Bishops. fol. 91. page
2. Donatistes their wonderful defyre to dye for their faith. fol. 45. page 1.
David renueth the Saduces sect. fol. 55. page 1. Demoniacall heretykes. fol.
55. page 2. Discord of heretykes among them selves, shows with what spyrit
they be led. fol. 57. page 2. EIght diverse interpretations of heretykes
concerning these words, This is my body. fol. 14. page 1. Four foundations or
principal pillars, where on the sathanisme or dyuellish doctrine of the
heretics of our time is builded. fol. 1. page 1. False Martyrs stoutenes in
dying not to be maruayled at. fol. 45. page 1. GEspar Querchamer how many
contrary opinions of heretykes he reherseth about communicating under both
kinds or under one. fol. 75. page 2. Glory is the end which founders of nue
sects seek for. fol. 76. page 1. HEretykes can not abide to be corrected. fol.
15. page 1. Heretykes arre to be handled and punisshed severely, says Ioachim
Westphalus a Lutheran. fol. 25. page 2. Heretykes manner to provoke Catholykes
to dispute before a lay judge. fol. 30. page 1. Holiness of heretykes the Dyuell
his pytfall to catch sowles. fol. 53. page 2. Husband men not far from
Wittenberge greatly deceived by an heretyke. fol. 55. page 1. How peryllouse
it is to swarne from the old religion in small matters. fol. 63. page 2. Hosius
Bishop of Corduba his stout and godly answer to the Emperor Constantius.
fol. 87. page 1. Hilarious his godly and stout reprofe of Constantius the
Emperor. eod. page 2. Ihon Westphalus a Sacramentarie his au^swer to the
Luthera^s, which accused the Sacramentaries of cruelty. Nota. against our
Protestants accusing the Catholykes of cruelty. fol. 20. page 1.
Interimisticall Lutherans. fol. 58. page 1. Illiricus vexes the Adiaphoristes
of Wittenberge. fol. 60. page 2. Illiricus his sentence of excommunication upon
the Adiaphoristes of Wittenberge. eod. page 2. Ihon a Lasco his testimony, how
much many learned Lutherans honor the confession of Augusta. Nota. fol. 73.
page 1. Ignatius his Sentence concerning doing honor to Bishops. fol. 92.
page 1. Kings after what sort they be servants. fol. 83. page 2. Luther was
the first which sowed discord in the Church of God in our age. fol. 4. page
2. Luther forsook the Catholyke faith because the preaching of pardones was
translated to the Dominicanes. eod. Luther his confession disputing with
Eckius. fol. 5. page 1. Luther his sect did spring out of the root of
covetousness. eod. page 2. Luther his submission to the Pope. fol. 6. page 1.
Luther began his sect by rebelling against the Pope. fol. 7. page 1. Luther bad
battle to the sacraments. eod. page 1. Luther condemned an heretyke of the
Pope, minded nothing else, but how he might deface the supremacye, so he
wythnesseth him selffe. eod. page 1. Luther confesses that the dyuell was the
author of his doctrine. fol. 8. page 1. Luther his droncken death. eod. page
1. Luther would have his scollers called Gospellers. fol. 9. page 1. Luthers
doctrine why it may not be allowed. eod. page 2. Luther more cruel then the
souldiars which did put Christ to death. fol. 10. page 2. Luther the author of
Sects. eod. page 2. Luther most gredye of glory. fol. 11. page ^. Luther a
sore ennimye to Image breakers. eod. page 2. Luther beguyled of Bucer becam a
Sacramentarie. fol. 13. page 1. Luther full of disdain and arrogancye. fol.
16. page 1. Luther his verdict of the Zuinglia^s and the Sacramentaries, and
mark how he proves them and him selffe heretykes. fol. 21. page 1. Luther
being not able to answer the Anabaptists by Scripture, flies to the
traditions of the Apostles. fol. 29. page 1. Louaines article defended. fol.
43. page 1. Luther his addition to S. Paul his word, rejected of the deuynes
of Lipsia. fol. 59. page 1. Luther made wyndowes for sathanisme fol. 61. page
2. Luther denies free will. fol. 65. page 1. Luther how much he esteemed the
books of Melancthon. fol. 67. page 1. MEnno Phrisius an Anabaptist his bold
brag of the surenes of his doctrine. fol. 28. page 2. Munster a city, Read
there a notable history, how the Catholykes were driven out by the Lutherans,
and the Lutherans by the Anabaptists. fol. 30. page 1. Martyrdom is not
gotten out of the Church. fol. 44. page 1. Martirs be not made by the
lykelyhode of the punishment but of the cause. fol. 47. page 2. Melancthon how
arrogantly at the first he denied free will. fol. 65. page 1. Melancthon
confirms free will in his latter books. fol. 67. page 2. ONe error draws
many other after it. fol. 6. page 2. Osiander a Lutheran ill handled of the
Confessionistes. fol. 71. page 2. Osiander his doctrine allowed in one
University and condemned in an other. fol. 72. page 1. Osiander his disdain
against Melancthon. fol. 73. page 2. Poole preserved from heresye through the
wonderful watchefulnes of their Byshopes, and Godly devotion of their Kings.
fol. 3. page 1. Persecution sometime is necessary, a difference between the
persecution of good men and evil. fol. 47. page 1. Petrus a Soto why he wrote
against the Confession made by Brentius. fol. 77. page 1. Petrus a Soto his
order in writing. fol. 78. page 1. Petrus a Soto his praise. fol. 80. page 1.
Paul the Apostle what manner of servant he was. fol. 84. page 2. Petre the
Apostle what manner of servant he was. fol. 85. page 1. Special faith making
no doubt of the forgyuenes of sins reproved, and the objections making for it
soluted. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. Suenckfeldius his
heresye, that we ought to have no scriptures. fol. 49. page 1. Suenckfeld.
vouched diverse scriptures for his propose. fol. 51. page 1. Suenckfeldius
fynished the Ghospel which Satan began by Luther. fol. 51. page 2.
Suenckfeldians mo then Lutherans or Zuinglians. fol. 53. page 1. Suenckfeldians
maruaylously holy to see to. eod. page 1. Seruetus condemned and put to death
by means of Calvin. fol. 56. page 2. Stanislaus a Martyr for rebukyng of the
Emperor. fol. 91. page 1. Thomas Muncer of an Anabaptist dyed a penitent
catholyke. fol. 32. page 1. Tymmanus a Lutheran theacheth, that heretykes arre
to be punished. fol. 56. page 2. The constancy and godlynes of the King of
Pole. fol. 63. page 1. The oath which all commencers at Wittenberge must take.
fol. 72. page 2. Tuentye opinions of the Confessionistes concerning
iustifycation. fol. 74. page 1. Vladislaus and Vitoldus Kings of Pole refused
to reign over heretykes. fol. 3. page 1. Who it is which deuideth Jesus. fol.
10. page 1. What verdict the sacramentaries give upon the Lutherans. fol. 21.
page 1. What the Catholykes thynk of outward ceremonies. fol. 60 page 1. What
manner of servants the Byshopps and Popes of old time were. fol. 86. page 1.
Z.
Zeal in matters of religion is to be considered what manner of zeal it is.
fol. 21. page 1.
Faults escaped in some copies.
fol. page lin. Which although. read, which even as. 32. 1. 17. Orde. read,
order. 10. ^. 26. Plyet. read, plyeth. 24. ^. 4. esontrary. read, contrary.
25. 2. 17.

An admonition to the fault fynder.
If mo faults in this book thou find
Yet think not the correctoure blind.
If Argos here him selffe had been
He should perchance not all have seen
Al words awry mend without stryffe
And words amended, redress thy lyffe.
Rychard Shacklock.

