SERMONS PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS AND ELSEWHERE, BY JOHN HOSKINS, SOMETIMES
FELLOW OF New-Colledge in Oxford, Minister and Doctor of Law.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at Saint Austens gate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON, KNIGHT, Baron of Ellesmere, Lord
high Chancellor of England, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
IT were a shame (Right Honorable) our liberty should be now to learn, what
the Jews captivity was long ago taught, that the public inferres the
private benefit; In the peace of the City shall ye have peace. (...)
A sufficient Apology for this bold adventure of presenting some parts of my
poor endeavors, before any merit has recommended my person to your Lordships
knowledge. For I feel my self no senseless member of those bodies, which out
of diverse experiences challenge an interest in your Honors most favorable
protection. And could I collect all those grave judgments and decrees, which
your Honors learned integrity has afforded unto Churches, Colleges, and
other Incorporations for charitable uses; I doubt not, but posterity would
equal them with many new erections and foundations. Accept then (Right Noble
Lord) these few notes of a Scholars observation, who desires not so much to
make himself known, as to acknowledge his portion of the Churches and that
Universities duty, whereof your Honor is a blessed Patron. God remember your
Honor according to that which you have done for both.

Your Honors in all duty, I. HOSKINS.

1 A Sermon preached at S. Mary's in Oxford. The Text. LVKE, 12.48. 2 A Sermon
preached at Paul's Cross. The Text. ISAI. 28.1. 3 A Sermon preached at New
College in Oxford. The Text. MATTHEW. 11.19. 4 A Sermon preached at S. Mary's in
Oxford on Act Sunday, in the afternoon. The Text. MATTHEW. 11.19. 5 A Sermon
preached before the Judges in Hereford. The Text. 1. SAM. 2.25. 6 A Sermon
preached at Paul's Cross. The Text. ZACH. 5.4. 7 A Sermon preached at S. Mary's
in Oxford. The Text. HOSEAH, 8.12. 8 The Conclusion of the Rehearsal Sermon at
Paul's Cross. Anno 1614.
Faults escaped.
Page 4. Li. 16. R^ad. waking. p. 15. l. 5. r outstrip him. p. 21. l. 22. r.
(...) p. ^7. l. 26. r. the. p. 30. l. 25. r. (...). p. 31. l. 23. r misplace
but. p. 32. l. 19. r unto. p. 40. l. 20. r. punishment. p. 41. l. 23. r.
sel^es. p. 45. l. 14. r. step up. p. 46. l. 14. r. necks. When. p. 49. l. 1. r.
quiver (...). p. 54. l. 5. r. mind. For. p. 58. l. ^^. r. salutations. p. 65.
l. 16. r. (...).

Page 3. Lin. 2. r. Hyperbolically. The. l. 3. r. proposed old l. 11. r. (...)
p. 4. l. 20. r. in deed. p. 9. l. 26. r. derogatio. p. 12. l. ^. r. the word
uttered. p. 38. l. 4. r. (...). p. 4. l. 23. r. lead the blind.

Page 2. Lin. 18 read. gray. l. 20. r sakers. p. ^. l. 20. r. equal. Besides.
l. 22. r. circumstances, their. p. 6. l. 26. put o^^, right. p. 7. l. 6. r.
these. p. 9. l. 16. r. moates. p. 28. l. 7. put out, First. l. 20. r. (...)
none, without. p. 33. l. 9. r. this hand. p. 39. l. 16 r. paint. p. 52. l. 10.
r. ^stric^^. p. 58. l. 14. r. f^nus animae.

Page 3. L. 3. r. pentateuch. l. 6. r. ^xcludes. l. 16. r. Vzziah. l. 19. r.
time; an. p. 4. l. 3. r. faithful. l. 28. r. opposition. p. 6. l. 1. r. (...).
p. 13. l. 1. r. seeks to disgrace the p. 14. l. 1^. put out, (...). l. 27. r.
place. l. 30. put out more. p. 16. l. 7. r. uncommanded. p. 28, l. 1. r.
command me the. p. 29. l. 11. r. art laesa pudicitia est. p. 32. l. 3. r.
complexion: no. l. 4. complexion? al^^ l. 30. r. a Transubstantiation. p. 39.
l. 4. r. diminish it. p. 40. l. 15. r. silent, without.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARY'S IN OXFORD.
LVKE, 12.48. For unto whom so ever much is given, of him shall be much
required.


SOme may restrain the gift in this place implied unto spiritual grace,
excluding by spiritual, temporal; by grace, natural abilities; (for
whatsoever properly may be called grace, is above nature) and among the gifts
of grace, only to one suit and sort of them: but because I take the words
general, and the coherence none other, then this my present Text is brought as
a proof universal, to infer, and, as it were, by more special doom of
conclusion, to inflict store of stripes upon the back of that negligent servant
that had received store of understanding. Give me leave to limit it no more,
then I shall be counseled by circumstances belonging to these times of
knowledge, and this learned Auditory. The principal parts, for which I am to
crave your attention, are first a Receite: Unto whomsoever much is given:
Secondly, an Account; of him shall much be required. In the former you may
descrie some difference of Gods gifts committed unto some in greater abundance
and excellency then unto others. Unto whomsoever much is given: In the latter,
you shall perceive the proportion and correspondency, the Account shall bear
with the Receipt, much is given, much shall be required: of these two in their
order.

Concerning personal graces, as Faith, Hope and Charity, given for the good of
the receiver himself, called by the Schools, gratum facientes, though unto
them that have them, much be given, and very much forgiven, I purpose not at
this time to speak. Graces Ecclesiastical, bestowed only for the benefit of
others, termed gratis datae, were of several kinds in the Primative Church, as
appears, Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. and Ephesians. 4. whereof some were more excellent
then the rest. Otherwise there had been no place for the Apostles exhortation,
(...), Desire the best gifts. Now whereas every thing must derive its true
worth and estimation thence, whence it has its perfection, that is, from the
end; they of necessity were most excellent, that did principally respect, and
as means, accomplish their end, next to them they that in reference to their
end were secu^darily subordinate. The end, you know, was the gathering together
of the Saints, and the edification of the body of Christ. Tongues, Healing and
Miracles were occasions to inuit hearers: but Prophets, Pastors and Teachers
were isntrumental causes to make them learners. Covet spiritual gifts: 1.
Cor. 14 1. (...), But rather that you may prophecy: (...), rather, in respect
of the gift of tongues at that time, whereof too too doting admiration had
newly possessed the Corinthians. All could not excel in the best gifts, (for
excellency, were it common and ordinary, were no longer excellency.) To the
question then, 1. Cor. 12. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all
Teachers? The answer must be, No: For he gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers: Ephesians. 4.
Then unto these some, that had received these gifts nearer to their end, and
therefore by consequence, surpassing the rest, much was given. Neither has
there been only granted unto men, a superiority above their brethren, in an
higher kind of different grace; but in a greater measure also of the same
grace. Not to urge Saint Paul, who said of himself, I thank my God, 1. Cor.
14.18.
I speak Languages more then you all: nor Moses commended, where the book of
Deuteronomy is concluded, There arose not a Prophet since in Israel, like unto
Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face, which might be especially for his
mighty hand, and miracles in Egypt: Nor John Baptist, who was a Prophet, and
more then a Prophet, among them that were borne of women, arose there not a
greater then John Baptist: which was for his vicinity to Christ, in whom all
Gods promises and prophesies were Yea and Amen. The Spirit was doubled on
Elisha, 2 King. 2.
if not in respect of his Master Eliah, as many think not, (surely not for
that reason, because Eliah wrought but eight, Elisha sixteen miracles, as some
are justly censured by Peter Martyr for misreckoning) yet in respect of the
other Prophets, over whom he was in his Masters place to succeed, which the
phrase, noted by Iunius as borrowed from the right of the first borne, Deuteronomy. 21.
may seem to require: still he had a double portion of Gods Spirit, in
comparison of others. As Elisha was in that College, so in all likelihood was
Samuel before in the College of Naioth: Dan. 1.
2. Sam. 19. In Nabuchadnezzers Schole, the Inchanters and Astrologians were
exceeding great Clerks, no doubt; notwithstanding, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael
and Azariah, were found ten times better then they; and yet Daniels sleep was
wiser, then his fellows w^^king. This unequal, though most just dispensation
of much unto some above others, may be seen in the delivery of the Talents,
Matthew. 25. by which are understood (...), spiritual graces, if we believe
Theophylact. Should I but lead your attention aside (but that I would not
willingly misleade it) in Histories, we could not escape examples of some, who
to their last time remembered so much, that they could repeat whole Orations;
of others, who in their youth time learned so much, that they could have
discussed very many questions; of others, that in their life time wrote so
much, that they could, with their own books, have furnished and filled whole
Libraries. Last of all, of as many rare, and excellent gifts of grace, as there
have been strange, and heroical properties in men. But what need these,
especially in this place, where several faculties and professions, several
degrees and proceedings, several graces, which men give unto men, have been,
and I hope shall be, of degrees and proceedings in the grace of God, no lying
testimonials? Certainly, hows;oeuer man's choice, and man's judgment, and man's
measure, may fail for these outward graces; this truth, for the inward grace,
can never fail: Unto every one of us is grace given, according to the measure
of the gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.
Here do I trust, there is no conceit so by blindness emboldened, as to
charge the Judge of all the world, for this uneven division of graces, with
acception of persons and partiality. For it is well enough known, that the
swaruing and declination from the rule of equity, which we call, acception of
persons, is the respecting of some outward circumstance, and adherent quality
to the person, practiced only in such distributions, as are ex debito: but in
God there is no respect of the face, as some translate, (...), Acts. 10.
Neither is he in any man's debt: wherefore al misconstructions of his eternal
Justice in this behalf, may receive a full satisfaction in that one demand,
Matthew. 20.15.
comprizing an eternal Truth: Is it not lawful to do what I will with mine
own? But whereas a greater measure of grace must needs issue from a greater
love; how can his affection, which is his nature (for God is love) possibly be
intended, or made to be more love? This intention is not, as the Schoolmen
answer, ex part affectus, for with one simple act of his will, he loves all;
but ex part voliti; he is therefore said to love one more then another,
because the good he wills to one, is greater then the good he wills to
another. If any ask farther, why he wills a greater good to one then
another, besides his will, the highest rule of all things a priori, there can be
no reason. There may be some thought upon a posteriore: for had God
communicated his graces alike, man, in his corrupt imagination, might have
thought, he did whatsoever he did, by necessity of nature, (...), Like the
fire which burns here and in Persia alike. But God wills nothing besides
himself, and his own goodness, and glory necessarily, in all things else,
without himself, he is an agent altogether voluntary. His Spirit is most
free, as in the work of regeneration, like the wind blowing where it lusts:
John 3. so in the gifts of illumination, distributing as he pleases. This
beside we may conceive to be done, according to the private capacity of the
receivers, for the public good of his Church: by the capacity of the
receiver, I mean, no strength of free will, or natural preparation, (as if
grace were so beholding to nature, as some Philosophers teach, the soul is to
the good disposition of the body in her first determinate being in the body)
but I mean Gods own work, as well seen in the opening, as in the filling of
his servants souls: for he that gave Solomon wisdom, 1. King. 4.
gave him likewise a large heart to receive it; and he enlarges men's hearts,
as he purposes to employ them, secundum quod expedit, as far forth as is
expedient, as Jerome speaks, Ephesians 4. And, as Ambrose says of prophecy,
quantum causa erigit propter quam datur, Romans 12. as much as the cause
requires for which it is given. The end is the public good of the Church,
which is either the good of order, or the good of ornament, or the good of
charity. In eminent gifts, there is diversity for ornament: in diverse gifts,
there is preeminence for the order of the Church: both diversity and
preeminence for the maintenance of charity, as is plain in the Apostles
illustration from diverse members of the body, (a common, but as even Menenius
Agrippa in Liuie, may teach us a most feeling similitude:) for one member would
not love another, if one did not help another; one should not help another,
if one did not need another; one should not need another if one had not
somewhat above another: wherefore God has divided his blessings in that manner
you have heard, that those terms of despite and defiance, I have no need of
thee, and I have no need of thee, might no more be heard, no more spoken,
evermore be banished out of all Christian Congregations. Therefore, as in part
has been showed you, the manifold Wisdom of God has manifested it self,
by giving diverse gifts to his Church; as David dedicated to the Temple, vessels
of gold, vessels of silver, and vessels of brass, and, as it was the custom
of the Roman chief Generals, when they triumphed, and did ascend the Capitol,
Bellica laudatis dona dedisseviris: Sig. 2. de antiquo iure pro.
To bestow warlike gifts upon men commended: and that to several men, in
several manner, as Sigonius shows. So he that ascended up on high, led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men; not to all indifferently, but unto
some in greater excellency and abundance, then unto others. Now let me
persuade such in this assembly, as think they have received little in humility
and contentation, to conform their wills unto his will, which has allotted
them, at least, as themselves imagine, but a small proportion. It may be, like
young Samuel, they be but newly dedicated to the Lord, and God has yet but
begun with them, because they have yet but begun with him; there is a time,
there are degrees, there must be a growth: you may not now look for strange
motions, and sudden inspirations. I know, the importunity of some wits have
happily wrested learning from this their Mother, in a very short space, as the
prodigal Son did wring his portion out of his fathers hands: much good might
it do them, and, I would to God, that they would not, as he did his, waste it
again in riotous living: but ordinarily it cannot be expected, that a good
Scholar should shoot up in a night like a Mushrum: let all the Lullian
Mountebanks in the world promise what they will, prescribing cons^^sed Methods
o^ universal learning monstrously compendious, co^^ ary to the propriety of
man's limited apprehension, that apprehends but one thing at once* ^o Gods own
decree and appointment plain^ contrary: The truth we must trust to, is, that
ou^comming to the University, is not like Cesar^ expedition: Veni, vidi, vici:
If we would be o^ the number of the learned, we m^^t be of the number of
them that love Wisdom; Love Wisdom, and she shall preserve thee; of the
number of them that profane not Wisdom: His secret is with the righteous; of
the number of them that pray, and take pains for Wisdom. Assure your selves,
that when you shall be of the valiant number of those holy Champions, whose
diligence will encounter difficulties, and their devotion, like Jacob, wrestle
with God himself for a blessing, he cannot but perform more unto you, then
^^neas in the Poet promises, Nemo ex hoc numero mihinon donatus abibit:
None of this number shall depart from me unrewarded.
For if thou call after knowledge, and criest for understanding; if thou
seek her as silver, and searches for her as for treasures, then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: then shall
thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity, and every good
path, Prou. 2. Only be patient, and wait the Lords leisure with a good eye,
without repining; because to grudge at greater gifts, is to judge the greatest
giver. This, and much more might be spoken to them that have received little;
but I know where I stand, surely not before many that have received little. The
greater part I rather beseech with me to surueigh that much, which God has
given unto us above all the Land, I had almost said all the world besides. I
do not bid you, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 48. Compass Sion, and go
round about it: behold, and number her Towers, mark well the wall thereof,
that you may tell them that come after. Yet though Fathers should hold their
peace, and not declare it to their children: though all the children of the
daughter of our Sion should be dumb and tongue-tied; these stones, this
outside of our prosperity, the very houses of the Prophets might seem to cry
aloud, Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: Praise thy God, O Sion: for he has made
the bars of thy gates strong, and has blessed thy children within thee. But
to step one foot inwards, how are our Mothers children blessed, wherein is our
preeminence? What is the preferment of an University? Much every manner of way:
chiefly, because unto us are committed the Oracles of God I confess, we have
not Vrim and Thummim, revelations extraordinary. No, we are in Canaan, that
Manna was for the wilderness: public and private Lectures, public and private
Sermons, public and private Orations, Moderations, Disputations, may be unto
us in stead of Oracles. Besides, in this concourse and confluence of judgments
and inventions, we might enjoy (I would we might peaceably enjoy) an
unspeakable benefit in mutual conference. But suppose men are men, that is,
mere men, wanting that Wisdom from above, which is, as Saint James speaks,
(...): peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; and therefore as wrangling
gamesters show they play for money, not for recreation; so cauelling conference
bewrayes, men confer for credit of victory, not for instruction. God of
late, Sir Tho. Bodley.
by his faithful servant (whom we are bound to remember in our prayers) has
opened a learned consistory; whither we may appeal from the living to the
dead shall I say? I say, from the dead to the living; from choleric emulation,
and contention of wit, the dead works of living, and unmortified men, unto
books of all sorts, the living labors of good Writers, whose passions are
buried with their bodies. Here, here, he that runs may read, that Much is
given unto us. A blessing of blessings (my brethren) that we should be
reserved unto these times, wherein the words of Daniel are verified, not only
for his prophecy, but for knowledge in general; Many shall run to and fro:
or as Calvin and Polanus read it, Many shall search, and knowledge shall be
increased: Dan. 12.4. Our learning is grafted on the stock of former ages, and
all ancient Writers were but our Harbingers; so that many conclusions, for
which, no doubt, they did sweat and beat their brains, we take ready made
for our principles: others have labored, and we have entered into their
labors: wherefore unto us, above others, much must needs be given. Many of us
besides, which at no time we should forget, but at this time more feelingly
consider, by our Founders allowance, are exempted from the s^nse, yea, from the
knowledge of public famine and ^carcitie: let him that has the best
conscience tell me, whether he can free himself from the sin that caused
it; it may be, some that have not the best, are free from the punishment. I
should speak of knowledge; but in this plenty of means, me thinks, I may take
it for granted, that we have plenty of knowledge. And indeed in all this, it
is not my purpose, to hold you with admiration of your own bappinesse, at the
gaze, and to leave your understandings in the reflex of themselves upon
themselves: rather forget not, I beseech you, I beseech you, mistake not the
end of your maintenance, and the end of your knowledge. He that made the
Angels that are in heaven ministering spirits, and placed Adam in the garden of
Eden to dress it, and keep it, has seated no man, in any place whatsoever
for idleness. When the men of Laish, Judges 18. a place which lacked nothing
that was in the world, were espied to be careless, after the manner of the
Zidonians, you know what followed: Let us but suffer sloth to emasculate our
Christian strength, and idleness, that can make nothing else to make our
souls effeminate: Though we live in David's house, if we be known to be but
wanton Concubines, disorder and confusion, like long haired Absalon, will not
stick to break in upon us. Wherefore as we are men, Christian men, take heed
of that killing Cloister-sinne, (...); whatsoever it was, it was a greater
barbarism indeed, then was in the word, which they called accidia, when they
that possessed the fat of the Land, became ranckly riotous; when an Abbot might
have easily been mistaken for an Earl; and a Monk could hardly be known in
some things from a Gentleman; as root and branch grew more and more abominable,
so desolation was ready to tread on the heels of abomination. Never let us
flatter, and sooth our selves, because this was a plant which God never
planted; his judgments know well enough, how to begin in his own house, with
his own children, at his own Sanctuary. Wherefore (learned Fathers and
Brethren) for the love of these peaceable times, and yet for fear of more
prying times, grieve not the Genius of this place, the Spirit of God that is in
us, and amongst us, the Angels that look into the Arc, and watch over us. For
if the conniuence of our Fathers, answer unto Eli his indulgence; and our
children, like his sons, will run into slander, being therefore more wanton and
disobedient, because they live by the Altar; we may justly fear, the Lord will
begin a thing in our Israel, whereof, whosoever hears, his two ears shall
tingle: and when he begins, he will also make an end. We have escaped many
dangers and visitations; which may teach us, that the children in the street
and fields may die, fathers in their chaires may die, the practice of religion
in this place may die: but though we and our fathers be removed, far be it
from our unthankfulness, to remove the Arc of Gods presence: God evermore
forbid, that our barrenness should beget an Icabod, whose name may be a
trumpet to the world of our shame, The glory is departed from Israel. Yet no
distress or calamity so grievous, which abuse of maintenance may not aboade,
if we forget the end of it, which was in all our Founders intents, Christian
knowledge. I say, Christian knowledge; because knowledge it self not well both
tempered and directed, is likewise very dangerous: he that in other things was
instructed how to abound, was in danger to be exalted, through abundance of
revelation. And herein, though much be given unto us, it is, that we should
bless him that gave it, and teach Gods people that want it; not that we
should contemn them, and only bless our selves: yet let a plain Countriman
come amongst us, how disdainefully do we laugh at his plainness? how proudly
do we sport with his rudeness? how scornefully do we insult upon his
ignorance? Fond and inconsiderate man, who seperateth thee? What have thou,
that thou have not received? If thou have received it why reioycest thou, as
though thou had not received it? If any man think that he knows any
thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know: 1. Cor. 8.2. Compare thy
self with whom thou will, a thousand to one; but (as it falls out in most
questions of comparison) in the end and resolution, you must be excedentes and
excessi, as thou shall outstrip in somethings, so he will have the start of
thee in other things. Be it that thou art an absolute man, thou thy self art
sound in judgment, quick in apprehension, present in invention; praise God in
this, thou were not borne so: another is neither witty, nor intelligent, nor
judicious; despise not him for that, God knows whether thou thy self may
not die so. We may learn by that disputer in Iouius, whose Epitaph was, Semel
sepultus, bis mortuus: Once buried, twice dead; that subtilty may end in an
apoplexi, yea, and beat out her own brains. There is a story in M. of Paris,
placed about King John's time, of Simon de Churnay, as it seems, a very
learned divine; who, after he had solemnly defined profound matters concerning
the Trinity, being sought unto for a copy of the former disputation, began to
please himself, and cried out, Iesule, Iesule, Jesus, Jesus, how have I
confirmed, and advanced thy law by this question! yet if I would be malicious,
I could disprove what then I proved, by stronger arguments. Whereupon, the
Author says, he was strooken speechless, and became like a profane wretch,
altogether infatuate. The relations may be suspected, but the thing, which by
them I would illustrate, is possible; common experience makes it more then
probable, that unless wit be seasoned with grace, and understanding with
sobriety, (...) with (...) a man, alas, most miserably may survive his own
wit, and out-liue his own understanding. Can our learning then be tempered
with grace, while we be proud of it? It is impossible: the swelling side,
which you call the conuexity of any body, receives nothing but blows; the
receptacle is always the concauity: right so, pride is the conuexity: God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, Iam. 4 Were any among us
troubled with this swelling disease, inhaunsing themselves above their
brethren, I should advise them, to give their knowledge a greater vent by their
practice. For I remember, Saint Bernard comparing knowledge unto meat, 36.
Ser. in Cant.
memory to the stomach, sins unto malignant humors, makes the natural heat
to be charity: when we daily see, that where learning abounds, humors
super-abound; we may quickly judge, it is for want of charity to digest it. You
know my meaning, Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth, 1. Cor. 8. Much
reading, without reference unto action, is like much eating: a spiritual kind
of Epicurisme, and knowledge for private satisfaction (as one well says) is
but a Curtezan, more for pleasure then for propagation. God gives none
learning, as a man gives a book to a Library, there to be stalled and
chained, which sometimes requires more skill to pick, and extract learning out
of it, then the book has learning in it: Aliquidintersit inter te and librum:
Let there be some difference between thee and a book: It Is Seneca his
counsel. Wherefore for conclusion of this part (Reverend Fathers and learned
Brethren) you that have gone down into the deep, you that have searched the
secrets of divine learning, following truths to their last resolution, into
principles; and chasing heresies, to the first point of their deuiatio^: deal
with us, as your Fathers dealt with you; as much is given unto you, bring out
of your treasures (you learned Scribes) both new and old; knowing for certain,
that you shall instruct, and encourage us; by our instruction and
encouragement, you shall increase your Talents in your selves, for unto him that
has, shall be given, and you shall double them in others; I mean, you shall
commit, what you know, to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others
also, 2. Tim. 2.2. in that double increase, you shall discharge that much,
which is required at your hands, and so further your own reckoning, which is
my second general.

Only for intimation of this account, which serves my turn, you may find,
that after the delivery of the Talents, Matthew. 25. it was a long season indeed,
but at the length, the Master of those servants came, and reckoned with them.
But in stead of all places that I should commend unto you, that commandment,
Luke 16. Give an account of thy Stewardship, is most pregnant for my purpose,
though it be but a parable, because it carries within it self the reason of a
reckoning. For when we consider, that a Steward is no more, then, as the
Lawyers describe him (who are the only competent Judges, both of the Term and
function) (...): A servant which is wont to set forth his Masters goods for
advantage: or, as that Church-Reeue is defined in the Code, Oeconomus est,
cuires Ecclesiastica, gubernanda mandatur, Episcopi consensu: He is a Steward,
to whose government the goods of the Church are committed. We may well
conceive, that he always stands accountable: wherefore, whether he be
(...), as they are called, 1. Pet. 4. Steward, or, Dispenser of the grace of
God: or (...), as Erastus is termed, Romans vlt. Steward, Chamberlain, or
Receiver of the City: Minister or Magistrate, the Talent that is given him, is
but (...), depositum, or, fidei commissum, a matter of trust and confidence;
the delivery of it, but a bailement, himself but a Steward, his very name will
bring him to the Audit, and the nature of his office will call upon him for a
reckoning: for as it is, 1. Cor. 3. (...), It is required of a Steward, that a
man be found faithful: (...), the same word with this in my Text (...), not
(...), it is barely asked, or coldly demanded, but (...), with an intensiue
particle, it is required, or exacted, and so required, if we urge the extent of
the word, as things are required by an importunate disputer in the Schools, or
a violent tormenter on the rack, Whence it seems there shall be an account in
general; but because (...), much, the last in the receipt, does echo back
again (...), much, first, in the account, I shall, by your favor a while,
according to my promise, follow the special proportions: for here is more
then a general account, an account answerable, and correspondent with the
receipt; and that either in correspondency of duty, that is exacted, or for
defect and in default of duty, a correspondency in punishment that shall be
executed: in this sense, I take it, much shall be required.

Our Lord and Master is not like Pharao, or his cruel Taskmasters, denying
straw, and yet exacting the full number of the brick: no, that was a
slanderous imputation of the evil servant; I knew that thou wast an hard man,
which reapest where thou sowedst not, gatherest where thou strowest not: Mat.
25. Yet when he has planted a Vineyard, and hedged it round about, made a
Wine Press, built a Tower, and let it out to husbandmen, who can in equity
deny, that he may send for the fruits thereof? As he has filled Ioshuahs
heart with his Spirit, Deuteronomy. vlt. so we must look, that he will fill his hands
likewise with business. Ios. 1.
And if the Rubenites and Gadites be served in their possessions on this side
Jordan, before their brethren; they must sustain the brunt of the skirmish,
and go in arms over Jordan before their brethren. This, it seems, the
blessed Vessel of election applied to himself in his calling; and therefore,
as grace had abounded unto him, so he labored more abundantly then they all.
Neither can I imagine, how any man may handsomely shake off his conscience, the
great burden that great blessings (will he, nill he) must needs impose upon
him, both for the intent of the giver; wherein, if the world do not blind us,
we may read that old canonized rule, beneficium propter of ficium, the benefit
is for the duty. And also for that of Aristotle, Eth. 5.5. (...): It behooves
the party gratified, to be proportionably serviceable to him that did him
kindness, and to begin again. So that every good turn in nature is
obligatorie, and whatsoever benefiteth, ipso facto binds. If this be an
effect of free donations, much more of donations in trust; and therefore unto
whom much is given, of him much shall be required. And as much grace received,
asks for much duty; so, you will all grant, great duty neglected, must needs
be great sin in the receiver. When God had done what ever he could unto his
Vineyard, and the fruit was wild grapes, Esaias. 5.
the sin was aggrauated. Among other things enbaunsing judgment, knowledge is
not the least. In this respect, it is evident, that the sins of the Jews
were greater, caeteris paribus, then the sins of the Gentiles of old: for, In
Jury was God known, he has not dealt so with every nation, neither have they
known his judgments. And the sins of the Christian, if other circumstances
be matches, are greater then the sins of the Jews, because unto them he
spoke by the Prophets, and that (...), part after part, precept upon precept,
now a little, then a little; then was there but an aspersion, but unto us, by
his Son and Apostles that is fulfilled, I will power out my Spirit upon all
flesh: Joel. 2.
now there was an effusion. And as the neglect of great duty implies great
sin, so (to conclude the prosecution of this proportion) great sin calls
for great punishment; for answerable to the offense are the stripes, Deuteronomy.
25.2. So are we come home at length to this our servant, the occasion of my
Text, who knew his Masters will, and did it not; and therefore shall be beaten
with many stripes; he that knew it not, shall be beaten with few. But first, he
that knows it, shall be beaten with many, for this is Gods proceeding: You
only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore will I visit you
for all your iniquities, Amos 3.2. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the
soul of every man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Grecian.
And how of the Jew first? not only for order of time, but for greatness of
punishment, (...), He that has enjoyed more instruction, deserves to undergo
more punishment, if he transgress, Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in cand. Epist. So that
we see clearly, the proportion and correspondency that the account shall bear
with the receite, according to that in Occumenius his collection upon the 4
Ephesians. (...): by how much greater the grace, by so much stricter the accounts.
For the reckoning is but the comparison of the receipts, with the gains and
expenses; and therefore the multitude of receipts, must of necessity increase
the reckoning, as Saint Gregory in his 9 ^^om. upon the Gospels observes, Cum
augen^ur ^ona rations etram crescunt donorum: When the gifts are increased,
the account of the gifts does also increase.

Suffer me now to be, as I am, both warranted and charged by the scope of this
Scripture, at least, a remembrancer of an account; of an account, that well
considered, may slack the pace, and cool the courage of the most proling
hot-spurs in this ambitious generation, which making sluttish means and
motions, taking slavish terms and conditions, to the reproach of learning, and
extreme scandal of religion, think that much al too little, which God has
given them: little do they think, they cry for more and more weight, to
press themselves to death: for whose sakes, some man (perhaps) might wish
(though I think that cure too desperate) I say, some might wish in indignation,
ambition it self a virtue: the only wish to free them from it, the Church
from them, and to make better men more ambitious. You know how backward Ambrose
was, what dangerous shifts he made to hide himself from a Bishopric; and
yet we read, how Origin was so forward, though it were to be a Martyr, that
his mother was feign to hide his clothes from him. To the contrary minds of
contrary men, in our contrary times, wherein we see many, that in all
likelihood, would be most backward for martyrdom, most forward for preferment,
what should a man say? Surely might true seriousnes beg for me, that the
suite might not seem ridiculous, I would beseech my Mother (I mean this
famous University) to keep back some of their clothes, from some of them.
But let them go, I have done: me thinks, when we ponder, and balance this
account, we have little reason to envy them: for our selves, of whatsoever
condition or vocation while we live, we must acknowledge our selves but
Stewards; and therefore when we dye, we must look for a reckoning. A Steward,
as you have heard, is one that manageth another estate; Wherefore if you have
not been faithful in an other man's goods, Luke 19.
says our Savior, who shall give you that which is yours? Did this
faithfulness consist in keeping, we might suspect the argument, for that men
love and keep their own things best, as Aristotle has taught us, Occono. 1.
but this faithfulness is seen in liberal expending, and that with the owners
consent and permission, yea and commandment: wherefore, if you have not been
faithful, in spending that which was another, who shall give you that which is
truly yours, that which shall stick by you, that which shall never be taken
from you? Give me leave to speak yet in more particular instance, God knows,
not upon mine own discovery for reprehension, but from mine heart for caution,
and that, upon supposition. If our Rulers, to whom much is given, should seek
their own, and not the advancement of learning, piety and religion, which is
required in all our Founders general intents (howsoever according to the
knowledge of their times they be limited) If men that live in Colleges, to
whom much is given, should either have no ends to direct their endeavors, which
is required by statute, but wrap themselves within their own present rest and
retyrednesse, It is good being here: or only have such ends as end in
themselves, by carrying of a key, or bearing of a bag, to seek the
contriuance of their own commodity: God will see, and their own consciences
will one day feel, that this was no good Stewardship. The world besides, will
be ready to suspect, that men in Colleges imagine themselves to be like
Colldges; that is, as the Lawyers call them, bodies without souls; and
therefore that they have no touch, or (...), of conscience, no conscience of
carfulness, no care of salvation: Wherefore, as when ye behold the houses
which ye built not, the trees which ye planted not, the wells which ye dug
not, you learn, that unto you much is given. So look on them once more, and
let them be as memorials, to put you in mind, that of you, much shall be
required.

You that are before others in prerogative of birth and blood, whom God has
invested with right unto titles and revenues, though you never labored for it,
as he does clothe the Lillies of the field, in this Chapter, though they never
spin for it: consider, that unto you much is given; and withal remember, that
of you much shall be required; and therefore, if no other reason may move you
to studious and religious conversation; if neither the eminency of your place,
which will make your sins exemplary; and every defect in your life, noted and
observed like an Eclipse; nor the necessity of not degenerating, laid upon you
by your forefathers, which Boethius thought the greatest profit of nobility;
nor the danger of being surpassed by your inferiors, who finding no such
flattering heraldry in their originals, press forward to a glorious end,
forgetting their beginning; yet let that great account which you must make,
make you religious. And let me tell you, that religion will make Honor more
honorable: for the Noble Bereans had not been known unto us, in all
likelihood, for their Nobility, unless they had been first known by Paul for
their religion: Acts 17. If this be not enough, Solomon can teach you; He that
loves pureness of heart for the grace of his lips, the King shall be his
friend: Prou. 22. If that will not serve the turn, God himself will fully
satisfy you: Them that honor me, will I honor, 1. Sam. 2.

We that are Ministers, must recount with our selves, that both before, and at
the laying on of hands, much, very much is given unto us: remembering withal,
that our charge is greater, then the charge of any; our sin will be greater,
then the sin of any; our reckoning greater then the reckoning of any. As
therefore we know, that at our hands, much labor, much watching, much praying
is required: So let us labor, watch and pray, lest much blood be required at
our hands: we know it is a beam in the eye of the Church, if we bury and
suppress a Talent, by not using it; and it is likewise a leprosy in the face,
and forehead of the Church, if we pollute, and profane a Talent by abusing it:
for though we be Sons of thunder, and be mistaken, as was Barnabas for
Jupiter; yet if we be but mistaken, our loosenes of life will utterly undo our
preaching, as Jupiters adulteries even among children, do altogether discredit
his thundering.

To draw to concluson; every wise man among us, before he suffer his eyes to
slumber, or his eyelids to take any rest; will make an Inuentory of Gods
blessings, whether they be blessings general, or bleffings special;
blessings of nature, or blessings of grace; blessings that belong, either to
the soul or body, or the outward estate, as unto some of us in all these, unto
all of us, in some of these much, without question is given; and then examine
his own heart upon interrogatories, how, and to whose advantage he has
employed them, that he may bewail whatsoever is amiss, and study to amend
whatsoever he bewayleth. When a Gentleman of Rome, having concealed his broken
estate, died, and his goods were set to open sale for his Creditors
satisfaction, Augustus himself sent to buy that bed for his own use, wherein
the man, so far in debt, could possibly take his rest. If we (my Brethren)
who have received much, returned little, knowing what God requires, and how
deep we are in his arrerages, notwithstanding can find in our hearts to sleep
dead sleep; is is to be presumed we have soft pillowes? or is it not rather to
be feared, we have very hard hearts? Otherwise (me thinks) the difficulty of
our account at the last inevitable Audit, should awake us: for what shall we
answer for the gain and interest, if we have prodigally wasted, and misspent
the principal? if our very receipts were so great, that we cannot reckon them;
how alas, how shall we reckon for them? But the terror (if there be any
tenderness left in our hearts) the terror, that shall undoubtedly take hold of
us, if we be not good accountants, must needs appale us, affright us, and
astonish us. Some of us have bin hedged about with outward blessings, and
increase of substance; if we have not used it, or if we have abused it, the
rich glutton in the Gospel may teach us, that though it breed security for a
while, our fear at the length will seize upon us, like fire on iron, where,
though it be long kindling, it has more fervent and violent operation. Many of
us have enjoyed strength of bodies; if we have not used it to Gods glory, the
strongest shall be as tow, if we have abused it to intemperancy, Woe unto them
that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are strong to power in strong
drink, Esaias 5. Most of us have knowledge; but as knowledge does raise and
cleuate the soul, so, if it be not used, or abused, the fall must needs be
greater from on high, when the soul shall fall, like an Anglell we then suffer
the rust of our spiritual riches, to be a crying witness against us? and can
we endure that common exprobation to ring in our ears continually, Surgunt
indocti and rapiunt caelum; the unlearned arise, and take heaven by violence?

Never, O, never let our knowledge and learning be like Vriah his letters,
letters unto us of blood, of death, and of destruction, only to condemn us
unto Satan that last merciless Executioner, with this deadly commendation,
Go, bind him hand and soote. Egomet tabellas detuli vt vinc^rer? Did I my
self bring letters that I might be bound? The foolish servant in the Comedy,
spoke it with indignation. Wherefore if there be in us any wisdom of the Spirit,
and Christian ingenuity; let us fear and be ashamed to make our own learning
and knowledge, our own Mittimus to hell; and to change, and turn our talents
by suppression, or profanation of them, into milstones about our necks, to
sink us down into deeper condemnation. I conclude all with that, which may
be the sum of all that may be spoken, the end of all Sermons, and as one
calls it, the voice of all creatures, Accipe, Read, Cane; If it be obscure,
I open it thus, Accipe, receive in the name of God, receive the blessings;
Read, return for the love of God, return the duties; Cave, beware in the
fear of God, beware of the punishments.

O Lord, as thou have showed us much mercy, both in giving us great blessings,
and forgiving us many sins and transgressions; so let not our offenses hinder
the continuance of thy grace unto us, but make us more mindful of our duties,
thankful for thy benefits, zealous for thy glory, devout in thy service,
confident in thy promises, holy in our lives, diligent in our vocations. Hear,
O Lord, etc.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS.
ISAY, 28.1. Woe to the Crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim: for his
glorious beauty shall be as a fading flower, etc.


BEcause this argument is an argument of terror, uttered in a full sense,
without either preface ^ere, or manifest dependa^ce upon the former Chapters;
suffer me, Right Honorable, to try the beginnings of my strength in a plain,
and unaffected interpretation, that the words proving first no strangers
themselves, may find that interest in your Judgments, as to recommend the
matter, to the readiest entertainment of your best affections. Woe to the
crown of pride.] Though woe be a particle of bad aboade, importing a curse to
them that are threatened, yet some Grammarians call it an inter^ection of
sorrow; Scholiasts reduce it to (...), which signifying to groan, can hardly
be pronounced without some sucking of the breath some sighing accent; and
Translators have rendered it sometimes, Alas, as well as, woe. Let it therefore
seem no riddle, if, as out of the strong there came sweetness: the threatner,
who thus roareth in the sinners ears, appear anon gracious compassionate,
quique dolet quoties cogitur esse serox.

The Crown of pride some slightly passse over, as standing barely for power
and authority, for honor and majesty, for any kind of eminency; but I dare not
rashly despise their conjecture, who suppose that the Prophet sends us, by way
of allusion, to the common custom of drinking bankers; wherein men of elder
time crowned themselves with garlands. I might trouble you with many profane
Poetical authorities, in imitation whereof Clemens Alexandrinus plaieth the
Poet. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But all authorities to this purpose are super fluous, amongst them that ever
looked back upon antiquities; one reason of this usage was, no doubt,
necessity, to prevent pain and amazement, because wine does in a sum first
give the brain a blow, that like a subtle wrastler, it may suppla^t the feet
afterward: sundry flowers and herbs, whereof then their garlands were
platted, are at this day prescribed for headache by Physicians. There followed
another reason, the desire of trimnesse and elegancy, that they might not only
adorn, but arm themselves against such sauors, and annoiances, as usually fall
out in a throng of pot-companions. It is ob^ected by Mart. Roia, out of
Tertullians book de corona Milites, the 9. chap. that this was no Jewish
fashion: neither do I strive to make it Jewish originally; rather I think it
derived from the Gentiles by Jewish imitation: for besides, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Cap. 2. verse. 8.
the Author of Wisdom, whether Philo, or another Jew, lively describes this
riotous ceremony: Let us crown our selves with rose-buds before they be
withered: yea, the conjunction of these two sins, pride and drunkenness,
intimate the crown, to be that crown, which in the third verse belongs also
to the drunkards.

The drunkards of Ephraim] The Septuagint read (...) the mercenaries or
hirelings: misplace but a point in the Hebrew letter and Sacar for Schacar, is
as easily read as Siboleth, pronounced for Schiboleth. Drunkards they were
then, not in a sense metaphorical, drunk with error, as Hierom would have
it; or as others, drunk with prosperity; but (for that they dwelt near the
vines; and there is below, repetition of wine, and of vomiting) they were in a
literal and gross sense the drunkards of Ephraim, that is, of Israel, the
kingdom of the ten Tribes; partly, for that Samaria, the seat of the King, was
within the portion of Ephraim, and partly, for that ^eroboam, the first founder
of that reuolting regiment, was an Ephramite.

For his glorious beauty shall be like a fading f^owre.] In which words, the
King of Ashur his coming isimplied, who took and carried away the people
captive, in the ninth year of Hoshea: the whole story may ye consult in the
2. of Kings 17.

The head of the valley of them that be fat] is Samaria, standing above the
Valley Cenereth, or else some fertile soil, nothing inferior for fruitfulness
to that place in the 20. of Matthew, corruptly called Gethsemane, truly
Geshemanim, the valley of fatness. The sense and sum of the whole is this, a
commination of a judgment executed by Salmanaser upon the 10. Tribes, led
perforce into captivity, because they did abuse the fatness of a good land,
unto Pride and Drunkenness.

The Parts can be nolesse then four.

1 The denunciation of a woe. Woe. 2 The persons to whom, and their sin: The
crown of pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim. 3 The reason why: For their glorious
beauty is a fading flower. 4 The place where, which ministered occasion to the
sins: which is upon the ^ead of the Valley of them that be fat, and are
overcome with wine. Of these in order.
To pass by the Prophet, who threatens instrumentally, all Gods threatenings,
who threatens principally, may be thought, either absolute or conditional: of
the latter, the condition is sometimes concealed within the purpose of his own
will, Sometimes expressed, and that extraordinarily by singular revelation unto
some, or unto all in his written word ordinatily: the revealed ordinary
condition is either Legal, If you will not obey, Leu. 26. or Evangelical,
Except you repent, Luke 13.3. Apoc. 2.5. Repentance is an ordinary revealed
Evangelical condition to be still supplied, whenever God threatens, and
gives space for repentance. Though we should imagine now, Salmanasar very
near the gates of Samaria; nevertheless, three years siege was warning
sufficient; yea, that the Lord of Hosts should threaten at al before he
strikes, nay therefore threaten, that being prevented by conversion, he might
not strike at all, may fill my mouth, and your cares, God grant it may fill our
hearts with a feeling consideration of his long suffering. There were more
days, you know, spent in the destruction of one City Ierico, then in the
making of the whole world: the whole world was made in six, yet
notwithstanding the wickedness of many generations, whereunto we have added
no small portion, it stands after many thousands. A man would think, Judgment
were all this while omitted, as an improper, and impertinent business, scarce
agreeable to the blessed nature of such a Sovereign goodness. I am sure, some
conster the Prophet in the 21. verse of this Chapter, where he terms a
judgment, his work, his strange work; his act, his strange act, so as if every
act of scuerity secmed strange unto him; for after his patience would have been
but for infinitenes, tired with a tedious expectation of our leisure to repent;
at length when the sword is drawn, the hand is up ready to smite, mercy steps
in, like the Angel to Abraham, Wherefore should Ephraim be destroyed? Why will
ye die, O ye house of Israel? Never had people better experience of this, then
this people, as you may perceive in the 11. of Hosea; How shall I give thee up,
Epharaim? how shall I deliver thee, Hos. 11. verse. 8.
Israel? how shall I set thee as Zebo^m? mine heart is turned within me, my
repentings are rouled together. How? and How? mercy belike has got the
victory, and all the weapons in the Armory of heaven, are become like the
Rainebow, a bow indeed, but without an arrow; with a full bent, but without a
string, the wrong side being always up wards, as if we shot at him, not he at
us. Confounded then be Tertullians adversary, whose hellish heresy dividing
the Godhead, charged the God of the old Testament with blood and cruelty;
Cruel and bloody Marcion, who, had thou not been a cursed spawne of that
principal Apostata, who in Paradise, a place full of love, would have fastened
envy upon his Maker, hardly could thou have laid so foul an imputation of
rigor, in a world of mercies upon thy Creator: but thou forgattest he was thy
Creator, he created that head which invented, that tongue which uttered this
devilish blasphemy; could thou forget thine own head and tongue, invention
and utterance? afterward in mercy he spared thee, when thou through malice
sparedst not him: Was this a cruel God? No, Marcion, no, God needs no cruelty:
2. Cor. 1.3.
if he would turn all things into nothing, he might do it in justice, and his
justice is a part of his goodness. But he is (...), the Father of mercies, the
motive of showing mercy is within him, but the motive of executing judgment
and revenge is without him in our provocation: you read him not called the
Father of judgment. Behold then a heavenly pattern, when all earthly patterns
fail, according to which you may proportion (...) public and private
discipline, whomsoever God has made Censurers and Commanders over your
inferior brethren. I stand not now before many Magistrates; if I did, I durst
not show my self wiser then their laws, which limit all necessary
jurisdiction, setting down the time betwixt judgment and punishment. Only I
would with reverence beg of such, that in arbitrary censures concerning
voluntary jurisdiction, they would consider and beware of peremptory rashness,
which at S. Ambrose his motion caused Theodosius his decree in the Code, that
there should be 30. days respit between his sentence and execution: but I
turn my self willingly unto you that are Judges at home, Masters of your own
families, beseeching you by these mercies of God, as you have found the
patience of a Master in heaven, when in conscience you did not go at his
sending, come at his calling, nor do your duties at his command; among your
covenant servants, rather spare, where in equity you might have punished, then
punish, where, with a little clemency you might have spared: walk before them
in such innocent conversation your selves, that they may despair of pardon for
their offenses, and yet so pardon theirs, as if your selves did offend
continually. They are your Apprentices, that is, Scholars, use them like
Scholars, give fair means always the preeminencie, multiply direction upon
direction, instruction after instruction, now a warning, and then a threatening;
discharge not your whole authority like a piece of Ordinance, which bruseth,
crusheth, and breaks into pieces or cuer it reports; when words will not
serve, yet let not blows come without weeping eyes, yerning bowels, and
melting hearts:

Qui fruitur poena, ferus est leguinque, videtur.
Vindictam praestare sibi. --
Passion and precipitation may make mental murder of a just correction.
Betherefore merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful, using your power,
all that have power, for edification, not for destruction: for Saint James has
spoken it, James 2.13.
and the day of Jesus Christ shall make it true, There shall be judgment
merciless to him that shows no mercy, and mercy rejoices against judgment.
This vial of wrath hanging over the crown of pride, does more evidently
demonstrate their misery that are threatened: for God which gives his
Husbandman discretion, as you may read in the end of this Chapter, to beat
out Fetches with a staff, not with a threshing instrument; and Cummin with a
rod, not with a cart-wheele; much more himself fitteth his menaces to the
merits of his people, never thundering out a woe upon them, whose present
estate is not already woeful.

The punishment is added (I confess) as a reason, not for that it should give
the being, but because it should work the feeling of their misery: then, even
then, before Samaria was taken, whilst the Prophet cried, from the time they
began to be sinful, they began to be miserable. Take away sins (my brethren)
outward things have lost their stings, punishments are no punishments, but
gentle corrections; plagues no plagues, but gracious visitations; deaths no
deaths, but blessed changes; and in a good cause, glorious martyrdomes. Omnis
paena, peccatipoenaest: All punishment, is the punishment of sin. Admit again
of sins, you must needs admit of calamities, calamities upon your persons; If
I have done wickedly, woe unto me, Job 10. Calamities upon the Church, Woe now
unto us that we have sinned, Lament. 5.10. Calamities upon the Commonwealth,
for sin is a shame unto the people, some read it, the peoples misery, Prou.
14. One part of man's unhappiness consists in a woe privative, the want of Gods
gracious countenance, so is it said of Ephraim, Of. 9.72 Woe to them when I
depart from them, which is strait upon man's departure from him, plainly to be
seen in the 59. of this Prophecy. Esaias 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you that he will not hear. Reprobates and castawaies,
ordained to condemnation, like Owls that cannot see till night come, seldom
perceive this woe, before they depart into that utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth: only the children of light are mightily
distressed in this life, by spiritual desertions, and Ecclipses of grace, when
their body has been for a time interposed betwixt their souls and the Lord of
life. Therefore as Archimedes, that peerless Mathematician, after his brains
had been hammering about a difficult conclusion, leaped and daunced, and cried
out (...), I have found it, I have found it. The children of God, when hunger
has been their best sauce, and want of feeling has increased their feeling,
after recovery spring and exult, rejoicing and singing with joy unspeakable,
and glorious, He is come, he is come, our souls have found him, whom our
souls do love. The second part of man's unhappiness is a woe positive, a
captivity, which far surpasses the captivity foretold in this place; Isai.
5.18.
Woe to them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with
cart-ropes. Solomon gives the reason: Prou. 5. His own iniquities shall take
the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his own sin.
God help the man thus held, thus entangled: this is a case, wherein a King may
be pitied by a Galley-slaue. Miserabilis seruitus, a miserable bondage, says
Aug. tract. 14. upon. John: for other servants have their remedies: but what
shall the servant of sin do? whither shall he fly, or how can he change
his Master? Se trahit quocunque fugit: He draws himself along whither soever
he flies. Not to mention them, whose natural hardness of heart is confirmed
in evil, by voluntary customs, so that their seared consciences being past
feeling, can as easily dispense with the hardest offenses, as an Ostriges
stomach can digest the hardest Iron:

Quid miserius misero non miserante seipsum? What more miserable, then that
miserable man, which has no commiseration upon himself?

Many men, now adays, apprehend a Woe, but when? when their counsels of pride
and covetousness be crossed, and their hands have not power to practice by day,
that wickedness, which their heads have imagined by night; like Ahab and
Haman; they mourn for their parts in their closets, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon, and will not be comforted, because they
judge it a death, that they cannot be suffered to die; a hell, that the gates
of hell are shut against them: whereas every such arrest should advise them to
cast up their arrerages; and when the Lord stays their iourneies, as he
stayed Saul's and Balaams, it should concern them to grow jealous of those
enterprises, wherein they meet so strange impediments, whether their abilities
be hindered by the shortning of their own arms, or the strengthening of
others; or their wills hindered, by reasons drawn from dishonesty, disprofit,
or impossibility; whether their religion has been hindered by the fear of God,
or their infirmity by the spirit of God, or their ignorance by the word of God;
for so manifold, and more manifold is Gods wisdom in hindering the sins of
men; howsoever, whenever, against whomsoever the Lord has stopped their ways,
or made an hedge about them, down they should fall upon their knees in secret,
and lifting up their hearts, imitat the ground of S. Augustine his meditation,
who Soliloque 16. says Tentator defuit, etc. The tempter was away, time and
place was wanting, thy doing it was that the tempter was away; the tempter came
in time and place convenient, but thou with-heldest me from consenting; when I
had will, I wanted ability; when I had ability, I wanted opportunity: Blessed be
the Lord, as for his furtherance in good, so for his hinderance in evil.

Others apprehend a Woe too, but either for the punishment, not at all for the
sin, or at least, not so much for the sin, as for the punishment, when that
woe which in nature yet remains as long as your sins remain, was made more
sensible and manifest, by Gods destroying Angel in your streets, within doors
(I presume) the voice was, Mine head, mine head, my feet, my feet, my belly,
my belly, my sin, or my soul, was none of your complaints: was sin all
that while no sickness, or were not your souls rather senseles? the
lamentation abroad was, I take it, My father, my father; ah my brother, and ah
my sister; alas, my daughter; help, help, I am a widow, my husband is dead.
O my Son Absolon, my son, my son Absolon, would God I had died for thee.
Not a word of the cause:and what is our peevish lamentation of small effects,
when sin, the maine cause of all, increases, but the curing little clefts of
skin, at the root of our nails, when the head and heart grow more and more
infected? When one told Honorius that Rome was lost, he cried out, Alas,
supposing it had bin an Hen, so called, which he loved more tenderly, then you
would think an Emperor should love so mean acreature: but upon notice that it
was his Imperial City Rome, surprised and sacked by Alaricus the Goth, his
spirits were revived again, that his loss was no greater. Condemn this you
may, most justly, for an unreasonable passion, proceeding from a nice and
childish disposition; but beware you wrap not your selves withal in the same
condemnation. For if you lament the departure of a friend into bliss, but not
the departure of Christ from your own souls; if you can be more heartily
troubled with the toothache, then with the shipwreck of a good conscience; if
you think your wealth, as you name it, your substance, attending thereupon your
selves like base circumstances, and servile accessories: if none of Gods woes
can out of this place reach home to your hearts, and yet euerytrifling
inconvenience of your own debt, or others disappointment have a certain
tyranny to torment, and afflict your souls, as though you must needs break
straitwaies, be gone, and undone, worse by much then nothing; marvel you no
longer at Honorius, for though it were a weak part in him, to grieve for the
lesser damage, more then for the greater, yet had it been like lost labor in
any man, to grieve at all for either. With us the case stands far
otherwise, vain are sighs indeed and groans, for worldly losses, for want of
wine and oil we howl. (I call it, as God accounts it, Ose 7.) I say, We howl
on our beds all in vain, whereas true tears, and untaught sobs for sin, are
neither forcelesse, nor fruitless. A medicine, says Chrysostom, ad Pop.
Antioch. hom. 5. which cures the eyes, and nothing else, we may well say, was
made for the eyes, and nothing else. A man loses his wealth, and is sorry for
it, sorrow will not recover it; he burieth his child, and is sorry for it,
sorrow will not raise him from the dead; he suffers a wrong, and is sorry for
it, sorrow will not right him; himself is sick, and is sorry for it, sorrow
will not heal, rather it will hurt him; sorrow was not made then for these
things. But he sins, and is sorry for it, sorrow takes away sin: sin
then is the sickness, for which sorrow is the remedy. And now that you have
seen in a small word a double refere^ce, mercy from him that threatens, in
them that are threatened misery; put both together, and consider the multitude
of Prophets on the one side, which travel hither from most corners of the land
with a woe, the multitude here, and confluence hither of offenders on the other
side, which by their invincible hardness of heart, justly deserve a woe, and
tell me whether woe be not the burden of the Lord unto this City, I must needs
take it for granted. Let us al then most miserable offenders, as long as Gods
threatenings are but threatenings; while we have light and life, whilst it is
called to day, and we are yet in the way, take advantage of this accepted time,
make much of this day of Salvation, and husband aright this blessed
opportunity, the only certain hour of our visitation. Should we (like Pages
at Court, who having allowed them a candle to go to bed withal, spend it at
Cards, and go to bed darkling) consume the short remainder of our lives in
folly, and send our hoary heads to the grave in ignorance? The sudden
conversion of any man, like the thief on the Cross at the last cast, was
never intended in Gods purpose, for our temptation. We have bin often certified
from S. Aug. that though there were one so saved, that no man might despair;
yet there was but one, that no man might presume. If every man should trudge
along in sin, until he met mercy, because one in sin obtained mercy: every man
might spur his beast until he spoke, because Balaams beast once did speak:
were we sure that God would call us then, as we have no assurance, what
sacrifice can it be, when Satan has devoured the finest of the flower, and
sweetest of the wine, the best of our time, to reserve and present the bran and
the dregs of our dotage to the Lord? If we repent when we cannot sin,
gramercy sins, they leave us, this comes from fear, all is necessary, no
thank to us, we leave not them, nothing here is voluntary. And what equity
do we call it, to lay the heauiest burden, on the weakest beast, to force old
age, so feeble, that it cannot bear it self, to bear the burden of our
repentance? forsooth, when our enemy, the strong man, is grown stronger by
prescription; when our rotten tabernacle is ready to fall about our ears; when
custom has turned infirmities into nature; when sin is soked into substance,
and our bones are full of the vices of our youth, then belike we would repent,
we would if we could: but be sure, that as he who never went to School, will
hardly read his neck-verse; so he that never learned what repentance was in
his life, shall in his death find it exceeding hard, if not impossible. To
conclude, since heaven, as some say, is like Ahashuerus his Court, no mourners
enter thither, all there have wedding garments, since it is mourn in earth, or
mourn in hell; woe unto us, if we defer our repentance; woe unto us, if we
repent not our deferring; woe unto us, if we repent not as soon as we can,
and repent for this, that we repented no sooner: Foelices quibus hae minae
fient medicinae; Happy, thrice happy are they, whom these woes shall woo to
repentance. This of the denunciation, Woe.

The sins follow: Pride and Drunkenness, I must begin with pride, and first,
with her nature pride, then with her ornament, the crown of pride. For the
description of this haughty sin, which springs from the preposterous
self-love, whereof every man more or less is partaker, most of the Schoolmen
are beholding to S. Augustine, and he truly calls it a perverse, or
inordinate desire of ones own excellency, out of which, as they jointly proceed
in the steps of S. Gregory, either a man presumptuously challenges to
himself that which he has not, or that whereof he is owner, but will not
confess himself receiver: the former is more senseles, being altogether
without any color of ground, or matter of tentation: but the latter is more
heinous, because it includes an unthankful injury directed against God
immediately. This injury is offered two ways, first, when a man makes himself
the total cause of all good things, impudently denying the receipt of any
benefit. Secondly, when he makes himself the principal cause, acknowledging
the receipt, but pleading his own merit: here common reason might step and
object, that though merit be always a doctrinall sin in Romish mouths, and
a personal sin in too many English hearts; yet none ever will cross Saint
James his doctrine, Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above:
James 1.17.
or if any shall be so graceless, that man may be thought in equity more
then proud, rather in plain terms, an Atheist, or an Infidel. Certainly
none under the degree of a manifest Infidel, can possibly be so far corrupt
in estimation, as to maintain such an unchristian monstrous Paradox
universally, but in particular, and for the time; passionate affectation of
their own worth, may beguile wise men's understandings, and teach them so proud
an outward deportment, as they could have no prouder, whosoever should imagine
constantly Gods gifts their own creatures. Now Gods glory, whereof, as of his
dearest spouse, he is most ielous, My glory will I not give to another, Es. 42.
must of necessity call for a woe against a sin of this nature. Woe was the
portion of the King of Babylon, who said in his heart, I will ascend into
heaven, Esaias 14.13.
and exalt my Throne above, besides the stars of God, Esa. 14 Woe was the
portion of the Prince of Tyrus, who said, I am a God, and sit in the seat of
God, Ezech. 28.
in the midst of the Sea. But above all that either have bin read or heard, Woe
is the portion of that man of sin, that child of perdition, whose triple
Crown, shall I say, nay, whose foot of pride is advanced above all Crowns of
pride, I mean the beasts unclean hoofes, lifted up either to receive the
kisses, or spurn off the Diadems, and tread on the neck of Kings and
Emperors, so that he does sit as God in the Temple of God, 2. These. 2.
showing himself that he is God, if not by verbal profession openly and
directly, yet covertly by consequent in real usurpation. I touch not his going
in Procession before the Os^e, it is unto us but the going of a creature before a
creature, his sitting above the Altar, Lapis super lapidem, a stone upon a
stone: no great pride of precedencie; but what can God or Christ be more then
he makes himself? a forgiuer of all sins, a binder of all consciences, a
dispenser with all laws, a disposer of all Kingdoms, a commander of Angels
and devils, a sole Clauiger of heaven and hell: though he should carry
numberless numbers of people with him headlong to the kindgom of darkness, none
must say, Quid it a facis? Holy Father, why do you so? you can appeal no
more, ascend no higher, dispute no further, then to the closet and consistory
of his breast, wherein there is neither weakness nor error. Saucy therefore was
that Canon Regular, in the days of Paul the third, who did set out a book
against the Popes authority, wherein, among others suppressed, this was one
galling argument, Either the Pope is a brother, then may he be warned at the
least, if not excommunicated, Matthew. 18. or else he is no brother: then why
does he say with us, Pater noster, Our Father? Wherewith, when the Pope was
both offended and perplexed, a Courtier gave him this jesting counsel, Nolite
vos vnquam dicere Pater noster, and solutum est argumentum; Never say your
Pater noster, and this argument is answered. As jesting as it was, we judge it
agreeable to Popish principles; for we can do him no greater wrong, then once
to think he says his P^ter noster, if he be, as he is termed, by the
permitted and authorized voice of blasphemous parasites, Dominus Deus noster
Papa, Our Lord God the Pope. How long, Lord, how long, holy and true, do thou
not consume the pride of this wicked miscreant with the spirit of thy mouth,
and with the brightness of thy coming? Thus we preach, and thus you hear,
and thus all Christian hearts do pray: mean while every man must watch over
his own soul with all diligence, le^t, as the Pope rose whilst the Emperor
was absent, when the fear of God departs, there steal up in his heart a
little Antichrist; when once a man's dependence upon God is forgotten, he shall
easily mistake his own proportion; when his proportion is mistaken, he will
dote in admiration of himself, and admiring himself, he quickly proceeds to
contempt, and extenuation of others, I thank thee, O God, I am not as other
men, or as this Publican. But, as Optatus concludes that parable, meliora
inuenta sunt Peccata cum humilitate, quam Innocentia cum superb^a: Humble sin
was found better then proud innocence. My short advice for preventing of this
Satanicall sin is, first, that men would bring themselves often into Gods
presence, which was the thing that made Job abhor himself, Job. 42.6. Isai.
6.5.
and Isay confess himself a man of polluted lips: and Saint Barnard, living
in a time and place of darkness, detest the proud opinion of merit. Secondly,
that they would often examine themselves by the rule of the Apostle, What have
thou, that thou have not receined?

The Crown on her head makes her appear more glorious, either sitting like
her, Reu. 17. or standing like her, 2. King. 9. or coming out of her chamber
like her, in the 25. of the Acts, verse 25. (...), with great pomp, speaking
the pompous words of vanity, walking with the pompous gesture of majesty,
clothed in the pompous robes of bravery, the least of these might make a
simple man eloquent; and I would never wish a fitter subject in this great
assembly, were I to treat of one subject alone: but the larger part of this
Scripture being yet behind, will not suffer me to fight hand to hand with
pride, only I must shoot at her Crown, or at the most, but hit her Periwig,
my first arrow will I borrow out of Nazianzens Qui^^ (...). Daughters of
England (for so must I speak) build not Turrets or Castles on your heads, with
braided hair, and gold put about: these can be no fences or fortresses of your
chastity, rather they are allurements of your enemy, if not trophies and
tokens of his victory. The Persian Kings having many wives, appointed this or
that City, to find this or that wife a Tire, or a Bonnet, and other to supply
her with another ornament: the Prince of the world, I fear, having set up his
proud banners amongst us, and conquered us, has imposed an heavier tribute
upon us, one of our Cities must now maintain most of his concubines. For could
I conceive it, or you hear it without grief of heart, our ancient,
substantial, fundamental trades belonging unto Clothing go down, and they
that fill our Cities are Nugi^endi, triflesellers, or as the Civil law names
some Gyneciarij, such as provide for that woman's wardrope in the third of Esaias.
The men that are busied, and the charge that is employed about these painful
and difficult to yes, would serve for many new Plantations, but for the waste
of precious hours, dum moliuntur, dum comuntur, while they are tyring and
trimming themselves, it is more lamentable then credible, I dare be bold to say,
Kingdoms might be conquered, whilst Ruffes are a pinning. Proud imaginatio^s
may pervert my meaning, yet though my speeches were racked, they would not
confess one syllable against civil decensie, mundus erit qui non offendet
sordibus, that is, comeliness which does not offend by sluttish negligence, the
garnishments of pride have no communion, or agreement with the garments of
comlines; comlines would never bid a woman go beyond her condition; only pride
being no lawful Queen, usurps here a Crown, as some that are scarce
Ladies, wear Coronets; comeliness would never bid a woman pass the bounds of
her ability, only pride sets us walking in the midst of our wealth. Quis
pudor est census corpore far suos? Comeliness would never make more of
Jewels, then of children: Cornelia called her children her only Jewels: but
alas, now adays, Matrona incedit census induta Nepotum, the pride of Matrons
stalks along the streets, clothed with the spoils of children and posterity.
Besides all this, honest comeliness will not offer occasion of suspicion, but
the garish ceremonies of pride cannot but carry bad significations, so
covering the body, that they discover the mind. Genesis 38.
Judah knew what Tamar was by sight, for she had covered her face, which puts
me in mind to borrow one arrow more out of Nazianzens Quiver, (...): Neither
may you daughters of England (so must I still speak) abuse Gods Creation,
attempt to control, or correct his workmanship, adding to that face, which
Saint James terms natural, the borrowed features of a face artificial; for
Esaias cries here, Woe to the Crown, and we must cry, woe to the face of
pride. Was it not enough that unnatural niceness has hid their breasts, and
refused to give their own bowels suck? must pride hide their face too? No
wonder then, if husbands grow ielous of their wives, and know not their
children, whilst wives so disfigure themselves like Courtezans, that children
hardly know their mothers: and can they then say, this is to please their
husbands? No sooner are they varnished, but they forsake their home, Their feet
abide not in their houses, they must abroad among the fools and the children;
that they may please the young man destitute of understanding, Prou. 7. Among
the wise, their pleasing humor takes none effect or success at all; for when
their time, their colors, and their pains, and their inventions are wasted,
facies dicetur an vlcus, shall we call it a face, or shall we call it an
Impostume? Iesabel (I am sure) proves Iesabel, when all is done, sit for
nothing, but to look out at a window toward the place and instruments of her
destruction, unfit to stir or travel in her vocation; drops of rain, or the
sweat of her own brows, will soil her countenance; unfit to blush and be
ashamed of her wantonness, the rising of the blood will fret her countenance;
unfit to mourn and repent for her wickedness, the tears of her eyes will
wrinkle her countenance; unfit to lift up her face toward heaven for pardon
and forgiveness: God may justly say, he knows not that countenance, he knows
it not with approbation: Iesabel, Iesabel, thou shall know that he will know it
by just visitation. Personam capiti detrahet ille tuo: God shall uncase thee,
God shall smite thee, thou whited wall, walls and not women have need of such
plastering.

Nec tame^ admir or si vobis cur a placendt, cum videant comptos saecula nostra
viros. I do the less marvel, that women should deny their age to please men,
when men have almost denied their sex to please women; some spend whole
mornings in purging, powdering, and perfuming themselves, as though there were
good reason so to do; others in anointing their head, or platting their locks,
as if they had rather the Commonwealth then their hair should be disordered;
others in frizling their tuffes, and curling their foretops, as though one
hair skorned to dwell by another; most men so form and fashion themselves to
the variable excess of out landish attire, that women shall have much a do to
be more vain or fantastical, as if few believed the Lord in Zeph. I will
visit all such as are clothed in strange apparel. The Germans have a
tradition, that the Turks Painter being commanded to describe every nation in
his peculiar fashion, left the Germane naked with cloth in one hand, and a
pair of sheares in the other, that his own humor, which no fashion could
please constantly, might please it self, and be its own caruer, would we
make challenge and demand, our right to this Pagan scoff, is much better then
the Germans. Amongst us the compendious course is taken of gathering our
credit near unto us into clothes, which lay scattered in hospitality before,
and in attendants: the City wonders at the Country, that the poor sheep
should eat up men; the Country wonders again at the City, that suits of
apparel should devour Seruingmen; nor has this pride turned away men's
followers only, it has likewise banished all affection of charity. A poor
man were as good go beg of an Image, or a Monument, as of these gorgeous
Idols, which represent nothing but apparel. They have not for him, they say,
They have not for him, when the Jewels in their ears, the Rings on their
fingers, and Roses on their shoes, give their mouths the lie, their
superfluities might supply his necessities: But what speak I of the poor!
give my plainness leave to press a comparison; our Liege Lord, and gracious
Sovereign (whom God preserve for ever) requires a support at our hands; we
are not for him, but for our selves; the Crown of the King must want, the
crown of pride must not want; and let her assure her self, as long as there
is a Prophet in Israel, and a providence in heaven, she shall both hear and
feel a woe; Woe to the Crown of pride, etc.

Pride and drunkenness, without any tie placed together appositiue may make us
suspect, that howsoever they seem contrary sins, there is a secret
acquaintance betwixt the^; first, both in the judgment of God and in nature,
one succeeds another. In the judgment of God, he that exalts himself above
his creation against the first Table, falls below his creation into sins of
the second Table, why not from pride to drunkenness? In nature, when once this
falsehood has place, All is mine own; that truth must follow, It is lawful
for me to do what I will with mine own, thence arise all abuses of the
creatures. Secondly, the Prophet Habakuk tells us of more then a consequent
succession, of a neighborhood betwixt them: The proud man is as he that
transgresses by wine; for the general name pride is a surfeit, and so is
drunkenness; the one of the body, the other of the mind: for effects, pride in
Nebucadnezar, made him of a man a beast, so does drunkenness. Lastly, their
opposites are the same, pride is contrary to sobriety, (...) to (...), so is
drunkenness; therefore, since they are not unlike one another, I could wish
the motion might not seem ridiculous, that they might be matched hand in hand
together in punishment; the drunkard, to keep the proud from strouting, the
proud, to keep the drunkard from stumbling.

Proof of woe belonging unto drunkards, were altogether needless, no sin can
answer more directly to the question of all woes. Prou. 23.29.
To whom is woe, to whom is strife, to whom are wounds without a cause, and to
whom is the redness of the eyes, even to them that tarry long at the wine, to
them that seek mixed wine. But lest these curses of al sorts one with another,
should in a confused heap perplex your attention, we will begin with the
drunkards outward estate; Prou. 21.
He that loves wine and oil, shall not be rich: not that he stands at a stay
without farther thriuing, and going forwards only; though it be true, an
Emperor shall sooner make himself a beggar, the^ a drunkard rich; but the
drunkard, and the glutton shall be poor, says Solomon, he must of necessity
go violently backward, not so much because he lies always open to the sober
plots and devices of fraudulent oppressors, (Though he that refraineth not his
appetite, Prou. 25.28.
is like a City broken down without walls) but principally because himself is
to himself within, in stead of all outward caterpillars, his lands are as good
as drowned already, his back is almost stripped to fill his belly, his house
shall shortly vomit him out of doors, his appetite continues notwithstanding
unappeased. Rather it urges more and more, adding drunkenness unto thirst, as
though he vowed to revenge Corah, Dathan, and Abirams death, swallowing the
whole earth by degrees, part whereof did swallow them; in the mean time poor
souls complain on Cormorants, whose vinowed store breaks forth at last;
but here are the most abominable Ingrossers, diminishing the commodities, and
raising the prices, both meriting and procuring famins every where, while that
is transported down a few throats irrecouerably, which might satisfy the
hunger, and quench the thirst of many thousands, some of these thousands may
be their own sons and daughters, who may weep one day for bread, when
there shall be none to give it them, because the prodigal fathers have
already drunk it. This is one Woe for the drunkards of Ephraim.

They that ever saw the staggering feet, and heard the stammering tongue of men
intoxicated with wine, may reckon as well as I, though neither I nor they, can
reckon all their corporal inconveniences, for setting the sin aside, who for
the pain would endure one drunken paroxisme? A Monk of Prage (if we may
credit one Fornerius, of his own religion) having heard at shrift the
confession of drunkards, and pawning his wits to purchase experience of the
sin, stole himself drunk; and after three days drowzy loathsome languishing
vexation, when he came abroad, to all that confessed the same sin, enjoined
no penance but this, Go and be drunk again. Leaving the Monk to your
censures, the meaning of this penance was that, which Seneca has in his 97.
Epist. Sceleris in scelere supplicium est: Their own wickedness was enough to
correct them, and their own turning back to reprove them: but if they
persist incorrigible, there are owing them, rotten teeth, stinking breath,
trembling hands and running eyes, gouts and dropsies, palsies and pleurasies,
innumerable diseases wait and attend their bodies, striving which shall bring
them first with lothsomnesse unto the grave; yet all lingering sicknesses may
be deceived, while drunkards, either by a quarrel, or by a surfeit, or
otherwise under the hand of God suddenly fall, dying in their sins, as they go
to bed in their clothes. There is another woe to the drunkards of Ephraim. This
beastlike swinish sin besides is of it self sufficient to sink both body
and soul eternally, yet as though it threatened more hels then one, it never
comes alone; sometimes it stammereth out into mocking, The drunkards made songs
upon David; sometimes it stumbleth into murder, Herod at the feast beheaded
John Baptist; sometimes it reeleth upon adultery, They rose in the morning,
like fed horses, every man neighed after his neighbors wife, Ier. 5. And
sometimes it walloweth in incest, as you may see by Lots fall, whose drunken
and incestuous issue were the Moabites and Ammonites, both mortal, almost
immortal enemies to the Church. Quem Sodoma non vicit, vicit Ebrietas, vritur
ebrius flammis mulierum, quem sobrium sulphurea flamma non attigerat: He whom
Sodom conquered not, drunkenness conquered. So runs Origens descant upon that
example. They would hear this, were they now present, whose Church is the
Tavern, whose Altar is the Table, whose God their belly, whose end, without
repentance, is damnation: of whom Saint Paul told the Philippians often, at
last he told them weeping. Must Paul and all Ministers weep for them? will not
they weep for themselves? Alas, is the fatness of Gods house, and the delight
of his Sabbath, the continual feast of a good conscience here, and the
perpetual comfort of an everlasting Sabbath in heaven, of so mean and vile
account in their eyes, that al must needs yield to such beast like and
transitory pleasures, as are the taste of the tongue, the touch of the palate,
the smoking of the mouth, or the soking of the throat? Esau will part with his
birthright for a mess of pottage: and these profane persons, for a little
tickling of the palate, and the taste of a running banquet, hazard the fruition
of the substance of eternity. Do I displease any man in this congregation?
Should I please men, I were not the servant of God. Should I please men in
beasts shapes, I were Satan's servant. If a man (says Micah) walk in the
spirit, Micah. 2.11.
and would lie falsely, saying, I will prophecy to thee of wine and strong
drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this people. As, I trust, you have no
will to be such a people, so, I thank God, I have no skill to be such a
Prophet. Yet have I learned of David, that wine is given to make glad the heart
of man; they that have a Christian right, may take a Christian delight in the
creatures: but when men drink not once alone for necessity against dryness,
which is allowed; nor a second time against sadness, which is likewise
tolerated, but a third and fourth time, yea, whole days and nights, in spite
of sobriety for madness, which by the laws of God and man is intolerable, they
must abide this woe to the drunkards of Ephraim. But their sturdy brains
carrying their liquor without distemperature, exempts them from the name of
drunkards; yet our Prophet in his fifth Chapter, meets with such spunges, Woe
unto them that are mighty to drink wine, Isai. 5.22.
and to them that are strong to power in strong drink: yea, though some drink
not at all themselves, only setting others forwards, by prescribing healths,
and pressing votiue salutation, yet Abakuk has a woe in store for them, Abak.
2.15.
Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, thou ioynest thine heat, and
make him drunk; they that laugh, and clap their hands, rejoicing in this
their brothers fall, little think they rejoice in the devils victory; yet so
you know it must be, and therefore a grievous kind of persecution: some
think the passion of Martyrs, and of Christ himself, received the name of a
Cup from this distastefull custom of cramming, and violencing men's appetites,
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me.

The remembrance of this one Cup, did not we, like Joseph and Marie, lose
Christ at our great feasts, might season all our drinkings with abstinence,
especially at this time, when it concerns your practice to join with my
doctrine: we do not mislike the voluntary restraint of our inordinate
appetites, it shall be by and by the matter of mine exhortation, more then
this, far be it from us, to speak against any civil ordinance, for sparing
set meats at set times, for the benefit of a Country. Farther yet, God forbid
we should once open our mouths against religious fasting; religious I mean
not in it self immediately, but mediatly as it stands in reference to
mortification and devotion, to which it is a wholesome preparatiue; all that
good is in fasting, we receive and embrace most willingly, until they cease to
be such Fasts as the Lord has chosen: but we may not endure any Jewish
opinion, of cou^ting that unclean, which the Lord has cleansed; and we owe that
service to the God of Truth, that as long as we know there is but one
Lawgiver, who can sa^e and destroy, we cannot brook that ceremonious,
erroneous, superstitious doctrine of devils (so does the Apostle call it) which
out of the chair of Rome, sends forth imperious traditions, Touch not, Taste
not, with proposal of merit and salvation to such as observe it; to such as
will not, under no less penalty, then mortal sin and damnation. Imagine
the Papists cannot, in this hard case (though I wrong his Holiness facility,
by calling it a hard case) Imagine the Papists will not procure a dispensation,
what do they eat? how do They keep their fast? wherein lies their
abstinence? they will not touch a piece of flesh throughout the Lent for any
good, not they, yet the choicest fruits and shel-fish, the strongest wine and
spices, the costliest conserues and electuaries, by which the flesh in nature
is most stirred up to lewd, and lustful prouocations; these they can take, eat
and digest, they find no stay or stop at all in their stomachs, less in their
consciences.

Thus do they gull the Christian world, with a lying profession of austerity,
whereas their fasts indeed are nothing else, but a mere exchange of gluttony,
for their more variety. But ye (beloved brethren) keep Lent without
equivocation, beating down your bodies, and bringing them into subjection,
mortifying the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof, crucifying the
carnal members here on earth. Set all those woes, which you have heard this
day, before you, together with those conditions, to base and beast-like for
Gods Images, detest both the sin, and the sinners company: and since the
Kingdom of heaven is not meat nor drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost, labor not for the me^te that perishes, nor be drunk
with wine, wherein is excess but be filled with the Spirit, and pray for the
meat that endures to everlasting life. Lord, evermore give us this meat.

For his glorious beauty shall be as a fading flower] Such similitudes as this
of a flower, illustrate most commonly the common frailty of our mortality.

(...): Ad flesh is grass, Hom. Isay 40.
and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the field. But here it notes a
violent calamity, not of one or a few, but both of Prince and people. Now if
men fading like flowers, may remember us that we are men, kingdoms fading like
flowers should teach us, that we are worms, and no men; and in a world, where
heaven and earth wax old, as does a garment, no marvel though kingdoms come
to ruin,

-- Sic omnia verti
Cernimus, atque altas assumere robor a Gentes.
That Image in Daniel does preach it in plain English, This City Samaria, and
this kingdom Israel was emptied by deportation and captivity: the sudden
invasion, the siege, I must altogether omit. It would ask too long time to
stand upon their banishment, and loss of their sweet country, their servitude,
and loss of their sweeter liberty: but the sweetness of all sweetnesses
among them, that bad any spark of religion, was the service of God; well might
they hang up their harpes and weep, How should they sing a Song of the Lord in
a strange Land? Had a Gentile been banished thither he had not been an exile,
but a Proselyte: foelix exiliu^ cuilocus ille fuit: but for a Jew or a
Samaritane, it was far otherwise; yet thus God remooueth his own Candlesticks,
rather suspending his own worship, then suffering sinne^ (such as these are)
unpunished, his executioners were Salmanazar, with a swarm of barbarous
Assyrians. See here again, (for I can but point at heads) how such sins as
these, make men out-lawes, depriving them of Gods protection, and subiecting
them to Tyrants, Isai. 42.
whose mercies are cruelties. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the
robbers? did not the Lord? because we have sinned against him: for God
resists the proud (...), Iam. 4. His forces are against them directed in
battle array, the wrong was his wrong, the enemies are his enemies, the
quarrel shall be his quarrel; though hand join in hand, though they
conspire, or rather deliver over their goods, into the hands of their
posterity, they shall not be unpunished: and for the drunkards, The new wine
shall be pulled from their mouths, Joel 1. I could show you more at large, how
these sinners draw Cities and Kingdoms unto desolation. In brief, the reason
in humane policy I take to be, because both are contrary to providence; they
must be sober that will watch, and they must not contemn, that will
circumuent the enemy. The reason in Divinity is, for that both are enemies to
repentance, and God punishes for impenitency, not for impurity. Ierem. 7.12.
Now, as God in Jeremy says, Go unto Shilo, so say I, Go to Samaria, behold,
and see what he has done to it, for the wickedness of his people Israel, his
justice now was his justice then, and these sins of England may compare with
the sins of Samaria: why then may we not justly fear captivity? Tell me,
What is our privilege? Indeed we hear neither noise of war, nor news of an
enemy: Yet God can lift up a sign to the Nations a far off, and hiss unto
them from the ends of the earth, and they shall come hastily with speed. The
Turk has bid himself welcome, where he was sometimes as little looked for. A
mighty Nation we are, whose bulwark is the Sea, whose confederate Neighbors
round about are our Sentinels; yet forget not Nahums question unto Niniue, Art
thou better then No, Nahum. 3.8.
which was full of people? That lay in the Rivers, and had the waters round
about it: whose ditch was the Sea, and her walls was from the Sea, Aethiopia
and Egypt were her strength, Put and Lubin were her helpers, yet was she
carried away, and went into captivity. Perhaps we have lived in long peace
without interruption, though the year 88. should be blotted out of all records
of time, yet is not our estate the better, for this security much the worse. I
am patimur longae pacis mala: Now do we suffer the mischiefs of long peace.
Moab has been at rest from his youth, and has not been powered from vessel to
vessel: but what follows? I will send unto him such as shall carry him away.
Though he send none unto us, yet have we Salmanazars and Assyrians at home, or
as barbarous as they that took the Samaritanes; nay more barbarous then the
Lions, that devoured the Samaritanes successors; pride is grown up with our
glory, like Iuy with an Oak to the height,

-- Summisque negatum est stare diu -- When such things are at their highest
pitch dream not of stabilitie, which had we rather, learn at the charge, and
by the stripes of others a far off, or that the Lord should come, and bring
the doctrine of destruction to our doors? I know your answer. Understand
then, that Egypt and all Asia now in servitude, many great Cities and mighty
Kingdoms made habitations for Dragons, and Courts for Ostriges, and the fairest
flowers of all histories trampled under feet, may teach England to forsake her
surfeiting. It is true, to the praise of God be it spoken, our swords are
turned to mattocks, and every man sits under his own vine, the Bees may
hiue themselves in our helmets, and horses of war have little use, saving to
draw our Coaches to the Church. This is the glorious beauty of our Church and
Kingdom, and this is the grievous eyesore of our enemies. I wish from mine
heart, I wish, that all their plots and devices may have their womb to be
their grave, like the Powder Plot. Yet if God should give us over into their
hand, (though rather let us fall into thy hands, O God, then into the hands of
our enemies) yet if he should give us over into their hands, we should weep
with bitter tears, and cry out with hideous lamentations, O that our fear had
looked forwards, before our grief was forced to look backwards upon this
desolation. The place yet remains.

The head of the Valley.] The Metropolis of the ten Tribes, Samaria, might it
self be named the very Crown of Pride, because it compassed the hill Somer,
with magnificent buildings in form of a Crown, the Countries about abounded
with Gardens, Vine-yards and Pastures: in a word, with a general concurrence
of all earthly commodities: so Laish, in the 18. of Judges, was a place which
lacked nothing that was in the world, but the people were careless, after the
manner of the Zidonians. Sodom, in the 13. of Genesis, was as the garden of the
Lord, or the Paradise of God: Sodom and Samaria were sisters, Ezech. 16. Like
sisters, had like daughters: the iniquity of Sodom, was fullness of bread,
pride, and idleness, the wickedness of Samaria, pride and drunkenness; whence
we may conceive the truth of that motive, for which Cyrus in Herodotus, would
not suffer his Persians to change a barren for a fruitful dwelling, (...),
because delicate habitations make delicate inhabitants. There is good reason
why no point of Philosophy should stand more beholding to history, then this
for instance, and exemplification. In Sibaris, in the barn or storehouse of
Rome, Sicily; in all Campania, in that seat of pride, and house of Luxury,
Capua, in all places the famous rankness of the soil betrayed it self, for
the most part in the notorious ripeness of sin. Therefore Rhetoricians frame
their arguments of praise and dispraise from the Country; and Vlpian holds
it necessary, that he which selles a slave or villain, conceal not from the
buyer where he was borne, or what countriman, not only for his voluntary, and
reasonable inclination to the faction of his Country, that the buyer may know,
whether he be a Guelph or Gibeline; but for his natural and habitual
inclination, according to the Genius of his Country: for some Nations, says
the Lawyer, are infamous: not the place the people, but the people make the
place infamous: for when the dew of heaven, and the store of the earth, become
snares unto us, and occasions of falling, the direct cause is in the weakness
of our stomachs, which cannot digest the good meat, and the weakness of our
brains, that cannot bear the strong wine of prosperity; I mean the
weakness of our Christian reason, whose office it is to prescribe a moderation.
When there is a scantnes, the things themselves do stint, and restrain our
appetites and affections: but when Gods blessings abound, and our cups
ouerflow, the measure is left to our discretion, and our discretion is
deceived; because pleasure in these things cloakes it self under pretenses of
necessity, Greg. 3. mor. 28. it is not then simple prosperity, but the
prosperity of fools that destroys them, Proverbs 1.

To draw near to a conclusion, and to conclude with application. Your City is
built in the sweetest air, upon the gentle rising of an hill, amidst the
richest soil above the valley of fatness, Large vbifoecunda rerum vndat
copiacornu, where there is Gods plenty, whence without plowing or sowing,
reaping or keeping, you are fed like the fowls of heaven, and grow up as the
Lillies of the field, a thousand times more happily, then if corn grew at your
doors, or cattle grazed in your streets, near enough the benefits, and far
enough from the dangers of the seas, in the best place of the best River of
three maine Rivers in the Land; when I have named the River, you know I have
named all: For an Alderman of your own Body (I believe the Author of your
Cities Apology) when a Courtier gave him some signification, that Q. Marie, in
her displeasure, purposed to divert both Term and Parliament to Oxford, asked,
whether she would turn the Channel of the Thames thither, or no: if not, said
he, by the grace of God, we shall do well enough; the River it seems, is a
sufficient purueyer. Thus the consent of Elements conspiring for your good,
does almost proclaim, that the lot is fallen unto you in pleasant places, you
have a goodly heritage.

Notwithstanding all that has been spoken, and all that has been left
unspoken, Deuteronomy. 32.
If he that should have been upright, when he waxed gross, spurned with his
heel. And again, no sooner fat in my Text, but straight ouercom'd with wine;
to come nearer. If, what Travelers and Historians have observed, be worth our
observation, that, because Islands are the richest soiles, Ilanders are the most
riotous people; Good God, in what a slippery place are such children, as rest
in the bosom, and lie at the full dugges of a most fruitful Mother-Iland?
have they not need of Gods especial grace at every turn? have they not urgent
cause to wrestle with God in prayer, that they be with Paul instructed not to
want and hunger, but to be full and abound in all things? Yes, yes, without
this prayer, all rich men's devotions are imperfect, and without this clause
there were in our Churches prayers an imperfection, In all time of our wealth,
good Lord, deliver us. England is this fruitful Mother-Iland, the Londoners
are her children, who draw her breasts, reposing themselves in her bosom upon
the head of the fattest valleys; pardon the closeness of mine application:
though I may not name men's persons, as long as my Prophet in reproof singleth
out Ephraim; I trust I may pray for London in all time of her wealth, good Lord,
deliver London. For as Nilus may rise too high, and water Egypt overmuch, so
the world may come too fast upon us, with too too violent an inundation. Prou.
30.
Otherwise Agurs prayer had been indeed a paradox, Give me not riches, feed me
with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is
the Lord! Safer it were for us by thousands of degrees, to live at Gods
immediate finding, and as the Israelites in the evening hoped for their morning
breakfast from the clouds, daily to ask, and daily to receive our daily
bread, then that by storing, and treasuring up goods for many years, we should
forsake the Lord that made us, and cease to regard the strong God of our
salvation. Infinite experiences, without controversy, may teach you the same
truth which this Scripture does afford in one experience of Ephraim; he now
full of branches in this Land that flows with milk and honey, forgets his
own root in Egypt, and that heavenly Husbandman, by whose right hand he was
both planted there, and transplanted hither. Most that hear it, I make no
question, are either younger brothers themselves, as was Ephraim; or their
fathers were younger brothers, as was Ephraims Father, joseph; or their
grandfathers were younger brothers, as was Ephraims grandfather, Jacob;
whether therefore the Grandfather came over this River with a staff like
Jacob, and were afterward Master of two bands; or the Father being sold like
Joseph, to the Ishmaelites, became Ruler over Egypt; or the son himself like
Ephraim, borne in a land of affliction, but now blessed (God purposely crossing
his bands that he might be blessed) above his elder brother: Let not, O, let
not Ephraim forget Jacob his Grandfather, and his Father Joseph; far be it
evermore from him to forget himself, and suffer the large Catalogue of all his
Makers blessings, either to be trod under foot by pride, or to be drowned in
drunkenness. Yet I cannot but free mine own soul from your blood with some
sorrow, and I shall think my sorrow some part of my happiness, might it work
in any man sorrow to repentance. The wickedness of Ephraim, and the sins of
Samaria; the wickedness of England, and the sins of London are plainly
discovered, excess of apparel, and excess of feasting; I appeal to the
knowledges and consciences of all men, from the highest to the lowest. Sen.
epist. 114.
These a wise man calls aegrae Ciuitatis indicia, the tokens of a sick and
surfeiting City, ready either to fall her self, or spue out her inhabitants.
Now, if our happiness, so tempered by such visitations, have made us thus
sick, what monstrous distemper would entire happiness have wrought upon us,
we should by this have studied our own undoing, we should have made
artificial conueyances of vicious customs, by nice education to posterity,
we should have labored to purchase sin a perpetuity, our very trade would
have bin a trade of sinning. A trade of sinning? I would to God there were no
such trade stirring, as is the trade of sinning. When the Pope was as God,
Decretals as Scriptures, Canonists were the best Divines, the^ strong wine was
called Vinum Theologicum, because (as one wittily speaks) the Divines in
request fed on the sins of the people, and such harsh meat did ask strong
wine to digest it; your immoderate feasting (my brethren) make your customers
fear an immoderate gaining, that you live, if not by the sins of the people,
yet by your own sins, and the peoples ignorance, drinking wine in bowls to
help your digestion, where that none may suspect you, nor you your selves: for
men that enjoy their portion in this life, be sober and watch; and that I may
join exhortation with exhortation both in one, If riches increase, set not
your hearts upon them, that when the swelling of your River, by the surfeit of a
tide, brings in your increase, your increase breed not in your souls another
swelling, in your bodies another surfeiting. The swelling of the proud, and the
surfeiting of drunkards, are both as Augustine calls one, Vermes diuitiarum,
worms of wealth. Let rich me^ kill these worms betimes, lest they naturally
beget another worm, the worm that never dies; I repeat it again, Be sober
and watch, and if riches increase, set not your hearts upon them; that while
you dwell here below, you may be kept in your own Country, in your own
City, in your own houses by the same virtues, which keep men in their wits,
Humility, Sobriety, that your glorious beauty may never fade, that your
children, and childrens children may see no leading into captivity, no
complaining in your streets, and that when death shall disfranchize you here,
you may be Citizens with the Saints in a City, which has a foundation, and a
kingdom which cannot be shaken, whose builder and maker is God. Where there
shall be fullness of knowledge, fullness of love, fullness of joy, fullness of
all fulnesses, without all abuse of fulness.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS PREACHED AT OXFORD: THE ONE AT NEW COLLEGE, THE OTHER at Saint
MARY'S.

By JOHN HOSKINS, Minister and Doctor of the Law.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at Saint Austens gate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, Lord Bishop of London, his very
good Lord.
RIGHT REVEREND,
THese few Sermons cannot in good manners expose themselves to the view of all,
except they first make an humble recognition of your Lordships favor to their
Author. For some of them were uttered in the hearing, others by the appointment
of your Lordship, whose zeal has ever rejoiced, not only in your own
personal pains taking that way, but in drawing private Talents unto public
use for the building up of Gods Church. None I suppose but judges himself
honored in your Lordships imploiment: I am sure, it is hard for affection to
wish your Lordship more good, then the effect of all their prayers, who, when
they saw the light of their common example, and the strength of their general
encouragement increased, thought themselves raised in your Lordships
preferment. Amongst whom mine heart can truly testify, that he mistakes not,
whosoever ranketh,

Your Lordships in all duty, I. HOSKINS.

A SERMON PREACHED AT New College in Oxford.
MATTHEW. 11.19. But Wisdom is justified of her children.


NOt to repeat, with loss of time, and hazard of your patience, such
interpretations here, whether positive or figurative, literal or tropicall,
as by repetition alone, would quickly vanish in the thoughts of a ^udicious
auditory: suppose this Scripture, but barely resolved into an active sense, and
then, in the plainest posture of the words, as they lietranslated; briefly
consider, An object, what it is, wisdom: An iuslified, and how. The authors of
this wisdoms children. The plain sense of the proposition shall, I trust,
appear from the natural signification of the simple terms in their places,
to which in their order I purpose to speak anon, as God shall enable me, and
your Christian patience endure me. Only, because the whole does make the latter
part of an antithesis, not unkindly to be divorced from the former, uttered in
an Epiphonema, whereunto rules of art bid us rather step, then stumble, brought
in by the particle (...) discretiue, as may be gathered here, and answerable to
(...), conuersiue of the sense in Hebrew: Suffer your attention to be stayed
but a little in the turning: where (I hope) you will not esteem it a note
altogether begged at the door of my text, if in reference to the variety of
wisdoms inuitations in Christ piping, in John mourning, requited with naught
else but variety of reproaches, Christ is a drunkard, John has a devil. I touch
the maine opposition of the world against wisdom. But wisdom is justified.
The generality of those speeches Ioh. 11.48. and 12.19. If we let him alone,
al men will believe in him. Perceive you not that you prevail nothing? behold,
the world goes after him, might in the first entrance hinder my proceeding,
did I not perceive an open passage, by the manifest condition of the speakers,
who were in the leaue^ of envy and maliciousnes (...): Al things seem great
unto them, says Aristotle, 2. Rhet. Wherefore conceiving their own loss, and
others gain by fallacy, greater then they were; no marvel though they did
express them by figure hyperbolically. The truth of my drift but now proposed
Old father Simeon saw by the spirit of prophecy, that, as all eyes had not
been before like his cies, waiting for the consolation of Israel: so all arms
afterward, would not be like his arms, in the Temple ready to embrace it. No,
behold, this child, though he be the wisdom of the father, appointed (...),
for a sign or mark, or a Butt of contradictions. A prophecy so fitly verified
every way, Luke. 2.
that he was no more truly (...), a chief corner stone chosen of God, wherein
both Jews and Gentiles were reconciled, then he proved (...), a rock of
scandal, disallowed of men, wherein both Jews and Gentiles were offended. The
Jews are told to their faces by Stephen ( Stephen, who like noble Proteselaus
in the Grecian fleet, durst be the foremost champion of the primitive Church to
fight with Wisdoms enemies unto blood) that there was no news at all in their
resistance, Act. 7.51.
Ye stiffenecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost. Would I dwell here, it is no barren ground: a larger
book might be written of sufferings among this people, then is that of Acts.
Yea that of the Apostles Acts, should have been entitled rather in a bloody
rubrike, The book of sufferings; but for the power of heaven which vouchsafed
earthen vessels a miraculous success, in the safe conduct of a Gospel through
a world of repugnancies. Come down with this Gospel from Jerusalem to the
Gentiles, and skippe with me from the first martyr, all along to the last
Apostles, I think (says the chiefest of them, 1. Cor. 4.9.
) that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed to death.
Where I am taught by a father, Irenaeus de Haeres. l. 4. c. 4.
that the word last does crave both accent and emphasis. For the first endured
but the wrongs of their own country, whence if sometimes they traveled, it was
to visit their countrymen in dispersion, whom they could not choose but find in
some truths teachable, because they did embrace the Prophets doctrine. But
besides the malice of unbelieving Jews, accounting the propagation of Moses
doctrine beyond Jury, no better then a profanation of Moses doctrine; all
nations far and near, who received no law, looked for no Messiah, believed no
providence of God, nor immortality of their own souls, did strive and vye
who should multiply most disgraceful injuries upon the last Apostles. So that
what was spoken of persecution indeed, Acts. 20.23.
In every city bands and afflictions abide me: 2. Cor. 4.10.
and, Every where we bear about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, (as
sure to find it, as if we brought it with us) is much more true, of persecution
in word. For the tongue is a sword still unsheathed, and many will speak, that
dare not strike. As concerning this sect (say the Jews, Acts 28.22.
Acts vlt.) we know that it is spoken against every where. Tertullian thinks
they might well affirm it, who were the first authors of it.

Thus open confession, you see, freeth us from proouing the worlds malice
against wisdom; and that sensual loathing which Augustines experience
delivers; Palato non sano poena est panis, qui sano est suauis: The same
bread is distastefull to the sick, that is sweet to the sound palate; may
likewise free us from wondering at the cause by proportion. Most of you know
better then my self, that though the nature of truth remains still most
agreeable to the nature of man's understanding and affection vnforestalled; yet
when by shining, truth shall reprove either erroneous opinions, or inordinate
passions, amani lucentem, oderunt redarguentem: Men love it shining, but hate
it reproouing. They have hated him that rebuked in the gate, Amos, 5.10. Ahab
could not dissemble: I hate him, for he does not prophecy good unto me, 2.
King. 22.8.
but evil. It is impossible (that I may compare Sectaries with truth, and
verily Sectaries shall gain no more by mine, then piping and dancing does
here by Christ's comparison) I say, it is impossible, received physic should
be more displeased at the first rising of Paracelsus, or regular Astronomy at
the peeping out of Copernicus, or any profession of learning with any father of
a paradoxe, then flesh and blood is with the Gospel. This old man, older in
each man's particular acquaintance, then faith or religion, or reason, having
through the spectacles of self-love read the rudiments of hypocrisy and
liberty, and many a doting lecture besides, and hearing mention of restraint
and discovery, cannot choose but fret and chafe that himself is silenced, and
the Spirit gets the chair, to cross and vnteach his principles. In mean time
there is a providence above, which through this reluctation, evidently
publishes his power, showing with great advantage of glory, how little need he
has of men's help or favor, either in the collection of his Church, or
promulgation of his Gospel.

Address your selves then in wisdoms armor, al you that now sit at wisedoms
feet, to fight hereafter with wisdoms enemies. Event has sealed Paul's
prophecy, 2. Tim. 4.3.
The time is already come, men will not suffer wholesome doctrine. Uncharitable
censures of style, or phrase, or method, or voice, or gesture, are but weak
imaginations of a scholars Jealousy, far inferior (if they were true) to
the first essays and flourishes of a combat in earnest. The worldlings heavy
censure condemns down right both manner and matter, the whole substance of
your preaching. Threatenings are termed cruelty, promises flattery, the
proof of both, nothing but sophistry: mildness is charged with dreaming,
boldness with railing, affability they conster lightness, and translate
austeritie in their malicious dialect, madness. And for your persons, you are
not greater then John Baptist and our Savior. Sooner therefore shall you want a
world, then a theater: wherein, though the best do favor you, by the most, be
sure to be stared upon as prodigious, hissed at as ridiculous, shunned as
infectious: (...), What not? Piacular, pestilential, execrable fellows: away
with such fellows from the earth, it is pity they should live. All the
filthy scoffs and slanders that Satan's Scauingers can rake out of the sinkes
of all professions, are thought ouercleane to throw in their faces, who make
the face of the Church. Whatsoever taunt or reproach malice can invent, or
tongues can utter, which have been dipped in the sire, and tipped at the forge of
hell, is but fair language, Pomum si in Vatinium, as good as good morrow,
provided that you meet a Minister. Notwithstanding that no religious soul in
this assembly, may conceive so much as a momentanie dislike of this sacred
function, (as if imputations were annexed necessarily to the propriety of our
calling) it cannot in vain be repeated that the worlds grudging and
heart-burning is against Wisdom. Scarce any difference therefore in this
respect whether you be Wisdoms messengers, or Wisdoms entertainers. Josh. 10.4.
Is there peace betwixt Gibeon and Iosuth? then there is quarrel enough for
all the Kings of the Amorites to fight against Gibeon. This is their portion
whosoever have escaped Satan's snares, whosoever by grace have obtained dominion
over their own corruptions, this is questionless their portion. For as Saint
Hierome plaieth upon the 47. of Ezekiel Morally, the possession begins at Tamar
that is victory, and reaches along to the waters of strife. Semper enim
virtutibus contradicitur: Virtues are still contradicted. Pretend the world
what the world can, here is the head and the heart of the controversy.
Contrariety breeds enmity, enmity causes separation, separation supposes
danger, from the party avoided, of infection. So there is in the Churches
wisdom some secret exprobation of the worlds foolishness; otherwise we
should never hear of worldly Stratagems ex professo directed against wisdom.
But the Gospel has warned us of a persecution in the word (...): which the
French renders by doing despite, from the root (...), Mars, not unlike the
sallies of a martial man: Rbet. 2.2.
(...), says Aristotle, that is, merely for offense. A thousand experiences
have in these later days proved it by palpable demonstration, that when a man
of integrity shall either be coniured by device, or fall by occasion into the
ring and circle of Libertines, (the liueliest abridgement and epitome of that
greater world which lies in wickedness) they conspire, as one man, to task
his ears with fearful oaths, and his unwilling appetite with drunken
salutations, rejoicing as in harvest, or in the division of a spoil, if in the
frailenesse of sinful flesh they can grieve the spirit, drench sobriety, and
discountenance honesty. But man of God, or child of God, whosoever thus
besieged and assaulted, Tunecede malis, sed contra audentior ito: Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21. Such an
antiperistasis must increase and inkindle zeal, if thy profession depend not
upon fashion, and thy conscience upon company: for though Gods powerful
Spirit should suspend his operation, yet can thou not forget the reason of a
man, and brutishly be driven with the drove, without out Election, much less
abandon common sense, and without any motion of thine own, like a nail in a
wheel, only move as thou art moved, and turn as thou art turned. They who
never touched the hem of the Churches vesture, or once dreamt of salvation, held
it not the least part of their glory, to stir a course like Antipodes,
clean opposite to the liking of the multitude. Phocion in Plutarch applauded,
suspected his speech: (...)? has any bad speech fallen from my mouth without
my knowledge? And Antisthenes in Laertius commended, was afraid of his deeds:
(...), I am in an agony, lest I have done some mischief. What in them without
the Law was voluntary, the same the Law of our union with Jesus Christ (if we
believe August. 87. tract. in Johan.) imposes upon us as necessary, Recusas
esse in corpore, si non vis odium mundi sustinere cum capite: Thou refusest to
be in the body, if thou will not suffer the hatred of the world with thy Head.
Which consideration might drive our deepest Christian policies into
desperation, for procuring any passage unto Gods friendship by being passable
among his enemies. Surely this was not the current credit in Gregory's time:
Peruersorum derogatio, vitae nostrae approbatio, Hom. 9. in Ezech. Wicked men's
detraction, is the approbation of our lives. Rather in all times the rebuke of
Christ was the religion of Christians. Heb. 11. Wherefore that I may not number
numberless encouragements, stand upon your guard within the lists of your daily
war-fare with the world, according to promise in baptism, since faith is the
victory that overcomes the world: Heb. 12.3.
Only consider him that endured such speaking against of sinners, both
commander and spectator of this combat, both Judge and rewarder of your
courage: both leader of your whole company, and conqueror of this your enemy:
John. 16.33.
be of good comfort, for I have overcome the world. Think that as arguments
assoiled well, do breed a clear conclusion, all this rubbing shall make you
shine one day the brighter; possess your souls in patience: your souls shall
be taken up and possessed with true wisdom for ever. This of the Occasion;
now to the Object.

Wisdom.] Divine wisdom, (though not that common attribute of the whole
Trinity, counsel or providence at large, nor Christ alone, nor the Gospel
alone, but principally Christ himself; secondarily the Gospel, wherein the
manifold wisdom of God appears) sweetly disposing the ways of man's
salvation: the former may rightly be styled wisdom; first, if sobriety may
look so high, because of his nature, then because of his office. According to
his nature and eternal generation he is (...), the word inward, and
essential: not metaphorical, as John Baptist is called a voice. That was
thought a part of a late error, and of their heresy, long before, who labored
to make the Son of God a creature. One of their chiefest arguments was drawn
from that groundless text, Prou. 8.22. where, whether it were in the
Translators malice, or ignorance in the Scribes (which charity together with
the words affinity, may persuade us to believe) in the received Septuagint we
find, (...), he created, the Hebrew plainly bespeaking, (...), he possessed: a
word sometimes applied unto generation, which Basil well perceived in his second
book against E^nomius. Other good men, who had only the vulgar Greek in their
hands (for that Arreius supported his blasphemy, for the most part, by culling
out the descriptions of Christ's office, and appropriating them to his nature)
understood that place of ordination to his office prophetical, in respect of
which, Christ may likewise truly be named wisdom. No man has seen God at any
time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him, John 1.18. In him is the fountain of all spiritual knowledge,
as all the senses are in the head. That which was in the gold, Zach. 4. came
from the golden pipes; that which passed through them, ran from the two olive
branches, and the two olive branches stood with the ruler of the earth. What
wisdom soever, through what instruments soever the Church receives, proceeds
originally from Christ, in these days of the Gospel most evidently: for as the
light which lay diffused abroad throughout the rude mass of the world, was
afterward (as some fathers are of opinion) aggregated into the body of the
Sun, that thence it might be communicated to the creatures: so, that wisdom
which spoke in the Prophets (...), at sundry times, and in diverse manners, may
seem to concenter in Christ: Heb. 1.1.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Colos. 2.3. I am
not ignorant, some conceive those words, as spoken in reference to Christ, some
to the mystery of the Gospel, both are before mentioned, both come to one
issue, and both are to my purpose indifferent. The Gospel, which is (...), a
word pronounced, may fitly be termed wisdom, whether we look backward to the
cause, it is inspired from Christ; or forward to the scope and effect, it is
able (...), to make a man wise to salvation, 2. Tim. 3. Behold here sun and
beam, spring and stream, of soundest and profoundest wisdom, Christ and his
Gospel: the one the matter and end, the other the manner and means of all
saving revelation. This is life eternal, here is wisdom above wisdom: he
that knows this with feeling experimentally, knows all; Est enim sapiens, cui
quaequeres sapiunt, prout sunt: cui vero ipsa iam in se, prout est, sapientia
sapit; is non mode sapiens, sed etiam beatus est: He is wise (says a Father)
who knows all things in their nature as they are; a number may think
themselves such among our skilful Philosophers: but he which knows wisdom her
self, is not only wise, but blessed; and God increase the number of such among
our most skillful Divines. Accept then mine exhortation, (learned and beloved
brethren) unto the fervent and importunate desire of true wisdom: where
necessary, for a motive; where need less, at least for a commendation. A lame
man, you know, may point out the right way: give me likewise leave, in spite
of mine own simplicity, to tell you, that wisdom is no matter of mere
opinion: nay, that in this spiritual travel, they come nearest the matter,
who stand farthest off in opinion; and these are always the fewest. For upon
citation of Mechanics, none but Mechanics appear, no Tradesman will answer
to the name of another craft, or mystery: but at the proclamation, (...), O
yes, All wise men, come hither. Who comes not? It cannot so soon be forgotten
as it was spoken, that this of all diuidends seems most equally divided; every
man thinks his own share sufficient. The Preacher, who says, Eccl. 8. The
Wisdom of a man makes his face to shine, might have added, that wisdom should
be by grace, as far out of a man's conceit, as the face by nature is out of
his sight. The people saw, the people saw it and were afraid. Moses himself
saw not the brightness of his own countenance. It is the counsel, I am sure, of
the same spirit in another instrument: If any man among you seem to be wise
in this world, let him be a fool, that he may be wise. What? but seem to be
wise in this world? 1. Cor. 3.18.
were a man wise in this world, 'twere no such great temptation; where the
wisest knows but in part, the rest see but a part of that part. As there is no
day without a night, only that is the longest day which has the shortest
night; so no mind of man without some clouds and shadows of error, or of
ignorance. Optimus ille est, qui minimis vrgetur: That is the best, which has
fewest. He that thus shows you, my brethren, how far you are behind, does
as good as bid you mend your pace. In all this, I may perhaps strive to curb
the proud imagination: God knows I do not, God forbid I should at any hand
attempt to stay the painful search, and pursuit of wisdom, which in me^ of
our profession must admit no bounds, but the common bounds of our mortality,
more especially because of these latter days. In the Primitive time, as S.
Austen often observes, Satan, like a lion, by persecuting Emperors, tried
altogether the patience; now Kings are nursing fathers, and Queens nursing
mothers; like a Serpent in heretics, he tries the wisdom of the Church.
Wherefore as you disdain, after so long training and experience in the Lords
battles, to be surprised like naked, maimed, dead men, without weapon, hand or
heart to make resistance: hate with a perfect hatred, all the counsels of your
Antichristian enemies, among whom simplicity, sometimes a sin personal in
the lay people, for want of teaching, is grown to a sin cathedral in the
Rabbis, whilst teaching appointed to remove, is abused to maintain
simplicity. Wheresoever simplicity is commanded, the sense of that
commandment, to the youngest reader of the Scripture can be no stranger: for
either it respects affection for subject, as, Concerning maliciousness, be
children, but in understanding be of a ripe age, 1. Cor. 14. or else it
respects evil things as objects, Romans 16.19.
rather then good: I would have you wise to that which is good, but simple to
that which is evil. To conclude, my brethren, that this part may not trespass
on the rest; if any want wisdom, Christ and his word are wisdom: two words
are as good as twenty, for direction: no more but this, Ora, labora, prayer,
and labor, devotion, and diligence. Now because as Augustine truly judges,
Nemo recte sapit, nisi qui acceperit spiritu^: No man is truly wise, but he
that has received the spirit: pray that nothing may be left vnco^prehended in
your prayers for Christ's spirit. Would you briefly know the success? Ye have
it already promised. Mat. 7.11.
If ye which are evil, can give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? Christ's
Spirit will more surely teach Christ's wisdom, then Aristotle's brain will make
a man dispute like Aristotle. Last of all, that you may be wiser with David,
then your fathers, then your teachers, then your enemies, your labor must be
bestowed in reading and observing the Scriptures: wise you cannot be without
it. Jeremy 8. They have rejected the words of the Lord, and what wisdom is
in them? That well known Epistle ad Demetriadem, shows, that you cannot
choose but be wise with them. Ama Scriptur as sanct as, and amabitte sapientia:
That wisdom may love thee, love thou the Scriptures. This of the Object.

Wisdom is justified.] And that is the Action. As often as the Scripture
says, or the Church prays, that Gods name may be magnified or sanctified:
because, neither augmentation of quantity, nor intention of qualities, can
agree with an infinite nature; we must conceive no more then a notification, or
at the most, a solemn celebration of his greatness, and goodness: none
otherwise, is wisdom justified of her children. For the Papists here may
suffer us to take it for granted, with less contradiction, then where
justification is applied to men's persons, that the word is legal or judicial.
Now wisdom being considered within the bounds of a consistory, to justify,
must either importan act of a Judge, by sentence to pronounce it just: or an
act of a witness, by deposition or acknowledgement, to declare it just. The
former signification is, I confess, received by them, that interpret Christ's
words of the Jews, tropically, to this effect. Thus the Jews (forsooth) may
censure wisdom, and children (belike) sit in judgment to condemn their own
mother. But the latter, I should suppose more natural, comparing this place
with that, Luke 7.29. Then all the people that beard, and the Publicanes
justified God: that is, confessed the wisdom of God in Christ, and John
Baptists preaching. I know no necessary reason on wisedoms part: All this is
only for her childrens sake: for if philosophical virtue need not outward
supportment; and a mere moral man may rest upon the center of his own
integrity, without walking in the circumference of report abroad, whereof the
vilest vassal and basest groom is both condus, and promus, keeper and
commander: much more may wisdom take such solace in her self, as God did
take in her, in and before the beginning: She was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him. Prou 8. I receive not the record of man, John. 5.
Nevertheless, these things I say, that ye might be saved. That we might be
saved, the most venomous malice of mortal tyranny, neither has been, nor
ever shall be able to stop the breath of all wisedoms trumpeters together.
Herod cannot murder James and Peter at one blow: when the three children are in
the furnace, Daniel is at liberty: when Daniel is in the lions den, the
three children are in credit: while Christ is scarce known, John gives his
testimony; whiles he is almost oppressed, Nicodemus sta^ds up: when his own
sheep are scattered, behold, of a wolf, a sheep; of a malefactor from the
very brink of hell, upon the Cross, a confessor. Yea, the Lord will raise in
the latter times, as John did prophecy, though not any great number, yet at
least, sufficient to save their evidence from the maine exception of
singularity, two witnesses, Apoc. II. This constant counsel of wisdom thus
revealed, implies in her children a necessary duty, that they labor by all
means for her outward justification. For the Apostles rule, have thou faith?
Romans 14.22.
have it to thy self before God, inioyneth an abstinence from scandalous use
of things indifferent, and undetermined, it exempts not our obedience from
those commandments which bind us, semper, non ad semper, always for purpose,
though not at all times for performance. I mean the justification of wisdom,
by the most peculiar and heroical effect of faith and ^haritie, Martyrdom.
Does Martyrdom sound harsh in our tender ears, my brethren? and seems it for
these peaceable times unseasonable? Therefore, enlarge the signification, and
suppose it common unto all times. For as we learn of Saint Paul in the first
to the Philippians, of Cyprian, in his ninth Epistle, and of Cyprians imitator,
throughout the book De duplici Martyrio: there is a bloody martyrdom, when
Christ is magnified in the Roses of the Church, by death: and there is a
bloodlesse martyrdom, when Christ is magnified in the Lilies of the Church, by
life. This latter, is either verbal, when with the mouth we confess unto
salvation: or real, when what in word we confess, we deny not in our deeds,
this our light so shining before men, that they seeing our good works,
glorify our Father which is in heaven. As God is glorified, and Christ
magnified, so I hold wisdom justified. Which one point well prosecuted with
hearty meditation, might inuit many virtuous students from lower disciplines,
to that high profession, which above all others affords fittest occasions
(yea most inevitable necessities) to plead for wisdom publicly: much more
enforce us professed Divines, who, like that footlesse bird described by
Geographers, stili houer in the air, always contemplative; after Christ's
example, Ioh. 9.4.
To do the work of him that sent us, while it is day, with all our power. For
there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither we, with all the world are travailing. It Is but a little time redeemed,
our own reason, (I make no question) upon sense of such wants as practice
would have richly ^^ppl^ed, will one day teach us, that speculation, ab^^^u^^ly
more excellent, is not the whole frame or building, rather a ground work of
action, for our present estate more necessary. Much like the lower millstone
which rests it self: add unto it the other upper moving millstone, both will
grind sweetly together. But where exercise is not, learned and honest men must
want experience; where experience fails, all men are imperfect: Imperfect men
must needs be timorous, and timorous men shall yield perforce, to the dishonest
and illiterate Chaplins of time: who with monstrous tongues, bigger then their
hands, can play their prizes in empty forms, far more valiantly, Non quia
plus cordis, sed minus or is habent: Not because they have more courage, but
because they have less modesty: did our faint-hearted bashfulnes only cast our
persons behind, the matter were less grievous, I should for my part dissemble
such a prejudice: but the cause, the common cause of Christ sustaineth a wrong:
wisdom her self is wounded, through her childrens bashfulnesse. Not one man
(O that I might err in saying, not one Minister of an hundredth) but sometimes
or other, yields an implied consent unto Gods dishonor. Which of us in his
place adventures to withstand corruption? who dares rebuke oppression, as Paul
did P^^er, to the face? where is the ear that ringleth, the blood that rises,
the heart that tre^bleth at the liars and the swearers cursed variations? A
multitude of unhallowed tongues do by custom whet themselves every where, to
pierce through the name of our heavenly Father, as the word is, Leuit. 24. And
lo, while children that are dumb, like king Crasus son, should speak; we
children that can speak, are dumb and speechless: yet is there store enough
of spiritual weapons, wisdoms armory yields not in any sort, for choice of
furniture, to the tower of David, ten thousand shields hang therein, and all
the targets of the strong men: but alas, all the strong men are (...), and as
the chief rulers did not confess Christ, Ioh. 12 lest they should be cast out
of the Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of
God: So love and fear of them that can help no more then a broken reed,
hur^no more then a silly spider, has stolen away courage from men's hearts,
men's hearts from the Lord. And were our forefathers in their fiery trial,
almost prodigal of their blood for Christ, against the current (nay the
torrent) of magistrate and kingdom? ^hal we through shame be niggards of a word
for Christ, in this free passage of the Gospel, against private sins, lurking
in corners under the roof, and miching in the thickets under the leaves of
hypocrisy? God for bid, wise men know, shame is a consequent of sin: good
men will bestow their shame upon their own sins, against the Gospel: but for
the Gospel of Christ, and against the sins of others; Horat. lib. 1. epi. ad
quintin.
Vir bonus, and sapiens audebit dicere Penth^u, Thou art the man: It is not
lawful for thee to take thy brother Philips wife: 2. Sam. 12.7. Mat. 14.4.
Thou and thy fathers house do trouble Israel. 1 King. 18.18.
Well has he learned by heart, no doubt, Hest. 4.14.
that stinging part of Mordecaies admonition to Queen Hester. If thou hold thy
peace, comfort and deliverance shall appear out of another place, but thou and
thy fathers house shall perish. For look what John Husses extraordinary
spirit prophesied of Luther definitely for the time, Centum reuolutis annis Deo
respondebitis: After an hundred years, you shall answer to God for this: An
ordinary spirit may with good warrant foretell indefinitely, though some die,
and others fly once in an age, one of a tribe, at the least, shall always
arise, that the world may be convicted, and wisdom justified. But the
fearful, who deny Christ, being ashamed of him and his word before men, shall
be denied before Angels, and inherit their portion among the fearful, in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Apoc.
21. Good God, it is beyond imagination, terrible for us to think, but above
all wonder, horrible for them to feel, what an endless train of policies
will utterly deceive, and what a world of confusion shall surprise the greatest
earthly wizards: when wisdom shall turn away her face: and say, Depart from
me, I know you not; dastards you have been, none of my champions; strangers
you are, and none of my children: Wisdom is justified of her children.

A SERMON PREACHED AT S. MARY'S in Oxford, on Act Sunday in the afternoon.
MATTHEW. 11.19. Of her Children.


THE variable forms of Gods ordinance in Christ piping, in John mourning
almost outvyed, and ouerswayed by the no less variable forms of men's
reproaches, ( Christ is a drunkard, John has a devil) being heretofore
discovered; Indeed the protasis or part premised in application of the parable
above. In this aduersatiue Apo^los^s, a most sententious conclusion plainly
resolved into an active sense, I promised to prosecute.

First, an object, what it was, Wisdom.

Secondly, an action, 'twas justified, and how.

Lastly, the autors of this action, who they were, wisdoms Children.

Wisdom, as both Ambrose, and many other had taught me, seemed to be not munus
naturae, a gift of nature, sednaturae munerator, but the rewarder of nature,
Ephesians. 4.8.
even he, that ascended up on high, led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men: Christ himself more principally; Colos. 2.3.
because in his person al thetreasure of wisdom and knowledge were hid; 2.
Cor. 4.6.
because in his face the light of the knowledge of the glory of God was
reu^^^ed; because for his nature, in respect of the Father, for his office in
respect of us, he was (...), The word, as Nazianzen has more fully delivered,
in his second oration upon this argument: But in an inferior place under
Christ subordinately, from Christ deriuatiuely, the dispensation of the Gospel
might be styled wisdom, especially for that blessed effect, 2. Tim. 3.15.
It was able to make men wise v^t s^luat^on. Whence I desire to repeat no
more, then the nicest soul, not altogether inamoured with novelties, may be
contented to hear; the shortest vpshot of a longer inference, or a, labora,
first pray and pray with earnestness for Christ's spirit. N^mo recte sapit,
nisi qui acceperit spiritu^: No man is rightly wise, except he have received
the spirit: August. 105. epist. But that will show you Christ's wisdom in a
greater abundance, then Aristotle's brain can furnish a man to dispute like
Aristotle. 1. Ioh. 2.27.
You need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of
all things. Secondly labor, and labor with diligence in this book of books;
wise you cannot be without it. Lo, Iere. 8.9.
They have rejected the word of the Lord; and what wisdom is in them? But
that wellknowen Epistle ad Demetriadem shows, you shall have much ado to be
unwise with it. Ama Scriptur as sanctas, and amabitte sapientia: that wisdom
may love thee, love thou the Scriptures.

Justification, I took for an action, implying not, at any hand, the real
addition of a new, but the legal declaration of an ancient quality, and that
not by sentence, forasmuch as they who wrongfully conceived this whole clause,
as uttered in a scoffing accent ironically judged aright herein, that for a
scholar, or a child, or an inferior to censure a teacher, a parent, a
superior, (...), Sus Mineruam: were, for his part, to turn the vpside down
preposterously; rather by deposition and acknowledgement of witnesses. Let them
bring forth their witnesses, says the Prophet, Isai. 43.9.
That they may be justified. Here I noted the counsel of wisdom, in raising
the zeal of her children, in affording throughout all generations a sufficient
number of competent witnesses, who like so many Lilies or Roses, partly by
life, partly by death, either in a bloody, or else in a bloodlesse martyrdom
may still preach unto us their wanton posterity, that neither love nor fear
ought to steal men's courage from their hearts, men's hearts from the Lord.

And now such a preparatiue being plainly made unto the remainder, as was
precisely for my promise requisite, since he, who commands the little riuerets
from between their narrow banks, to discharge themselves at length in the main
Ocean, likewise bids my slender meditations, after passage through a private
channel, end their course in this great Congregation; I may think my self an
happy man, being to speak of the authors of this Action, the same persons
before whom I speak, of wisdoms children (I hope) in the mids of wisdoms
children: concerning whom whatsoever follows, may be ranked either under
their relation unto wisdom, they be wisdoms children: or under their
disposition to be witnesses, wisdom is justified of her children. Of these.
--

The name of a child in Hebrew, much like a child in nature, who calls every
man father, stands in it self indifferent, importing many times no more then a
transcendent appointment, the child of wrath, the child of death, the child of
perdition: but children here under wisdoms wing, as those little ones (
Marc. 10.) admitted into Christ's imbracements, farther suppose some tender
relation grounded upon a work of grace: wherein, whatsoever it be, though
necessary concurrence of the whole Trinity for outward operations may prove
the second persons common interest, yet children may demand a reason of this
singular appropriation, why they should be called here wisdoms children?
Philem. 10.1. These. 2.7. Gal. 4.19. Matt. 10.24.
Paul can beget Onesimus, nurse the Thessalonians, travail in pain with the
Galatians. The Disciple is not above his master: nor wisdom herself less
loving in her in ward collation of filial grace, then her handmaides and
ministers, in their outward administration. Among them, they that have
consciences able to digest iron, like the Ostriches stomach, have a care of
their young, like the Ostriches care, which leaves the eggs to the sun
above, and the sand beneath, forgetting that the foot might scatter them, Job
39.
or the wild beasts devour them. But to resemble wisdoms ever dear and
indefatigable affection, few young Gentlemen can take such delight in hawking,
as Bernard seems to take in springing up similitudes: for example: Sapientia
Dei quasi Perdix fouet filios, Bernard sentent.
quos non peperit: quasi gallina congregat pullos sub alis: quasi aquila
prouocat ad volandum: The wisdom of God is like the Partridge, that brings
up the chickens, which she bred not: and a hen that gathers her chickens
under her wings: and like the Eagle which provoke to fly. No providence in
earth, under a motherlike providence, can afford her brood that heat, those
motions, and that nourishment: yet children full of questions ask again how
wisdom, he who represents a mother here, is not else where ashamed to call
them brethren, Hebr. 2.11. A brother, I do confess, he accounts himself,
Go to my brethren, and say unto them, Ioh. 20.19.
I ascend unto my Father. Ioh. 20. Yet an elder brother, yea The first borne
among many brethren: Romans 8.29.
of whose birthright-preeminences, your learning would not wonder, though much
were spoken; you know whole Volumes have been written. In brief, the first
borne being another head of the family, bare the name, sustained the place,
exercised the office of a Father, ruling and blessing his younger brethren. If
such precede^cies appeared suitable with the grounds of justice among children
all of the same kind and generation, our Savior may challenge much more,
being of an higher kind, not voluntarily made, but necessarily begotten, the
son of God by nature, whereof all adoption is but (as the Ciuilians speak)
an imitation. And in this prerogative case, that a natural father may not
assume or adopt a legal or supposed son, because this later help was
invented or intended only for solace of the fathers barrenness, or the
childrens mortality, seems an exception issuing from a mortal and a barren
brain; Isai. 55.8.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor your ways my ways, says the
Lord. Had the twilight of our adoptiue conception been dim through
darkness, looking for light in vain, but never seeing the mornings eie-lids,
God could have been without no more then he could well have spared, he needed
not adoptiue children.

Wisdom. This Wisdom before depths and hills, mountains and fountains was
daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, Proverb. 8. God works, not at
all to close up his defects, or furnish his scarcity, but merely to
communicate his perfection and abundance. Wherein his natural Son is so far
from being any let or hinderance, that as the whole store of Egypt came
through Joseph's hands: so the largess of al heavenly Manna through Christ's
hands, wherewith the famine of the poor Church is evermore relieved. Blessed
be God, Ephe. 1.3.
even the Father of our Lord Iesas Christ, which has blessed us with all
spiritu^ll blessings in Christ. The Apostle descends unto special instance,
as he has chosen us in him; where he that could sit in the chair, putting on
the looks of a father, though Gods decrees are before all times eternal, (yet
according to the received process and succession of causes here) might add
after what manner, in what order he has chosen us in him: concluding Christ
perhaps the first effect of Gods ordination, and a mediator in some sort of
Gods actual choice, our potentiall child-ship. My self but a child, standing
with reverence at the footstool; when I see men of the best purposes above
me distracted; and in their peculiar understandings about these profound
contemplations perplexed, resolve and beseech withal my brethren of mine own
lowest pitch and growth, to for bear ouer-curious inquisition: Not so much to
consider the reconciliation of justice and mercy in our heavenly Fathers
counsel, as in our heavenly Fathers covenant, taking great pleasure in the
prophetical declaration, greater in the real exhibition, greatest of all in
an experimental application of our common Savior. The Father all along
throughout the whole execution of his counsel, (...), Ephe. 1.6.
has made us accepted in his Beloved. But we are all the children of God by
faith, Galat. 3 26. which receiving her life and beginning from the spirit of
Christ, that father of eternity within us, apprehends the merit of Christ
without us; upon which Act and instant, being actual children, we cry Abba
Father: As when Agelmond king of Lombards, (be it reported upon Sigeberts
credit in the year 789.) passing by a pond where seven infants lay, thrust out
his spear, and brought home that one, which took hold of it, where having
been maintained like the Kings own son, he succeeded him in his kingdom:
whether it were Lanussio or Lamussius from Lama a ditch, out of which he was
taken. So when Gods essential word, this personal wisdom came into the
world, and the world knew him not: As many as received him (not many, scarce
one of seven) as many as received him, Ioh. 1.12.
that is, (as it follows exegetically) as many as believed in his name, to
them he gave; he did not obtain for them, or only proclaim to them, but to
them he gave power to be the sons of God. If now sons, sons for ever.
Nec enim moribus nostris conuenit, filium habere temporalem; For it agrees not
with our manners, to have a temporal son: could man's law say: If sons for
ever, heirs in the kingdom for ever, yea heirs annexed with Christ: Rom 8.
of which August. tract. 2. in Ioh. Non timuit habere cohaeredes, quia
haereditas eius non fit angusta, si multi came possederint: He was not afraid to
have coheires with him; because his inheritance is not abridged, though many
have possession in it. Of which immortal and undefiled inheritance, from a
mortal man of polluted lips, expect not any proportionable description,
since no Pulpit can deliver it, no pleading place commend it, nor University
possibly teach it, save that one University, the University of heaven.

Behold then, 1. Ioh. 3.1.
what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called
the sennes of God: or if peradventure you like the change, behold what learning
the Son has here reueiled unto us, that we should be named Wisdoms
Children, Charity makes me presume you came not into this presence in a
sullen humor, as Cato was supposed to step into the Theater, merely, that
he might step out again: nor in a brauing disposition, as men make
appearance at a muster, only to be seen and known, and show your furniture;
but with humble hearts and teachable spirits, to listen and mark, learn and
be taught of God: where then (I beseech you) can your observation rest, your
attention wait, your meditation dwell better, then on this Behold? Once again
behold the sons of God, and once again behold Wisdoms Children. I show you
not a spectacle of the kindred imperial, adopted into some of the Caesar's
families; their stock was honorable before, therefore no such strange
preferment: but of an of spring, whose father was an Amorite, whose mother was
an Hittite, desperately forlorn, naked and unwashed, and cast out into the
wilderness: nor of such hopeless foundlings, at last by miracle entertained,
like young Cyrus in a shepherds house: a shepherds house is not much above
the ground, ordinarily there are no promises of high promotion there: No nor of
Moses, though from among the bulrushes taken up to be the son of Pharaohs
daughter. All examples come short of it; they cannot express the
disproportion. Ose. 1.8, 9.
It is of Lo-ruhamah and Lo-ammi the bastard fruits of fornications exposed to
the rage of hellish monsters, more ravenous then any wolves of the evening:
None but our selves, sinners of the Gentiles; I mean, when we were, before we
could see the sun, be-nighted in ignorance, antequam nati, damnati: Before
our nativity adjudged to captivity: ready to be kept close prisoners with
Satan in chains under the blackenesse of darkness for ever, not only
pitied, and rescued by the hand of heaven out of that accursed thraldom, but
settled and estated in a liberty most blessed and glorious: A mystery, which if
Paul admire, whose carnal kindred, to make way for it, stands for a while
rejected, and the Angels, whose natures are utterly disinherited, desire to
behold, we whose kindred, and whose nature, and whose persons are exalted,
should so remember; that all other thoughts be condemned for digressions, all
other occurrents for temptations, if they serve not to this, as places
memoratiue. Come hither then, that I may give some smacke of a new art, this
art of memory. Come hither all you that behold and conceive not the meaning of
tomorrowes ceremonies, understand but this language of Gods love: err you may
in the true signification, you cannot err in application. There shall you see
the father of his faculty rejoicing and triumphing in his newborn children:
your selves are children too, though like prodigals, gone astray.

There is another Father, Luke 15. who came out once for all, in his own Son,
and now runs out, to meet you, in his word: he has provided (...) the fat
calfe, what ever it be, far above all our Venison, he gives the kiss, and
the ring, and the robes, and the book indeed. O that our glorious spectators
would turn gracious Actors here, descending down into the dust, changing
their pomp and garishnes, for sack cloth and ashes, and doing their exercise
in repentance. Christ would gladly dispute with such Doctors, Angels would
rejoice at their proceedings. Other miracles shall straight surrender their
reputation of strangenes, do you but glad our hearts, and bless our sight with
some possibilities of this miracle. Every man will turn to his friend with
amazed looks, neighbor communing with neighbor in terms of astonishment
and admiration: Is Saul also among the Prophets? Do the children of Nimrod,
hunters and oppressors, the children of Lamech, sighters and swaggerers, the
children of Iubal, singers and players, come in? What? all Wisdoms children?
See, see! It is the Lords doing, and needs must it be wonderful in our eyes.
God has persuaded Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Shem. O the deepenesse of
the riches of wisdom, which raises out of stones children unto Abraham! And O
thou Savior of men, which only workest wonders, arise, show forth thy strength
in our weakness: that such stones may be children, before they moulder into
dust, and such Iapheths before they die, may dwell at length in the tents of
Shem. For let religion be a fable, and ministers false prophets, if upon this
happy change, you be not as men that dreamed, musing and maruciling at your
selves to see such a dawning of light, such a dayspring in your judgments,
seconded with a trance and rauishment of every religious affection: Old things
then are done away with a deep loathing and detestation of their remembrance,
as though your golden hours of precious time spent upon your youthful
vanities, had been a greater waste, then if a countryman (pardon my familiar
comparison) then if a countryman (I say) should anoint his Axle-tree with
Amber-greese, or liquor his boots with Balsamum. And you that of late posted
by wisedoms school, as by a Pesthouse or middle pillar of a race, shall now
watch daily at the posts of her door: You that of late would have spit in
wisdoms face, likelier to have cut off a preachers head, then hear his words
whilst you courted He^o^ias daughter, shall now suppose your selves preferred,
if you may loose the latchet of her shoe, striving to wash the feet of her
handmaids servants accounted in your eyes, from which the scales are fallen,
most beautiful; you that of late abhorred the fruit of wisdoms lips, no
better in your vnfa^ory tai^^, then the poison of Aspes, shall now, like newborn babes, cry for her milk hanging at her breasts, the breasts of the two
Testaments. Judge then this day, whether I have not just cause, in the name of
this famous nurserie, to beg of all parents, and all parents great reason, in
the name of Christ, to beg in their prayers unto God for this blissful
alteration. For as much as it is the sole and compendiarie way to be a wise
father or mother of earthly children: First, to be a wise child of our
heavenly Father. Such a father, will not send his son hither, only with his
purse and a serving man, looking no higher then a chamber, a table, a bed, a
stool, and a candlestick, but come himself to choose with good advice, shall
I say a Gamaliel for his Paul? rather a Paul for his young Timothy, that in
his tender years, being like a looking glass, which may be defiled with a
breath; or a stringed instrument, which is put out of tune, with the very
change of weather; he may be well sorted and well seasoned; lest as many words
that lose their sense in construction, he lose innocence by company; verily a
temptation (as many good souls taken like brands out of the fire can best
testify) more violent and outrageous then a tempestuous whirlewind, more
virulent and contagious then the breath of a Basiliske. Such a mother as is
wisdoms child, will not only seek wool and flax to labor cheerfully
with her hands amongst her daughters at home, singing and saying, Mittenda est
fratri, nunc nunc properate puellae,
Quamprimum nostra fact a lacerna manu.
Haste, haste, my girls, your brother must have of our own making a liuerie:
but like Anna, bring it up her self from year to year, that she may confer
with Eli, as concerning young Samuels dedication. So concerning young Samuels
education, both father and mother that are wisdoms children, at meeting and
at parting, will with exchange of tears, insert this parenthesis never too
long into their blessing: My soon, my son, the book, and language of
wisdom, the study and exercise of wisdom, the house and company of wisdom,
above all books, languages, studies, exercises, houses, and companies. So
should they be sure to receive none but Timothies, and Samuels hence back
again, men not only secured of this their relation, that they be themselves
wisdoms children; but armed with a disposition for the good of others, to be
wisdoms witnesses, which is my second General.

When I compare this present Antithesis with our Saviors argument, Ioh. 10.26,
27.
John 10. Ye believe not, for ye are not of my sheep, my sheep hear my voice.
So far am I from suspecting children, as only remaining like witnesses at an
exigent in defect, and upon de fault of more sufficient record, that I conceive
them in wisdoms cause the fittest deponents: from their judgment who may
deem this a paradox, I straight appeal to Gods own choice, for
notwithstanding, some transient revelations might glide through Balaam and
Caiphas, as wise in themselves meanewhile, as trunks: It is on both sides
confessed (saving that some Papists stick at Solomon) that Gods public
Notaries, the Canonical writers of the Scriptures, were all regenerate and
children of wisdom. 2. Pet. 1.21.
Holy men of God (says Peter) spoke as they were inspired by the holy Ghost.
Holy men spoke, as if wisdom, the richest Domains of the Crown of heaven, The
Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way, Prou. 8. were something
resembled in the ancient Demaines of England, which may not be tried (as the
Lawyers say) by strangers, but only by the Tenants of the same Demaines. And
why not soonest by strangers? The truth can have no greater advantage, a man
would think, then when it may be said: Our God is not as their God, our
enemies being judges. -- Nulla est victoria mayor, Claudian.

Quam quae confessos animo quoque subiug at hosles:
A fair color, when things are by strangers and enemies discernable. For
fuller answer, give me leave to lead your meditations not much aside; through
the reasonable proceedings in men's Courts, by witnesses, against whom
domestical inward acquaintance is a most material exception: because they
that dwell under the same roof, may without any jealousy, be mistrusted for
partial affection, in one another behalf. Nevertheless, even these are
admitted, whenever others either actually were not, or habitually (that is)
in likelihood, could not be present at the fact. Suppose it, if you will, some
clandestine contract, the maine scope of all depositio^s, being the
manifestation of the truth, by them that are best able to inform: whence it
follows, that a challenge against the Judge himself, should in reason be
sooner heard, then against a a witness: for if one Judge fa^le, the King can
ordain another, but it is (...), we saw and we witness: now no Prince under the
sun can make me see, that which I did not see, none can create a witness,
and when he is made, omnipotency it self cannot destroy him, because it
implies contradiction: to make a summarie collection, (...), Every man can
best judge of that which he knows: I might have inserted without any fraud,
(...). For witnesses are Judges of the fact. Now they that are without, know
not what is done at home: therefore there is room in all consistories for
household testimonies. Such a case for all the world is wisdoms case, 1. Cor.
2 14
The natural man knows not the things of the Spirit of God: there is a
denial of the act, neither can he know them: the habit is there excluded. A
reprobate may lend wisdom sometimes a voice; but it is either fained with a
damnable reservation of some towzing equivocation in his heart, or if his heart
be of his lips opinion, it is only of Gods and Christ's power after a conflict,
arrest, racking and co^uictio^ of conscience forced and extorted: like that of
Julian, Vicisti, Galilaee, or of the Magicia^s in Egypt. Exodus 8.19.
This is the finger of God: but a true voluntary confession of Christ their
Redeemer, proceeds from the mouth of children only. Matthew. 16.17.
Blessed art thou, Simon, the son of Iona: for flesh and blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. He which opened Simons
heart, to power in that happy learning, untied Simons mouth, to power out that
happy language. Simon said, Thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God:
And as no man can see the Sun without the Suns light, 1. Cor. 12.
So no man can say, Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: which words, I am
not the first, who with distinction of the manner has restrained to the spirit
of regeneration. So that I may bind up this point with an Historians censure,
touching the most honorable acknowledgement, that ever was yielded unto
mortal man, (...): he said it: Val^riu^.
Magnus honos, sed schola tenus: It is a great honor, but within that schole:
the same in effect with this; Wisdom is justified, but of her children. We
marua^le not at all: because as we never saw man distinguish right from wrong,
that had not either some rule in his hand; or at least some notion of a rule in
his mind: so to speak in Tullies words, Iudicare quis sit sapiens, vel maxim
videtur esse sapientis: To judge who is a wise man, belongs chiefly to a wise
man. Well is it then provided by divine dispensation, that wisdom may take
her deponents at home, otherwise who would not fear abroad (...): that either
she should prove non-suite, for want of evidence; or for lack of compurgators,
excommunicate. Such a vile and contumelious conceit has that part of the world
entertained of her and all her handmaides, which has most need of her and all
her handmaids. What S. Paul 1. Cor. 14. interprets a strange language, the
Prophet Isai. 28.11. called the flowtes and mockeries of a language. We must
not imagine, that it fares better with learning, then with a language; let it
be strange, be sure it will be ridiculous. A^t has none other enemy to speak
of, but ignorance: for when the first rudiments thereof can take no root in
barren and unblessed understandings, difficulty does beget desperation, and
desperation forsooth is turned into judgment, judgment ends with
condemnation. E^ (...) 3. cap. 12.
Lici^ius his wide mouth is open to decree, though his unskillful hand cannot
subscribe to his own decree. That good letters are a venom and a pestilence:
but not to torment him here, who lies tormented elsewhere: in our own time,
that we may not insult upon the common peoples simplicity, to whom Divinity
seems heresy, and ministers a kind of coniurers, nor yet discover our own
bodily fathers nakedness (whose best definition of knowledge, is a pretty
shift fora younger brother to live by) never were there more devils in Julian,
then there are Iulians in one of our English patrons, who chose rather to ^ea^^
the blind for a little execrable gain, then to be led by them that can see,
which in Augustine his judgment were their chiefest happiness. Non possunt
stulti beatius viuere, quam si seruiant sapientibus: Fools are never so
happy, as when they serve wisemen. 12. De vtil. credendi. I am not my self
beholding to the cunning of Apolonius for the Dialect of these Harpyes. Yet
many a silly Leuite, either imprisoned, or indebted, or impouerished,
bewraieth their unconscionable covetousness, when a man has served for meat and
drink, a suit of apparel, and ten shekels of silver, his master Micah
peradventure brings him into some Benefice (as Agrippa came into the world, not
after the common fashion) yet must he warn his servants, teach his children,
wait upon his Jupiter, and watch his Capitol, having no more tithe-corne
himself, then will serve to feed a poor goose of the Capitol. As I never
read my self one line in my life, why the grace of God, or reason of a man
should be subjected to such graceless and unreasonable conditions: so do I
not marvel at you (my reverend elder brethren) who wear out your seats and
your selves in these Nurseries so long, to the manifest reproach of all
unlettered Church. robbers. Here would I stay, were I as you, like the Creeple
by the poole side, until Christ himself did come and cure me without water,
since none will throw me into the waters, or rather, since the waters have lost
their virtue, and will do no good now adays, except they be stirred by more
Angels then one.

And you (my brethren) who, notwithstanding such discouragements, beyond these
lower degrees aim at an higher, which they get to themselves, 1. Tim. 3.15.
whosoever minister well, think not the testimonial of this renownd
University, nor any of the reverend Bishops seals, no nor the Donation of
Ecclesiastical graces from above, which are enough to prove you wisdoms
messengers; an authentical commendation to the people, except, besides all
these, you bring along an innocent, and unrebukable conversation, which may
profess, by silence, that you be Wisdoms Children. The least experience may
teach the youngest probationer in our calling, as well as the Author De duplici
martyrio in Cyprian: Efficacius est vitae, quam linguae testimonium. Men are
sooner persuaded by our lives, then by our words. Would you see them both in
one person at one time compared? Look upon Fernando preaching by the way side
near Armagutium, in the fourteenth book of Petrus Maffeius his History;
where, when a Barbarian did spit in his face, and he notwithstanding only
wiping it away with his handkerchiefe, held on his speech with the same tenor
of voice and countenance; 'twas presently conceited, that certainly this was a
noble and Divine kind of Philosophy, which brought men to such a blessed
temper of patience. This might have gonefor good preaching, though the Preacher
had been speechless: (...): A dumme work, Nazian.
is better then a word not brought to effect. Not all the points of his Sermon
wrought so powerfully for the conversion of that rude people, as that one
point, which was no point of his Sermon. Had Spain and Rome, out of their
pretended zeal, sent none but such Fernandos abroad, wisdom should not have
been condemned where it was not heard, because they were children of the rocks
and mountains, not wisdoms children, that proffered it: heaven it self
should not have been despised, for fear of their company that did promise it.

And would not Christians, think we, have made the like refusal? which of us
being invited at this solemnity by the most curious entertainer, would not
inuit himself another way, upon the lest notice that Medusa were the
Cup Bearer, or Cloacina the Caruer? Likewise in spiritual things, all men's
meditations cannot separate and abstract a doctrine; only running upon what was
taught; some receive what they receive, in the concrete, with a reference to
the person of the teacher, which was the reason why Annius Viterbienses, a
preaching Friar, set out his books, under the name of Philo and Metasthenes,
men more passable, and plausible: Great is the preuaylement of authority.
Basil thought Athenasius his voice did still ring in his ears: 2. Tim. 3.14.
and S. Paul exhorts Timothy to continue in the things which he had heard,
with this Memorandum, knowing of whom thou have learned them: but when your
credit is once cracked, as good your brain were crazed; treat you may of
heaven and hell until Doomesday, truth will be truth in your mouths, but such a
testimony as Cassandraes prophecy was. Tuncetiam fatis aperit Cassandra
futuris,
Ora Deiiussu non vnquam credita. --
Cassandra opens her mouth, and by Gods appointment, shows what shall come to
pass, but no body believes her. Mistake me not for a transgressor of any
common place. Holiness is no necessary note of a Church, no necessary note of
a Minister. Men's personal offenses suspend not the power of the holy Ghost
directly, but yet they do suspend it occassonally, by simple men's infirmity,
who were not simple men, if they were only led by sound arguments: therefore
you must deal with your charge, as God did with his, (...): He bare with their
manners in the wilderness. Acts 13.18.
His life is bad, therefore, his doctrine false, sounds like an harsh non
sequitur: it follows not, in the schools: yet in Court and country a thousand
times better our good lives should prevent it, then our great learning be
driven afterward to confute it. Be therefore careful (my brethren) that
whilst you preach to others, your selves be not reproved, I mean not as the
people would have reproved Christ, Mark. 1.
Physician heal thy self: But as Christ reproved the devil, not only
because he would conceal his Divinity, but because he liked not (as
Chrysostom thinks) such an impure instrument (...), Hold thy peace, keep
thy breath to cool thy thy torment. Non tali auxilio, nec confessoribus is it is
Christus eget. --
This is no such help, nor these Confessors such as Christ has need of.
Psalm. 50.
What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? Wisdom is
justified of her Children. Saint Lukes interpretation, with addition of a
particle universal, does enlarge my ground: Of all her Children. Romans 10.
No sooner with the heart man believes unto righteousness, but immediately
with the mouth man confesses unto Salvation: whereof among many more you may
find a proper Hypothesis, 1. Cor. 14.25. where the new convert falls down on
his face, worships God, and says plainly to the Prophets, God is in you
indeed, nor is this justification seen only before her friends, but in a more
peremptory style to the face of her enemies: Acts 4.20.
We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, we cannot:
not, that it was absolutely impossible, but in two of those senses at the
least, borrowed by some Interpreters out of Nazianzens fourth oration, de
Theologia. For an outward incongruity of reason or law, idpossumus quod iure
possumus: We can do that, which we may do by law; and an inward resolution of
the will founded upon that outward incongruity, working necessarily so far
forth as it is habitual: this is the flame of the Prophets fire in his bones,
possessing all the parts of all the powers of body and soul. A love as strong
as death, nay stronger, moripossum, tacere non possum: I may dye, but I cannot
hold my peace. Therefore when the Papists proudly demand, among other
circumstances, what Bishop, or Doctor, or Martyr, or Writer resisted their
innouations, stand not perplexed with Eliah his tentation, as in the hour of
the power of darkness. For though Popery crept in, part after part, in every
part by gentle degrees, in every degree with pretense of truth, and when it
prevailed, advanced the banners of her painted ceremonies, with such a mighty
noise of Excommunications, that a poor man's tale could no more be heard, then
the humming of a Be in a clap of thunder; yet Wisdom then left not her self
without witnesses: the particular Authors, who mention particular Adversaries
of particular errors, are infinite; the answer is there to be found where the
title does promise it, in that book which Illyricus has compiled,
Catalogustestium veritatis. Here I should exhort al hearers not to be ashamed
of that good name by which they are called: Christians are always Protestants.
Only that none of our own body may misconster my labor, for the report of an
absent estate, or mistake himself, for one like the Queen of Sheba, far
off; pardon me, I beseech you a little, while I now conclude all at home: for
in this place above other places, 1. Cor. 2.6.
We speak the wisdom of God among them that are perfect; if not perfect in all
degrees of knowledge, like Wisdoms champions, yet perfect in all parts of
knowledge, like Wisdoms children. Every man has his proper gift of God, 1.
Cor. 7.
one after this manner, another after that: yet, all these gifts are here: here
are Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas, here is piping and mourning, here are sons
of thunder, and sons of consolation. For individual indowments of wit,
eloquence, favor, credit and health, what is there left almost to pray for,
besides continuance and increase, with continuance and increase of our
thankfulness? Quid voueat tenero nutricula maius alumno, Hora^.

Quam sapere and fari vt possit quae sentiat, vtque
Gratia, fama, valetudo contingat abunde?
Some times besides have had more experience of some divine attributes, then
others. I appeared to Abraham, Exodus (...).
Isaac and Jacob by the name of Almighty God, but by my name Jehovah was I not
known to them: Our fathers who built our Synagogues, had sensible trial of
Gods bountifulness; though all be conveyed down unto us; yet is he better
known unto us by the name of wisdom. For here has wisdom built her house,
and hewn out more then twice seven Pillars, and, as if this were but an
earnest of more hereafter, lo where she is building still with both her
hands. What should I speak of Naioth, now turned into Kiriah-sepher? Joshua
15.15.
A City of Books, wherein Wisdoms youngest children may consult, all Sages,
Universities, Churches and Kingdoms, calling a Counsel of their councels
altogether. 1. Cor. 9.2.
If I be not an Apostle unto others (did Paul tell the Corinthians) yet doubtless
I am unto you. If I be not Wisdom unto others (may God and Christ tell us)
doubtless I am wisdom unto you. Neither are we taught only like children,
but like children nourished, in such a liberal and magnificent manner, as no
traveler could ever parallel. Iustus Lipsius (who might have sued out a Writ
of dotage in his later days) doted not in this: 3. Book, (...). cap.
Vnum Oxoniense Collegium (rem inquisiui) superat december nostra: One College in
Oxford (I have inquired the truth) surpasses ten of ours: in his Local
History of Louaine. When Pope Adrian the sixth had erected his College there,
with these inscriptions in the porch or entrance: first, Traiectum plantauit;
then, Louanium rigauit; after that, Caesar dedit in cremenium: Traiectum has
planted, Louain watered, Caesar gave the increase. No more; another in scoff
subscribed, Hic Deus nihil fecit: Here God did nothing. Take heed we slubber
not over our meditations here, as he did his inscriptions there, omitting the
principal, that another come not after and write, Hic Deus nihil fecit. All
these strangers then will rise up in judgment against us, who walking through
this Mesopotamia, protest we dwell in the garden of Eden, Praesentemque refert
quaelibet herba Deum: And every herb shows that God is amongst us. You that
are Lords of this herbage, suffer not these herbs and flowers to be trod under
feet by beasts in men's shapes, as your souls will answer al terrible
expostulations. Must God nourish children, and they rebel? Shall Christ come
to his own, and his own refuse him? Is there no balm in Gilead, no wisdom
in Teman? no goodness in Oxford? God forbid. What should Wisdom do? Whither
should she go? Where should she began Auditory? Will you send her into the
tents of Kedar, and the streets of Askelon? Alas: Askelon and Kedar look upon
her and her children, for evil, and not for good; Only to shape excuses out
of her childrens examples, for biting and toothlesse Usury, for conuentionall
and confidentiall Simony. If men in Colleges do so and so, then this, and then
that, and then, I know not what: you shall hear an hundred conclusions. I hope
the power of your integrity shall one day stop the mouths of such disputers,
that they may be put to a non plus, and hissed out of the world, for want of
all exemplary arguments: and did I think such fools did now peep in at
Wisdoms windows, I would lift up my weak voice like a trumpet once more, to
proclaim, that Wisdom is still justified, even here of her children. Though
Samuel, D. Reynolds.
the true child and witness of Wisdom, be dead and buried, in his own house
at Ramah, then when all Israel needed no commandment to mourn; there is, I
trust, a remnant who can say, Whose ox have I taken? and their hair shall
never stare at the question. Nay, if they knew that finger in their hands,
which itcht to be but accessorie to the least circumstance of a corrupt
bargain, they would cut it off, and sacrifice it to the memory of those
Founders, whose Alms should not be saleable. What use of words? Believe your
own eyes, you shall perforce confess, that though we vaunt not, yet we
despair not of some Nehemiahs. The former Governors, that were before him,
Nebem. 5.
had been chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine,
besides forty Shekles of silver; yea, and their servants bare rule over the
people: but so did not he, because of the fear of God: rather he fortified a
portion in the work of the wall. Yet strangers might imagine us Scholars in a
fools paradise, and I my self should not justify Wisdom, but beguile mine
own understanding, dispense with my conscience, and preuaricate with that
providence of God, which brought me hither, would I proceed hence to the
justification of all equiuocal members, which are, or have been of our visible
incorporation. If any man therefore, that is gone out from us, drink securely
in the Vessels of the Temple, and devour holy things, converted into new
moulds, as if God, who has the chain of all causes, and reason of all sequels
tied to the footstool of his Throne, might be blinded with a few changes of
the property, let his knees smite one against another at Baltasars judgment.
If any man among us, for a base nemo scit, brought in at a Non licet gate, dare
hazard the shipwreck of a good conscience, let his shoulders shrink at the
name of Gehezi his leprosy. These are the worlds own changelings, wrongfully
laid at Wisdoms doors. Their Parasites may soothe them with a mock of Wisdoms
children, as Alexanders flatterers would have gulled him with a title of
Jupiters son. But when they are thus and thus wounded, they may cry, as he
cried, (...) This is the blood of a man, it is not such as Home^ says, issues
from the Gods: so, This is surely flesh and blood (my brethren) it is not such as
the Scripture says, proceeds from Wisdoms children; therefore as they need not
answer to the name of children, so the Church and University may consist
without them, we are not bound to defend them: Rather, that such plants, whom
God never planted, may be rooted out, and miss of propagation by succession I
beseech my mothers daughters, the chaste and virgin graces still to continue
looking upon one another, especially the graces of men, upon the graces of God,
that they never, either publicly or privately cast a look (much less fasten
a kiss) upon a rude and ungracious supplicant; lest, while wise men's favors
are entailed to fools, barbarism steal into this place, at the same gate
that Yotylas entered Rome, Porta Asinaria: and our Colleges now houses (as I am
verily persuaded) of Wisdoms children, degenerate into theeuish dens of
money changers, or garrisons of Turkish Ianizaries: which abomination of
desolation, the Lord in mercy keep for ever, far from this Holy place; and
let all that have, or desire to have, in themselves, or in their children,
Heads of Scholars, or hearts of Christians, say, Amen.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS PREACHED: THE ONE AT HERE-FORD, THE OTHER AT PAVLS Cross.

By JOHN HOSKINS, Minister and Doctor of the Law.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at Saint Austens gate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, AND his approved good Lord, ROBERT Lord
Bishop of Hereford, I. H. wishes grace and happiness.
RIGHT REVEREND,
NO motive of this world, but a strong persuasion of that zeal which preached
to the heart, furnished the Church, and reformed the Country where I was borne,
first submitted my service to your Lordships direction next unto Gods, leading
me to be trained up under your Lordship next unto William of Wickham: where the
favorable care that ^ath been taken for the convenient supportation of mine
earthen vessel, to the end it might bear heavenly treasure, agrees rather
with the nature of a Father, then the name of a Patron: which as I have been,
and ever will be ready to profess, so am I now, by this small pledge of my
thankfulness, most willing to publish, though it cost me withal the
publication of mine ignorance. God Almighty direct and protect your Lordship.

Your Lordships Chapellan in all duty to be commanded, I. HOSKINS.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE IVDGES IN HEREFORD.
1. SAM. 2.25. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge it: But
if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?


OF this double proposition, infallibly grounded upon the disproportion
between GOD and man, a fundamental principle of eternal truth, the
principal Author must needs be God himself; the Author under God
isntrumental, was according to the Text, old Eli, both Judge and Priest in
Israel. Though he, good man, sinned as a Priest, that he spoke not to his
sacrilegious and adulterous children before, or that he spoke no more; though
be sinned as a Judge, that he did no more but speak; though there be many
strong circumstances in the style too conditional, If; too general, If a man
sin; All which betray much weakness of affection, that he had almost
murdered the living severity of a Judge, almost extinguished the burning
zeal of a Priest, for which the Tribe of Leui was chosen, in the frozen and
dead indulgence of a father: Yet the matter and substance of his speech, seem
confidently to depose for him, that the true degrees of sin were entirely
preserved without confusion in his judgment.

Imagine then you see that grave ancient, reverend personage, and those grave
hairs, like Snow ready to melt; think that you hear him, while his hands
tremble, his tongue falters, and his head, that oracle of age, droopes out of
the Chair toward Golgotha, reading unto us at the last gasp, in one long
breath, this short Lecture, If a man sin against another, the Judge shall
indge it: But if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?

You have obs^rued, no doubt, already, that the whole puts a difference
between sin and sin. This difference my Meditations find to be two fold:
The one causall, drawn from the distance between the parties offended, in the
two suppositions, If one man sin against another, and If a man sin against
the Lord. The other consequent, from the different success of offenses, The
Judge shall judge it, who shall entreat for him? Of these in their order, etc.
First, of the former difference.

That the nature of all virtues, consisted in a point indivisible, and all
swaruings or declinations from that point, offenses, were equal, was out of
the more judicious Philosophers Schools, once rejected as a Paradoxe, and can
now by no means be received, as an Orthodoxe conclusion in Divinity. For
Christ himself original of truth, rule and example of life, in the 19. of
John speaks evidently: He that delivered thee unto me, has the greater
sin; whether his reference were to the Jews, more forward in condemning his
innocence then Pilate, or to the manner of their proceeding, therefore more
odious, because they sought his blood, as Iezabel did Naboths, under a color,
and with a face of judgment. (As, by the way'tis a sin of sins, when men
force any sacred ordinance of God, appointed for preservation, against the
hair, to cross, and as it were, to stabbe it self in the bloody work of
destruction) Howso^uer, still one sin looks more like a Goliath then an
other. Therefore one sinner in the Scriptures phrase justifies another.
Jerusalem instified her sisters, Ezekiel. 16.
Sodom and Samaria: not absolutely, or a toto: that an Heathen man could
deny, Nonest bonitas esse meliorem pessimo, said, Laberius. So Sodom and
Samaria were not good, because Jerusalem was so bad: but comparatively, or, a
tanto, as we read in the same Chapter, Thou wast corrupted more then they in
all thy ways. Jerusalem was so bad, that Sodom and Samaria were less evil.
This might serve for establishment of that foundation upon which I purpose with
help of your attention, to raise a greater building, among sober judgments;
and for the rest, where it serves not, be it here pronounced, that the grand
Muster-master of Rome, Bellarmine, who presses many weak reasons, and
unwilling authorities to follow his camp and cause, with bag and baggage,
has not only satisfied, but gratified the most curious inquisition, with
abundance in this argument: I mean, in his first book De amissa gratta, and
ninth Chapter, where, though he come wretchedly short of his own project, to
prove that some sins are in themselves venial, others mortal; yet he
speaks home to our purpose, that there are moates and beams, Gnats and
Camels; all sins are not equal. Besides differences arising out of inferior
circumstances: Their inequalit^e, degrees and ground of aggrauation, sins may
be said to receive thence whence they receive their special kind and nature:
for as that which made a Cockatrice a Cockatrice, makes him more exquisitely
venomous then a Snake: So that which makes Treason Treason, makes it more
enormous, then murder. Now their special kind or nature, sins do derive,
some say, from the scope or intent of a sinners will; others from their
objects; others from the sins inconformitie or repugnancie to the Law.
Between these assertions, I do conceive little or no manner opposition: For
they who draw the special nature of sins from their objects, understand not
objects in any material sense and consideration (as if such a real impression
upon such or such an object, were presently conclusiue of such or such a
sin.) So, that French Knight Tirell, the glaunce of whose arrow dispatched
King Rusus, should have been as much a Regicide as R^uilliac, who lately
killed the French King. No, they mean, that finnes receive their nature from
their objects in a formal consideration. The will intending such an object
forbidden by such a commandment, defiles it self with such a sin. Better I
cannot suddenly deliver this doctrine for all capacities, then if I plainly
say, sins receive their nature from their aim; from their aim therefore
they receive their degrees of inequality. For example, whensocuer the will
from within gives the King of Armascharge, 1. King. vit. v. 31
Fight neither with small nor great, sane only against the King of Israel,
that must be Treason ineuitably, with such an intention to kill the King of
Israel. Saluianus in his sixth of Gods government lays down the rule: Semper
per dignitatem iniuriam patientis crescit culpa facientis: That sin must
needs be fowlest, which shootes at the fairest. Therefore that sin ascends
to the highest pitch, which aims at God, the highest Majesty. All sins, I
grant, are against God, as he is the chiefest good from whom all sinners make
an Apostacy, They have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and as he
is that sovereign Lawgiver, whose will all sinners do transgress. All
sins aim not at God, as at their immediate object, but only the breaches of
the first Table; therefore are they more heinous, then the breaches of the
second. The reason; because the more principal obligation inferres always a
more principal guilt in the forfaiture. If you be bound in a Recognisance to
the King, it is more dangerously extended, then if you be bound to a common
person. Now the bond of obedience toward God, you yield, to be more
principal: We ought to obey God, rather then men, Acts 5. Therefore you must
grant, that the disobedience to God is more principal, then if one man sin
against another. The common objection against this last position, you have
often heard, that God in the sixth of Hoseah, and Christ in the ninth of
Matthew, prefer mercy, a duty of the second Table, before sacrifice, a
duty of the first: the resolution you may hear as often, that any moral
duty, though of the second Table, may challenge place of right, right before
any ceremonial, though of the first Table. For the Scribes confession in the
twelfth of Mark, that to Love God, and our neighbor as our selves, is more
then all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices, holds not only in sensu
composito, but also in sensu diuiso. Every branch of this love is more then all
whole burnt offerings and sacrifices: To do Justice and Judgment, is more
acceptable to the Lord, then sacrifice, Prou. 21. Thus far we proceed
clearly, without any rub at all, In these, there may be more scruple about
this Hypothesis, our example in hand; How were the sins of Elies sons
against the Lord?

Their sins were two. First, That they prevented the time, and were their
own caruers, in snat ching perforce more of the sacrifice, then God had
allotted to the Priest as his portion, Leuit 7.

Secondly, They lay with the women that assembled at the door of the
Tabernacle, verse 22. A sin, not much unlike that, for which Nectarius once
pulled down public confession in the Church of Constantinople, and for which,
I hope, we shall never set up Popish shrift again in the Church of England.
Let us apply the same fact for substance, and ordinary deformity, unto other
men elsewhere. For as much as they trespass not upon the first, but upon the
second Table, we cannot in the sense received, style them sins against the
Lord: yet hear first what the Lord himself says, Leuit. 10. I will be
sanctified in them that come nigh me. Then deny, if you can, that a place
consecrated, the Tabernacle, and persons consecrated, Priests, advance theft
above theft, to sacrilege, and inhaunce adultery above adultery, to profane
pollution: The scandal (I am sure) issuing out of these circumstances, which
directly thwart his ordinance, corrupting and unhallowing consecration,
redounds by consequence and resultance to the Lord himself. Right so it was in
those days, and will be while providence continues orders of men in the World,
as the good Bishop speaks in the fourth of that golden Treatise, Criminosior
culpaest, vbi honestior status: The more honorable the condition, the more
reproachful the transgression. Measure all your titles, and your places, and
your callings, with this one of Elies house, where with I dare be most bold,
and make instance in the words of Barnard, 2. de consideratione inter seculares
Nugae nugae suntin ore Sacerdotis blasphemiae: Trifles are trifles among
secular men: But trifles in the mouth of Priests, are blasphemies.

Thus, briefly to sum up things, you have heard for the general, that offenses
being unequal, take their degrees of inequality thence, whence they take their
special kind and nature, from their objects, not in a material, but a
formal consideration: more plainly, from their aim: the higher they aim, the
higher the offense. Therefore offenses against God and the first, more heinous
then offenses against man and the second Table.

For the special you have heard, that Ophni and Phineas offenses, though they
were for the naked fact against the second, were for circumstances of place and
persons, against the first Table, and against the Lord.

Here, upon any condition of access and entrance into Christian affections, I
would entertain your ears a while with a few words of exhortation: But the
hearts of most hearers in these latter days, disdayning comparison for
hardness of heart with the nether millstone, resistall spiritual strength, and
drive back all ministerial forces. So that either they must rebound in
prayers and wishes toward Heaven, or fall down to the earth in mourning and
lamentation. One while we wish and pray, Oh that God would grant men wisdom,
to judge, Discretion to distinguish of offenses: another while we mourn and
lament, Ala^, that custom makes neither true consci^nce, nor true difference
of off^nces: A little strayning of gnats, a little quarrelling with moates,
couzens the world, and takes up the time, while beams may be winckt at, and
Camels swallowed more conveniently. John 18.
The Jews would not enter into the Judgment Hall, being under the roof of an
Heathen man, lest they should be defiled. O fair pretense of Religion! Yet
they defiled themselves with the blood of Christ, and would not (forsooth)
admit the price of that blood into their Corban. O the damnable turnings and
windings of hypocrisy! Notwithstanding, our practice and profession comes not
far behind theirs, they stumbled at Ceremonles, and leapt over sins; we
distaste little sins, and digest the greater. Mark (I beseech you) whether
we in our best estate, imitate not King David in his worst. David was ready to
pronounce the sentence of death against him that took away the poor man's
only Lamb: The man that has done this, shall surely die: Die he meant (no
doubt) by the law of conueniencie, for the manner; for by Moses law it was but
a fourefold restitution: meanewhile partiality will not suffer him to read
death in murder, and death in adultery, though for those sins the enemies of
God in Gath and Askelon long to be delivered of blasphemies against the Lord.
Ask this day a Papist, what that servant deserves, who steals himself, like
Onesimus, from his Master: what will he say, but, The whipping post, or the
house of correction? What does he then deserve, who changes his God, for them
that are no gods? There must be no whipping post for such a Renegado, no house
of correction for a Recusant. Ask again the Patron of a Benefice, what
shall be done to him that embezels his neighbors goods? Hanging, he cries, were
too good for Felons. What then shall be done to him that robbes his God. Mal.
3. in Tithes and Offerings? Here he can see no Felony: This is a simple theft,
they call it Sacrilege. Ask any man touched in his good name, whither he will
send his reuiler? He presently curses, as if he meant to send him to hell: Be
it true, or be it false, Veritas conuitij non excusat conuitium: The truth of
the matter excuses not the guilt of the staunder: he therefore swears no
mean oaths, he will send him to the Consistory. Whither then shall he go,
who dishonours Gods Name? That bears no action, cursing and swearing inferres
not any defamation. Thus, as in a throng, it comes to pass, that a man of
lowest stature, who kept least ado, is lifted up above the shoulders of the
taller, and made a laughing stock: So in the course of this world, where
sins of all sorts are pell mell confounded, the least are many times exposed
to most shame, and censure. A poor Sea-Captaine brought before great Alexander
for Piracie, confessed his fault and said, Indeed I am a Pirat, because I
preyed upon some poor Fishermen in a Cock-boate: But if I had scowred the Seas
as thou haft done, and robbed all the world with a Navy and an Army, I had
been no Pirat: I had been an Emperor. I wonder, any witty malefactor, while
he is punished for petty larcenie, can escape application of this History.
Me thinks, he should grant his fingers were to blame for a few trifling
points of pidling theeueri^. But if he had robbed the bowels of Gods people, by
giving many Childrens bread in a dear year unto dogs; if he had spoiled
the Church of her right by Simonie; God himself of his honor, by blaspheming;
of his service, by Sabbath-breaking; he might have been some Justice of Peace,
or some great landlord. The cause of all (that truth may be confessed, and
dissimulation confuted) is, we have peruetted the degrees of all good duties;
we be lovers of our s^lues, more then lovers of God; we care not for God, so
much as we care for men: which conclusion in carnest, I have heard unhappily
brought about out of jesting premises. A servant convicted for misdemeanors
before a Magistrate, besought some favor for his Masters sake. Why? Whom do
you serve, asked the Magistrate? I serve God, said the servant. With that, his
Mittimus was dispatched the sooner, for scoffing at authority. Not long after,
a great Lord sends for enlargement of this his servant, and the Magistrate in
all haste sent for the Prisoner, of whom he demanded in a rough and chiding
accent, why he told him not that he served such a Lord? The servant answered,
Because I thought you cared more for the Lord of Heaven. Some may smile
(peradventure) at the relation, as too fabulous for this place. Haec tamen vt
res est ficta, ita facta alia est: I would to God too much matter of Fact in
the World agreed not with this fiction. But they who have the soundest warrant,
not to respect the persons, or fear the faces of men, can no more withstand
the arm of flesh in humane and worldly motives, then Israel the men of Ai,
while God forsook them.

It is therefore high time for all true-hearted Ioshuaes, to rent their
clothes, fall down and water the dust with tears, and blubbering prayers, Oh
Lord, what shall we say, when Israel turn their backs? When Elias, who should
call for fire from Heaven, loses one syllable of his name, turns Eli, and
besprinkles his sons with such cold water, It is not well; and, I hear no
good report; do so no more: when Samuel, who should hew Agag in pieces,
relents with Saul, sparing the fattest for a sacrifice. O Lord, what shall we
say, when Magistrate and Minister, the Israel of Israel turn their backs? This
we say, We hope for aid from you (right Honorable, right Worshipful) whom
God has made Custodes vtriusque Tabulae, Commissioners to enquire, Justices of
Oier and Terminer, to determine of offenses belonging unto both Tables, as
far as they may be discovered. And can you want in this case discovery?
There are shops and houses, and Tauernes every where, which profess their
entertainment, Aequa ibi libertas; The Gamester, and the Drunkard, and the
Whoremonger, and among the rest, which is most lamentable, some cracked piece of
broken Magistracy meet there, and are reconciled with Hail, fellow; well
met; upon equal terms in cursing, swearing, and blaspheming against the Lord.

Now for the care of this Kingdom and Commonwealth, cause these cursed
Associations to be dissolved; for the zeal of Gods House, appoint these Dagons
to be defaced, which out-braue the Ark of GOD; For the love of the
Inhabitants, command the signs to be pulled down, before vengeance
importuned by sin, pull down their habitations; or if they stand before the
simpler sort of Gods Saints vexed with their profane resorts, begin to mutter
in Cyprians words 2. Epist. 2. Consensere iura peccatis, and cepit esse
licitum, quod publicum erat: The Laws consent unto sin, and that begins to
be lawful, which was before common and customarie.

Not to perplex your attention with diverse interpretations following upon the
diverse both significations of a Noune, and Conjugation of a Verb, in Hebrew,
nor yet to enlarge mine own ground by resolution of judgment, into several
acts of iudiciarie proceeding, from the summons to the sentence, (all which,
Lawyers deduce from Gods own example, in the first sinners conviction) but
briefly to prosecute the different success, of sin against a man, and sin
against the Lord, of the one it is here pronounced, The Judge shall judge it:
There can be no societies amongst men, without hope of indifferency; no hope
of indifferency, where one man sins against an other, without some
satisfaction; satisfaction may be sought many ways, no way enforced, but by
judgment. To make a Judge, two conditions must concur at the least; the one,
outward Warrant or Commission; the other, inward inablement or sufficiency:
For the former, judgment is not every man's work; I confess, extraordinary
designs of Justice the Scripture mentions: Such as was that of Iael and
Phineas without specification of warrant; they had (no doubt) the substance of
authority from private revelation, though they wanted the solemnities of
authority from public deputation.

The widow in the Parable, Luke 18. took the direct course in coming to the
Judge, and saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. When they have a matter (says
Moses) they come unto me, and I judge between one another, Exodus 18. The later
condition of enablement or sufficiency, requires many virtues and perfections;
All may be reduced unto knowledge and conscience. First a man of knowledge
must be Judge. Deuteronomy. 1.13. Bring you men of wisdom, and of understanding,
and I will make them Rulers over you. Every man judges best of that which he
knows. Paul thought himself happy, being to make his answer before King
Agrippa, Acts 26.
who had knowledge of all customs and questions among the Jews; whereas on
the contrary, Ignorantia Iudicis, calamitas innocentis, Aug. 19. de ciuit.
cap. 6. The Judges ignorance, is the innocent man's calamity. Yea, ignorance at
the Bar may prejudice it self or one man's cause; but ignorance on the Bench,
does prejudice all the Country: for either it must determine causes by
hap-hazard, or frame weak resolutions out of her own shallow brain, as
Spiders spinne their Cob-webbes out of themselves. Now the poor men come to
the Court, to have their hearts relieved with some sentence of equity, they
come not, to have their hopes deluded with a Lotterie, or their ears delighted
with a ierke or trick of Poetry. The other inabling perfection, is conscience.
A man of conscience must be Judge, That he may walk with David, Psalm. 101. in
the uprightness of his heart; neither stooping to rewards, as Samuels sons:
for such Judges do wrap up a matter, as the word is, Mich. 7.3. Sometimes give
me thy silver for thy sin by commutation, and sometimes bear with me, I Will
bear with thee, by compensation: nor yet winking at injustice for favor with
Eli here, whose condemnation proceeds out of his own mouth: The Judge shall
judge it. He was Judge himself; he did not judge it. Yet I would not be
conceived in a wider sense, then I dare speak. You shall banish some justice,
if you banish all favor out of judgment. The Imperial Laws, though they
detest respect of persons, yet, I am sure, favor the Defendant more then the
Plaintiff; and by the municipall Laws of this Land (as I have heard) a Bar
to common intent is good, whereas a Declaration must contain precise form and
certainty. The reason I take to be that of the Ciuilian, Actor Instructus
accedat oportet: and the reason of that reason is, because actions are
according to nature, more in our power then passions. To be short, favors
within the cause, not favors without the cause; legal favors, not personal,
are in judgment considerable. A Judge, after the manner you have heard
qualified, stands bound in reason to execute the proper act of his function;
for the judgment (as Iehosaphat spoke) is the Lords, 2. Chron. 19. Therefore
are Judges a living kind of instruments. You know, the nature of instruments
consists in use and operation; wheresoever you find instruments without
operation, as in the Psalm, They have eyes and see not, you find Idols. The
speech then is as natural and agreeable, when we say, The Judge shall judge
it, as when we say, The eye shall see, the ear shall hear; they be the
Ministers of God, (...), attending continually on the same thing. Therefore in
those days, when Kings themselves were Judges, (such days there were,
howsoever the French advocate dispute against it, as unbefitting Majesty) in
those days a widow coming as Xiphilinus and Spartianus say, to Adrian, but,
as Plutarch relates, to Demetrius and Philip, to seek for justice, and being
answered, he was not at leisure, replied, Noliigitur regnare: Be not at
leisure to be King. The event bids me believe it of Philip; for I find, that
his neglect of Pausanias suite, when he came to be righted against Attalus, was
the cause why Pausanias killed him. Therefore if a Judge, he shall judge it.

So have you heard the means of mediation, when one man sins against
another, a man with warrant from without, sufficiency from within, both of
knowledge and conscience, whom the German calls in a significant word,
Bidermann, Vtriusque virum, awards for every damage, a satisfaction. Gallio
told the Jews, If it were a matter of wrong or evil deed, he would,
according to reason, maintain them. If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge it.

A benefit more known by experience in England, then ever it was in Israel,
God be blessed; and blessed might we be, if it were acknowledged with
thankfulness. They had their counsel of three, their lesser Sanedrim of three
and twenty. Their greater Sanedrim of threescore and twelve: to which our
Savior alludeth, Matthew. 5. We have more for number, better for conueniencie,
for all causes spiritual and temporal, civil and criminal, pecuniarie and
capital. Samuel amongst them went about year by year to Bethel and Gilgal,
and Mispeh, and judged Israel in all these places. More then one Samuel amongst
us, more then once in the year, visit all the great Cities of our Kingdom, in
such manner, that neither offenders have any long respite to reflect upon
themselves, view their own strength, and take encouragement; nor any else just
cause to complain against the public trial, since they stand or fall at home
by the deposition and verdict of their nearest neighbors. So much of that
sin, for which there may be some mediation.

That the sin of Elies sons was a sin against the Lord, I have showed
already; the success in this last sequel, being the want of true success,
bids us search somewhat deeper into the manner. Great was that darkness, whereat
Christ, the very light of the world, did wonder, and ask the question, How
great is that darkness? So strange must that offense be here, of which the
High Priest himself, best acquainted with all the means of atonement,
proposes this interrogation with admiration, Who shall entreat for him?
Compare Protasis with Apodosis, sequel with sequel, the former with the latter,
as they stand in opposition, what does the former affirm? No more but a civil
and humane mediation, for a temporal satisfaction. What then does the latter
deny, by the rules of opposition? no less then Religious or Divine
intercession for eternal satisfaction.

Here may we behold some Symptoms of that disease, for which there is no Balm
in Gilead, some signs of that sin we commonly call the sin against the
Holy Ghost; not that it is against the third person of the Trinity, as he is
the third person, more then against the first or second: But because it is
against the function and operation of that person, upon whose office depends
men's conviction and men's illumination. This sin is a sin of men enlightened,
who have received a taste of heavenly g^fts, Hebr* 6. Who more enlightened, who
received more in their times, then the Priests of Israel? This sin contemns
Christ, it treads under foo^e the Son of God, Heb. 10. Their contempt could
reach no nearer to the truth: they contemned the type, Wherefore have you
kicked against my sacrifice? Verse. 20. For this sin there remains no more
sacrifice, Heb. 10. The wickedness of Elies house shall not be purged with
sacrifice for ever, the next Chapter, Verse. 14. The Apostle, 1. John 5. terms
this sin, a sin unto death, meaning unto death (...), with that fearful
addition, I say not, that a brother shall pray for it. Of those it is said, The
Lord would slay them; and if a man sin as they sinned against the Lord, Who
shall entreat for him? This general Apostacy wherein a man, and all that is
in him totus, falls from God, and all that belongs to him a toto, for a time
beyond all times: for all effects of sinful perseverance, in totum, shall
never be forgiven, Matthew. 12. The Schools yield a reason of this
vnpardonablenesse, peradventure (though the speculation be curious) some may
quickly conceive it, the defect is pardonable where the will may pretend fear
of excess. A sin of ignorance is pardoned, as Paul's persecution was, because
a man may affect too much knowledge with Adam; and a sin of infirmity, as
Peter's, denial is pardoned, because a man may affect too much power and
sovereignty with the Angels: but a sin of malice is unpardonable, because a
man can never affect too much love. I remember, Bernard upon the Canticles has
a pleasing strain, in proouing, that there is nothing but love, wherein a man
may contend with God himself. But the plainest reason why this sin is
incurable, is, because it strives against the cure: as a mad man wounded, will
not suffer his wounds to be bound up, but fights with the Physician or
Surgion. To draw toward a conclusion. The partition Wall is taken down, the
Veil of the Temple rent, the Temple it self, with all the discipline of the
Temple, is abolished; Christians now are all Priests, Apoc. 1. Witness their
separation from the world; they are a chosen generation, witness their
dedication unto God. They are (says Peter) a royal Priesthood. The very
bridles of the Horses, as we read in the end of Zachary, have under the new
Testament the same inscription, which was upon the high Priests forehead,
Holiness to the Lord. From the top of these high prerogatives we may fall; if
we do fall, more deeply and dangerously then ever did these sons of Eli,
these Priests of Israel: yea Julian and Latomus, and Ecebolus, and Franciscus
Spiera, and many hundreds more, might we send effectual summons to the dead,
would quickly resolve us, that a man may proceed in sin beyond all comfort,
in his own conscience, being (...), damned of his own self, Tit. 3 11.
Beyond all interest in the Churches devotion, Thou shall not pray for this
people, neither lift up cry or prayer for them, neither entreat me: for I will
not hear thee, Jeremy 7. Beyond all claim unto Christ's satisfaction, it
shall never be forgiven, Matthew. 12. Wherefore with humbleness of spirit, and
trembling consideration of all tentations, keep your selves betimes, and a
far off (beloved) from the terror and amazement of this hopeless inquiry,
Who shall make request for us? Whether you pronounce judgment, as Judges, or
assist and learn judgment, as Justices, or debate and open judgment, as
Lawyers, or enquire as Jurors, or depose as witnesses, think that your souls
best health and spiritual constitution consists in your integrity; the least
crack therein, a great Divine calls solutionem continui. The Apostle, before
him, called it a shipwreck: when this shipwreck is once made, out runs all
love of God. So much every man weighes; so much every man is worth, as he
loves God. Amor meus pondus meum. When this is once gone, and we be brought
to the balance, no wonder, if like Baltasar, we be found too light; no wonder,
though the weight of Reverence, and the weight of Authority depart from us; no
wonder, if he who powers contempt upon Princes, make us, though we were as
great as Antiochus, even such as he is called, Dan. 12. a vile person.
Therefore as you love your lives, and love your souls throughout all the
transitory, temporary, momentanie course of this world, evermore preserve the
life of your lives, and soul of your souls, your integrity.

You have now heard the speech of a Judge and Priest of Israel, opened by a
Priest, before Judges of Israel: if I have failed in showing the duty of a
Judge, God (I hope) and you will pardon mine unfeigned desire, to do the duty
of a Priest; and as you are received in the common opinion (right Honorable) I
speak it for your future encouragement, not for any flattering incroachment)
as you are received and renowned for great learning and patience, so I pray God
direct your learning, where I have been defective to your own souls
instruction. But for your patience, let my freedom and boldness of speech
this once so far forth ingrosse it, that there may be none left in store for
those offenses against which I have spoken; and I have spoken.

Most gracious God, and loving Father, grant that thy holy Word may teach us;
grant that thy holy Spirit may work thy word into us; grant that thy holy Son,
who sits at thy right hand, may make intercession, and assure us of that
intercession which he makes for us, that we may put a difference twixt sin
and sin; that we may make a conscience of all sin; that we may preserve
our integrity; that we may never be brought to this comfortless perplexity,
Who shall entreat for us?

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS.
ZACH. 5.4. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter
into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that falsely swears
by my Name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume
it with the timber thereof, and stones thereof.


AMongst those diverse manners, wherein God at sundry times spoke by the
Prophets of old, doctrine and vocal predictions were usually sealed either
with ocular or spiritual representations. And though we might imagine
Zachary, who succeeded in the later times, altogether untaught by
predecessors, other Seers in Israel; yet his own personal experience could
not choose but acquaint him with this lively method of Illumination. For
being, as Justin Martyr truly judges, transported in an ecstasy, First, he
beheld a man riding on a red Horse, doubtless Christ himself ready pressed,
and up in arms for his Church: then four horns; four (belike) of the
Churches chiefest enemies; next, a man with aline in his hand; a type of the
Cities building: after that, a contention between our High Priest Iehosuah and
Satan his and our maine adversary. In the Chapter immediately precedent, the
riches of Gods Spirit, under the similitude of a golden Candlestick. Thus, as
Argus his head in the Poet was full of eyes, in the face and former part of
this prophecy we find nothing almost but visions. The last, and nearest in
affinity to my present message, is the semblance of a flying Book; not like
the books we read, bound up in many leaves, whereof every one carries his
several latitude, but after an ancient fashion, with one, folded about a
rouler in manner of a Pedigree. The Heavens, says Esaias 30. shall be folden
like a book, that is, like such a book. Now, whether this volume noted a
cause of wrath, some Catalogue of heretical positions, quickly dispersable
throughout the world, suppose (for example) the Council of Trent, or if you
will, the Romish Canon Law which iustifies men, notwithstanding, theft and
perjury; or else an effect of wrath, a denuntiation of some speedy judgment
from Heaven, against theft and perjury, the number of Interpreters is more
equally divided, then the weight of their interpretation. Far be it from my
simplicity to censure or restrain their spirits, who collect hence higher
mysteries by fair probabilities: but in the beaten path according to the
letter, This is the curse that goes over the whole earth. Rabbi David
conceiueth in regard of vengeance written both within and without, the curse of
the thief appearing on the one side, the curse of the false swearer on the
other. Yea the original word in the third verse, whose doubtful signification
ministered the chief cause of different construction, is translated by none of
the worst Hebricians, not after the metaphorical sense, shall be pronounced
innocent, but shall be cut off, according to the sense natural. Naturally the
word does import a kind of riddance, no kind of acquittance, a desolation
rather then an absolution. And that I may not hold you long in the first
entry, come near and see the whole phrase of my Theme of it self directing
us throughout unto matter penal, supposing that which all threatenings do
suppose, matter criminal. Where since your religious attention stands arrived
past all danger of farther difficulties, be pleased, I beseech you, to survey

First, The publication of the curse, I will bring it forth, says the Lord of
Hoasts.

Secondly, The surprisall or invasion, And it shall enter into the house of the
thief, and of him that falsely swears by my Name.

Thirdly, The continuance, and it shall remain in the midst of the house.

Fourthly, The effect or consequent of it, and shall consume it, with the
timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

Of all which, as God shall enable, in order: and first, of the publication, I
will bring it forth.

(...), When Mercy has almost spent her spirits in words of forewarning
prophecy, Justice arises to gird her self for works of revenging
providence; so the curse, which was published before by revelation, shall now
be published in execution: in execution certain and infallible. For the zeal
of the Lord of Hosts shall bring it forth.

Bring it forth. Therefore your eyes shall behold an execution visible and
exemplarie. First, admit in sobriety the ratification of this extraordinary
curse for a part of his counsel, then follows an absolute infallibility.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will. Isaiah 46.10.
Who has resisted his will? we were best say None without assignation of
seeming instances; lest Augustine in the hundredth Chapter of his Enchiridion
presently reply, Hoc ipso, quod contra voluntatem Dei fecerunt, de ipsis fact a
est voluntas Dei: in that wherein the will of God was not done by them, the
will of GOD was done upon them. Such an universal Soueraignetie clearly
perceived in the Lord of Hosts, might well move Saint James (by occasion of
certa^ne Merchants in his time, who so deliberated aforehand of their future
employment, that they scarce once looked upwards) to teach all humane language
a most necessary Parenthesis, If the Lord will, James 4.15.
or if we live, we will due this or that. Which when a King of this Land,
'twas William Rusus, sometimes omitted, threatening to make a bridge from the
rocks of Wales over into Ireland; a Prince there understanding of his
irrespectiue speech, boldly professed, he never feared that man's coming, who
would so presumptuously determine in a confidence of his own strength, without
due reference unto Gods determination. None but the King of Kings has right
unto the style Imperial, I will, or will not, without all limitation, because
his will and power be matches only, his decrees are always attended with
answerable success of events inevitable.

Secondly, forasmuch as the secret things belong to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the things revealed belong to us and our children; afford this curse the
common acception of a doom, which proceeds from God none otherwise, then as
a means of bringing his counsel to pass, being pronounced out of men's desert
and moral disposition, yet can it brook no other condition, save the
condition of men's repentance, If this Nation against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague I thought to bring
upon them, Ierem. 18.8.

Properly God is not as man, that he should repent, 1. Sam. 15. but speaks as
man. Nouit Dominus aliquando mutare sententiam, nunquam nouit mutare consilium:
God changes his sentence, he changes not his counsel. Nay so far are the
alterations of any or all inferior things from fastening upon him, but the least
imputation of mutabilitie, that if any second causes exigent do cease or
change, that very cessation or mutation is from the first causes intendement.
But in case they persist in their impenitencie, the consumption decreed shall
ouerflow with righteousness, Isay 10.12. Then to close up the passage, or
hinder the course of divine justice by mortal means, will be more
impossible, then for a man to stop the violent inundation of the Sea with his
arms, or to force lightning, and beat it back again into the clouds with
his breath; for the Lord of Hoasts will bring it forth. Luke 12.
There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid, that shall
not be known: sooner or later the madness of Hypocrites shall be made
evident, if not in the sin, as Iannes and Iambres fury, yet as both David's
and Iezabels, 2. Sam. 12.
in the punishment: They did it secretly, says God, but I will do this thing
before all Israel, and before the Sun: so shall the Name of the Lord of
Hoasts be famous in every sinners infamy. There is another vision in the
seventh of Daniel, very near allied to this in signification, where it is
said, A fiery stream issued out and came forth from the ancient of days,
thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood
before him: That stream was this flying Book, and that Ancient of days, is
here the Lord of Hoasts. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hoasts.

A Meditation whereunto their hearts, of all this great assembly, should in
reason lay principal claim, who take place nearest on earth to the Lord of
Hosts; called after his own Name, seated on his own throne, armed every way
with his own authority; Bring forth, O ye sons of the most High, bring
forth your fathers judgment, in imitation of your father. For let mercy be
showed to the wicked, yet will not he learn righteousness, Isai. 26. Nay,
your cruel pity toward such, like water powered out upon Lime, does in stead
of quenching, kindle the rage of their iniquity; Eccles. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the hearts of the sons of men are fully set to do evil. Though in matters
of far less importance, execution may be suspended a while, because the
Judge must rather step, then stumble from a verbal to a real prejudice, yet
capital causes regularly require more peremptory proceedings. They that
allege against expedition here, the life of a man which is precious in all
Laws, are easily answered with the very name of a Church or Commonweal, more
precious: and where two such favors meet together, fit it is the part should
stoop to the whole, the private to the public. The life of good men, I
farther grant, for whose sakes not only the great Cities of a Kingdom, but
the great Kingdoms of the world do stand upright, may be justly thought a
public treasure. To them must that in the fourteenth of the Proverbs be
restrained, In the multitude of the people is the honor of a King. But Kings
are abused, and Kingdoms pestered, Religion it self discountenanced, and all
they, that in desperate times dare keep a good conscience, discouraged in the
killing preservation of the wicked. Cui malus est nemo, quis bonus esse potest?
How shall men ever believe that he will prove a back of defense unto Gods
friends, who wants all edge of courage against his enemies? Be wise then, O ye
rulers; be learned, you that are Judges of the earth, that judgment may drop
down like rain, even like the former rain. Psa. 101. verse 8.
Betimes will I destroy all the wicked of the earth, that I may cut off all the
workers of iniquity. But if you prolong the trial in your declining days, as
the Sun setting stretches the shadows of the Evening, deferring that
business night after night, which David made his mornings work, Gods people
fear to presage, what may become of you and your houses? only thus much they
be persuaded with Mordecai, that help and comfort shall appear unto them out
of an other place: Ester. 4.14
They will open their grieuances unto an higher Judge, no Judge dormant, whose
sentence is no dead letter, but a piercing Oracle, I will bring it forth.

Gods Will cutteth off all hope of impunitie: I will bring it forth: Gods forth
cuts off all opinion of secrecy. Sinners shall hear and fear; all eyes shall
see, and every mouth acknowledge, that vengeance that rough hand-maide of
heaven, remains still a Virgin, neither power can force her, nor wealth
win her, nothing in the world corrupt her. And thou monster of men, who wilt
not learn; though God bring his judgments to light, ^s it is Zephan. 3. every
Morning; say no more in thine heart, My Master is gone into a far Country.
Tush, he sees not, the vision is deferred; where is the promise of his
coming? Suppose thy self one of those escape Goats, in whose temporary
repriuement, the Judge of all flesh does but represent the necessity of his
last Assizes; yet for thee to conceive the first motion of a the cuish
cogitation, were as much in his sight, as to steal this Book out of this hand
before all these witnesses. If Liuius Drusus an Heathen, in the second Book of
Paterculus his History, when a a master-workman offered him to build him an
house free from the sight of all men, desired him rather, if he had any skill,
to build it so, that al men might see whatsoever he did; much more should
Christians order both their he arts and their hands, as though their houses, as
though their bodies were transparant. God sees already, and men shall behold
our shame hereafter: in the mean while, to revel all our life, were as
desperate a madness, as if some malefactor should swagger at the Gibbet
foot, because there are some few rounds of a ladder betwixt his neck and
execution. For yet a little, even a very little while, and behold the Judge in
the clouds, the only visible person in Trinity, over a place, though not the
same, yet as conspicuous as the valley of Iehosaphat, the Books all open, and
the secrets of all hearts manifest. In that bright day must Hypocrisy, the
cold glow-worme of the night, lose her vainglorious shining. All they, whose
tongues were the tongues of Mounte-banks, whose hands were the hands of
Painters, whose lives were the lives of Players, while they neither did what
they said, nor said what they did, nor were in any point of their dealings like
their appearance, must appear in their likeness: the inside of all things
must be turned outward, and painted sepulchers of stones shall spue out many
more painted sepulchers of men. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of
Hoasts. Then and there certainly, peradventure here and before that time; it
may be, while these words are in thy memory, my Prophets vision may cross
thy brains; the wings of this Book may flutter over thy drowzie conscience,
until out of a furious paroxisme thou may vent this hideous exclamation, O
the Book the Book! amongst the rest of thy frantike imaginations. A terrible
supposition may some man say: but terrors are no wonders, when God ^omes to
Judgment. Would (...) ^^^^cede (...) p^^^^able and judicial manner (...) not
a tr^mbling sinner fear, when he (...) more fly the power of his Judge above
him, then he could stand still, if there were an Earthquake under him. There
is no matter of appeal, no Writ of errout lies against this Judge, though he
be both Judge and partic; because he can be neither ouerborne nor ouerseene.
But here farther the Judge, under the name of the Lord of Hoasts, that is the
King of glory, who can muster out of the dust plagues against Princes, issues
out in a Martial manner, like that strong man, Luke 12. ready to make a breach
into the houses of theft and perjury, which is the surprisall or invasion, my
second general part; where I will crave leave to single the parties surprised,
because the difference of their sins asks a distinct examination. It shall
enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of the swearer, etc.

2. Between the strictnes of Hebrew and Greek Etymologies on the one side,
which appropriate the word unto secret thefts, and the largeness of most
expositors on the otherside, which extend it to the breach of the whole second
Table, we may find surest footing in the middle way, while according to the
Scriptures use, and Saint Augustine his description in the threescore and
eleventh question of his second book upon Exodus, we take theft here for
unlawful usurpation of another man's goods; therefore unlawful, because the
owner was unwilling, whether deprived of his substance without his knowledge,
by fraud and close carriage, or with his priuitie, but against his consent, and
that either his full consent, as by violence and oppression, or his consent in
part, as in the practiced exaction of couenanted interest from distressed
debtors, who wish with all their heart, that creditours would lend according to
the nature of loan (a contract of mere gratuitie) their money according to
the nature of money, which is an appointed instrument of exchange incapable of
such monstrous improuement. All these may seem comprehended in the Apostles
exhortation (1. Thessal. 4) Let no man oppress or defraud his brother in any
thing: for God is an auenger of all such things: the flying Book does houer
over all their heads.

Whatsoever may be spoken of this argument, must suppose this plain
principle, that every man is not owner of every thing; the principal right of
all outward things God has reserved to himself, therefore the Israelites did
not properly rob the Egyptians; Deo ministerium praebuerunt: God himself by
a special commission entitled them thereunto: yet has he committed to the
sons of men a right of use and dispensation agreeable unto reason, which
asks that things in nature perfect, should serve creatures of more
perfection; wherun to, for the avoiding of disorder, a general distinction of
ownages, was added by the Law of Nations. For I reckon the Lacedaemonians
opinion of theft, that it was an allowable exercise of Martial discipline, a
paradoxe only of some men who withheld the truth in unrighteousness, which
besides supposes what ever I have said; because there can be no theft, where
there is no distinction of ownages: afterward as experience perceived, that
the common Ass was never well saddled, more special proprieties with
designation of every man's proper portion, -- me us est hic ager, ille tuus,
entered in by laws positive. These bounds are ancient bounds, the curse of the
flying Book must light upon their houses, who labor to remove them, whether
they teach others so to do, as Anabaptists and elder Heretics called
Apostolici; or do it in their own persons, as thieves and oppressors. For when
the chief Lord has been no less careful of fencing his Tenants
possessions, then in the maintenance of his own homage and service, writing
down, Thou shall not steal, with the self same hand with which he wrote,
Thou shall have none other Gods but me: What singular ingratitude reigns in
them, who rejoice in the spoils one of another? The very Law of charity
being trodden under foot, seems in a greeuing accent to demand, Si sterilitas
in ignem mittitur, rapacitas quid meretur? Nor are the laws of men written in
blood, which in the censure of this ungrateful and uncharitable sin exceed
the punishment of Moses Indicials, amongst a multitude of offenders: which is
caused not only by the fierceness of a wild Nation, but by the wantonness of
a peaceable Nation: For the latter is no less powerful then the former, to
quicken our original corruptions, in whose judgments stolen waters are sweet;
Aliena nobis, nostra plus alijs placent.

It is high time for the grand Cacus of this Western world to look about him,
how he may defend himself, and all his Italionated emissaries, from the curse
of this flying Book. For, not to mention that spiritual sacrilege, whereof
good Doctor Tailor complained in a dream; Thieves, thieves, rob God of his
honor, nor yet to pursue the manifest Leger-demaine of all their Divinity,
whereof the fittest title and inscription, in my conceit, may be that of the
Apostle: 1. Tim. 6.5.
Vain disputations of men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, who
think that gain is godliness: because it emptieth it self from point to point,
into the Churches treasure: their unequal exchange of lead for gold, which the
French Lawyers account no better then robbery; and the practice of Priests and
Jesuits, who, like the two Neopolitane thieves, Pater noster, and Aue Marie,
under pretense of long prayer, devour widows houses, might tell them, that
their judgment and damnation sleeps not: The flying Book shall enter into
the house of the thief.

Thus far while a Preacher walks in the general, describing the nature of
theft, declaring the equity of the Laws against it, or otherwise declaming
against strange thieves abroad, every man can be master of his own patience;
descend hence unto conclusions and applications, Thou art a thief, thy trade
is a theeuish trade; Kings Courts, and great Cities will quickly report, that
the Preacher did forsake his Text, and clean mistake his Auditory; give me
therefore leave, for mine own part to profess, that no child of the Prophets
should be less troubled with Ionabs passion, would Gods mercy make me this day
a liar, and your innocence my speeches all impertinent.

It was an honest opinion of antiquity, that theeuery should lurk altogether,
among the brethren of base degree without preferment; as I could prove by the
speech of Iarchas out of Philostratus in the life of Apollonius, which Saint
Jerome upon the second to Titus, ascribes to a namelesse Author: whosoever he
were, when a Magistrate was commended in his presence for being no thief; A
good commendation, said he, for a servant, if besides he be no runnagate. To
which relation Saint Jerome adds this Epiphonema of his own, In tantum furti
suspicio ab omni libero debet esse aliena; so far must every freeman be,
from all suspicion of theeuery. We may likewise say, what men should be,
supposing them for the present far otherwise. Without flattery, to paint men
as we find them; the lamentable ruins of many decayed estates in this Land,
bid me make an humble suite to freemen, and rich men, and Gentlemen, to
Lawyers, and Judges, and Magistrates; that they would think it no scorn to be
no thieves. If all thieves lurk in corners, or only scowre the plains; what
means my Prophet? why does he mention such a one as dwells in a house, and
that house his own? It shall enter into the house of the thief. Without all
question the self same sin, as the self same river passing through diverse
regions, receives diverse appellations; In the Church it is Sacrilege and
Simony; in the place of Government it is oppression and tyranny; in the place of
Judgment, it is corruption and briberie; and when the River swells up to the
bank, it is Usury. Consider and compare these aright, and I dare undertake,
they that lie in ambushment between Jerusalem and Jericho, shall be justified
as no thieves in comparison. Alas, these be trifling Treuants, scarce their
own crafts-masters, quickly discovered, apprehended, committed and fettered in
chains of iron, while the greater abide at Jerusalem, stalking about the
streets in chains of gold. As this glorious port was purchased either in the
Country, by racking Tenants, improouing Leases, enclosing Commons; or in the
City, by diminishing quantities, corrupting qualities, or taking opportunities
by observing the seasons of dearth, and scarcity; by lessening measures, and
falsifying balances; by mixtures and blendings, and other sharking
sophistications, Amos 8.
which The Lord has sworn, by the excellency of Jacob never to forget: so
must it be maintained by no dribblets; but by the pound, and under some great
countenance of authority. There a small booty will not serve the turn: Mice
indeed may be nibblers, and live, when the Cat that keeps them, proves to be of
an eating kind: twenty to one she deuoures more at one bit, then the poor
Mouse would have done at twenty. So, great men turning thieves, can be
satisfied with no less, then a man and his heritage, especially when greatness
is accompanied with an ambitious desire of growing yet greater, (...), a
Serpent must eat a Serpent, before it can be a Dragon. You may see the heads
of Jacob in the third of Micah, flaying, and chopping, and dressing the people
as in a day of slaughter; and the governors of Jerusalem in Zeph. rauenously
devouring them raw, like wolves in the evening; and are these no thieves? no,
they be murderers. (...), betwixt life and living there is no such wide
difference: cut but the poor man's purse, he thinks you cut his throat, and
the throat of all his children. Such an unmerciful cutthroat is oppression, a
sin which the poor man cannot commit, though he would: Saint James accounts
it the rich man's peculiar: Iam. 2.6.
Do not the rich men oppress you by tyranny? do they not draw you before
judgment seats? yet of all men, they can plead in themselves no necessity.
Men do not despise a thief (faith Solomon, Prou. 6.) when he steals to
satisfy his soul, because he is hungry. They can plead in others no
superfluity, for they rob the poor: Now he that oppresses the poor,
reproves him that made him. Let not then the motion sound harsh, in great men's
ears, that they would not disdain the commendation of no thieves. O that they
would strip themselves of that pomp and state, wherewith injustice has
clothed them, but for one moment, and consider if they were to begin the
world, how many poorer then themselves would fear to be bound for their truth
and honesty! I would to GOD they would search their own hearts, and ransacke
their own consciences, and make a strickt inquisition after every suspected
passage of their lives. At this instant I hold it not impossible, that some man
in his own bosom may discover and attach a thief. Tell me, beloved, do you
not find him full of fetches, pretenses, and excuses? Believe him not, spare
him not, favor him not, shriue him to the proof; arraign him, condemn him,
punish him; punish him in the body, by fasting and mortification; punish him in
the soul, by repentance and contrition; punish him in the purse, by works of
charity and restitution. Thus if you would judge your selves, the Lord would
not judge you: the flying Book would pass by your house.

In conclusion, unto young and old against this crying sin, of all that I
have read, I give but two retentiue admonitions; the first, that old men cease
to load themselves with long provision, for so short a journey, bewaring of
covetousness, which is the root of all evil: They that will be rich, fall
into diverse temptations: Dives qui fieri vult, and cito vult fieri; right or
wrong, hook or crook, all is fish that comes to the net, though it be
(perhaps) a Serpent. He that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent.
The last, that young men dull not their quick and active spirits, for want of
exercise in some vocation, taking heed of idleness: for this is the common
progress; Idleness brings poverty; Necessity comes upon the sluggard like an
armed man. Prou. 24. Prou. 30.
Poverty brings theeuery; Feed me with food convenient for me (says Agur)
lest I be poor, and steal: and what I pray you, follows? Lest I be poor
and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain. Stealing must be covered and
concealed with swearing, the sin next to be surprised by the flying Book,
next to be handled. It shall enter into the house of the thief and into the
house of him that falsely swears by my Name.

Of those three conditions prescribed for an oath in the fourth of Jeremy.
Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness, a defect of the foremost alone may be properly termed Perjury.
For since the end does determine natures in morality, that which precisely
crosses the end, must needs be the virtuous actions directest opposite. Now
nothing overthrows the scope and purpose of an oath (which in the sixth to
the Hebrews is a confirmation) more then the sin of false swearing, whether
it testify falsely of things past or present, as in an oath assertorie, or
undertake things de iure, and also de facto, possible without performance, as
in an oath promissorie. No sooner can your senses exercised in the Scripture,
apprehend the notion of a flying Book, but you renew the remembrance of that
in the third of Malachy, where the Lord threatens, he will be a swift
witness amongst the rest, against false swearers; and can you marvel, that
they become sharers in the curses and plagues of this Book? marvel rather,
that they do not ingrosse the whole. The proud merit of their prodigious
profanesse, seems to scorn any proportion under a full volume of punishments.
If a simple he be so passing cuill, that it can be made good by no
circumstance, no not by the glory of God, in the conversion of a world; Will
you make a lie for him, as one lies for a man? Job. 13. All judgments
created, are too narrow to conceive the guilt of Perjury: forasmuch as
therein, besides the wrong of our neighbor, who can have no commerce with us,
if there be no truth and trust in us, by making GOD himself an Idol,
ignorant of truth, or like the father of lies in the eight of John, a Patron
of fraud and falsehood, we send him up a desperate challenge of impudent and
Atheistical defiance. Ask in this case of Histories, from the Book that
flies here, to the Book that lies any where in press, whether ever any
dared this Giant without their own notorious destruction. When Vladislaus King
of Hungary, contrary to his solemn oath, falsified at the earnest instance
of two Cardinals, set upon Amurah the Turk unawares, he perceiving his
soldiers falling and victory flying away from his side, pulled a copy of the
Truce out of his bosom, and lifting his eyes toward heaven, be uttered some
such words as these. O Jesus Christ, lo, these are the leagues, which thy
s^ruants have confirmed by thy Name, and yet have violated! If thou be a God,
as they say thou art, show thy self in this thine and mine injury, by
plaguing these forsworn miscreants. Scarce had he ended this strange
petition, but the success of the Christians battle turned, the King was
slain, his army discomfited, and his people pitifully butchered. Certainly
this flying Book mightily triumphed there, like the Angel of the Lord in the
Camp of Ashur, that all after-ages might out of an awful reverence, frame
this incontroulable inference, that he which plagued a Kingdom, will never
leave an house vnplagued for perjury. Wherefore we conclude, that though God
was much glorified, and Religion justified, in the suffering of that holy
Martyr John Husse at the Council of Constance, yet both were cruelly
dishonored on the parts of his cruel persecutours, because they put him to
death contrary to safe conduct. A promise equivalent to an oath in the Laws
estimation. Johannes Molanus, a professor of Louaine, in a book of this
argument acknowledges the fact, but with certain limitations.

First, that safe conduct was granted not by the Council, but by Sigismund, by
which distinction (upon supposall that Sigismund and the Council might be
distinguished) the fault is not discharged, but only translated.

Secondly, that it was against unlawful violence, and not against lawful
executions; where he stands beholding to Minsinger the Ciuilian, who
mainetaines indeed, that a man may be punished for some superuenient
misbehauiour, notwithstanding safe conduct; whereas John Husse before
excommunicated for nonappearance, suffered in that very case, for which he
received warrant of security. The disputers third evasion may wrest laughter
from the spleen of gravity it self, which is, that he had safe conduct to
come, but not to return. Had not return been specified in the letters,
Minsinger might have taught Molanus in the 82. observation (the place whence
he mistook his second shift) that in letters of safeguard, where access is
promised, there recesse is always included. And was it then credible, that an
understanding man should moon one foot out of doors, upon such weak terms
of security? Yes, says this charitable Author: for you must note, that this
John Husse was a reprobate; and reprobates are very presumptuous. Thus this
censurer of books boldly transcends his commission, and censures men. We are
the more unwilling to me^e out the same measure back again unto him, because,
although he square with us in the Hypothesis touching John Husse, yet he
mainely ioynes with us in the Thesis, that faith must be kept with Heretics;
wherein after several proofs, he takes it in some kind of indignation, that
Hermannus Letmasius a Divine of Paris, misapplieth Isidores sentence In malis
promissis rescinde fidem, to the violating of promises made with Heretics,
since Isidore meant by evil, a present cuill of sin, no lawful matter of an
oath, not a future evil of punishment, or ensuing inconvenience. By such
principles of perjury as Let masius strives to lay down, you may generally
mistrust the Papists, especially considering a doctrine subordinate; and in the
next neighborhood, to wit, equivocation; by the benefit of which politic
muention, both in private and before a Magistrate, they can say what they will,
swear what they will, against their knowledge, and against their conscience,
provided that they reserve in mind the contrary. Before you pass over the
Alps, all travailing young Gentlemen, study this learning, as young Scholars
in the University do study fallacies, not for your practice, Quid Romae
faciam? mentirinescio: but for your own profit and security. With them that
pervert the formal intent of words, which were first ordained not for
concealment, but discovery; you can have no fruitful conference: you can
have no safe society with them, that impoyson the remedies of contention, and
cancel all seals of confirmation. Amongst our selves at home, sacred and
inviolable evermore be the Religion of an oath, both within and without the
place of judgment. In judgment; for no man that has entered into a statute,
but understands, it extends to be executed on his body, lands, goods, and will
not suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of
his head to take any rest, until he knows how to perform the defesance and
condition. An oath is a kind of Statute entered into, and acknowledged unto
God; the condition, to say the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; to be
extended on the house: The curse shall enter into the house of the false
swearer, the goods, the lands, the body, the soul; and the devil like a
nimble Vnder-sherife, stands ready to take all in execution.

-- Phalaris licet imperet, vt sis falsus and admoto dictet periuria tauro.
Were it possible that the greatest Tyrant would extort a falsehood from me by
proposal of the greatest torment as (God be magnified for our Prince and
peace, we know no such violence) yet were it possible, still I must hold fast
truth as the horns of the Altar, because our Savior has ouer-ruled this
case: Matthew. 10.
Fear not them which can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul;
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.
Without the place of judgment think not that men must be couzened with oaths,
as children are with Counters. Glory not in equiuocating forms of swearing,
with some secret reference to the mysteries of your unknown profession. For
thus runs the rule recited by the Schoolmen and Canonists out of Isidore,
Quacunque art verborum, etc. With what slight and cunning phrase soever you
swear, God the witness of your conscience, takes it, as he to whom you
swear, by common construction understands it. Therefore subtle Tradesmen
ensnare themselves, whiles they make a snare of Gods ordinance and the
credulous buyer departs away nothing so heavy laden and oppressed, with the
price of wares, as the sellers soul is laden with the weight of his own
perjury. Cast off all, in all places, at all times; because as Philo speaks,
(...), false swearing proceeds from much swearing, while use breeds facility,
facility custom, and custom perjury: Let your yea, be yea, and your nay,
nay: swear not at all in your ordinary communication.

Here am I fallen upon that complaint, which I could fill with tears, as well
as with words. It may grieve, I say not, any tender, but any heart of flesh,
which knows not yet the degrees of the nether milstones hardness, to hear
that Name, which is reverend unto Angles, and terrible unto devils, tossed
about among the sons of men, without reverence or fear. Children we see have
wit to swear rashly, before they have discretion to speak distinctly. Young
men use oaths in hot blood, as arguments of courage and resolution! Old men
swear in choler, to maintain their credit and reputation, and he that will
not sometimes rap out an oath in a brauado, has in the common opinion neither
the wit, nor the courage, nor the credit of a man, sure no stamp, nor spark,
nor spirit of a Gentleman. It Is a bare and naked speech, a cold and dead
narration, which is not mingled and interlaced with some blasphemous mention,
either of our Maker or Savior. There must be either nails, or wounds, or
blood, or heart, or body, or soul, or somewhat, else it wants due complement
and circumstance. O God, must the foundation of our honor needs be laid in
thy dishonor! Lord Jesus, was it the end of thy diverse sufferings, to minister
unto men diverse forms of swearing, or to take away the variety of their souls
diseases? To take away the variety of their souls diseases without all
controversy. Therefore let them fear that they have little or no part in the
merit, who thus abuse every part in the pains of his sufferings. If the love
of God with all the bonds of all the benefits we have received, or hope to
receive, cannot persuade us to covenant with our lips, against this evil, from
which of all evils, we have most power of abstinence, to which of all evils,
we have fewest temptations, yet remember from whence it arises, from the first
cause of evil, Satan; whither it falls, into the last effect of evil,
damnation, and in the middle point the short spanne of our life, what mischief
and vengeance it procures: for the sentence, I know, is Apocryphal, but the
sense compared with this flying Book, appears to be most Canonical, A man
which uses much swearing, Eccles. 23.
shall be filled with wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his
house: which continuance of the plague was the third part in my first division.

Some would in this place observe a reigning Book, which shrinkes not into
corners, but takes possession in the middle room most honorable; Media
dominatur in aula. Kings indeed have sometimes chosen the middle place of
Kingdoms for their seat; because, that I may speak in that old similitude,
the way to keep a stiffened hide from rising at the sides round about, is to
set your feet upon the center: but the language original shows me small
odds, between, In the house, and in the midst of the house. Therefore I rather
observe the stubburne quality of vengeance, which like a froward Inmate once
admitted under any roof, will neither suddenly remove, nor remaining, cease to
be troublesome. God has ordained to put a difference between his friends,
whom he chastises out of that anger, which Saint Augustine calls an anger of
consummation, and his enemies, whom he plagueth out of another anger, an anger
of consumption, that the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the
righteous. Psalm. 125.
That was the ground of that heroical confidence of Athanasius, when he
pronounced of Iulians hot persecution, Nubecula est, cito transibit; it is but
a cloud, and a cloud will quickly vanish. As for the unbeliever, The wrath of
God abides upon him, Ioh. 3. which words have a double aspect; one backwards,
according to Saint Augustine, as if it were a wrath of great antiquity, it
comes not now, it was before upon him; another aspect it has forwards in the
Greek Fathers, exposition noting the continuance of wrath, (...), It shall not
depart from him. In this sense it abides, and I know not whether there may not
lurk in the word upon him, some secret intimation of advantage from an upper
place, as though revenge did stand continually preying upon a wicked man, like
the ravenous bird in the fable upon Prometheus, or that other upon Titius in
hell; whereof if any demand, Why is mine heaviness continual, and my plague
desperate, and cannot be healed, they have matter enough for answer within
themselves, their own obstinate continuance in sin, whereof though the
particular acts are transeunt, yet the stain and guilt is permanent. A
consideration which abundantly justifies the tenor of Gods temporal
punishments in earth; forasmuch as it quitteth his eternal judgment executed
upon the damned in hell; whereof Saint Gregory, Ad distr^cti Iudicis iustitiam
pertinet, vt nunquam can eant supplicio, quoram men's in hac vita nunquam voluit
carere peccato; it concerns the justice of the strickt Judge, that they never
want punishment, whose minds would never have wanted sin; yea they
desperately cast themselves into a state irrecouerable, and they would have
lived for ever, only that they might have sinned for ever. And therefore no
marvel if the flying Book here lodge all night with the impenitent
malefactors, because impenitencie deals with it, as the Romans dealt with
victory, clipping the wings of it, that it cannot fly away. It shall remain
in the midst of his house. It is no Christian wisdom then, but carnal
weakness, for men any way visited by the hand of heaven, to sigh and groan,
and ask how long out of ignorance! and wonder that the term of their heavy
visitation is not yet expired. In such a lamentable condition, the Church may
teach them how to correct and direct their spirit in the third of Ieremies
Lamentations. First, there must be an inquisition after the proper cause, Why
is man living sorrowful? man suffers for his sins: then a resolution to
use the proper remedy, Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the
Lord. Otherwise, as when you are dead, all the while any moisture remains,
the worms will not forsake your carcass; so while you live, the curse will
wait close upon the cause; still a sinner, and still a sufferer. Now the sin
of them, which either devour holy things, which is abomination; or rob and
oppress their brethren, remains still, as long as the spoils themselves are
vnrestored. Israel could not stand before their enemies, till they had put away
the execrable thing from among them: J^sh. 7.11.
no more will the curse of the flying Book, until the treasures of
wickedness be returned back again to their owners. Let the great Goliahs and
An^kims of the world, who grind the faces of the poor, as they fear a weight
greater then a millstone about their necks, when these shallow rivers of
temporary punishment shall run into the sea of eternal torments, come down
from their pride, and imitate (even the greatest of them) the example of little
Zach^^^, the greatest example that ever was, for effectual and substantial
restitution, and let them break off their sins with righteousness, which
gives every man his own; for, if we believe Saint Augustine in his fifty
four Epistle ad Macedonium, non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum:
Without restitution no remission: and where there is no remission of the guilt
of sin, there can be no decrease of the power of sin; and where the power of
sin decreaseth not, the plague of sin increases like a spreading plague or
Leprosy, which spares neither house nor walls of the house, which is my last
general part, the consequent or effect of the curse, It shall consume the
house with the stones thereof, and the timber thereof.

Solomon at the fourteenth of the Proverbs delivers in general, The house of
the wicked shall be destroyed, you may conceive here verified in a special
manner of destruction; It shall consume it. A consumption which Bildad
describes ( Job. 18*) not without allusion to Sodom and Gomorrah, Brimstone
shall be scattered upon his habitation. Yet if a man himself and his children
might escape, more houses then one would be purchased for money; No, the
thief and the swearer shall be cut off in the former verse: Job. 18.19.
He shall neither have son nor nephew (says Bildad) amongst his people, nor
any posterity in his dwellings, the curse will consume the house; and the house
in the Scripture comprehends the whole family. For all that; yet, though his
body be accursed, like the barre^ fig tree, Never fruit grow more on thee; and
his house accursed too, which consists rather in the frame and fabric, then
in materials, may he not say as Absolon said, and do as Absolon did? I have no
son to keep my name in remembrance, suffer me to take some of these stones of
emptiness, that I may rear a pillar, and call that pillar after my name; no,
nor so; Down with it, down with it, even to the ground, does vengeance cry:
not a stone must be left upon a stone his remembrance (says Bildad) shall
perish from the earth, and he shall have no name in the street. This
consumption is a total destruction, without all dispensation. It shall consume
it with the stones thereof, and the timber thereof. So Spurius Melius and Sp.
Cassius in Rome, and all such bastard plants have been rooted out; justice
ordaining, besides their own death, Vt penatium quoque strage punirentur, says
Valerius, Lib. 6. Cap. 3. Every man's house is his Castle, by the civil Law,
and no man may be dragged out of his own doors iudicio civilly; yet in such
causes as we in England call Crown causes, especially Treason, evident
contempt or contumacie, stately buildings have been utterly ruinated, as
theirs in the third of Daniel, or converted into filthy draughts, and
receptacles of excrements. This severity men have learned of God himself, who
if he make his own Temple waste, where it once becomes a den of thieves,
certainly he will by no means spare private houses, which are not only
shops for exercise, and shelters for defense, but Monuments also for the
bragging proclamation of iniquity. When the stones at every joint do weep
like Marble, and the timber at every pin does bleed like the Vine; when both
the stone out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber join in a mournful
Antheme, one beginning, and the other answering, Woe, woe to the man that
buildes an house with blood, the curse must needs consume that house with the
stones thereof and timber thereof.

Now then that my speech may keep within the bounds of your pattence (R. --) I
should think my self and others blessed in this days errand, if every man
would vouchsafe by the trial of his heart, to try the foundations of his
house, whether they totter upon sand near unto destruction, or rest upon the
rock, able to withstand the tempest of Gods indignation: whether you have
indeed a Palace of pleasure for your offspring, a fortress of defense for your
posterity; or a tower for the records of vengeance; and for this flying Book
a Library, do it, I beseech you, thoroughly. No where does flesh and blood
delight to deceive it self more, then where the wages of deceit is a color
of profit and advantage. They that sell the sheep of the slaughter, in the
eleventh of this Prophecy, Say, Blessed be the Lord; for I am rich. Many
Prophets, I make no question, have cried out of this place, as Zephaniah cried
against Jerusalem, Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, Woe to the robbing
City; and as Nahum against Nineue, O bloody City! the prey departs not, it
is full of lies and robberies: they meant the men more then the walls, though
(peradventure) the walls did as much observe them. Nor was there suspicion
without all probable grounds, who have had Tradesmen throughout most ages of
the world, in continual jealousy: otherwise our Savior would have found
another name, then Thieves, for buyers and sellers in the Temple; and that old
Athenian Law, (...), had never been enacted, That men should not lie in place
of intercourse. You do not hear me deriuing Merchants from so wicked a
Patron as Mercury, though the verse say:

Expertos surandi homines hac imbuit art
Mercurius. --
Notwithstanding the danger of mine own profession, a burden under which the
shoulders of Angels may justly shrink, and for which my shoulders will smart,
if I be not faithful, pleads sufficiently for my boldness, while I plainly
tell you, that your profession is dangerous, yea exceeding dangerous. Difficile
est, says one, vt non interueniat inter ementes and vendentes peecatum: It is
hard to keep sin out of trading. For Customers are not procured by chance,
but gained, as it falls out, by casual opportunities.

Therefore where the fear of God is once expelled, or overwhelmed with
covetousness, affection cannot so much move you; you deal not so much with
friends or acquaintance; discredit cannot trouble you, you deal with strangers
either soon forgotten, or never seen again, until you meet in heaven, or
meet in hell. Satan stands at your elbowes all the while, stirring up your
desire of profit in ouerprizing, cherishing the pride of your wits in
ouer-reaching, and mingling lies, oaths, and blasphemies; all his foulest
brokeries, with your fairest merchandise. The means to stand upon such
slippery ground in your most lawful contracts, is by no means to covet a
larger freedom in unjust or suspected bargaining. Some may remember where I
ranked the Usurer, when I made him the thieves companion. Me nemo Magistro Fur
erit. As far is my tongue from recanting, what Leo speaks, Foenus pecuniae,
f^^nus animae, as mine cyes are from seeing that fire in this place, then which
Agesilaus never saw clearer, when bonfires were made of Obligations. Did you
discern in this and all other matters of practice, the full scope and extent
of your liberty; thus far may we go and no farther (which all cases of
conscience extant can hardly teach you) yet would there be some difference
still retained betwixt a moral agent, by will determinable, and a natural
agent, who knows no limits, but the limits of his power; between a beast,
that deuoureth all within his tether, and a man to whom God has given both
reason and grace to rule his appetite. Sin will soonest take occasion by the
Law, when men hang upon the brinkes of their liberty. The Jews might give
offenders forty stripes by the Law; yet Paul received, you know, but forty
stripes save one: perhaps they thought, if the full number had once been
given, their singers might have itched to give one more, Qui a nullis refraenat
licitis, vicinus est illicitis: he that refraines from no lawful things, is
upon the borders of things unlawful, and is in danger to fall unto them; As
that note which comes too near in the margent, will slip into the Text at the
next impression. Of all studies then never study to range in the borders and
extremities of your freedom. How much of the world you may swallow, and the
world not choke you; how near you may come through the skirts and suburbs of
hell, and hell not wholly devour you; Lest the enemy perceiving the ventrous
outroades of your extrauagant desires so near his own ground, lead you
captive at his pleasure. The wisest mere man that ever was, crowns and
commends a course clean contrary; Prou. 28.
Blessed is the man that fears always. And Saluianus gives the reason, Nemo
magis diligit, quam qui maxim veretur offendere: None loves God more, then he
that fears most to offend him. This man with an awful eye still directed
toward his last account, will be more careful by many degrees of the manner,
then of the matter of a purchase; how he gets it, then what it is he gets.
Because this latter, will he, nill he, must be left, happily to them who
came more lightly by it, an instrument of sin and cause of punishment how
soever

De male quaefitis vix gaudet tertius haeres, seldom proves a lying
observation. But the manner of a purchase will either bring a judgment home to
his doors here, or at least, follow him to judgment hereafter. Most men are
too forward admirers of them, who store, and enrich, and apparel themselves
with oppression, whereas their suites are the suites of Gehezi, their gold the
gold of Tolowse; and all their cattle no better then Equus Seianus, whereof
the owners never prospered. Foolish Birds follow the Kite, in hope of a part in
the supposed prey, when she drags her own guts after her: (...) we should
not have gained this loss, says Paul of his shipwreck; such gains are the
gains and riches of iniquity, wherein a good conscience suffers shipwreck:
nay, worse; for atemporall loss a man grieves but once; for evil gains,
because he has made a more dangerous shipwreck, he must grieve for ever.

You have now heard, first the publication of a curse both infallible, against
hope of impunity; and visible crossing all opinion of secrecy: secondly, the
surprisall or invasion, where the parties surprised, were the Thief and the
false Swearer: thirdly, the continuance of it, as long as sin continues:
fourthly, the consequent, a consumption and universal desolation.

Upon the ground of all these fearful premises, let me beseech you this once,
as you tender your own dearest dwelling places; alas, what have the stones and
timber deserved? yet because the Vulture has carried all to her nest, nest and
all must be set on fire: as you tender the fruit of your loins, which may be
wrapped in the same destruction; why should you consult shame to your own house,
destroying a child in the gain of a childs portion, as if a man should sell
his horse, to buy him prouender? as you tender you own souls, if you know the
price of a soul, and bear not that rich treasure in your bodies, as a Toade
does a precious stone in his head, and knows it not; Lay not up your hearts
there, where riches abound and multiply: Lay not up riches there, where thieves
break through and steal: Lay not up thieves there, where vengeance may break
in and consume. Now the God of all merciful operations, by the sprinkling of
his blood, which speaks better things then the blood of Abel, purge our
hearts from covetousness, and cleanse them from profanenes, that neither the
curse of the flying Book, nor any other destroyer enter in upon us, and
consume our persons, our families, and our habitations. Hear us, etc.

TWO SERMONS PREACHED: THE ONE AT SAINT MARY'S IN OXFORD, THE OTHER BEING THE
CONCLUSION of the Rehearsal Sermon at Paul's Cross. 1614.

By JOHN HOSKINS, Minister and Doctor of the Law.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at Saint Austens gate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTER RANDVLPH WOOLLEY, Master of the Right
Worshipful Company of Marchant-Taylors in London.
SIR,
NOt so much for your particular inclination toward me, much bound unto you
for many kindnesses, as for the love which you have always borne to Gods
glory, Christ's Gospel, and all good causes, wherein you may be charitable, I
must mention your name before some of these Sermons. The copies were wrested
out of mine hands in your house through importunity, and, though distraction of
my thoughts about the passages of another business, suffered me not fully to
peruse them, yet I was contented, such as they were, to let them go. For so,
perhaps, I may recompense, in some sort, the time which I then lost from my
function, while that which was sometimes preached in the ears of a few, shall
now preach to the eyes of all. God direct it both ways to the heart, and the
Lord prolong your time with much comfort here, and crown it with eternity.

Yours assured in the Lord, I. HOSKINS.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARY'S IN OXFORD.
HOSEAH, 8.12. I have written unto them the great things of my Law, but they
were counted as a strange thing.


THE Prophet having begun this Chapter, as an Herald, or officer at Arms,
with a solemn proclamation of war against a people rebellious in general,
applies afterward in order more particularly, several points of reuengement
to the several points of their rebellion. Among the rest I have at this time
brought unto you their contempt of that rule, which should have kept them
within compass both for civil and religious allegiance, as the most
principal, and indeed the mother-breach of Gods covenant; you will call it
presently Isreal's estimation of Gods direction, wherein taking the reading most
received, you come first acquainted with Gods direction. I have written unto
them the great things of my Law, then with their estimation of it: but they
were counted as a strange thing.

First in the former, to pass by the person directing, with his irrefragable
authority, the persons directed with their singular prerogatives (for that
they are of common observation) attend (I beseech you) with reverence but a
while the manner, I have written unto them, and the matter, the great things of
my Law, then by Gods gracious assistance, and your Christian wonted patience,
we will examine what welcome it found in the peoples estimation.

I have written unto them] Were there no more but a special reference here to
that individual action, where Tables of stone were delivered to Moses, written
by the singer of God, Exodus 31.10. 'twere richly sufficient to consecrate and
hallow for ever this outward form of Revelation. But he which is, which was,
and which is to come, points not only at his own work, then more
immediate; but at all the discoueries of his will, written by the ministry and
mediation of his servants. For what though the Law be named? 'twere a wrong to
restrain it to the Decalogue, or to the Pentateuch; the name you know is
general, and therefore when Malachy, concluding his Prophecy, sends us to the
Law, we may not rashly conceive, that he ^oncludes the Prophets, since by it
is meant, as Saint Austen notes, 15. de Trinitate 17.
and we find it true many times, the whole Testament, Galath. 4. Genesis is
the Law, Job, 15. the Psalter is the Law, Romans 3. both it and Esaias is the Law,
all is but either a repetition, or exposition, or application of the Law, and
therefore all is and may be termed the Law, the Gospel it self (the Law of
Faith, whose true property is to rejoice the heart) not at all excepted. Psalm.
^9.
But Hoseah (may some reply) was too early up to brook this acception, in the
days of V^iah long before much of this ample Law was written. Therefore
observe, that you find the word original, in the future time and Enal age
indeed, yet not a bare Enallage without signification, but importing in
general sentences, as I am taught by the best Hebricians, Drusius. Tremelius.
use and continuance of the matter in such a sort uttered; so that by I will
write, instead of I have written, is understood the course that God has taken,
his custom of writing, which customarie manner of disclosing divine knowledge
unto mankind, howsoever licensed enough at the first choice, yet by the
successiue practice of men inspired from above, may farther appear more and
more authorized, more and more sanctified. For Moses, Samuel, Esdras with the
rest, the same men who for their own times were Gods holy Spokes-men, approved
themselves likewise for the perpetual benefit of aftertimes, his full
Secretaries. And the same Spirit which did persuade Jeremy, to receive that
which God did command, moved Baruch, no doubt, to write that which Jeremy did
dictate. That I may not single out the Prophets one after another, but ground
the declaration hereof upon some consent; I take that modest collection in
Caluins Preface upon Esaias, to be very probable, that it was their familiar
usage (as he there, and others elsewhere from Abac. 2. and Esaias, 8. conjecture
to fasten the sum and abridgement of their errands to the doors of the
Temple, which, after some few days view, was taken down, laid up and kept in
the treasury for a sacred monument. Here might I stand upon the brinke of
this former covenant, would I but listen with affection to some men's glosses
upon Gods promise, Ier. 13. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, used indeed for assurance of pentifull grace under the
Gospel, which the Spirit makes the administration of righteousness, giving
with the precept power of performance, far above the letter of the Law, the
ministration of condemnation; but they abuse it, as containing an extreme
difference, in respect of writing betwixt them both, or rather (if it be any
ground of their argument) a plain opposition. From the strict severity whereof
it would follow, that nothing should be inuisibly written in the old, nothing
visibly written in the new Testament; whereas contrariwise, Saint Paul is a
witness above exception, that the very Gentiles, Romans 1. had the Law of God
written in their hearts. And this blessed draught of truth written in ink and
paper without (except all Christian experience be but a delusion) has been and
still is not an enemy to the Spirits secret printing; but a subordinate means
to ingraue the same Characters more deeply in the mind and conscience. For
which cause the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3. writes outwardly of this inward kind of
writing, wherefore I trust, we may fairly proceed over hence to the new
Testament, as from strength to strength, notwithstanding this barrelesse bar
of seeming separation betwixt them. The writers accounted the first on this
side, are the Apostles, who in the most ancient Synod, and therefore not upon
the motion of any private brain, sent letters unto Antioch by Judas and Silas,
who went with Paul and Barnabas, and therefore not for want of trusty
messengers; wherein this was part of their style, Act. 15.28.
It seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to us, and therefore the Spirit of
Christ was among them. The last in all men's account, and suruiuor of all the
rest, is Saint John, who is commanded to write above ten times in the
Apocalips, and toward the end of the Gospel, he tells us, that these things
were written, that we might believe, and that believing, we might have life
through his Name. From the first to the last, as well for direction in the
manner, as suggestion of the matter, (...). The whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God. Not to betray distrust in a case apparent, by the multitude
of allegations, or my mistake of you (beloved etc.) whom I know to be far
from a froward Auditory; let me not look so many learned judgments again in
the face without blushing; if I dare affirm that the Christian world has
devised hitherto any instrument in reason fitter then letters, cither for
preservation or propagation of Religion. The first of these ends the Poets
mistook not, though he appeal to Fame, for Author of the device it self.
Phanices primi (famae si creditur) ausi,
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris.
And our own experience (it grieves me in this case that I should urge
experience) our own experience does daily teach us, that the best Preachers
words are but fleeting sounds, moving more perhaps for the present; yet no
sooner spoken, but gone, and almost forgotten, unless they be taken alive as
it were while they are flying in the snare of this most profitable invention:
then indeed the loss of the ear is restored to the eye, and the certain
pattern of truth becomes secured in men's memories. When I found in some
Antiquaries, that the Reed has been used for a pen, and that the Canes which
grew in the banks of Nilus, ministered matter for paper, I remembered those
Egyptian frogs in Aelian, who taking in their mouths, (...), save themselves,
from being devoured by the water Serpent, the rather because me thought it
might be a fit emblem, to show that the weakest conceits, taking hold of
writing, cannot be consumed by revolution of years whose Hyeroglyphicke was a
serpent. And as the tyranny of time, which like Saturn would devour his own
children, is by this art greatly beguiled: so Heretics also, who wind
themselves into the Church, as marginall notes often creep into the text, are
refuted and rejected by recourse unto this original. You may be told of
Pythagoras, and as those Pagan Druides.
Priests of France, that in their rules abhorred writing. But where are their
precepts? how many footsteps are there now remaining of their learning? their
very names in these days had been unknown but for writing, and happily their
own opinions been unwritten; but that they were in their own times accounted
Paradoxes. But was not this the discipline of Gods own house, for two thousand
years and upwards, to feed his eldest children only with tradition? Surely
the diverse restitutions and reformations of Gods true worship, argue that those
times were not generally so fortunate for Religion. But suppose that in one or
two families, when men were at the fewest, their hearts at the purest, and
their lives at the longest, Religion were a while retained, yet was it not
only by tradition, but by Visions, Oracles, Elements, and Rudiments, which
might be unto them in stead of writing. Writing began with Moses very
conveniently, when the number of men was much increased, and their years much
shortened, that so Gods worship might be propagated, both downwards to
succeeding generations. This shall be written for the generation to come, and
the people which shall be created, shall praise the Lord, Psalm. 102. And
abroad to diverse Nations before Christ, in some divine glimses obscurely
shining through the chinkes and crannies of the then-decaying partition wall,
as appears in the Eunuch: after Christ in a brighter and more clear light,
at the noonetide of the Gospel.

Go therefore and teach all nations] And who will presume to except this
manner of teaching? By which that it was their purpose to teach, I could gather
further out of their own several writings; and if it needed, I could add
both the suffrages of primitive Fathers and Histories; but they being Gods
witnesses and Ambassadors, have as you see written, and therefore may not be
thought (except we saw greater contrary proofs) to have done what they did,
besides their Commission.

All which considered, the less marvel may it be, that we deal in strict
terms with our adversaries, holding stiffly Tertullians plea against
Hermogenes, Scriptum doceat Hermogenis officina; for whence the needless
overplus of their unwritten supplies proceed, we know not: from themselves in
all likelihood that are parties, who must not think to be conveyed into the
room of Judges by this couzenage; but these written evidences (we are sure)
are Gods own deeds and specialties, wherein moreover we are taught, that the
Lord will reprove them, and they shall be found liars, The Lord will add unto
them the plagues of this Book, and they shall be cursed and abominable that
shall offer to piece his word, to mend his workeman-ship, to mingle and imbase
his precious gold of the Temple, with the dross and unsanctified refuse of
their own inventions. Let it then be acknowledged among us (for Papists I
hope are absent) a silly shift of Romish brokery, for vent of tradition any way
to discredit the Scripture; yea let it be graven with an iron pen in lead or in
stone for ever; that they, who would sometimes have set up those unwritten
verities, fell in the end to open railing at the Scripture; that all after-ages
may be filled with questions and exclamations. What? were all colors spent?
was there no cavil left? did the luxuriant wits of Rome end in such
barrenness and beggerie, that nothing could be forged, but a mute, or a
brute, a dumb or dead letter, a black Gospel, or a piece of inky-diuinity? O
thou that destroyest the wisdom of the wise, and castest away the
understanding of the prudent, how have thou confounded the disputers of this
world, that they should thus turn the edge of their malice from our cause to
thine ordinance, and at the lowest ebb, in the ruins of their strength, bid
battle unto the Lord of Hosts, their strongest and their mightiest enemy?
They might have known, that whatsoever may cause their joy to be full,
whatsoever may perfect them for every good work, whatsoever may make them wise
unto salvation, all this is written, and therefore a man of God should not
presume, or be wise above that which is written, certainly a man of reason
should not presume, or be wise against that which is written. But we, that be
both men of God, and men of reason, enjoying the places of sober and religious
Christians, are bound while we live, to magnify the grace of God in this
unspeakable benefit; had he but obscurely signified a word of his will, Angels
in reason must have stooped and obeyed. And therefore, if our Fathers had but
told us some part of our duties, many whole Countries, to this day without God
in the world, might have envied our happiness.

But since we take not what we take, upon trust of men's report, having yet a
more sure word of the Prophets and Apostles; since whenever we will, we
survey at the full that great mystery of godliness, which (I say) not Kings
and Princes, but Saints and Angels have desired to behold: Behold in it, I
beseech you, a marvelous high point of merciful providence, a blind man (my
brethren) may perceive, how we that can read (though we could but read) are
almost as far beyond them that cannot, as he that has seeing eyes in his
head, surpasses a blind man. And yet the late invention of Printing may make
us farther doubt, whether ever learning has so much excelled ignorance, as
Scholars have in this case excelled Scholars. Gods will is near as well known
as his works, and the Book of grace, is now become like the Book of heaven.

His arcana notis terra pelagoque feruntur: their sound, yea now, if we will,
their line is gone forth into all the earth, and their words into the end of
the world. Wherefore I hope we cannot enter into our large Studies, but they
will put us in mind of the time when a Deske in some narrow window, was taken
for a little Library, yea the store of our learned volumes now must needs, I
trow, remember us of that ancient scarcity, which like that old woman that sold
books unto Tarquin, Dionys. Hal. lib. 4. antiq.
enhaunced the price to so high a rate, as might have made a Tarquins ransom:
When questionless many men in this place laid both wit and wealth together, to
compass with a common purse, the joint purchase of a little outworne dark and
difficult manuscript. If this were but one of the Themes of our meditations, it
would sink at length into our affections; if our affections were truly
moved, they would call upon us for thankfulness; if thankfulness did appear
clearly, to be our debt, we would return it and express it (as near as we
could) in the same, or the like kind, striving to the utmost of our power, to
enlarge the means of knowledge both by words and writing. GOD knows I desire
not, that any who travel only with the wind, should be delivered of their
emptines. I do not, I need not here exhort the soming brains of this age, to
soil clean paper with their unchaste scurrility: such weeds (being nourished
in the composte of carnal humors) grow too too fast of themselves. I should
rather commend the Procrustes of Rome, that would proportion the bodies of all
writers to the bed of the harlot, for inhibiting profane and obscene Pamphlets,
did I not think that it were not so much for detestation of them, as to
countenance his other expurgations, more cruel to the dead, then ever was
Spanish Inquisition to the living. But because the pen of Antichrist commands
so many ploughs in Europe, and you whose hearts have indicted good matters, may
weep with that great Calculator before you die, Suissetus.
because you cannot read your own observations, for the private and public
good, I beseech you, that as your tongues have been like the pens of ready
writers: so your pens would be like the tongues of ready speakers. Great must
be their reward, who treading in the steps of the blessed Prophets and
Apostles, shall write of the great things of the Law, whereof I am now to
speak in the next place.

The great things of my Law] By this addition of greatness, attending upon the
Law, you plainly perceive the great Lawmakers purpose, to give it here an
honorable commendation, whereunto because it is our duty like good subjects to
subscribe, we may do it in David's language, The Law of the Lord is perfect,
Psalm. 19.
the testimony of the Lord is sure, the statutes of the Lord are right, the
commandment of the Lord is pure. I confess, Saint Paul seeks the Law
ceremonial, Gal. 4.
by the names of Impotent and beggarly rudiments. But it is comparatively, not
absolutely, not as it was a schoolmaster unto Christ: but as it was without
Christ, or rather as it was set up against Christ; I deny not, that he
speaking of the moral Law, shows how the same commandment which was
ordained unto life, was found to be unto him unto death, not directly, but
occasionally, as himself interprets himself, Romans 7.
Sin took occasion by the Law: it was then a scandal taken, not given.
Otherwise in it self considered, this heavenly doctrine cannot want any
praise, which choice and variety of Scripture can give to the best of Gods
ordinances: yet let me speak but once more for it, before I come to justify
what I speak by comparison. An expounder of the Law, who had not observed the
least, Math. 22.
asked our Savior which was the great commandment, to this end, as Saint
Jerome thinks, that whereas all the things which God had commanded, were
great, upon assignation of any one above the rest, he might take occasion to
accuse him: wherefore Christ's answer is full of good circumspection,
delivering him first an Epitome of the former Table, and then subioyning, that
the second was like unto it. Lastly, adding that in both, did hang all the Law
and the Prophets, as if all were (...), The wonderful things of God, the great
things of the Law. And indeed, be it that this greatness is a word of
quantity, or let it note perpetual dignity, or largeness of extent between
it and men's precepts, you shall find no resemblance of proportion; for besides
that eternal bliss, the end hereof (I mean, of this whole doctrine) is
above the reach, and beyond the Horizon of all humane learning whatsoever, the
Author (in respect of whom part of it is termed the Royal Law, Iam. 2.8.)
has so ratified it, that it gives all other decrees of man (though they were
as of the Medes and Persians) challenge in this behalf unanswerable. None of
them all can match this eueruerlasting Gospel, themselves being judges in
unchangeableness. For suppose John Gersons construction of Socrates modestic,
and the Academicks reseruatiuenesse were too too charitable (whereas (...) he
thinks their reason of it, might be, because they might think no stable
truth, or constant Law was to be looked for but in God alone) yet that
testimony which Saint Augustine borrows from Seneca, Lib. 6. de Ciuit. Dei,
cap. 11.
is a plain confession, how the Jews, accounted otherwise but a contemptible
people, wheresoever they came, victivictoribus leges dederu^t: Being conquered,
gave Laws to their Conquerors. What do I spend my breath in this argument,
since all men, the chiefest point of whose maiefty is to make a Law, will grant
that their best Topic places, to commend their learned constitutions, lies in
the deriuation of them from Gods commandments? and they truly think that they
can no way (...) confirm the^, bettter, hen by confessing whence they stole
the^. Wherefore upon experience that Gods Law still continues, and men's Laws
are transitory, every man may say with the Prophet David, I have seen an end
of all perfection, but thy commandment is exceeding large, exceeding large
indeed, for in extent it reaches to the very secret purposes, and most inmost
affections, entering through (like that other thundering voice of the Lord, which
makes the Hindes to calue) dividing the soul and the spirit, there like an
Anatomist searching and prying into every piece of a member, and reading a long
lecture upon the smallest portion of every particle, spelling, like a Critic,
the fractions of imperfect, and as yet unshapen cogitations of concupiscense:
whereas of a thought, kept within the compass of a thought (if a sinner can
wash his bloody hands with Pilate, and not betray his bloody heart by word,
deed, or writing) no Law of mortal man can possibly determine. And therefore
it is excellently spoken by Lactantius, Sapentia little vt plurimum efficiat,
Lib. 3. cap. 26.
non abscindit vitia, sed abscondit. The utmost effect of this worlds wisdom,
is but to drive corruption inwards, and in making men co^formitants, many times
to make them hypocrites. Nay farther, so short has it come of this outward
conformity, that we find in histories, how men, wise men, have not only winked
at gross transgressions, but themselves grossly transgressed, and that not in
their actions alone, but in their constitutions: the plain conclusions and
seco^dary precepts of nature, threatening to trespass almost upon the very
common principles, whilst murder among some has been scarce punishable,
adultery pardonable, and theeuery among many commendable, but Gods more pure,
perfect and unchangeable Law leaves no evil uncensured, no good vncommended,
for which large comprehension, the ten Commandments are by Peter Martyr
compared to the ten predicaments; wherefore I trust I may well conclude this
point with Moses, What nation is so great, that has ordinances and Laws so
righteous, as I set before you this day?

Here the very worth and the exceeding great perfection of this sacred
doctrine, though all advocates should be corrupt, and all Champions Cowards,
seems to me to plead, yea to fight for its own right and interest, not that
it may be a bare advertisement, which is granted by the adversary, but a rule,
as it is called Gala. 6. Phil. 3.1. Cor. 10. nor a potentiall rule only in
regard of fitness (may it please the Church so to pronounce it, for that it
preferres the voice of men, before the voice of God) but an actual rule; nor
partial only (for that is contrary both to the nature of it self and of a
rule too) neither of which can admit addition, but totally definitive and
directive for Gods service and all our actions.

These things often inculcated, and seldom seriously contradicted, which you
know where to find more fully proved, I ca^ but salute by the way: and I would
to God the Papists doctrine only, and not our practice also made a leaden, and
a Lesbian rule of Gods commandments. But as their ^enents were first invented
for profit and advancement, then Clerks were set on work for arguments to
mainetaine them. So, though Bala^m be dead, and Iohanan dead, their children
which tread in their steps, are still alive, that is, they that will purpose,
then seek the Prophet, they that will determine, then ask Gods consent
afterward: to speak yet more plainly, they that will resolve with the most
part for Bribery, for Symony, for their own commodity in elections, in
competitions, in resignations, in compositions in their thriuing, in their
rising, in any thing, and a long time after their vows, perhaps inquire what
rules or examples among the Divines, are of their opinion. O the preposterous
proceeding of a carnal, nay of a d^uellish imagination! must Gods infallible
word, the straytest scepter of purest righteousness, come unto us to be
measured? and shall the crookednes of our perverse inclination be the standard?
may we then make stark Idols of our own wills, set shoulders and heave with
might and maine at the borders of Christian liberty? May we make our selves
large rooms, and crect a Court of faculties within our breasts, to dispense
with such desires, as we are sure abhor this rules examination? Tell me
(beloved) are we the men? can these things thus be? and is it possible that we
should be flattered, as though we were all this while Gods servants? 10.
Confess. 16.
Optimus Minister tuus est, qui non magis intuetur hoc a te audire quod ipse
voluerit, sed potius hoc velle quod a te audierit, says Saint Augustine. This
may be told us and told us again, in the mouth of two or three witnesses, but
I know not how the stubborn Soldier Marius cannot, that is, will not hear
the Laws for clattering of armor. Let Gods Ministers lift up their voices,
stretching and breaking them into hoarsenesse, Satan that cunning Siluer-smith,
raises a louder noise and uproar more agreeable to our humors: so are these
great things of the Law drowned in some clamor, or other ringing in our ears,
Great is Diana of the Ephesia^s. Then if the conscience, the first act of whose
office is to apply the Law, after the massacre of many Christian virtues, which
satan has made come unto us in the phrase of Jobs messenger, I only am
escaped to come and tell thee, we like not the message, we will imprison the
messenger, withholding the truth in unrighteousness. And as those old
Idolaters that offered their children in the fire to Moloch, 2. Chron. 28.
made themselves deaf with instruments, that they might not hear their
pitiful lamentations; so some delight or other, some pastime or other, serves
to dull and stupifie our hearts, that our conscience in it self, perhaps more
tender then a tender Infant, miserably lamenting before the flames of hell, may
not be perceived. Then if the subsidiary grace of God, come to succor or
relieve our crying and ^ying conscience, we are ready to quel and quench it,
grieve and despite it, Isay, 37.3.
Thus are the children come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring
forth: Strength enough, but it is to strangle them, no strength to bring forth.

The Mid-wiues of Egypt feared God, and therefore preserved the children alive.
But alas, the stilborne motions of Gods own Spirit many times may testify to
our faces, that we are bloody mid-wiues. Last of all, if God himself come in
his Ministers, to breathe the breath of life again into those motions we have
murdered, we show what we are; for as churlish Nabal, so wicked that a man
could not speak unto him, asked, Who is David? who is the son of Ishai? So,
though we do not speak it out with Pharaoh, I fear we lispe it within our
lips, Who is the Lord, that we should hear his voice? God unto us is become
as an alien, and the great things of the Law are accounted as a strange thing;
and this was Isreal's estimation, whereof I am to speak in the last place.

But they were counted as a strange thing.] This strangenes is not attributed
to the persons directed alone, as the Chalde-paraphrase reads it, but to the
direction with an obiectiue relation to the persons; neither does it imply in
the^ simple ignorance only, but want of reverence and respectfulnesse. A man
may be strange, first, when he is not perceived; Barharus hic ego sum, quia non
intelligor: Except I know the power of the voice, I shall be to him that
speaks an alien, and he that speaks, an alien to me. Secondly, and more
especially (because men love their own better then that which is another, a
supposed ground of one of Aristotle's arguments against community prettily
declared, by that Apolog of Gell^^^, lib. 2.29.) a man may be strange when he
is neglected and contemned: They that ^wd in my house, and my maids took me
for a stranger, I was a stranger in their sight, Job. 19. So the Law may be
said to be strange, when it is unknown, and so the hearers are fools
privative; and when it is vncared for, and so they proceed higher, and are
fools possessiue. Answereable to those two significations, wherein the great
things of Gods Law were strange unto this people (as all supernatural truth
must needs be to all men merely natural) there may be rendered two reasons
why it should be so reputed. First, because of a negative indisposition to
receive it, for want of the Spirit, which only reuealeth the deep things of
God (which the old Prophet knew well enough, 1. King. 13. and therefore he
contradicted the man of Gods charge no other way, but by pretense of a second
reuclation) and by consequence, by want of faith the first borne of the Spirit,
concerning which that of the Septuagint Esa. 11. (which some Fathers follow) is
a sound position, though I dare not call it a sound translation, (...): If you
will not believe, you shall not understand.

Secondly, for a positive disposition of resistance against it in their own
wisdom: The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God; it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Whence that must follow, which is worth
a Scholars meditation, that the more any man is confirmed in the judgment of
sense, reason, and experience, the farther off he is (without special grace)
from Gods Kingdom. Nicodemus (though a master in Israel) wondereth at
regeneration: so that every proposition in such begets a question, how can
these things be? Will you see all that I can speak to this point, in one place
exemplified? you may see it, Acts, 17. where Paul preaches Jesus and the
resurrection, but they cry out, What will this babbler say? he seems to be a
setter forth of strang^ gods: may we hear what this new doctrine whereof thou
speak, is? for thou bring certain strange things unto our ears. These
were not the vulgar, but the Philosophers, of no vile City, but of Athens,
which was the Greece of that Greece which counted all the world (besides their
own inhabitants) Barbarians.

Now if in Israel, or in Athens, the great things of Gods Law be accounted as
a strange thing, we must not marvel if godly men be taken for signs and
wonders in Israel, or in Athens. For that they that walk according to the
rule, should be deemed miracles, where the rule it self is taken for an
hidden mystery to me it can be neither miracle, nor mystery. (...), says
Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 4.4.
, They think it strange you run not with them to the same excess of riot.
The Hen that has hatched Partridge or Phesants eggs, seeing them soar
aloft, looks strangely after them, because she knows not that they are of a
higher kind. The world that in some such sort has brought up Gods children
(for that which is natural, is first, and then that which is spiritual) when
they take a flight somewhat above the world, stands amazed, because it is
ignorant that they are of a better generation: thus you have heard briefly, in
what sense, for what reasons, with what consequents, the great things of the
Law are accounted a strange thing.

Now let us be bold in the conclusion to ask what is the degree of this great
Laws acquaintance in this place? whether it have indeed the sincere welcome of
a friend, or the slight and transient remembrance of a stranger amongst us?
Act. 28.
The Barbarians of Melita showed Paul no little kindness. God forbid, that our
Athens, as that Athens of old, should use him like a Barbarian; yet other
Authors we can learn by heart, and have the Text at our fingers ends: but let
a Text of Scripture be pressed upon our consciences from the mouth of the
Preacher, Aristotle we know, and Plato we know; but who are ye? Quis nouns hic
nostris successit sedibus hospes? If we be to speak at home, we would not be
thought ignorant of Grammatical congruities, and proprieties (things which
might be more precisely kept, especially in public, without derogation on of
granitie, or exprobration of curiosity) if we be to converse abroad with
others, digitum exere peccas, the nicest rules of decency are thought worth
the learning, things which well used, serve to stir up, and maintain loving
kindness. But not to know Christ, is no false Latin, sencelesly to wound him
through with fearful oaths, is no breach of good manners, our complement is
complete enough without him. Alas, no negligence or ignorance can make us be
pointed at for punies, or for freshmen here: do I descend too low (my
brethren) and speak I but of trifles? Blame your selves then, ye that tithe
Mint and Rue, and Cummin, and pass over the mightier things of the law. When
Alcibiades came into a School, asking the Schoolmasters for one of Homers
works, and the Schoolmaster answered, he had none, he up with his fist, and
gave him a sound box on the ear. There is a keeper of Israel, that with a
watchful eye visits howerly the Schools and Colleges of our Prophets, if
he take, shall I say thee a Prophet? no, that were too foul a shame, I will
not suppose it, or once suspect it: but if he take thee a fair Professor of
Christianity, without this book of thy profession, though thou presently
feel not his hand, and thine ears do not tingle, (...): God shall smite thee
thou whited wall. But if we have this book, and for our use many thousands
more, living for all that like beggars in the midst of our wealth, and like
strangers, amongst our own servants, what may we, nay, what may we not fear?
Moses shall accuse us, the word that Christ has spoken shall judge us, John
12. Let us cast up our helps, our means, our provision, so have we the number
of our accusers: our walks, our retiredness, our Maintenance, our Languages,
our Lectures, our Exercises, our Libraries, we cannot reckon them: Lord, Lord,
thou know we shall reckon for them. In that thy day thou may justly say
unto us, Depart from me, I know you not, if in this our day, Job 21.
we shall say unto thee, We desire not the knowledge of thy ways. If it will
be no good answer then, it is a shift, and no good answer now to say, I am no
Divine, this is none of my profession: for all learning, as you have heard,
without modification hence, does make but strong holds, and high things to
keep out such batteries, as come not always from our enemies. We are sheep,
and of Christ's fold, John 10.
My sheep hear my voice: we are children of Wisdoms household, Matthew. 11.
Wisdom is justified of her children: Mich. 2.
we would be thought honest men, Are not my words good to him that walks
uprightly? We would be made blessed men, Blessed is the man, whose delight is
in the Law of the Lord. Here then, you blessed souls, who have begun to vow
and profess in your Christian station, to follow this your exercise both day
and night, let it be your crown, and your rejoicing still, that your thoughts,
which are meditations upon this book, are deemed fits of melancholy, which
many men scorn and deride, that your works, which are your obedience to this
book, are supposed paradoxes against which most men dispute eloquently; that
your speech, which is the language of this book, is taken for such a
Shiboleth, as all the world besides cannot pronounce, give not one foot of
ground, stick close to your vows, hold fast your profession.

Pardon me (brethren) I know not how many rules of lesser circumstance I have
broken, whilst it has been my desire to keep my self to this one great one.
And now that the great things of Gods law may never be accounted a strange
thing unto you, let me once for all exhort you in the Apostles words (which
because they are most natural for my purpose, I wish from my heart, may be
remembered, as the last words uttered in the last breath of a man expiring and
departing) Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, not
lodge for a night like a stranger, but like a friend or a brother dwell, nor so
dwell, that the niggardlines of our diligence should afford us but a scant and
sparing measure, but plenteously, nor so plenteously, that it should
notwithstanding be vnconceiued, or vnapplied, misconceiued or misapplied, but
in alw^sdome: and the God of all wisdom, lead you by the conduct of his spirit
in his fear, through the knowledge of his will, to the fruition of h^s glory,
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE REHEARSAL SERMON at Paul's Cross, Anno 1614.
AT length your patience has conquered mine harsh abridgeme^ts of those
delightful Treatises, which never in their whole so much as tempted your
patience: verily grief in my self all along bid me bele^ue, there was
indignation in you, that so much sound learning at the first should, by my
unfaith full memory, be cracked in the second carriage to this famous
Auditorie. 'T were high time now to bless you with a dismission, or to
dismiss you with a blessing, did not custom rather, then any desire at all to
speak, or to be heard any longer, here command me^* The remembrance of these
four Remembrancers only to mention (I cannot say to prosecute) some passage of
holy Scripture for conclusion. Better mine interrupted meditations could not
light upon, then that in the 62. of Isaiah, verse. 6. You that make mention of
the Lord, or, You that be the Lords Remembrancers, be not silent. Wherein I
present unto your Christian consideration, first, the condition of our office
described, You that are the Lords Remembrancers. Secondly, the execution
enjoined, be not silent: of which, though I purpose to be passing short, yet,
if you be not weary even of your weariness, I shall have reason to pronounce
your patience invincible. I come then to the condition of our office here
described, You that are the Lords Remembrancers. Hamazchirim, Remembrancers, a
word of office (attributed to Ioah in the 36 of this prophecy and Ichosaphat,
2. Sam. 8. who were both Recorders) includes the proper act of that office,
not a publication at randum, but a comemoration. This act sends us back to the
proper principle, whence it proceeds, none other faculty of the soul, but
the memoratiue. The memoratiue faculty directs us again to the proper object,
not occurrents of all sorts, but occurrents that are past. Reserve me then a
lawful liberty to apply this Cruill term, to Civil Officers anon, and take
it a while as this Prophet does naturalize it in the Church. You shall need
small light to discern the nature of a Preachers errand: no late device
starting up upon occasion in the fantasy, but an ancient record long since
enrolled in the memory. Preachers are Remembrancers: because Esaias looks
forward ^ere toward an administration, altogether Euangelical, su^fer me to
lay the foundation of my proof in the Gospel which Saint Jude comprehends in
a short description, the faith which was once given to the Saints: where no
wits exercised in Gods book and good language, will construe once after a
simple sense, at one season. For not only Hebrew, and Greek, but the Latin is
more emphaticall then so, Nulla reparabalis art pudicitia (...) deperit illa
semel: Once doubtless the Apostle means with intimation of perfection so
given at once, that it needs never to be given again. The selfsame doctrine,
Saint Paul. 2 Timothy 1. styles, (...), A worthy trust or treasure, with allusion
to some repositorie: whereupon Vincentius Lyrinensis has bestowed a large
Comentaric, in his 27. Chapter against heresies, Quod tibi creditum, non quod
ate inuentum, quod ^cc^pisti, non quod excogitas^i, cuius non author esse debes,
sed custos, and that which there follows, whosoever can with judgment peruse
that pithy Manuel, may freely renounce all collections out of other Fathers, as
superfluous, in this argument, and settle his resolution upon that rule of
truth, wherewith Tertullian begins his eight Chapter depraescriptionibus, a
book in drift agreeable with the former, Nobis curiositate opus non est post
Christum, nec inquisitione post Euangelium: After Christ, there is no further
need of curiosity, after the Gospel, no use of further inquisition. Nay,
Christ himself taught us not, because he brought us not any novelties from
heaven. I do prevent that objection in the 13. of John, A new commandment
give I unto you, that you love one another. The commandment was not new, but
renewed, and how renewed? We have a diminution of the old burden, by the work
of Christ, He has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse
for us, Gal. 3.13. An addition of new strength we have by the gift of Christ,
The spirit which helps our infirmities, Romans 8. The preaching of faith it
self sets before us a conueyance of righteousness, contrary to that which the
Law required, no contrary righteousness: for our Redeemer in his own person,
did as well perform the strictest precepts, as sustain the severe penalty of
the Law to the utmost: but for life and manners, the Decalogue, without
contradiction, is that magnacharta, to which, as to their common principle, all
doctrinall conclusions are reducible. Let us hear the conclusion of all, Fear
God, and keep his commandments, this is the whole duty of man, Eccl. 12.13.
When we pass once the number of ten, in Arithmetic, the latter numbers,
though multiplied unto millions of millions, can be but compounded resumptions
and repetitions of the former. So the whole consent of the Prophets wholly
consists in expositions and applications of those ten words, written at the
first by Gods own finger, in two Tables, for which cause Malachi seals up the
old Testament in his last Chapter at the very point of his passage, toward the
prediction of Christ, and John Baptist with this memorandum, Remember the Law
of Moses my servant. Prophets then and Preachers be Remembrancers.

Enough (though I might urge much more) for the many years continuance, and
the continual maintenance of this present exercise. For, as after the works of
God were crowned with their Makers approbation, It was very good: all
contemplations were but surueighs, Genesis 1. vult.
all inventions but discoueries; and all actions of men nothing in effect but
imitations, there is no new thing under the Sun: Eccles. 1.9.
So when Gods word was perfectly delivered, all Psalms ensuing were like the
105.6.7. rehearsal Psalms. All prayers like the Levites, Nehem. 9. rehearsal
prayers, and all Sermons like Stephens, Act. 7. rehearsal Sermons. That we may
not be ashamed to preach, that you may not be grieved to hear the same
things: If you be true virgins, true sheep of Christ's flock, you will love his
name, and the echo of his name, harken to his voice and every reflection of
his voice. Were your regeneration absolute, continual obedience to his word
should trouble you no more, then the perpetual aspect of his countenance does
trouble Angels: How soever answerable to the degrees of your Regeneration be
the degrees of your attention, likeness causes liking. If you be changed into
that Image, 2. Cor. 3. you shall desire to behold in the Gospel, as in a
glass with open face, that image into which you be changed. Israelitish
stomachs, stomachs lothing Manna the bread of heaven, Athenian ears, ears
itching after heaps of Teachers, are no good signs and Symptoms, that the
heart is of a good complexion. No good signs that the heart is of a good
complexion. Alas, I would to God they did not presage a constitution of the
soul, exceeding dangerous and desperate. But not unto us, or the best prayers
of the best of us, be the praise given: Blessed rather be that providence
eu^rmore, which can bring means of preferment, as vnc^rtaine in our eyes, as
the winds out of his bidden treasure, that so many, so reverend, so learned
orthodoxe Fathers, sit in Moses chair, who cri^ down paradoxes, amongst all
their children, with a beck of their countenance. Otherwise, this universal
wantonness, from which the word of God it self cannot be privileged among
the people, much like febris alba, the Green sickness, ever longing for food,
which is no food, would soon turn and remove to another Gospel, which is
not another Gospel, Gal. 1. Oh, the wan^^ing in^linations of inconstant
hearers, what will they do? whither will they go? me thinks I se^ them,
gr^ene and unseasoned as they be, warping ^o^^^^^ds Papistry. There, there
shall they mee^, with ^hanges and vari^^i^s proportionable to their humo^^us
appetites. Well knew the cunning co^triuers of that policy ^ow the greater part
of the world is transported up and down by force of imagination. Therefore have
they devised a penance in appa^ell, ad^uotion upon the fingers ends to please
imagination. A Transubstantiation, like a Metamorphosis, to please imagination;
li^es Saints, like tales of the Queen of Fairies, to please imagination;
orders of Friars of all colors, like the dream of a Painters apron, to please
imagination; Masses, Eleuations, Processions, like Measures, Mummeries,
Enterludes, and all to please imagination. What shall I say, the time passes,
your attention droopes, my strength fails, I cannot, I may not stand to fill
up an induction with their inuentiue Ideas, and Chimeras, whence I might
conclude the Popish humor, without either face of gravity in the doctrine, or
foot-step of antiquity in the practice; a Religion merely Poetical,
Theatricall, Histrionicall. To conclude this point, and this part, as that
Merchant is more likely to grow rich, who turns his gallery into a warehouse,
then he who turns his warehouse into a dancing. School, or a gallerie: so
shall he sooner thrive in sound and saving knowledge, who borrowes places of
his fancy for received principles, making it serviceable to his memory, then
he who by remembering nothing but such dumb ceremonies, and frisking gestures,
makes his very memory fantastical. For are these the wares, for which we
should exchange an everlasting Gospel, of an everlasting Kingdom? only
because they that preach it, often beat upon it, and inculcate it often,
because they be Remembrancers, and no more but Remembrancers. God forbid, for
grant that the fundamental Articles of faith may be taught within less then
the term of a Preachers life, (which curious speculatio^, idle digressions,
and vain altercations laid aside, I conceive not impossible.) impossible.) In
the remainder, what shall he do? Either he must preach the same again, and be
a Remembrancer, or be silent, and be no Preacher, which the execution of our
office, the second part of my d^u^sion now succeeding, by no means will admit.

Be not silent.] Hierom best skilled of the Fathers in Hebrew, wonders here
why the 70. translate, (...), between which two readings, there is in the
sense small correspondency, whereat I have more reason to wonder: but
peradventure, for as much as (...) the verb signifies, to be like, and to be
quiet, because nature is stilled and quieted with likeness offended with
disproportion, they might imagine some such Noune, only by proportion of the
language. The precept negative in sound, for that the particle not, denies that
only term before which it stands, never the whole (except in an immediate
posture before the verb) is in meaning affirmative. Be not silent, as much to
say as speak, nay, speak continually; for this not, excluding here the
privation of speech, answers after a sort to non infinitans, in logic
admitting any thing rather then silence: Hold your faith, hold the truth, hold
your profession, hold not your peace, Tenuisse silentia clerum. Oh it is the
basest tenure any Minister can hold his living by. The Apostle in more words
expresses the same charge at full, 2. Tim. 4.2.
Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season. Not that any Timothy
should break through the rules of discretion, to preach at seasons in
themselves unseasonable. There is a time to keep silence, and a time to
speak, Eccles. 3.7. Rather that he should not be ruled by the hearers
disposition, or estimation when to take his opportunities. Oportune volentibus,
importune nolentibus, says Saint Augustine, In season to the willing, to them
that are unwilling, out of season; whether hearers be willing or unwilling,
still preach the word and be instant.

You know that graces essential to a Christian, accidental to a Minister,
Faith, Hope, and Charity be personal; principally serving for the good of the
Receiver, though in a second place and degree they serve for others good,
because every thankeful convert will proclaim the mercy which appeared in his
conversion, Come unto me, and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my
soul. Whereas graces Ministerial, in which number and account prophecy
comes, are Ecclesiastical, secondarily respecting the receiver, because
teachers shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12. Principally
they tend to the hearers benefit, according to the donors will, The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man, to profit w^thall, 1 Cor.
12. Wherefore as on the one part, to speak in Gregory's words, Vobis and nobis
parcimus, quando quod displicet non tacemus: We favor ourselves, and favor
you, when we speak that which so much displeases. So on the contrary part,
while we hold our peace, which so much pleases we prejudice you and prejudice
our selves: our selves we wrap first in a criminal mischief, because silence
directly crosses our vocation, a silent Remembrancer implies as harsh an
opposition as a dark light, a dumb crier, or a blind Master-gunner.
Secondly, in a penal mischief, and that either of greatest loss in this
life, while our gifts decay, The idol Shephearas arm shall be clean dried
up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened, Zach. 11. Take the talent from
him that hid the talent in the earth. Or else of most grievous sense for ever,
Woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. You the people our
silence does boulster and abett in your sin, many be the maxims of the
civil Law, Qui non improbat, probat, qui tacet, consentit, qui per annum
tacet, recusare videtur. We have a case in the thirtieth of Numbers, If a woman
in her fathers house vow a vow, and the father hear and hold his peace, the
vow shall stand. A mute indeed is no vowell, yet a mute among vowels cannot
avoid the office of a consonant. Secondly, our silence does draw on your
punishment. Your punishment both temporal and eternal: for a City or a
people are never nearer a woe, then when they suspend the threatening, and say
to the Prophets, Prophecy not, Amos 2. News came to a Town, as some think
in Italy, once and again, that the Enemy was approaching: well, he did not
approach. Therefore they made a Law, that none should bring such rumors of
war, such news of an Enemy. Not long after, the Enemy came, besieged,
assaulted, ruinated the Town, of those ruins nothing remains at this day
for remembrance, but a prouerbiall Epitaph (...) That town was destroyed by
silence. Yet this you may justly think as nothing, in comparison of punishment
eternal, That also follows upon our silence, Where there is no vision, the
people perish, Prou. 29.18. For we take not silence here, in any metaphysicall
consideration, as a mere privation, Non entis nullae sunt operationes, that
which has no being, can have no working; and he which speaks nothing, speaks
no harm. But we take it in a legal consideration as a grand omission. So be
that is bound to work, must give an account of his idleness; and he that is
commanded to speak, shall answer for his silence, and good reason: for as the
darkness of Egypt was a darkness that might be felt, so the silence of a
Remembrancer is a silence that smarts, and smarts at the quick. If you trust
not me, trust S. Gregory, Tot quotidie occidimus, quot ad mortem ire tepidi and
tacentes videmus. Every day we kill as many as we suffer to die, by the
coldness of our zeal and silence. Or if you give no credit unto his words, I
hope you will give credit to his argument, Lib. 33. Ep. to Venantius, Paul kept
nothing back from the Ephesians, Act. 20. and thence infers, I am pure from
the blood of all men. Mundu^ ergo a sanguine eorum non esset: si eis Dei
consiliu^ anuntiare noluisset: He had not been pure from their blood, if he
had not declared unto them the counsel of the Lord; or last of all, if you
believe not his argument: as many as believe the Creed, are bound to believe
his Author, Eze. 3. When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou
give not him warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to
save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood
will I require at thine hands, guilty of silence then, and guilty of murder.

Therefore you that be the Lords Remembrancers, be not silent, you have not
forgotten that, because the word of the Text was a civil word, I reserved to
my self a lawful liberty, to apply it unto civil officers: For though Saint
Augustine says, upon the similitude of the deaf Adder in the Psalm, Non
vndecunque s^militudo datur, res ipsalaudatur, Every thing from which a
similitude is drawn, is not commended. Yet when you have one officers
diligence proposed as a pattern to an other officer, whatsoever inference
holds against the neglect of the latter, holds much more against the neglect of
the former. You then that are the King and Kingdoms Remembrancers, know that
we must follow you: therefore you must go before us. Satan has his
Remembrancers in all assemblies, they vouch their precedents, Thou shall find
in the book of the records of thy Fathers, that this City is a rebellious
City, Ezra 4. they vouch their Law, We have a Law, and by that Law he ought to
die, Ioh. 19. Shall they speak without a calling? and will you that have a
calling, hold your peace? what will you answer to those voices, which sent you
hither? They will not hold their peace, if you hold your peace: if you hold
your peace, they will wish with tears and grief of heart, that they had held
their peace when they chose you. Or if your might knows how to shake off the
poor men's clamours in the Country, what will your consciences answer unto God?
Your silence may hazard his glory, nay diminish no less at this time, then the
silence of a Remembrancer in the Exchequour may diminish the Kings Revenues;
or if his glory find other issues, as it may find innumerable; Tell me, how
does your silence provide for your own posterity? You must be contented to
hear what Hester heard, cap. 4. If thou hold thy peace at this time, then
shall enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but
thou and thy Fathers house shall be destroyed. Pardon (I beseech you) my
boldness; I confess you have lately made it much less necessary, by laying
down the best, and most religious ground of all good remembrance: Do this in
remembrance of me, only let the rest of your proceedings ever look back unto
this devout beginning. Remember Majesty, and bring not the least discontent to
our Sovereign Lord the King, provoke not a Lion, remember piety, and breed not
discord in our Church, beware of the concision, remember the Comminaltie, and
suffer not a decay to prevail in the Kingdom speak peace unto the people,
Mordecai, Hest. v^^.
blessed Mordecai was next unto King Ahashuerus, great among the Jews, and
accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people,
and speaking peace unto all his seed. O you that have either greatness in your
eves, or goodness in your hearts, set before you this example of a true
Patriot, a true Parliament man; why are your dead desires at a stay, where is
your courage, what is become of your ambition? It is impossible that man should
live and love his Country, who would not in the midst of all earthly
happiness, be contented to part with the whole world, (provided that he might
make even with God through Jesus Christ) and leave behind him such a
Testimony, such a Legacy, Orbi quietem secula pacem suo, haec summa virtus
petitur hac coelum via.

To shut up all with a general application unto the hearers, according to the
meaning of this iniunction, which we have taken upon our selves, as truly
belonging unto our vocation: If we the Lords Remembrancers may not be silent,
without all farrefetcht motives; The very strength of a Relation between us
and you, deriues an inevitable inforcement of attention upon you. For if the
Apostles question seem reasonable, how should they hear without a Preacher?
is it meet, think you, that we should fight as men that beat the air? why
should we preach without hearers? I grant that the men of these latter times
have cares judicious enough, I hear them praising voices, magnifying the
learning, extolling the gifts of teachers. Nay, you would soon confute me,
would I deny that many painful laborers are in the highest places of the
Church: But (beloved men and brethren) there is one preferment yet behind; and
that most proper unto preaching, a preferment in the hearts of the hearers. If
Preachers were at your hearts, all your works would prove effectual examples,
and your examples would prove a second kind of preaching. It is not for the
small relics of my strength here to begin a quarrel, though a just
quarrel, with your lives and actions; yet I must tell you for my last
farewell, how though there be many good and gracions men amongst you, yet the
desert of the greater part has brought such a slander on the better part, that
the world thinks and speaks, as it thinks abroad. The Citizens of London,
God bless us from the Citizens of London, they care not, they pass not for
the means, whether warrantable or unwarrantable, so their ends may be
profitable. As if you were those only Merchants of the earth, who fill your
sails, and fill your ships, and fill your houses, but cannot fill your souls.
Never considering that like some. Merchants upon the coasts of Lap-land, you
buy your winds of the devil. Where this report, or any bad reports are true
of any; while all the skill of most Preachers in the Land at one time or other,
in one place or other, does empt it self within your walls; I refer me to
your consciences, whether the cause can be want of preaching. Would you know
the true cause indeed? The man that calls himself veridicus Christianus, the
Christian tell-troth, speaks of a Lady who demanded of her servants, whether
the Sermon were done or no? They answered, I, 'twas done. She pleasantly
replied, Dicta non fact a concio, 'Twas spoken, 'twas not done. You have had
Sermons for liberality against extortion, for charity against usury, for mercy
against cruelty; Sermons ever spoken, never done. O these were tedious Sermons!
judge you that have been hearers, on whose side lay the tediousness. I will
hold you no longer: now you may say, This long Sermon is spoken and done by the
Preacher, God grant we may say, It Is practiced and done by the hearers.

Most gracious God and loving Father, which out of thine abundant mercies, have
so richly provided for thine unthankful servants, such instructions for their
understandings, such persuasions for their will, such repetitions for their
memories, crown all this labor with fruit and good success from heaven, to
the glory of thy Name, the comfort of the Preachers, and salvation of their
Hearers, through Jesus Christ: to whom be praise for ever.

FINIS.

