King Edward the 2 surnamed Carnaruen was crouned at westminster at the 22
year of his age the 24 of febru 1^03 he Reigned 19 year 6 months was deposed
the 25 of Ianuvarius 1326 he was slain in the Castle of barkley in the 43 year
of his age
portrait

THE DEPLORABLE LIFE AND DEATH* of EDWARD the Second, KING of ENGLAND.

Together with the Downfall of the two Unfortunate Fauorits, GAVESTONE and
SPENCER.

Storied in an Excellent Poem.

LONDON: Printed for Roger Michell. 1628.

THE DEPLORABLE Life and Death, of Edward the Second, KING of ENGLAND.
1
I Sing thy sad disaster, (fatal King)
Carnarvan Edward, second of that name:
Thy Minions pride; thy State ill managing,
Thy Peers revolt, the sequel of the same:
Thy Life, thy Death I sing, thy sin, thy shame;
And how thou were deprived of thy Crown,
In highest Fortune, cast by Fortune down.
2
Did I say Fortune? nay by Folly rather,
By vnrespect unto the rules of State;
For let a Prince assure himself, to gather,
As he has planted, either Love, or Hate,
Contempt, or Duty; not the works of Fate;
Much less of Fortune, but of due respects,
Two causes, which must needs produce effects.
3
As if a Prince do lay his platform right,
And then with courage prosecutes the same;
His ends prove happy; but, by ouer-sight,
He that is weak, wholly subuerts the frame
Of his own building, and does idly blame
Fortune, which wise men make to wait on them:
But for a way-ward Mistrisse, fools condemn.
4
In which Discourse, if I shall hap to touch
Those faults; that in our time are frequent grown,
Let not the gauld offender, winch or grudge?
For I intend a private wrong to none:
Only I would have those same errors known;
By which the State, did then to ruin run,
That (warned by theirs) our age like sins might shun.
5
Nor do I mean to bound my self so much,
As only for to tie me to those times:
The causes, courses, consequents i will touch
Of latter ages, and of their designs;
And if detractions breath, does blast my lines:
Be it, for me, I have for my defense,
The privy coat of harmless innocence.
6
And thou (great King) that now do weild our State,
Building on that, which former times did square,
Oh let it not be thought to derogate
From thy perfections, (admirable rare)
If I some errors of these times declare:
Sure never State was so precisely good,
But faults have escaped, which could not be withstood.
7
For men are not like God, complete Divine,
Whom neither passions move, nor errors blind;
Who is not limited with any time,
Nor tide to means, nor into place confinde;
But free in all, no counter-check does find,
But works all in all, and nothing ill
To contradict the least part of his will.
8
Whereas our humane actions are all mixed,
Men live in motion, so do their designs,
Nothing is simply good, or firmly fixed;
All have defects, nature it self declines:
Darkness often clouds the clearest Sun that shines:
Our purest streams are not without their mud,
And we mistake what often we take for good.
9
Besides, Kings needs must see with others eyes,
From whence mistaking cannot choose but spring,
And when the offense from errors does arise;
Why should men cast the envy on the King,
And not on those that mis-informe the thing?
This is the gall most banes the Kingly Throne,
That, of his faults, the least part is his own.
10
For he himself is blameless often, (God knows)
Except it be, because he does not know
The noted scandals, that arise from those,
On whom he does his favors most bestow,
Which they abusing, discontents may grow
Against the Prince, though not deserving them:
So apr we are, even goodness to condemn.
11
Nor must we with a coal, straight mark or brand
A Prince or State, because of some defect:
Who can be free from Sulley (if it so stand)
But that same Prince or State deserves respect,
Whose actions does in general effect,
And aim at good; for in particulets,
None can be so complete, but often erres.
12
And much are they deceived that think to find,
A State without a blemish, or a stayne,
Conceit may cast Ideas in the mind,
And forge strange forms (not practiced in the brain,)
But States consist of men, and men retain
This native badge, which unto all does cleave,
That is, to be deceived, and to deceive.
13
The warlike Trumpet (sounding to the fight,)
Commands the hearing more, then does the reed,
Each eye is fixed on the Eagles flight,
When little Wrens deserve not any heed;
The greatest men shall have the greatest meed:
Mark who so list, and they shall find it tried,
That all men's ears to Princes tongues are tide.
14
Then let the World attend King Edwards words;
The second Edward (matter fit for moan,)
Whose smiles gave life, whose frowns did wound like swords
Whilst he did sit upon the Kingly Throne,
Not minded now nor mean'd by any one.
So time cuts down (we see) with fatal blow,
As Well proud Oaks, as humble shrubs below.
15
Imagine with your selves, you see him come,
From forth the deep dark cauerns of the earth,
Starued and pined, nothing but skin and bone,
In Princely plenty, suffering want and dearth,
As naked as an infant at his birth:
So pinching need does pluck, what pride does plant,
And wastfull riot, is repayd with want.
16
And thus poor Prince begins his Tragic plaint,
Am I the same that was first Edwards son,
By nature borne to live without restraint?
Were there for me so many Trophies won,
By Long-shankes? and such great atchiuements done:
I am the same, and he so great did leave me,
As none (I thought) of greatness could bereave me.
17
But now I find by proof, that one there is,
And well it is, that there is such a one,
Who is not hood-winckt unto our amiss,
And he can pull us from our Kingly Throne,
For all our Guards, our Forts, our Walls of Stone.
Know King, how great and powerful thou be,
The King of Kings still rules over thee.
18
I know that nature, (apt to ouer-weene)
May easly strain a Princes thoughts too high*
I know it is, and evermore has been,
A common course to flatter Majesty,
Greatness is apt to swim in Surcudrie;
Yet though like hills we ouer-looke low grounds,
All virtuous Kings confess they have their bounds.
19
And therefore though we have Prerogatives,
Yet there are certain limits to the same,
Which hinders Kings to be Superlatiues,
To sway (as Gods Lieutenants) this fair frame,
And those Aspirers merit Death and shame,
That do repine against those Supreme powers,
Whom God has made his underlings, not ours.
20
And yet, although their State be free from force,
That gives not Lawless liberty in all:
Kings must observe a just and rightful course:
God is their King, by whom they stand, or fall,
And every Act, unto account will call:
Their oath, their virtue, and their own renown,
Are Dyamantine chains to tie a Crown.
21
And such as are not moved with these respects,
But make their might, to serve their will in all:
Leave them to God, who ruins and erects,
Sets up a David, and pulls down a Saul:
He prospers, Houses rise; he frowns, they fall:
It Is not discents, nor swords, nor force, nor fate,
But God supports, and God supplants a State.
22
Nine Kings had ruled since the Conquest here,
Whom I succeeded in a rightful line:
My father, (all domesticke tumults clear)
Did War, and win in fruitful Palestine,
This Northern Sun even to the East did shine:
The French were fearful, hearing but his name,
French, Scots, and Turks, eternised his fame,
23
No Realm but did resound first Edwards praise,
No praise was ever won with more deserts;
And no deserts (though great) could counter-paise,
Much less out Balance, his Heroicke parts:
Mars taught him Arms, the Muses taught him Arts,
Whereby so great he grew, that might there be,
A Jove on earth, that earthly Jove was he.
24
A King may leave his name unto his Son,
But to his Son, no King can leave his Nature:
In outward form and shape, they may seem one,
His Posture, Speech, both Countenance and Feature,
May make the Son be thought the selfsame Creature,
I know in Face, Sons may be like the Sires,
But Faces like, have often unlike desires.
25
For why? our bodies made of Humane seed,
Resemble them, whose matter was their making,
Yea so far forth, as often times we read
Of many griefs hereditary, taking
First root from Parents loins, and not forsaking
Their issues issue, until many ages
To woeful masters, most unwelcome Pages.
26
But minds, not cast in any mortal mould,
Infused from Heaven, not tide unto succession,
Are freely left (for so the Maker would)
Unto his wife, and provident discretion,
Likesoftned wax, apt to receive impression:
But when the form is once imprinted in,
It Is hardly lost, what Nature first did win.
27
It Is somewhat to be borne of Noble seed,
An honest belly bears a hopeful son;
But yet (we see) good Parents often breed
A wild and naked issue, which do run
Most thriftles courses, till their lives be done:
As was the Sire, the son himself will fashion,
Is probable, but yet no demonstration.
28
Which is but truly instanced in me,
For I was far unlike my worthy Sire:
A sour Crab from sweetest Apple Tree:
A cloudy smoke, from Sun-bright shining fire,
And that small good, which nature did inspire
By soothing tongues, too soon was turned to ill;
So smallest Frost untimely fruit does kill.
29
For when men did perceive my youthful itch
To vain delight, and saw my mind affected
But to the flight, where pleasure made the pitch,
How all my Noble studies were neglected,
My youth with ease, my ease with lust infected.
Straight some sowed pillowes underneath my sin,
And praised that most, that I delighted in.
30
Amongst the rest, one Pierce of Gauestone,
French by his Birth, and French by his behavior,
(One that indeed was second unto none,)
In winding in himself to great men's favor,
That by their hazard, he might be the safer,
When he did spy the mark, whereat I meant,
Sraight found the means, to give my bow more bent.
31
We lived together even from prime of years,
Whereby our joint affections were combined,
The mutual consort of our infant pheares,
Does keep a long possession of the mind,
And many deep impressions leaves behind:
Would thou have love last even to the tomb,
Then let it take beginning at the Womb.
32
So hunts the Hound, and so the Hawke does fly,
As at first entrance they are made and manned;
And so those springing humors seldom dye,
That in our first conceit ingraued stand,
Though childish love seem to be built on sand;
Yet every one even in himself may prove,
He likes it still, that he at first did love.
33
Princes, that do intend your Heirs such good,
As shall enable them for to succeed,
And no way to disparrage their high blood:
Oh, let it be your most respective heed,
To sow their tender years with virtues seed;
For so the well, or ill manured field
As it is til'd, does Corn, or Cockle yield.
34
In ure their youth unto their Peers commerce,
From whence some seeds of liking first will grow,
Which even the soul it self in time will pierce,
And prove a constant zeal, from whence will flow
All dutious offices, that men may show.
And then designs of Princes happiest prove,
When their great Peers do serve, because they love.
35
Besides, there is a secret trust reposed
In those, whom long assurance has combined,
And when we know how humors are disposed,
We frame our Counsels fitter to the mind,
Unsounded natures sharpest judgments blind;
And those, we intertaine with difference,
Of whom we have but small experience.
36
So that to win a trust, to plant a love,
To gain a settled service of the Peers:
This is the way which wisest Princes prove,
To glue them close even in their infant years,
And here my Fathers error much appears,
Who did ingraft me into Gauestone,
By co-uniting both our loves in one,
37
He was in face a Cupid, or more fair;
A Mercury in speech, or else as much:
In Active vigor, he was Mars his heir:
In wit Ioue-bred; Minerua was not such;
But all those guilts will not abide the touch,
Except with inward virtues of the mind,
Beauty, and Speech, Strength, Wit, are all refined.
38
Why then should Nature set so fair a gloss
Upon a mind, that sin does see deforme?
Why should she gild and polish such base dross,
As if she did the Souls perfection scorn?
And only would impiety adorn:
Or else seduce those minds from judging right,
Who do conform their censure to their sight.
39
But often we see a sweet and mild aspect,
A comely presence pleasing unto all;
A Face that seems all virtue to affect,
Does hide a heart of stone, a mind of gall,
A crabbed will, a soul to sin most thrall;
And therefore, he in judgment shoots awry,
That daily takes his level from the eye.
40
Because the glorious inside of the mind,
Has no dependence on the outward form:
In which, if erring nature prove unkind,
And disproportions do the shape deforme,
She commonly endeauours to reform:
The bodies errors, with the minds supply,
So richest lems in earths base intrailes lie.
41
The face is false, the look is but a liar:
The habit and the heart do much dissent,
For good pretenses cloak a bad desire;
Fair complements do guide a false intent,
Who does rely on them, may chance repent
Which was my case, and caused my ouer-throw.
And I did prize the substance, by the show.
42
If I may use that word without control,
If ever any Metempsuchosis was
I think, the last Assirian Monarchs soul,
By due descent to Gauestone did pass,
For he a right Sadanapalus was,
Drowned in delights, if one may term them so,
That hatch in lust, and breath their last in woe.
43
This highest Scholar in the School of sin,
This Centaur half a Man, and half a Beast;
This pleasing Siren, so my soul did win,
That he was dear to me above the rest,
Look what he said, was Gospel at the least:
Look what he did, I made my President
So soon we learn, what we too late repent.
44
This Angel-Diuell, thus shrin'd in my heart:
This Dragon having got the golden Fruit;
My very Soul to him I did impart;
Nor was I ever deaf unto his suite,
He acted all, I was a silent mute.
My being, seemed to be in him alone,
Pluntaginet was turned to Gauestone.
45
And having seized me into his hands,
(For fear belike) that he should be disseaz'd;
He thought to tie me still in straighter bands,
By praising that wherewith my mind was pleased,
Affirming that our lives were to be eased
Of many cumbers, which the curious wise
Had laid on men, the more to Tyrannize.
46
For what are Laws but servile observations,
Of this, or that, what pleased the makers mind,
The selfe-conceited sown imaginations,
Of working brains, which did in freedom find
Our humane State, which they (forsooth) would bind*
To what they like, what likes not was forbidden:
So Horse and Mule with hit and spur are ridden.
47
Which well invented Scar-crowes though they serve,
For mud-borne men to keep them in some awe;
Yet Princes are not borne, so to observe,
The strickt precisenes of th'incombring Law,
Which their high State to base contempt does draw:
Kings, made those Laws, and Kings may break them now,
That pleased them then, and this now pleases you.
48
No, no (sweet Prince) says he, there is no Law
Can bind a King, but only his desire;
And that full well the Assirian Monarch saw,
Who had, before them, borne consuming fire,
(Emblem of Regal power,) which all admire:
But none must touch for fear of following harms,
For fire we know consumes as well as warmes.
49
The Spiders web holds fast the silly Fly,
The Hornet breaks it, (like a mighty Lord)
That King of Kings, when he could not untie
The Gordian knot, deuides it with his Sword;
That act of his, fit matter does afford
For President, were I, as thou shall be,
I Would rule the Law, it should not govern me.
50
Except it were the golden Law of Nature,
Sweet Nature (sweetest mother of us all,)
Which has infused thus much to every Creature,
To love the Honey, and to loath the Gall:
To serve delight, not to be sorrows thrall;
For pleasure does with Nature so agree,
As Bees with Hiue, as Honey with the Be.
51
For in the Prologue of our Infant play,
Even in our Cradle, we do cry and yell
For Nurses breast: why so? for food (y'ould say,)
It Is true, and food (say I) does please us well,
As hunger seems to be a second Hell:
So that in truth, the motive of our cry
Is to be fed, and to be pleased thereby.
52
As in our Prologue, so in our next act,
(I mean in childish years) who does not see,
That every thought of ours, and word, and fact,
Do aim at sport, at pastime, and at glee
Which daily cares, and mighty studies be:
Witness the check, the rods, the blows we take,
The many blows, and all for pleasures sake.
53
But when our Youth does step upon the Stage,
The sweetest part that any man can play;
Then pleasing love, and hope (loves pleasing pay)
And courage, hopes attendant night and day,
And Fortune, seldom saying courage may,
With full sailed course does carry us amain,
To seek the course where full content does reign.
54
Not staying here still Nature drives us on
To new delights, but of a diuets kind,
For middle age to arms will needs begone,
With honors sweet, to feed his hungry mind,
And what is honor but a pleasing wind:
Remember what the famous Grecian says,
The sweetest music is a man's own praise.
55
Next elder age, and filuer seeming hairs,
By Nature run full chase, still after pleasure,
For (oh) the solace of the wayning years,
To view their ruddocks, and their heaps of treasure,
To weigh and tell their gold at every leisure.
For great it is, speak they that rather choose,
Gold should loose them, then they their gold should loose.
56
The Epilogue of all our former time,
More hunts for joy, then any of the rest,
Decrepite age does pray before the prime,
With fearful eyes, and knockes upon the breast,
And gives his Alms to them that are distressed:
And what is his end? that he might Heaven obtain:
And what is Heaven? pleasure void of pain.
57
And as the mind has motions to effect,
So have we means to satisfy the mind,
Our little world, is made with much respect,
Our mother Nature, has been wise and kind
By whom we have apt Orgaines assigned,
To execute what so our thoughts intend,
And all our thoughts, aim at some pleasing end.
58
Is not the Head the Storehouse of conceit,
Plotting the means to compass our delight?
Our Eyes attendants that do daily wait
Upon such objects as may please our sight?
Witness the Cherry-cheeke, and Brow milke-white:
Witness no other witness but my wish,
How Sight and Soul both like, and longs for this.
59
What mind, what man, what man of any mind
That is not touched and moved, with musickes sound?
Whose deep impressions, work in brutish kind,
As Dolphins, else Arion had been drowned,
The savage Beasts, that would not Orpheus wound,
The senseless stones, whom Phoebus Harp did move,
Do witness all, how all do Music love.
60
The bubling murmur of a sliding Spring,
That seems to run with sweet, yet sullen mind
By which, the winged, Quiers in Consort sing
With fair faced Eunuchs, Cherpres of their kind,
Whose Notes are answered with a soft still wind;
Whilst some desired Dame, cheares all with kisses,
Who would not hold that place, a Heaven of blisses.
61
As Head, and Eyes, and ears, so are our Hands
Flesh hooks to draw, and gather all unto us,
That with our pleasure, and our profit stands,
Thrusting a side what ever may undo us,
For which employments are allotted to us:
Two Hands, two Feet, the agents of our wills,
To follow, rest, and fly from restless ills.
62
So likewise, in the structure of this Frame,
What is not made for pleasure, with much art?
So likewise in the guidance of the same,
What is denide us that may please the Heart?
Most senseless man, what man so ere thou art,
That in the very fullness of such store,
By wilful wants, wilt make thy self most poor.
63
In heat of Summer, when the burning Sun
Does crust the earth, are there not shady bowers?
Are there not rivers that do mildly run;
And now and then some cooling dewie showers,
To keep the beauty of the blooming flowers,
Wherewith our mother earth's so fairly delight,
That she allures her Children to delight.
64
I will not speak of every days delight,
They are so various, full of rareties
But are there not sweet pleasures for the night?
Maskes, Revels, Banquets, mirthfull Comedies,
Night Songs, even Natures dearest prodigies,
Which work in men with powerful influence,
As having their first life, best motion thence.
65
If then the mouer of this glorious round,
Has wisely fitted each thing so to pleasure:
May he not seem his order to confound,
That bars himself from this same earthly treasure?
And to delight does limit sparing measure?
Is It ever like, he would have made things thus,
But that they should be fully used by us?
66
And that I may not run about the Field,
But keep my self in compass of the Ring,
I will omit the rich and fruitful yield,
Of pleasure, pointing only at the Spring,
The taste whereof such perfect bliss does bring,
As I do think none other Heaven there is,
Heaven pardon me, if that I think amiss.
67
This is (sweet Ned) the Paradise of love,
The joy of life, and life of our conceit,
The Heavenly fire infused from above,
On which the Muses, and the Graces wait,
The bodies health, souls hope, and Natures bait,
The quintessence of pure essential sweet,
The point where all the lines of pleasure meet.
68
Sweet love, that have sweet beauty for thy object,
Wise love, that do convert both souls and hearts:
Great love, to whom the greatest King is subject:
Pure love, that sublimates our earthly parts,
And makes them ayery by ingenious arts:
Oh, let my Ned, my Prince, my Jove possess
The joys, I would, but cannot well express.
69
And thou, sweet Ned, experience but the pleasure,
Try what it is to love, and be reputed,
And I will pawn my life (my greatest treasure)
With one sweet night, thou will be so delighted,
That thou will wish the world were still benighted:
Then say (dear Prince) when thou the same do prove,
No Heaven but joy, nor any joy but love.
70
Oh see the fruits of ill abused wits,
What hurt is wrought by armed impiety:
Thrice wretched souls, that ill with art commit,
And surfeit with the sweet satiery
Of Graces, given them by the Deity:
Were all such minds brought up to Plough and Cart,
Learning should have their due, they their desert.
71
I see the rule holds true, the best of all
Being corrupted, turns unto the worst;
And so those damned spirits, before their fall
Most blessed, (changed from what they were at first)
Are now most wretched, vile, and most accursed:
Look what degree of goodness things retain,
Whilst they are good, being ill, they so remain.
72
With such and many more, more wanton gloses,
Whereat thy virgin Muse, will blush for shame;
With unchaste words, and Pander-like supposes,
This Gauestone so brought me out of frame,
That I neglected Father, Friends, and Fame:
And to those pleasures only was respective,
That to my Fancy seemed most delectiue.
73
We see how soon our sweetest Buds are blasted:
How soon our fairest colors loose their flourish?
How easly are the seeds of virtue wasted,
And noisome weeds of vice how much we nourish,
Which does the soul of her chief wealth impouerish:
Youth apt to stray, is easly led awry,
We fall by Nature, what needs flattery.
74
And yet it has too much to work upon,
The vnexperience of our younger years,
The hear of blood, which easly draws us on;
Ungrounded hopes and fond surmised fears,
The courses intertain'd by like compeares:
Our own desert, our Parents loving care;
This Devil does use as traps unto his snare.
75
And soon it will the least advantage find
Whereby it may creep into men's conceit,
Observing first, to what they were inclinde,
Which once perceived it fits the humor straight,
Still keeping fashion, but still wanting weight,
In complements most seemingly precise,
And that fair Mask, blinds vnsuspecting eyes.
76
But like as those diseases faster grow,
Whose moving causes our complexions feed,
So far more dangerous is this private Foe,
That does attire himself in friendships weed,
Then he that shows his hate by open deed,
For Arms, or Laws, or Friends may fence the one,
The Other, God himself must shield, or none.
77
So Synon did the Trojan State confound:
So gilded Tombs are full of rotten earth:
So Crocadils, although they weep, they wound:
So Panthers circumuent with their sweet breath:
Sy Sirens though they sing, their tunes are death;
And yet as Fish bite most at honey bates,
Even so are men most caught with sweet deceites.
78
Therefore be pleased to hear a plain Discourse,
Suspect the tongue that is still tuned to the ear;
Fair Truth is not for nakedness the worse;
But falsehoods many ornaments must wear,
Least all her foul deformities appear:
Which Art can flourish over fit for Court,
While simple Truth to Deserts does resort.
79
And this is that waste Sea of misery,
In which the greatest Monarchs most are drowned,
That they are seldom free from flattery:
Pretenses being colourably found,
To sooth that humor, that does most abound;
And so the Prince runs on from ill to worse,
And still's persuaded best of his bad course.
80
Whereby the danger on himself does fall,
The gain unto the Favorite accrewes;
For grieved Subjects being wronged withal
Forgetting Duty, impiously pursues
Means of revenge, whence danger often insues.
Mean while the man, that fed the humor so,
Falls off perhaps; and scapes the coming blow.
81
Therefore let Kings prefer them that are plain,
And make such great, as do not greatness fear:
Such serve their Lords for love, and not for gain,
They Are jewels of the heart not of the ear,
They will discover dangers that are near;
When oyled Tongues will still make all secure;
And careless greatness ever stands unsure.
82
But why should I give rules, since I kept none,
Why should I teach, and never could obey?
Only for this, why, I was ouer-throwne,
Others may look least they be cast away;
And they that make this use, thrice happy they:
Because by others wrackes themselves may read,
How to prevent their own mishaps with heed.
83
Soothed thus in sin, all goodness was forgotten,
My Fathers words of no esteem were grown:
And I that scarce seemed ripe, was straight found rotten:
Like fruit that is from Tree untimely blown:
But that took root, which Gauestone had sown.
And sprouted so, that it did seed at last,
So worthless seeds we see do grow too fast.
84
For at the first I was ashamed of sin;
But sin did say, my greatest sin was shame,
Then by degrees did I delight therein:
And from delight did I desire the same,
And my desires so prosp'rously did frame,
That now I could with Gauestone coniue,
So does the Bramble with the Thistle thrive.
85
Which when mine aged Father did perceive,
With many tears (the messengers of moan)
He did bewail himself, that he should leave
His Crown to me, and me to Gauestone:
I in my Son (says he) am overthrown;
My bliss, my bane; my peace procures my strife,
First Edward dies, in Second Edwards life.
86
To be a Father was mine only joy;
And now my grief it is to be a Father,
Why should my solace turn to mine annoy:
Why planted I hearts-ease, and Rue must gather?
As I did sow, I should have reaped rather,
My hopeful Harvest proves but Thistles weeds,
And for the blood I gave, my heart now bleeds.
87
For (oh) how near a touch does Nature give?
How searching are the sufferings of our blood:
How much the Fathers soul does joy or grieve,
When he does see his issue bad or good?
It Is hard of any to be understood;
Except of those whose feelings bowels find,
What deep impressions do proceed from kind.
88
Wise was the Prince, who playing with his Son.
And teaching him to ride upon a Reed:
To whom a great Ambassador did come,
And seemed to blush at his so childish deed;
Do not (quoth he) to judgment yet proceed:
I only crave a respit of thy doom,
Till thou thy self, art Father of a Son.
89
Inferring, that there is a secret love,
Which untouched hearts can hardly comprehend,
Would God the same reciprocal might prove:
Oh that kind Nature would sometimes ascend,
Fathers too often in indulgence offend:
But Sons more often in duty prove defective,
These way ward times are grown so vnrespectiue.
90
Nature so wrought, that Cressus son cried out,
Who from his birth before had not spoke word:
When he did see a Soldier go about
To kill the King his Father with a sword:
Could Nature then such presidents afford?
Was she so powerful then, now weakened so,
That Sons themselves now work their Fathers woe.
91
But foolish man, why do I blame my Son,
Whose yet unknowing years, by ill advise
Being led away, a dangerous course does run?
For youths hot blood forgets cold ages ye,
And whilst his hand is in does throw the Dice
At all, that pleasure sets, and thinks to gain,
If with the bye he can discharge the maine.
92
Sweet Ned, I blame not thee but Gauestone,
For he it is that sits at the Helm,
And steeres the Stern at pleasure, thou art blown:
Nor will he leave, till he does ouer-whelme
In deepest gulf thy self, and all thy Realm,
For stirring spirits do troubled streams desire,
And then thrive best, when all are set on fire.
93
Observe those wasted States that do decline,
How apt they are for innovation,
How much they do against public good repine,
And hopefully expect an alteration,
That whilst things are vnsetl'd out of fashion,
They may close up the wounds they had before,
And by that means their private wants restore.
94
Therefore let those that have a grounded State
And may live well, join close in any wise,
Against all such as seek to innouate,
If not in duty, yet in good advise
To keep such down, as hope perhaps to rise
Upon their ruins, whose revenues may
Cut short their lives, sure prove the spoilers pray.
95
And with these linkes such spirits as would rise,
But are by former great ones still suppressed,
And such do dangerous Stratagems devise,
Not will their egar hopes afford them rest,
But mount they must, who ever be deprest
And little do they force the States confusion,
May they thereby to greatness make intrusion.
96
And to this end they are obsequious still,
They sooth, they fawn, they seem officious:
They fit themselves to their great mouers will
Be It good or bad, just, or injurious,
They serve even turns, base, and luxurious:
But I Will provide a wholesome Methridate,
So to prevent these poisons of the State.
97
And firmly settled in this resolution
By strict command, was Gauestone exiled
I begged of him to stop the execution:
But then my Father shak'd his head, and smiled,
Oh Ned, quoth he, how much art thou beguiled,
To foster that, which will thy downfall be;
And warm the Snake that will inuenome thee.
98
I wish, my self an Echo at that word,
That I might then have boldly answered thee;
For never was there sharpest edged sword,
That wounded more, then that same wounded me;
But go he must, that was the Kings decree:
And when he went, then died my bloudlesse heart,
So does the body from my soul depart.
99
The former times have held it good advise,
That some offender should abjure the Land,
But it is a course both dangerous and unwise,
And with no rules of Regiment can stand,
For if the matter be with judgment scand,
It will appear to men considerate,
That abiuration hurts both Prince and State.
100
I do not mean of men that are not mist,
For who respects the humming of a Gnat?
Such Attomes may wander where they list,
Their muddy pates can neither frame the plat,
Nor feeble hands work danger to the State.
Let men of note be marked, and wary heed
Be had of them that may disturbance breed.
101
And it is not safe to banish such a one,
As may find means to work his own return:
So Bullingbrooke stepped in to Richards throne,
And he had leisure afterward to mourn Henry 4.

His foolish fault, such Medicines may adiourne
The present pain a while; but makes the sore
To rave more selly then it did before.
102
Mild drugs may stir the humors that abound,
But will not quite expel the growing ill;
The root and body both remaining sound:
Although the Tree be lopt, yet thriues it still,
But when thou have the Axe to use at will,
Strike at the root, and fell it to the ground,
Rather then pare the boughs and branches round.
103
For it is lost labor to begin with them,
They needs must wither, if the other die;
And do not fear, though vulgar breath condemn
Thy carriage, in such courses; whose weak eye
Looks at the present only, and thereby
Values the rest; do thou make good thy end,
The common sort will ever be thy friend.
104
Wise Longshankes (yet in this thou were unwise)
If thou had took the head of Gauestone:
Those subsequent disasters that did rise
From him, had been prevented every one:
Thy Son had not been shouldred from his Throne;
Thy Peers not slain, nor Realms to ruin brought
But so God works, till all his will be wrought.
105
My Gauestone thus driven into Exile,
My self committed like a Captive thrall:
(For so my Father kept me short a while)
With bitter curses I did ban them all:
I drank my tears, and fed upon my gall:
I chafed and fround, yet could I not prevail,
Needs must, will be, feign would, does often fail.
106
Then were my colors turned to mournful black,
I did put on the livery then of care,
Like to the hopeless Seaman in a wrack,
That sees the greedy waves devour his share,
No otherwise did thoughtfull Edward fare;
When sad remembrance in my soul did plant
His lot, my loss, his woe, my pleasures want.
107
The chiefest Cordial of my grieuedsoule,
The one and only period of my pain,
Was this, that Death admitting no control,
Would end my Fathers wrath, his Life, his Reign,
And then (thought I) Ned will have Pierce again:
When Englands Crown shall make a Jove of me,
Then Gaueston my Ganimed shall be.
108
As I did hope, so had my hopes success,
For shortly after did my Noble Sire,
Whilst he prepared the Scots for to suppress:
Lo now (quoth I) I have my hearts desire,
Longshankes is dead, his water, air, and fire,
Are turned to earth, and earthly might he be,
That on the earth did keep the Crown for me.
109
Yet in that sad dismaifull hour of dying
No grief did him more feelingly distress,
Then that his vicious Son, al virtue flying,
Should ruin that by riot and excess,
Which he had built with so great carfulness;
And therefore for to weane me from such sins,
These well tuned Notes this dying Swan-beginnes:
110
My Son (quoth he) for in that name of zeal,
My words may prove of more effectual power,
Why should thou so, with thy sick Father deal,
As to torment him in his parting hour,
Whose life has had his portion full of sour?
And yet to make my measure fuller still,
My Son does daily add unto my will.
111
I know what it is by many dire extremes,
To keep the Crown upright upon the head:
I know the troublous sleeps, and frightfull dreams
That houer still about a Princely bed;
The worm of greatness (jealousy) is bred
Out of it self, yet this I know withal,
Our powerful sway does sweeten all our gall.
112
But for thy self, and for my heart-breake grief,
That out of thy sin-shipt-wracke youth does grow,
No circumstance yields color of relief;
The cause excuselesse, limitlesse the woe,
That does from thy full sea of follies flow:
For foulest faults proceed from powerful ill,
And subjects sort themselves to Princes still.
113
Thou do not only by thy vicious living,
Bereave thy soul of bliss, which virtue winnes,
But also by thy ill example giving,
Thou do attract weak minds unto like sins,
For certainly the Subject ever swims,
Just with the stream, so growing like to thee)
A general deluge of all sin will be.
114
Much better had it been, thou had not been,
Then that thy being, should so ruin all:
Oh wherefore was thy birthday ever seen,
If by thy life, the State it self does fall
To those soul sins, which wrath from Heaven do call,
By whose just doom such States confounded are
By Foreign fury, or domesticke ware.
115
For when the seed of sin to ripeness grows,
Then Justice with a Sith does mow it down:
This, that it is, that Kingdoms ouer-throwes,
Lays wast the field, vnpeoples every town:
Or if not so, disorders yet the Crown,
Although it prove no general desolation,
Yet many dangers grow by innovation.
116
When my Heauen-seeking soul shall leave her Inn,
And this my flesh closed in a house of clay,
Then will my shame survive me in thy sin,
And Babes unborn, will ban my births and say
His wretched life, gave life to our decay;
And had no other ill by him bin done,
He sinned too much in getting such a son.
117
Did I for this endure the dust and Sun,
Dis-lodg'd at midnight, march in midday heat?
Where Turkish, French, and Scottish trophies won
Was all my care employed to make thee great,
That some might dispossess thee of thy Seat?
Oh then I see that greatness soon is gone,
When God draws not the plot men builds upon.
118
And my divining soul does sadly see,
Thy ruin in thy riot (oh my Ned,)
When I am gone, a King then shall thou be;
But if thou still be with thy passions led,
Thou will not keep thy crown upon thy head,
My soul now parting from the earthly cage,
Fore-tels thee so, in her propheticke rage.
119
Well Son, I feel my faltring tongue does fail,
Therefore this short abridgement I do make;
Fear God, love virtue, let the right prevail,
Shun sudden courses, Parasites forsake:
Dis-fauour not thy Peers, their Counsels take
For thy designs, revoke not Gauestone,
For he will prove the canker of thy throne.
120
Pursue those Scottish wars I have in hand,
And for because my soul did make a vow
Unto my God, to serve in holy Land,
From which this sickness interdicts me now,
Though Death disable me, effect it thou:
Embowell me, and thither hear my heart,
That I therein at last, may have some part.
121
And you my Lords, speaking unto his Pe^res:
Whose wealth and greatness, I have much increast,
Be Fathers to my sons vntuter'd years,
Love him for me; though Longshankes be deceast,
Let not Gauestones exile be releast,
Least his repeal occasion civil strife,
And so first Edward ends both speech and life.
122
Thus Death that Herald that even Kings does summon;
The Purseuant that does attach great Peers:
The City Seriant, whose arrest is common:
The errant-bayliffe, that a Process bears,
And no place bounds, but serves it in all Shieres:
The general Surueior of each one,
Did bring my Father to his longest home.
123
The Obsequies and Ceremonies done,
Then I was Crowned, me thought the Sun did dance;
And that the Thames with silver stteames did run;
Likewise the Stars did all applaud my chance,
That did my State unto a Crown advance:
Smile Stars, dance Sun, and River run with mirth,
Carnarvan Edward is a god on earth.
124
But all the Stars to blazing Commets turned,
Whose sad vprise presaged my dreiry fate;
The Rivers seemed as if they wept and mourned;
The Sun did never shine upon my State,
Stars, Streams, and Sun, saw me unfortunate:
Disastrous man, so borne, to suffer wrack,
As is the Aethiop to be always black.
125
Observe the man whom Fates have slau'd to grief;
See how the wretch that is destined Fortunes foe,
Will Be a rub to turn away relief
Even from himself, and weaue his own wrought woe,
Harm after him, he after harm shall go:
(Forspoken man) and never but successelesse,
Himself, his hurt, and yet his hurt redresseksse.
126
Nay even those very means which he shall use
In good discretion to prevent the clap,
Shall Be returned unto his abuse,
And serve for pullies of his own mishap,
So though he see, he shall not shun the trap;
And if his ruin were not ripe before,
His own designs shall hasten it the more.
127
The King of Epire fearing death: home,
Fore-warned thereof by formet Prophecy:
To Italy forthwith must needs begone,
So to prevent his fault by policy;
But still he is followed by his destiny.
In Italy, he finds an Acharon
The fatal flood from which he would be gone.
128
Fourth Henry was by some blind Bard foretold,
That he should never dye till he had seen
Jerusalem; fourth Henry will be old,
Jerusalem for him shall be unseen:
No he shall see it, when he least does ween,
He sounds at prayers, and by religious men,
Is straight conuey'd unto Jerusalem.
129
For so the place was called where he was laid,
And shortly after did the Noble King
In vain men strive, the heavens will be obay'd,
We may foreknow, but not prevent a thing,
Our selves will never cease, till we do bring
Our fates to full effect, and all we do
Shall Be but lines to lead us thereunto.
130
For first I do those Counselors remove,
That in my Fathers reign had borne most sway,
Whereby I did disarme me of their love,
To practizes and discontents made way,
Expose my self to envy, open lay
To disadvantage, wanting their advise
Whom long employment had made deeply wise.
131
Besides, I did the public State some wrong,
So to cast off those grounded Polliticians,
Who knew to govern, by, commanding long
Had seen, and well observed men's dispositions,
And so could tell when, where, how impositions
Where to be raised, how to avoid offense,
How to gain men and ends, with fair pretense.
132
Who likewise knew how other Kingdoms stood,
The concordances of each Neighboring state:
How Realms best correspond for eithers good:
How to make Leagues, how to negotiate:
When to break off, and when to incorporate:
How far remote, and near confiners too,
Are to be weighed, as they have means to do.
133
It Is not the practice of a day or twain:
It Is not the Schools, or Sophisters debate:
It Is not the foame of every working brain:
It Is not the start into a neighboring state,
That works men fit to bear a Kingdoms weight;
When men are fully made, employ them then,
For it is an art of arts to govern men.
134
Therefore I hold it for a certain ground,
Which new made Princes must not violate,
Except they will the Commonwealth confound:
Not to discard those men that knew the State,
Whose long experience, ingenerate
A true and perfect method to command,
Both for the Princes good and for the Land.
135
Besides this fault, scaree settled in my State,
I straight recal'd exiled Gauestone,
Who by my many favors grew so great,
That I did seem to him to live alone:
I Alexander, he Stephestion:
Oh no, I wrong them to usurp their names,
Our loves were like, but far unlike their fames.
136
Here, I did violate my Fathers will,
And all respect of duty did despise
To wrong the dead, is sacriligious ill,
A clog which endless on the conscience lies,
And at the latest gasp for vengance cries,
And lo the fears and doubts lurkes close within
That restless soul, that is guilty of such sin.
137
When all his joints are racked with dying pain,
With cold dead sweat all covered over quite:
What thorney thoughts will then distract his brain?
How shall he dare t'approach his fathers fight?
Whose dying words he lately set so light,
He Will fear his friends, suspect his wife est-soone,
And sighing think, they will do, as I have done.
108
It is too common to betray the trust,
That by testators is in friends reposed:
But mark Gods judgment, how severe, how just,
How to the nature of the sin disposed:
Even I my self, was by my son deposed;
I that infringed my fathers dying hest,
Was in my life, by my own son distressed.
139
Me, that a Siere did wrong a son did wrong,
I that did show my self degenerate,
As I had sown, so did I reap ere long
Such sin it is our faith to violate.
Oh deepest doom of all foreseeing fate.
How wisely are thy fearful judgments fitted,
To punish sin as snne was first committed.
140
The Giants heaped up Hills to climb the Sky,
I honors heaped, that Gauestone might clime,
They did contend with Jove, and fell thereby,
He with my Peers, and perished in his prime,
They thriu'd at first, but fell in after time;
His Prologue sweet, but sad was his last act,
So fairest glass (men say) is soonest cracked.
141
These were the honors that he did attain,
The Earl of Cornwell, and the Lord of Man,
Chief Secretary, Lord great Chamberlain;
And for his wife, the Glousters sister wan:
Aspiring men see how great Monarchs can,
Advance their States, whom they do please to afauour,
Who serves the King does seldom leese his labor.
142
Though Poets fictions seem to savor much
Of idle errors, yet they have their sense;
King Midas turned to gold all he did touch:
The Morrall thus, the favor of the Prince,
His gracious touch, may guild without offense
His greatest wants, and make him for to sore
A lofty pitch, that did but creep before.
143
Not all the painful passages one spends,
In serious contemplation of deep arts,
Nor any one employment so commends
The Agent, (though a man of rarest parts;)
As when the Prince but one sweet smile imparts,
One look of love, one eye-glance of delight,
Has power to change dark clouds to Suns most bright.
144
The eyes of Kings are more then simple eyes,
They are the Stars that do predominate
The Affairs of men, and in their influence lies
The good or bad of every ones estate,
They Are the primum-mobile of fate:
They whirle about their fortunes as they list,
And as they favor, we are cursed or blessed.
145
A Kings smooth brow, is the true dwelling place
Of honor, weakh, dependancy, respect,
And in this wrinckled forehead lives disgrace;
Death, exile, want, a general neglect,
A world of ills let that poor wretch expect:
Be it, all Rivers to the Sea must run,
And every light receive light from the Sun.
146
Let them be great whom Kings resolve to grace,
It is a privilege that is their own,
To raise such as they please to wealth or place,
Is truly proper to the Princely thrown,
And has not been denide to any one:
Jews of France, did say he spent his Reign,
In making and in marring men again.
147
Some by the School, some by the Laws do mount:
Some by the Sword, and some by Navigations,
As streams have had, though not the self same fount,
Shali only Kings admit a limitation;
How high, for what desert, or of what Nation
They shall advance? it were a wretched thing,
On this condition to become a King.
148
To make new Creatures, is the Princes due,
And without murmur let him have his own:
The danger only is to him that is new;
For envy ever waits on such a one,
Both from those men, that are not so well grown;
And from great Houses to, who straight will fear,
Least such new stars should thrust him from the sphaere.
149
For those which once have got the highest staire,
Will keep them down that mount with too much have,
It Is best (some say) to rise, but soft and fair:
If thou will gain thy iournies end at last,
Tire not thy means by posting ouer-fast;
Stir like a Dial vnperceiu'd to move,
So shall thou gather strength and purchase love.
150
And therefore they that sound a family,
Must gather wealth, and under their estates,
Make great pretenses of humility:
Allie themselves with strong confederates,
Serve great men's turns, so to avoid their hates:
For Cerberus with honey sops was pleased,
And malice must with mildness be appeased.
151
Then let it be his work that next succeeds,
To raise himself unto a greater height,
Who by employments, or by Martial deeds:
Or by vnlading some of that rich freight:
Which he has stored, perhaps with the conceit,
Which he much better, then the first may do,
Whose means he has, and adds his own thereto.
152
Nor shall he find such eager opposition:
Time having worn out all his fathers foes
Or else perhaps altered their disposition
By gifts, by favors, by obsequious shows
Or else perchance for fear of future blows:
And so some few discents, from higher to higher
The newness of the house will varnish fair.
153
Where sudden greatness ruined Gaueston
Whom I too much preferred before my Peers,
Who did possess me more then any one:
From whence grew many jelousies and fears:
Close discontentments which at first appears:
Of little moment, worthless of respect;
But proved such skars as we did least expect.
154
It is the praise, and blessing of the son
To make his heat and light both general:
Princes are sons, and both must freely run
In open course, and be not several
Unto some few, but common unto all:
The poorest he that breaths, this song may sing:
We all have interest in the Air and King.
155
And this too much did spread abroad my passion,
Who like pure water should have had no taste,
This error did my government dis-fashion,
That Gaueston unworthily was graced,
And made too great a monster, huge and vaste,
Who in his growth was vnproportionall
Became offensive to himself, and all:
156
My Seal, my Court, my Realm, was ruled by him
That neither knew to rule, nor to obey,
I cared not though my Peers did sink or swim,
Nor what my other Counselors did say,
For he did stearne my compass night and day,
Whilst I being sunk in sin and drowned in lust
Had almost wrack't, the Realm with such a gust.
157
The Court, which in my Fathers life time seemed
A Senate house of siluer-headed Sages,
Might now a pompous Theater be deemed
Pestered with Panders, Players, and with Pages.
Of my ensuing fall too true presages.
And yet in show it seemed fairer far
So Comets glifter more then any star.
158
But oh the quiet of that happy land,
Where aged Nestors bear the chiefest sway,
Where strength of mind, rules more then force of hand:
Where old men bid, and young men do abey.
Where Ages winter, guides youths sweet May,
But when the foot or hand commands the head,
The body then is many ways misled.
159
Let silver hairs, and long experienced age,
Be sole directors of each enterprise,
Let youth be as an Actor on the Stage,
To execute what staider heads devise,
For youth is active, age discreet and wise,
Youth is more daring, but precipitate,
Age more judicial, and considerate.
160
Yet should not Statesmen be too aged men,
Fer every year their spirits much decay,
They earthy grow, and melancholy then
Heavy and dull, their edge being worn away:
Wayward and teachy wrangling all the day.
Full of Morosity, and which is worse,
Extremely given to gripe, and fill the purse.
161
Besides, we see some men are ripe betimes,
Like summer fruit, some pleasing to the taste,
And if those spirits in whom such virtue shines,
May be with greatness, and employments graced,
They come to full maturity at last:
Men of exceeding worth, they being grown,
Both for their countries good, and for their own.
162
But to my self, who did neglect my Peers,
And only did deuote my self to pleasure,
Loved I? why, love it self, loves youthful years,
Spent I? why, Kings should not be slaves to treasure:
Heard I not Subjects suits? I had no leisure.
Did I forbear my Peers converse. What then?
love is not tide to sort himself with men.
163
When they did say, that Scottish Bruce did burn
My Northern borders, and did wast the same,
Then sighing I, to Gauestone would turn,
And say (sweet Peers) my self feels fancies flame,
I saw, I love, I dye for such a dame:
Cupid I fear a Bruce to me will prove,
My hold's by him, my heart is fier'd with love.
164
With thsee, and many more fantastic toys,
I shifted off my Council when they came:
I have not time enough to spend in joys;
Why should I spare one minute from the same?
Let them that list, by wars go hunt for same;
I force it not, give me these pleasing wars,
Where blows are given, but never cause no skarrer.
165
But when the field, is to a field-bed turned,
When eyes like sharpest Lances pierce, yet please;
When amorous hearts with equal flames are burned,
When Foes sink down, our furies to appease;
And lips on lips, redouble blows of ease,
When brave assaults are not by Death contrould,
In such a band, who would not be inroul'd
166
The Roman monster Heliogabilus;
And Persian Xerxes, never fortunate,
Might well be thought to live again with us;
We prized our pleasures at so high a rate,
Which was our sad, and still successelesse fate;
In peace, our fault procured our d^caies,
In wars our Fortunes made us run-awayes.
167
The lucklesse battles fought whilst I did Reign,
With Robert Bruce, that Noble English Scot,
Sad monuments unto the World remain,
That vicious life with Monarchies thrive not,
For sin and shame, are ti'd with Gordians knot,
And those designs do prove successelesse quite,
That are contrived by men, drowned in delight.
168
Mark but the Maps of all antiquity,
True Registers vnfalsefi'd records,
The race of time which we call History;
And 'twill be found, that every age affords
Plenty of proof to fortify my words
Each leaf, each time, do pregnant witness bear,
Who riot most, to ruin are most near.
169
When sin did ouer-flow, the Deluge came,
The Assirians then did loose their Monarchy,
When their last king did live most out offrame
And was ore-whelm'd with sensuality:
The Persians then did wrecke their Empery,
When wealth, and ease, and lust did most abound,
Which also did the Roman State confound.
170
The Danes did first set footing in this Land,
Because Lord Buer^^ wife was rauish't here;
The Saxons forces got the upper hand,
When Vortiger held Hengests daughter dear,
And still our Realm to ruin has bin near,
When ripned sin has gathered strongest head,
So stalled Steeres, are to the Shambels led.
171
Thus Edward said, and this our age has seen,
Like instance of a near confining State:
Never was France more deadly sick of sin:
Never was goodness grown more our of date,
Never did Princes more preposterate
Their private lives, and public regiment,
And as they lived, so died impenitent.
172
Never Religion served for more pretenses:
Never were Nobles more ambitious:
Never like inundations of offenses;
Never were Churchmen less religious:
Never were Commons more seditious:
Such plotting counter-plotting policies,
Such Massacres, such Barbarous cruelties.
173
Such impious courses, such impunity
Never was seen, less blushing, and more shame:
Never had sin so great imunity:
Never was ever all so out of frame,
As in these latter times, till the fiery flame
Of civil fury, and of Foreign foe,
Did make poor France the Stage of tragic woe.
174
And without doubt, had not the Man of men,
The mighty Atlas of that sinking State
Bin raised by God, to give new life; even then, Hen. 4.

That famous Kingdom of so ancient date,
By home ambition, and by Foreign hate,
Had breathed her last, being sin-sicke unto death,
And much a do there was to give her breath.
175
For still the eye of wrath does ouer-looke,
The wicked actions of obdurate men:
The Court of Heaven does keep a tallying book,
Wherein is entered all our sins; and when
Our score is full; let us look for payment then:
And (oh) what Prince, what Commonwealth can stand,
When God does scourge it with a rigorous hand.
176
And let us make this use of their new wrack,
Forbear to sin for fear of punishment:
God is not senseless, though he seem to slack,
He respits us, in hope we will repent;
But use grows more, the longer debts are lent,
And God forbeares, and winkes at our abuse,
That we might have less color for excuse.
177
I could not choose, when I had yoak't my Teame,
But make this Furrow to enrich my field:
And now return to my intended Theme;
And Edward wishes that his Reign might yield
Fit presidents, for Princes, how to weild
That weighty Province which they do sustain,
And thus continues his Discourse again.
178
When my chief friends did see how things mischanced,
And those mischances did impute to sin;
My sin to him, whom I had so advanced:
To banish him, they then again begin,
And made my self to have a hand therein;
Their force, my fear, compeld me thereunto,
It Is hard when Princes are inforst to do.
179
It is the chiefest good of Kingly reign,
That it is free from base compelling fear,
And it is again the Kingdoms chiefest baine
Not to admit wise Counsel to the ear,
Away with aw, hold Admonition dear,
Fears never should meet with Kingly eyes
But one the backs of flying enemies.
180
But the faier lively picture of advice,
should still be placed ny the Princes sight,
Thrice happy Kings, that are both stout and wise,
Your scorn controwle, but set not counsel light
No fear, but virtue, moves you to do right,
You Are Kings indeed, and may securely rest
Whilst fears are pitched within a weaker breast.
181
Te solum Vereor is a Princely word
Speaking to him that is Lord Parramount;
And supreme Princes, so should bear the sword,
As but to him, they need give no account;
Which they shall do, if as they do surmount
In greatness, so in goodness they excel.
It Is certain, he rules all, that gouerns well.
182
And none does so, but the self governor
That his own private passion can command
Which makes a slave even of an Emperor
If once they grow to get the upper hand
And soon deep searching spirits will understand
And find a Prince that's weak, and ride him so
That he must pace, as they will have him go.
183
Whereof my self may be a president
Who was soever awed by my great Peers,
That Gaueston was doomed to banishment
And now my soul full freight with greefes and fears,
Was in her motion restles with these pheres
But not so fixed; now go he should, now should not
So woman-like, I would, and straight I would not.
184
Yet ere he went, (as go he must, and did)
Dear Prince, says he, wherein have I misdone
That I am banished thus? does Edward bid
His poor (but yet his own poor Pierce,) to shun
His gracious fight, must I from England run?
He bidds, I must, farewell, yet think of me,
my body goes, my soul does stay with thee.
185
What were these words, but each to me a wound
Whereat my very lifeblood, gushed out,
I would have spoke, but words with tears were drowned
While giddy passion hurld by brain about,
Confusedly I spoke, oh do not doubt,
These damned Peers, it is not long on me.
though body stays, yet goes my soul with thee.
156
Mourn not sweet Prince, said he, oh do not mourn.
Let never tears disgrace those graceful eyes.
Is It not enough that I am thus forelorne,
Must cares from me, as clouds from sea arise?
My dear dear Liege, let it at least suffice.
That still you have the better part of me
My body they command, my soul is free.
187
Cease, cease, my Pierce, thy tongue does wound my heart,
I grieve to see, because I see thy grief:
Farewell, and yet me thinks, we should not part;
And yet we must, well, this be thy relief,
Thou bear a field of gold* a King in chief:
But be thou Irelands Governor then for me,
Would thou might stay, or I might go with thee.
188
At parting thus, with wanton grief we played,
He went to Sea, and I to sorrow went;
And yet my lustful heat was not allayed;
My treasure, that to Gauestone was sent,
And was in triumphs, among the Irish spent:
Who seemed now greater then he did before,
So Vines being cut, increase, and thrive the more.
189
And here my Peers did in true judgment fail,
So to remove, not take him quite away:
Who once returning, needs must seek to quail,
The adverse part that labored his decay;
Dead dogs can neither bark nor bite (men say)
But angered curres more fiercely still return,
And wronged minds with greater fire burn.
190
Better it is, still to dissemble hate
Then first to enter into discontent,
And leave him great, whom thou have edged of late,
Who having means, and sharpened in intent,
May easily work some dangerous event:
Either strike not, or else be sure strike so,
That thou thy self need fear no future blow.
191
Besides they did the more exasperate,
By opposition my enraged Ire.
And for my Gaueston, whom they did hate,
they did inflame me with a greater fire,
His absence setting edge one my desire
For Princes kept from what they do affect
do hurrey to their ends without respect.
192
What ever stops the current of the stream,
Is swept away with furious violence;
Force being effectlesse against a stronger mean,
But if one will with labor and expense
Divert the course, and turn the Channel thence,
It Is possible, that he in time preuailes,
For Art does compass, when resistance fails.
193
Philosophers do hold (and truly too)
That lightning often, (the sheath untouched, the blade)
Consumes, the reason, why it does so do
Is, by the one there is small resistance made
Being full of pores; the other hard t'inuade,
Does set it self against that heavenly shot,
Which quite consumes, because it pierces not.
194
I cannot fit the awful wrath of Kings,
More properly then to this wondrous fire,
Which once inflames, consumes resisting things,
Breaks up the bounds that limits their desire;
And by depressing down still mounts up higher,
Whereas strong passion borne with patience,
Spends on it self, and dies without offense,
195
My peers soon saw which way the hare did run
And therefore gave consent to his repeal.
Not Caesar, when Phasalia field he wonn
Did triumph more, then I, when they did seal.
And did subscribe, the ruin of our weal,
Then all was well, whilst all did well agree
But all proved Ill, for all, and worst for me.
196
For Gaueston after he did return,
Of all my former favors once possessed,
His full filld fortunes held my peers in scorn.
Nor could he any equal well digest
Oh foolish man to swell above the rest
When bubbles fullest blown do soonest break
And trees are ever at the top most weak.
197
Content does seat it self in lowest dales
Out of the dint of wind and stormy showers.
These sitts and sings Melodious Nightingales
There runes fresh cooling streams, there spring sweet flowers
There heat and could are fenced by shady bowres
There has he wealth at will, but this we know
the grass is short, that one the hill does grow.
198
Oh Gaueston why do thou then aspire
To be so great, when greatness stands one ye,
If thou should slip, as now thy place is hier
Then will thy fall be greater in a trice
He Is down that stands on Pynacles, be wise,
Stand low, Stand fast, but oh I speak in vain,
For men will mount, though suer to stoop again,
199
How Gauestone the third time Banished,
Did live in Duch-land where he found no rest:
How he returned, how I was famished
Did feed on him, as on some dainty Feast:
How ill my Peers, his presence did digest,
I do but touch at: now my Muse unfold,
How till his fall, he bare him proud and bold
200
Suppose him spleene-full melancholy sad:
And me in mine affections passionate:
Think him reuenge-full, think me doting mad:
Think, how I loved; and think how he did hate:
And think him then thus ^o expostulate:
Grieved with precedent, feared with future wrong;
Thus did this Siren tune his balefull song.
201
Oh King (no King) but shadow of a King:
Nay do not frown, but hear me what I say,
I speak in zeal, though fatally I sing;
Thou op'st a gap unto thine own decay,
By suffering thy proud Peers to bear the sway,
For look how much the shadows height does grow,
So much the Sun declines, and goes more low.
202
Thy waxing is their waine, thy ebb their tide,
When they are strongest, thou art weak and faint,
Turn every stone, to quell their growing pride;
It fits not Kings, to brook the least restraint,
Disgrace, exile, straight durance, or attaint,
Close practices, to bring them into hate:
These are the means to re-assure thy State.]
203
Now thou art King in show, but not in deed,
These petty pawnes do check, and mate thee to:
All is reuers'd that is by thee decreed,
They do inioyne thee, what thou have to do,
And what they will thou art compeld unto;
But though thy pleasure bend another way,
Yet things must pass, as they are pleased to sway.
204
They have allies, to strengthen their designs,
They back themselves with their Confederates,
Their seeming zeal, the vulgar undermines,
The wiser sort, for fear insinuates,
And so they gain assurance of all states:
Some by the gloss of fair deportment; and
Some by a hard; and ouer-awing hand.
205
Besides, they raise men that are popular,
And by their means, the peoples hearts they steal,
Themselves seems just, their courses regular,
They make pretenses for a Commonweal,
Of reformation, of religious zeal;
And by these colors which they do pretend,
They bring their complots to a sinful end.
206
But more then this, the wealth of all thy Land
Is in their hand, or else at their dispose,
Whereby they have an absolute command
Of many lives, which are maintained by those
Great bounties, that from their abundance flows:
For they must needs remain at their devotion,
Who have from them their being, and their motion.
207
These are the close consumptions of thy State,
Which by these antidots, thou must restore:
Be served by such as thou have raised of late,
Advance new Creatures of no note before,
And such will still depend on thee therefore,
For wanting means, except thou grace them still,
They must remain obliged to thy will.
208
Let them be staring spirits of air and fire,
Apt but to make, and to maintain a faction:
Ambitious, active, hungry to aspire;
Not foiled with fear, but apt for active action,
True to their ends, but false in faith and faction:
And such being graced, and favored by the time,
Will in despite of spightfull envy clime.
209
Whose growth thy Peers will malice and detest,
And seek to stop, which they not brooking well,
Will nourish mutual hatred in their breast,
And rankrous envy in their souls will swell;
From whence revenge, and greedy thrift to quell:
The adverse party, cannot but proceed,
And so confusion to them all indeed.
210
Mean while thou underhand must feed the flame,
And secretly give heart to either side,
And which is weakest, leave them to the same,
Whereby, thou shall confound the adverse pride,
And if they doubting chance to be espide,
Make it an open quarrel, and be sure
To cut them off, that may most hurt procure.
211
This lecture was by Tarquin well expressed,
When with his wand, he did behead those flowers,
That any way did ouer-grow the rest:
As who should say, be jealous of great powers,
And cut them down, whose State near equals ours
For that same Throne is but a slippery sear,
That suffers any to be ouer-great.
212
Make paenall Laws, to cut off their retainers;
Wrest from their hands, all public great command,
Grace them in show, but not to make them gainers:
Keep them aloof, let them not understand,
The passages of State, at any hand:
Do not commit thy forces to their trust,
Least having minds, th'aue means to be unjust.
213
Where ere they live, though they be far removed,
Yet let them be suruei'd with careful eye,
Such as are near to them, and dearly loved,
To whom their inward thoughts most open lie,
Win them by gifts, and by close policy
To serve thy turn with true intelligence,
Of any thing that may procure offense,
214
If they command, do thou not favor then,
Let all aduancements be derived from thee:
So shall thou weane from them, the hearts of men,
And they will only, thy dependants be:
For there men serve, while they preferment see:
Lastly, what Stratagem thou do intend,
Let shows of virtue color still thy end.
215
These are the baits to fish for wisest Peers,
The longlings may be caught with easier means:
Let Siren pleasures bane their youthful years:
Let lust, expense, and riotous extremes,
To which their age by course of nature leanes,
Let followers, change of beauties pompous pride
Infect their minds, and rack their States beside.
216
Yet if thou see a likely growing plant,
Whose spreading branches may in time prove great:
Lodge him at home, let him employment want,
And fruitless wither in his native seat,
For ease and rest, will chill his active heat,
And lulled in pleasure of a safe delight,
Relinquish mounting thoughts of honors quite.
217
But if his temper fore so high a pitch,
And that his working virtues must have vent,
Engage him in some action, by the which
His Harvest may be Death, or discontent;
Yet make a show to grace his hardiment,
And thrust him so (with highest honor) on
To such attempts, as Death still wait upon.
218
Which if he miss, as Heaven may bless him so;
Yet will the managing of such designs,
Afford fit matter for his over throw.
If that his Fortune any way declines,
For commonly the vulgar sort repines,
Against all actions that do want success,
And in their humors weigh the agents less.
219
And so they lie more open to their wrack,
When they have once manured a common hate,
And then some fair occasion cannot lack,
Either by death to cancel their lives hate,
Or at the least to weaken so their State,
As that the Prince need fear no future harm,
That may proceed from their vnioynced arm.
220
And having cleared thy self of such, yet then
That thou might keep thy Majesty and State:
Thou needs must intertaine some Noble men,
But frothy bubbles, full of idle prate,
Who study fashions, know their place (scarce that)
Al whose sweet worth, is fetched from bad men's toombe,
And they themselves less worthy then their Grooms.
221
Let them discourse of Kindred and Allies:
My uncle Earl, my cosen Duke, or so;
Who living, did this or that interprise:
And tell how his great Grand-fires house did go,
When he in France incountred with his foe:
Grace these (sweet Prince) these thy Courts Comets be
And pray for them, the'ile never pray for thee.
222
Thus must thy twigs be lim'd, thy nets displayed,
To catch these birds that sore up to the Sun;
And when these wise foundations once are laid,
It Is almost ended that is well begun,
Then art thou King indeed, then have thou won
Unto thy self an absolute estate;
Mean while thou live but in a golden grace.
223
Thus did this hellish Ate cast the ball
Of discontent, betwixt me and my Peers;
Whose damned Counsels flowing from the gall,
Filled them with fury, me with needless fear,
And set us all together by the ears:
For straight to arms they get, to venge the wrong,
And vowed his head should answer for his tongue.
224
I wished the trees were turned to armed troops,
And all the boughs were pikes, their hearts to wound;
All other birds; the Princely Eagle stoopes:
The Lion roares, the beasts shake at the sound,
Why should not I, their daring pride confound,
That saucily vsurp upon my right;
But Lions, are no Lions wanting might.
225
But they did strike whilst that the Steel was hot,
And still came on, to seize upon their pray:
What should we do, complain it booted not:
Go leauy men, our men did dis-obay:
Sue for a Truce, they would not grant a day:
Submit ourselves, and so some pity crave,
Me hurt they would not, him they would not save.
226
That Prince indeed is to be held most wise,
Who by his virtues does his slate secure:
But he is a fool that means to tyrannise,
And does not seek by forces to assure
His own designs, for let him be most sure,
A Prince that is weak, and yet does govern ill,
Is subject to a thousand dangers still
227
Nothing remained but flight, and fly we did;
So silly Doves before proud Falcons fly,
Till Gauestone in Scarborow Castle hid:
My Peers surprised whom Warwick Earl Sir Guy
Beauchamp beheaded, so my Pierce did dye:
A gloomy night concluded this fair morn,
And Fortunes Minion, ended Fortunes scorn.
228
Oh what is honor but an exhalation:
A fierye Meteor soon extinct and gone:
A breach of people, and the tongues relation,
That straight is ended when the voice is done:
A morning dew dried up with midday sun;
A ceasing sweet like Danaes golden shower,
Which both began, and ended in an hour.
229
There breeds a little Beast by Nilus streams,
Which being borne when Phoebus first does rise;
Grows old, when he reflects his hottest beams;
And when at night to Western Seas he hies;
Then life begins to fail, and straight it dies:
Borne, old, and dead, and all but in a day,
Such honor is, so soon it wears away.
230
How much more happy is that sweet estate
That neither creepes to low, nor soars too high,
Which yields no matter to content or hate,
Which others not disdain, nor yet envy,
Which neither does, nor takes an injury,
But living to it seek, in sweet content
Is neither fordide, nor yet insolent.
231
He lives indeed, and spends his course of time,
In truest pleasure that this life can yeald,
He has set hours to pray at even and prime:
He walks abroad into his quiet field,
And studies how his home affairs to weild:
His soul and body make one Commonwealth;
His Counsels care to keep them both in health.
232
He fears no poisons in his meats nor drinks:
He needs no Guard to watch about his bed:
No treacher undermines him what he thinks:
No dangerous proiects hammer in his head,
He sits and sees, how things are managed;
And by observing what has erst been done,
He leuels often, how future things will run.
233
If he would deal with Kings, and mighty men,
He does converse with them in History:
If he would know the Heavenly motions, then
He takes his Globe, he reads Astronomy:
His Maps and Charts do teach Cosmography;
And whilst in his safe Cell he studying stands,
In one short hour, he sails both Sea and Lands.
234
And tired perhaps with the Discovery
Of Foreign things, he comes more nearer home,
He looks into himself, with curious eye
That little World, that is indeed his own
He travels in, which being truly known
Affords enough for wonder and delight,
When he has learned to know himself aright.
235
The Earl of Cornwall, causer of the war
Thus being dead, they laid their weapons down,
Protesting all, they would not go so far
As to be thought disloyal to the Crown,
But they did seek the Realms and my renown,
Which was eclipst in him which they had slain,
But Englands Sphaere would not grow clear again.
236
Oh still dark clouds does shadow Englands sphaere,
And bitter storms on gloomy clouds dependant,
Unfortunate, and fatal every year,
Whilst hapless Edward was chief Lord ascendant;
Malignant stars were still on me attendant,
Though at my birth, love smiled with sweere aspect,
Yet froward nature did my life direct.
237
For though disasted Gauestone was dead;
Yet Edward lived, and lived to farther ill:
For still I was by my ^ffections led;
I willed no Law, yet had no Law but will:
My Peers disgraced, my Council grieved still.
The Spencers, they succeeded Gauestone,
He changed for worse and worse; two ills for one.
238
These Spencers now the subject of my Song,
Descended of a race of good esteem:
The elder Hugh (the father) lived long
In great account, and happy days had seen,
Till his ambitious son did ouer-weene,
Whose greatness caused the Father to aspire,
And at the last did wrack both Son and Sire.
239
Oh what have thou, old man to do with Court?
Thy books and beads had better been for thee*
Live still retired and do not now resort,
To stormy tempest, age does ill agree
With great concourse and vulgar mutiny,
It rather craves immunity and rest,
And powerful case, with tumult not distressed.
240
Whose joints being wrack't and torturd with the gowte
Can scarce endure the stirring of a straw,
Who being vn-wildie must be borne about,
Whose golden Ewer is cracked with many a flaw,
Who has no grinders left in either iawe.
Whose strong men bow, whose keepers shake and tremble,
Whose meager looks pale death does most resemble.
241
But this ambition is a boiling ill,
Honor does make dead Cinders grow again,
What aged one so great, but by his will
Would feign grow greater, age does still retain
Two humors, hope of life, desire of gain,
And this was that which made old Spencer clime,
When he had past the Autumn of his time.
242
The younger Hugh, the son of this old man,
Was of an active spirit, and able Brain:
Who with the Barons at the first began
To side himself, they favoring him again,
For Gauestone made him Lord Chamberlain,
That he in place so near about the king
Might always serve their turns in every thing.
243
Thinking because he was by them preferred,
He still would cleave to them in their designs,
But (ill advised men) herein they erred.
A swelling spirit hates him, by whom he climes,
As yute kills the Tree wherein it Proines,
So rising men when they are seated high
Spurn at the means, that first they mounted by.
244
Because they think, such favors challenge still,
An equal correspondencie of love,
Which ties them to be pliant to their will;
And as the lower spheres, by those above,
Are whirled about, so, they by these must move,
In all attempts still swaid by their direction,
And for no end, nor measure of subjection.
245
And such well-mettled men cannot digest,
To be obsequious to an others mind:
Their working spirits will not let them rest,
Till those precedent bands, which did them bind,
By opposition, are again vntwin'd,
And such an open rupture does restore
Their liberty, which was engaged before.
246
And greatness houlds it needful policy,
To rid his hands of them, that did it raise,
By entering into open enmity.
And so to cut them off without delays,
These were, and are the courses of our days,
Who list observe both old and modern times,
Shall find, I wright no fables though some times.
247
I will not touch particulars at all;
I play the ball, let others mark the chase;
The Spencers do my wandering muserecall,
Who being near the king in chiefest place,
Did heap up much, and that in little space,
For all things hid he from their passage then,
Who turned to gold, all matters, and all men.
248
The chiefest Peers were underhand kept down,
The Mynions of the King got every place,
Though Edward had, yet Spencers ruled the Crown;
And being both made Earls in highest grace,
They built, they bought, they raised, they did deface,
Whom, what they would, such was their powerful lust,
And sudden greatness grows to some unjust.
249
Especially, if like a Mole it works,
Only in earth: how greedy's such a man?
How closely he in Covert, silent works,
To Compass a whole Country, if he can;
Still griping all; that comes within his span,
What wealth, wit, friends, force can do, good or ill,
Shall, must be practiced, for to please his will.
250
The Princes favors do for Pullies serve,
To draw on men, to be at his command,
Even seats of Judgment shall from justice swerue,
If they may bring a title to his hand:
And if some reverend fathers shall withstand.
Then weed them out, they will not serve our turn,
Such men are fit for Martits, let them burn.
251
His Agents must be of another mould,
Sharp-sighted into other men's estate,
Pliant to do, what their great Masters would,
Close, cunning to dissemble love, or hate,
Well spoken, powerful to insinuate,
Seemingly honest, outwardly precise,
By which they may their close complots disguise.
252
These are like pipes of Lead that do convey
Those practices, that from their head do spring;
And let these seconds come to bear greatsway,
Are legged and crouch'd unto, for fear they sting,
These buy and build, and beg, and raise, and wring,
Farmer, Esquier, Kinght and Baron too,
And Prince and all, with whom they have to do.
253
And this indeed was the most dangerous rock,
Whereon I split, and so at last did drown:
This was mine Error, this the stumbling block,
At which I fell, and cast my fortunes down:
This lost my peoples hearts, and that my Crown.
My Minions rapine, and unjust oppression,
And my too much indulgent indiscretion.
254
My Peers were male content, being unrespected,
My Captains mutinous for want of pay,
My Court with all incestuousnes infected,
My people poor, with taxes pared away,
And apt for innovation every day.
All out of joint, dejected, and dismayed,
Only the Spencers, and their Consorts swai'd.
255
I sold, they bought, I wasted, they did thrive,
They had abundance I was indigent,
They sucked the honey, Ithe ransack't hiue:
Which made them grow, bold, tart and insolent,
And thereby caused a common discontent,
Of all those crimes, I did in curre the blame,
Because my heat gave life unto the same.
256
Princes attend, for I do speak in zeal
It Is not enough that you your selves are just,
But you must look into the common weal,
And see that those, whom you do put in trust,
Do govern by the law not by their lust.
For he indeed the wrong does perpetrate,
That may redress, yet it does tolerate.
257
And so you make their wickedness, your own,
By suffering them to sin, without control,
But let no Widows tears bedew your throne,
Nor poor men's sighs, sent from a grieved soul,
Nor Orphans prayers, which heaven does still inrolle
Nor common curses, caused by public greeuance.
Draw judgment down on you for their mischieuance.
258
Kings must use some, and may choose of the best,
But let them still remember what they are,
Let not all laws be locked up in one breast,
Let no one only censure make or mar,
For men have passions, which often strains them far:
The most sees least, few best, but none fees all,
Who has not, does; who does not, yet may fall.
259
I do not bark against authority,
My heart did never lodge irreverent thought,
Heaven knows, how I adore just Sovereignty,
How often my soul, with vpheau'd hands has sought,
Unto that God whose precious blood us bought,
For our right virtuous king, this peaceful state,
And all those powers, he does subordinate.
260
Oh if one beam of thy resplendent light,
Most fair all guiding Sun chance to descend
Upon this short abridgement which I write.
Let no conceit thy sacred self offend,
For they were chiefly molded to this end:
To show how much our selves obliged stand,
For these good times as now do bless our land.
261
Which by collation of these wretched days,
Appear more full of comfort and content:
But I go on, Muse, keep the beaten ways;
Whilst Spencers ruled with common discontent,
Even God himself inflicted punishment
Upon the Prince, the people, and the land,
Who felt the weight of his afflicting hand.
262
The king himself was full of diffidence,
And thought to strengthen his partiality;
The Lords not brooking Spencers insolence,
Did league themselves with strong formalitie,
The best were guilty of neutralitie.
The vulgar sort was tided up and down,
As fortune list, to favor or to frown.
263
The earth her self as sorrowing for her sons,
Or weary of their foul misgouernment,
Grieve out of heart, and barren straight becomes,
Not yielding men sufficient to be spent,
But seemed to drop away with languishment:
So may we see how God vnfructifies,
A fruitful land for men's impieties.
264
The lowering Heavens did seem to drop down tears,
As if they wept, to wash the sinful earth,
Infectious foggs, and gloomie clouds appears,
Which choke the growth of all things in their birth,
Heaven, earth, and all conspired to make a dearth,
Oh see when God takes arms against a land,
He can Inroll all creatures in his band.
265
Great was the want of that unhappy time,
The Earth not yielding her accustomed store:
And that which was, whilst greedy men purloyne,
And hord it up, they make the famine more,
Grinding thereby the faces of the poor.
As if Gods heavy hand were too too light,
Unless even man should study man's despite.
266
Such men are traitors even to natures Law,
And do conspire against the common good:
They wring the bread out of the poor man's iawe,
Whose very soul does starve for want of food,
But without doubt, God will require their blood.
Their guiltless blood which from the earth shall cry
And beg revenge of him that is most high.
267
If but one spark of grace in them did dwell,
Did they respect humane society;
Had they a hope of Heaven, a fear of hell;
Or any little sense of piety;
Did they in heart conceive a Deity;
And that most just, most wise, most powerful too;
They would forbear, what God forbids to do.
268
But neither fear of God, nor love of men,
Nor just compassion of a public ill
Can work upon their brawnie hearts, and then,
Coerciue means best fites a stubborn will,
Else they will be hardened in their malice still,
For oftentimes we see where nature fails,
Law interposes, and indeed preuailes.
269
The ancient Roman state in its chief pride,
When it was governed with most sound advise,
Had Leges frumentarias to provide
That grain should not grow to too high a price,
Our times such laws, our Laws need such advise,
Some men are grown so monstrous in their kind,
We must like monsters, them enclose and bind.
270
Me thinks this sin has in it some taste of blood,
And what if Dracoes laws did match this sin:
Which is not only opposite to good,
And all good offices what soever been:
But does also infringe the common kin,
Whereby one soul is linck'd unto another,
As several sons descending from one mother.
271
But oh what times are these wherein we live,
In which we neither can endure the sore,
Nor yet the salve, the causes why we grieve,
Nor yet the means, which should our state restore,
Once Pharoes kyne, which were but lean and poor,
Devoured the fat; those times are altered clean,
For now we see the fat deuoures the lean.
272
But whilst impatient hunger did constrain,
The vulgar sort, to eat unhealthy food,
A great mortality began to reign,
Spilling too much (but most plebeian) blood,
And after death came war with angry mood.
Lo wretched man, how woe still comes in gross,
And after one succeeds a second cross.
273
When God severely scourges any land,
He seconds plagues, with plagues, and woes with woes
He takes his three stringed whip in hand,
Of dearth, of death, of home, of farraigne foes,
And from these three, all desolation grows,
What true Content, what rest to men remains:
When ills, by ounces; Good scarce comes by grains.
274
And to increase the current of my ear,
A slavish Groom John Pordras was his name,
Borne in the west, at Exeter did dare,
To bruit abroad, that he from Longshanks came,
And I a Changling, but supposed the same,
That he in truth was Edwards lawful son,
And by a nurse this treachery was done.
275
But afterward of his untruth convicted,
He did confess that he was moved unto it,
By those foul Arts that God had interdicted
And by a spirit in likeness of a Cat;
Who did assure him by this damned plot,
He should unto the Sovereignty attain,
But hanging did indeed prevent his reign.
276
Here give me leave a little while to dwell,
Upon the nature of this accident:
First I observe the Diu'll cannot foretell,
Before things come what will be their event,
If that they be not properly contingent:
This is, that may be, and not be as well,
And such no Devil, nor spirit can foretell.
277
All future things, that have or may be told,
Are in themselves, or by their causes known,
Things in themselves, God only can unfold,
And yet sometimes, he does impart his own,
And proper knowledge of such things to come,
Unto such Agents, as he lift inspire,
With some small sparkles of his heavenly fire.
278
Such were the holy Prophets in their days,
Who only by th'infusion of his grace,
Foretold strange things, such likewise did he raise
At seu'rall times, even from the gentle race.
And in that rank, some do the Sybills place,
Who by the glimmering of his glorious light,
Of things to come, did often divine aright.
279
Those things that by their causes are concein'd
Do either follow of necessity,
Therefore in them even men are not deceived
Or grounded else on probability.
Or they do hit by mere contingencie,
The first the Diu'l must certainly conceive,
Ones at the second, in the least deceive.
280
And yet because of long experience,
And by their wondrous knowledge in all Arts,
And for no earthie substance dimmes their sense,
And by their speedy motion which imparts
A present knowledge from the farthest parts:
I grant they fully comprehend those things,
Which unto us great admiration brings.
281
But when in truth, the things are so concealed
That neither causes nor the effects appear
Then those occurrents are by them revealed,
In such a sort, as double sense may bear,
Always ambiguous, cloudy, never clear:
And such were those same Oracles of old,
Which were by Phoebus, or by Haman told.
282
I will be no Retailor of such wares,
For they are cheap, and common unto all,
But I observe what comes to such men's shares,
I note the fearful Judgments that do fall
Upon such Artists as do use to call
Which both the ancient Annalls do record
And modern stories of our time afford.
283
Some burnt with fire as Zoroastes was,
And some, the earth did swallow up alive,
As Amphoraus when that he did pass.
To Thebes, some did their own spirits deprive,
Of breath, And so Pope Benedict did thrive,
The ninth of that same name, whose vital sine
The devil himself by strangling did untwine,
284
Nicephorus and so Abbidoes tells,
How Simon Magus flying in the Aire^
By Magic Art, and by enchanting spells,
Fell down and brake his bones at Peter's prayer,
And so he di'd in horror and despair.
Oh God, how far thy hand is stretched out
To power down vengance on this damned rout.
285
But to reuert from whence I did digress,
Besides this common confluence of ill.
Those wars I undertook, God did not bless,
But evermore they were successlesse still,
Because I failed, both in advise and skill.
Which being managed without due respect
How could their ends but sort to such effect.
286
Most true it is a power of fearful Hearts,
That by a Princely Lion is but led,
Shall in the field exploit more glorious parts,
Then armed Lions with a Heart their head
For wars do thrive as they are managed,
And in the stream of Action sound advise
Preuailes as much as does bold enterprise.
287
A Ship well manned, well victual'd, tackled well,
Without a skillful pilot steer the same,
Does in that warrie world in danger dwell.
Look what the Pilot is to that huge frame
To armed troops, the Chiefetaine is the same,
Who wanting either courage or foresight,
Ruins himself, and all his Army quite.
288
In managing of Civil home designs,
If any Council be not wisely fitted:
There yet remains some space in aftertimes,
To execute what was before omitted.
Or to correct what was before committed,
But in the fields, when Armies join in shocke,
One only error brings all to the block.
289
And hence, as I conceive, it does proceed,
That excellent Commanders are so rare.
Because they must be very wise indeed,
To take the least advantages that are,
And very valiant to attempt and dare,
And oh how seldom mere in one these twain,
A Lions heart joined with a foxes brain.
290
Troy only stories forth one Hectors fame
One Alexander, name of great did merit.
One Hanniball from Carthage only came,
And but one Pirrhus Empire did inherit,
So saving are the Heavens of such a spirit,
That no one climate has produced many,
And many one has scarce been blessed of any.
291
The Theban state no greatness did attain,
But only in Epaminondas time:
Who being dead, it did grow weak again,
He was the sun that lightened all the clime.
His setting was their fall, his rise their prime,
Before most glorious, after of no fame,
Such powerful virtue from their Chiefetaine came.
292
Therefore let Princes labor to attain,
The art of war, by all the means they can;
Because it does enable him to reign,
And makes him greater then a private man
That often has the Supreme title wan
Of sole Commander which who does possess,
Is scarce a Prince, and yet but little less.
293
To have such troops of Soldiers at command,
To have such store of wealth as men affect,
To have such potent means by sea and land,
To execute what er'e they would affect,
To be observed with duty and respect.
By foreign States, and have dependancie
Are shadows at the least of Sovereignty.
294
And he that often has tasted that delight,
Wherewith such powerful greatness does bewitch,
Me thinks can hardly humble so his spite,
As not to think himself above the pitch,
Of common men: more eager is the itch
To mount the top, of one that is up half way,
Then his, that still at lowest step does stay.
295
Therefore in truth, I do not Iump with those,
Who think the Prince a conduct in the field
Should both himself, and common wealth repose
Upon some Chiefetaine, whilst himself does wield,
The home affairs which more assurance yield.
In show I grant, but weighing euerything,
Such seeming safeties certain danger bring.
296
For if ambition seize upon the soul,
As it is a passion apt to entertain,
And once possessed no just respects control,
I would advise the Prince that then does reign,
To doubt the event, it is worser, to complain
Then be complained of: And who does not know,
How many Kings have been vncrownedse.
297
This was the Rock that wrack't great Olerones line,
And brought the Crown of France to Martells care.
For Childerick was forced to resign,
To Pepin (Martells son) his kingly place,
And so likewise Hugh Capet did displace
The line of Pepin, and advanced his own,
Because in war, his worth was greater grown.
298
A Subject may in shape a Prince excel,
A Subject may more then his Sovereign know,
Either in arts or in discoursing well,
He may be stronger to unhorse his foe,
And it no danger to the Scepter so,
But if in arms the subject grows too great
The Prince may chance be set besides his seat.
299
Therefore the Prince, whose forces and whose arms,
By other then himself commanded bin,
Must for prevention of ambitious harms,
Have many chiefetaines to employ therein,
So shall no one be able for to win
So strong a party, but another may,
Serve for a help to be crossed in his way.
300
But is there then no Ciment for to join
The Prince and powerful Peer, so close, so fast,
As the one shall not suspect, nor the other clime?
Or is the state of things so strangly past,
That men cannot be good with greatness graced?
Must Princes fear the noblest virtues still?
Or must a Subject use such virtue ill?
301
Oh no, such minds the gloss of virtue bears,
But no essential part of her partake?
A kingly nature cannot nourish fears,
And virtuous souls love good for goodness sake,
And only that their actionsayme do make,
Where such as borrow virtues for a time,
Are dangerous men, and very apt to clime.
303
Especially if their designements bend,
To compass that which we dependence call,
If all their actions Ieuell at this end,
Tender themselves unto the General,
Oh the'yle be easl'y drawn to throw at all,
When they have got the day into their hand
By having often conduct and command.
303
The Antidote for Princes to preserve
Their State vndanger'd from such poisonous pares,
Is only Justice, which, who does observe,
In all designs to men of all estates
And is not swai'd with fears, love, hopes, or hates,
Or any passion, but goes clearly on:
That Prince is wise, and does secure his Throne.
304
Let all the politics that breath this day,
Rack their conceits until they break their brain,
They never shall invent a better way
Whereby a Prince may with assurance reign;
Than to be truly just, and to retain
An even proportion Arithmeticall,
Which gives equal justice unto all.
305
This is the mother both of love and fear,
This does engender duty and desire,
This does the Prince from all suspicion clear,
Because it does cut off the means t'aspire;
This distributes to all, deserved hire.
Whereby the Subject (having his just due)
Remains contented, and contented true*
306
And you great Stars whose power is influence
May work so much be not irregular
Move fairly in your orbs without offense
Be Nobles truly, and not titular,
But soft my muse, how apt art thou to err
From thy first path, return and make it plain
That arms are safest for a sovereign.
307
Not only to prevent aspiring harms
Would I have Kings Comanders of their own,
But chiefly would I have them practice Arms,
That their brave spirits might be the better known,
And have more vent, to make their virtues shown;
For greatness does much in opinion rest,
And that is maintained by being in action best.
308
Besides, it is certain all men wish to serve
Rather in Princes eye, then by the ear,
Nothing inflames the soul more to deserve;
More quickens honor, more abandons fear
Then when the Prince in presence does appear
To check the coward, and with praise and merit
To grace the actions of a gallant spirit.
309
This of all causes, that I can conceive
Made Alexander Monarch of the East,
It is a mighty motive not to leave
Their sovereign Prince in danger or distressed,
Ill thrive they here on earth, in heaven unblessed
That wish not so, and grant oh dearest Lord
That men and Angels to my prayers accord.
310
Wise was the State, and very well advised,
Wise forces being often put to flight,
Still finding bad success, at last devised
To bring their infant Prince into the fight
Even in his cradle, that his very sight
Might give them better which proved most true
For they did fight, and fighting did subdue.
311
Besides, those under officers that are
Imployd according to each several place
Will with more faith, and more respective care,
Intend their charge before the Princes face,
So to avoid both danger and disgrace,
And then the common soldier serves best
When he is respected most, and fleeced least.
312
And though I know examples do not prove,
Yet is the state of things not so confounded
But that those selfsame motives still may move
On which their resolutions then were grounded,
Therefore since Norman William first was crowned
Who list survey our Kings cannot but yield
Their States thriu'd best, who most did keep the field.
313
Yet if the Prince by age disabled be
Or otherwise by any like defect
Or if the sex with arms do not agree
The let them make fit choice with much respect
Of men of greatest virtues, to direct
Their martial forces and the more they train
In such designs, the surer is their reign.
314
Because the Prince with more assurance lives
That does rely on many then on one,
For nothing sooner apt occasion gives
To swelling spirits for to live upon
Then if they often have command alone
Especially if men do hold them such
As without them the State cannot be much.
315
Besides it causes envy on all parts,
Many malignant humors will be bred,
If that the Prince all powerfulness imparts,
Solie to one, which ev'nlyquartered
Sets many spirits on work and all are fed;
At least with hopes, which else perhaps might fall
To practice, if one hand engrossed all.
316
Nor would I have the Prince to nourish fears
Or iealousies, of such as well deserve;
But let them make, and keep great spirits theirs;
And let their favors and their bounties serve
As chains to bind them, that they do not swerue;
From loyal duty: stronger is that tie
Then cunning practice of soul cruelty.
317
And since they must have Agents of their will
For execution of their enterprises,
Or be themselves engaged in action still,
Let not ungrounded fears and false surmises
unapt their means, and cross their own devises;
For who suspects when no cause does appear,
Does give a cause to that which he does fear.
318
So Commodus and Bassianus so
Two Princes of a most distrustful brain
Did spinne the thread of their own overthrow
By difference which they did entertain,
And were the means that they themselves were slain
By their most dear Pirmadus, their false fear
Making them guiley that before were clear.
319
For where is the man that may in peace possess,
The happy blessings of a private state,
Yet prostituts himself to wretchedness,
To care of mind, to bodies toil, to hate,
Of envy, to the violence of Fate,
To techie times to dangers ymminent.
If virtue finds no grace but discontente.
320
Therefore let Princes weigh their servants merrits,
And grace them most that have deserved best,
So shall respected virtues raise new spirits
And every noble heart, and gentle breast,
Will boil with zeal, which will not let them rest;
Till they have robbed of blood, each several vein,
To do due service to their sovereign.
321
But if the Prince too much distasteful be
Sad, sower, and of a melancholy mind,
Hard of access, close handed, nothing free
To best deseruers, ever most unkind,
Let such a one assure himself to find
False hearts and feeble hands, but certain hate,
If any danger threatens his estate.
322
Besides the soul defacing of his glory,
And the remembrance of his living shame,
Which will recorded be in every story
And every Annall will report the same,
And tax with hateful tyranny his fame,
And why should Kings be so ill governed
That their black deeds should live when they are dead,
323
A thousand years and more are gone and past
Since that Justinian did the Empire sway,
And yet his foul dishonor still does last
And will do still while there is night and day
Because, he did unworthily repay
Thy services brave Bellisarius
To whom he was unjustly tyrannous.
324
Why though he did pluck forth those eyes of thine
Thy cheerful lamps that lightened those dark days,
Yet thy great acts, mauger his malice shine
As bright and glorious as the Sunny rays
And time both sees, and speaks thy lasting praise
And what though thou do beg from door to door
Thou shall be rich in honor, he but poor.
325
Besides God does ingratitude detest
But loves kind offices from man to man,
For sweetness, goodness, private States are blessed,
And much more Kings, because indeed they can
Do much more good, they measure not byth'span,
But by the ell, and as their means are more
With abler wings, so must they higher sear.
326
And oh dear God, the fountain of all good,
How much obliged are these times to thee
For one most blessed Prince of greatest blood,
And yet of greater virtue, happy we
Yea, ten times happy that have lived to see
So many rare perfections joined in one
And that some one to fit upon our throne.
327
I ^oe not purpose to perfume my rimes
With the false breath of servile flattery,
I rather am to bold with these our times,
But I apeale to Gods al-seeing eye,
To which our closest drifts do open lie,
How my true pen writes from my feeling heart,
When I great King but shadow what thou art.
328
And oh how blessed, how dear the heavens do love
That common wealth where virtuous Princes sway,
Oh sweet experience, now by thee we prove,
We taste, we touch that blessing every day;
And grant (all guiding God) that long we may
Long in himself, and so long in his race
Till there be neither room for time nor place.
329
But whether has my zeal my souls desire
With seruent passion, led my pen astray;
To my first subject now I will retire,
And bring my Muse into the beaten way,
And sing of thy disaster and decay
Oh fatal Edward, whose ill governed Crown
Both ruined others, and thy self cast down.
330
But yet of all thy multiplicitie
Of several ills that do unhappy life,
There was no greater infelicitie
Then was the falsehood of his faulty wife,
That bosom wound, that deadly poisoned knife
That stabs the soul, and never finds relief
But kills with outward shame, or inward grief.
331.
Oh what a Chaos of confused ill,
Is in the Compass of this one Contained*
First violation of Gods secret will,
Next parents, brother, Cozens are defamed,
The Commonwealth by basterdy is stained,
Inheritances wrongfully possessed,
The husband scorned wife loathed, and babes unblessed.
332.
The festerous sore grows to a dangerous head
Now Mortimer begins to play his prize,
A brauer Spirit, nature never bred,
Of goodly presence to attract the eyes,
Of sweet discourse, wherein great influence lies,
Of high resolve, and of a noble heart
No want of nature, and all aid of art.
333.
This was the Paris, which my Hellen won
And this Prometheus stole my heavenly fire,
This was the Eagle airing in the Sun.
He Is more then man that can restrain desire,
Especially being waged by such a hire.
A Queen, and young, and faier, she is half a Jove,
Whom honor, youth, and beauty cannot move.
334.
And though there be no just excuse for sin,
Yet Isabell, this will I say for thee,
It Is hardly kept, what many seeks to win,
The finest cloth does soonest stain we see.
Perhaps thou had these presidents from me,
It Was like forlike, though wrong in thee it were.
Yet was it right and just for, me to bear.
335
Besides he did employ all potent means,
To undermine the Bulwark of her breast,
And oh that Sex too much by nature leanes
To Change of loves, what need it be oppressed
With powerful Art, but men will do their best
To scale the fort, and tillthe same be vvon
It is undone desired, repented done.
336
And after many sweet enticing baits,
When he had something diu'd into her heart,
He then fit opportunity awaits
To act the last, and best of all his part,
Wherein he was to show his master Art,
Which having got; thus he begins the field,
To conquer her, that of her self did yield.
337
Fair Queen (quoth he) may I behold thy beauty,
Why not (quoth she) the Sun is seen of all,
And shall speak respecting still my duty
Why not (quoth she) Jove hears the Captive thrall;
Shall not disdain on my endeavors fall.
Fear not (quoth she) great minds take all in worth
It Is flint (no pearl) sends sparks of fire forth,
338
Then beauteous Queen my words, shall vent my woe
I love, how sweet were that same sound from thee.
For once (quoth she) I will be sure thine Ecchoe,
I love, it is no perfect point (quoth he)
The sentence wants, except your Grace adds me,
You said not so, I made but repetition,
To greatest sums (fair Queen) needs no addition.
339
Why then (quoth she) what is it that I should add,
Add fancy to affection (gracious Queen)
Let not desire in tawny weeds be clad,
No suit becomes sweet love, so well as green
Add love to love, love will more lovely seem,
Believe me (fair) stolen fruit contenteth most,
Then spare not that which being spared is lost.
340
Ah Mortimer thou know (quoth she) I may not,
Maddam (quoth he) I know you may, but will not,
What if I will, why then sweet Queen delay not,
Edward will know, why say he should, it skills not,
Fame will defame; Fame well may hurt but kills not
Danger may grow, that will endure delight,
As darkest grounds make wheat to seem more white,
341
Thou will be false, then Sun leese thou the light,
Why being eclipsd thou know, it often does so:
Let water burn, I now thou hitt'st it right,
Even from our bathes such boiling waters flow.
Be constant Moon when I unconstant grow,
That fitteth Just, she changing you untrue,
Nay, you the Moon, and I the Man in you.
342
I Will cry, do Madame, shed some tears for joy,
You wrong me much, yet wronged you will not tell,
I pray thee leave, it is but an Idle toy.
It Is true, and toys, please Ladies very well.
I cannot yield, no women must but spell,
Men put together, that is my part to play,
I Will fight, i will kiss, and so begin the fray.
343
You will, nay then I must, because you will
Women (poor souls) are weak and dare not fight
Who ever rises we go downward still,
And yet fond men will say that we are light
Well it is our fortunes, and the destines spite,
I am content because I cannot choose,
It Is best to take what boots not to refuse.
344
Thus Mortimer, this golden fleece did steal,
Desunt Nonnulla.

go to thy loomes again
Unwearied Muse, till thou have wou'ne at will
The woeful story of poor Edwards ill.
347
It Is out of Air whereby we live and breath,
It Is not the Earth the mother of us all,
Nor Stars above, nor is it Hell beneath,
Nor those same spirits which men their Demons call
Nor chance which seems to sway things casual
That are the sole procurers of our evils,
We to our selves are either Gods or Devils.
348
But I was still the later of the twain,
My selfe-wrought wrack, bears witness of the same,
And you great Lords that lived whilst I did reign,
And were consumed with the furious flame
Of my enraged wrath, I will not blame
Your wayward pride, nor yet my wives untruth,
My seed was sin, my crop was shame and ruth.
349
And when did ever the accursed field
Bear other harvest, then such thistles weed;
Can poisoned Fountains wholesome waters yield,
Or do not worms out of corruption breed,
Mischief the damme pregnant with sinful seed,
Brings forth her daughter Misery at last
And they are always glew'd together fast.
350
There can be no divorce betwixt those twain
They mix, or rather they incorporate,
Like to the Poles of Heaven it does remain;
Constant and fixed, sin is unfortunate
Still drawing judgments down upon each state
Which sometimes are deferred not following straight
But what time loses is repaired with weight.
351
How many houses have been raised by sin,
And flourished fair for one or two descents
But still the third unprosperous has been,
And God has crossed them with some strange events,
Whereof these times yield many presidents:
But stay my Muse, if thou will shun offense
Thou must not meddle with the present tense.
352
Speak of the Spencers mighty in their days,
Let Edward be the subject of thy pen,
Who did his Minions to such greatness raise,
That the whole State was by them managed then,
As men with counters, so do Kings with men,
Sometimes they stand for half pence, and anon
What was but so, becomes a Million.
353
But when my Peers did see how I was bent,
To make base waxen wings to mount the Sky,
whilst their fair plumes were plucked with vile contempt
And they oppressed with scorn and injury
To last-left arms they got them by and by,
They moved war, the Spencers to remove;
Hate armed them, and I was armed by love.
354
They leui'd men, I likewise men did levy,
Both raised all the forces we could make;
A tyrants hand, they say was too too heavy
A traitors head I said became a stake:
They vowed redress, I vowed revenge to take,
We met, and meeting fought, and fighting found
No hurt more grieves than does a selfe-wrought wound
355
Oh English Peers relinquish impious Arms,
Build not your weightiest actions upon Sand,
It Is not the collout of-pretended harms,
Nor seeming zeal unto your native land.
Nor reformation though you bear in hand,
The people so of some abuse of laws,
That can make lawful, your unlawful cause.
356
These have, and ever have bin those smoth oils,
With which foul treason seeks to paint her face.
That she might seem fair, pleasing, full of similes,
So to win love, and gain the peoples grace.
Who silly Gudgions ever bite apace,
Until the fatal hook be swallowed down,
Which by ambition Angles for a Crown.
357
Who ever practiced against Prince or State,
But always did pretend the common good.
Thereby to draw into Contempt or hate,
The course of government as then it stood,
This has bin still the marrow life and blood,
Of such attempts, but hear the rule stands fast
What Is thought on first, is executed last.
358
For when that once their private turn is served
The cares of common wealth is laid a side:
That did but whet the knife with which they carved,
For their own good: that Vizor did but hide.
Some secret ends not fit to be descride,
Until accomplished which once brought to pass,
The public state stands as before it was.
359
And for to Angle men, crimes must be made,
Against the Prince, if he be without touch,
If that no just exceptions can be had,
Then must the imputation rest on such
As being near the Prince are used much;
For this is certain they that stand on hie
Are fairest marks for fowlest obloquie.
360
But though the Arrow seems at them aimed
Yet through their sides, it wounds the Princes breast
Whose reputation cannot be but maym'd.
By their reproach whom they do favor best,
And they that kill, the birds would spoil the nest,
But what is intended must be closely wrought
And that pretended which was never thought.
361
Why should vain man still doubt his actions thus,
With outward whitelime, which are pitched within,
Even wicked kings must be endured by us.
What ere the cause be, Treason is a sin:
Rebellious arms cannot true honor win.
The Sword is not the Subjects: his defense,
In all extremes, is prayer and patience.
362
Therefore dear spirits, die not your silver arms,
Into a Sanguine with your mothers blood,
Let not vnciuell hands, cause civil harms:
For private grief, confound no public good,
Not all the water in the Ocean flood
Can wash the sin from you and your allies,
For treason lives although the traitor dies.
363
Sweet Trent, how were thy Christ all waters stained
With English blood, that was at Burton shed
Let Burrow-bridge a Golgotha be named,
A field of Death, wherein lay buried
So many people, and all natives bred,
Had those dear lives against Frenchmen been employed
We had not grieved, though they had lived or di'de.
364
At last the doubtful victory proved mine,
The Barons lost the day, and lost their lives
Their heads went off, whose hearts did so repine
Against their Prince, for Treason seldom thriues.
That great all-seeing God, whose knowledge Dives
Into the deepest secret of the soul;
Unjust contempts in Justice does control.
365
Great Lancaster, then whom no greater Earl,
This greatest I Will of Europe had before,
Good Lancaster, in goodness such a pearl;
That him the vulgar sort did long adore.
Had then his head struck off, and many more
Even of the greatest felt the self same stroke;
So lightning spares the shrub, and tears the Oak.
366
The sword was sharp, and wounded every where;
Many great men of noble quality
In several Cities were beheaded there,
For beinst Actors in that treachery,
Which always proves a mournful Tragedy.
For though I know the sword is due to such,
Yet should a Prince forbear to strike too much.
367
For often executions in a state,
(especially of men of fashion).
First stir up pity, then dislike, then hate,
Then close Complaint, then Combination,
Then follows practice for some alteration.
And that indangers all, if not withstood,
Although unprosperous, yet it spills much blood.
368.
And the same Throne that is often wet with blood,
Is very slippry, apt to catch a fall.
Yielding no hours rest, nor pleasures good,
Sleeping on thorns, and feeding upon gall.
Still thinking, meditating ill of all.
Haunted with restles fears, whilst day does last,
And then at night with fearful dreamesagast.
369
Our Stories do report third Richard so
(And without doubt he did too much let blood)
Always mistrustfull both of friend and foe.
Ready to strike them that but near him stood.
Fearful to all, such was his furious mood,
And fearing all, as one that knew too well
How many souls did wish his soul in hell.
370
Oh that a Prince might see a Tyrants mind,
What Monsters, what Chimeraes therein are
What horrors in his soul, he still does find,
How much himself, is with himself at war.
Ever divided full of thought and Care
With Pistolls, Poniards, poisons he conceits,
And thinks each one for his destruction waits.
371
Besides indeed, it is no policy,
Except it be in a mere Turkish state,
To make the Crown a Common butcherie
To govern all by fear which breeds hate
In noble minds; and does exasperate
A freeborne people; where the Turkish race
Fear best commands; being servile poor and base;
372
Princes rewards should fall like gentle rain,
Which coming softly does the longer last;
That their sweet relish might still fresh remain.
Their executions should be done in have,
Like sudden furious storms that soon are past,
Because when once the violence is done,
The Offense thereof may be forgot and gone.
373
One limb of the great body that did band,
It self against me in these factious fraies.
Was Mortimer, who yet upon command,
Came in before the fight, and then straight ways,
Sent to the Tower to spend his weary days:
In wretched bands restrained from liberty,
But walls of stone kept not out destiny.
374
Which either finds or maks it self away;
For Mortimer thus sent unto the Tower,
To free himself still labors night and day:
And by a sleepy potion which had power
To make men slumber till a certain hour,
He found the means (his keeper being fast)
To make escape, and got to France at last.
375
This was not done without my Queens consent,
Whose head and hand were working in the same,
Little thought I that that way the hare went,
But Steeuen Segraue only I did blame.
Wretched mankind how bold we are to frame,
Hopes to our selves, how blind to see our ill,
That least we fear, what most does hurt us still.
376
Do but observe, how much we strain at Gnats,
And swallow Camells down without respect,
And Hudwinkt are we to discern those platts
That hurt us most, how ready to suspect,
Our friends, for foes, how apt and pressed to effect,
Our own disaster, Mortimer getts free,
And others die, that less had, wronged me.
377
And now I thought my self and State as sure,
As if great Atlas did uphold the same:
The dross being purged my gold must needs be pure,
The smoke once gone my fire must brightly flame,
Their eyes were out, that marked and marred my game,
They have no heart to dare, or tongues to peach,
Or hand to fight, or restles heads to reach.
378
But hartlesse, hapless, yea and headless to;
Are these disturbers of our awful reign
Who would prescribe their Prince what he should do,
And when and where, and why, and whom refrain.
Like Pupils whom their Tutors do restrain,
To try with edge-tooles is a dangerous thing,
And no way gainful to control a king.
379
Thus in a Calm, I feared no storm at all,
But yet to soon a sudden Cloud did rise:
From whencesuch store of wintrie storms did fall
As for my shrowde, no shelter could suffice.
Until pale death, had closd my teare-full eyes.
Oh bring with you what ^^er reads my fall,
Sad thoughts, wet eyes, and wayling woes withal.
380.
And thus it was; I sent my Queen to France,
And after her, the Prince my Son I sent
to treat a peace, but see the fatal chance,
They brought home war, although for peace they went,
The Ambitious woman, she was fully bent,
To have sole rule, and meant to put me down,
So Ninus once did loose both life and Crown.
381
There is more mercy in the Tigers Clawe,
Less venom in the Scorpions sting does lie
More pity in the hungry Lions pawe,
Less danger in the Basiliske his eye,
Hyaena that does call the goers by
The Panthers breath, and Crocodiles false tears,
Have truer hearts then faithless women bears.
382
Let loosers speak, for they will not be let,
I lost my Crown, my life I also lost,
My glorious rising, had a gloomie sets
My wife the Sea, wherein my Bark was tossed,
The wrack wherein I suffered shipwreck most,
She Clytemnestra, Agamemnon I,
Whom false Aegistus foully caused to dye.
383
His part, my Rival Mortimer did play,
Whom Isabell my Queen so well did love,
That still in France, with him she meant to stay
As one that would the self same fortunes prove,
And move no otherwise then he did move,
Mean while the Cuckoe hatched in Edwards nest,
And in my Boat, his Oar was liked best.
384
They that enjoy, and joy in their own love,
Whose virtuous souls, no secret sins do stain,
Who never did unlawful pleasures prove,
But truly living are so loved again,
Thrice happy they, and more contentments gain,
Then those that have the change, and choice of many
And using all, are never loved of any.
385
For streams divided, run a shallower course,
Then they, that in one Channel only run,
A mind unchaste does ever like them worse,
That are obtained, then those that are vnwon
Because it thinks some pleasure is to come.
Which yet it has not found, end never ill,
Did seem so sweet, but something wanting still.
386
For how can sin afford a full delight,
When as it is indeed a mere privation:
As well may darkness be the cause of light,
And Heaven to Hell be turned by transformation
As wickedness yield perfect contentation
The virtuous pleasures are complete and sound
And lawful is at last delightful found.
387
But lust is deaf, and has no art to hear
The cunning Charmer, charm he never so well
Which did too much in Isabell appear.
Who did resolve with Mortimer to dwell,
And both of them did labor to expel
Me from my kingdom, and to please the time,
They made my son the color of their crime.
388
And here observe the foul effects of lust,
What treasons, murders, outrage from it springs,
How both to God and Man it is unjust,
How it defiles all States, confounds all things,
And at the last to utter ruin brings.
How much more pure is that most holy fire,
Which God does bless, and men themselves desire.
389
As Mortimer and Isabell my Queen,
Practiced in France, so here they had their factions
Of Earls and Barons, men of great esteem,
Both wise and stout to manage any actions,
And the poor Commons grinded with exactions,
To Innovation were most easily led,
And nothing wanting but an able head.
390
But he that was chief workman of the frame,
Which drew the plot at home for all the rest,
Who afterward did build upon the same,
A Bishop was, yet Churchmen should be best,
But oftentimes, sin lurks within their breast,
When sacred titles, and religious names,
Are but the Couerers of uncomely shames.
391
'Twas Tarlton whose great spleen and working brain
Was the productor of this monster first,
Who for some private wrong he did sustain,
An inward hate, and bosom treason nursed,
Against his Prince, which afterward did burst
Into these open flames from whence did grow,
As hateful Ills as ever age could show.
392
May then religion be a cloak for sin,
Can holiest functions serve but for pretenses,
Are Churchmen Saints without, and Devils within
Dare men make good a Color for offenses:
Oh know with what fierce wrath he recompenses,
Even simple sinners that scarce know his will,
Then much more those, whose knowledge serves but ill,
393
Most reverend Priesthood thou art now prophand,
How comes thy glorious luster so obscure
That even thy very title is defamed?
The cause is plain Professors are impure;
Their lives do hurt, more then their tongues do, cure,
For laymen think all lawful which they do
And on that thought are easily drawn thereto.
394
And so there grows a confluence of all sin,
For sheep will wander, if the shepherd stray,
Small boats must drown when great ships cannot swim,
If Doctors fail, what shall poor pupils say.
God help the blind, if clear eyes miss the way,
Though sin does ever draw with it a curse
Yet does the Author make the sin the worse
395
But to my self I doubted what to do,
For weighty causes challenge heedfull care,
I feared the French, I feared my subjects too
I wanted Crowns the sinnewes of the war
Those that I had I thought not good to spare.
But freely sent them to the king of France,
For fear he should his sisters part advance.
396
Whereby from thence she had no aid at all,
Oh what a pleasing Orator is gold,
How well he speaks that tells a golden tale,
How sweetly sounds it both to young and old,
And yet it loves not to be heard but told.
Orpheus did make the stones strange wonders do,
But this can move both stones and Orpheus too.
397
Which when my Queen and Mortimer perceived
They leaving France, to Henault went for aid,
And there with honor they were well received
Forces prepared, and Ensigns were displaid.
And ships were Rigd, and nothing was delaid,
That might advance their enterprise begun:
So deepest sea's with smoothest silence run
398.
They took the Sea, and landed at the last
At Orwell Haven, a deadly gulf to me,
And thither their Confederats did have,
Both Lords and Commons seemed to agree.
As winds and waves consent when wracks shall be,
All turn their faces to the rising sun,
Because my date was out and I undone.
399
But when the voice of Eagle-winged fame
Had spread abroad the cause of their repair;
And seemed still to justify the same
By due succession of my son and heir;
My hope to fear, my fear turned to despair
And my despair on these two grounds was laid,
My Peers werefalse, my Partisans dismayed.
400
Then did I flee from London where I lay,
Because they seemed partially affected;
And in my flight did often weep and say,
To what hard haps (poor Prince) art thou subjected
What gloomy stars have thus thy state infected.
That they should hate, who ought to love theerather
A hapless King, a husband and a father.
401
Most mighty Monarchs have been often distressed,
Whom yet their wives have loved with tender care;
And many in their matches cursed, are blessed
Yet in their issue, but my cause is rare;
In all of them, my fortunes fatal are,
They wrong me most that should protect me rather,
A hapless King a husband and a father.
402
Some say that Kings are Gods upon the earth
And marriage, quasi merry-age some surmise.
God give us joy they say at childrens birth:
What God am I, whom traitrous men despise,
And marre-age from my marriage does arise,
There reap I care where most content should gather
A hapless King, a husband and a father.
403
And thus I fled, my Queen pursu's a^^aine,
So runs the hare for life, the hound for prey;
Few followed me, but thousands were her train;
So flies swarm thickest in the Sunshine day:
At last at Oxford did she make some stay
With all her troops, and did deliberate,
What course to take with me, and with the State.
404
There did her Tutor Tarleton think it fit,
Of their chief drift remonstrance for to make,
Who being of good discourse and pregnant wit,
To broach the matter, first did undertake,
He preached, his text was this, My head does ache;
Whereon dilating, he did seem to prove
That Subjects might a King their head remove.
405
And in that compass he concluded me,
And so concluded I should be deposed,
A dangerous and detested heresy
By some infernal fury first composed
In hell, where long the Monster lay enclosed
Till impious spirits, swollen with insolence
To curb all christian Princes brought it thence
406
Why should such diu'lish principles be broached,
By them that seenme to bring Gods Embassy?
Why should the Pulpit be so much reproached
As to be made a place to tell a lie?
To serve a turn to such impiety;
But they that only their own ends affect
Nor God, nor man, nor heaven, nor hell respect.
407
No worthy mind will charge me to diselose
With cursed Cham my fathers secret shame,
Though my free muse do somewhat touch at those
Of holy Church, whose actions full of blame
Have sold themselves (not function) with defame,
Not is it a wonder, though these blinded times
Did hatch both monstrous men, and monstrous crimes
408
William whose sword did seat him in his throne
Brought with him Odo Bishop of Bayone,
Whose pride, whose lust, whose irreligion,
Whose symmonie to buy the Sea of Rome,
Incenst his brother to just wrath, by whom
Th'aspring Priest in prison was restrained
And not released as long as William reigned.
409
And had the headstrong man been still held in,
(Rufus) thy reign had been more easy far,
For having head, he labored still to win,
All discontented spirits, that always are
Apt to take fire unto a civil war;
And the corrupted humors drawn to head
In Prince and State great inflammations bred,
410
When second Henry wore the Diadem
How did ambitious Becket toil the State?
Who made the Pope to interdict the Realm?
Who with the French King did confederate?
who under hand nursed man and wives debate?
Who drew the son to arms against the sire?
'Twas Becket that most kindled all the fire.
411
What bitter storm had almost wrackt the State
By Clergies practice whilst King John did reign;
Six years the Realm stood excommunicate,
And under interdiction did remain,
People and Peers drawn from their sovereign,
Lewis of France broughtin to wear the Crown
If by his forces John were shouldered down.
412
Who almost sinking with so rough a blast
Finding himself unable to withstand
To save his Crown, was forced at the last
For to resign unto the Pope this Land,
And by a rent to farm it at his hand,
Then all was well, the Clergies turn was served
Lewis was cursed, and John had well deserved.
413
Do Kingdoms then serve but for tennis-bals
For holy Church to racket up and down,
Must Scepters be disposed by Bishops Pulls,
Or shall a Prince make forfeit of his Crown
If a poor Prelate chance to fret and frown,
If they can carry it so, I like their wit,
But sure I am, it is not by holy writ.
414
When Straw his base rebellious troops did gather
And drew the Commons to a dangerous head:
One Ball a Priest, or one of Baals Priests rather;
By close seditious Libels which they spread,
By times, and old said sawes he much misled
The vulgar sort, and made their madness more
Which in it self did rage too much before
415
When Lancaster King Richard did depose
His chief Assistant, Thomas Arundell
Primate of England did absolve all those
That joined in that foul action, to expel
Their rightful King and did in substance tell
The very tale that Tarleton erst had told,
So often this Realm by them was bought and sold.
416
Whilst Humfrey Duke of Gloucester ruled the Sat,
Henry the sixth then being under age,
What bloody tumults with intestine hate,
Were here untimely raised by Beawfords rage
Which was so fell that nothing could assuage
His rank'rous spleen, nor would he stint the strife,
Till by foul practice Gloucester lost his life.
417
Richard the third that did usurp the Crown,
And swomme through blood to get the kingly place;
Had he not Shaw a Clerk of great renoune:
Before that time he in the peoples Grace
Who at Paul's Cross did bastard Edwards race,
Defamed the dead, forged, wrested, soothed sin,
Ventured his soul, a tyrants love to win.
418
But stay, I handle with too hard a touch,
The Churches wounds, that now are fairly healed,
then were the hudwinckt times, then were they such
In those dark days, now is the truth revealed,
Now are those former errors all repealed,
And now the Sun illumines all our clyme
Most learned Fathers, answer ye the time.
419
Be (as you should be) Lamps to give us light,
And shining Stars to grace the Firmament,
Though you do teach, and we believe aright,
Yet minds unsettled sooner will be bent
When they shall see your words and works consent,
And therefore let your lives, your faith express,
And preone by practice what you do profess.
420
Whilst I, and my Queen and Tarleton plaild
The Pageant thus, the Current went so swift,
That I thought fit, until the fury stayed
In some close private place a while to shift:
And, for the Land seemed cross unto my drift,
I did resolve by sea to seek some clime
Where I might harbor till some happier time.
421
And so I left the land, and took the seas,
But sea and land conspired unto my taking,
For neither plaints nor prayers could appease
The winds and waves which fared as they were making
Sharp war betwixt themselves whilst I stood quaking
For fear least I the subject of their strife
Should end their war by ending of my life.
422
And yet thrice happy had poor Edward been
If death had ended then his weary days;
But cast on shore in Wales, I lived unseen
In paths, in woods, in unfrequented ways
With those few friends which whilom I did raise,
Balduck and Redding. young Spencer and no more
Who in my fall their ruin did deplore.
423
Of all the swarms that followed kingly reign,
Of all the friends that fawned on awful pride,
Lo only this poor remnant did remain:
A true love knot with sad affliction tide:
Who suffering, and who sorrows were to abide,
For wretched men compassionate each other,
And kind compassion is afflictions mother.
424
Oh see what quick sands honor treads upon,
How Icie is the way that greatness goes.
A mighty Monarch late attended on,
With supple hammes, smooth brows, submissiue shows
For many followers, he has many foes.
False fawning friends from falling fortunes run,
As Persians use to curse the setting Sun.
425
When Jove had made the chief of all his Creatures,
Whom we call man (a little world indeed)
The gods did praise his well proportiond features,
Each in their functions serving others need.
But prying Momus (taking better heed)
Observed at last one error in his Art
Because he made no windows in his heart.
426
Oh that the glorious Architect of man,
Had made transparent glasses in the breast,
What place should be for Politicians then,
How should dissembling grow in such request,
And Matchiauillian Atheism prosper best,
But temporising is the way to clime,
There is no music without keeping time
427
I shall not do amiss, if I do sing,
Those heavy Anthemes our sad consort made
Whilst they did warble with their wretched king,
As we did sorrowing sit in silent shade,
The sudden downfall reeling greatness had
Balducke quoth I out of Philosophy,
Extract some medicine for our misery.
428
Dear Prince (quoth he) whom late our eyes beheld,
In greatest glory that the world could see.
Whilst thou with awful majesty did wield,
The public State, let it no wonder be
If some few Stars prove opposite to thee.
Since in their favor none so firmly stood,
But they have given grief as well as good.
429
Do but observe the favorite of Chance,
Her chiefest Mynion highest in her Grace,
Philips great son, whom she did so advance,
Who did subdue the East in little space,
Unto whose Arms the amazed world gave place.
Whose actions are the subi^ct of all stories,
He poisoned dies amids the world of Glories.
330
I list not wade in telling tragic tales,
Suffices this, all greatness is unsure:
Storms rage more fiercely on the hills then dales,
Shrubs better then high Cedars winds endure
Those Colors soonest stain that are most pure,
Oh let him graspe the Clouds and span the skies,
That can assure himself felicities.
431
In all that this same massy world does hold,
There is a certain mixture to be found,
Either of dry, or moist, or hot, or cold,
Of which, if any one too much abound,
The body often afflicted proves unsound,
But being kept in just proportion,
They do maintain a happy union.
432
So fares it in our fortune and our State,
Nothing is simply sweet, or simply sower.
Our wealth is mixed with woe, our love with hare,
Our hope with fear, and weakness with our power
Bright moons breed mists, the fairest morn a shower,
And as there is an Autumn and a spring,
So change by course is seen in every thing.
433
The wind that is now at South, will change to Nore,
The greenest Groves will turn to witherd hay,
The Seas both ebb and flow at every shore;
The Moon does wax and waine, yet not decay,
Day draws on night, and night draws on the day:
Our selves once babes, now men, then old, straight none,
Do plainly prove a change in every one.
434
Wise Politicians, and deep sighted sages,
That have discourst of Common wealths with care,
Both of our time, and of precedent ages,
Observe in them a birth when first they are,
A grouth which often extends very far,
A state wherein they stand (so change withal)
And then at last a dismal fatal fall.
435
Rome had her being first from Romulus,
Her growth from Consulls that were Annual
Her State most flourished in Octauius,
Many conuersions, these most principal,
From kings to Consulls, last Imperial,
And who sees not she is now ruined
And in her Ruins now lies buried.
436
The greatest and best grounded Monarchy,
Has had a period, and an over throw;
There is no constant perpetuity,
The stream of things is carried to and fro,
And does in euer-running Channells go.
If then great Empires are to changes bending
We weaker States are warned from their ending.
437
Ruins of kingdoms, and their fatal harms,
From one of these same causes do arise,
From Civil fury, and from sorren Arms
Or from some plague doomed from the angry skies,
Or worn by wasting time, dissolved dies,
For as the fruit once ripe, falls from the tree,
So common wealths by age subverted be.
438
If these be rocks that shipwreck Monarchies,
Are private States exempted from the same?
Where lives the man has such immunities?
It Is hard to escape vnscorch'd in common flame,
Or parts to stand when ruined is the frame.
Those public harms, that Empires do decay,
In private states do bear a greater sway.
439
Five, hundred years some that are curious wise
Would have the period of a public State,
And they appoint for private families.
Some six or seven discents the utmost date,
I dare not so precisely calculate;
But without doubt there is a fixed time,
In which all states have both their set and prime.
440
Let these be motives (oh dejected great one)
To calm the tempest of thy stormy care,
And though I must confess, it well may fret one*
The past and present fortunes to compare,
Yet since in all things changes common are,
Think eb'd estats may grow, and think withal,
What happs to one to every one may fall.
441
Thus Baldocke chased, and Reading thus began,
But first his eyes dewd down a weeping rain,
Oh thou (once glorious) now eclipsed sun.
Now thou art clouded, yet must clear again,
With courage therefore hopeful thoughts retain.
For often those winds that draws the clouds together
By their disperse occasioneth fair weather.
442
But I intend no comment on this text
Nor will I harrow that which he did sow,
What I apply to thy sad soul perplexed
With those dismaies, that from thy fortunes flow,
Out of th'assured grounds of truth does grow,
Then make good use thereof, and learn thereby,
This sovereign salve for thy sad mallady.
443
All things that boundless thought can once conceive
Sacred, profane, of Elements composed
Unbodied spirits, or what else does receive
A being, when or where, or how disposed
Within one triple Circle, are enclosed.
Being eternal or perpetual,
Or else indeed, but meerlie temporal.
444
That is eternal which did not begin
Nor ever ends, And only God is so
Who has for ever, and for ever bin,
Whom no place circumscribes nor times forgo,
Nor limits bound, nor thoughts can fully know:
Whom we so much the more ought to admire,
How much the less to knowledge we aspire.
445
That is perpetual which in time began,
But never any time shall end again,
Such are the Angels, such the soul of man,
Such are those sprits that live in restles pain,
(Rebellious spirits against their Sovereign,)
All these were made as pleased the makers will,
Once to begin, but to continue still.
446
Lastly, those things are counted temporal,
Which had beginnings, and shall have their ends,
And in that rank the world it self does fall,
So honor, riches, strength, allies and friends:
All which by nature to corruption bends,
And in this sense it is true Philosophy,
What does begin shall end most certainly.
447
And therefore make not things so weak and vain,
To be thy God, as if they were eternal:
Nay do not prize them as an equal gain,
Unto thy soul, which is perpetual.
But hold them, as they are, but temporal,
And since their nature is, to cease to be,
Think they observe but their due course with thee.
448
The spacious world is fortunes Tennis Court,
Men are the balls, which with her Racket (Time)
She tosses to and fro, for her disport,
Sometimes above, sometimes beneath the line,
Now bounding, straight struck dead, but yet in fine
All go into the hazard that is the Grave,
And they once gone, she other balls must have.
449
So silent he, and then spoke Spencer so,
To my discourse, (dear Prince) vouchsafe thine ears
And since we all do share alike in woe,
Let me have leave to tune my voice like theirs,
United forces, greater virtue bears,
And all of us, level our aims at this,
To make thee think the world but as it is.
450
Which (oh) that our experience proved not true,
Would we did sit upon the quiet Strand,
And thence behold the Rack that should ensue,
And pity others, we secure on land,
But our estates in doubtful hazard stand,
Succeeding ages in our fall may read
How all things hang but by a slenderthred.
451
Such is the sad condition of each State,
Annexed to it, by eternal doom,
Which is enrolled in the book of fate.
From whence the least occurrents here do come,
That happen from the Cradle to the Toombe.
For though our fortunes seem but casual,
The finger of the highest is in all.
452
And it is a work of his all guiding will,
Whose boundless knowledge sees which is the best
In our whole life, to mingle good with ill.
Contents with crosses, quiet with unrest,
Least we should hold the world in such request,
That for the same we should abandon heaven,
And sower our selves with too much earthly leau'n.
453
For who sees not how much the world bewitches
Who feels not how the flesh is apt to yield,
Especially made insolent with riches.
How hard it is prosperity to wield,
How proudly sits sin with such a shield
When lustful ease, and full satietie,
And pleasing tongues still draw on vanity.
454
We may even of our selves an instance make,
When did we entertain such thoughts as these,
Or when did we this theme for Subject take.
Whilst sin (begot with greatness, nursed with ease,
Confirmed with vice) did seek all means to please,
The pleasant humor, that did most delight,
And framed our wills, according to our might.
455
But now afflicting sorrow does assail us,
We tune our Consort to another key,
We change our minds because our means do fail us
And those Lewd motives being removed away,
Which did induce us so to run astray,
We now recall our wandering thoughts again,
And from our troubles take our truest aim.
456
Oh sad affliction though thou seem severe,
Yet oftentimes thou draw'st us unto God,
Who strikes for to instruct, and clouds to clear.
So does the tender father use the Rod,
So bitterst herbs in medicin, often are sod,
Of easy Raines who does no reckoning make,
Must needs be ridden with a rougher brake.
457
If thus thou do account thou reck'nest even
And thou shall sum thy sorrows with delight,
God strikes on earth, that he may stroke in heaven,
He gives a Talent, when he takes a mite,
And least thy soul should live in endless night,
He sends his Herald only to this end,
That thou might be his follower by thy friend.
458
He ceast, I said Spencer I find it true,
Even from my self I can the proof derive,
Calamity does fashion us anew.
Remorsefull grief into the soul does diue,
And sorrow makes repentant thoughts to thrive,
But full sad souls and fortunes soaring hie
Think neither how to live nor how to die^.
459
I must confess the truth, the time has bin
Whilst my sweet canded fortune lasted still,
I never thought on things that were unseen;
I only was obsequious to my will.
My sense my god, whose hests I did fulfill.
And my deluded soul did place her good,
Only in that, that pleased my wanton blood.
460
How often did I plot impiety,
And fashion it upon my sinful bed,
Still hunting after fresh variety,
Longing to act, what was in fancy bred,
How much were all occasions wellcomed
By which I might add heat unto my fire,
And still new forms were framed by my desire.
461
And that I might do ill without control,
Without all Check or touch of conscience;
How often did I say unto my soul,
Enjoy a present good be ruled by sense.
Not by opinion or conceit, from whence
Some curious brains have forged strange novelties,
But be thou wise, and follow realties.
462
But Spencer, now I find, I was a fool,
And like Ixion did a Cloud embrace,
Calamity has set me now to school,
Where though I feel more grief, I find more grace,
And now I see, how wretched was my case
Whilst being bewitch't with false felicity,
I thought religion but mere policy.
463
But now my soul grieves with the weight of sin,
And I ly prostrate at my makers feet,
I do confess, how sottish I have been,
How my distaste has taken sower for sweet
I find a God whose judgments now I meet:
Damned Atheist thou, that say there is no God,
Thou will confess one, when thou feel'st his rod.
464
Let Pharoe live at rest, and he will wage
War against Heaven, and ask who is the Lord
Nay more and more, the Tyrant still shall rage
Till God draw forth his sharp auenging sword,
Till his just plagues no breathing time afford.
Then I have sinned pray for me, let them go,
And then who goe's as Pharoe, learnes to know.
465
So does the sharpest bryer bear sweetest rose,
And bitterst medicines, purge the body best,
How wondrously does God his works dispose.
That even by crosses he can make us blessed
And has our chiefest joy in sorrows nest,
Then let us not repine against his doom
But weaue our web, as we have warp'dour loome.
466
And Reading of the world thou read right
It is indeed but merely temporal
Even those dear pleasures, wherein men delight,
Friends, honors, riches, all are casual,
And as they have their honey, so their gall:
There Is nothing certain in the world, but this
That every worldly thing uncertain is.
467
These were our parlies as we sat alone,
These tearfull tributes daily were defrayd,
Now did we walk and weep, now sit and groan,
Till faithless Walsh, me (friendly wretch) betrayed
Into their hands, who straight ways me conuaid
To Kenelworth, where I imprisoned lay
And never after saw one blisfull day.
468
For first I was deposed by Parliament
From Princely rule, as one not fit to reign,
Both Peers and people all did give consent,
That I vnking'd in durance should remain,
And sent their agents to me to explain
That if I would not to the same resign
Thai'd choose a Prince out of some other line.
469
Oh English Peers weigh what you take in hand
Look but with judgment into your design,
That which you now attempt will wrack the land
The wounds whereof will bleed in after-time,
And babes unborn, will curse your hateful crime,
For what so does pervert the course of things
Wrath, envy, death and desolation brings,
470
There is a lawful and a certain right,
Which always must be kept inviolate,
And being infringed by practice or by might,
Draws fearful judgments down upon the Stare,
Then you or yours will wish, although too late
That I had kept my rightful intrest still
And you had not been agents in this ill.
471
When your own children shall each other wound
And with accursed hands gore others breast,
When civil fury shall your State confound,
Then will you say his ghost is not at rest
He it is whom vainly we have dispossessed
The second Edward for whose sacrifice
Your nephews then shall play a bloody prize.
472
Never, oh never was the rightful course
Of this our Crowno perverted or suppressed,
But still the same has been a fatal source
Of many mischiefs, and of much unrest:
And as the land has been therewith oppressed,
So the Usurper never kept it long,
In any quiet, what he got with wrong.
473
William who with his sword did win the Crown
Getting by conquest, what he kept with care,
The true and lawful heir being shoulderd down
Like a wood Lion (his own word) did fare
Against the English whom he did not spare
Or young or old, that were of worth or place,
And for the rest, he yoked with bondage base.
474
And as he toild the land with his unrest
So tasted he his share of misery
Robert rebels, a bird of his own nest
The Normans brake forth into injury
The oppressed English hatched conspiracy,
Always inforreine brawles or civil strife,
And so wastes forth a wretched weary life.
475
Nay death the period-maker of all moan,
Even against nature follows him with spite,
The mighty Prince by thousands waited on,
Being dead is left alone forsaken quite,
No son, no friend to do him his last right,
None that vouchsaf'de to give him burial;
But unregarded lay despised of all.
476
Nay more the ground where he should be inten'd
Anselme fitz Arthur, his dead bones to spite,
Claimed as his own, a thing scarce ever heard,
And, for the Prince there dead by lawless might,
Had worm'd him out of that which was his right,
On Gods behalf, he did forbid them all,
Within his earth to give him burial.
477
Nor would he cease the challenge he had made,
Nor yet durst they inter his corpse therein
Until a sum of money was defraid
With which they paid the ransom for his sin,
So much ado had this great Prince to win,
That which none does the poorest wretch deny,
A bed of peace, where his dead bones might be.
478
Nor was the stream of misery thus stayed,
The date of our affliction lasted still:
There is not yet sufficient ransom paid,
The ill got Scepter must be swaid as ill.
Rufus succeeds, and still more blood does spill.
Still hauecks more, and still does tyrannize,
Until by sudden violence he dies.
479
Nor did the Crown stand well on any head,
Till Beuclark got the Scepter in his hand
Who to the Saxon Maude being married,
Some beams of comfort cheered the drooping land,
And then our State in peaceful terms did stand
Till Henry di'd and Stephen unjustly got
The Crown, and set new troubles here on foot.
480
Then burst there forth an all consuming flame,
The Empress Maude sought to acquire her right
Stephen had the Crown, and he would keep the same
Until she could recover it by fight,
Then followed all the hostile Acts of might
Sword, fire, rapes, murders, leagers, wast and wrack,
And nothing of extremest ills did lack.
481
So has iniust succession scourged this Realm
At length Stephen dies after a wretched reign,
Then second Henry wears the Diadem
In whom the rightful title did remain
And then our State did happy fortunes gain,
Then did our strength increase, our bands extend,
And many Nations to our yoke did bend.
482
Then Richard his brave son did next succeed,
In a just course of all things prosper'd well,
In Syria he did many a worthy deed
The Eastern world of his exploits can tell,
And many thousand miscreants sent to hell
By those unconquered arms have proved long since
That Cordelion was a Peerless Prince.
483
He dead, young Arthur should have had the Crown,
The son of Ieffrey, who was Henry's son,
Had not King John his uncle put him down,
Who being hal'don by ambition
Diuerts the course of true succession,
Makes himself King, vsurps the Princes name,
And murders Arthur to secure the same.
484
And now, (oh) now begins our Tragedy,
where death and horror only actors are;
John gouerns, as he got prepostrously,
And does both with his Peers and Clergy jar:
Then Ianus sets wide open the gates of war
And then the land with blood was overflowed
And none could safely call his own his own.
485
Then were the Cities sacked the fields laid waste,
The virgins forced, the marriage bed defiled,
Then were the ancient Monuments defaced
The Ports vntraffick'd, landed up and spoiled,
Even God himself seemed here to be exiled:
The land was cursed, all sacred rights were barred:
And six years space no public prayers were heard.
486
Then did the King lease forth the Realm to Rome,
Then did the Peers of France betray the Crown;
Oh Heavens great King, how fearful is thy doom,
How many mighty plagues can thou pour down,
Upon a Nation, when thou please to frown.
Arthur, it was the wrong done thee of late
That made the Heaven so to afflict our State.
487
Oh no, although third Henry was the man
In whom the lawful title was invested,
For Arthur dead, the right was then in John;
And John deceast, the same in Henry rested,
Yet that the world should see how God detested
Such wrongful means, acts so unjustly done
The fathers whip is made to scourge the son.
488
For still the civil fury wound the State
During the time of Henryes pupil age,
And still the Peereswolne with intestine hate
Against their harmless Prince being under age
Combine themselves with France, and when that rage
Was spent, the Barons war broke forth again*
So full of tumults was third Henryes reign.
489
He dead, my father Longshanks then did reign,
And in due course succeeded next his sire;
Then all afflictions did begin to wayne
And England did to peace and wealth aspire,
Nor did the stream of bliss flow ever higher;
Then when first Edward managed the State
Prudent in peace, in wars most fortunate.
490
That noble Prince to me my breath did give
Whom I succeeded in a rightful live,
You all have sworn alleagiance whilst I live
And will you now enforce me to resign,
Will you again with wicked hands untwine,
That sacred chain whereon depends our good
And drown this Island once again in blood.
491
Oh if you do disorder thus the Crown
And turn the lawful course anotherr way,
If you unjustly wring from me my own,
You spinne a thread to work your own decay,
And my Prophetic soul does truly say
The time will come when this unjust design
Shall draw down wrath on this unhappy clyme.
492
And from my flock two branches shall arise,
From whom shall grow such great disunion,
As many thousand lives shall not suffice
To reunite them both again in one.
England shall waste more dear blood of her own
Against her self, then would suffice t'obtaine
All France, and conquer Germany and Spain.
493
But when that men are bent to do amiss,
Then all persuasions are but spent in vain,
The Parliament was resolute in this
That I their King no longer should remain;
Whereto, if I opppos'd my self 'twas vain,
They were resolved, and my perverseness might
Make them perhaps to do my son less right.
494
Which when I heard, think how my soul did war
Within it self, which way I should decline;
Dear was my son, my self was dearer far;
Through my eclipse, must I procure his shine?
Cannot he reign, unless I now resign?
My father di'de ere I could get the Crown,
I live, and now my son must put me down.
495
My son? alas poor Prince it is not he,
For many wolves mask in that Lambs attire;
Proud Mortimer it is thou vncrownest me,
Luxurious Queen this is thy foul desire,
And moody Tarleton bellows of this fire,
It Is thou that art the marrow of this sin,
My son does serve but for the outward skin.
496
You are the wheels that make this clock to strike
My fatal hour, the last of all my good;
For this is not the hight of your dislike,
Death is the fruit, when treason is the bud;
Such practices do always end in blood,
When others stumble, Kings fall headlong down,
There is no mean betwixt a grave and Crown.
497
For this is certain, sin does always find
Within it self sufficient cause to fear,
It Is dangerous to trust a guilty mind
The Creditor removed, the debt's thought clear,
Men hate whom they have wronged, and hating fear,
And fearing will not cease till they have proved
All means by which the cause may be removed.
498
Therefore would I might lead a private life
In some sequestered place which none might see,
Where I might see to reconcile the strife
That sin has made betwixt my God and me,
Or if the ransom of my Crown were free,
My life from slaughter, little would I grieve,
For none so wretched, but desires to live.
499
And yet why should I lose or life or Crown,
Are lives, or Crowns so light and easy losses?
It Is vain to ask why fortune lists to frown,
Or to enquire the causes of our crosses,
When ships on sea, storms, winds, and billows tosses;
It boots not ask why winds and storms should rise
For powerful heavens respects not humane whies.
500
The stately Steed that champs the steely bit,
And proudly seems to menace friend and foe,
Does sling and some, and boundeth often, and yet
Poor beast perforce, he is enforced to go,
Even so fared I, and since it must be so;
As good the same should seem to come from me
'Twas best to will, what' against my will must be.
501
And so I made a solemn resignation
Of all my right and title to me son,
And herewithall an earnest protestation,
Which was with sighs and weeping tears begun
How much I grieved that I had so misdone
As to procure thereby my peoples hate
And so be thought unworthy of the state.
502
Which since I was, I willingly would give
Unto my son, my State and Maiesttie,
Desiring them to give me leave to live,
And not too much tread on my misery:
For I had once their faith and fealty,
Which though I now discharged and set them free,
Though not obey, yet should they pity me.
503
The Crown had often made my head to ache,
And I prayed God my son felt not the same,
Whom they should no less value for my sake;
Since by his virtue he might salve my shame,
And well I hoped my president would tame
All youthful humors which are easily led
Unto those courses which confusion bred.
504
And here though grief my senses did orewhelme
And I seemed dead, yet that no bar might be;
Sir Thomas Trussell Knight for all the Realm,
Did then renonce obedience unto me,
And of all faith and service set them free,
My Steward brake his staff, my stare before
Was now discharged, and I was King no more.
505
Mark what pretenses wrong can make of right,
How loath men seem against justice to offend,
Oh sacred virtue thou art full of might,
When even thy foes, thy title will pretend,
As if thy only shadow could amend
All wrongful acts, but now it is grown a use
Thou must be made a cloak to hide abuse
506
But when I had thus parted with my Crown,
I did bewail the waining of my State,
Poor Prince said I, how low art thou cast down
From that high heaven which thou enioyd'st of late,
Thou have no prospect but an iron grate,
Thy costly hangings, ragged walls of stone,
And all thy solace, solitary moan.
507
Now of a Cushion thou must make a Crown,
And play the mock-king with it on thy head,
And on the earth thy Chair of State sit down.
And why not so since thou art earthly bred?
But for a Septer how will thou be sped?
Why take a brand, and shake it in thy hand,
And now thou art a king of high command.
508
All guiding heaven what change do I endure!
I'had wealth at will, but wealthy now in want,
Then men my pleasure, now my grief procure,
Then change of houses, now in Chamber scant:
Then thoughts of rest, now restles thought does plant
The sad remembrance of my wretched fate:
What now I am, and what I was of late.
509
Me thinks the Birds upbraid me in their songs
And early sing my shame in every place,
Me thinks the waters murmer sorth my wrongs,
And in their Course, discourse of my disgrace,
Me thinks, the Snne does blush to see my face,
The whistling winds me thinks do witness this,
No grief, so great as to have lived in bliss.
510
When I complain to Echo of head-aking,
The sound's a King, and yet no King am I
In silent night, when I my rest am taking,
I dream of Kings, yet I vnking'd do lie,
And still sweet sleep seals up my weary eye,
I cannot fix my thought on any thing,
But tells me straight that once I was a king.
511
That once I was(aye me) that now I am not,
And now I am not, would I had been never,
Less feels he want, that yet to plenty came not,
To have bin happy, is unhappy ever.
But to forget my self, I will endeavor,
And only this poor plain-song will I sing
I was not borne nor shall I die a king.
512
In such Complaints* I spent my weary time,
My Cosen Leicester well respecting me,
Which to my foes did seem a heinous crime.
Who after consultation did agree,
Some more obdurate should my keepers be:
And Gurney and Matreuers Cosens were,
To rid me of my life, them of their fear.
513
They that have ears to hear of my extremes,
And feeling hearts to comprehend my woes,
And yet have eyes as dry as sunny beams,
Where no moist tears(poor pittles tribute) flows
Within such mines, whole mines of marble grows,
Flint-hearted men that pity not my moan,
Some Gorgons head has turned your hearts to stone.
514
And what have I to do with stony hearts,
With men of Marble what have I to do,
I take no pleasure in Pigmalions arts.
I would not work on stone, or marble woe.
He loved his stony maid, and Joyed her too,
She was transformed at his incessant moan,
So were my foes, but changed from men to stone.
515
And would to God I had bin changed like them
Then without sense, I should have borne my pain,
And senseless, hapless, and half happy men
Who feel no grief what needs they much complain,
But I was touched being struck in every vain,
That my dispares to their desires might bring
The fatal period whence their fears did spring.
516
And first, they hurried me from place to place,
That none might have intelligence of me.
They clothed me with garments vile and base,
Unlike my self, that I unknown might be.
And least I should the cheerful daylight see,
I still removed, when Soll his course had run
My day was night, and Mooneshine was my sun.
517
I did lament, that woes to words might yield,
And said fair Cynthia with whose bright Sunshine,
This sable night does bear a silver shield,
Yet thou art gracious to these griefs of mine,
That with thy light do clear my drooping eine,
Thou borrowest light to lend the same to me,
I lightened those that my Eclipses be.
518
The glorious Sun thy brother lends thee light,
My son makes me obscure unlike to thee,
Endymions love, thou did with love requite:
My love distresseth and disdaineth me.
Yet both too like in often changing be,
Oh no for thou being wain'd do wax again,
But still her love continues to her waine.
519
Some do ascribe the Oceans ebbes and flows,
Unto thy influence working in the same,
I wot not that, but this poor Edward knows,
Men ebb and flow as fortune list to frame,
Whose smiles or frowns, do make or war or gain,
Then sure we all must stoop unto herlure:
When she is false, how may our States be sure.
520
But cease fair Phoebus, cease thy beutious shine,
Spend not thy rays on such a wretch as I,
Against whom, the very heavens themselves repine
Whose presence, all good-boading stars do fly,
Then give me leave that I obscured may die,
And suffer me (unsought, unseen) to go,
Some case it is not to be known in woe.
521
And that the hony'd vapors of the night
Might be of force to make weak nature fail
They made me ride cold, and bare-headed quite
To whom both hats and heads were wont to veil,
Whilst I with prosperous wind at will did sail.
But now I was reproached with hateful crimes,
Oh times, oh men, oh change of men and times.
522
Think not that I was marble, not to have
A sense of ill, after a feeling fashion
Which made me sometimes for to fret and rave,
Sometimes to weep, and humbly beg compassion,
As I was swaid, by variable passion.
Remembering what I was some storms did pass,
And straight a Calm remembering what I was.
523
Traitors (quoth he) why do you use me thus,
Know you not me, forget you who I am?
Was not great Longshanks father unto us?
I Kingly Edward, second of that name?
Why kneel ye not, often have ye done the same?
Why should you not, since you are sworn to do it,
And by our birthight, we are borne unto it?
524
From forth the loins of many Kings came I,
This head has been impaled with a Crown;
And will you now a simple hat deny,
I Will be revenged: they do not fear my frown,
Too well, too well, they know my sun is down,
My day is done, now does my night begin,
And Owls, not Eagles use to flee therein.
525
I have been graced, let me be gracious now,
I have commanded, let me now request,
Your sometimes King, has humble knees to how,
And weeping eyes to crave some little rest,
Man's heart is flesh, he has no flinty breast,
One Ari^^^^^^ines had a hairie heart,
But you are stones, else would you rue my smart.
526
And that I might be wretched every way
That every sense might have his proper pain,
The bird to whom Prometheus was a prey
The waking serpent that does rest restrain
Hunger I mean, did gnaw on me amain,
Hunger, fell hunger forced me to eat
Such food as nature never made for meat.
527
I that Lucullus like was served at will
With whatsoever sea or land affords,
Would now be glad of crummes to feed my fill,
Such want does often follow wastfull boards,
Better the frugall fare of roots and goards
That keeps the soul and body both in health
And God does bless with grace increase of wealth.
528
Camelions feed upon the piercing air,
I wish that nature had but made me such;
The Salamander does it is strength repair,
Amidst the fire, when it the flame does touch
Against whose happy state I did not grudge
But only wished my self to have such means,
For hunger is extremest of Extremes.
529
I thought sometimes to eat my very flesh
My brawnelesse arms would do some little good
But still my stomach loathes so vild a mess;
And would not serve me to digest my blood,
My teeth should rather tear the stones for food,
I Will soften them with tears and ceaselesse mones,
But stones were hard, and men more hard then stones.
530
And for to make me fret my self to death
They crossed and thwarted me in every thing,
Sweet sugar words like to the Panthers breath;
You pleasing tongues whose chimes so sweetly ring
Where are you now, why sooth you not your King?
Yea so you will, but that is not my case:
And flatterers time not to the mean or base.
531
How deadly is the venom of fair tongues
Whose Nectar-tearmes do seem more smooth then oil;
And all the breath that comes from their longs
Is sweet in show, but full of gall and guile,
Believe me, there is more danger in their smile
Then in their frown, for seen is soon detected,
But they hurt most that are the least suspected.
532
Oh why are Princes like to brazen pots
Which being great are lifted by the ears;
Little see they their reaches, and their plots,
Whose tongues are turned to sooth them many years;
Till turns be served, and then it straight appears,
That honey gone, the combs are soon rejected
And wanting means, the man is less respected.
533
May it please your highness, was my wonted style,
Whose pleasure now is valued less than mine?
Did I look cloudy who durst seem to smile?
Or was I pleasant, who durst then re pine?
Speak I; Apolloes words were less divine,
What ere I did, applause graced every thing,
And this the cause, because I was a King.
534
But now the spring time of my bliss is done,
Those Nightingales that did so sweetly sing,
In this my winter all are fled and gone,
Nay turned to serpenrs that both hiss and sting,
Thus bells to marriage feasts and burials ring,
And this the cause, because I am no King,
A King, no King, hap and mishap does bring.
535
And that my words might unrespected be,
And neither they nor I regarded ought,
They gave it out my senses failed me,
And I was mad, and helpleslie distraught,
It Is true, I, have been mad and deerlie bought,
My madness, I was mad, when I did blot,
My soul with sin, when I my God forgot.
536
But now my senses are restored again,
And I begin to see how mad I was,
To put my trust in things that are so vain.
To change my heavenly gould for earthly glass,
To dote on shadows, letting substance pass,
And now my God has purged that lunacie,
With bitter potions of Calamity.
537
And oh this sickness is too general,
The world does labor of this mad disease,
This frantic humor does distract us all,
We only seek the present sense to please,
And whilst we live so we may floate at ease,
We quite forget the place where we must land,
The throne of judgment where we all shall stand.
538
Why should mankind be so extremly mad,
As for the short fruition of vain pleasure
Which often is reported when it is had,
To loose a soul more worth then worlds of treasure,
This is indeed a madness above measure:
Thus once I fawned, and therefore now I rue,
Thus reign I now, and therefore so shall you.
539
And least my torments should but seem to cease,
Or breath a while, they would not let me rest.
Of quiet sleep, (the Harbinger of peace,
The common Inn both unto man and beast)
My weary eyes could never be possessed,
My head waxtlight, yet heavy was my heart
Two contraries, one cause, but no desert.
540
I that had once, so many princely bowers,
And in the same so many beds of state.
With sweet perfumes and beutious Parramonres,
And melody, such as at Plutoes gate,
Once Orpheus played, and all, most delicate,
To charm the senses and bewitch the soul,
Must not now sleep one hour without coutroule.
541
Oh Justice what a tallie do thou keep
Of all our finnes, and how thou pai'st them right,
Though God does wink, yet does he never sleep,
The eye of Heaven sees in the darkest night,
My sinful wast of time, (then thought but light)
Was chaulked up, and now he pays the skore,
With want of that, which I abused before.
542
Fond men quoth I you have in all been cruel,
But yet in this, you are too much unwise,
If to my torments you will add more fuel,
You should permit some slomber to mine eyes.
That being waked fresh sorrow might arise
Nor can I last, my strength with waking spent,
For Bows grow weak that never stand unbent.
543
Besides continual thinking of my woe,
So dulls my senses that I feel the less;
As paths grow plain whereon we always go,
So hearts grow hard that never find redress.
And you will make me senseless by excess,
I know you hate me, show your hate therefore,
And let me slumber for to vex me more.
544
And that my grief might work on me the more,
By apprehension of my present fall;
And sad remembrance of my state before,
They wreath a Crown of hay and there withal
They Crowned me, and king eft soones did call,
And said in scorn, God save this Jolly king,
Oh save me God, whom devils to death would bring.
545
And thou meek Lamb that by thy precious blood,
Did make atonement twixt my God and me,
Which was more soueriagne for a sinners good
Then sweetest mirrh, or purest balm could be,
See how these wicked men dishonor thee:
The Sponge, the Spear, the Cross, the Crown of thorn
Thine ensigns are, and may not else be borne.
546
Thy head was Crowned with thorn mine but with hay,
Thou knewst no sin, my sins the sand exceed,
Well may I follow when thou leadst the way.
And (oh) that I might follow thee indeed.
Then of the Tree of life my soul should feed.
My soul that has none other hope but this,
Who will be thine, thou always wilt be his.
547
Sweet Savior Christ, these are the hopes I have,
Though they afflict me, yet my soul is thine
A tyrant cannot reach beyond the Grave,
These fiery trialls make me brighter shine,
Thou can relieve me when thou see thy time,
Or I shall end, or they at last will cease,
Thou will give patience, till thou give release.
548
And that I might even of my self be hated,
They shan'd of all my beard in my disgrace;
Their instrument, a Razer blunt, rebated.
And from a filthy ditch near to that place,
They fetch'r could muddy water for my face:
To whom I said, that even in their dispight,
I would have warm, my tears should do that right.
549
These drops of brine that power down from mine eyes
Mine eyes cast up to heavens high glorious frame;
That frame whence God all earthly deeds descries,
That God that guerdons sin with death and shame,
Shall witness, yea and will revenge the same,
That you have bin most cruel to your king,
Whose death his doom, his doom your deaths will bring
550
Unmanly men remember what I was,
And think withal what you your selves might be.
I was a king, a powerful king I was,
You see my fall, and can your selves be free?
But you have friends, why you were friends to me:
And yet you see how much your love is changed,
So others loves from you may be estranged.
551
But you are young, and full of able strength,
And am not I, what boots my strength or youth,
Both now seem firm, but both shall fail at length,
Old age, cold ache and both sad grief ensues,
But you are wise, the more should be your ruth,
Of mine estate, whose rack may teach you this
That hateful chance may cloud your greatest bliss.
552
You are not, no you are not beasts by birth,
Nor yet am I made of a senseless stone:
We all were framed, and all shall turn to earth
You should have feeling souls for I have one;
Then seem at least relenting to my moan,
I pity crave, and craving let me have it,
Because one day your selves may need to crave it
553
But these dead motives could not work at all
In their sad steely hearts the least remorse,
They rather added wormwood to my gall,
And exercise of ills did make them worse
So violent streams hold on their wonted course,
And being flesh't in cruelty before,
Use made the habit perfect more and more.
554
And least one torment should be left vntri'de
They shut me in a vault, and laid by me,
Dead carcasses of men that lately died,
That their foul stinck my fatal bane might be;
These were the objects that mine eyes did see,
These smells I smelt, with these I did converse,
And unto these, these words I did rehearse.
555
Oh happy souls, whose bodies here I see,
For you have played your parts, and are at rest,
Yet some way hapless, ye may seem to be,
That with your bodies, I am thus distressed,
Perhaps you would grieve, if that you knew at least,
That by your means your King is thus tormented,
Grieve not dear souls for I am well contented.
556
It Is not your bodies senseless as they are
That do inflictt these torments on your King,
But the fierce agents of proud Mortimer,
From them my plagues proceed; as from their spring,
And (oh) just heaven let them their tribute bring
Back to the Ocean whence they first did flow
And in their passage still more greater grow.
557
But what poor soul have you deserved so ill,
That being dead you must want burial;
Nothing but this, I must my fates fulfill,
And still be plagued with woes unnatural,
My wretchedness must still transcend in all,
The living and the dead must do me spite
And you poor souls for me must want your right.
558
But you are happy free from sense of wrong,
Here be your bodies, but your souls are well,
Death do not you forbear your stroke too long
That with these happy souls, my soul may dwell,
And soul be glad to go, here is thy hell,
And even in this thou art happy that it is here,
Oh better so, then it should be else where.
559
What see thou now but objects of disgrace?
What do thou hear, but scorns and terms of spite?
What do thou touch, that is not vile and base?
What do thou smell, but stench both day and night?
What do thou taste, that may procure delight?
Thy sight, thy hearing, touching, taste and smell,
All cry for heaven for here is now their hell.
560
This darksome vault, the house of Acheron,
These wicked men like friends do torture me,
These very Snakes resemble Phlegeion
Mine acted sins like fearful Iuries be.
And he that would a whole infernal see
Let him observe those torments I endure,
And he shall find them hells true portraiture.
561
The earthit self is weary of my pain,
And like a tender mother moanes for me,
From me thou came, return to me again,
Within my womb, i will keep thee safe, quoth she,
And from these vile abusers set thee free:
Never shall these fell Tyrants wrong thee more,
He that paies death discharges every score.
562
These bodies that thou see, thy brothers were,
Subject to many wants, and thousands woes.
They now are cleared from care, and freed from fear,
And from the pressing of insulting foes,
And now they live in love, and sweet repose:
Thy self can witness, that they feel no woe,
And as they rest, even thou shall rest thee so.
563
Their eyes, that whilst they lived often tided tears
Thou see, how sweetly they enjoy their rest,
Those harsh unpleasing sounds that deaft their ears:
Are turned to Angels tunes amongst the blessed.
Their souls that were with pensive thoughts possessed,
Now in their makers bosom without end,
Enjoy that peace whereto thy soul does bend.
564
And thou had need of peace, poor wretched soul.
If ever any soul had need of peace,
God being in arms against thee does inrowle
All nature in his list which does not cease
To fight against thee, and does still increase
Thy wretchedness, forbear rebellious dust,
To war with him who is both great and just.
565
Oh would to God, that I had di'de ere this,
Then had my sins bin fewer then they are,
Then had my soul, long since reposed in bliss,
Which now is wandering still in ways of care,
Life's grief exceeds life's good without compare.
Each day does bring a fresh supply of sorrow,
Most wretched now, yet shall be more to morrow.
566
My careful mother might have helped me,
When I lay sprawling in her tender womb,
If she had made her burdened belly be
My fruitless birth-bed, and my fatal tomb,
Sure had she known her sons accursed doom,
She never would have wronged her self so much
To bear a wretch, save whom was never such.
567
My tender nurse is guilty of these pains,
She might have put some poison in my pappe,
Or let me fall, and so dashed out my brains,
When she full often did dance me on her lap,
A thousand ways had freed me from mishap.
But he, whom heaven ordaines to live distressed,
Death will delay to set that wretch at rest.
568
For Death's the weary Pilgrims rest and Joy,
This world of woes, a hard and flintie way.
Our birth the path that leads to our annoy,
Our friends are fellow passengers to day,
And gone to morrow, honor is a stay,
That either stopps, or leads us all amiss
Pleasures are thieves, that interrupt our bliss.
569
And in our passage as the way does lie,
We meet with several Inns wherein we rest,
Some at the Crown were lodged and so was I
Some at the Castle, that is now my nest,
Some at the horn there married folks do feast,
Though men have diverse Inns, yet all men have,
One home to which they go, and that is the grave.
570
Yet whilst we travel, fortune like the weather,
Does alter fair or foul, so does our way:
If fair, then friends like fowls do flock together
If foul, each man does shift a several way,
Only our virtues, or our vices stay,
And go with us, whose endless memory,
Does make us live, or die eternally.
571
This is the freight that men cannot unload,
No not by death, therefore mortality
Work for thy self, whilst here thou make abode,
For on the present has dependencie
Thy fortunes endless bliss or misery.
And death's the Conuoy to conduct us home,
Come death to me, that I to rest may come.
572
Perhaps thou fear me being great and high,
Oh death, man were a thing intolerable,
Were he not mortal, but even kings must die.
No privilege does against death enable,
Both fat and lean are dishes for his table,
The difference this, the poor one has his grave,
The great one he his Monument must have.
573
Our fates may be conceived, but not controlled.
Before our dated time we cannot die,
Our days are numbered, and our minutes told.
But life and death are destined from on high.
And when that God that rules the imperial sky
Shall find it fit, then thou shall go in peace.
Mean while with patience look for thy release.
574
Thus unto care I pay his due complaint,
And joined with all my tributarie tears
Such my lament, for grief finds no restraint,
As they at last did come unto their ears,
That by the Castle past which caused such fears
In their self guilty souls that used me so,
As they resolved by death to end my woe.
575
To which effect came letters from the Court,
Written by Tarlton at the Queens command,
In such a Clowdie, and ambiguous sort,
That diverse ways one might them understand.
By pointing them, that if they should be scand,
He and his Letters might be free from blame,
And they delinquent that abused the same.
576
The words were these (kill Edward do not fear,
It Is good) which being comma'd diversely
As please the reader double since may bear,
Oh Art, thou art the worlds chief treasury
But being employed to practice villainy,
What Monstrous births from thy foul womb do spring,
So Grammar here is made to kill a king.
577
Which to effect, they first removed me,
From forth the Vault, where I before did lie,
And made a show as if they seemed to be,
Compassionated, for my misery.
And would hereafter grant immunitie
For such unworthy usage, so we see,
The Sun shines hot before the shower will be.
578
But being ouerwatch'd, and wearied too
Nature was much desirous of some rest,
Which gave them opportunity to do
What they desired, for being with sleep oppressed,
They Clapped a massy table on my breast.
And with great weight so kept me down withal,
That breath I could not, much less cry and call.
579
And then into my fundament they thrust,
A little horn, as I did groueling lie.
And that my violent death might shun mistrust,
Through the same horn a red hot Spit, whereby,
They made my gutts and bowels for to fry,
And so continued, till at last they found,
That I was dead, yet seemed to have no wound.
580
And here I pitch the pillars of my pain,
Now, Ne plus ultra shall my posie be.
And thou which have discrib'd my tragic reign,
Let this at least give some content to thee,
That from disastrous fortunes none are free.
Now take the work out of the Loomes again,
And tell the world, that all the world is vain.
FINIS.

