THE BRVTISH THVNDERBOLT: or rather FEEBLE FIER-FLASH of Pope SIXTVS the fifth,
against HENRY the most excellent King of Navarre, and the most noble HENRY
BORBON, Prince of CONDIE.

Together with a declaration of the manifold insufficiency of the same.

Translated out of Latin into English by CHRISTOPHER FETHERSTONE Minister of
Gods word.

Nahum. 3. I will reveal thy filthiness upon thy face, and will show thy nakedness
amongst the nations, and thy shame in the kingdoms.

Imprinted at London, by Arnold Hatfield, for G. B. and R. Newbery. 1586

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORD ROBERT DVDLEY, Earl of Leicester, Baron of
Denbigh, Knight of the most noble orders of the Garter, and of S. Michael,
Master of the Queens horse, one of her Highness most honorable privy
Council; and Lord Lieutenant and Captain general of her Majesty's forces in
the Low countries.
THE EXPERIence of your honorable acceptance of my last simple travel in
translating Master Caluins Commentaries upon Saint John's Gospel, has
imboldened me further to present your Honor with another slender fruit of the
same. Which, though it be not of like quality with the former, yet I doubt
not, but it shall prove profitable to as many, as with diligence and
indifferency shall vouchsafe it the pervsing. The Author (albeit not specified
heerin by name) seems to be a man of great reading, singular judgment, and
excellent dexterity, in handling the matter which he undertook. The work a
notable discovery of that Abaddon, or destroieng enemy, the son of
perdition, that sits in the temple of God, as God; wherein both his defacing
of the glory of the son of God in heaven, whose vicegerent he would be
counted, and his trampling under feet whatsoever is called God amongst men,
besides his manifold violences committed against the Church and Saints of God,
are most lively depainted and set before our eyes. Many worthy wits of rare
gifts have traveled in laieng open his usurpations, villainies, and outrages,
with the original and process, causes and effects, precedents and consequents
of the same, acording as they were occasioned. But this man has drawn into
one entire body a great many memorable points, which are dispersedly found in
others; so that he that lists may at once take a view, as it were, of such an
ugly monster, as would trouble the strongest fantasy in the world to imagine,
and the most curious hand to pourtray the like. Howbeit, it is not much to be
hoped for, that the Italianate atheists and discontented Papists (of which
there are such swarms amongst us) will any thing at all be moved with the
clear light of these most evident demonstrations, to reform their judgments
and preiudicate opinions already conceived and rooted within them touching his
pretended supremacy over Gods Church. For it is greatly to be feared, least,
by a just judgment of the almighty, they are become past feeling, so that
they grope as the blind at noone day, given over to all deceiueablenes of
unrighteousness through a strong spirit of delusion, because they would not
receive the love of the truth that they might be saved. But howsoever their
hearts be as hard as the adamant, and their eyes covered with the mist of
palpable darkness even to this day: yet wisdom shall be justified of her
children. Whom God has foreappointed to be beholders of his glory, they shall
in their due time be enlightened with the knowledge of his saving truth, and
come out of Babylon with as great speed, as ever the Israelites posted out of
Egypt. Yea, they shall clap their hands at the ruin of that Antichristian
synagog, which being now tottering and ready to fall to the ground, laboreth
with might and maine, by force and fraud, by treacherous attempts, by cruel
practices, and open invasions, as it were by mingling heaven and earth
together, to uphold it self: as may be seen in most places of Europe at this
day. But he that sits in heaven, laugheth them to scorn, the Lord shall
have them in derision. Whose words touching the overthrow of Babylon, cannot
fall to the ground, but must be fulfilled in their time. For doubtless Babylon
must fall, and be rewarded according to her works: the kings of the earth shall
loath and persecute this universal strumpet, to make her desolate and naked,
to eat her flesh and consume her with fire. Thrice blessed are they, that band
themselves together, and bend their whole forces to execute these judgments of
the Lord, which he has decreed upon her. In which respect your H. has great
cause to magnify the Lord for his gracious mercies toward you, in that he has
vouchsafed you this honor, to stand in arms against one of her principal
lovers, in so just and holy a quarrel, as is the maintenance of his sacred
religion, and the delivering of the helpless out of the hands of the
oppressor, so advisedly and necessarily undertaken by her excellent majesty. A
thing justifiable by the laws of God and man, of nature and nations, yea
warranted by the like practice of most Christian Emperors in former ages, and
sundry other good presidents of antiquity. Now, seeing God has dealt so
mercifully with you, it is your H. part, to behave your self valiantly, and to
fight the Lords battles with courage. He is on your side: therefore you are on
the mountains, and your enemies in the valleys: he shall be a brazen wall to
defend you on every side, if you set his fear before you, and repose your
trust in him. The guard of his holy Angels shall be a surer protection unto
you, than any trench, bulwark, or fortress you can devise. The prayers of all
the godly in the land being deeply touched with an inward sympathy and
fellow-feeling of their neighbors calamities, are powered out continually for
your safety and happy success in this noble enterpise: and your H. may be
well assured, that they shall procure more favor to you at the hands of the
Lord, than any either adversary forces, or associations of the holy Tridentine
league shall be able to prevail to the contrary. Wherefore, my Lord, arm your
self with Christian courage, policy and warines against these uncircumcised
Philistines: remember that they with whom you fight are deuowed vassals to that
beast, which is described in this book: whose power (God be thanked) has been
found too weak to shake the throne of our gracious Sovereign, notwithstanding
his often assaults. His thunderbolts of excommunications and bannings have
been esteemed as paper-shot by those noble Princes of the house of Borbon and
Vendosme in France. He sits in his Vaticane as one at his wits end,
destitute of counsel, knowing that the assurance of his kingdom stands but
upon one or two such Egyptian reeds, as are mentioned by the prophet, of no
great safety or surety to be leaned upon. Should not the consideration of
these things increase your fortitude and magnanimity, that you never faint nor
give over before you see a blessed end of your labors? Which the Lord of heaven
in a tender regard of his poor Church in this corner of the world, grant unto
you, that in the end returning home, you may be received with such ioifull
acclamations and songs of triumph, as David was by the daughters of Israel
after his victorious subduing of the Lords enemies; and in the life to come may
be crowned with those precious blessings, which are reserved for them that to
the uttermost of their power help the Lord against the mighty.

Your Honors most bounden and at commandment in the Lord, CHR. FETHERSTONE.
London. The third of October. 1586.
To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, my only drift and purpose in translating this Treatise,
was, to acquaint my countriemen, who are not skillful in the Latin tongue, with
such papal practices as are heerin described. The title whereof being in the
Latin copy, BRVTVM FVLMEN, I was first of opinion that I might well english
it, THE BRVTISH THVNDERBOLT. But when I remembered with my self that words are
no otherwise current than as they are allowed by use; and the philosopher
gives good advise when he says, Loquendum Arist. Top. 2.
cum vulgo, sentiendum cum sapientibus: Our speech must be such as is commonly
used, howsoever our thoughts be the thoughts of the wiser sort; and it has not
bin lawful for the emperors themselves to give as it were freedom of city to
words in Rome, when they might enfranchise what persons they listed without
controlement: I would not adventure to be the first coiner of so strange a
term (strange indeed in respect of that sense to which it was to be applied)
without better warrant, than I have any; and therefore I have expressed the
authors meaning in some other manner, thus, THE FEEBLE FIER-FLASH that is Bruta
fulmina and vana, vt quae nulla veniant ratione naturae. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 43.
dull of force, vain, and whereof no sufficient cause can be given in reason.
For such now a days (who knows not?) are those ordinary anathematicall
lightenings that break forth from the sea of Rome, as the Poet in his Aeneis
attributes to king Salmoneus, Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
which may happily amaze and seduce the hearts of them that have bin all their
lives long noosled up in superstition and error: but as many as God has
enabled by his grace to try spirits, they make no more reckoning of such
foolish flames, than they that walk in the night do account of that fire which
is commonly called Ignis fatuus, by which no wise man would suffer himself to
be misled. For the rest: I submit all my travel to thy gentle and courteous
inte^pre^^^^on. I have done what I might, seeing what I would, I could not, by
reason of sickness (...) upon me. In which respect, I shall the (...) pardon for
those sundry ouersights which have escaped me, for want of sufficient
conference with my friends. Only I pray thee, let not the tedious narrations
of Dominick and Francis setdowne almost in the first entrance, keep thee back
from wading through the whole work. No doubt, but the author himself was
half ashamed to make recital of such gross stuff, and absurd follies,
saving that he had good reason to do that he did, partly in respect of the
present Pope, and partly because such beastly vanities are highly esteemed in
the church of Rome. I confess that the Jesuits are not altogether so palpablie
gross in outward show, (howbeit, he that lists to take a taste of their
extreem impudency in lying, may read To which Melch. Canus applies their
common country proverb, De luengas vias, luengas mentiras.
their letters written from Iapan, and the Indies, with many other reports set
down in the life of their father Ignatius Lay^^^, full of like vanity.) They
have learned to lay fairer colors on their filthy corruptions to dazell the
eyes of the simple and ignorant. But remove those colors, and they will
quickly appear to be birds of the same nest. Their first Founder was never yet
of greater name and fame, than Dominic and holy S. Francis. Their doctrine,
vows, rules, and profession, either the same in substance, or not very much
differing. The other had their time of flourishing in the world, and so must
these have likewise, till they return back again to the bottomless pit, out
of the smoke whereof they ascended, (Revel. 9. 2. 3.) to give place
(peradventure) to some other new vpstart progeny of Locusts, by whom the light
of their credit also shall be obscured and quite extinguished. The Lord make us
thankful for all his mercies toward us, and either convert or confound the
enemies of his everlasting truth.

Thy brother in Christ Christoph. Fetherstone.

The blessings of our most holy Lord Pope Sixtus the fifth, against the King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Condie.
Page 2.
We exercise the weapons of our warfare against two sons of wrath, Henry
Borbon sometimes King of Navarre, and also against Henry Borbon sometimes
Prince of Condie. The former having from his youth followed heresies, has
stood stubbornely in defense thereof.

Page 4.
The same lieng wallowing in filth, being the head, captain, and patron of
heretics and rebels, has borne weapon against his most Christian king, against
him and the rest of the catholics: he has with violence enforced his subjects
to become partners in his impiety: he has caused conuenticles of heretics to
be kept.

Page 6.
The Prince of Condie having two heretics for his parents, having followed the
heresies of his father and mother, entering the way of his father being a most
wicked persecutor of the catholic church, showed himself an author of civil
war and sedition, he used alkind of fiercenes and cruelty: being the
detestable and degenerate issue of the house of Borbon.

Page 8.
We pronounce them to be heretics, relapsed into heresies, to be impenitent,
captains and favorers of heretics, and guilty of treason against God, and also
to be enemies to the Christian faith, that they are deprived and put from, the
former of and from the kingdom of Navarre, that the other, and the posterity
of either of them are deprived of all principalities, dukedoms, lordships, and
fees, honors and princely offices: that they were and are unfit and incapable
to retain the same.

In the same Page.
And in like sort that they are deprived, incapable, unfit to succeed in
dukedoms, principalities, and kingdoms, and specially in the kingdom of
France: and moreover and besides of that high authority we have, we do deprive
them and their posterity for ever, and we make them unable to succeed in
dukedoms, principalities, lordships, and kingdoms, and namely, in the kingdom
of France.

Page 9.
We absolve and set free the Nobles, feodaries, vassals, and al other which by
any manner means are sworn to them, from all such oath, and duty of faith and
allegiance: we forbid them that they presume not to obeie them.

In the same Page.
We admonish and exhort the most Christian king of France, that he be diligent
in executing our sentence. Given at Rome the fifth of the Ides of September. Anno
1585.

Psalm. 109.
O Lord, they shall curse, and thou will bless: those which shall rise against
me shall be confounded, but thy servant shall rejoice.

THE BRVTISH THVNDERBOLT of Pope SIXTVS the fifth, against HENRY the most noble
King of Navarre, and the most excellent HENRY BORBON Prince of Condie:
Together with the protestation and declaration of the manifold nullitie or
inualiditie of the same.
Whereas of late there was a declaration pronounced by Pope SIXTVS the fifth of
that name, being a Franciscan Friar, and it was shortly after published and
printed, that Henry the most noble King of Navarre, and also Henry Borbon the
most excellent Prince of Condie, should first be excommunicate as notorious
heretics from among Christians; and also that they should be put from their
empires, honors, and al dignities, and principally from hope of succeeding in
the kingdom of France: secondly, that their subjects and vassals should be
absolved from the oath of allegiance wherewith they were bound to them: last of
all that they should be set upon by force, sword, arms, and camps by the most
mighty king of France: the most excellent and noble Princes aforesaid, have
thus protested touching that matter: that with the good leave of all
Catholics, and without any hurt of the concord of both religions, which the
same princes do greatly desire to be kept entire in France, that proscription
or declaration of the pope being a Franciscan Friar, was pronounced, published,
and diuulgate against all laws divine and humane: and that for that cause it
is in law none, and to be accounted for none: and that all that furious curse
is nothing, but a brutish thunderbolt of the Roman papacy, whose force is
frivolous, vain, and of none account: and that principally for four causes:
namely, for the incompetencie of the rash judge, the falsenes of the
allegation, the want of judicial order, and for the foolishnes of the form
wherein it is written: whereof we will hereafter entreat in the same order
wherein they are set down.

Of the incompetencie or insufficiency of the judge.
THerefore the first cause of Nullitie is the incompetencie of a rash judge,
which appears thereby, because the papacy of Rome which has taken this
judgment upon it against so great princes, has long ago been condemned for
seven most grievous crimes, by the most part of Christendom: namely, England,
Scotland, Denmark, Sweueland, the most part of Germany, and also the most
part of Heluetia: namely, for impiety, for exercising tyranny in the Church,
for corrupt religion, sacrilege, treason, rebellion, and forgerie. And it is
certain, that although the popedom had not been condemned for so great
crimes, but had been only found guilty, yet notwithstanding I do not say
that it is not lawful for it to be a judge, but not so much as to accuse the
basest or simplest man of any crime of offense, until it have fitly purged it
self of all crimes: so far off is it that in this so great a state of matters
the pope can condemn so great, and so famous and mighty princes of so great
wickedness, especially being unheard and before their cause is tried l. neganda,
19. c. de publ. iudic.
. Which the Canonists themselves do teach 4. quaest. 1. c. 1. 25. q. 1. c.
omnes. 24. q. 1. ca. ait. and duobus cap. seqq.
. And which more is, seeing in this cause of the foresaid princes the matter
and state of the paparie it self is handled, none, either civil or natural
reason, does suffer the pope to sit as judge in his own matter, and to give
sentence for himself in his own cause l. qui iurisdictioni. D. de iurisd. l.
1. c. ne quis in sua causa iud. l. Julianus, 17. de iud.
. But and if the pope be not a fit judge in this matter, but an vncompetent and
unfit judge, as it shall plainly appear by those things which we shall
hereafter speak: it follows that the sentence pronounced by him is none in
law, and that of it self, and without any appeal it falls to the ground.
And we cannot doubt, but that l. 1. and pass. ca. si a non compe. iud. l. 6.
quod si quis, D. de iniust. rupt. test.
the judgment and authority of the most part of Christendom aforesaid, shall
be of great importance with magistrates and orders, and principally with the
Parleament of France: seeing it is evident that this is the law of all nations,
that in deliberations especially being hard and weighty, judgment be always
given according l. item si vnus. 17. vlt. and l. seq. D. de recep arbit.
to the sentence and opinion of the most part: especially where the more part
is judged not only by the number of persons, but also by the manner and
quantity of the universal order: as when of three parts of judges, two make a
departure: suppose eight of twelve: but that England, l. 3. de decret. ab.
ordin. fac. l. 3. and l. 4. D. quod cuiusque vniuer. l. nominationum. 46. c. de
decurio. l. quod mayor. 19. D. ad municip.
Scotland, Denmark, Sweueland, the most part of Heluetia, and part of high and
low Germany, are two parts of three of Christendom, and that therefore they
shall have great weight and authority with the orders and Parleament of France,
we neither can nor ought to doubt, for our singular judgment of their
wisdom. Moreover, it seems that we ought not to let slip even that, that
the pope is rejected for an unmeet and incompetent judge, not only of the
most part of Europe, but also of those Churches and nations, which in Africa,
Egypt, Syria, the East, Asia, and Grecia do profess their name among Christian
Churches.

The manifold crime of impiety, and first for arrogating to himself the
Godhead.
THerefore the first crime whereof the papacy is convict and condemned of the
most part of Europe, we say is impiety, and that threefold: the first because
the pope does get to himself a certain Godhead: secondly, he derideth and
mocketh Christian religion: last of all he brings in into the Church false
and forged religions. The testimonies of the first impiety are these: The pope
does both rejoice and boast that he is called God *: where it is written thus:
It is sufficiently declared, did. 96. satis.
that the pope cannot at all be either bound or loosed by the secular power,
who, as it appears evidently, was called of the most godly prince
Constantine, God: seeing that it is manifest that God cannot be judged of men.
Which place Augustine Steuche a most earnest defender of the pope, and the
keeper of his library in the book of the donations of Constantine, page 141.
praising and reciting, adds this: Do thou hear that the highest bishop
was called of Constantine, God, and that he was taken for God? This was done
when he adorned him with that excellent edict, He worshipped him as God, as the
successor of Christ and Peter: he gave him divine honor, so far as he could, he
worshipped him as the lively image of Christ. Thus writes Steuchus in the
foresaid book, printed at Lions, anno 1547. Of the same kind of impiety is
that of the gloss in the preface of Clement: The pope is neither god nor man,
but he is a neuter between both. Also that other in ca. fundamenta, de elect.
in 6. where, when it was written in the text, that the pope is subject to no
man, he adds thus, And in this point the pope is no man, but Gods vicar.
There follows another blasphemy out of the book of the popes ceremonies.
The pope, says he, in the 1. tit. 7.
night of the nativity of the Lord does bless a sword, which he does
afterward give to some prince, for a token of the infinite power given to the
pope: according to that, All power is given me in heaven and earth. Also, He
shall bear rule from the one sea to the other, and from the river unto the
worlds end. But there is no more deadly and detestable blasphemy found any
where than is that *, where in c. quoniam, de immunit. in 6.
the pope calls the Church his spouse. We says he, being unwilling to
neglect our righteousness, and the righteousness of our spouse the Church, etc.
For all men agree in this, that this is proper to Christ only, to be called
the husband of the Church, and that the Church should be called his spouse: as
it is in Paul *, I have coupled you to one husband, 2. Cor. 10.
to present you a pure virgin to Christ. But let us hear other, such as is
that, The pope is he whom the whole Church ought to obey. 1. did. 93.
Also, When the pope dissolueth matrimony, C. inter corporalia de translat.
praelat.
it seems that God alone dissolueth it, because the pope is canonically
chosen to be God upon earth. The pope has Fell. in cap. ego N. de iureiur.
the place upon earth, not of a pure man, but of a true God. Also, If the pope
should c. si Papa, did. 40.
thrust into hell whole troops of souls, yet were it not lawful for any man
to ask him this question, Why do thou this? Is there any that thinks
aright of Christian religion, which in these monsters of words does not plainly
know Antichrist? of whom Paul says thus, 2. These. 2. That wicked man shall be
revealed, that son I say of perdition, which sets and extolleth himself
against that which is called God, or divine power: so that he sits in the
temple of God, boasting himself as if he were God. What? that he durst also
profess and openly boast that the force and holiness of his seat is so great,
that what baudie person soever, or man how wicked soever, perjured person, or
ungodly person shall sit in that seat, he does draw holiness forthwith from
that sitting? Of which wicked blasphemy this in cap. non nos, did. 41.
testimony is extant. Saint Peter transmised the everlasting gift of his
merits with the inheritance of his innocence, unto his posterity. That which
was granted him by the light of his actions, appertains to those whom like
brightness of conversation does illuminate. For who can doubt that he is holy
whom the top of so great dignity does advance? In whom if good things gotten
by merit be wanting, those are sufficient which are performed by the
predecessor of the place. What? me thinks we hear that fable which the poets
feigned touching the three-footed stool of Apollo, and of the deep hole, from
which came such a breath, that so soon as the prophetess of Apollo was once
set upon that stool, having received behind her the spirit of divination, she
did forthwith power Strab. 9.
out oracles? And yet that detestable blasphemy of the popes champion is
shortly after in c. multi.
, most manifestly reproved by the words of Chrysostom: by which and six
hundred other places of the decree of Gratian we may judge of the folly of
that book. But go to: let us now bring to light other testimonies. The pope is
God upon earth according to Baldus in l. vltim. c. sent. rescind. Decius in c.
1. de constable. Felin. in c. ego N. de iure.
. The pope and Christ make one consistory: so that except sin, the pope can
do as it were al things, which God can do, and he can be judged of none:
according to Abb in c. licet. de elect.
. and those things he does, he does them as god, not as man c. inter incorpor.
de translat. praela. Car. Paris. in conc. 63. number. 162. vol. 4.
. The pope is a certain divine power, and as it were bearing a show of a
visible God: as Ludouicus Gomes. says in reg. cancel
. The pope can make righteousness of unrighteousness ca. debitus, de appellat.
. The pope can dispense against the Apostle, and against the Apostolic canons
31. did. c. lector. 87. did. praesbyter.
. The pope is above the law c. proposuit de conc. praeb.
. That which the pope does, must be counted as don of God c. quanto de transl.
praelat.
. A part of which blasphemies Philip. Deci. in consil. 137 diligenter pro
tenui. number. 3. vol. 1.
reckons up. And Jason, besides these before mentioned, recites these out of
the opinion of the same canonists: which notwithstanding (as it does plainly
appear) he does not allow. The pope is all, and above al, according to Baldus
in l. Barbarius, De officio Praetoris.
. The pope can do all things above law, contrary to law, and without law,
according to Baldus in c. cum super, de causis prop. and pos.
. The pope is Lord of lords, and he has the authority of the King of kings
over his subjects in c. Ecclesia vt tit. pendent.
, according to Baldus. The pope can change square for round: according to
Hostiensis in c. cum venissent, de iud.
. It is sacrilege to doubt of the popes power l. sacrilegij, c. de crim. sacril.
. For the pope is the cause of causes. Wherefore we must move no question
about his power, seeing there is no cause of the first cause: according to
Baldus in d. c. Ecclesia, vt tit. pend.
. And no man can say to the pope, why do thou so? according to Specul in tit.
de leg. nunc ostend. ver. 89. and Bal in praelud. feud
. Thus writes Jason word for word in consil. 145. circa primam, number. 3. vol. 1.
. Which self same things in a manner he does repeat again, only a few words
being changed in consil. 95. requisitus. coll. pend. vol. 4.
. Me thinks we have set down arguments ynow of the first impiety of the pope,
so that the famous Councellers of the king of France, and the Senators of the
Parleament may know and understand, that the most part of Christendom has for
most just and weighty causes rejected and refused the papacy. But
notwithstanding we will ad moreover some other things, and that especially:
That, the pope has so great power both in purgatory, and also in hell, that
he may deliver by his indulgences, and forthwith place in heaven, and in the
habitation of the blessed, as many souls as he will, which are tormented in
those places: as it is in the bull of Clement the 6. and in Ant. Florent. That
the pope has so great power in heaven, part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 6.
that he may canonize and place in the number of the Saints, what dead man
soever he will, maugre the heads of all the bishops and cardinals. Thus writes
Troilus in tract. de canonis sanct. 3. dub.
Maluit. By which and such like we may know how true that oration of Eberard
sometimes Archbishop of Salisburge, was, which he made two hundred years ago in
a public assembly of the Empire of Germany, which we will recite out of the
7. book of John Auentine his Chronicle, printed at Ingolstade, anno 1554. The
chief priests of Babylon, says he, desire to reign alone: they cannot abide
an equal. They will never have done until they have trodden all under their
feet, and they sit in the temple of God, and they be exalted above all that
which is worshipped. Their hunger for riches, and thirst for honor, can never
be satisfied. The more you grant to a greedy man, the more he desires: reach
out your finger, and he will covet your whole hand. He which is the servant of
servants, does covet further to be Lord of lords, as if he were God. He
speaks great things, as if he were God. He changes laws, he establishes his
own: he polluteth, he robs, he spoileth, he coseneth, he slaieth, that
wicked man whom they commonly call Antichrist: in whose forehead is written a
name of blasphemy, I am God: I cannot err. He sits in the temple of God,
he bears rule far and wide. Thus says Eberard. Moreover in the same Auentine
in the same book, there is extant this complaint of Frederike the 2. being
Emperor, in an epistle which he wrote to Otho Duke of Bauaria. The popes of
Rome do seek after lordship and divine power; namely, that they may be feared
of all no otherwise, yea more than God. For it is evident that there be many
Antichrists amongst those Romanists: and that none other are the ouerthrowers
of Christian religion. And shortly after: That man that is called the pope,
namely, being become very wealthy, with the great loss of Christian
godliness, does think that he may do whatsoever he will, as tyrants use to do.
He will render an account of his doings to none, As if he were God. He usurps
that which belongs to God alone: that he cannot err, or be holden with any
religion of a lie: he does require most impudently and imperiously to be
believed. Thus writes he. Moreover, Erasmus in his Annotations of the new
Testament. 1. Tim. c. 1. does witness, that in his time in the schools of the
divines, these things were wont to be called in question and disputed upon.
Whether the pope could abrogate that which was decreed by the apostolic
writings. Whether he could decree any thing which is contrary to the doctrine
of the Gospel. Whether he can make a new article of the faith. Whether he have
greater power than Peter, or like power. Whether he can command the Angels:
whether he can take away all purgatory: whether he be only man: (O detestable
blaspemie) whether as he is God, he do participate both natures with Christ,
whether he be more gentle than was Christ, seeing it is not read that he called
back any from the pains of purgatory. Whether he alone of all men cannot
err. Six hundred such like things are disputed in great printed books. And
that by great divines, especially famous for the profession of religion. These
things does Erasmus write in as many words, Annotat. page 663.

The crime of mocking religion.
But some peradventure will say, it is only impiety and blasphemy of words.
Let us therefore bring to light the wicked factes of the same papacy, a few of
many, as it were for examples sake: that every one may understand, that the
popes many years ago did make but a mock and scoff of Christian religion. And
first of all, that of Gregory the seventh, which we will lay down in the
words of cardinal Benno. The Emperor Henry the third (says he) was wont
often to repair to prayer, to the church of S. Marie, which is in the mount
Auentine. But Hildebrand, who being afterward made pope was called Gregory the
seventh, when as by his spies he made diligent inquiry after all his works,
he made the place be marked where the Emperor was wont to pray: and he
persuaded one by promising him money, to lay great stones upon the beams of
the church secretly, and that he should so order them, that he might throw
them down from above upon the Emperors head as he was at prayer, and so beat
out his brains: which thing when he that was appointed to do so great
wickedness, did make haste to accomplish, and sought to lay an huge stone upon
the beams, with the weight thereof, the stone drew him down, and the boorde
being broken under the beams, both the stone, and the miserable man by the
just judgment of God, fell down into the church floor, and by the same stone
was he quite crushed to pieces. Of which fact after that the men of Rome knew,
and of the order thereof, they tied a rope to the wretches foot, and caused him
to be drawn three days through the streets for the example of others. But
the Emperor of his woonted clemency caused him to be buried. Thus far goes
Benno. Whence we understand how detestable the impiety of the pope was, who
having no regard either of the place wherein the Emperor prayed, and which the
pope professes to be holy to himself: nor of the time, wherein he prayed,
but serving his blind fury and madness, sought the destruction of the
Emperor and his prince. But go too, let us cite another testimony of impiety
out of the same Benno. John bishop of Portua, (says he) who was thoroughly
acquainted with Hildebrands secrets, went up into Saint Peter's pulpit, and
amongst many things in the hearing of the clergy and people, he says,
Hildebrand has done some such thing, for which we ought to be burned alive:
speaking of the Sacrament of the Lords body, which Hildebrand, demanding
oracles from God against the Emperor, threw into the fire, though the
cardinals his assistants did speak against it. These are the goodly
testimonies of the papal piety in Gregory the seventh. Now let us cite
another touching Syluester the second, out of the book of John Stella a
Venetian, written unto the patriarch of Aquileia, being cardinal priest of the
church of Rome of the title of Saint Mark. Last of all (says he) he was made
pope of Rome through the devil his assistance. Yet upon this condition, that
after his death he should be wholly his both in body and soul, by whose
crafts he had attained unto so great dignity. After this Syluester asked him
how long he should live pope? He answered, thou shall live until thou shall
say mass in Jerusalem. Last of all, in the fourth year of his popedom, when
as in the Lent-time in the solemn feast of the holy cross, he song mass in
Jerusalem at Rome, he knew forthwith that he should die by destiny. Wherefore
repenting himself he confessed his fault before all the people: and he prayed
them all, that they would cut in quarters and pieces his body that was seduced
by the devils policy, and being cut and torn a sunder, they would lay it in
a cart, and that they would bury it there, whither the horses should carry it
of their own accord. Therefore they say that the horses came by Gods
providence (that wicked men may learn that there is place left for pardon with
God, so they repent in this life) of their own accord to the church called
Lateranensis, and that he was buried there. Thus writes Stella the Venetian.
There is extant also a certain sermon made in the Easter time by John Gerson,
governor of the University of Paris, wherein he left it written that pope John
the xxij. did hold that the souls of the wicked are not in pain before the
day of judgment. Which heresy of his the school of Sorbona in the same
University did stoutly condemn, and caused that pope to recant his error.
Of the same sort of impiety is that which we will set down in the words of
Raphaell Volaterane, out of his fifth book of Geographie, where speaking of
pope Sixtus the fourth, whose name this our Quintus took, and whose godliness
also he does follow, he writes thus: The pope being privy and helping
thereto, the conspiratours come to Florence, and they meet all together in the
church of S. Reparata at the mass and sacrifice in the morning. In the mean
while Saluiatus departing the church privily with his confederates being
armed, he goes into the court, that he might speak unto the banner-bearer,
feigning that he had some other business. Yet to this end and purpose, that when
the murder should begin in the church, he might be present and ready to set
upon the court and magistrate. Therefore when the watch word was given, in the
Elevation time (mark the notable testimony of the popes holiness: The watch
word, says he, being appointed in time of the Elevation) Bandinus did stick
Julian de Medicis brother to Laurence. Antonie, which was desirous to be
chief, sets upon Laurence on the other side behind his back: and smote
him a little below the throat. When as he forthwith turning himself unto
crieng did avoid the stroke, he fled with speed from him as he was about to
strike again, into the vestrie of the church that was near to him. Then the
popes ambassador (who gave that watch word to commit the murder in the time of
the Elevation) being caught by the citizens, and led by them out of the church
into the court, was committed to ward, and was handled as he had deserved. In
the mean season Saluiatus bishop of Pisa, who of set purpose did protract his
speech with the banner-bearer, that he might see the end, was forthwith
caught, and was the same day hanged up at the court windows: which message
when it came to the popes ears, he did excommunicate Laurence de Medicis, who
(as we have said) was feign to save himself by flieng, because he had laid
hands on Gods priests and legate, and he proclaimed open war against the
Florentines. Thus writes Volateranus. Whereby every man may see, what great
account the popes use to make of their Eucharist. And yet notwithstanding they
will have all Christian religion placed in worshipping, carieng about,
reuerencing, and honoring with all manner honor, the same. But we must bring
forth another argument. For what more certain thing can be brought to show
the impiety of the popes, than that which is common in every man's mouth, that
the order at Rome is, so often as the popes go on progress, that that
Eucharist being laid upon some lean carrian jade, about whose neck a bell is
hanged, is committed to some horse-keeper, and is sent before amongst the
scullions and drudges, and other carriage, as a messenger to show the pope was
coming. For in the book of the popes ceremonies, 1. sect. cap. 3. it is thus
written. After them is led by a friend of the Sextins clothed in red, and
carrieng a staff in his left hand, a white horse, being gentle, carrieng the
sacrament of the Lords body, having about his neck a shrill little bell. Next
after the sacrament rides the Sextin: who, as the other prelates, has an
horse all covered with buckerom, etc. Also sect. 12. ca. 1. After them is led a
white horse trapped, gentle, and fair, having a shrill little bell about his
neck, which carries the coffer with the most holy body of the Lord. Also
cap. 4. Before the pope is always carried the cross by the Subdeacon, and
after the cross is carried the body of Christ upon a white horse with a
little bell, etc. And these are the ordinances of the popes pomp, but they are
but ordinances. For those which frequent Rome, do with great consent witness
both concerning the jade that is sent before, and also touching the sending of
him amongst other carriage. There is a book extant written by John Monlucius
bishop of Valentia, who was often sent ambassador to Rome for the king of
France, which book was written touching religion to Queen mother: whose words
are these *, being Page 101.
turned out of French into Latin; Quoties Papa, etc. So often as the pope goes
on progress, least he seem to give too much honor to his Eucharist, he does
not carry it in his hands: but he sends it away before him three or four
days before he himself goes out of the city, being laid upon an horses
back, wherewith he sends to bear it company, singers, mulitors,
horse-keepers, and other such of his guard of his court, that is, cooks,
kitchingboies, and curtisans (these are his words.) Then the pope who says,
that he is his vicar, follows afterward guarded and trouped with cardinals,
bishops, and other such peers. When he comes to the town, then that which
he calls the body of Christ, which has rested it self a while there, is
brought out of the town to meet him: and straightway they salute one another
by becking, saying not one word. And then he sends it before him again: but
with how great honor? The pope is carried into the city under a rich canapie:
the body of Christ is carried open. What need was there to bring that out of
Rome, and to carry it into another city, seeing there is no parish that is
not full of this sort? What need is there to send it away three, four, six,
ten days before the popes coming? If the pope have instituted that to this
end, that it may be brought to meet him to accompany him, and to set forth his
entrance into the town, there is no town so simple or poor, where there are
not such bodies to be found. If it must needs be brought out of Rome, why does
not the pope himself bring it forth, or at least give commandment that it be
carried with him: rather than send it before him amongst pack horses and his
scullerie? But if for obtaining of rain (as they use to do at Paris, and in
other places) they carry the image of any Saint or Saintesse from one church
to another, they use to do it with great pomp and assembly of men: they have
torches, banners, crosses, and other ornaments borne before them. Nay for the
most part those which carry those images are naked, and only clad in linen,
or at least they go bare foot. And the pope will not be ashamed to send that
before him, which he will have men to believe to be the body of Christ, with a
little lantern, and shut up in a pixe, being laid upon an horse, and
accompanied with the riff raff of his court? Who will think it to be a thing
like to be true, that he that professes himself to be head of the church,
would commit so great an offense, if he had verily believed that the body of
Jesus Christ was corporally under that sacrament? Thus writes Monlucius.
Whereunto we may also add that, which is approved by the authority of many
popes, and is openly received in the Romish church, out of the book of the
Conformities of S. Francis. As Friar Francis Fol. 72.
was saying mass he found a spider in the chalice: which he would not cast
out, but drank her with the blood. Afterward as he rubbed his thigh, and
scratched, where he felt it itch, the very spider came out of his thigh
without doing the Friar any harm. Also, One named Fol. 67.
Bonelus would not believe that the consecrated host was the body of the Lord:
and he said that his ass would eat the hosts: which when S. Anthony heard,
he said mass, and brought a consecrated host to the ass, and showed it her.
Forthwith the ass kneeled down, and bowing down her head did worship it.
Which when Bonelus saw, he became a catholic. Does it not seem that the pope
learned in the school of this ass, that, whereof we spoke before, that when
the Eucharist is brought to him, he uses to beck and bow down his head, and
so to salute it.

Of feigned religions.
THe third argument of the popes impiety remains. For although we have both
a form of Christian religion, and also to worship God, prescribed both by
Christ and also by his apostles, and though we have the same delivered unto us
in the books of the new Testament, and God does accurse those so often, which
bring in feigned religions into the Church: yet the papacy has brought in new
inventions of religion, so absurd and rediculous, that in so great calamity we
must notwithstanding give thanks to the immortal God, that he has suffered
so great wickedness to befall the dull wits alone. The inventions of religions
are these in a manner: first the innumerable troops of Munks, as Augustinians,
Battuti, Benedictines, Bernardines, Carmelites, Capuchines, Cartusians,
Caelestines, Dominicans, of ignorant Friars, Franciscans, Hieronymitans,
Maturines: of which every order has his particular form of cowled gowns
distinct from the rest, and of diverse colors: every one of them have their
proper and several prescript forms to worship their Gods, and (as they say in
plain words) their prescript forms of their religion, their rites and
ordinances, far unlike to the rest. Yet there is such a multitude of them, that
in our Europe the number is thought to amount to five hundred thousand. Which
we may easily conjecture. For Sabellicus has left in writing *, that the sect
of Franciscans did Ennead. 9. li. 6.
so swarm throughout the whole world, that there were of them forty
provinces, and that under every one there were sundry keepers of the convent
(Wardons they call them) and threescore thousand men. So that the master of
the whole order, which they call their general, has oftentimes been heard
promise the pope, at such time as he was to set out an army against the Turk,
of the family of the Seraphicall Francis thirty thousand men of war, which
could play their parts stoutly in the wars: without any hinderance of the
holy service. Again, their inventions of miracles and doctrines are so false,
that now the most of them are not only weary, but also ashamed of so great
folly. Neither would it seem to be a thing like to be true in any man's
judgment at this time, that the vanity of mankind was so great in times past,
and that the darkness of religion was so great, unless there were proofs
heerof extant more clear than the sun. For no man in deed denies, that
amongst the Romans, and other profane nations there were most absurd inventions
of religions: but silly men lived then in cruel and dark clouds, and as it
were in a night when the moon shines not, that is, without any moniments of
holy scripture. But when as the same books of scripture were extant, where
Christ gave light to mankind as the sun beam, who would think, that satan
and the pope could prevail so much by their messengers, that in so great
light, they should notwithstanding blind men's eyes, and as it were keep them
fast bound with bands? Go to then, let us also fet out of the moniments of the
Franciscans and Dominicans some examples of this kind of forgerie. For seeing
this pope Sixtus came out of that crew and sink, we must see what manner form
of religion he brings us out of that school. Therefore let be ranged in the
first rank that common oracle, which we will prove out of the book of the
Conformities of Francis, to be commonly received and approved in the church of
Rome, that Francis son of Peter Bernardo, was in a trance conioined with
Christ, and had as many stripes and marks, and was pricked by Christ in the
selfsame places, as Christ had when he hanged upon the cross: and that for
this cause he was called the Typical Jesus: that is, as it were a type and
figure of Christ crucified. So that as the seal or print makes a mark in the
wax, so Christ did imprint his wounds in the body of Francis: like Jesus
Christ is the image of the father, so is Francis the image of Christ: finally,
that Christ appears in the body of Francis as the image in the glass.
Whereupon comes that wicked and blasphemous verse in the beginning of the same
book:

Francisce, Jesus typice, dux normaque minorum,
Seeds nobis perpetue da regni coelorum.
Francis whom Typical Jesus we call,
The captain and rule of Minorites all,
Grant us in heaven places perpetual.
And now that every one may understand what manner marking that was, which the
church of Rome sets down to be believed of all the faithful, it is worth
the pains to mark the very words of the writer: or rather of our Friar pope
Sixtus, which has decreed that that writer be believed, and reverenced
commonly. For he says *, Not only his hands and feet, were bored, Fol. 228.
but also nailed, so that the nails might be seen in them. Again, the heads
of the nails were black: whereas notwithstanding they should have been like
to the flesh or sinews, whereof they were made: thirdly, the heads of the
nails were very long, and turned back again, whereas notwithstanding there
was neither hammer nor stroke: fourthly, the marks were imprinted in a bonie
place, and not in any soft place: fifthly, though the nails were fleshie, or
sinowie, yet were they hard as iron, strong and solid: sixtlie, the nails
themselves were not short, having only tops or heads, but they were long, and
went through: seauentlie, the nails did not stick out on the other side, but
they turned back, so that you might thrust your finger in under the crook and
bent thereof: eightlie, though the nails were made of flesh or nerves, and
were bent on both sides of his feet and hands, and were longer than they were
thick, truly neither his hands nor his feet were disfigured or drawn
together: ninthlie, the nails were on every side separate from the other
flesh, so that there were tents put in on every side, to stay the blood:
tenthlie, the nails did wag, and yet they could not be removed from his
hands or feet, though S. Clare and others had assaied to do this: eleuently,
the marks of the nails and of his side during this long time were not
putrified, namely for the space of two years and upward: tweltfthlie, the
wound of his side was like the wound of Christ's side. Moreover it was a wonder
how S. Francis (seeing his pain was so great by reason of the opening of his
body in five places, namely in his hands, feet, and side, and the blood
issued thence continually) could live so long, to wit above two years, all
which time he lived after he had gotten his marks. Our cowled friar hear
thou this, who seeing thou have so many years been a general chiefetane of
the Franciscane order, and a great master, have taught these fables in thy
schools, being now the chief stay and top of the same order, and being become
the pastor of the universal church (as thou say) thou go about to
deliver unto us these same monsters in steed of divine oracles? What? If there
were in thee and thy Franciscanes any shame or shamefastnes, should there
remain and continue at Blese a noble city in France, that wicked
superscription written openly upon the church doors touching Francis
Bernardo: His sin shall be sought: And it shall not be found? But it
delights us a little to declare whence these oracles have their authority.
For a few lines after he writes thus: The devil said, that when Christ saw
that Francis was given him to be the standerd-bearer of so great an order, he
imprinted in him the marks of his wounds, and the nails in his hands and
feet, and the wound in his right side. Thus says the devil. And why it was
done, the devil being coniured by a certain priest to tell the troth, after
more things, by the mouth of a woman abiding at Rauenna, called Santese, says
thus: There be two in heaven that are marked, namely Christ, and stout
Francis. Therefore when Christ knew that he would give stout Francis the bull of
his marks, he did not suffer him to receive a bull from the pope, made with
man's hands. Thus said the devil. These Fol. 230. col. 4. and fol. 231. col. 1.
words are written in as many letters out of the same book of Conformities.
Whereby we may understand what authority is due to these oracles, and to this
worthy testimony of theirs uttered by satan: although neither Christ,
neither yet his apostles could abide that he should bear any witness of them.
Now let the noble and famous Counselors of France consider according to their
singular wisdom, seeing that Sixtus the fourth, and Sixtus the fifth, being
both Franciscanes, and presidentes of the Franciscanes, and many other popes
have brought in these forged and blasphemous fables into the church, and have
confirmed them so long by their authority, and do so greatly confirm them at
this day, whether they be justly or unjustly condemned by the most part of
Christendom, of impiety and wickedness. Whereof that they may the more
commodiouslie consider, we will also add another place out of the same book,
where it is thus written: Francis was bodily lifted Fol. 231.
up in the holy mountain of Aluerne, as friar Leo his fellow saw him. For
sometimes he found him in the air, lifted up so high, that he could scarce
touch his feet, and then he did embrace them with tears: sometimes he found
him lifted up from the earth; half as high as beeches: sometimes he found him
lifted up so high that he could scarce see him. And friar Leo did oftentimes
find him speaking with Christ. O good Jesus! Who is he that does not shake
every iointe when he hears these monsters of words? For what other thing is
it to deliver these things to the people in sermons, than to make Francis a
bodied God, and to set him forth to be worshipped of the people of Christ? And
yet there follow more cruel, and filthy things. For Francis himself is
brought in speaking thus. After these things Christ Jesus crucified, laid his
hands to my body, and Fol. 232.
first to mine hands, and secondly to my feet, thirdly, I felt the mark of
his side with great pain: and he did imprint them every time, when I cried out
sore, and he told me certain secret words, which I never told any as yet. Does
our cowled Sixtus think that there is any so void of understanding in this our
age, that he does believe these blasphemous and wicked fables? Does he think
that the Counselors of the king of France and the Senators of the Parleament
are so dull and sottish, that they do not detest these wicked inventions
together with their author the son of Peter Bernardo? Unless peradventure
some man will say, these things are shut up in the selfsame cloisters and
prisons of Munks, and are kept in as mysteries of Ceres, there where they first
took their beginning: and that no man is at this day so void of wit, that he
does not know that these are old wives fables, and dreams of doterels. But on
the other side behold, we have in our hands the fearful decrees of the popes,
wherein they most sharply forbid that no man presume to doubt of the credit of
these histories: and they decree that they be received in the catholic Church
of Rome: that if any man think otherwise, he be counted an heretic and a
schismatike. For in the same book Did. 22. c. omnes.
, it is thus written: Pope Gregory the 9. has made sundry bulls of the holiness
Fol. 234. col. 3.
of S. Francis and his marks, wherein he affirms that S. Francis had truly in
his body imprinted by Christ the marks of the L. Jesus; And he commands all
the faithful to hold this, and to believe it, and that the wise man opposing
himself against it, be punished for an heretic. The Lord Alexander the
fourth, who saw the marks of S. Francis with his own eyes, whiles S. Francis
was yet alive, speaks thus in his bull. The eyes that saw faithfully, saw,
and the most sure fingers of those that handled, felt, the marks in the body
of the same S. whiles he was yet living. Thirdly, the L. pope Nicolas the 3.
gave the like bull. Fourthly, the L. pope Benedict the 12. And forasmuch Did.
11. in fi. did. 12. c. 1. and seq. and did. 22. c. reputatur did. 22. ca.
omnes in fine.
as the determination of the holy Church of Rome is most true and certain (for
the Church of Rome must be followed as a mistress in all things: and he that
speaks against her is counted an heretic 24. q. 1.
, because she has never erred from the path of the apostolic tradition did.
11. c. palam. did. 12. c. praecep. 24. q. 1. c. quoties. 11. q. 3. episcop.
Sola. 17. q. 4. nemini.
, unto which we must have recourse in doubtful and hard matters *, and she is
of force to judge all, and none is permitted to judge her *) and the same
church of Rome has declared that S. Francis was marked by Christ, as it
appears by the foresaid bulls. Wherefore this must be holden most firmly as
true, and he that holds the contrary must be despised of all as an heretic:
and especially seeing the foresaid two popes Gregory and Alexander did not
only see it with their own eyes, but do also expressly say that it has
been witnessed by witnesses worthy of credit. And streightway. Sixthly, Col.
3.
the marking of S. Francis is made authentical even by the testimony of the
wicked spirits, of whom we have spoken before. Thus far out of Fol. 234.
the book of the Conformities, so that all men may now plainly see, that it is
not for nothing that we do so greatly urge these things. For our friar the
excommunicator of kings and princes will not suffer these things to be counted
but trifles: especially seeing he has tumbled so long in the filth of the
Franciscans, and does now profess himself to be a patron and defender of
that order, and commands that they be counted heretics, which will not
believe and highly esteem of the church of Rome in all points. Whereof that no
man may doubt, these things are taught not in one place of that book, that is
fol. 234. but even in the very entry of the book also *, Fol. 3.
in these words: In what saint was the monstrous marking made? Surely in none
other, but in our holy father Francis: as the church of Rome does avouch, and
commands the faithful to believe. Secondly, pope Benedict also granted the
order a feast to be celebrated and kept for the marks. Moreover Antoninus
bishop of Florence says thus: Pope Alexander the 4. anno 1254. taking into his
special Lib. hist. 3. tit. 24. 10.
protection immediately the mount of Aluerne because of the impression of the
holy marks made there in the body of S. Francis, and making the same subject
to the church of Rome, and giving S. Francis great commendation, he gave an
effectual commandment that the friars should never forsake that holy
mountain. The same year being at Anagnia, he sent a servant to carry letters
to the faithful servants of Christ, according to the tenor of Gregory the 9.
touching the holy marks of Saint Francis, wherein he affirms that he saw
them with his own eyes. Also he sent other letters to the Archbishop of Genua,
commanding that he should personally cite and call before him those that had
maliciously put out the marks of the image of S. Francis in the church of S.
Marie and ministry of S. Xistus, to be punished as they had deserved,
inhibiting under danger of cursing, that no man hereafter should attempt to do
the like. Nicolas the third being pope about the year 1280. sent letters to all the faithful servants of Christ, containing a certain testimony of the holy
marks of Francis. Thus writes Antoninus. So that no man ought now to doubt,
but that all Christians, especially so long as this Franciscane friar bears
rule in the Church, must prepare themselves either to abide the punishment
appointed for schismatikes and heretics: or else to embrace these inventions
of the Franciscanes for divine oracles, given by the church of Rome. And that
we may have other and more commodious store of choice, it seems not
vnappertinent, to cite out of the same book of Conformities certain other
notable things, such as is that: A certain citizen, Fol. 66.
says he, slept, and was rapt up into heaven, where he saw Christ and S.
Marie, and other Saints, all which went as they go on procession, giving
reverence to Christ and his mother. But when he saw not S. Francis, he said to
the Angel that led him, where is S. Francis with his crew in this place? The
Angel answered; Tarry, and thou shall see S. Francis, and in what state he is,
and he saw: and behold Christ lifted up his right arm, and out of the wound in
his side came Saint Francis with the banner of the cross displaied in his
hands, and after him a great multitude of friars, and others. Then that citizen
gave his goods to the friars, and he became a friar minor. Also: S. Francis
Fol. 2.
making a representation of the nativity, had Christ in his arms, and whiles
he prayed the virgin that she would grant him comfort of her son Jesus, the
most beautiful virgin her self stood by him, and gave him to S. Francis to
hold in his arms and kiss, from the evening till it was day. Some will say
these are toies: and very bables: but these trifles (as it was sometimes said)
are counted among them matters of weight. Also by these we understand how
wickedly these former popes have mocked the Church of Christ in feining
religions, using the help of one Bartholomew Pisanus in patching these fables
together, and in forcing them upon the unskillful multitude in steed of holy
scripture. What? Whether may we call these trifles, or rather detestable and
execrable things, which are written in these words: Francis was more than John
the Baptist, Fol. 18.
because John Baptist was only a preacher of repentance: Francis was both a
preacher, and also an ordainer of the order of Repentance. He was a forerunner
of Christ: Francis was a preacher and standerd-bearer of Christ, wherein he
surmounteth John Baptist. Also, Francis went before John, because he converted
more unto the Lord, and in more places, namely in the whole world. John
preached but two years and a little more: but Francis preached eighteen
years. John received the word of repentance from the Lord: Francis received it
both from the Lord and the pope: that's more. It was told by an Angel to John
Baptists father, it was declared by the holy Ghost and the prophets what a one
he should be. But S. Francis was declared to his mother and the servants in the
shape of a stranger by the prophets, the Lord Jesus Christ, and also by an
Angel. S. John prophesied in and without his mothers womb: S. Francis
foretold with joy in the womb, that is, being prisoner at Perusius, that he
should be some great man. S. John was the friend of the bridegroom: S.
Francis was like the Lord Jesus Christ. John was the most singular in the world
for holiness: Francis was the most excellent of all other with Christ, for the
conformity of his marks. S. John was advanced in the Seraphicall order: S.
Francis was placed in the very same order in the place of Lucifer. What is it
to mock Christian religion, and to deride the sacred history of S. John
Baptist, if this be not? O God, thou Lord of vengeance, how long will thou
suffer these monsters of popes to mock thy most holy majesty so
reprochfully? How long will thou suffer them to rage in thine holy temple? But
surely there is another place in that same storehouse of blasphemies, almost
more detestable. For * he says: Francis Fol. 39.
is better than the Apostles, because they forsook only their ship and other
things, but yet not their garments, which they had on their back. But S.
Francis did not only forsake all earthly things: but he did also cast from him
his clothes and breeches, and offered himself being clean both in body and
mind, to the arms of the crucified: which we read not of any other Saint.
Wherefore he might well say to Christ, I have forsaken all, and followed thee.
Where be those Pharaos, and the woorser champions of the Pharaos, which count
the iuggling casts of the magitians better than the miracles of Moses: and make
semblance that they take delight in these munkish monsters, that they may
remove the unskillful people from reading the holy scripture, and from
studieng the same, and that they may abuse their subjects as beasts? And yet
these things were believed in former ages: and no marvel, since Paul foretold
so plainly that Antichrist should come with the effectual working of satan,
with all power, and signs, and lieng woonders: and with all fraud of
unrighteousness, in those that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved. Therefore God shall send unto them the
efficacy of deceit, 2. These. 2.
that they may believe a lie: that all that have not believed the truth, may be
condemned.

The invention of the religion of Dominic.
BUt let these things hitherto be spoken of the feined religions in the person
of Francis Bernardo: let us hereafter see somewhat of the inventions of another
friar called Dominic. Wherein we must give the first place to that wicked
comparison, wherein Dominic (God the father of mercy pardon us, which are
compelled to recite these blasphemies) is matched with Christ being God. For in
Antonie bishop of Florence it is thus written, The Lord In hist. par. 3. tit.
23. and ti. 24.
Christ, says he, is Lord absolutely, and auctoratiuely: Dominic possessiuely.
He had many divine visions: he saw Christ once purposed to judge and make an
end of the world: but the virgin Marie besought him that he would stay, and
send Dominic and Francis to preach. And again when he saw the heaven open, and
friars of all sorts in glory: and he saw not his Dominicans, but it was told
him by the son of God, that they were under the garment of the virgin Marie,
whom he saw there: and a certain master of the order of the Minors, which made
a very great masterly book of S. Dominic, says, that in the said vision it
might be said that Dominic did then see God in his essence, as Paul when he was
caught up. But it shall appear that he was very like to Christ, by the
discourse of his life and works. Therefore he was most fitly named Dominic being
most like to the Lord Christ. The Lord says, I am the light of the world: the
church sings of Dominic, You are the light of the world. All the prophets
bear witness of the Lord: of Dominic and his Act. 10. Zach. 11.
order, Zachary said in the person of God, I have taken to my self two rods,
I have called the one Decorem or beauty, the other Funiculum or a little cord.
Beauty or comlines is the order of predicants: the little cord is the order of
the Minors, because they are girt with a plain rope. Before Dominic was borne
in the world, there appeered the images of two painted at Venece, in the church
of S. Mark: the one whereof was like a religious man, in the apparel of the
order of the predicants, with a lilie in his hand. The other was like unto the
Apostle Paul, as he was wont to be painted: over which was written Agios
Paulus, S. Paul, and under the feet of the picture, Per istum itur ad
Christum, by him men go to Christ: under the other picture was written, Agios
Dominicus, S. Dominic, and under him, Facilius itur per istum, men go more
easily by him. And wonder not at this writing, because the doctrine of Paul as
of the other Apostles, was a doctrine leading unto faith. The doctrine of
Dominic, a doctrine leading to the observations of Counsels, and therefore men
go more easily by him unto Christ. 2. The Lord was borne upon the bare ground,
but least the cold should hurt him too much, he is placed in a manger by his
mother the virgin. When Dominic was borne being but a little one, and committed
to the keeping of his nurse, he was often found gone out of his bed, and lieng
naked upon the ground, as if he did already abhor the pleasures of the flesh.
3. When the Lord was borne there appeered a bright star, which guided the wise
men unto him, insinuating that the whole world should be illuminate by him.
Dominic arose, and upon him when he was to be baptized, his spiritual mother
saw a star in his forehead, foreshewing a new sun beam of the world. 4. The
Lord being twelve year old was brought by his parents into the temple, and
there he remained alone being but a boy. Dominic was carried by the neighbors
into the church in his tender years to be put in a divine office, there was he
left. 5. From that time until the time of his youth we find nothing
authentically of the Lord, save only that he increased in age, as being true
man, in wisdom and favor with God and men: but this outwardly. But Dominic
did not only increase in body, but also in mind effectually. 6. When the Lord
was baptized by John in Jordan, the holy Ghost came down in a dove upon him,
to betoken the fulness of grace, and he went into the wilderness. When Dominic
saw the famine increase in all parts of Spain, and saw also that there were
many that were in necessity, and that they had no comforter: in feruencie of
spirit he sold his books and stuff, and dispersed and gave the price thereof
to the poor, and newly and apparently replenished as it were with the holy
Ghost, he did streightway betake himself to the rule under Didacus the bishop,
as another baptism and spiritual desert, sequestered from pleasures and worldly
vanities. 7. The Lord does afterward gather together a few disciples; and in a
short space multiplieth them, sending them two and two to preach the kingdom
of God. Dominic taking with him but a few to lead a religious life, had
afterward a great number, whom he appointed to preach the Gospel, and to heal
the sick. 8. The Lord chose poverty in himself and in his Apostles: but he
had bags to keep those things that the faithful did give, and these did Judas
carry: but Dominic was a true lover of poverty, and exhorted his brethren to
the same. 9. The Lord when he led his disciples, they were so hungry, that
passing through the fields they plucked the ears of the corn, they rubbed
them in their hands, to eat them: and when it was now noone, being weary of
his journey, he sent them into Sychar to buy meat, and they eat thereof by
chance sometimes with unwashed hands. Touching the quality of the meat, it is
verily believed, that they did eat no flesh, but the Paschal lamb for the
keeping of the law. The patriarch Dominic, who spent sometimes the whole Lent,
not only without meat, but also without bread and water, did moderate this
sharpnes in his disciples, giving them leave to drink wine, and to eat white
meats. 10. Peradventure some man will say that it agrees not with the
similitude, that the Lord said to his disciples, Neither shall you have shoes
on your feet: whereas notwithstanding Dominic and his go shod when they go
abroad. But we must know that that was a commandment during but for a time,
for which he granted a dispensation at his last supper. For we may see that
both the Lord did wear shoes, in that which the Baptist says, whose shoo
latchet I am not worthy to loose; and also it was said to Peter in the Acts,
Take thine hose: unless some man say that he did wear hose, but no shoes:
which was not commonly used. And Mark a good imitator of him, gave a cobbler
his shoo to mende when it was broken. So that the Lord and his disciples went
sometimes shod, and sometimes barefoote. And so Dominic was shod when he was in
cities, but in his journey he was oftentimes barefoote. 11. When the Lord was
borne, none other person but his own mother Marie the virgin, did wrap him in
swaddling clouts: and when he was grown up his mother hir-selfe with her own
hands woue him his coat without seame, and his other garments: but of what
color it was we find not, namely, least if it were known, false prophets
should wear the like, and so should not be known to be ravening woolues. The
most blessed virgin Marie showed Dominic and his order what apparel they
should wear, and also the color thereof. For she appeered to S. Raynold when
he was sore sick, and healed him, showing him the garment which S. Dominic and
his sons should wear: namely a great cope, and a coat with a cowle, al
white. 12. The Lord and Dominic being both virgins in mind and body, and very
humble, as the scripture does witness: so Dominic was a most pure virgin and
very humble. 13. Dominic as also Christ did not possess his own bed, scarce
resting his body on the ground after his flood of tears. 14. The Lords
prayer was always heard, when he would, for which cause he said to the father,
I knew that thou hear me always: for though he were not heard in the
garden, when he prayed that the cup might be taken from him: this came to pass
therefore, because in as much he asked according to sensuality, he would not be
heard, according to reason. But Dominic told a certain religious man in the
Lords words, who was very familiar with him, that he did never ask any thing
of God, but he did obtain it according to his desire. 15. The Lord by his own
example did dedicate his Apostles to a mixed life, that is a contemplative and
active in preaching: the virgin his mother and Magdalene to a contemplative.
For Marie stood at the feet of the Lord, and heard his word. Lu. 10. But Martha
and the other women to an active. So the Patriark Dominic, like to another Noe,
made the arc of his religion, which was made of wood glued together with the
mortar of charity, having three roofes or loftes. Placing his brethren
together with him in one, to behold heavenly things, and to preach the
mysteries of salvation; taking to him the nuns that were shut up to
contemplation: in the second applying both men and women to the active life;
and in the third mansion bestowing the brethren and sisters which were called
of the repentance of Jesus, or the warrefare of Jesus Christ. 16. There
departed 72. disciples from Christ, being offended at the doctrine of Christ
which they understood not: who when they departed, Christ asked those that
remained with him, will you also depart? But Peter answered in the name of them
all, Lord to whom shall we go? And S. Dominic, when he had with him some
disciples, being one day tempted they departed from him: only there stayed
three behind; to which Dominic also said; will you also depart? To whom one
made answer, God forbid father, that forsaking the head we follow the feet. At
length as the disciples of Christ which went away, returned to him again, so
also the disciples of Dominic returned to him through his prayer. 17. The Lord
did valiantly bear even until death, many mockes, slanders, and persecutions,
of those that sought to entrap him in his words, sometimes to stone him,
sometimes to break his neck. Dominic did not regard scoffings, reproaches, and
speakings against: so that one did bind stubble upon his back in mockery:
others did cast dirt and other vile things at him. 18. The Lord loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his blood. And Dominic being not void of the
perfection of charity, did bestow the night in Gods service, giving himself
to meditation and prayer: he did execute a threefold discipline as it were
daily with his own hand, not with a cord, but with an iron chain, till the
blood came: one for his own offenses, which were the least: another for those
that were in purgatory: the third for those that are conversant in the world.
19. When the Lord iournied toward Jerusalem, when he saw the city, he wept
over it, and he foretold many secrets of hearts, and events of things to come,
for which it was said in his commendation, A great prophet is risen up amongst
us. When Dominic drew near to cities, beholding in mind, he wept bitterly for
their sins, and he revealed many hid and secret things as a true prophet: as
the death of the king of the Aragons in battle: the conversion of the heretic
Adiu that was to come, whom he therefore commanded to be saved from burning.
Thus far goes Antoninus: whereby the Councellers of the most mighty king of
France may judge, whether the most part of Christendom have justly or unjustly
rejected these inventions of religion brought in by the popes: seeing they
durst so wickedly and heinously set Dominic the munke to be worshipped in the
church of God for an idol, and to match him with Christ being God and our
savior. For we must not give ear to him that shall say that these are only
munkish toies, which grave and learned men do loath. For that which we said
before touching the Franciscane bables of the same sort, do we say in this
place of the Dominicans: seeing they are received for divine oracles in the
church of Rome, that all Christians must either worship them, or else they must
look for such punishments as are appointed for heretics, by this gallows,
cowled, and cord bearing friar. But now let us hear somewhat else. It seems
that nothing can be added to this impiety. But yet let us try what can be
done. For the same Antoninus in the chapter following where he compares the
miracles of Christ and Dominic together, says thus: Dominic raised Page 187.
three from death in the city of Rome, the son of the widow, which being
known to the pope he would have published it: but Dominic for humility did
utterly refuse it. The carpenter that was hired by his brethren, and crushed in
pieces by a wall that fell upon him: and Neapoleon the cardinal of the new
ditch his nephew, which fell from an horse, and was all rent in pieces. I am
fully persuaded, that the Lord did also raise others, because he says in the
plural number, The dead shall rise again, namely Mat. 11.
by me: whereas yet he had only raised the ruler of the synagogues daughter,
according to the Gospels. So likewise we find that S. Dominic did raise other
that were dead though not so notorious. For what shall we think of those
forty strangers which were in a ship in the great river beside Tholosa, who
after they had stood long time under the water after that the ship was drowned,
by the holy prayer of S. Dominic, they came out of the water safe and sound:
what shall we think but that either they were restored to life, or else they
were preserved in the water like fishes? 2. God did twice fill the hungry with
bread that he multiplied, and he turned water into wine. Dominic did twice
procure bread for his brethren from God, at Rome, and at Bononia: which the
Angels brought from the heavenly bread: wherefore it was most sweet. He made an
empty caske full of wine, and another time he turned water into sweet wine.
3. Christ did perfectly heal Simons mother in law that was sick of a fever,
and also he healed many sick folks. Dominic did thoroughly cure a woman of a
quartan ague. 4. Devils came out of many, crieng and saying, Because thou art
the sone of God. Dominic freed many that were vexed of devils in soul and
body. 5. Christ being made immortal entered in twice to the disciples when the
gates were shut: but Dominic being as yet mortal (which is more miraculous)
entered into the church by night the doors being shut, least he should awake
his brethren. 6. The Lord after he departed out of this world, drew infinite
men to the way of truth: though Dominic had reclamed thousands of heretics from
errors, yet many mo after his departure. O wonderful hope which thou have
given (sings the church of S. Dominic) to those that weep to thee in the
hour of death, whiles that thou have promised that thou will profit the
brethren after death. 7. And to come to an end, The Lord says, Power is given
me in heaven and earth. This power was not a little imparted to Dominic, of
things in heaven, in earth, and in hell. For he had the holy Angels to wait
upon him. Moreover, the very Angels coming to the brethren in man's shape, gave
them bread to eat. If we speak of the elements, the fire forgot his force:
when as the book of his doctrine being cast thrice into the fire, came out
thrice unhurt, when the books of the heretics his adversaries were suddenly
consumed. The rain coming down out of the air in great abundance does obey
the sign of the cross, when as not so much as one drop did touch him as he
iournied, though all that country were overflowed with that shower. The water
of the river into which his books fell as he passed over it, could not wet
them: but being drawn out in stead of fish by fishers unhurt and dry as if
they had been in a cofer: after a few days they were restored to him again.
The earth also which contains metals, did not deny him necessary money. For
when as having passed over a certain river in a boat, the ferrie man did
earnestly ask his boat hire of S. Dominic, and he forasmuch as he was poor
did avouch that he had no money, and the ferrie man held him fast by the cloak
asking his money, S. Dominic having prayed, and looking toward the ground, saw
the money whereof he stood in need lieng there, which he gave him, and so set
himself at liberty: but also (which is more) when a certain clerk could not
live chaste, having kissed the hand of S. Dominic as he returned from mass
with a sweet savor, so great a habit of virginity was diffused through his
mind, that afterward he could easily contain himself. What shall I speak of
the infernal spirits? Surely the devils did tremble at his beck, neither were
they able to refuse his power. Which appears: when he led him with him as he
appeered in the shape of a friar, through the assemblies of the convent,
namely, of the Dormitall, quire, fratry, locutorie, and afterward of the
chapter house, and he asked him of every place, what he gained there with the
friars? All which he was enforced to declare. Thus writes Antoninus. By which
we leave it to the kings Counselors to be judged, whether this be the true
religion of Christ, delivered to the Church by Christ's Apostles, or a feigned
fable of satan, brought purposely into the Church by the popes, that they might
either utterly extinguish the desire to read the sacred scriptures, or at least
that they might both be of like authority. Surely we hope that no man
doubts, but that the pope is already convict most manifestly of false and
forged religions: and therefore if he excommunicate the king of Navarre and
Prince of Condie out of the communion of his Church, which maintains these
monsters, he does not exclude them out of the Church of Christ, but out of the
iakes of Dominicans, or rather out of the synagog of satan. Which thing that it
may more plainly and firmly be confirmed, we will cite out of the same
Antoninus a like invention of the popish church. For in the chapter following
he writes thus: Dominic, says he, being one night earnest Page 190.
in prayer, saw at the fathers right hand the son rise up in his anger, that
he might slay all the sinners on the earth: and destroy all that wrought
wickedness. And he stood in the air being terrible to behold, and he shaked
three lances or iauelings against the world that was set upon wickedness, the
first whereof should pearce through the out stretched necks of the proud:
another should let out the bowels of the covetous: the third should bore
through those that were given to the lusts of the flesh. Whose wrath when no
man could resist, the mild virgin his mother met him, and embracing his feet,
besought him that he would spare those whom he had redeemed, and that he would
temper his justice with mercy. To whom her son made answer: See thou not,
says he, what injuries are done to me? Then said his mother: Thou know,
says she, which know all things, that this is the way by the which thou
shall bring them back unto thee. I have a faithful servant whom thou shall
send into the world, that he may preach thy words to them, and they will turn
to thee the savior of all men. Also I have another servant whom I will adioine
to him to be his helper, that he may work likewise. The son said: Lo I am
pacified, and have accepted thy face, but show me whom thou will assign unto
so great an office. Then our Lady his mother offered to Jesus Christ S.
Dominic: and the Lord said to his mother: He will do that which thou have said
well and carefully. Also she offered him S. Francis, whom in like sort the Lord
praised. Then S. Dominic marking his fellow well in the vision, whom before he
knew not, on the morrow he reknowledged him by those things which he saw in the
night, and kissing him with holy kisses, and embracing him sincerely, he said:
Thou art my fellow, thou shall run with me. And a little after: Dominic prayed
by night in the church, and lo the hand of the Lord was suddenly upon him, and
was rapt in spirit before God, and he saw God sitting, and his mother who sat
at his right hand clothed in a cope, of a sapphire color. And looking about him
he saw reioicing in the sight of the most highest infinite multitudes of
spiritual fathers out of every nation, that had begotten both sons and
daughters to Christ, of holy religions. And when he saw none of his sons
there, blushing, and being pricked at the heart, he wept most bitterly. Therefore
being abashed with the glory of Gods majesty, he stood a far off, and durst
not draw near to the countenance of glory, and to the excellency of the
virgin. But our Lady beckened to him with her hand that he should come to her.
But he trembling and fearing, presumed not to draw near, until in like sort
the Lord of majesty called him. Then came the man being pricked and of an
humble spirit, and contrite with his tears, and did most lowly and humbly
throw down himself at the feet of the son and his mother. But the Lord of
glory, the comforter of those that mourn, said to him: Arise. Who when he was
risen, and stood before the Lord, he asked him saying: Why weepest thou so
bitterly? Who said: Because I see in the presence of thy glory men of al
religions: but of the sons of mine order (alas for woe) I see here none. To whom
the Lord said: Will thou see thine order? But he said: That is my desire Lord.
Then the son putting his hand under his mother the virgins cloak, he said to
him: I have committed thine order to my mother. And when he continued in this
godly affection, desiring to see his order, the Lord said to him again:
Would thou so gadly see them? He answered: This do I earnestly desire. And
lo the mother of the Lord pleased her son: and opening wide her golden cope
wherewith she seemed to be covered: and holding it open before her mourning
servant Dominic, and this was so large and huge a garment, that it did sweetly
contain the whole country of heaven by embracing it. Under this covering of
security, in this bosom of godliness, that beholder of high things, and viewer
of the secrets of the Lord, Dominic saw an innumerable multitude of the friars
of his order. Then his mourning was turned into joy, and his sorrow into
solace. Thus writes Antoninus. Ridiculously, blockishly, and absurdly:
peradventure some man will say: Who denies it? But as we said before of
Bernardo his trifles, of what sort soever these be, yet are they both approved
by the authority of the pope, and also received by the church of Rome: and
therefore seeing religion is vndiuisible (for as M. Tullius says, either take
away religion quite, or else preserve it wholly) they must be counted in the
place and number of oracles, of al those which will give their name to the
church of Rome: a heavy decree being added, that he that shall think
otherwise, be counted an heretic and schismatike: forasmuch as by these
inventions allowed by the pope, as well Dominic as Francis is registered in the
number of the Saints of the church of Rome, as the same author Antoninus does
witness. By which we Tit. 23.. 17. fol. 197.
understand, first for how many and for how just causes, most Christian kings,
princes, and magistrates, have condemned the papacy for impiety and forged
religion. Secondly, what authority this execrable declaration ought to have
in the Parliament of France, which was published by Sixtus the fifth, a friar
lately vncowled: in which the most excellent princes aforesaid were pronounced
heretics for none other cause, save only because they thought that they ought
not to make like account of such inventions, as of the holy Scripture. For as
they did oftentimes profess before, and at this day they do profess, so much
as in them lies, before all sorts and orders of men, yea they do openly
denounce, seeing the church of Rome has religion mixed and confused with such
inventions and fables, those things which are drawn out of the pure fountains
of Scripture, those do they most carefully embrace: those things which are
brought in into religion out of these munkish pits and filthy sinks, do they
reject and detest. And yet this is the only cause why pope Sixtus the fifth
has so proudly and cruelly cursed the^ both. Of which pope Sixtus it seems
good to me to speak somewhat in this place, that all men may perceive both
what manner of man he is, and also from what roots he sprang to such pride, and
became so hawtie. Therefore his first name was Felix Peretus. He was borne in a
base village nigh to Formana, called Montalto: in the year 1521. the
thirteenth day of December. Being a boy he was brought up among munkes, that is
(not to say any more) among goat buckes, at length being a young man, he was
chosen into the order of the Franciscanes: unto whose holy rites after he was
admitted, and now grown up, he was at last chosen by the inquisitours of the
Romish faith into their college. Which office when he did so execute a few
years ago, that few could abide his cruel nature, it fell out so by hap at
that time, that he called a certain noble man of Venece before him. When he
did more cruelly handle the man unacquainted with hearing reproaches: not many
days after he met the same noble man by chance: whom so soon as the same
noble man perceived, he commanded one of his waiters to beat down with a
cudgel he had in his hand, the pride of unfortunate Peretus. The unfortunate
man who of Felix was become Infelix, went straightway to Rome, and told pope
Pius the fourth, who was then high governor at Rome. The pope being highly
displeased sends him back again to Venece with greater authority and power.
So soon as he showed the senate his bull, the wise men which knew full well the
troublesome nature of the man, and how that he was inflamed with desire of
revenge, commanded foorth-with a torche to be lighted: and did straightly
command him, that before the torch was burnt, he should get him with speed
out of their coasts if he were wise. Infelix going to Rome again, made his
complaint to the pope. When the pope perceived that he was a man most fit for
his purpose, he did first advance him to this honor, that he made him master of
his palace: that done when Toledanus the archbishop, one of the spanish
inquisition which is fearful to all nations, was suspected of heresy, the
pope sent him into Spain, that he might be present at that question and
judgment. It happened by chance at that time, that he that was then general,
that is, chief prelate of the Franciscanes, (which is the highest office and
dignity of that sort of men) died. Which inheritance the pope gave to Felix
Peretus: who by this means was made the archcowled, chief cowled, and cloaked
cowled friar of that order of Franciscanes: and a few years after he was also
chosen cardinal by the same pope. At length when pope Gregory the 13. was
dead, our archcowling Felix was chosen into his room, in troubling France by
his commendation and favor, who is chief at Rome in furthering these matters,
and whom he does plainly aid in holding the residue of the kingdom of
Navarre. By these degrees and proceedings, he which a few years ago was a
cowled, a roped, a most vile friar creeping in his slitted shoes, is now
become a thunderer, a thunderbolt caster, an excommunicator of kings and
princes,

Most mighty now with double sword
And high advanced, to kiss whose toe
Both Caesar comes and also kings,
In broydred purple which do go.
As Mantuan wrote of Julius the second.

The crime of using tyranny in the Church.
IT follows that we come to the second crime of the papacy, which consists
in using lordship over the church of Christ. For the holy Scripture teaches
us that Christ alone is the head of the Church: and 1. Pet. 2. and 5. Heb. 5.
and 7. and 9. Ephesians, 4. 15. 16. Ibid. 5.
in another place, that Christ is the head of the body of the Church *. The
same scripture gives this name to Christ alone, that he is the chief pastor
and high priest 1. Col. 18. 1. Pet. 2. and 5. Heb. 6. and 7.
. But the pope of Rome says, All the church, says he, through out the world
knows, that the holy church of Rome has right to judge all men: and no man
may give judgment of his judgment, etc. And as follows All the whole church
throughout the world knows, that the seat of S. Peter has power to loose
those things that are bound by the judgments of any bishops whatsoever, which
has power to judge the whole church. Also: The pastoral charge of carefulnes
is inioined Clement. pasto. de sent. and re iudicat. Cap. 1. extrauag. de emp.
and vend.
us by God over all nations of the Christian people. Also, Bearing rule over
the government of the church universal, by the lords providence. Also, Cap. ad
Regimen, extrauag de praebend. c. 1. de treug. and pac.
Being called by the disposition from above to govern the universal church.
Also: * Being called to the government of the universal Church by the
disposition of Gods clemency. Also, * The bishop of c. 1. de consuet.
Rome is appointed by the Lord, over nations and kingdoms. Also, * The holy
church of c. 3. de elect.
Rome, which by the Lords disposition has from God, the principality over all
other churches, as being the mother and mistress of all the faithful. Also,
That therefore all churches 24. q. 1. c. rogamus, etc. sacrosancta.
are subject to the sea of Rome, because Peter's sea was translated from Antioch
to Rome. Also, That the sea of Rome is the head and hinge d. ca. sacro-sancta.
of all churches: and as the door is governed by the hinge: so all churches
are governed by that authority of that sea. But to what end do we seek out
those old things? Seeing our Franciscan Sixtus the fifth began this his bull on
this wise. That, The authority given him by Christ and S. Peter does surmount
the power of all kings and princes, and that the care for all churches, people,
and nations lies upon him. Thus therefore writes the pope of Rome. Now we
must also consider by what right or authority he takes upon him so great
power and lordship. For we see he brings and alleges a double cause of this
lordship and principality: the former from the decree of Christ: Feed my
sheep: and, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock. For in that the Lord said,
says the pope, Feed my sheep, and that generally, Mine, not particularly,
Those or These, by this it is understood that he committed the whole flock to
him. The pope alleges c. vnam sanctam. Extrauag. de mayor. and obed.
another cause out of the Donation of the emperor Constantine did. 66. c.
Constant.
, wherein it is said that Constantine gave him the principality over all the
churches of the whole world. But let us see whether the pope be not fallen into
that error which is not wont to be tolerated in law and judgments, neither
can it by any means be suffered, that a pleader should allege contrary
causes of his intention. But these l. si quis. 7. D. de petit. hered. l. 1. c.
de fur. l. Titius, 99. D. de cond. and demonst.
things are contrary one to another, that Christ gave the pope principality
over all Churches (which he does most plainly affirm in the places above
written) and that The same principality was given him by Constantine, because
that which is every man's own, cannot be his by more and especially by
contrary causes. For their invention l. and an eadem, 14. penult. D de except.
rei iud. l. non vt ex plurib. 159. de reg. iur.
is intolerable, which dispute, that that principality was first given to the
pope of Rome by Christ: and that Constantine confirmed that donation: and that
so soon as the first emperor became a Christian, he gave Syluester the pope the
void possession thereof. First because a false Constantine writes in plain
words, that he gives the gifts of two most great things: of the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction over all priests that are in Christendom: which
the popes call the spiritual principality: and the lordship of the whole west
empire, which the same call, the Temporal lordship. Of the former, the false
Constantine writes thus: Constantine gave this privilege to the bishop of the
church of Rome, that in all the Roman circuit, the priests have him to be
their head, as judges have the king for their head. And streightway: We decree
that he bear rule as well over the four seas, of Alexandria, Antioch,
Jerusalem, and Constantinople, as also over all Churches of God thoroughout
the whole world. What could he write more plainly, to show that he did
attribute to the pope a certain new kind of authority? Who is he that knows
not, that a privilege is opposite to common authority? And that if Constantine
gave a privilege to the pope, the pope had before like and the same
authority, which all bishops did use? But if Constantine could give an
universal principality ecclesiastical, surely he must needs have been lord
of that principality by full right. Which even all the Canonists do grant to
be most absurd, that a secular prince should possess a spiritual
principality, that is, an universal bishoprike over all churches, seeing he
has not the priesthood or bishoprike of so much as of one little church. But
if Constantine had no bishoprike at al, how could he give the universal
bishoprike of all the whole world to Syluester, seeing no man can give more
right or authority to another than he himself has. And we see that this
argument was objected two hundred years ago to the pope by Marsilius of
Patauium, who writes thus: In the decrees Indefens. pacis, cap. 11.
there is found a certain privilege of the emperor Constantine, approved by
the popes, wherein he gave to S. Syluester bishop of Rome, the coactiue
jurisdiction over all churches of the world, and over all the rest of the
priests or bishops. And seeing the pope of Rome, and with him the rest of the
priests or bishops does grant that the said grant was firm, they must
consequently grant, that the same Constantine had altogether the same
jurisdiction or power over them. But let us return to the proposed Dilemma.
For whether the pope hold that he had that principality from God, as he
professes in the places of late cited: or he has it by Constantine his gift:
we will prove both to be false. First by that repugnance or contrariety,
whereof we spoke even now. Secondly, because he cutteth his own throat with
his own sword. For in the decree he cites this place out of Chrysostom:
Whosoever he be that will desire principality upon earth, shall find confusion
in heaven, neither shall he be reckoned among the servants of Christ, which will
entreat of the primacie l. 7. l. 8. de iureiur. in l. priuil. 27. c. de decur.
l. 10.
. Also: Let not the bishop of the chief Did. 4. c. multi. quicunque.
sea be called the prince of priests, or the highest priest, or any such thing,
but only the bishop of the chief sea. But let not even the bishop of Rome be
called the universal bishop. Which self same thing is repeated again and
again c. primae sedis. did. 99.
in a manner in as many words, in the two chapters following. But if we must
dispute out of the civil law, it is most evident, that there be three sorts of
successors. For some be successors of right, and such be heirs, which are
called universal successors: others be successors of the thing, as those to
whom legacies be given, buiers, those to whom gifts be given: which are called
particular successors l. qui ius, 177. D. de reg. iu. cum simil. lib.
. Last of all l. vlt. D. de excep. rei. vend. l. 1.. in locum. D. quod legate.
some be successors of a personal office, which are called Functionis
succedanei, Successors in an office *. The successors of the former sort have
their right and cause from those whom they succeed, whether they be universal
or particular *. But the third have not their right and claim from their
predecessors, but from those by whom they are chosen and are put in their
place: such as the successors of magistrates, tutors, curates, be. For it is a
personal office, l. 1.. 1. l. 6.. vlt. l. vlt. D. de muner. and hon. l. 1..
Sciendum. l. 4. l. 6. D de magist. con. l. 6.. vlt. D. de his qui not. in fam.
that is vpholden by carefulnes and watchfulnes of mind. Therefore when a
magistrate or tutor is dead, one succeeds him in inheritance, another in
office. These things being thus set down, seeing the pope holds that he is
Christ's successor, we may ask him of what kind of successor he professes
himself to be. For he cannot be called an heir and a successor of all the
right, seeing that the inheritance of one that is alive cannot so much as be l.
1. D. de her. vend.
imagined *. But Christ is not dead, but he lives both a blessed and
everlasting life. No more can he be called the successor of a particular thing:
seeing the kingdom of Christ has neither communion nor division, Heb. 1. 5.
no not among the Angels: because God has placed him, as Paul says, far
above all government, and power and principality, and has put al things
under his feet, and has made him head over all Ephesians. 1. 21. 22.
things to the church. But how can he have a successor or vicar in his
universal office, seeing he is neither dead, but lives an everlasting and
blessed life: and seeing he is perpetually present in his church, he does
always execute the office of the chiefest pastor and priest? Moreover, we may
1. Pet. 2. Mark. 16. 20. Psalm. 110. Heb. 2. and 4. and 7. and 9.
add that also without any doubting, that no bishop can be called the
successor no not of Peter, or of any other Apostle, as the canonists use to
call the pope Peter's successor, Apud Decium, in l. qui per successionem, D.
regul. iur.
in Decius, where when the lawiers use to say, that The heir of an heir that
is the Testator, is the heir of the testator though he be heir by the longest
succession: the Canonists reason that every pope is the successor of Peter,
though there came many between. For no bishop has his cause from Peter, or
any other Apostle: but from the choice made by the authority of Christ:
neither does the place, sea, or chair make the succession, but the continuance
of the doctrine of Christ: when as the religion received of Christ, is
continually delivered by all the successors as by hands to the Christian
people. Wherefore those new shifts of certain of the popes clawebacks make
nothing against us, who being moved by hope of some benefice dispute thus:
that the pope of Rome is not the spiritual head of the catholic church, but
the ministerial: because like as Christ does govern particular churches (that
is particular dioces) by particular bishops his vicars: in like sort the same
Christ does govern his universal Church by some one universal vicar of his,
namely, the pope of Rome: who keeps in doing their duty those inferior and
particular bishops, that are subject to his jurisdiction. For we answer this
objection three manner of ways. First, that this principality is not only
not ordained of Christ, but also that it is brought in by the pope of Rome by
ambition and desire to lord it. For when Christ sent his twelve Apostles about
to preach his Gospel, he gave not to some one some singular and principal
commandment, but the like and one to them all: thus, Go ye into all coasts of
the earth, and preach the Gospel among all people and nations. And therefore
in the Revelation the heavenly Jerusalem is not said to be founded upon one
and a particular pillar, or especially upon one of all the rest, but simply
upon twelve: and when as upon the day of Pentecost the holy Ghost was powered
out upon the twelve Apostles, he was not powered out upon some one of them
especially and chiefly, but he was simply powered out upon all. Last of all,
when Paul describes the functions and offices of the pastors of the Church, he
does not give to any one the principality or lordship over the rest, but he
expounds to them the same in plain words: Christ is gone up on high, he has
led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men. For he has made some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors, and teachers, for the
restoring of the Saints, for the work of the ministry to the edifieng of the
body of Christ. The other answer is, that if Christ or Peter had ordained any
principality, and one ministerial head in his Church, no doubt the primitive
Church would have retained that ordinance being so fresh in memory. But on the
contrary we see that the most ancient general Synods of all, namely, the
Nicene, that of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and Chalcedon, did ordain that
over every city should be appointed a bishop: that done, that every province
should have an Archbishop or patriarch, having all like dignity, authority,
jurisdiction, power, degree: besides, that it was granted to the Archbishop of
Rome, that for the antiquity and honor of the city, he should sit in the first
place, but yet not in an higher place: and next him should sit the Archbishop
of Constantinople, for the selfsame cause, because he was bishop of new Rome,
being the emperors city: whereas if they had had regard of the more ancient
Church, that first, or else the second place should have been due to the bishop
of Antiochia: and then the bishop of Alexandria, and of Jerusalem, afterward
the three archbishops of Justinian, made by the emperor Justinian for most
light causes, should take place in like seats: which causes we will show
afterward under the crime of forgerie: where we will reckon up the forgeries,
cossenages, and corruptions devised by the pope of Rome to fill up this his
ambition. The third answer is, that seeing Christ did appoint his Apostles to
be messengers and preachers of his commandments to go throughout diverse coasts
of the earth, we read not that any one of them was appointed to be an
Archmessenger: especially to be mute and to be at ease, that he might lie
busking and loitering at Rome, and harken after those things that were done in
other places of the world wheresoever, and might in the mean season serve his
ambition. For bishops are nothing else but messengers of Christ, and
proclaimers of his commandments, ordained in every city: like as in times
past, the emperors of Rome were wont to give things in charge to the
Proconsuls and Presidents, as all those that are students of the law and
antiquities of the Romans do affirm. Therefore he that is dumb either by
nature or will, that is, he that keeps silence, and does not execute the
office of a messenger and herald, and does not preach the Gospel, he is not
only not worthy of the authority, but not so much as of the name of bishop or
archbishop. But because the popes in their decretals do in every third line
inculcate that song: Because it was said to Peter, Feed my sheep, and Upon
this rock: it is worth the pains to set down the true and natural
interpretation of those places. For Augustine in his 124. tract. upon John:
When (says he) it was said to Peter, I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth: he meant the
universal church that is founded upon the rock. From whence even Peter took
his name. For the rock was not called Petra of Peter, but Peter of Petra or
the rock: as Christ took not his name of Christians, but Christians of
Christ. For therefore the Lord says, Upon this rock will I build my Church,
because Peter had said, Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Therefore
upon this rock, says he, which thou have confessed, will I build my Church.
For Christ was the rock, upon which foundation even Peter himself was
builded. For no man can lay any other foundation than that which is already
laid, which is Jesus. Therefore the Church that is founded in Christ, receives
from him the keys of the kingdom of heaven in Peter: that is, power to bind
and loose sins. For the same which Christ is in the Church by property, the
same is Peter in the rock by signification: by which signification is
understood Christ the rock: Peter the Church. Thus says Augustine, which
thing he repeateth in his book against Iud. paga. And also in the tenth tract
upon John, and of the word of the Lord, ser. 20. Concerning which opinion
Cyrillus says: He called the rock nothing In dial de trinitate lib. 4.
else but by agnomination the unshaken and most firm faith of the disciple:
wherein the Church of Christ is grounded. And this very In epist. ad Ephesians. ca.
2.
same thing does Ambrose In hom. in Mat. 55.
, Chrysostom in c. quodcunque. 24. q. 1
, and also the Canonists * confirm. They allege this same saying of Augustine,
Because in the person of Peter the Church hirselfe received the keys. Which
thing is inculcate out of Hierom in c. omnibus ead. q.
. But Bernard inueighing bitterly against that arrogancy of the popes,
breaks out at length into these words: And in times past truly In epist. 230.
you did rule as Lords over the Clergy contrary to the Apostle Peter: yea and
ye ruled as lords over the faith of the whole world contrary to his fellow
Apostle Paul. But now you have added some new thing, usurping also over
religion it self: what remains but that you proceed to rule as lords, even
over the holy Angels themselves? And Gregory surnamed the Great writes thus
to Mauritius Epist. 30. li. 16.
the emperor. I say boldly, that whosoever he be that calls himself the
universal priest, or desires to be so called, does in his pride go before
Antichrist, because in waxing proud he sets himself before the rest. The
like whereof we may see in many places in the Lib. 6. epi. 188. and epi. 194.
also lib. 7. epist. 3. and 74. and 79. and 80.
same writer and unto the said Mauritius. And thus much concerning the former
part of the Dilemma. Now let us see touching the other, that is, the donation
of Constantine. Though (seeing it may seem that we shall have a fitter place to
handle the same, when we come to entreat of the crime of forgerie) it be fitter
for us at this time in this one word, to pass over all that disputation,
namely, that all that instrument of the donation which the pope brings forth,
is false, feigned, and forged, and that it came out of the same shop, out of
which we showed before the volume of the Conformities of Francis came: whereof
because we shall in their place bring to light 25. most sure arguments, we will
now make an end to this second crime. Only in steed of a conclusion, we
will propounde a question of this Franciscane friar of ours, which will not
easily be answered, as I think. Our Sixtus is pope and also a Franciscane:
inasmuch as he is pope, he has (as we have showed before) not only chief
dignity upon earth, but also great in heaven, purgatory, and hell: inasmuch
as he is a Franciscane, no doubt according to his duty toward his patron he
grants that S. Francis deserves dignity above the Cherubins. We say not
amongst the Cherubins (says Antoninus of Florence) but above the Cherubins:
and it is certain according to the doctors, that the Seraphins are above the
Cherubins. Thus writes Antoninus. Therefore the question is, when this pope
departing Lib. hist. 3. tit. 23. ca. 1.
this life shall be received by S. Francis, whether he shall be placed above
the Cherubins, or the Seraphins? For we have showed that the Dominicane friars
only are placed under the mantle of the blessed virgin. It causes great
doubtfulnes, because, (as Augustine Steuchus writes) the pope is God: as the
Canonists dispute, half a God. But Francis (as we said before out of the
testimony of the devil) is nothing but a stout friar. On the other side, this
our friar calls Francis the Typical Jesus: as if one should say, Another
Jesus, or one that is made like to the former Jesus. If we should place Francis
above the pope, we should place him above his God or demie God, which were most
absurd. If we should give him a place below the pope, nevertheless we should
absurdlie make another Jesus subject to the pope: and peradventure the Jesuits
could not abide that for the high dignity of their name. What shall we say
then? Bartolus was wont in hard questions to admonish his hearers, to bethink
themselves. We in the mean season without any prejudice of the truth, will
leave to this pope that same place which Gregory the Great gives him: which,
what manner one it is we shall set down shortly after, where we shall make
mention of Lucifers coming to hell.

Of the crime of corrupt Religion.
HItherto have we spoken briefly of the second crime of the papacy, according
to our method and order set down. It follows that we entreat of the crime of
corrupt religion. For when as the pope took upon him that chief lordship over
Christian religion; he then determined as it were by his own right to innouate,
new trim and transform it at his pleasure. Whereof this is the first
testimony. The holy Scripture teaches us, that there is one only form of
religion and worshipping of God, the same which is set down in writing, in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles: so that it is not lawful to add any
thing thereto, or to take any thing there fro: no, not for an Angel in heaven.
Therefore Christ says: In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines which
John. 14. 2. Tim. 3. Matthew. 15.
are the commandments of men. And Ier. 7. Which I never commanded, neither
ascended they into mine heart. Therefore Irenaeus bishop of Lions, an author
most ancient: for he wrote about the year of Christ 198. After that, says he,
our Lord rose from the dead, and the Apostles had the holy Ghost given them,
after that power came upon them from above, they were filled with all things,
and they had perfect knowledge of salvation. Also: Cha. 4.
We must not seek the truth at others: seeing the Apostles have most fully
bestowed all things in the church, which belong to the truth: that every one
that will may take of the same drink of life. Also Athanasius in the beginning
of his second book against the Gentiles. The holy scripture, says he, and
inspired by God, is alone abundantly sufficient to all instruction of the
truth. Thus says he. But the pope sets down on the contrary, that, The
discipline of the Church besides holy scripture (so says he in the Council
of Trent) is contained in the traditions of the elders: Triden. council.
session. 4. cap. 1.
which being delivered as it were by hands came unto us also, as being
delivered either by word of mouth by Christ, or else by the holy Ghost. Now
let us see what manner traditions, being delivered to us by our ancetors as it
were from hand to hand, are to be observed. And first of all let us cite that:
The pope uses upon a certain and set day to make certain little images like
to a lamb, of white wax tempered with oil. He affirms that these, if they be
hoong about the neck, do in like sort purge men's sins, even as the blood of
Christ does purge them: he affirms that they drive away lightening, that they
help women in childbirth, and that they save men from burning, and shipwreck.
What more wicked thing can be spoken or thought upon. But these are called the
traditions of the elders, delivered to this pope by his predecessors as from
hand to hand. For in the book of the popes Ceremonies it is written thus:

Balm and pure wax with holy oil
Together mixed a lamb do make: 1. Sect, 7.

Which gift of price and virtue great
To the beloved I betake,
As borne of fountain and adjured
By sacred words. Whose power is great,
For flashing lightnings it depels,
And every evil away does beat.
It breaks sin like Christ's own blood,
It vexes it, It does preserve,
Women with child, and infant saues.
It gives those gifts that do deserve.
The fires force it will destroy,
And fair does save from floods annoy.
Let this then be the first tradition of the popes, which is delivered to us
with like and the same authority as the holy scripture. There follows
another: The holy scripture teaches us that the sacrament of baptism is the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ Jesus for the remission of our sins, and the
Acts. 22. Romans 6. 1. Cor. 6. and 15.
imputation of his righteousness. But the popes traditions do grant baptism to
bells: and the priests of the papacy do abuse so great a sacrament every where
so wickedly, and ungodly, that the emperor Maximilian the first wrote a
complaint concerning that matter, which is extant among his grauamina or
burdenings in these words: Also the suffragans have invented, that they alone,
and none other priest, should baptize bells. That done, the simpler sort do
believe, the suffragans affirming the same, that such bells thus baptized, do
drive away devils and tempests. Wherefore they have sometimes an infinite
company of Godfathers, and especially those that are of wealth are entreated.
In the time of which baptising, they touch the rope wherewith the bell is tied,
and then the suffragan he sings first (as they use to do at the baptising of
infants) and then they altogether make answer, and do double the name of the
bell, and they put a new garment upon it, as they use to do to Christians. And
shortly after: Therefore a thing so wicked and unlawful ought to be abolished.
Maximilian says excellently and clearly. But as the sow in wallowing, so are
the popes delighted in this filth and corruption. And concerning this most
filthy customary pollution of the In tract. de super. number. 3. nu. 9. number. 14.
sacrament, let us read Martin, de Arles. Go to now, let us prosecute other
corruptions of religion. The scripture teaches us that there is but one
mediator of God and 1. Tim. 2. 1. Ioh. 2. Romans 8. Heb. 7. Amb. in epist. ad Heb.
men, Jesus Christ *. And therefore Ambrose says: They are wont to use a
miserable excuse, saying that by just men we may go unto God, as by earls unto
the king. Go to now: is any man so mad, and so unmindful of his safety, that
he will attribute the majesty of the king to an earl, seeing that if any be
found but even to talk of this matter, they may by good right be condemned as
guilty of treason. And these men will not think those to be guilty that give
the honor of the name of God to a creature, and forsaking the Lord do worship
their fellow servants: as if they could do God any greater service. For
therefore do men go to a king by tribunes and earls, because surely the king
is a man: and he knows not to whom he ought to commit the co^mon-welth. But
to please and entreat God, who is ignorant of nothing (for he knows all men's
merits) we need no spokes-man: but a devout mind. For wheresoever such a one
shall speak, he will answer nothing at all. This says Ambrose. What? How
religiously does the papacy keep this ordinance of the holy scripture and
the old Church? It denies that there did ever any saint depart this life,
which was received into the place of the blessed, which does not execute the
office of a mediator and intercessor. Only so? Nay whatsoever bawds,
Francisses, Dominiks, and other deceivers and coseners they would canonize
among the saints, they brought us in the same for mediators and spokesmen. The
scripture teaches us that there be only two places for souls of the dead
John. 5. Matthew. 25.
after this life, heaven for the blessed, hell for the cursed. Therefore
Augustine says *: Lib. hypognost.
The faith of the catholics by the authority of God believes the first place
to be the kingdom of heaven: the second, hell, where every revolt and
stranger from the faith of Christ is punished. Of any third we are altogether
ignorant: neither do we find in the holy scripture that there is any such. Thus
writes he. But the papacy feigneth that there is a third place, where the
souls of certain that are guilty of light, and (as they term them) of
venial sins are purged before they go up into heaven: which place for this
cause they call the fire of purgatory: as if over and besides the blood of
Christ that was shed for our sins to purge us, we need either those pictures
of lambs, or this supposed fire: whereas notwithstanding the scripture does
evidently teach us, that our souls are purged by the only blood of Christ,
and that their blots are washed away by this medicine alone. 1. Ioh. 1. His
blood purges us from al sin. And Mat. 26. My blood shall be shed for many for
the remission of sins. Finally, these are the words of the Tridentine
Council, that There is a purgatory, Sess. 25.
and that the souls that are there kept, are helped by the prayers of the
faithful, and especially by that acceptable sacrifice of the altar. We see how
great corruptions the papacy has brought into Christian religion. Item sess.
6. ca. 30. Sess. 22. chapter 2. etc. 3.
But besides these, innumerable other may be reckoned up. The scripture
teaches us that there be only two sacraments: namely, baptism and the
supper: the former whereof was instituted, Matt. 28. Mark. 16. and the latter,
Matthew. 26. Mark. 14. Luc. 22. and 1. Corin. 11. 23. Therefore Augustine says:
Christ knit together Ep. 218. ad Ianuar.
the society of the new people with sacraments in number fewest, in
observation easiest, in signification most excellent, as baptism consecrate to
the Trinity, and the communicating of the body and blood of Christ. Also: The
Lord and the apostolic doctrine gave but a Lib. de doctr. Christ. ca. 9.
few signs: as is the sacrament of baptism and the celebration of the body
and blood of Christ. And in like number Ambrose in the book of the sacraments
acknowledges only two, baptism, and the Lords supper. But the papacy adds
over and besides these, five more: Order, Confirmation, Unction, Trident. con.
sess. 6. c. 14. sess. 14. c. 1. and seq.
Penance, and Matrimony. The holy scripture teaches us that matrimony is
not only comely and honorable for all men, but also that it is in a manner
necessary to Heb. 13. and 1. Cor. 7.
avoid fornication *. Therefore we read that Peter the apostle had a wife, *
where mention Mark. 1. and Matt. 8.
is made of Peter's wives mother. Moreover Chrysostom * says: The Apostle Ad
Tit. hom. 1.
stops the mouth of heretics, which slander marriage: showing that it is not
a detestable thing, but so honorable, that with it they may go up into the
holy throne even of bishops. To what end should I use many words? The pope
himself says: * If any man shall teach In decret. did. 28.
a priest to despise his own wife under color of religion, let him be
accursed. Also: * Because it Did. 31.
is provided that single life might not be fostered, and that he should be
sequestered from the communion of the faithful, which does separate himself
from his wife because of ecclesiastical orders. Also did. 3. c. si quis
nuptias. But the same pope does in the Tridentine Council so forbid his clerks
and nuns to marry, that he does even enforce them when they enter his holy
orders to take an oath that they will live in perpetual single life: which Paul
shows to be a sure 1. Tim. 4. Titus. 3.
mark of Antichrist. The scripture teaches that we must acknowledge that we
have salvation and justification by Jesus Christ from the alone mercy of God.
Ies. 43. I, I am he, says the Lord, which blot out your iniquities. Also,
Matt. 9. That you may know that the son of man has power to forgive sins
upon earth, I say to the sick of the palsy, Arise, take up thy bed and go
home. But the pope says thus in Bernardin. Rosetus. We can demerit eternal
life with works. Sermon. 20.
Therefore we ought to presume, and hold for a certainty, that after this life
we shall assuredly have eternal life, for the reward of good works. Also in the
Summarie de great. sanct. Good works demerit three things: namely, eternal
life, increase of grace, remission of punishment. As if either the chastity or
holiness of our flesh could be so great, that we should not always be accounted
unprofitable servants, or that we can do those works for our Lord and patron,
besides those that we of duty owe, that we can merit any thing. But let us see
the rest. The scripture teaches, that in the Lords supper as well the bread as
the wine must be given to those Mat. 26. Mark. 14. 1. Cor. 11.
that come thereto *. But the pope will suffer the people to have no more save
only the bread: and forbids them the receiving Council. Constable. sess. 13.
of the cup and wine *. Which inhibition we may so much the more wonder at, De
consecrat. did. comperimus.
because the pope in his Decrees * has left this in writing. We find that
certain having taken only a portion of the holy body, do abstain from the
cup of the holy blood: who undoubtedly let them either receive the whole
sacraments, or else let them be kept from the whole: because there cannot be a
division made of one and the same mystery without great sacrilege. The same
scripture commands all, to take, eat, and drink. But in popery only the
priests take, eat, and drink, which notwithstanding is manifestly forbidden
in the same decree * in these words: When De cons. did. 2. c. peracta.
the consecration is ended let all communicate, which will not want (be put
from) the bounds of the Church: for both the Apostles did thus decree, and also
the holy church of Rome holds this. The same holy scripture does appoint,
that in the Church and assembly of the godly all things be uttered in the
common language, that the multitude may easily understand what every one
says: and adds a reason, because if any thing should be uttered in a
strange and unknown tongue, the multitude could not give their consent, and
answer Amen. But in popery not only the priests, but also the multitude, and
silly women which mumble up certain forms of prayers, do say all in latin. The
scripture teaches us, that Christ is the only bishop and priest, who did once
sacrifice his body for mankind, according to that: * Christ was once 1. Tim. 2.
offered that he might take away the sins of many. And: We are sanctified by
the offering up of the body of Christ once made. And again: Ephesians. 5. and
Heb. 9. and 10.
By one oblation has he consecrated for ever those that are sanctified. But
the pope has made infinite priests, whom he has commanded that so often as
they say mass they should so often sacrifice the body of Christ both for the
living, and also for the dead. Whereupon comes that form of Canon in the
mass: We pray that thou will accept* and bless these gifts, these rewards,
these sacrifices, which we offer up to thee for thy Church. Also upon Easter
day in the secrets of the mass: Receive the prayers of thy people, with the
oblations of the hosts. Also out of the mass for the dead: The sacrifices we
offer unto thee for the souls of thy servants and handmaids. Also: O Lord, we
offer to thee sacrifices for the soul of thy servant. Also in the book of the
Conformities *. As friar Fol. 65.
John was at mass, and in the elevation of the Lords body, as he offered it
for the souls of the dead to God the father: he saw an infinite number of
souls go out of purgatory, as a multitude of sparkles out of a fiery furnace,
and fly to heaven for Christ's merits, who is daily offered in the most holy
host for the quick and the dead. But let these things hitherto be spoken
touching the corrupt, polluted, defiled, and filthy religion of the popes, only
for examples sake. For seeing this crime of the papacy has in many and great
books for the space of more than fifty years together been most plentifully
declared and handled by the Divines of Germany, Heluetia, France, and England,
and by others also, it seems more commodious to come unto the fourth crime of
the papacy.

The crime of Sacrilege.
HItherto have we spoken of the second crime of the papacy. Hereafter order
does require that we entreat of sacrilege, and of that wickedness which
commonly they all Simonie, of Simon Magus. For it is manifest that at Rome the
pope keeps two simonie marks, of those things which they call spiritual.
One is that, wherein benefices are openly sold without any dissimulation, and
that is the most gainefull. Another being not so gainefull, but notwithstanding
filthy and detestable, is that, which is called the tax of the Apostolic
penance, when as impunitie of all sin and wickedness is so manifestly sold,
every sin having a certain sum of money set upon it, that even some canonists
do detest that insatiable covetousness, and robbery. As in the gloss *, where
John the munke c. fundamenta. de elect. in 6.
says, that Rome being builteby Pirates, does as yet retain of his first
beginning. And surely so it is, that yearly an incredible weight of gold is
carried to Rome out of the most wealthy treasuries in the world, which the popes
and cardinals and other epicures of the same order do spend upon the most
insatiable and bottomless gulf of their lusts, with great infamy of the
name of Christians. The names and titles of the former are infinite: but of so
great store these are chiefly reckoned. The tribute of first fruits or
vacances: which is the name of the revenues of the first year, which the popes
gather into their treasury: but these are for the most part doubled, and
tripled. Also the tribute of preuentions, resignations for favor,
commendations, dispensations for age, order, irregularitie, corporal faults.
Also of expectatiue graces, deuolutions, benefices that are like to be void,
privileges, exemptions for not visiting, or to visit by a deputy, of
confessions of those that are agreed, of transactions made under the popes good
pleasure, of changinges of benefices with dispensation, of mandates of bishops,
of expeditions in form by reason of congruitie, for making notories and
protonotories apostolic, with their coadiutors: for letters of greater or
lesser justice, for secular dignities, for dignities ecclesiastical, for new
foundations, or changing the old, or for reduction of regular monasteries into
secular state, or for restoring them again, for receiving fruits during
absence, for legitimations, portable altars, for non obstances, for indulgences
of secular clerks, for reuocations, and reductions, for Toleramus, or
tollerances of concubines, and for rescriptions to suites. Time should fail us
if we should go about to reckon up all sorts of their unlawful scrapings and
robberies. Neither is it greatly needful. For there is a book of the popes
extant, concerning these matters and markets, having this title: The taxes of
the Apostolic chancery, with the Notables, as they write them at this day, of
the church of Rome: in which book there is a worthy saying expressed in these
words in a certain place: And note diligently, that such graces and
dispensations are not granted to poor men: because they are not: therefore
they cannot be comforted. Who is he that is so secure a contemner of God: who
is he altogether so void of conscience amongst the kings counsailers, whom
these monsters of robberies, sacrileges, simonies do not move? Who is so hard
hearted, and such an enemy to his country, which is not thoroughly touched with
so great spoil of the wealth of France, and with the ruin of the poor people,
out of whose marrowes and bowels this money is fet, which the deep lusts of
the popes and cardinals have devoured? That which we are now about to say, will
seem a thing incredible, but yet it is certain and tried to be true. When as
in times past the Roman empire stood, there was such abundance of wealth and
riches, so great store of gold and silver carried thither out of all parts and
places of the world, of the tributes and taxes of all people and nations in a
manner, that, that city was commonly called by the Greek word: The little
Epitomie Athenaeus li. 1. (...).
of the whole world. What if we now show that the pope of Rome does draw to
Rome yearly by his shifts, cosenage, and wicked policies, out of Europe
only, (which is counted but the third part of the world) no less store of
gold and silver, than the emperors of Rome did exact of all coasts of the
earth for so many legions that lay euerie-where in garrison? Let us hear
Flauius Blondus his testimony being a man that was an Italian, and a great
flatterer of the popes, out of his book of Rome restored 3. Now (says he) the
princes of the world do adore and worship the perpetual dictator, not of
Caesar, but the successor of Peter the fisherman, and the vicar of the foresaid
emperor, the chief and high bishop. Now the whole world does worship the
senate of cardinals in Rome, next to the pope. What? That almost all Europe
sends to Rome tributes being greater then, at least equal with the tributes
of ancient times, when every city receives from the pope of Rome benefices
for priests? Thus writes Blondus. But we must a little more diligently frame
the reason of this cruel sacrilege. For Suetonius in the life of Julius Caesar
writes thus: He brought all France into the form of a province, and he laid
upon the same yearly four hundred sesterties by the name of a stipende.
Eutropius left this same written in a manner in as many words in the sixth book
of his breuiarie. If we follow William Budeus his account we shall find that this
number of sesterties is in our coin, ten hundred thousand crowns: or as they
commonly call it, a million: as the Germans use it, ten tuns of gold. This was
a great tribute for France: which it did yearly pay to the emperors in such
sort, that yet notwithstanding there was paid out of the same to some legions
that lay in garrison, a stipende. What if we now prove that the pope of Rome
does with his iuglings and shifts gather to Rome yearly no less sum, without
paieng any thing out of the same? Peradventure it will seem to some a thing
incredible, and altogether monsterous: as I said before: but yet
notwithstanding we shall prove by a most sure testimony that it is most true.
Who is then a witness of that so great robbery or rather sacrilege? The senate
of Paris that bears chief rule in France, which about an hundred years ago,
presented to Ludouicus the eleventh, certain requests for the churches of
France, which Francis Duarene a lawyer translated into Latin, and published
with the kings privilege, twice at Paris, and also twice at Lions: toward the
end of the book concerning benefices. For in the 72. article of the same
requests, it is thus written: That we may specially and particularly show how
greatly the money of the realm is wasted within those three years, we must
mark, that in the holy bishops time there have bin void in this realm more
than twenty archbishoprikes, and bishoprikes: and it is not to be doubted, but
that as well for the yearly tribute which we call the first fruits, as for
other extraordinary costs upon every bull, there have bin paid down six
thousand crowns, which sum amounts to an hundred and twenty thousand
crowns. The 68. article follows: There have bin void in this realm
threescore abbots places: whereof every one cost two thousand crowns at the
least: therefore the sum is an hundred and twenty thousand crowns. 74. At the
same time there were void priorships, deaneries, prouostships, masterships,
and other dignities which have not the pastoral staff for their insigne, more
than two hundred: and for every one of these benefices there were paid down,
five hundred crowns: the sum therefore is, an hundred thousand crowns. 75.
It is manifest that in this realm there be at least an hundred thousand
parishes, which are inhabited and replenished. Neither is there any one wherein
at that time some one did not obtain an expectatiue grace: and for every one
of these they paid five and twenty crowns, as well for the charges of the
journey, as for the making of the bulls: non obstances, prerogatives,
annullations, and other especial clauses, which were wont to be adioined to
the graces expectatiues. Also for the executorie process upon the same graces.
This sum is twenty times five hundred thousand crowns. Thus says the
Senate of Paris. Now let us collect the total sum of the sums. We shall
find that it amounts to the sum of nine hundred six and forty thousand six
hundred threescore and six crowns, and moreover to the eight part of one
crown: which is the third part of that sum which the Senate of Paris shows
to have been carried to Rome in that three years space: namely, eight and
twenty hundred and forty thousand crowns: or to speak plainly in our country
speech, three millions of gold lacking an hundred and threescore thousand: or
(as the Germans say) almost eight and twenty tons of gold. Moreover, we have
found out that the tax of the vacations written in the books of the
treasure-house of the cathedral churches and abbaies of France, being taxed
only; does every sixth year amount to the sum of six hundred, ninety seven
thousand, seven hundred and fifty French pounds, besides the prelacies and
other benefices that are not taxed, the exactions whereof do almost arise to
that sum. And shall there be any in the kings Parleament of France, that will
confess that he can with a quiet mind suffer this whirlepit, or rather Scylla,
Charibdis, or gulf? And will not rather so soon as he hears this loss of
so great sums, detest and accurse that huge and cruel beast with all
prayers? And yet we will not cite this testimony only. Lo we have another out
of the book whose title is, The Forest of common places, which was published
about the end of the Council holden at Basil, wherein is gathered into a
gross sum, the sum of money that during the time of pope Martin the fifts
popedom, was carried to Rome out of France alone, which is said to have
amounted to ninety hundred thousand crowns. And do we wonder that that same
Senate of Paris, did in the same requests, artic. 71. sore and bitterly
complain, that so great a sum of gold and silver was yearly carried to Rome,
so that they were compelled sometimes for the use of the common people of France
to coin brass money for silver money? But let us hear the 62. article of the
same requests. Heertofore (says the Senate of Paris) the people of this
kingdom ran to Rome by heaps, whereof some served the cardinals and
courtiers: some being servants to no man, but being intised by some vain hope,
did spend their own and their parents substance: other some, and that a great
many went to Rome for this purpose, that they might procure trouble to the
rest that stayed here, and that they might wring out of their hands by hook
or by crook their churches and benefices. For we find by experience, that the
greatest part of those which went hence to Rome, was wont to die straightway
either through wearisomnes and danger of the journey, or through the plague,
which is oftentimes very rife at Rome: and those which escaped out of these
dangers, they procured trouble to old men, sick persons, and to such like,
which were continually resident in their churches and benefices. But it did
oftentimes fall out, that silly men being cited to the court of Rome, when as
they could not defend themselves against these false accusers, were enforced to
end their life through wearisomnes and sorrow. 62. Most of those that did hunt
after benefices, did quite empty their parents and friends bags, and at
length, they were brought to great poverty and beggerie. Neither did they
endure so great injuries upon any other hope, save only that they might
sometimes bring home lead for gold: and it fell out sometimes that the gaping
crow was deceived, and that the lead that was bought with gold, was nothing
else but lead. For whiles they trusted to their leaden bulls, there came in one
between, which brought at a sudden an annullation: and sometimes there were ten
or twelve that did gape and catch for one benefice. And when the strife was
once begun, they must back again to Rome to follow the suit: so that whiles
all men ran to Rome from all quarters, the realm was miserably destitute of
her people and subjects. And this surely was the complaint of the Senate of
Paris, of the insatiable covetousness, and greedy robbery of the popes, above
an hundred years ago, which was presented to king Ludouike, and yet not
sproong from the new and fresh robberies of the popes. For there is extant a
decree of that Ludouike that was called Blessed, anno 1228. which does plainly
show how great the covetousness of the popes was in France even at that time:
The exactions Sub. tit. de Talijs.
(says he) and heavy burdens laid upon the churches of our realm by the
court of Rome, whereby the realm is woonderfully impouerished, or which shall
hereafter be laid upon us, will we have to be levied and gathered no farther
forth, save only for reasonable, godly, and most urgent necessity, and such
as cannot be avoided, and according to our express and free consent, and of
the church of our realm. It seems good to me likewise to cite in this place
that excellent conclusion of the Abbat of Vsperge; out of the life of Philip
the emperor, whereby it may be understood, Page 321.
how ancient this complaint was concerning the robberies of the papacy of
Rome, which Sixtus the fifth has determined to maintain stoutly with all his
tyranny. There scarce remained (says he) any bishoprike, or ecclesiastical
dignity, or parish church, which was not in suite, and the cause it self was
brought to Rome: but not with an empty hand. Our mother Rome be glad, because
the sluices of the treasuries of the earth are set open, that the streams and
heaps of money may flow unto thee in great abundance: Rejoice over the
iniquities of the sons of men: because thou have a reward given thee in
recompense of so great evils. Be glad over thine helper discord: because she is
broken out of the pit of hell, that thou may have many rewards of money
heaped upon thee. Thou have that after which thou did always thirst. Sing a
song, because thou have overcome the world through the wickedness of men, and
not through thy religion. Not devotion, or a pure conscience does draw men unto
thee, but the committing of many heinous facts, and the deciding of
controversies gotten by money. Let us also hear the complaint of Theodore
Nihemius being not unlike Tract. 6. c. 37.
to this; that the king of France his Counselors may know, how freely many
good men have long ago detested these sacrileges of the papacy of Rome: and
have detested them at the same time when the Church of Christ was oppressed
with the most cruel lordship of the same papacy. The popes treasure-house
(says he) is like to the sea, into which all rivers run, and yet it does not
ouerflow. For so into this are carried out of diverse parts of the world thousand
waights of gold: and yet it is not filled: wherein there is a generation which
changes swords for teeth: that it may eat up the needy of the earth, and the
poor from among men: wherein there be many blood-suckers which say, Bring,
Bring. The officers of which treasury are called Gentes camerae: and that
truly. For the Gentiles be barbarous nations, which have manners that are
discrepant from the manners of men. O most just Gentiles, which shall have their
lot with the infernal furies, or Harpies, and with Tantalus being a thirst,
which never are satisfied. Moreover, there be certain verses of certain
Canonists extant, which accurse the wicked covetousness of the popes, and
amongst these of one John a munke, of whom we made mention a little before, out
of whose excellent monuments these are recited, and commended.

Rome gnawes her hands, but as for those
Whom gnaw she cannot, those she hates.
To those that give, she listeneth:
Against all those she shuts her gates,
That nothing give. That hellish court
The mother is of evils and care:
Unknown with known she equal makes,
And beasts with those that honest are.
Also in another place:

The court does empty purse and chests,
For why she longs after marks:
If thou disposed be to spare
Thy purse, fly popes and patriarks.
If marks thou give, and with the same
Their chests shall fill, thou loosed shall be:
And clean absolved from all offense,
And ugly sin that holds thee.
Who keeps the house? Whose there? Its I.
What would you have? I would come in?
Do you bring ought? No: Stand at doors.
I bring enough: then come you in.
Hitherto have we spoken of the monsterous robberies of the popes, and of the
former sort of the crimes of sacrileges and simonie: now order does require
that we speak of the other, which is commonly called the penitentiarie tax, if
first we add that one thing, which Francis Petrarcha an Italian, left in
writing touching pope John the two and twenty, that his heirs found in his
treasure house after his death no less than twenty times five thousand
thousand crowns. Which sum the French men express thus, five and twenty
millions of Gold. And the Germans, two hundred and fifty tuns of gold. By the
which every man may easily judge of other sacrileges and spoils of the like
thieves. Therefore the book is extant being published at Paris, anno 1520. with
the privilege of the Parleament of Paris, the sixth day of June the same year,
the title whereof is, The Taxes of the apostolic chancerie: and also the holy
penitentiarie taxes, being likewise apostolic: where fol. 36. you may see
these prices of absolutions, and apostolic markets. An absolution for a munke
that wears voided shoes, and that wears knit garments, seven grosses.
Absolution for a priest that has joined together in matrimony those that are
within degrees of kindred, and has said mass before them, seven grosses. For
him that has lien with a woman in the church, and has committed other evils,
six grosses. For a priest that has married privily certain persons, and has
been present at secret matrimonies, seven grosses. For a layman that has taken
away holy things out of an holy place, seven grosses. Absolution for him that
has had any carnal copulation with his mother, sister, or other kinswoman, or
allie, or with his godmother, five grosses. For him that has defloured a
virgin, six grosses. For a perjured person, six grosses. For a layman that has
slain an Abbat, or another priest under a bishop, which has slain a munke or
a clerk, 7. 8. or 9. grosses. Absolution for a layman killing a layman, gross.
5. For a priest, a deane, or clerk, when the supplication is signed with Fiat,
gross. 18. or 16. Absolution for him that has slain his father, mother,
brother, sister, or wife, or any other kinsman being a layman: because if any
of them were a clerk, the murderer should be bound to visit the apostolic
sea, gross. 5. or 7. For an husband that has beaten his wife, of which beating
she brought forth her child before her time, gross. 6. For a woman that has
droonken any drink, or done some other thing, whereby she has destroyed the
child that was quick within her, gross. 5. Is not the state of Christian
nations miserable and to be lamented, out of whose blood and bowels so great
heaps of money are carried to Rome, to be consumed forthwith in dens,
brothelhouses, and gluttony of the popes, cardinals, and such epicures? Does
not the spectacle of the common people of France seem lamentable and deadly,
seeing that in these times the persecutions of the reformed churches being so
often restored, and renewed, we see innumerable families cast out through
hunger and necessity, beg in the streets, being destroyed and quite past hope
of recovery? And to see the wealthy and fat epicures of Rome to be glutted
with the blood of our citizens? To see the natural countrymen of France that
came of most ancient houses, wander up and down with their wives and children
in strange countries, being driven out of their own country and places where
they were borne? And to see the Romish ruffians which are put into their place
by Sixtus the fifth, to be entertained so courteously by those that are in
authority? O nation of France derided of all other nations, that can so long
bear that tyrannical lordship of the papacy! O Jesus Christ that wast
crucified for us, and raised again, and art placed at the right hand of God
the father, what end do thou show us, or O thou great King what end do thou
give us of our labors?

And to the end the most famous Senators of the Parleament being lawiers may
understand, that there were long ago of the same order learned men, which have
openly detested that cruel and barbarous tyranny, I will hereafter cite some
testimonies out of their books, whereof that is the first, out of D. Albericus.
* The preside^ts l. been a Zenone nu. 18. c. de quad. praescrip.
of the church of Rome (says he) through their crafty and suttel wisedo^
according to the variety of times, have varied their statutes: sometimes
advancing their empire, sometimes depressing it a little and a little. But to
what end? save only that by little and little they might put all things under
their feet, both heavenly things as also earthly things, both temporal and
also spiritual things (as they call them) as they do openly boast. Let the
second author come forth, which is John Peter of Ferrara, in whose public
practices which he wrote above an hundred and fifty years ago, we find it
thus written: This desire did In formula, act. confess.
so increase, that not only the lay men, but also the high priests and clerks
are thoroughly infected with such an infection and vice. For thou see him that
should follow the footesteps of Jesus Christ as his true vicar, possess and
seek with a strong hand to detain the jurisdiction upon earth, in cities, and
towns, and places, which belong naturally both by the creation of the world,
and also by the ordinance of Christ, to the empire of Rome, according to that:
Give to God that which is Gods, and to Caesar that which is Caesar's. Yea the
pope himself endeuoreth to have the superiority over the emperor, which to
speak is ridiculous, and to hear abominable. Also, * Note how and how many
In forma resp. rei. conuen. nu. 10.
ways these clerks do ensnare the laymen: and enlarge their own jurisdiction.
But alas for you silly emperors and secular princes, which endure this and
other things: and make your selves slaves to the popes, and see the world
usurped by them infinite ways, and do not seek to remedy these things:
because you give not your selves to wisdom and knowledge. Therefore mark,
and remember what Hierom says: Perusing old histories I cannot find that any
did divide the Church, and seduce the people from the Lords house, save those
that were made priests to God. Thus wrote that practitioner an hundred and
fifty years ago, as we said, freely, stoutly, and courageously: whereas
notwithstanding about that time the Church of Christ was most of all oppressed
with the tyrannous lordship of the popes. Why should any man therefore marvel
at this time, if we detest the impiety of Sixtus the fifth in defending the
feigned religions of his Francis, his cruelty in renting in pieces the
kingdom of France so often, his madness in treading under foot the majesty of
kings, his robbery and sacrilege in taking away church-goodes? Let us hear
another saying of the same practitioner, * where he In formu. rei con.. Praes.
says thus: Italy shall never be in quiet, until the church do not possess
all cities, or castles: and until the Donation made by Constantine be quite
revoked by some good and mighty emperor: seeing the Psalter and harp do not
well agree together: neither was it granted by Christ or S. Peter that they
ought to possess such things: but let that be given to Caesar that is Caesar's,
and let that be given to God that is Gods. Also * Men (says he) may In formu.
sent. indefinit.. sed ad quemcunque.
appeal to the pope omitting any mean. Which promise was put in for this
cause, that they might draw suites to their court, and satisfy their
covetousness: which notwithstanding they will never do: because the mind,
desire, and endeavor of clearkes above the rest, is in heaping up money
contrary to common honesty, and their promise made to God, giving none
attendance, not bending their study to good manners, nor to the scriptures of
God. Also * Thou ignorant In for. libel. quo agitur ex sub.. ex suo corpore.
lay man, thou must know, that the empire had sometime both swords: namely the
temporal and the spiritual: and so consequently that at that time the
emperors gave al ecclesiastical benefices throughout the whole world: and
they did over and besides choose the pope as it is in c. Adrianus 13. did. and
not at. Innocent. in c. 2. de mayor. and obedient. The emperors granted a
privilege that the goods of those that betook themselves to lead a munks life,
should be applied to the monasteries: by reason of which privilege, monasteries
have bin multiplied, and an infinite number have bin founded throughout the
whole world: in times past for devotions sake, though at this day for spoil
and covetousness sake: in so much that they have destroyed the world, and have
annihilated the state of the empire, and of all the laity. Therefore those
places whether made or to be made, may woorthily be called nets to catch the
goods of lay men. Therefore let a good emperor arise, and let al men say,
Peace be in thy strength, and abundance in thy towers.

The crime of Treason.
IT follows that we come to the crime of treading under foot majesty. For
why should we say that it is hurt or diminished? Seeing the papacy for the
space of these four hundred years, has so proudly contemned all, both
emperors, and kings, and potentates of Europe, that it accounted them not only
vassals, and feudataries, but also most base bondslaues. Of which furious pride
these are most sure Extrauag. de mayor. and obedientia.
testimonies: first in c. vnam sanctam. Upon necessity of salvation we must
believe that every creature is subject to the pope of Rome. Also that, The
bishop of Rome is placed over nations and kingdoms *. The pope has
superiority c. 1. Extrauag. de consuetud.
over the empire, and when the empire is vacant, he succeeds the emperor.
Clement. Pastoralis, de re iudic. The pope can translate the empire from nation
to nation *. The pope c a. venerabil. de elect. c. 2. de re iud.
may depose the emperor *. The pope of Rome has the monarchy of both powers,
both spiritual and temporal: he has the principality of the priesthood, and
he is the head of Christian religion * Look how much the sun does surpass c.
fundament de elect. in 6.
the moon, so much does the pope surpass the emperor *. Al men of what
dignity, and preeminence c. solit. ext. de mayor. and obed.
soever they be, so soon as they come in the popes presence, standing a good
way off, they must kneel thrice before him, and kiss his feet. In the first
book of the popes ceremonies *. When the pope climeth up the lader Sect. 3. c.
3.
to take horse, the greater prince that is present, yea though he were a king
or emperor, he must hold the popes styrrop, and then lead his horse by the
bridle a little way. If the emperor or king were alone, that is, there were
not another king, they must lead the horse alone with the right hand. But if
there were another king, then the more worthy should hold the bridle on the
right hand, and the other on the left hand. But if the pope were not carried
upon an horse, but in a chair or litter: also if the emperor or a king were
present, they must carry the chair or litter, and the pope a little upon
their shoulders. Also *, The chief man Sect. 12. ca. 5.
of the city into which the pope shall enter, though he were a king, shall
lead the popes horse by the bridle: or if the pope be carried in a chair or
litter, he bears the litter together with his nobles a little way: and then
when the pope commands him, he takes horse and rides in his order *. But if
it so please the pope d. lib. 1 tit. 2.
that he will not be carried on a horse, but in a litter: then the emperor or
king, if any be there, must bear the litter upon his own shoulders. Tit. 2.
The emperor must power water upon the popes hands at a feast. At the popes
banquet, the emperor or king of the Romans must bear the first dish. in the
same 2. Tit. The emperor is bound to swear to be true and obedient to the
pope: the form of which in c. 1. de iureiur. etc. tibi domino, did. 63.
oath is extant *. Is not the intolerable boldness of the popes sufficiently
convict by these testimonies? Surely it seems so, specially with those judges
and senators of the parleament, in whom remains any fear of conscience, and
of God: especially seeing that even the canonist doctors do confess the same.
For cardinal Zabarella, who wrote a treatise concerning schism, about the year
of Christ 1406. writes thus in that treatise: We must consider upon doing
honor and homage to the pope, least men pass measure therein, so that they may
seem not so much to honor the pope, as God. For he must so be honored that he
be not worshipped: which S. Peter did not suffer to be done to him: of whom we
read in the Acts. 10. that Cornelius fell down at his feet and worshipped him:
but Peter took him up, saying, Arise: I my self am a man, like to thee. Thus
wrote Zarabella, whereto agrees that of John Faber *. The pope says he, in
words in praefat. instit.
calls himself a servant of servants: but indeed he suffers himself to be
worshipped: which the angel in the Revelation did refuse. Thus writes Faber.

But the popes fet this title and authority of so great pride from the
benefit of Constantine the great, whose instrument is extant, first in Latin
*: and secondly in in did. 96. c. Constable.
Greek, in Augustine Steuchus the master of the popes library, in the book of
the Donation of Constantine, imprinted at Lions anno 1547. as follows: that
the empire of the west, that is, of Italy, Sicilia, Sardinia, France, Spain,
England, Germany, be in the pope of Rome his power: and that he have the name,
like attire, like, and also greater dignity, majesty, empire and power, as
Constantine had: that he have also the like troop of horsemen to wait upon
him: so that when he rides on horseback the emperor do for a time go by him
as his footeman, and wait upon him some space, holding his horse by the bridle.
Concerning which matter the same Steuchus in his second book and threescore
and sixth chapter writes thus: * Also that part of the edict wherein Page 134.
the mighty emperor says that he held the bridle of S. Syluesters horse being
pope of Rome, and that he led his horse (wherein is known the kissing of the
feet) is proved to be true, because the emperors that were successors did the
like not long after. For as the pope of Rome entered into Constantinople,
Justinian having his crown on his head, did prostrate himself and kissed the
popes feet. Also when pope Stephen went to Pipinus the French king, the same
king hearing of his coming, went with all haste to meet him, together with his
wife and children, and nobles; and he sent his son Charles almost an hundred
miles to meet him, together with some of his nobles. Also he himself in his
palace that is called Ponticone almost three miles off, alighting of his
horse, with great humility lieng prostrate upon the ground, together with his
wife, children, and nobles, received the same pope, on whom he waited still as
an usher, unto a little place besides his sell, and brought him with glory to
the palace. These things have I cited word for word out of Iuo Carnotensis:
and he (as I think) out of Anastasius the keeper of the library. Thus writes
Steuchus: the like whereof Platina reports of Pipinus and Charles in the life
of Stephen the second. Now let us confer with these flattering and glosing
words of the pope of Rome, the modesty and commandments of Christ, whose
successor and vicar the pope affirms he is. You know, says he, that the
princes of the nations bear rule over them, and that those that are great do
exercise authority over them. But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your servant: and whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your minister: as the son of man came not that he might
be ministered unto, but that he might minister *. I am in the midst of you as
he Matt. 20.
that ministers *. Therefore so often as he gave any commandment or committed
Luke 22.
business to his Apostles, he did in no place prefer one before another: but he
made like account of all: as being fellows in office, and fellows in one
business. As when he commanded them to go into the world, and to preach the
Gospel, and to confirm that preaching by miracles *. Or Mat. 10. 7. 8. Luke
10. 9.
when he forewarneth them that it will come to pass, that they shall judge the
twelve tribes of Israel, he says not that some one of them shall sit in the
tribunal seat, and the rest in lower places *, as the Mat. 19. 30.
false Constantine writes, I grant to the pope of the church of Rome that the
priests have him to be their head in like sort, as judges have the king for
their head *. When the holy Ghost was sent C. Constable. 96. did
down upon the Apostles as they were together: when power to bind and loose
was granted to them: when they were sent to preach the Gospel, to which of
them (I pray you) is any prerogative of right, or John. 20. Mat. 28. Acts. 1.
privilege granted *?

And surely these are great examples of the popes insolency, pride, and
hautines: but that is somewhat more and more wonderful, which many
historiographers have recorded touching the emperor Friderike Ahenobarbus: and
amongst these Helmodus in the eight chapter of Scl. Chronic. 1. Naucler.
generat. 39. Barnus of the life of popes. When he and pope Adrian were agreed
together, that he should give to the pope as great reverence as he could, as to
S. Peter's successor: finally, that when he did alight, he should hold his
stirrup, it is said that the emperor stood on his right side, and touched the
right stirrup. Whereat the pope was displeased, and reproved the emperor: but
he answered him, that he did it, because he knew not what the holding of
stirrops meant, because that was the first time that ever he held any. Which
things seeing they are so, and the pope has taken to himself so great
lordship over the most mighty princes of the world, yet it is pleasant to
hear, that our pope Sixtus the fifth does call that lordship by the name of
service. For in the beginning of his declaration against the king of Navarre,
he uses these words: That he does therefore excommunicate the King of Navarre
and the Prince of Condie, that during the time of his Service, there may be
peace and quietness, heretics being taken away. What manner service is this with
a mischief, which is spent in possessing the empire of the earth, in treading
under foot the majesty of kings and emperors? Of the same sort of service is
that, which the same pope Adrian wrote to the same Friderike: We wonder not a
little at your wisdom, that you seem not to give to S. Peter and to the
holy church of Rome so much reverence as you ought. For in your letters which
you sent to us, you put your own name before ours: wherein you incur the note
of insolency, I will not say, of arrogancy. Touching which thing the same
Nauclerus Genes. 39.
* does testify. But now we must come to the chiefest and principal testimony
of the popes pride, and of his treading under foot the majesty of kings. For
after that Alexander successor to the same Adrian, had terrified the foresaid
emperor Friderike with his usual excommunication, in those cruel clouds and
darkness of the Church of Christ, and Friderike being infected with the
superstition of those times, was desirous to be absolved from the same: the
pope appointed him a day, in which he should be present in Venece in the chief
church. When he was come thither: as great store of cardinals and bishops stood
by him, the pope denied to release him of his proscription, unless he would
first fall down at his feet and humbly crave forgiveness of him. Which after
he had done, then the pope lifted up one of his feet, and set it upon the
neck of the emperor as he lay prostrate, and then commanded his priests to
sing that verse out of the psalms of David: Thou shall walk upon the adder and
cockatrice, the lion and dragon shall thou tread under foot. Of which ^antish
cruelty there be plentiful testimonies extant in the same Nauclerus, in
Barnus, of the Genes. 40.
life of popes, and Funcius in his chronicles. Is there any of so great a
number of the Senators and Counselors of the French king, that can desire any
greater or more sure testimony of treason, or treading majesty under foot?
Though peradventure some man will say: Why was so great an emperor and so
mighty a monarch so cowardly? Surely this was the fatal superstition of these
times, which did possess the minds of men in so great darkness: concerning
which kind, that of Titus Liuius is known writing of the Bachanals: Nothing is
more deceitful to look to than false religion, when as wickedness is cloked
with the power of the Gods. For men are afraid least in punishing the falsehood
of men, some point of the divine authority mixed among be violate. Thus writes
he. But now we must fetch some other testimonies of the popes Service out of
the majesty of our kings that is trodden under foot, whereby it may more easily
be understood, how that the boldness which is in this pope Sixtus, being
stre^gthned with so great antiquity, is not to be woondered at: seeing that he
durst give the most excellent king of Navarre, and most renowned prince of
Condie this title, as to call them Sons of wrath: ministers of proud Lucifer,
patrons of heretics and heresies: that they lie wallowing in mire and filth:
that they be heads, captains, and chief defenders of heretics, that they be
most earnest fautors of strangers: that they make war against their king,
against him, and also catholics: that they be murderers of religious men: that
Condie a part had heretics for his parents, and that he continues in the
footesteps of his father being a most wicked persecuter of the catholic
church: that he is an author of civil wars and seditions, and that he does
execute all kind of fiercenes and cruelty. And that both of them are a
detestable and degenerate issue: and guilty of treason against God: and
enemies to the true Christian faith. But an evil plague light on thee (most
holy Antichrist) which dare belch out these things, and vomit out this poison
of thy bitterness against such and so great Princes. But as I have already
said, why do we wonder at so great insolency of the pope against these two
most renowned Princes? seeing that he used as great boldness in times past,
against Philip the Fair, the most mighty king of France. For in the year
1286. it is reported that Boniface the eight was so proud, that he did avouch,
that he was subject to his government not only in spiritual things, but also
in temporal things. Only so? Yea he proclaimed him a schismatike and
heretic, and having cursed him with all curses, he did excommunicate him. But
the king being very courageous, thought that he ought not to yield to this his
so great boldness: yea as it became a valiant prince, he brake and did beat down
that fiercenes and madness. For he appointed that inquisition should be made of
his wicked facts, and that he should be made answer for the same, and so soon
as he found him to be convict by manifest testimonies, then he made him be
apprehended at Rome, and cast in prison: in which prison (to use the words of
Baldus and Platina) he that had reigned like a lion, died like a dog: which
history is recorded by most French chronicle writers, besides Platina. Such
was sometime the magnanimity of our kings in despising and repressing the
impudency of popes. For shall any in all France, either noble man, or of the
common sort, either with government, office, power, or also private man, be
thought to bear a good mind toward the kings majesty, in whom this so great
pride of that tyrant of Rome will not provoke lothsomnes and detestation? And
we wonder that our Sixtus being thus taught by satan, being hardened by such
antiquity of cruelty, durst in this his declaration pronounce that, He does
deprive Henry king of Nauarr, and Henry prince of Condie, and all their
posterity, of kingdoms, principalities, dukedomes, lordships, cities, places,
and fees: and also of dignities, honors, and princely offices: for these be
his words. Also: To declare them to be incapable, and unable to succeed in all
dukedoms, principalities, lordships, and kingdoms, and specially in the
kingdom of France. What with a mischief what tragical and Thyesticall
cursing is this, and furious pride of Antichrist, and of an impudent friar? Was
there ever any that heard more outrageous barking of a band-dog or Cerberus,
than this?

But, as I have already said, this boldness of the pope against the king of
Nauarr is not greatly to be woondered at, seeing such was his unbridled fury
against the most mighty king of France. Wherefore let us hear rather other
testimonies of like and the same pride: for it is not for man to contend with
satan in railing speeches: and it shall be sufficient to use that curse of
Michael the archangell: The Lord Jude. 1. 9.
rebuke thee. Therefore to return to our purpose, we must not pass over that
testimony of the same popish service, which is reported touching the same
Boniface, who in the year 1300. when there was great concourse of people at
Rome by reason of the Jubilee, in the first solemn day, the pope showed
himself to the people in his Pontificalibus: the day following, having on the
attire of the emperor, he commanded a naked sword to be borne before him,
crieng with a loud voice: I am the pope, and emperor, and I bear rule in earth
and heaven. And a few days after he proudly rejected Albertus created emperor
by the electors of Germany, when he came to crave his confirmation, denieng
that the election had without his authority ought to be counted firm: seeing
he alone had the authority of both swords. After some good space he confirmed
him upon condition, that with all expedition he should make war against the
French king, whose kingdom he gave him for a pray and reward of his victory.
Which things are witnessed by Cuspianus in the life of Albertus in the
chronicle of Vsperge, and by the writers of the French chronicles. But to what
end do we prosecute these light and trifling things? We have before declared,
that the pope of Rome does claim by the donation of Constantine, the empire of
all the west parts. These be but bare words. Wherefore let us look into the
thing it self. For we deny that there is any king in the west, I mean of
France, Spain, Aragon, Portugal, Hungary, Bohemia, England, Scotland,
Denmark, Sueueland, Ruscia, Croatia, Dalmatia whom the papacy of Rome will
not have to be vassal and feudatarie to it: as if he had received his kingdom
from him as a fee and benefit, and ought for that cause to ow allegiance, and
to do homage to him. It is much that we say, and almost incredible to be
spoken: but the truth shall appear by instruments that we will bring to light,
and by testimonies that we will use. For we will touch every realm according to
the order of the letters.

Of that of England.
AVgustine Steuchus the master of the popes library does witness in his book
of the donation of Constantine, that in 2. page 138.
that library of the popes there is extant a register of pope Alexander the 3.
wherein is found an epistle to William king of England. For as we understand by
that book of Steuchus the master of the library, all the acts of every
pope are written in several registers: to the which what credit we ought to
give the very rule of the law does show, wherein it is said, that a private
writing must be believed, but only against the writer himself. Therefore this
was Alexander his epistle. Your wisdom knows that the kingdom of England,
sithence the time that the name of Christ was there glorified, has bin under
the hand and tuition of the chief of the Apostles. For as you know full well,
the Englishmen were faithful, and in respect of godly devotion, and knowledge
of religion, they gave a yearly pension to the apostolic sea: whereof some
part was given to the bishop of Rome, some part to the church of S. Marie,
which is called the school of the Englishmen, to the use of the brethren.
These things are cited out of Steuchus. But I find these testimonies in other
places besides Steuchus. Flauius Blondus in his 6. book Decad. 2. Then, says
he, John king of England fearing that he was not of sufficient force to deal
with the French king, fled to the mercy of Innocentius the third pope of Rome:
for making England and Ireland feudataries to the church of Rome, by league he
promised to pay for either Island an hundred marks in gold yearly. Antonie of
Florence says *, John king of England of his own accord Hist. part. 3. tit
19.. quinto anno 1223.
by the counsel of his princes, offered, and did freely grant to God, and his
most holy Apostles Peter, Paul, and to the holy church of Rome, and to the
lord Innocentius the third, being pope, all the kingdom of England, and also
of Ireland, with all their rights and appurtenances: and he has done and
sworn homage for the same kingdoms, to the said Innocentius the pope, that
he should hold them hereafter as a feudatarie of the said pope and his
successors. Whereof also Polidore Virgill makes mention in his 15. book. By
this instrument of the pope, if, as I said, we may give credence to a private
writing, the realm of England is feudatarie to the pope. Go to, let us see the
rest.

Of the kingdom of Arragonia.
STeuchus in the self same book *, says. Page 193.
Peter king of Arragonia in the third year of the L. Innocentius the third
being pope: came to Rome to the same Innocentius, and he received from him
solemnly an honorable knighthood: and he offered willingly to S. Peter and to
the holy church of Rome his whole kingdom: and there he had for his fee the
same kingdom. Also he appointed to pay a certain sum of money for the
kingdom of Sardinia.

Of the kingdom of Croatia and Dalmatia.
STeuchus in the same book *, in the register of Gregory the seventh, we
read thus. In the name of the lord, of the holy Page 191.
and indivisible Trinity, in the year of the Lords incarnation, one thousand
seventy six: in the 14. indiction of the month of October, I Demetrius which
am also called Suinumir, by the grace of God, duke of Croatia and Dalmatia,
being made and constituted by thee L. Gebizus, having the power of Pope
Gregory, by the embassage of the apostolic sea, by the synodall and general
election of the whole clergy and people, in the Solantine church of S. Peter,
and being invested and appointed king, in the government of the kingdom of the
Croatians and Dalmatians by the banner, sword, scepter, and crown, to thee I
vow and promise, that I will unchangeably fulfill all things, which thy
reverend holiness shall inioine me, that I may keep mine oath to the Apostolic
sea in all things: and that I may keep irreuocably whatsoever as well the sea
apostlike, as the legates thereof have or shall establish in this realm: that
I may execute justice, and defend the church, also I appoint to pay to S. Peter
yearly in the resurrection of the Lord, the tribute of two hundred Bizanties,
of al my consulships and primacies, for the kingdom granted to me. Furthermore
seeing to serve God is to reign, in steed of S. Peter and of our lord pope
Gregory, and after him instead of his successors in the apostolic sea, I
commit my self to thine hands, and in committing my self I establish this
fidelity with an oath. I say, I Demetrius which am also called Suinumir, by the
grace of God, and the gift of the apostolic sea, being from this day and
heretofore king, shall be faithful to S. Peter and my L. pope Gregory, and
his successors that enter canonically. As for the kingdom, L. Gebizo, that is
given me by thy hand, I shall faithfully keep it, and I shall not take away
the same, and the right thereof from the apostolic sea by any means or
policy at any time: I shall honorably receive, and honestly handle, and send
back my L. Gregory the pope, and his successors and ambassadors, if they
come into my dominion: and I shall humble serve them what service soever they
shall appoint unto me. These things writes Steuchus. Whereby we may know what
eloquent and learned scribes the popes use to have, which cannot only set
down in writing the deeds and famous factes of Francis and Dominic, but also
write the instruments and witnessed briefes of invested feudataries.

Of the kingdom of Denmark.
STeuchus in the same 2. book *, The Page 189.
kingdom of Denmark says he, does properly belong unto, and is the tribute
of the holy church of Rome, which thing the true monuments of the popes do
witness. Alexander the holy bishop, the holy L. to his beloved son Sueuis
king of Denmark, sends greeting and the apostolic blessing. We admonish
your wisdom, that you provide to send to us and our successors the tribute
of your kingdom, which your predecessors were wont to pay to the church of
the apostle: yet so, that it be not laid as an oblation upon the altar, but
that it be offered as well to us as to our successors presentiallie, that it
may be more certainly approved.

Of the kingdom of France.
THere is extant in Nicolas Gillius a french man, and a Chronicle writer, an
excellent epistle of pope Boniface the 8 which we will set down. Boniface the
servant of the servants of God, to Philip the french king: Fear God and keep
his commandments. We will have you know that in spiritual things and
temporal things you are subject to us: there appertains to you no bestowing
of benefices and prebends: and if you have the keeping of any that are void,
reserve the profit thereof for the successors: and if you have bestowed any, we
decree that the gift thereof is void: we count those fools that believe
otherwise. Given at Laterane 4. of the Nones of December in the 6. year of our
popedom. This instrument of pope Boniface is without doubt set down in his
register according to the custom, by the keepers of the library: but let us
hear what the other party answers. For we shall know by the kings answer
what credence and authority we ought to give to these registers of the popes.
Philip by the grace of God king of France, to Boniface that carries himself
for the chief bishop, sends small greeting or none at all. Let your great
folly know, that in temporal things we are subject to none: that the bestowing
of any churches or prebends that are vacant, does belong unto us by our
princely right, and to reap the fruits thereof against all possessours, to
maintain our self profitablie: and as for those that think otherwise, we
count them doltes and mad men. These things are cited out of the Britain
Chronicles of Armorica: the 4. book chapter 14. and out of Nicolas Gillius in the
french Chronicles, whereby we may easily coniect, that howsoever we grant that
these furious letters aforesaid were sent unto kings by the popes, yet did they
sharply and vehemently repress their boldness and rashness. And yet the same
Steuchus the master of the popes library as we have said, trusting to his
register, durst in the same book of his * write thus, Page 198.
and cause it to be printed at Lions. Boniface the 7. against Philip the king
of France, because he did exalt himself against the Church, when the pope had
unfolded to him the old monuments, whereby he taught, that France was subject
to the church of Rome both in holy and profane things, for which it was
necessary that he should reverence and worship the pope as Lord of his
kingdom, when he despised him, he did excommunicate him.

Of the empire of Germany.
THe same Steuchus writes nothing touching this empire by reason of the great
power of Charles the fifth, whom Steuchus was afraid to offend. But we have
else where very many testimonies. First in the canonists *, wherein is
contained c. tibi. Domino* did. 63.
the oath of the emperor Otho, which he gave to the pope. Which pope Clement
affirms to be the oath of allegiance, in c. de iureiur. in Clem.
which vassals do give to their patrones when they receive a fee. Whence the
Canonists do stoutly dispute and reason, that the emperor is the popes vassal,
and that he holds of him his empire by the name of a fee: but also pope
Innocentius the 3. writes, * that the right to choose the emperor in c.
venerabilem, extra, de elect. c. 2. de re iud. in 6. in c. 1. ext. Ne sed.
vacan.
came unto the princes of Germany from the apostolic sea. And * that the
emperor may be deposed by the pope. And *, that the pope when the empire is
void is emperor. And heerupon rose that boldness of pope Innocentius the second,
that he painted in the Laterane church at Rome, the emperor Lotharius, as a
vassal lieng prostrate at his feet, and receiving the imperial crown at his
hands: and did write these verses under the same picture:

Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores.
Post homo fit papae: sumit, quo dante, coronam.
The king before the doors did come,
The cities honors first he swears:
That done the popes man he is made,
Of whom he takes the crown he wears.
The memorial whereof is extant in the chronicles of Hirsaug. in the life of
the abbat Hartuing, and in Radeuic. * And when as lib. 1. number. 9. and 10.
the same day the emperor Friderike had reasoned with the legates of pope
Adrian, Radeuic writes that they answered thus, Of whom the^ has he the
empire if not from our Lord the pope? Moreover, there is extant in John
Auentine *, an epistle of pope Adrian unto Lib. 6. pa. 636.
the archbishops of Treuirs, Moguntine, and Colen written thus: The Roman
empire was translated from the Grecians unto the Almaines: so that the king of
the Almaines was not called emperor before he was crowned by the Apostle.
Before the consecration he was king: after the consecration emperor. From
whence then has he his empire but from us? By the election of his princes he
has the name of king, by our consecration he has the name of emperor; and of
Augustus, and of Caesar. Therefore by us he reigns: our sea is at Rome: the
emperors at Aquis nigh Arduenna, which is a wood of France. The emperor has
all that he has from us. As Zachary translated the empire from the Grecians
to the Almains, so we may translate it from the Almaines to the Grecians. Lo it
is in our power to give it to whomsoever we will: being therefore set over
nations and kingdoms, to destroy and pluck up, to build and plant. Thus writes
the pope of the Germane empire: boldly enough as it seems: seeing he sends
him to Aquisgranus, and into the wood Arduenna, as if he were some sheepherd or
neatheard. Shall there be any of the Counselors of the most victorious emperor
that can abide that fierce and importunate voice of that tyrant? But let us
hear more.

Of the kingdom of Spain.
STeuchus in the same second book: Gregory Page 133.
the seventh, says he, writing to the kings and princes of Spain, says thus:
You know that of old the kingdom of Spain belongs to the church of Rome.
And shortly after out of the register of Epistles of the same pope, which he
affirms to be kept religiously in his library, he sets down this epistle.
Gregory the bishop, the servant of the servants of God, to the kings, earls,
and other princes of Spain, greeting. We will have it known to you, that the
kingdom of Spain, was given by the ancient decrees to S. Peter and the holy
church of Rome for their right and property; and so forth.

Of the kingdom of Hungary.
COncerning the same there is a testimony of like sort extant in the same
master of the library. Gregory the holy bishop, Pa. 186.
the holy lord to his beloved son Solomon king of Hungary, greeting. As thou
may learn of the ancients of thy country, the kingdom of Hungary is
proper to the holy church of Rome; being in times past offered and devoutly
delivered by king Stephen to S. Peter, with all the right and power thereof.
And again: The same Gregory writing to Geusus king of Hungary: we believe
thou know that the kingdom of Hungary, as also other most noble kingdoms
ought to be in the state of their own liberty, and to be in subjection to
none other king of any other realm, save only to the holy and universal
mother the church of Rome.

Of the kingdom of Polonia.
ALbertus Krantz in Wandal. lib. 8. ca. 2. Lakoldus was duke of Cracouia at
this time, and he that bare rule throughout all Polonia. He had from John
bishop of Rome the crown: because he did (...) Lodwik lawful emperor, because
the pope did curse and excommunicate him. For the popes were now come to that
majesty (which secular princes call presumption) that they made kings: citing
the words of him that was first pope after Christ: Behold, says Peter, here be
two swords. Against which the princes interpret the words of the eternal
bishop: Put up thy sword into the sheath, of the carnal, humane, and secular
sword: as if it were not lawful for the pope to fight with it. But Lakoldus
being named and consecrated king by the pope, made all the kingdom tributary to
S. Peter, that there should be paid yearly for every one a penie, which pence
are called Peter Pence.

Of the kingdom of Ruscia.
STeuchus in the same book *. Also the Page 1^^.
kingdom of Ruscia is of right and destraint of the church of Rome, as
appears by the same ancient moniments. Gregory the seventh writing to the
king and queen of Ruscia: To our beloved children, says he, Demetrius king of
Ruscia, and to the queen his wife, greeting, and the apostolic blessing. Your
son visiting the shrines of the Apostles, came to us, and because he would
obtain that kingdom by the gift of S. Peter by our hands, he craved it with
devout petitions, having given due allegiance to the same S. Peter the
Apostle: affirming undoubtedly that that petition of his should be confirmed
and established by our consent, if he might be rewarded with the grace and
defense of the Apostolic authority: to whose petitions we gave consent: and
we gave him the government of our kingdom in the behalf of S. Peter, namely,
with that intention of love, that S. Peter should defend you and your kingdom
by his intercession to God.

Of the kingdom of Sicilia.
CLement the fifth. * Again, we must not In clem. pastoralis de sent. and reiud.
pass over with silence, that the king of Sicilia himself being our known
subject, and the subject of the church of Rome by reason of the foresaid
kingdom, and being a liege man and vassal, has his continual abode in the
same kingdom.

Of the kingdom of Scotland.
POlydore Virgil writes thus in his seventeenth book. In the mean season
Boniface the pope being wearied by the Scots with their petitions, forbad king
Edward that he should not hereafter trouble the Scots with war: because that
realm was before committed by the Scots to the tuition, and made subject to
the power of the pope of Rome. And therefore he avouched that it was in his
power alone to give it to whomsoever he would, or to take it from whomsoever he
would.

Hitherto have we reckoned up all the kingdoms of Christian kings, which the
pope avouches they hold and possess as a fee or benefit received from him. By
every one whereof, and by them all in general, we leave it to men of courage
to judge whether this seems to be the humility of a modest pastor of the
church, so greatly commended of Christ, or rather boldness and hawtines of a
fierce and intolerable giant. Also we would have them think with themselves
whether this so great proud speaking of the popes, came not from the same
spirit from whence that oration of the tyrant Nero, came, which is left by
Seneca to the posterity in his first book of Clemency: Of al mortal men I
was liked and chosen to serve in the place of the Gods upon earth. I am to the
nations the judge of life and death. It is in my hand what condition and state
every man has. What thing soever fortune would have given to any mortal man,
she pronounces it by my mouth. People and cities conceive causes of joy by our
answer. No part does any where flourish save only when I am willing and
favorable. These so many thousands of fencers which my power does suppress,
shall be girded at my beck. It is my jurisdiction what nations ought to be
quite cut off, which ought to be transported, to whom liberty ought to be
granted, from whom it ought to be taken, what kings ought to be bond-slaues,
and upon whose head the princely crown ought to be set, what cities shall come
to ruin, and which shall flourish.

The crime of Rebellion.
THe fourth crime follows, whereof we said the pope of Rome was long ago not
only accused by the most part of Christendom, but also convict and condemned.
We call the same rebellion, that is, factions procured with an envious mind to
overthrow the state of al common wealths that are in Christendom. But because
this our disputation was principally appointed for our country of France; it
seems to be sufficient for this present, if from it alone, and so from the
fresh remembrance of those factions, we fet testimonies of that crime. It is
now three and twenty years, during which our France has been pitifully vexed
in a manner with continual civil wars: do I say with wars? Yea with butcheries,
and furious and cruel slaughters. They that have diligently numbered those
which were slain in those wars, do find them to be no less than twelve
hundred thousand French men borne. Is there any in the Parleament of France
either president or Senator, that dare from his heart swear, that the pope of
Rome was not the Alastor * of or prouoker.
so great evils, that he was not the principal brand of so great a fire? That
he did not continually send cardinals or bishops, and others of his crew and
retinue as messengers to the court of France, that they might inflame the minds
of the kings (like evil angels) to these deadly and bloody wars, to these
butcheries, and to lay waste the realm of France? When as in the mean season
he like a bloody master of fence, having set these swashbucklers by the ears
together, did behold these bloody plays from the top of his castle of
Saint-angell: or like another Nero did from his tower look upon the city,
which he himself had fired: and did feed his eyes with these doleful
spectacles, and did covet to satisfy his cruel mind? But if we will record
those things which have happened in this our realm in the remembrance of our
fathers, we shall first find this: that Lodwik the 12. (alas, what king? Which
obtained the name of the father of the country with the great consent of all
good men) did make subject to pope Julius the second some cities of Italy,
which he took in war. That the pope after a few months did repay this thanks
to the king for the benefit received, that he did not only pronounce him to be
a schismatike and heretic, he proscribed him, he proceeded against him with
the fearful thunderbolts of excommunications: but also he caused all the
French men to be tormented like enemies, and to be slain: he did also promise
reward to the murderers, forgiveness of all their sins, and freedom from
punishment, if any man could murder even but some one French man any manner of
way. What is it to be a rebel, or rather to surpass rebels in all cruelty
and wickedness, if not this? But it is worth the labor to set down somewhat
more plainly all that whole tragedy. That pope was of a cruel nature, and so
fierce, furious, and turbulent, that his companions in robbery and murder the
bishops and cardinals could not abide him, but to the kings and princes he
seemed altogether intolerable. Therefore with the full consent of al, there was
a Council called at Pisa a city of Italy, that by common council they might
prevent those evils that did hang over the Church of Christ by reason of him.
And how wisely, and lawfully, and solemnly that Council was called, appears
by the hundred fifty one Council of Philip Decius a most famous lawier in
those days, which he wrote and published against that pope at Mediolanum. The
furious pope did forthwith disturb that assembly with war and weapon.
Wherefore it was translated by the authority of our king first to Mediolanum,
and then to Lions, where after the matter was heard and examined, pope Julius
was suspended from his popedom: that is, he was for a time put from the
administration of the papacy. Whereof when Julius heard, he was so incensed
with sorrow and anger, that he did not only forbid all French men fire and
water, but also he commanded that every of them that was met, should be
murdered: also he provoked cut-throtes and murderers with rewards, as I have
already said. Which madness or rather fury of his, because William Budeus of
Paris, a man no less loving to his country, than learned and skillful, has
courageously and sharply prosecuted in his books De Ass, it seems to me
most fit to set down all that whole complaint of that courageous man and good
subject, to be read not only of the Senators of our Parleament, but also of
all men of all sorts and orders: especially seeing that all historiographers in
general do woonderfully agree with him in setting down that complaint. For
this is Julius the second, concerning whom both Arnoldus Ferronus, a man very
learned, and an historiographer of our country of France, and Burdegalensis
sometimes a Senator of the Parleament, and many other have written: that as he
came out of Rome against France having gathered an army, having his mind
inflamed against our king, as he led his armed bands out of the city over the
bridge of Tiber being himself armed, in the hearing of many thousand men, he
uttered these words: Seeing Peter's keys help us nothing, go to let us draw
Paul's sword: and forthwith he threw the keys which he brought with him into
Tiber, and he drew his sword. Touching which we know that old verse: in English
thus:

Pope Iulie as the fame does go,
Against France did cruel wars prepare:
His armed band then forth he brought,
And in his hands the keys he bare.
A sword hang by his side, which out
Courageously forthwith he drew:
And Peter's keys into the deep
Of Tiber flood withal he threw.
Then blustering out these words, he said:
If Peter's keys cannot prevail:
Then with the sword of Paul we will
Our cruel enemies assail.
But now let us come to Budeus his complaint which he sets down at large in
his fifth book De Ass: The bloody master of the clergy casting off all
fear of God, sent cruel nations against the Lords people, and accursing those
that took part with the french and their fautors, he raised with more than
tragical wickedness, almost the whole world being loosed from religion against
those that were accursed. Do we not remember that time when Peter and Paul, and
their followers, the principal builders of the church, were not given to fight
battles being infected with the confidence of glistering weapons, but trusting
to blood and innocence, and being otherwise unarmed, they were stirred up with
the trumpet of most hot love, to defend the tents of Christ in the tumult? Now
they are made only bare names, after so long time, though the holy principal
orders of the priests do shadow and cloak their pride with the people only
with their majesty. O hard and monstrous blockishnes of most holy power! For
who did ever in mind conceive so great wickedness, that the Top of priests, the
master of the clergy, that the principal worker of holy things, should
abide to arm his hallowed hands that are yet hot with working at the altar,
against the Lords family! that with a mind more tha^ murderous he should seek
to put out the top of the christian name, namely a most christian king, in the
blockish world! and that he should sometimes shake that mystical sword edgeling
and foyningly in his angry purpose as we think: that he should sometimes
borrow of Mars that bloody spear or iauelin, and should also seek to put
those to death whom with cruel curses he had cast down, which peradventure did
turn upon him? Lo what hands, what feet, thou do willingly kiss, from
which thou ought to pluck back thy mouth though bloody and polluted. O
wretch that thou then art, Julius, and carried with distemperature, which
thoughtest that thou oughtst to obey thy blind anger so far forth that thou
wast carried with furious blindness of mind? and not to respect either thy
self, or the comelines of most blessed majesty through hatred, but carrieng
headlong with thee against their will for the most part, and even murmuring
against thee, that most honorable order, that reverend senate, being famous
with chief reverence, the glory of Libanus, thou should seek to oppress
us with the fall of the tower of the church, and so consequently thy self?
that thou should also change in a manner the whole world, being shaken with
those thunderbolts which thou have raised and shot against it, that thou
should behold us with these fiery eyes, which are inflamed with hatred and
envy, and also burn with fire, and should not now cease, but fall upon our
king as he did burn, thou having obtained thy purpose? O immortal God! was it
lawful for wickedness persuading evil things, to throw down by right or wrong
from the top of the sanctuary so great a man, being even stung with the waspe
of revenge more than that of Atrius? that he should hasten to destroy even his
body and soul in the grave of his enemies. Was it not sufficient for his most
furious wrath to have driven us back again into our own coasts, being
terrified with a thunderbolt, departing from the possession of Italy which we
deadly loved, and that with grief and sorrow, unless he should moreover have
made us fight for our altars and fires (as they say:) and finally to fear
most extreme examples? When as in the mean season under that bloody fenser
almost all this whole country did fight with us with a most deadly envious
mind: where was then that zeal of the Lord, which is just anger revenging the
majesty of God, being hurt or diminished? For it is lawful for the holy
armies to go into the battle with this standerd-bearer alone, if at any time
it be lawful. Did he then, I pray you, fet aid out of that tower of Love, or
chapel of Faith, or crossed standerds? Was he any whit ashamed to call
himself, the Servant of the Servants of God, when as he did boast that he made
France which was always the beauty of Christians, and temple of the popes,
and fortres of religion, famous with the graves of french men? Seeing that a
priest being seauentie years of age, the ambassador of Christ, the author
and parent of peace, did offer sacrifice to Bellona the goddess of war: to
whom he strove to offer sacrifice with great loss of mankind. And even at
such time as the profane multitude did make their prayers before the altars of
peace and concord with a pitiful show. Surely a spectacle worth the
beholding: To see a father not only most holy, but also reverend in respect
of his age and white hairs, stirring up his soldiers whom he had called out
with the fame of Bellona, as it were to procure tumult in France: not
reverently attired in his kirtle, and carrieng his gorgeous arms, not holy
with his pontifical mace or scepter, but clad with a mantell, and in barbarous
attire: but girt with furious boldness, that I may so call it, glistering with
these beastly and vain thunderbolts, having the cruelty of his spirits
appeering in his stern countenance and apparel. Undoubtedly we have seen in
a few years many things, which our posterity will think to be incredible.
The ioints of ecclesiastical authority and discipline being dissolved in this
wind and tempest, how should the right faith have continued, unless it had
been fastened with the iron and eternal pins, and unless it had once been
affirmed and established in the holy moniments? Thus far goes Budeus, a man,
as I said before, that loved his country, and which deserved al praise. Who
though he knew not as yet fully what difference there was between Christ and
Antichrist, yet could he not being enforced with love of his country, but set
down in writing that cruelty and barbarous fiercenes of the pope, to the
eternal reproach of the papacy: that al posterity might understand with how
envious and rebellious a mind our Alastor was the companion of Sarpedon king of
Lycia, whom Ulysses slew at Troie. Alastores were also certain fiends that did
sow plagues, famine and calamity among men.
Alastors raged in the time of Budeus in France. Go to: let us hear another
testimony of the same rebellion against the kings of France, being not a
little more ancient. No man is ignorant that almost half the realm of France
was in times past in the possession of the kings of England for the space of
more than three hundred years. When as king Philip who was afterward surnamed
Augustus, did seek to recover that region in war, it cannot in words be
expressed how prowdly and furiously pope Innocentius the third did set himself
against him. We do not think that any man is so void of humanity, that he is
ignorant that in times past this was the policy of the Romans to bring under
them other nations, that if they did perceive any contention to be risen
amongst neighbors, or kings, or people, they did carefully nourish the same,
and did offer friendship and fellowship to the one party by the most honorable
decrees of the senate, and did also promise that party aid against the other.
After that by these shifts they had overcome and subdued the one side, they
found afterward within short time very easy opportunity to oppress the
other. Our people (says M. Tullius) De Repub.
has now gotten the whole world by defending their companions. The popes
following this self same way of their ancestors, that is (as John the munke a
noble Canonist does interpret it) the way and footesteps of rouers and
murderers, so soon as they know any discord arise among kings and princes that
were neighbors, they began to increase and nourish the same by their messengers
the cardinals: and also to covenant with the one of them, that if by their
means they could obtain the kingdom of their adversary, then they should
confess that the sea of Rome was the author of so great a benefit: and that
they should be sworn to them, to do homage to them, and also pay a yeerelie
tribute to the sea of Rome, for the kingdom newly gotten. When this covenant
and conspiracy was concluded, forthwith the prince that held on the other
side was proclaimed an heretic and schismatike: and his kingdom was adjudged
to him that did first get possession thereof. By which shifts, it cannot be
told, how many fires the popes have kindled in all parts of Christendom within
these four hundred years: how many kings and princes they have made vassals,
tributaries, and stipendaries to them and their filthy stinking sea.
Concerning which matter because we have spoken at large a little before, it
shall be sufficient to speak of those two kings of France and England.
Therefore when there arose contention between them, pope Innocentius the third
sent first from his consistory into France two legates, that they might both
terrify the king with threatening curses, and that they might raise his
subjects to rebel against him, and that they might secretly consult and talk
with the bishops and priests of France. That done, he did so quickly and
sharply raise the emperor Otho the fourth, and also Ferdinandus earl of
Flanders, and many other princes of other countries, to bear arms against the
French king, that unless he had happily with a valiant and stout heart
contemned those threatenings and beastly bulls of that pope, he had lost not
only that part of his kingdom, but also in a short time all the rest. The
remembrance whereof is extant, not only in our French chronicles, but also in
the Canonists *. For that decretall shall be a in c. nouit. 13. extra de iudic.
perpetual moniment of the popes hatred and rebellious mind against our kings
and country.

Therefore we suppose that it is apparent to all men by these things and other
that we have showed before, what authority the orders and Counselors of the
realm of France ought to give to this declaration of pope Sixtus: whom we have
proved by most manifest testimonies to have been not only accused by the
most part of Christendom of most notorious crimes, but also to have been
convict and condemned. But if happily there be any that dispute, that like as
because two parts of three parts of Europe, have put down the pope, the third
part must give him none authority: so seeing two parts of three parts of France
would have his authority reserved to him, it is meet that his authority be
preserved in France: we have a double answer in readiness. The first because
out of that number of French men which takes part with the pope, all
cardinals, archbishops, bishops, priests, innumerable crues of munks and
clerks, and other sharuebugs of the same sort, the popes vassals, finally all
dogs, which lick the popes tribunal seat, must be culled out: because of the
rule of the law wherein we say, In what business soever any man's matter is
handled (because in some respect. sed neque Inst de testam. ordi. l. nullus,
10. D. de test. l. omnibus, 9. C. eodem. l. 1.. in propria, D. quand. appell.
sit.
it concerns him) he is not a meet witness in that business. The second is,
that when as these are culled out of the number, no small part of the rest
which follow the old custom of religion in France, do that not with judgment
and willingly, but being compelled with threatenings and terror: that they are
no more to be numbered amongst the clients of the papacy, than (as the lawiers
say) witnesses or Gardans retained in any business by violence and fear, are
numbered among fit witnesses and authors, of whom Vlpian writes finely, those
that are present at any act or l. 1.. vltim. D de tutel. l. qui testament. 20..
vlti. D. qui testamen. fac. l. nouiss. 7.. 1. quod falls. tutor auctor. l. 2. D.
de iud.
business against their will, they seem to be no more present, than if they had
been in that place being asleep, or oppressed with the falling sickness.
Finally, all men perceive, that if the French men had like liberty to use and
exercise both religions, scarce the fourth part of the people of the realm
would continue in the religion of the sea of Rome. In which place it likes us
well to recite that old saying of Bartholus, who in the preface of the Digests
*, number. 14.
where disputing about Constantines donation, and rekoning up the opinions of
other doctors, when he comes to his own, he says thus: Lo: we are upon
earth of the church, (for he taught at Bononia) and therefore I say, that that
donation was of force. Where notwithstanding he writes many things afterward
flatly against that donation. And in like sort when the canonistes did dispute
that it was not lawful for the emperor to condemn any man of rebellion, that
did follow the popes faction: Bartholus making mention of the sentence of
Henry the emperor, wherein he had condemned Robert king of Sicilia of
rebellion, and of the contrary sentence of pope Clement the fifth, whereby he
had absolved the same Robert: he shows surely that he dare not oppose
himself against the pope. But he dissembleth not to allow the emperors
sentence: with which Bartholus the canonists were therefore greatly displeased,
which use that verse of the pope and Caesar, calling the pope their Jupiter:

Caesar with Jupiter does divide,
The empire reaching far and wide.
Moreover Bartholus disputes in the same place, that it was so far off, that
Robert was the popes vassal, as the pope avouched against the emperor: that
he testifies that when Robert was dead Aloysius his heir did swear
alleagance to the emperor in the name of Sicilia, in the city of Pise, he being
there present. Concerning which matter we must repair to the constitution of
Henry, Ad reprimendam, Qui dicant rebel. and the contrary In Clem. Pastoralis,
de iud.
constitution of the pope, abrogating and reprochfully reuersing that. But if
we think it meet to speak any thing of the ecclesiastical rebellion of
popes, it shall not be amiss to bring to light the testimony of one that was
sometime a most famous Senator of Paris, called Cosma Guymerius: who upon the
preface of the pragmatical decree written at Bituriga, the author whereof was
king Charles the seventh, reckons up some things which are greatly
appertinent, to know the madness of these Romish Alastors. About the year of
our Lord, says he, M. cccxxc. after the death of Gregory the eleventh, when
the cardinals were to proceed to choose another to succeed, they were threatened
by the Romans, that they should die, if they would not choose some Italian.
Therefore they chose the archbishop of Bare, who was then at Rome, making known
to him that they chose him to avoid danger, or rather they did feign that
they did choose him: but afterward, when opportunity was offered they did
freely intend to choose another. Therefore when they had chosen him that was
called Vrbane the 6. he said that if they would choose him, that they did
choose him, because he did intend to be pope. Notwithstanding those cardinals
departed from him after a while, and flieng to the city of Funda, they chose
another, who was called Clement the 6. he translated his court to Auenion, and
France, Spain, Catalonia reverenced him for pope. And to the other did Italy,
Almaine, and Hungary cleave obediently, and this wicked schism continued
above xxx. years. During this schism, after Vrbanus succeeded on that side
Boniface the 9. After Boniface came Innocentius the sixth. After Innocentius
succeeded Gregory the 12. On the other side after Clement came Benedict the 13.
who was called Peter de Luna, or of the Moon, under whom was kept a counsel
at Pise: anno 1410. wherein after they were deposed, Alexander was chosen who
was called Peter of Candie, in whose room came John the 23. by reason whereof
arose another schism. At length when there was a Council gathered at
Constance, by the emperor Sigismunde, the said John the 23. and Gregory the
12. agreeing together, and the cardinals of the Lord Benedict being there also,
Gregory the 12. gave place there, and the other two were deposed for their
stubburnnes, and to appease the schism. Thus writes Guimerius. Now let us
hear another testimony of this out of the same book. Martin, says Fol 5.
col. 2.
he, was chosen pope by the Council of Constance, the other that did contend
being deposed, who did long time cause a schism. And he commanded that there
should a Council be held at Basil, where he was not by reason he was
prevented by death. Yet he sent Julian thither, then his legate, of the title
of Saint-angel in the eleventh year of his popedom: the first of February,
to keep the Council: and after him succeeded Eugenius the fourth, who though
he had approved the Council of Basil, and had sent the foresaid legate to
Basil the day before the Calends of May, the first year of his popedom, and
had also revoked the dissolution of the said Council being attempted by him,
ann. 1433. and in the third year of his popedom, in his public session kept
at Rome in S. Peter's, the 17. day before the Calends of January, in the same
year, and had by his bulls patents promised from that time forward to obey the
said Council, confessing that the same Council was always truly continued.
Yet would he not afterward keep the decrees of the Council of Constance,
neither obey the Council of Basil, affirming that he ought rather to do the
contrary, and he dissolved the same again, and translated it to Ferrarie, for
the bringing back of the Grecians, and thence to Florence, because of the
plague that began there. Whereupon arose great strife among those that wrote
touching this matter. For one side said that the pope is above the Council:
the other, that the Council is above the pope. Therefore he was cited by the
Council of Basil the last of Iulie, in the year 1437. he was suspended from
the administration of the papacy the eleventh day of the Calends of February,
1438. and was also deposed the seventh before the Calends of Iulie, in the
year 1439. into whose place the Council of Basil chose Amedaeus, the duke of
Sauoy, being afterward called Felix the fifth. But Eugenius regarded it not, for
which arose a schism, which continued nine years, and even until the death of
Eugenius. Into whose room was chosen in the city Nicolas the fifth, to whom
Felix gave place, because he favored the unity of the Church. Pope Pius the
second, who was before called Aeneas Syluius, who was present at the Council
of Basil made a treatise for the authority of the Council of Basil: but
when he was made pope, he reuersed the same. Thus far goes Guimerius sometimes
a Senator of Paris as we said: that the Senators of this age may more
attentively perceive with how great ambition, contention and madness, the
champions of Rome have used rebellion in the Church, and how furiously they
went by the ears together among themselves, how many fires they have kindled
in all parts of Europe, that they might satisfy their own ambition. Moreover,
how ancient and old this madness of theirs is, we may know by the history of
Ammian Marcel. a man expert Lib. 29.
in Christian religion. Whose words are these. Damasus and Vrsicinus being
inflamed above man's measure or capacity to catch the bishops sea, being
divided in studies they made many sharp conflicts with danger of death and
wounds, the aid of both going forward: which when Viuentius the governor of
the city could not redress nor mollify, being enforced with great violence
he departed into the suburbs, and in the conflict Damasus gat the upper hand,
that side which did favor him being instant. And it is manifest in the church
of Seruinus, where there is an assembly of the Christian rite, that in one day
were found one hundred and seven and thirty carcases of dead men: and that the
outrageous multitude was hardly afterward appeased. Neither do I deny,
considering the ostentation of city affairs, that those that are desirous
hereof, ought to chide with all their might and maine, for obtaining that
after which they long: seeing that after they have obtained that, they will
become so secure, that they are enriched with the oblations of matrones, and
come abroad in their coches bravely apparelled, giving themselves to prodigal
banqueting, so that their banquets surpass the banquets of kings, who might
indeed be blessed: if despising the gorgiousnes of the city, which they set
against vices, they would live like certain provincial bishops: whom slender
diet, and moderate drinking, also baseness of apparel and countenances looking
down to the ground, do continually commend to God and his true worshippers, as
pure and chaste. Thus writes Ammianus: whereby it plainly appears how
ancient this ambition and desire to bear rule, which was and is in the bishops
of Rome, was, which was also coupled with fiercenes and cruelty. But to omit
old things, and to come to touch those things which touch us and our country
of France more near: is there any of so great a number of the kings Senators
that is ignorant, how many wars the popes of Rome have raised in Europe among
christian princes within these fifty years, either to defend or else to
amplify their power? The first was that of Heluetia, wherein they set at
variance most peaceable cities, which were linked together not so much by most
near league, as by mutual love, and desire to preserve their common country.
Then followed the war of Germany, and after it that of England and of
Scotland, which also even at this day the same fiends and champions go about to
renew by their messengers the squibbish Jesuits, being most assured firers of
Christendom. What shall we say of our civil and deadly wars of France? For first
of all the popes of Rome did earnestly desire Francis the first, that if any
would embrace the reformed religion, they might be burnt alive having their
toongs cut out, and having fire put under them. Among the king of France his
constitutions, there be extant the edicts of that king, published in the year
1534. and also in the fortieth, and again in the 42. by the authority whereof
the Senators of the Parleament shed so much blood, and yet with so great
godliness and constancy of the martyrs, that it seems that the posterity
will scarce believe it. What these hellish fiends gained by this cruelty, it
is worth the knowing by the testimony of him, tha^ whom no more plentiful
witness can be brought forth in this kind. That is, king Henry the second, the
father of these latter kings, a prince (as most men may remember) most famous
both at home and in war. For his edict written at Castrobriant in the month of
June, 1551. is extant, the words whereof are these: All men might see before
this with what study, and with how great contention our father (whom God
absolve) king Francis, being a most Christian king, and most catholic,
endeavored greatly during all his life time, to root out heresies which budded
out in his realm against our holy faith and catholic religion: and how many
laws and constitutions the same king with the same mind and purpose did
publish: as the variety and necessity of times did require. Notwithstanding
that so great study and endeavor did no great good. For that disease was so
spread through all the most noble families of our realm, that it did infect like
a certain contagion the families of all sorts and orders. Thus says he in his
edict, which contains six and forty articles, being all of them written most
bitterly and sharply to stop the course of that religion. Moreover, shortly
after, that is in the year, 1547. there was another edict published by the
same king, wherein by name he professes in many words, and does plainly
denounce, that he has omitted no labor, no endeavor, no diligence in
suppressing that religion. Only so? Nay surely (says he) the more carefully
and painfully we labored to do this, so much the more that doctrine gat the
upper hand. Surely we may conjecture what was his endeavor and travel, even by
that, that all men know, that there died of that miserable and bitter kind of
punishment a great number of all sorts of men. There succeeded these kings, to
wit, the grandfather and father, king Francis the second: his edicts, to wit,
six in number, were most sharp and vehement, besides innumerable broad seals
and letters patents, which he sent continually through all parts of his
kingdom with so great heat of mind and stomach, that above three hundred men
were in less than three months space tormented, scortched, burnt and (as it
was commonly written in the decrees of the senate) brought into ashes, by the
decrees especially of the senate of Paris and Tholosa. This so great abundance
of blood that was shed, might peradventure satisfy even the most bloody
tyrants: such as the report goes Cyclops, Busiris, Siron, Phalaris, Tython,
Gyges, were in times past. But so great cruelty cannot satisfy the pope of
Rome, whom we may rightly term a rebel against mankind. It is worth the
hearing what good he did. For there is extant a decree of the same king Francis
the second, published at Ambosia, in the month of March, anno 1559: in these
words, which we would have the kings Counselors to read very attentively, and
to consider of what weight it is. We to the end we might answer and satisfy
our princely office, were enforced to use diverse kinds of punishments and
pains, as the state of things and times did require. But by the instruments of
criminal causes it is known and revealed, that a great number of men, women,
ages, kinds, and of all orders were present at unlawful and privy sermons,
suppers, baptizings administered by those for whom it was not lawful to do
that. But and if every one of these should be put to torture, as the rigor of
our authority and laws does require, there should wonderful much blood be
shed, of men, women, virgins, young men of flourishing age, whereof some being
induced and suborned, other some being persuaded through a certain simplicity
and ignorance, other some enticed rather with a certain curiosity, than of
malice, have fallen into such errors and discommodities. Which things if it
should come to pass, we should be greatly and continually sorry: neither
should that well agree either with our age or nature: both which do inuit us
to use clemency, gentleness, and mercy in this kind. Therefore we will have
all men know, that when this whole matter was in due time handled by our
Counselors in our presence, we are not determined to leave this first year of
our reign famous to our posterity, as cruel, bloody, and full of the murders
of our silly subjects: though they had greatly deserved this: yea after the
example of our heavenly father, we are determined to spare the blood of our
people, and to bring back our subjects to the way of salvation, and to
preserve their life: hoping that through the Lords mercy it will come to
pass, that we shall do more good by the way of gentleness and clemency, than
by the rigor of punishments. Therefore according to the opinion of our foresaid
Counselors, we say, appoint, ordain, that hereafter our subjects be not
molested for the cause of crimes that are past, which concern faith and
religion, by our judges of what sort and condition soever they be, neither in
judgment, nor without judgment. Moreover, we declare that we grant to our
subjects a general pardon, remission, and absolution for such crimes as
concern faith and religion. And shortly after: By the authority of the king
who was chief in this counsel: and according to the sentence of the lords
cardinals of Bourbon, of Lorraine, of Chastillon, the dukes of Montpensier, of
Guise, of Niuernois, and of Aumale. Thus far goes Francis the second: plainly,
as it appears, declaring and testifieng, that the tortures and punishments of
former times did nothing at all avail to extinguish this religion. What did
then the fiends and enemies of mankind, the popes of Rome? What did they? So
soon as they perceived that some of the nobles of that realm, and furthermore
that some of the princes of the blood royal had tasted of that religion, and
had rejected the deceits of Bernardo and Dominick: so soon as they foresaw
that France would by little and little wind her self out of the bondage of
the papacy into Christian liberty: finally, so soon as they saw that so fat
a pray would be taken out of their jaws, they began to cast new firebrands of
civil war throughout all parts of France. That done, when this would not serve
they appointed furious massacres and butcheries to the everlasting discredit
of the name of France: last of all when they perceived that even this way they
could do no good, there arose a Franciscan friar our Sixtus the fifth, who
trusting to his whoorish and munkish impudency, did proscribe our most
excellent Princes, and commanded the most mighty king of France, to pursue
them with force, arms, and camps, and that he should afresh fill his realm
with murders, spoils, and burnings. But me thinks we have already spoken
sufficiently of the furious rebellion of the hellish Champions of Rome.

The crime of Forgerie.
IT rests that we speak of that crime, which we ranged in the last place, so
briefly as we can: namely, of forgerie, or of false and corrupt writings. And
we have very many testimonies every where of this wickedness, and especially
out of the pontifical decree of Gratian, which is full of such corruptions and
forgeries. Whereof we will only set down a few, as for examples sake, and
first of all that instrument of the donation of Constantine, wherein the pope
affirms that that emperor gave him, the city of Rome, and also Italy,
Sicilia, Sardinia, Spain, Germany, and Britain *: and more fully and at
large in Did. 96. c. Constantinus.
Bartholomew Picerne, and Augustine Steuche, which affirmed that that
instrument was found at Rome in the popes library, written in Greek, and they
published it being translated into Latin. For this is the sum thereof: The
emperor Constantine being an enemy to Christians, and infected with the
disease of leprosy, being in a dream admonished by Peter and Paul the
Apostles, that he should commit himself to pope Syluester pope of Rome to be
cleansed, being forthwith baptized and healed by him, for recompense of so
great a benefit, he gave the same Syluester and his successors the city of
Rome, and all the empire of the west: also his crown of gold and scepter, and
the other insignes of the empire, that the pope of Rome might have greater
dignity, than the emperor himself. Also he wishes to his successors till the
end of the world, that they might burn in the lower hell with the devil and
the wicked, unless they confirm and keep that donation. Given at Rome the
third before the Calends of April. Constantino A. quater and Gallicano Coss.
Therefore we will prove by very many arguments, that this instrument whereby
alone the lordship of the popes is vpholden, is false, feigned, forged, and
cogd in by some od pope, even as the book of the Conformities. The first
argument is this: Constantine; yet there is no plentiful author that makes
mention of so great, so bountiful, and of so inofficious prodigality: amongst
these Eusebius who wrote five books of his life. Also Socrates, Theodorit,
Euagrius, Rufinus, Eutropius, Paulus Diaconus, Orosius, Beda, Zonaras,
Nicephorus: who, it is not likely, would have passed over so great a matter
with so great silence, if that donation had been true. Moreover, the popes of
Rome themselves, who have oftentimes and greatly contended with other bishops
about their power and honor, yet in prosecuting their title, and in publishing
their instruments, they are never read to have spoken any word of that
instrument. The second, Gratian: and amongst these Antoninus of Florence a
bishop, in the 8. title, and first chapter of the first historical part, and
Volateranus where he speaks of Constantine. That chapter, says Antoninus, is
not in the ancient decrees. Therefore we are not very sure what and how much
Constantine gave. But Nicolas Cusanus in his third book of the concord of
Catholics, says: Without doubt if that instrument had not been apocryphal,
Gratianus would have found it in the old copies, and collections of canons, and
because he found it not, he set it not down. Moreover Eneas Syluius (he that
after he was made pope, was called pope Pius) does in a certain dialog which
he wrote being as yet cardinal, manifestly convince that instrument of
forgerie: and he calls them blockish pelting lawyers, which took so great
pains in disputing whether that donation be of force, which was never made.

The third, Eusebius in his 4. book of the life of Constantine has recorded,
that a little before his death, he made this division of his empire amongst his
sons, he assigned to the eldest the west, to the second the east, to the
third, the country lieng between. Also Socrates. Forasmuch, says he, as he
had three sons, he Hist. eccle. 3. cap. vlt.
appointed that every one of them should be parteners in his empire. The
eldest son being called Constantine after his own name, of the west parts.
The second being called Constantius after his grandfather, did he appoint in
the east. And the yoongest named Constans, did he ordain in the middle region.
Also, Sextus Aurelius victor says. The government of the Roman empire was
brought unto three, Constantinus, Constantius, and Constans sons of
Constantine. All these had these parts to govern. Also, Zosimus. His children
says he, having gotten the succession in the empire did Lib. hist. pr. 2.
divide the nations among them. And Constantinus indeed being the eldest
together with the yoongest named Constans, got all that is beyond the Alps, and
Italy, and Illyricum. Now let us consider the history of later times. For as
al Chronicle writers do witness, the empire not only of Italy, but also of
Rome continued in the government of Constantine his successors, an hundred and
forty years, until the year of Christ 401. at what time that empire of the
west began to be troubled with the Gothi, Franci, Alani, Burgundi, Vandales:
yet it did always continue under the dominion of the Roman emperors, until
the time of the emeperor Augustulus, whom Odo king of the Goths drove out of
Italy, having gotten the city of Rome, anno. 476. at which time the Roman
empire failed in the west, the Barbarians reigning both at Rome and also in
Italy. For the princely name of the Romans continued in the power of the
posterity and successors of Odiacrus 325. years. Therefore we may see in
Cassiodorus very many letters of Theodoricus the king, written partly to the
senate of Rome, and partly to the people of Rome in the kings name, and by his
authority: so that none can doubt but that both Italy, and the city of Rome
it self, did continue under the dominion of the Goths, and not under the
lordship of any pope: until such time as the Goths being driven out of
Italy by the emperor of Constantinople, they began to send presidents into
that province: which were called Exarchi: who though they had their abode at
Rauenna, yet they bare rule in Italy many years. Again the Longobardi, whose
reign began in the year 568. kept all Italy, besides the city of Rome, two
hundred and six years, that is until the year 744. all which things are
gathered out of the writings of Procopius, Iornand, Marcellinus, Paulus
Diaconus, and others: so that every man may plainly see, that that is false
which the popes do hold, that their ancetors had their lordship either in
Italy or in the city of Rome by the gift of Constantine: seeing that lordship
began only in the eight hundred year of our salvation by Christ, by the
liberality of Pipinus and Charles the great, who gave the Exarchate which they
took from the Longobards together with the city of Rome, to pope Stephen the
second: as Platina, Volateranus, and all other do witness, but especially
Sabellicus, who besides the rest writes, Ennead. 8. li. 8.
that Constantine the fourth, the emperor of the east, sent ambassadors unto
Pipinus into Italy, to entreat him to restore to their emperor, Rauenna, and
the rest of the places of the Exarchate which were belonging to the empire (so
says Sabellicus) and not to the pope. And that Pipinus made answer that he
went to war neither for Constantine, neither yet for any man, save only for
the church of Rome, and that for that end and purpose he had put on arms, that
he might save the Apostolic sea from the injury of all mortal men: and that
he might bring in subjection to the church of Rome, Rauenna and whatsoever the
Longobards had subdued by force and weapon. So that the Grecian Orators
returned home having vnended their matter. Thus writes Sabellicus. But Platina
says that the Exarchate was taken from Astulphus a Longobard, and was given to
pope Stephen anno 756. and also that he gave the name of emperor to Charles the
great, son of Pipinus, which the emperors of the East did hardly maintain in
those times, that is, anno 801. touching which matter Albertus Krantzius
writes thus: Some do attribute to In Saxon. lib. 2 c. 1.
Constantine the great that donation of Italy that was made to the church of
Rome, of Italy and Germany, and I wot not of what provinces: to which let them
look. It was Charles who with the victory of the Longobards enriched the
church of Rome; whereas long before both the Goths had given somewhat in their
time, and the kings of the Longobards somewhat also.

The fourth, in d. c. Constantinus, did. 96.) they confess that they received
the Roman kingdom, and that of Italy, and of all the West, from Constantine,
and in the year of Christ, 338. they do notwithstanding in another place
commend Ludouicus Pius son of Charles the great as the author of this benefit
of theirs, out of the year of Christ, 835. The impudency of which falsehood
and forgerie that it may the better appear, we will compare two instruments of
that donation together, the which the popes and canonists have published for
us. For Volateranus says thus: The master of the library Lib. Georg. 3.
says much of the godliness of Ludouicus Pius toward the popes of Rome,
reckoning up the cities which he gave them. I likewise have written out a copy
out of the copy of the old book, which is at this day kept in the vatican
library, where his donation is recorded.

The edition of the instrument by Volaterane.
I Ludouike Emperor do grant to S. Peter the chief of the Apostles, and by
thee to thy vicar the Lord Paschalis the chief bishop, and to his successors
for ever, the city of Rome, with the jurisdiction thereof, and with all the
lands about it, cities, havens, and places lieng near to the sea of Hetruria.
Finally, in it the old middle earth city Balneoregium, Viterbium, Saona,
Populonia, Rosells, Perusium, Mathuranum, Sutrium, Campania toward Nepe,
Auania, Signia, Ferrentine, Alanum, Patricum, Frusinonum, with all the towns
and villages there about: and also the whole exarchate of Rauenna, like as our
father of godly memory Charles, and also Pipinus our gra^dfather (let the
reader note that here is not a word of Constantine) did of late grant it to S.
Peter. Namely, Rauenna, Bonicum, Aemilia, the common place of the people, the
common place of Julius, Fauentia, Imola, Romania, Ferraria, Comadum, Adria,
Seruia. In March, Pisaurus, Fanus, Senogallia, Ancona, Oximum, Numana, Esium,
Forum Sempronij, Feretrum, Vrbinum, the territory of Valne, Callium, Luceoli,
Eugubium. In Campania Sorum, Aquinum, Arpinum, Thranum, Capua, also the
patrimonies appertaining to our dominion, that of Beneuenta, Salernita, that of
the lower and higher Calabria, and the dukedom of Naples. Moreover, Spoletinum,
Tuderotreculum, Haruia, and the rest of that dominion. Also the islands of the
lower sea Corsica, Sardinia, Cicilia, all which our grandfather of godly
memory, named Pipinus, and also Charles the emperor our father, have by their
writing granted to S. Peter and his successors, by Athenius and Mainardus the
abbats being sent willingly for this purpose: and we also do allow and grant
the same. Furthermore we will that the Council of Rome have power to choose
the pope, so it be done without discord, and afterward after the consecration
there be ambassadors sent to us and our successors the kings of France to make
and procure love and amity: as the custom was in the time of the L. Charles our
great grandfather, and of Pipinus our grandfather, and last of al of Charles our
father. Therefore we confirm this our will by writing and oath, and we have sent
it by our ambassador S. R. E. Theodor, to the L. Paschalis, and I have
subscribed it with mine own hand, I LVDOVIKE. Also his three sons subscribed,
ten bishops, eight abbats, fifteen earls, the keeper of the library, the
Mansionarie and one porter* the year from the incarnation was, 835.

The decretall edition of the instrument.
I Ludouike Emperor of Rome Augustus, do appoint and grant by this covenant of
our confirmation, to S Peter the chief of the Apostles, and by thee to thy
vicar the Lord Paschalis, the chief bishop, and to his successors for ever,
like as from our predecessors until now ye have kept them in your power and
dominion, and have disposed them, the city of Rome with the dukedom thereof,
and the suburbs, and with all little villages, and hillish territories thereof,
and the sea shores, and havens, or with all cities, castles, towns, and
villages, in the parts of Tuscane. Also when by the calling of the Lord the
bishop of this most holy sea shall depart this life, let no man of our
kingdom either French man or Longobard out of any part that is under our
dominion, have leave to meet against the Romans either privately or publicly,
or to make an election: and moreover, let no man presume to do any evil in the
cities or territories belonging to the power of S. Peter the Apostle: but let
the Romans with all reverence, and without all molestatio^ bury their pope
honorably: and let it be lawful without any doubt or contradiction to
consecrate him after the canonical order, whom all the Romans by the
inspiration of God, and intercession of S. Peter, shall with one Council and
consent without any promise, choose to the order of the popedom: and when he
shall be consecrated, let ambassadors be sent to us or our successors the
kings of the Frenchmen, that they may conclude friendship, love, and peace
between us and him.

By this comparison it is evident, by what deceit, and how wicked policies the
papacy did use to obtain that highest lordship of Italy. For as the true
emperor Constantine l. scripturae, 14. c. de fide instru.
says in Justinian, Diverse writings, and such as discredit one another, can
have no l. si is qui 13. vtrum, D. de rebus dubijs. l. vbi pugnam. 188. D. de
reg. iur.
strength: seeing that two speeches containing contrary things cannot be
true. Therefore so often as there be many instruments of one and the same act,
they must agree together in as many words: though an error in some little mark
be tolerable, as if L be written for C. * But an l. Sempronius, 47. D. de leg.
2.
error in the note of the number is one thing, and the diversity in the things
themselves is another thing, as in this place, where in one instrument there be
only certain places near to Rome named, in the other besides the greatest
part of Italy, there is mention made of Sicilia, Sardinia, and Corcyra: in
which case because they be diverse donations, there were diverse instruments
required *. Finally, if Constantine l. sancimus, 34.. si quis autem, C. de
dona. l. quingenta, 12. D. de probat.
had given to the papacy the empire of the west, so long before, what new
right could the pope get by this new donation of Ludouike? Seeing that as it is
commonly said, There is no getting of that which is l. 4. C. de contrah. emp.
a man's own. Fifthly, Gratian *, there 12 q. 1. c. futuram.
is extant the testimony of pope Melchias, who held the popes sea before
Syluester, where even then, I say, before the papacy of Syluester he makes
mention of this donation of Constantine, made even before his papacy, in these
words: He gave very great gifts, and he built the frame of the temple of the
first sea of S. Peter: so that he forsook his imperial seat, and he gave it
to S. Peter and his successors that it might profit them. For if Constantine
made that gift before the times of Melchias, what argument or substance can
this fable of Syluester have, who affirms that Constantine was both baptized
by him, and also that he gave him so great an empire?

such inventions, fictions, and lies of the papacy came, such as is that in
Antoninus: As Dominick was at Rome, and made Par. 3. tit. 14.. 3.
his prayer in the cathedral church of S. Peter for the preservation and
dilating of his order, the hand of the Lord was upon him, and he saw the
glorious princes Peter and Paul coming to him: of whom Peter seemed to deliver
him a staff and Paul a book saying: Go, preach: because thou art chosen of
God for this ministry. Or that other of pope Stephen the second, in Reginon
in his chronicle, anno 753. where pope Stephen, to whom Pipinus gave the
Exarchate of Italy (as I said a little before) writes, that As he slept in
the monastery of S. Dionysius in the street of Paris (these be his words)
under the bells, he saw before the altar S. Peter, and the teacher of the
Gentiles Paul: whom he knew by their scars: for S. Dionysius was slenderer and
taller: and that The Lord Peter said, This our brother desires to be healed,
and that S. Paul answered, He shall be healed even now. And that he drew
near, and laid his hand on the breast of the Lord Dionysius friendly, and that
S. Peter said merrily to the Lord Dionysius: Thy grace is his health. And that
by and by the Lord Dionysius holding in his hand a censar and palm, said to
the priest and deacon, Begin to pope Stephen, Peace be with thee brother: Fear
not: arise up whole. And by and by, says he, I was healed: and I would have
fulfilled that which was commanded me: and those that were there said that I
was mad, and so forth. Which things are so foolish and blockish, that it
seems that pope Stephen sought by that invention to be laughed at. But we are
to praise God that he has suffered so great wickedness to befall blockeheads
only. But moreover that is not to be omitted touching the seeing of the
apostles Peter and Paul in a dream, which we read in the book of the
Conformities. Fol. 51.
As S. Francis went to Rome, he was sweetly embraced of the holy apostles
Peter and Paul, and there Peter and Paul being requested by Francis did obtain
of Christ the confirmation of the rule of the Minorits.

The seventh, Constantine the great was sick of the leprosy, forasmuch as
neither Eusebius who wrote his life in five books carefully, as I have already
said, neither Zosimus, who for hatred of religion does rail upon Constantine
so much as ever he can, neither Paulus Diaconus, neither any other makes any
mention of that disease: to omit the argument of Baptist Mantuan *, who de
patient. 1. cap. 30. Plin. lib. 21. cap. 1.
after he had taught out of Pliny * that that kind of disease was long ago
extinguished in Italy, he infers thus: If therefore in the time of Pliny
who flourished under Vespasian, this disease was now extinguished in Italy, it
is not likely that Constantine had it, who reigned long time after.

The eight, Constantine whiles he was in the font baptized by the pope, saw the
hand of God sent down from heaven upon his body, which cleansed him from his
leprosy. Being put into the font, says he, I saw an hand with mine own eyes
touching me out of heaven, under which I knew I was cleansed from leprosy. For
who sees not that this invention is of the same sort, whereof those be, which
we read euerywhere in the book of the Conformities of Francis, or in the life
of Dominick?

The ninth, Syluester and his deacons would be so improuident, that they would
baptize Constantine a most deadly enemy to Christians, and especially to the
church of Rome, so soon and suddenly after he had told them his dream, and
would not first teach him the mysteries of Christ and religion, as they use to
do to those whom they catechize. Moreover, Zosimus an enemy to Christian
religion, as I said, reports that he was taught that religion by a certain
Spaniard, and learned how great the force thereof was in blotting out men's
sins: and that then he banished out of his court soothsaiers, and flamines,
and other priests of the Romish superstitions.

The tenth, Constantine only a little before his death, and in the year of
his age 65. was baptized, and that not at Rome, neither yet by Syluester the
pope, who was dead almost five years before, but at Nicomedia, by Eusebius of
Nicomedia, in a great assembly of bishops. Thus writes Eusebius in his fourth
book of his life. Hierome in his Chronicles. Rufinus in his first book and
eleventh chapter. Socrates in his first book chapter 39. Theodoret in his first
book chapter 31. Ambrose in his book of the death of Theodosius. Neither must
we give credence to Nicephorus, who in his seventh book and 35. chapter, when
he writes that he was baptized at Rome, adds afterward that he follows the
church of Rome therein as his author. Especially seeing Vincentius in his 24.
book of histories, feared not to write according to S. Hierome, that
Constantine did truellie murder his wife Fausta, and his son Crispus, and that
in the later end of his life, he was baptized by Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia.

The eleventh Constantine had appointed to cure his disease with the warm
blood of infants, either that he would have their throtes cut openly by the
priests of the Capitolium, or that he needed so much blood that a whole
cesterne might be filled therewith.

Constantine did so long oppugn christian religion, but that he had hard
somewhat of Peter and Paul, most famous Apostles of Christ: and that he was not
so unskillful in christian affairs, that after he was raised out of that
dream he should ask of Siluester what gods they were, that were called Peter
and Paul: for though he had learned nothing save the vision only, it is not
likely that Peter and Paul did boast themselves before him for gods.

The thirteenth, Peter who was Gods messenger, than from God himself, from
whom Peter was sent to him. Secondly to Peter alone, rather than to Peter and
Paul jointly. For he uses these words: And by the benefits of the same Peter I
felt the health of my body return most fully and perfectly.

Constantine having five sons, did notwithstanding according to the sentence of
all his dukes (which word is altogether new, geason, and unused in the laws
and moniments of the emperors of Rome) and of his whole senate and nobles, and
of all the people that was in subjection to the Roman empire, gave half his
empire to a seely poor priest: seeing al men know, that the senate of Rome
retained their country superstitions, not only at that time, but also until
the empire of Valentinian: which we understand by the epistle of Simmachus,
written to the emperors Valentinian, Theodosius and Arcadius *, wherein in the
Lib. 10. Epist. 54.
name of the senate of Rome he prays them that superstition and worshipping
of Idols may be restored again in the city of Rome: whom S. Ambrose in two
epistles written to the same emperor Valentinian, and Aurelius Prudentius, in
godly and fine verses answers.

Constantine did not only give power equal with his imperial power to pope
Syluester, but also greater principality of power, than says he, our princely
sovereignty is known of all men to have. And shortly after. Giving him power
and dignity of glory, strength, efficacy, and honor imperial. Touching
which matter, and the ambition of the popes, it is worth the pains to hear
the judgment of Barnard abbat of Clareuall, written to Eugenius the pope, in
his second book of consideration. Learn, says he, by the example of the
prophets to sit as chief, not so much to bear rule, as to do that which time
requires. Learn that thou have need of a weedhook, not of a scepter, that
thou may do the work of a prophet. Also, Admit, thou do take these things
thy self by some other means, yet not by apostolic right. For Peter could not
give thee that he had not: that he had he gave, carefulnes for the churches.
Did he give lordship? Hear what he says: Not as over Gods heritage, but being
a pattern to the flock. And least thou think it to be spoken only in
humility, and not in truth, it is the voice of the Lord in the Gospel: The
kings of the nations reign over the^, but you shall not do so. It is plain, the
apostles are forbidden lordship. Therefore go thou: and usurp greedily to thy
self either lording it apostleship, or being apostolic lordship. Thou art
flatly forbidden to do either. If thou will have both together, thou shall
loose both.

No more tolerable is it that he adds, Antiochia, Alexandria, Constantinople
and Jerusalem. Wherein we find not only manifest, but also ridiculous
falsehoode. First, because there was not as yet any Constantinople: which
began to be builded afterward in the tenth year of the empire of Constantine,
as Nicephorus witnesses *, Lib. 8. cap. 4.
and all the citizens were for the most part given to idolatry at that time.
So far off is it, that there was there either any church or any mother-citie of
the churches, or prerogative.

Also that is less tolerable that follows, Constantine, which
notwithstanding in infinite other places they boast they had immediately from
Christ himself. For, as all men know, that which is every man's own, cannot be
his own by many causes, for as much as lordship or mastership comes not by
many causes, but only by one *. And it is ridiculous that they bring l. ^..
ex pluribus. D de acq. poss. 18.
in Constantine boasting thus of himself, That, In building the church of
Rome, he bare up upon his own shoulders twelve baskets of earth, being equal
in number to the twelve Apostles. For seeing that he does so often give greater
honor to Peter alone than jointly to all the other eleven, did not the reason
of the proportion require, that he should carry up more baskets full of earth
in honor of him alone, than of all the rest?

And no less ridiculous is that which he adds afterward, that, For
continuing those lights which did burn in that temple, he gave not only lands
and possessions, but also he gave thereto his liberty, that is his right and
power, in the east, west, north and south climate; namely in Judea, Asia,
Thracia, Graecia, Africa, Italy, and in diverse Isles: that they may be disposed
by the hands of S. Syluester, and of all his successors. These things writes
the pope in as many words and sillables: whereby we may understand, that those
tapers and lights were wonderful dear: for maintaining whereof the tributes
and yearly revenues of the whole world, and specially of four parts thereof
must be given. And not only so, but also because the faithfulness of treasurers
is sometime had in suspicion in such a case, it is reported that Constantine
appointed that when he was dead, the government and dispensation of those
revenues should be committed to the popes themselves. So that it seems that
it cannot easily be judged, whether the impudency of the popes that seek to
enforce upon us these old wives fables, or the madness of those men, if ever
they believed an old wives fable so foolish, was greater.

Constantine. The first, the Lateran palace. 2. the crown of gold. 3. the
miter. 4. the imperial collar. 5. the purple robe. 6. the scarlet cote. 7. the
imperial attire. 8. pomp of horsemen going before him. 9. the imperial
scepter. 10. al insignes, banners, and standerds. Therefore admit that Peter
the apostle was in times past shriueled, old, clad in a patched cote like a
fisherman: his vicar will now wander throughout the whole world in broidered
garments, clad in princely apparel, environed with a troop of footmen and
horsemen, with a four square train, with pomp and great preparation. How
much better is the state of the chief vicar of the chief of the apostles,
than of the chief apostle himself? O almighty God, how great is thy clemency,
gentleness, patience, which do so long suffer that filth and brothelhouse, to
mock thy Christ so freely? O miserable kings and princes, which do so long
lick the foul and filthy flowers of that whore! O good Jesus, how great
difference was there between that thy show and shape, and the pride of that
cruel and vile tyrant! There was, says Esaias, no beauty in Christ, no
comlines. When we saw him, we turned away our eyes and countenance. An abject,
and contemned of men, full of sorrows, troubled with continual diseases,
hiding away his face from us. So despised, that he is counted as nothing. And
will any man wonder that the pope durst boast, that Constantine called him
God? For in this distinction 96, c. satis. he writes thus: It is sufficiently
proved, that the pope can neither be bound nor loosed at all by the secular
power, who, as appears, was called of the godly prince Constantine, God,
seeing it is manifest that even God cannot be judged of men. But it is worth
the pains to hear the judgment of the doctor Bernard touching all this kind
of pomp, who in his fourth book of consideration, writes to pope Eugenius in
these words: It is not known that Peter at any time came forth bedeckt either
with pearls or silk: he was not covered with gold, not carried on a white
horse, not guarded with soldiers, neither environed with ministers making a
blundering about him. Without these he both believed that the wholesome
commandment might well be fulfilled. If thou love me, feed my sheep. Also in
another place: Consider before all things that the holy church of Rome over
which thou art placed by God, is the mother, not the mistress or lady of
churches: and thou thy self art not the lord of the bishops, but one of them.
Thus says Bernard: but what will we say of the clause following? where
Constantine after that princely inuesting of pope Syluester, adds, that he
held the popes bridle with his hand, For reverence of S. Peter, and that he
served him as an apparitor. Woe, woe to that bewitching whore, whose filthy
flowers so great princes do so licourishly lick so long. For pope Stephen the
second suffered king Pipinus to give him this self same honor near to Paris.
Alexander the third would have had the emperor Friderike to have done the like,
so that it is not without cause that S. Hierom in the prolog of the holy
Ghost, does in plain words call Rome Babylon, and that purple whore, which is
described in the Revelation. But let us again hear the judgment of the
foresaid Bernard touching all this kind, who writes thus: They go honored for
the goods of the Lord, Upon the Cantic. ser. 33.
which Lord they do not honor. Thence comes that whoorish glistering which
thou see daily, that stagelike apparel, that princely preparation, thence is
that gold in his bridle, sadle, and spurs, and his spurs shine brighter than
the altars. Thence are his gorgious tables, and costly meats, and cups. Thence
come banqueting and droonkennes. Thence are the lute, harp, and pipe. Thence
are the ouerflowing winepresses, and full sellers, one filling another. Thence
are the fats of spices and ointments, thence are the strouting pouches. Fie for
shame! Prouosts of churches, deanes, archdeacons, bishops, archbishops will be
and are such. For these things do not give place to that business that walks
by dark: and by and by after: FOR HE IS ANTICHRIST. Did ever either Luther, or
any other such as did inueigh against the papacy, bring forth any more plain
or vehement thing to accuse the pope of Rome of the crime of Antichristianisme?

But let us hold on. verse following she makes Constantine say thus: We give
the clerks that serve the church of Rome the same glory, and power, and
preeminence, which our most honorable senate has: and we decree that the
clergy of the church of Rome be worshipped, even as the imperial army.
Therefore the cardinals and other clerks trusting to this liberty, will
hereafter go either to preach the Gospel, or to sing and say their masses
furnished and armed with brest-plates, helmets, tergats, swords, and with other
weapons. Only so? Yea (says he) as the emperor his power is adorned with
diverse offices of chamberlaines, door-keepers, and garders, so we will have the
holy church of Rome guarded and adorned, and that they ride upon horses most
white, and that like as our senate uses shoes with latchets: * so let them be
clad in most white linen. Is there any of so great a number of the Senators of
the king of France, who when he remembers the humility and modesty of Christ
and his apostles, does not with all prayers detest this pride and hautines of
the popes?

Moreover Constantines senators into the order of the clergy, let them not
proudly refuse that honor. With a mischief, what tyrannous barbarism is this,
that it is lawful for any college of clerks to choose at their pleasure any one
of the order of the senators, whom they will also make a clerk or munke
against his will?

He proceeds: Bizantia: adding moreover a very fit cause: Because, says he,
it is an unmeet thing, that an earthly king should bear rule in that country,
where the head of Christian religion, and the principality of priests is
placed by the king of heaven. He did excellently make himself the beginning of
this sentence: for in the time of Constantine, that is, two hundred years
before Justinian, the deliverance of the empty possession was requisite to
make a donation: but there be many other things that do disturb the matter.
First because if Constantine gave to Syluester the empty possession of that
country, he could not afterward in his will leave it to his son Constantius:
seeing the alienation of any thing made among those that are alive, does leave
no place for making any will l. 6. c. de test. l. sequens. 52. D. de leg. 2.
thereof *. But if the donation were made after that division made among his
sons, it was plainly void, and of none effect: because the division that a
father makes among his sons, has the force of a testament, l pen. and l.
vlt. C. fam. excisc. cum similibus.
and therefore of a last will. Secondly, with what godliness could Constantine
who had three sons and two daughters, do so great injury to his children, as
to deprive them of half their inheritance, and to give the same to a stranger
especially to a wretch and vile person? For that is a pretty saying of
Augustine: Whosoever he be that will disinherit his son, and make the church
his heir, let him seek another to take it than Augustine. Where also the fact
of that 17. q. vlt. c. vlt.
bishop is commended, who restored al again to a certain testator, who having
no children left his goods to the church, and then afterward had children
contrary to his hope and expectation. Which self same thing is set down, 13.
q. 2. c. si quis irascitur. But nothing is so ridiculous, as is that reason of
his purpose, which the counterfeit Constantine adds: That it is unmeet, that
in the same city wherein a priest sits as chief, the emperor should have
the sea of his empire. Woe to thy head most holy hangman. For what shall we say
of Solomon, of Aza, of Iozia, and other godly kings of the Israelites, who
placed the sea of their kingdom at Jerusalem? What of Theodosius, who had his
at Mediolanum? But that we may not go far for examples, what shall we say of
Constantius son to Constantinus, who according to his fathers testament did
not only exercise his empire and jurisdiction at Rome, but also he put from
the popedom, and thrust out of Rome pope Liberius for taking upon him the
defense of Anastasius a bishop a certain magician and sacrilegious person? as
Theodoricus, Zozomenus, and Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 15, have left it written.
If any, says he, of our successors shall be a violater or contemner, let him
be subject to eternal damnation, being insnarled, and let him burn in the
neathermost hell with the devil and the wicked. But Constantine brought this
curse first upon himself: who (as we said even now) in his last will gave the
empire of the West to his eldest son: finally, he was bound with the same
curse, whosoever possessed as his own either the West, or any part of the
West, either by the name of king, or duke, or by any other name. And by this
reason there has been none that has been king either of France or Spain
heertofore, that burns not in the neathermost hell with the devil and all the
wicked.

Platina did not omit in that Syluester. But Laurentius Valla a man of most
sharp judgment in this kind did more at large prosecute it. Whereto we will
adioine this one thing: if any man consider the manner of phrase wherein the
laws of Constantine are written in the book of Theodosianus, and Justinian:
he shall soon perceive without any great ado, that this instrument came out of
the same shop which we showed before, out of the Conformities of Francis, or
out of the life of Dominick. And we must not pass over with silence another
cosoning knacke of a certain latter pope (of Leo the 10. as it seems) who to
the end he might with some color cover that corruption of speech and baseness of
style, he heaped falsehood upon falsehood. For he suborned a certain hungry
Grecian called Bartholomew Picernus, and afterward Augustine Steuchus the
master of his library, to say, that they found in I cannot tell what
library of the popes, that instrument written in the Greek tongue, and that
then they translated it somewhat more fitly into the Latin tongue. Which
invention Gregory the 13. has now of late confirmed in the last edition of
the decree of Gratian. But all the laws of Constantine are extant in the
foresaid books of Theodosianus and Justinian, written in the Latin tongue:
though they were published both at Constantinople, and in a city of the
Grecians, and among the Grecians. Furthermore Eusebius, in his third book of
the life of Constantinus, has recorded, that he spoke in Latin in the Nicene
synod. And in the second book he witnesses, that he turned into Greek, his
epistles and decrees which were written in Latin: so that some man may suspect,
that either he never wrote that instrument in Greek, or, if he wrote it both
in Greek and Latin, that surely he did not use that Beotian and foolish kind
of phrase. But now it seems that we have spoken sufficiently of the
falsehoode and wicked invention of the popes touching the donation of
Constantine: so that al men may plainly see, that the whole papacy, which
rested only upon this foundation, cannot stand any longer, forasmuch as the
foundation is taken away.

Another most ancient crime of Forgerie.
NOtwithstanding it seems to be a thing most fit to set down some other
examples of the popes forgeries and periuries, and specially those, whereby it
may be understood, that the pope of Rome has affected that tirannicall
lordship not only against the authority of the holy Scripture, but also of
the old primative church. For after that ambition and desire to lord it had at
that time possessed some bishops, the Nicene synod was gathered in the year
of Christ 325. wherein it was decreed that in every province or diecese (for
these old fathers used both words) some pastor excelling (as we may think) in
age and doctrine, should be chosen, who should have authority when need was, to
call together his fellows in office, and to make report to them of the
affairs of the common churches. This man was in those times sometimes called
the Patriarch, sometimes Metropolitan, sometimes Archbishop indifferently: yet
so, that neither the lesser bishops without this man's consent, nor this man
without their consent and authority did any great and weighty matter. The
words of the senate were these: Let the ancient custom be of force, which was
Chap. 6.
in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the bishop of Alexandria have authority
over all these, because even the bishop of Rome observes this custom. And
likewise let the privileges be kept both at Antioch, and also in the rest of
the provinces. And that is plain, that if any be made bishop without consent
of the Metropolitan, the great senate has appointed that this man ought not
to be bishop. And Rufinus does Lib. 10. eccle. hist.
thus interpret that decree, Let this custom be kept in Alexandria, and in the
city of Rome, that both the bishop of Alexandria take care for Egypt, and that
the other be careful for the churches, lyeng about the city. Whereby we
understand, that the Nicene synod did hedge in the bishoprike of Rome, within
the bounds of the churches of the suburbs: so far off is it that either
principality or authority was given him by Constantine the emperor over al
churches of the whole world. Let us now hear what was decreed six and fifty
years after in the first Synod of Constantinople, touching the self same
matter: that is in the year of Christ 321. For in the second chapter it is
thus written: Let not the bishops which have their several diocese, incroch
upon the churches that are without their bounds: neither let them confound
their churches, but according to the canons, let the bishop of Alexandria
govern those things only that are in Egypt. And let the bishops of the east
govern only the east. And let the church of Antioch retain her dignity
declared in the Nicene synod. And let the bishops of the diocese or province of
Asia govern those things only that are in Asia: let those that are in Pontus,
govern those things only that are in Pontus. And those of Thracia those
things only that are in Thracia. And let not the bishops, unless they be
called, intrude themselves into another man's diocese or province, either to
give voices, or to any other ecclesiastical functions. And if the foresaid
canon be observed in diocese and provinces, it is plain that every provincial
Synod shall govern all businesses of every province, as is decreed by the
Nicene Synod. Moreover, Socrates * confirms Lib. hist. eccl. 3
the same thing in these words: Again they confirmed the faith delivered by
the Nicene Synod, and they appointed patriarks in the described provinces: that
bishops being placed and set over a certain diocese, might not thrust
themselves into other men's churches. And anon after: Notwithstanding reserving
the chief degree of honor and dignity to the church of Antiochia, which they
gave to Miletius who was then present. And they decreed that so often as need
should require, the Synod of every province should determine the business of
every province. Thus says Socrates. And we may see the selfsame description
of churches delivered and set down by the emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and
Theodosian. Let the bishop of Rome now In. l. 3. C. Theo. de fide cath.
go and boast, that Constantine the emperor gave him principality over al
churches of the whole world, and by name over the sea of Antiochia, Jerusalem,
Alexandria and Constantinople. For we have proved that this state and
condition of the primitive Church continued until the year of Christ,
CCCXXCI. Moreover, in the fifth chapter of the same Synod it is thus written:
Let the bishop of Constantinople have the primacie of honor after the bishop of
Rome, because it is new Rome. Which is also reported, did. 22. cap.
Constantinopolitanae. Where the canonist Gregory the 13. has of late noted,
that that canon was not received by the sea of Rome. And no marvel: seeing by
that canon the papacy is manifestly convict of forgerie. Let us also hear
John Chrysostom his judgment touching this matter, who flourished about the
year of Christ 300. and does in plain words attribute that primacy to the
church of Antiochia, in these words: * Our city Hom. 3. ad pop. Antiochenum
of Antiochia is of all other most deer to Christ: and like as Peter did first
preach Christ among all the apostles, so among cities (as I said before) this
has first of all the name of Christians, as a certain wonderful crown. Also
Hom. 16. And what is the dignity of our city? It fell out that the disciples
of Antiochia were first called Christians: and no city in the world has this
besides, no not the city of Romulus: wherefore Antiochia may lift up her eyes
against all the whole world. And this truly was (as I have said) the condition
of those times, when the pope of Rome was most far from that tyraunie, which
afterward he had and used in the Church. Now let us consider what was observed
afterward. For in the Synod of Ephesus, which was kept fifty years after,
that is, in the year of Christ 431. in the last chapter it is thus written: It
seemed good to the holy and universal Synod, keeping to every province the
privileges pure and sound, which do long ago and from the beginning belong to
the same, according to the ancient custom used long ago, etc. Where is that
principality that was long ago given to the pope of Rome over the churches of
the whole world, by the emperor Constantine? Let us hear the next general
Synod gathered twenty years after at Chalcedon, that is, in the year of
Christ, cccclj. For when the bishop of Constantinople, by reason of the sea of
the east empire placed in his city, was sick of the like and very same
disease of ambition, whereof our bishop of Rome is now sick, he did effect by
his policy and subtle shifts, that that mother city, which had so great
dignity, should have a certain privilege above the rest: and that he alone
should appoint the Metropolitans of Asia, Pontus, and Thracia. Whereby it came
to pass, that the authority of the church of Antiochia so greatly commended
by Chrysostom, and established first in the Nicene Synod, and then afterward in
the Synod of Constantinople was quite overthrown. Also by these deceits it was
brought to pass, that four men should be appointed to govern the whole
world, who had metropolitans under their dominion or province. For Africa was
granted to the bishop of Alexandria, the west to the bishop of Rome, and to the
bishop of Constantinople almost all that part of Europa and Asia, except a few
churches, which were left to the bishop of Jerusalem for the antiquity and
authorities sake of the city. Therefore when as in times past archbishops,
patriarks, and metropolitans were all one, and were called by so many names
confusedly sometimes by one, sometimes by another, afterward there were only
four archbishops made (who were also called patriarks) which did bear rule
over the metropolitans, as we have already said. For in the 28. chapter of the
same Synod it is thus written: And where the laws of our most holy fathers
that follow, the same things do we also determine and decree touching the
dignity and excellency of this most holy Church of Constantinople being new
Rome. For our fathers did woorthily give the first degree of honor to the sea
of old Rome, because that city did then reign. And upon like consideration
the Cl. bishops loving God most deerly, have given like degree of honor to new
Rome (note these words) the most holy sea: decreeing for good causes, that
that city, which has got so great honor, that it should be both the sea of
the empire, and that it should have a senate, and should have like degree of
dignity, as the old sea of the empire of Rome has: have even in
ecclesiastical affairs like honor and dignity as it has, seeing it is next
to it. Where did then that principality and lordship of the pope of Rome hide
it self, which Constantine gave him (as it is said) over al Churches. Let us
hear the words of the second Synod of Constantinople out of the 36. chapter:
Renewing those things which were ordained by the 150. fathers, which were
assembled in this city preserved by God, and in this princely city, and by
the six hundred and thirty that were gathered together in Chalcedon; we
decree that the sea of Constantinople have like dignity with the sea of old
Rome, and that it be magnified as well as the other in ecclesiastical
businesses (note these words) seeing it is next to that: and next to it let be
the bishop of the great city of Alexandria: and next to this the bishop of
Jerusalem. But afterward the number of the archbishops was increased by little
and little as pleased the emperors. For the emperor Justinian gave that honor
to the city of his country, Nouel. 11. where he writes thus: Being desirous
to increase our country many and diverse ways, wherein we were borne by the
appointment of God, we command that the most holy bishop thereof, be made, not
only a metropolitan, but also an archbishop, and that certain provinces be
under the authority thereof: that is, Dacia that lies in the continent, Dacia
that lies near the sea coast, Mysia the second, and Dardania, and
Preualitana, etc. Also in the conclusion: We decree that the archbishop thereof
be ordained by the reverend council of metropolitans. There were also other
cities called by the same name Justinians cities, in Africa Instinians
Carthaginensis, which the same emperor adioined to the Roman empire, in the
yland Cyprus, Iustiniana the country of his wife Theodora, whereto Justinian
gave like prerogative of right, honor, and dignity. Therefore by these
appears the manifold impudency of the popes of Rome: first therein because
in those times they reckon only four patriarchies or archbishops seas: and
also in that, that they make their sea to surmount those four seas, and do
challenge to themselves, superiority and jurisdiction over them: secondly,
because they take to themselves the authority and power of those patriarks,
seeing it appears most evidently, that that authority and power did belong
to the emperors: all which that they may appear more plainly and evidently, we
will content our selves with one only testimony of the same Justinian: whose
words are these in the 230 Nouel. turned into Latin by Julian Antecessor:
Therefore we command the most blessed patriarks, that is, the pope of Rome, and
of Constantinople, and of Alexandria, and of Theopolis, that is, of Antiochia,
and of Jerusalem, seeing that it is a custom, etc. And by and by: And the
metropolitans, which are consecrated by their counsel, or by the most blessed
patriarks, or by the metropolitanes, etc. Also Nouel. 131. Let the pope of
Rome, says he, sit above all bishops and patriarks, and after him the bishop
of the city of Constantinople: let the archbishop of the first Iustiniana have
under him the bishops of Dacia in the continent, and Dacia toward the coast,
also those of Praeualena, and of Dardania, and of the upper Mysia, and of
Pannonia: and also let him be consecrated by them, and let him have the same
privileges over them, which the pope of Rome has over the bishops that are
placed under him. Therefore it is evident, that in the first times of Christian
liberty there were only four patriarks, being all of equal honor, dignity,
jurisdiction, authority, degree: save only that the patriark of Rome sat
uppermost in general Synods, because of the old dignity of old Rome: and that
then the number of the patriarks was increased, not by the pope of Rome, but by
the emperor of Rome: so that there were first five, then six, then seven, and
last of all eight: for we reckoned so many under Justinian. Whereby we will
also have men mark the notorious fraud and impudency of the pope of Rome in
corrupting that 36. chapter of the Synod of Constantinople. For in Gratian,
did. 22. c. renouantes, they have thus translated the Greek words of the
Synod: Renewing the decrees of the holy Council of Constantinople, we crave
(yea we decree, (...)) that the sea of Constantinople have like privileges
which the former Rome has. Yet let it not be magnified in ecclesiastical
affairs as the other: but this being next after that, before the sea of
Alexandria be reckoned, then that of Antiochia, and after it that of Jerusalem.
Of which forgerie that no man may doubt, we will cite the Greek words
themselves: (...). We decree that the sea of Constantinople have like
privileges as the sea of old Rome, and that it be magnified in ecclesiastical
matters as the other. But peradventure some man will say, that that fault is
amended in the edition of Gregory the 13. and that in stead of Non tamen or
notwithstanding, is put Necnon, and also. Very well. For first of all by this
reason the pope is compelled to grant, that he is convict of most manifest
forgerie: and that he used that forgerie and corruption for more than three
hundred years wickedly and deceitfully to cosen and deceive the church of
Christ. And furthermore that that forgerie would never have been amended,
unless he had been long ago accused and convict of falsifieng by our men. But
what will either Gregory the 13. or our Sixtus say to this self same forgerie
repeated and renewed in c. antiqua, extra de priuileg. where there is also a
more filthy forgerie committed. Renewing the ancient privileges of the seas of
the patriarks, we decree, that after the church of Rome (which by the Lords
disposition has the principality of ordinary power over all other churches,
as being the mother and mistress of all the faithful) the sea of
Constantinople have the first place, the sea of Alexandria the second, the sea
of Antiochia the third, the sea of Jerusalem the fourth: reserving to every
one her own dignity: so that after the bishops of those places have received
the cloak from the bishop of Rome (which is a token of the fulness of the popes
office) having taken the oath of faithfulness and obedience, freely, etc. Is
there any either so hard hearted, or so dull spirited, whom this so great
impudency of the popes in corrupting the moniments of the Church of Christ
cannot move? And yet we must not pass over in silence another like
impudency. For whereas it was decreed against the Ex c. placuit. 2. q. 6.
pope of Rome in the sixth Synod of Carthage, at which S. Augustine was present,
that no man should appeal to his sea from the churches beyond the seas: if any
durst be so bold as to appeal, he should be excommunicate: yet the same pope
in that chapt. placuit, after these words: But as for him that shall think
that he may appeal to places beyond the sea, let none within Africa receive
him to the communion: he added this exception impudently, Unless peradventure
he appeal to the sea of Rome: where Gregory the 13. being of late manifestly
convict of treacherous falsehood and forgerie, added this excuse, These things
are written in the old copies as the words of Gratian. Very well again. For by
this means we see the intolerable impudency of the popes of Rome, who have
not only purposely corrupted with that exception the decree that was written
against their ambition, but also they deceived the Church of Christ with that
lie for the space of more than three hundred years, until our men found out
that forgerie and iugling. And because we take this pains principally for our
country men the French men, it shall not be vnappertinent to show out of
Doctor Bernard in his own words, what befell Paris in times past by this
ambition of appealing to Rome. This happened (says Lib. 3. de consid
he) at Paris the noble city of France, the kings sea. A certain man was
openly betrothed: the solemn day of the marriage came, all things were
prepared, many were bidden: and behold a man coveting his neighbors wife, brake
forth into a sudden appeal, affirming that she was first delivered to him, she
ought rather to be his: the bridegroom was daunted, they were all hushed, the
priest durst not proceed, all that preparation was dashed, every one went home
to his own house, to eat his own supper. The bride was suspended from the
table and bed of the bridegroom, until return was made from Rome. Again in
the same city of Paris, a certain man having betrothed a wife to himself,
appointed the marriage day: in the mean while began a cavil: for some said,
that they ought not to be joined together. The matter was brought before the
church. But an appeal was made before sentence was given. Yet nevertheless he
did accomplish that he purposed contemning or making as if he knew not of the
appeal. Go to: let us consider the state of the later time. For in the year
CCCCXXCV. there was a synod at Carthage, and that a general one, whereunto the
bishop of Rome sent three legates, Faustinus, Philip, and Asellus, with these
commandments, that his authority and right that was granted him by the Nicene
synod should be reserved for him, namely that appeal should be made from all
Metropolitanes to him. Then at a sudden the scribe called Daniel, was commanded
to read those commandments: and also that chapter of the Nicene synod, which
the pope of Rome had adioined for an instrument of his matter. The whole fifth
chapter of the synod of Sardis, was read, which the bishop of Rome had
fraudulently and wickedly cogd in in steed of the Nicene synod. All the bishops
and archbishops that were present at that time denied that ever they read that
in the Nicene synod. Therefore they agreed that the copy of the Nicene synod
should be read, which they then had in their hands. There was no word of
appealing. It was decreed that certain men should be sent to Constantinople,
to Alexandria, and finally to Rome, that they might fetch their copies of the
Nicene synod, but especially to Constantinople: where the authority it self,
or the original of the Nicene synod was kept. The year following they were
brought. They were read. There was no suspicion of that privilege and chief
authority of the bishop of Rome. That could not be found in any place of the
Nicene synod: yea on the contrary it was decreed in the self same synod, that
he should keep himself within his bounds as other popes and metropolitanes.
Wherefore if he were wise, he would henceforth content himself with his
diocese and dominion: and would not incroch upon another man's possession. To
this sentence subscribed two hundred and thirty fathers: and among those,
those same whom we named before, Faustinus, bishop of the church of Potentia,
legate of the pope of Rome, Philip a priest and legate of the same bishop of
Rome, Asellus a priest and the same bishops legate. And moreover the synod
alleged these four causes of that decree of the Nicene fathers. Which it is
not vnappertinent to repeat: The Nicen fathers did most prudently and justly
provide, that all manner businesses should be ended in their places where they
began: and that the grace of the holy Ghost would not be wanting in every
province, whereby the priests of Christ may both wisely discern and constantly
hold equity: especially, because it is granted to every one, if he shall be
offended at the judgment of those that are appointed to hear causes, to
appeal to the councels of his province, or also the general council, unless
peradventure there be any man which does believe, that God does give by
inspiration to some one man the justice of hearing and examining matters, and
does deny it to infinite priests assembled in a synod. Or how shall the
judgment given beyond the seas be firm, whereunto the necessary persons of
witnesses cannot be brought, either for infirmity of sex, or of old age, or
for many other hindrances that come between? And as concerning those three
legates, there are grievous complaints made of them in those very same letters,
and especially of Faustinus, that they had greatly troubled the assembly,
when as they feigned that they maintained the privileges of the church of Rome.
Then we see that even at that time the wickedness, treachery, and impudency of
the pope of Rome was revealed, and that it was convict and condemned by a
general council. Do we think that he did any thing having taken away al his
enemies or familiars of out Africa and Asia, that he might establish in his
west parts the power that he did even then affect? And thus much hitherto
touching the first cause of the nullitie, and incompetencie or insufficiency
of the judge: which notwithstanding that they may be more apparent to the most
excellent senators of the kings parliament, and to other lawyers, we will
confirm them with the authority of the doctors. And first of all with that
common saying of the canonists, that The pope is no meet judge even in the
only crime of heresy, but that it ought to be judged by others. * And Philip
Decius C. si papa. did. 40.
does constantly avouch, that in that case a council ought not to be gathered
by the popes authority. * The same does Panormitanus in c. cum venis. number. 37.
extra de iudic.
and Decius affirm, in c. significasti, number. 4. and number. 9. de elect. But of
al other Ludouike of Rome does most copiouslie and constantly avouch *, out of
the authority of the decree it self, that he that in Council. vlt. nu. 15. and
seqq.
lives rebelliouslie, and refuses to learn and do good things, is rather a
member of C. nullus, did. 38. in council. 95. vol. 4. Decius cons. 115.
the devil, than of Christ, and that he is showed to be rather an infidel, than
a believer *. The same says Jason *, and Decius *.

The second Nullitie by reason of the falsenes of the Allegation.
THerefore we say that the second cause of the nullitie does consist in the
falsenes of the allegation: that is, in a false cause alleged, which the pope
followed in co^ceiuing his sentence. For the rule of the law is known, that a
sentence pronounced according to false causes, false allegations, false
instruments, is void in law and without any appeal, especially where the l.
1. and pass* C. si ex falls. instru. l. si praetor. 7. D de iudic. l. cum vero.
2.. Subuentum, De fideic. libert. l. Seiae. 26. D. de tutor. and cur. dat. l.
1.. haec verba, D. ne vis siat ei l. 1. C. si ex falls. alleg.
sentence had for the principal cause and foundation, the falsenes of the
allegation *. But pope Sixtus says that he has therefore proscribed the king
of Navarre, and the prince of Condee, because they be (as he says) notorious
heretics. Finely. For by this reason, if those princes be notorious heretics,
then they must be proceeded against with arms and war: if they be not notorious
heretics, then the proscription and execration is of none importance. Let us
see then for what cause and allegation the foresaid Princes are condemned for
heretics. For so great a crime must not be laid to the charge even of a man of
base estate, without a great and weighty cause: much less of so great princes,
and the kinsmen of so great a king. The emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and
Honorius decreed, that they be counted heretics, which shall be detected even
by a light argument to err and go astraie from the judgment and path of
catholic religion *. Who can l. 2. c. de haeret. and Manich.
like of and allow that definition? For Augustine does not account those
heretics, which defend their opinion though false and pernicious with no
stubborn wilfulnes, especially which they have not brought forth through
boldness of their presumption, but have received it from their parents, being
seduced and fallen into errors, and do seek the truth with wary carefulnes,
being ready to be reformed, when they have found it: as he says text. 24.
did. 3. c. dixit. Again John Auentine in the third book of his chronicles
left in writing, that a certain bishop of Germany called Virgil, being
skilful in mathematical arts, was therefore accused of heresy, and was called
to Rome by pope Zachary, because he affirmed that there were Antipodes *. That
is, such as go with their feet toward ours.
The canonists decreed, that he should be counted an heretic, that should not
obey all and singular the popes decrees *. The gloss. did. 10. c. nulli, and
did. 21.
pope himself has decreed, that he that denies emperors, kings, princes, and
finally every humane creature to be subject to the temporal and material
sword of the bishop of Rome, be counted an heretic: because it is upon
necessity of salvation to believe this: that is, it is one of the articles C.
1. in fin. extr. de mayor. and obedient.
of faith *.

In the year of Christ cxc 8. Victor pope of Rome did therefore pronounce that
the East churches were heretics, because they thought not the same concerning
Easter, which his church thought. For which cause Ireneus bishop of Lions, did
sharply reprove that pope: as Eusebius does witness in his fifth book 26. and
Epist. 24. What need many words? He is defined to be an heretic in popery,
which does not believe al those things which are taught for truth in the church
of Rome *. But we have before C. nulli. did. 19
showed, that this doctrine was delivered to the Church of Christ of it to be
believed, by the authority and commandment of the popes, that Dominic wrought
more miracles than Christ and all his apostles: that the same Dominic was much
more excellent than Christ and all his apostles. That John Baptist, to whom the
holy scripture gave this title, that there was never any mortal man upon earth
greater than he, was by many degrees inferior to Dominic that cosener. We have
showed furthermore that the popes have approved that fable touching the marks
of Francis Bernardo; and that it is delivered to the church of Rome to be
believed, and that that wise man that opposes himself against it must be
punished as an heretic, for the popes use these self same words in their bulls
*. Wherefore this (says Lib. conformit. fol. 234. col. 3.
he) must be holden most firmly as true, and he that holds the contrary
must be despised of all men as an heretic. In like sort Anthony of Florence
writes thus: The church has Hist. part. 3. c. 1.. 3.
undoubtedly approved and declared that there be a solemn feast kept for
this: that the Lord Jesus who was crucified appeered to Francis as he prayed,
and was transformed like to a Zeraphin (that is, having six wings) and that he
imprinted in his hands and side the signs of his passion, wherein he felt
great pain. Let the most excellent and most wise Counselors of the French
king judge now, whether that be a true definition of an heretic, that he that
shall not believe those most filthy inventions touching Dominic and Bernardo,
allowed by the authority of the church of Rome, shall be counted and taken for
an heretic, and thrust from the fellowship of the church. If they do not think
that that is an equal decree of the papacy of Rome, then let them remember
that rule, wherein it is taught, that rash and light accusers, are not only
condemned of false accusing, and so noted with infamy, but also they are
condemned to abide like punishment, which the other should have suffered whom
they accused *: and therefore l. vlt. C. de accus.
that pope Sixtus the fifth who has falsely accused the king of Navarre, and
prince of Condie of heresy, ought flatly to be taken for a schismatike and
heretic. But let us now a little more attentively consider, to whom that
wicked crime and name of heretics does properly belong. For So Much as we can
gather by the authority of holy scripture, and of the ancient doctors of the
Church, he only is to be counted an heretic, which stubbornly holds, and
seditiously sows doctrine that is contrary to the rule of faith (that is,
the Christian Creed) notwithstanding he has been lawfully admonished and
convict. For thus does Augustine define him *: Those (says De ciuita. Dei 18.
c. 51.
he) that in the Church of Christ, do taste of any sick or corrupt thing, if
being rebuked, that they may savor of that which is sound and right, they
resist stubbornly, and they will not amend their pestiferous and deadly
opinions, but persist to defend them, are made heretics, and going out adoores,
they are counted in the number of exercising enemies. And now as touching the
creed of Christians, which Tertullian calls the rule of faith, there is this
notable testimony of the same Tertullian extant in his book of Prescriptions
of heretics. It is the rule of faith (says he) wherein it is believed that
there is one only God (note this periphrasis of the Christian creed) and none
other besides the creator of the world, who has brought forth all things out
of nothing by his word. P. That that word was called his son, that he appeered
diversely to the patriarks, that he was always heard of the prophets; last of
al, that he was brought into the virgin Marie by the spirit and power of God
his father, that he was made flesh in her womb, and that Jesus Christ came out
of her being borne, that thencefoorth he preached the new law, and the new
promise of the kingdom of heaven, that he wrought miracles, that being
fastened to the cross he rose again the third day, that being taken up into
the heavens he sits at the right hand of the father, that he sent the power
of the holy Ghost to be his vicegerent, to govern the believers, that he shall
come with glory to take the saints into the fruit of eternal life, and of the
heavenly promises, and to adiudge the profane to everlasting fire: both parts
being raised again with restoring of the flesh. This rule instituted by
Christ, has amongst us no questions, save only such as heresies cause, and
such as make heretics. Thus writes Tertullian. Whereby we understand, that
those are by him defined to be heretics, which bring in into the Church a
doctrine contrary to the Christian creed: which is consonant and agreeable to
that commandment of the apostle: He that brings you another Gospel than
that which we have brought, let him be accursed. Therefore Tertullian in
another place of the same book says: Whence came strangers and heretics
enemies to the apostles, save only from diversity of doctrine, which every
one has either broched or received of his own head against the apostles?
Therefore we must make account that the corruption both of the scriptures, and
expositions is there where there is found diversity of doctrine. Also in
another place: Let heretics bring to light the beginnings of their churches,
let them turn over the order of their bishops, so descending from the
beginning by successions, that first of all the same bishop had some one of the
apostles or apostolic men, Who notwithstanding continued with the apostles,
for his author and predecessor. Tertullian does in plain words call those
apostolic men, neither does he suffer any other to be called by this name,
save only those that have agreed with the doctrine of the apostles, and have
continued therein: so that it may easily be understood that apostolic men must
not be esteemed by the sea and place, but by succession and perpetuity of
doctrine. Therefore he says in another place: The doctrine of heretics being
compared with the apostolik doctrine, shall by the diversity and contrariety
thereof pronounce, that it neither has any apostle for the author thereof, nor
apostolic man: for, as the apostles had not taught things that were diverse
among themselves, so the apostolic men had not published things that were
contrary to the apostles: save only those that fell away from the apostles,
and preached otherwise. Lo how manifestly Tertullian shows, that those ought
properly to be called heretics, which bring in a doctrine contrary to the
Christians creed, though they call themselves apostolic men: forasmuch, says
he, as they be fallen away from the apostles: and (as he said a little before)
have invented of their own head, that is, their own wit and invention,
somewhat besides holy scripture. Furthermore we must mark, that Tertullian
does not properly and chiefly call those apostolic men, which succeeded Peter,
but generally which succeeded any of al his fellow apostles: and that not
precisely: that it ought to be referred to some certain place and city: but
jointly, which succeeded the apostles in delivering the doctrine of Christ by
hand. Whereby appears the impudency of the popes, who did not only properly
restrain the name of apostolic unto the bishop of Rome, but also they gave
the same to foolish things: as the apostolic sea, the apostolic legate, the
apostolic messenger, the apostolic chancerie, apostolic penance, the
apostolic notarie, the apostolic treasury, the apostolic privilege,
apostolic provision, the apostolic bull: so that at length it may be said the
apostolic mule, and (sir reverence) the apostolic pissepot, and so forth.
But to return to our purpose, that the difference between an heretic and an
apostolic man might more plainly be understood, Tertullian adioineth a most
manifest example, and very appertinent to that we have in hand: Paul, says he,
instructing Timothy, does amongst heretics nip forbidders of marriage. Why so,
Tertullian? Surely, because that inhibition is contrary to the doctrine of the
apostles: who taught in plain words, that marriage is not only comely and
honorable for all sorts and orders of men, but also for the most part
necessary. Whereby it appears that the forbidding of matrimony is not
apostolic, but heretical: because, according to Tertullians opinion, those
are defined to be heretics, which bring in doctrine contrary to the writings
of the apostles. And those are defined to be apostolic and sound and
catholic, which contenting themselves with the writings of the apostles, do
detest and accurse together with the apostle, those that detract from, or add
to the same. Furthermore to this definition of heretics agrees that, which S.
Augustine delivers *: He is an heretic, says he, who In lib. de vtil.
creden.
for love of gain or principality does either beget or follow new opinions.
Where he means principality of faction and departing from the Church, the
captain and prince whereof he professes himself to be, having as it were set
up his banner. And with this self same mind Paul calls Philetus and Hymeneus
heretics, because they had not only erred from the faith, but also subverted
the faith of others: whom likewise in another place he calls (...): that is,
wanderers or straiers, 1. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 3.
and such as lead others into errore also. But moreover, Peter describing
heretics, says, that they entrap the minds of inconstant and weak men. Also
in another place: Amongst them, says he, there shall be false teachers, which
shall secretly bring in heresies or deadly sects. 2. Pet. 2. And as touching
the form of declaring heretics, Paul shows the same in these words: An
heretic after the first and second admonition 1. Tim. 3.
avoid. Unto which form that order does also appertain, which Christ
prescribed *, that he be accused before the Church, Mat. 18.
and if he show himself stubborn, let him be counted as an heathen man, and
profane person. And we see that even the school doctors are of this mind: and
amongst these the master of sentences *: where he In 4. did. 18. c. 7.
writes thus: that Excommunication ought to be put in practice, when a man
being according to canonical discipline called the third time to amend a
manifest fault, and making no account to make satisfaction, is cut off by the
sentence of the church, from the place of prayer, and from the partaking of the
sacraments, and from the fellowship of the faithful, that he may be ashamed,
and that he may repent being converted through shame of his wickedness, that his
soul may be saved. Who if professing repentance he do repent, he is admitted
to the communion that was denied him, and is reconciled to the Church. By all
which does plainly appear, that there be three marks of an heretic, whereby
they are known and discerued from those that hold the truth: if they bring in
any thing into the Church that agrees not with the rule of faith, if they make
a departure, and if being solemnly admonished they do stubbornely persist. But
because this disputation does for the most part appertain unto the kings
Senators which are lawiers, it seems to be nothing vnappertinent, to set
down another definition of heretics, out of the books of Justinian. For in
the Nouel. 115.. si quis, where amongst the lawful causes of disheriting
children, he reckons up heresies, he adds these words interpreted by Julian
Antecessor. But we call those men sound, which communicate in the holy
catholic church, into which all the patriarks are gathered with one consent
and concord: and the four holy Councels are preached: the Nicene, that of
Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, and that of Chalcedon. And we call those
heretics, which do not communicate with the catholics. These things being thus
set down, let us now see by what right our foresaid Princes* are condemned by
pope Sixtus the fifth for heretics: for whether we follow the former or the
latter definition, the foresaid Princes do profess and declare so earnestly as
they can, and they call to witness God and Angels, and all men of all sorts and
kinds, finally heaven and earth, that they do neither bring in into the Church
any thing that is repugnant to the rule of faith and usual creed of
Christians, ne yet to those four most ancient Councels, but that they do with
all their heart embrace their doctrine and confession such as was conceived in
the Nicene synod, the synod of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and Chalcedon,
neither do they depart even an hears breadth (as they say) from the form set
down by Athanasius. Futhermore they profess, that they neither have made,
neither will make any departure, from those churches, which have continued in
that rule of faith, and form of confessions, such as be those churches of the
most noble and mighty electors, and princes of the confession of Augusta. Last
of all, that they were never till this day admonished, and reprehended by any
church of this sort, which has perseuered in the doctrine of the apostles. But
and if being young men, and terrified with the blood and infinite murders of
the massacre of Paris, and moved with the sight and presence of a most mighty
king, and finally being hedged in with the swords of many armed soldiers,
they did and pronounced those things unwillingly, which they were commanded
either to do or pronounce, this must not be counted a solemn and lawful form
of ecclesiastical admonition, and such as Christ appointed, and the Apostles
and apostolic men have kept: especially seeing that shortly after, when they
had recovered their liberty, they protested, that they did all that they did
unwillingly and compelled with threatenings: and did openly crave pardon for
that their infirmity, at the hands of God and Christians, in a reformed
church, before a great assembly. And on the contrary they show, that the pope
of Rome is condemned by the judgment of the most part of Europe, not only
amongst heretics, but also as a chief heretic, and as the chief author, and
captain of sedition. First, because he has brought in into the church wicked
fables, and blasphemous, touching the false miracles of munks, and traditions
most contrary to those four ancient councels: such as we have before set
down, touching the feigned purgatory, the invocation of the dead, the
worshipping of images, the daily renewing of the sacrifice of Christ in the
mass, the idolatrous worshipping of the bread and chalice, touching the
forbidding of marriage, touching the Dominicane munkes hid under the garment of
the virgin Marie, touching more and greater miracles done by Dominic and
Francis, than either by Christ or his Apostles: which are such wicked, heinous,
and ungodly blasphemies, that the minds of all the godly do abhor the rehearsal
thereof. Secondly, because having taken to himself lordship and princely power
over the whole church, and using ministers and officers, dukes, and purpled
cardinals, to defend him and furnish him, he professed himself to be the
captain and prince of a new faction and synagog. Last of all, because being
about four hundred whole years ago, requested by the prayers of al Christian
princes, and admonished to admit some amendment and reformation, he did
prowdlie reject their request and precepts. Of which, not to fet testimonies
far, surely the memory of our fathers and grandfathers may be a witness, out of
the council of Constance, Basil, Florence, and Trent: in which last, false and
erroneous doctrines were not only not taken away, but also more and more
confirmed: so that no man can now doubt, but that these three marks, whereby
we said a little before, an heritike is discerned from one whose judgment is
sound, do most evidently appear in the pope of Rome. Which things, seeing they
are so, we think that it is now evident enough, of what importance this
accusation of pope Sixtus ought to be with the counselors of the French king,
whereto the most part of Europe has subscribed it self, also we understand of
what authority this accusation by him made against the king of Navarre and
prince of Condie, ought to be with them. For to cut his throat (as they say)
with his own sword, lo, in his own decrees 24. distinct. 1. it is every
where in many testimonies set down, that he that is fallen into heresy
cannot deprive any man of his office, or insnarle him in any sentence, as in c.
acasius. If therefore, a bishop (says he) be fallen into an heresy already
condemned, being condemned by an ancient excommunication, he cannot condemn
others. For he that is excommunicate, cannot excommunicate others. Which
self-same thing is confirmed in that which follows, by this reason being
added thereto: For the power to bind or loose was given by the Lord, to true,
not to false priests. And in the chapter following. Peter's privilege remains
wheresoever sentence is given according to his equity. Hereto belongs that
which Jason writes in his 145. council. requisitus. number. 3. vol. 2. That the
pope cannot depose any man placed in dignity, without cause: because the power
granted to Peter, to feed the sheep of Christ, is not extended to kill them.
c. in nouo. 21. did. for Peter's power continues so long as he judges truly,
and does not err with the keys. * The self-same writes d. c. manet, etc.
Abba. * Also Jason writes more plain in in. c. vlt. col pe. and vlt. de
confi. vtil. vel inut. and in c. constitutus, col. 3. de relig. dom. and in c.
vlt. de postul. praelat. and in c. de multa, de praebend.
his 95. council, requisitus, vol. 4. When as, says he, the pope is guilty
of heresy, seeing he may for this crime be deposed, c. si papa. 40. did. by
this he cease to be pope, seeing he is without the catholic church:
according to the notes by Innocentius in c. ex part, de verb. sig. and in like
sort when the pope shall be a notorious criminal person, and entangled in
grievous crimes, so that he does offend the church; etc. Also, col. 3. But the
old gloss held more strongly, than the whole world alleges, in d. c. si
papa, that the pope may be accused for another fault, as symonie, or adultery,
which is notorius, and the pope being admonished cannot be reformed, so that he
offends the church of God, seeing he is counted as an heretic: and so the
pope may be accused and punished, not only for the cause of heresy, but also
for any other crime, wherein the pope commits excess offending the church,
if it be notorious and the pope cannot be reformed: because notable
disobedience is counted heresy: wherefore, as the pope may be accused for
heresy, and condemned, so likewise for any notorious crime wherein he is
incorrigible. Moreover, Felinus says *. The pope which is not canonicallie in
c. Ego N. de iureiur.
elect is a devil, not having the keys of the kingdom of heaven, but of hell.

The third Nullitie by reason of the want of judicial order.
LEt us now come to the third cause of nullitie, which we said to be the want
of form and judicial order. For as in times past the great orator said, what
is more unseemly, than that judgment should be given of his life and of all
his goods, who was neither commanded to be present, nor yet cited, nor accused?
We showed before, that this form and order of ecclesiastical judgment was
appointed by Christ and his Apostles, in judging heretics, first, that they
should be sometimes convict of their error: then if they would not obey not
one, but many and often admonitions of the church, but would (as says
Augustine) stubburnely resist, and persevere in their error, then they should
be counted as enemies and profane persons. Therefore admonitions are
necessary, and a solemn and lawful hearing of the cause. God was not ignorant
what Adam and Eua had committed against his commandment or inhibition. Yet he
called both of them forth, and made as it were a question and hearing of the
cause: and then at length he gave sentence against them after they were
convict. The same God being a most severe punisher of wickedness, was not
ignorant with how great and how vile wickedness the Sodomites and Gomorrheans
had defiled themselves. But yet notwithstanding that he might show an example
of equity to mortal men that are judges, he took upon him to hear the
cause, and he said that he would descend and know. Which thing likewise the
canonists have in many words every where delivered in 1. q. 2. but specially in
c. Deus omnipotens. But moreover the same scripture does in another place
testify, that the elders of the people of the Jews who judged matters at the
foot of the mount Sinay, gave not sentence before they had heard both parties,
and until both parties had laid down their matter. Moreover, the Jews
though they did maliciously seek to put Christ to death, and to destroy him,
yet they kept the usual order of judgments, so that they accused him before
Caiphas the highest priest, and a competent judge: and then they did bring him
before the judgment seat of the same high priest, after they had caught him,
and also they did bring forth witnesses for their accusation. Therefore both
sides laid down their cause: and the opinions of those that sat with the
highest priest were asked: and then at length, judicial order being kept, the
condemnation was pronounced. But what need more testimonies? When the woman was
taken in adultery (as says the scripture) as the deed was a doing, and there
was none to accuse her, and to bring forth witnesses, then said Christ,
Neither John. 8.
says he, will I condemn thee being not convict *. Also in another place:
when as upon a certain day the Jews would have condemned Christ before they
had heard him, then Nicodemus rebuked them in these words: Does our law
condemn any man before he be heard, and his fact known? Finally, there is
nothing whereof the old patrons of the Christians, and amongst these
Tertullian, Arnobius, Augustine, Lactantius do so greatly complain, as that the
heathen men did every where and rashly condemn the Christians being unheard,
and before their cause was known. But pope Sixtus and his assessors the
cardinals have followed the rashness of these Ethnikes in this most mad
declaration, when as with certain barbarous and giantlike arrogancy they
condemned the foresaid most excellent king of Navarre, and most noble prince
of Condie, I do not say being unheard, but not so much as commanded to be
present or cited. But peradventure some man will say, these Princes were
condemned not simply as heretics, but jointly as notorious and manifest
heretics. For they are oftentimes thus called in many places in that furious
declaration. But this law is received among the canonists, that in manifest and
notorious crimes there needs none accusation and C. manifesta. and ccc. seqq.
2. q. 1.
judicial order *. Whereupon they will have this conclusion follow, seeing the
foresaid Princes do manifestly and openly profess, that they are fallen from
the sea of Rome, there needed no citation or accusation, or hearing of the
cause to condemn them. But we may easily answer this objection: for the
answer is threefold. The first is, that the pope takes that to himself as
granted, which the most part of Christendom does stoutly deny him, that the
religion of the foresaid princes, and of so many other kings and nobles which
think the same thing, is heretical: and that therefore it is an absurd thing,
that those should be called notorious heretics, which are not even heretics.
The other answer is, that all those points of the decree of Gratian. 1. q. 1.
which can be objected to us, do in no point appertain unto the crime of
heresy: but (as pope Nicolas says *) unto the c. 16.
works of the flesh: which (as he adds out of the apostle) are manifest: as
manslaughter, robbery, whooredome, incest, adultery, and such like. Neither
shall there in all these places any word be found touching the crime of heresy:
which crime does differ from the works of the flesh, and other wicked deeds
therein, because in condemning heresy the correction and amendment of the
person is sought: which Paul does therefore call (...), using the same word or
name, which Plato gives to that chastisement, which is used for amendements
sake: for in other punishments the amendment of the person is not sought, but
there is an example given to others, that men with fear of like punishment may
be terrified from doing evil. For which cause the same Plato calls it (...),
or a public example *. Agell. 6. c. 4. and Plato in Gorg.
Therefore though a man wander in some article of religion, yea do manifestly
err, and slide, yet he must not forthwith be either excommunicate, or (as
Augustine says) be accounted in the number of exercising enemies: but he must
be once and often admonished, chastened, taught, neither must he be removed
from the fellowship of the faithful, until he show himself rebellious and
stubborn: and (to use the words of the same Augustine) do stubbornly resist
the Church. Wherefore seeing that the foresaid Princes do neither profess any
doctrine, dissenting from the rule of faith (as we said before:) but do most
carefully embrace the four forenamed councels, neither yet have bin
reprehe^ded by any apostolic church: which (as Tertullian defines it) has
perseuered in the doctrine of the apostles, neither yet have showed themselves
stubborn in learning, but if they be convict of any error are ready to amend
it: we conclude without any delay, that we have abundantly satisfied the cause
of Nullitie set down by us in the third place. To what end should I use many
words? For even by the law of the canonists all this declaration of the pope is
proved to be unjust and void: for so much as when an excommunication is sent out
for no just cause, and without observing the judicial order, then the curse of
the excommunication is said to redound upon the head of him that accurseth.
Touching an unjust cause, there be testimonies extant in the writings of
Augustine *, where in c. temerarium, eodem.
he thus writes: Rash judgment does for the most part hurt him nothing, upon
whom judgment is rashly given, but him that judges rashly must the rashness of
necessity hurt. Also in the chapter following: What does it hurt a man that
man's ignorance will blot him out of that table, if so be it an evil conscience
do not blot him out of the book of the living? Think of Augustine what thou will, only let not my conscience accuse me in the eyes of God, etc. Etsi,
these things are cited out of the same Augustine: Though thou be condemned of
man for a time, the earthly seat is one, and the heavenly throne another
thing: from the lower he receives sentence, from the higher a crown. Also out
of the same Augustine: 11. q. 3. c. Episcopi, c. nemo. c. certum, c. ex part,
cap cum olim. De sent. excom.
I in c. illud plane.
will say that boldly and not rashly, that if any of the faithful shall be
unjustly accursed, it shall rather hurt him that does, than him that suffers
this injury. For the holy Ghost dwelling in the saints, by whom every man is
bound, or loosed, does not punish any man undeservedly. But in judicial order
is required first citation, then the stubbornnes of him that is cited Host. in
sum. tit. de sent. excomm* number. 7. gloss. in c. statuimus codem tit. in 6.
. As for example, says Hostiensis, if any man being commanded or admonished
will not amend his wickedness. cap. ad nostr. De consuet. vbi concord. in gloss.
Furthermore it is requisite that the excommunicator be a competent judge:
otherwise the excommunication of an insufficient judge is none c. solet. etc.
venerabilem, and per tuas eod tit. in 6.
. Thirdly, if the excommunicat person have lawfully appealed, or in stead of
appealing have fitly protested *. For he that alleges no sentence, though he
desire not to be absolved, but (as it falls out in this matter) showing
lawful causes of Nullity, especially so many, and so lawful, he must be heard:
and in the mean season the sentence is suspended, as the same canonists do
commonly teach in d. c. per tuas. and in d. c. solet.
. In like sort if the sentence contain an intolerable error: as the same
canonists affirm in d. c. solet. in d. c. per tuas.
: as in this matter of ours, where the bull of pope Sixtus is convict of most
manifest errors: as is showed in the last cause of Nullitie, especially where
the sentence does manifestly contain the error of the fact: as Augustine in
Sum. contra gloss. in d. c. per tuas.
notes. For a sentence pronounced according to false allegations is in law
none: as we proved before at large.

The fourth Nullitie by reason of the form of the sentence.
THere remains the fourth cause of Nullitie, by reason of the foolish form
of the conceived sentence. For, as it is commonly said, the foolishnes of
speech declares the foolishnes of the mind l. pend. D. de cond. and demon l.
1.. pen. and vlt. D. de aedil. edict.
. Therefore a judge which gives sentence foolishly, fondly, and absurdly, is
called a fool l. vlt. c. de fideic. libert.
, such a one as we shall prove this Friar, a scholar of Francis Bernardo to
be, by this his sentence, and Frierlike bull. For he begins thus: The
authority granted by the infinite power of the eternal king to S. Peter and
his successors, does surmount all the powers of earthly kings and princes. See
how the hangman speaks sentences. But it is an old rule of the Logicians,
that comparisons are used in those things only that are of the same sort. But
what agreement is there between the authority that was given to the apostles,
which appertains to religion and conscience, and the power granted to kings,
which consists in civil and politic matters? Therefore our cowled Friar has
spoken, as if he had said: The foolishnes of Bernardo his scholar does
surmount the ears of all the asses that are in Arcadia. But that we may answer
somewhat in earnest, let this conclusion come to light. A successor of right,
has no more than his author had. Peter had not authority surpassing the
powers of kings, but he was commanded to obey them as superiors. Therefore
though the pope were Peter's successor (which we proved before to be false) yet
being inferior to kings, he ought to obey them. The assumption is plain out of
these words: Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Whosoever he be
that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Romans 13. Tell them
that they submit themselves to principalities and powers, that they obey. Tit.
3. Be subject to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be to
the king, as to the chief ruler: or to presidents, as to those that are sent by
him. 1. Pet. 2 But what shall the authority of the holy scripture avail with
the pope? For it shall even now be refuted with this one word: Constantine
granted to the pope all the kingdoms of the West, and he commanded that
emperors and kings should hold his stirrup when he gat up upon horseback; that
they should wait upon him as pages, and finally that prostrating themselves
upon the ground they should kiss his feet. This is that preeminence of the
popes, whereof he speaks in this place: such as either was in times past upon
earth, that of his god Francis, when being taken up into the middle region of
the air, he talked familiarly with Christ: for which cause to avoid that cold
he put on a hooded garment: or else is at this day in heaven, where he is said
to sit stradling above the Cherubins. But now let us see what follows:
Standing firm upon the rock, it does not turn aside from the right course by
any contrary, or prosperous blasts. Who ever heard before this, that either
authority being set upon a rock did sail, or that any ship was ever turned
aside from the right course by prosperous blasts? But notwithstanding howsoever
this ship does sail, we have showed before, that he that did boast that he
sits in the stern thereof, and does hold the helm, has not a place left
him so much as in the pumpe, or sink. Like to this is that that follows: If
he find any that resist the ordinance of God, those does he more sharply
punish. As if even in the city of Rome, which is a mansion of al wickedness,
the ordinances of God were not resisted: or the pope did sharply punish any
such as resist. But Petrarcha, Mantuan, Sannazarius, and many mo Italians, call
Rome the shop of all wickedness, Babylon, Sodom, the school of errors, the
temple of heresies, a shameless strumpet.

Go shame into the villages,
If villages be not become
Receipts of filth: For that is now
A brothelhouse that erst was Rome.
says Mantuan. Also in another place:

At Rome are sold
The temples, priests, and altars brave,
The sacrifice and diadem:
The fire, incense, and prayers eke,
To sell both heaven and God they seem.
Also Albericus Rosat. in the word Rome:

The court of Rome will not be served,
With sheep that's robbed of her fleeze:
Against all those that nothing give,
The doors are shut: but those which greeze
Her hand with bribes, she hears with speed.
Also S. Bernard in his fourth book of consideration to pope Eugenius, cap. 1.
Whom will thou show me of a whole great city, that received thee to be pope,
without reward, or hope of reward? These being hated of earth and heaven, have
laid hands upon both: being wicked against God: rash against holy things:
seditious one against another. Also Petrarcha in his epistles: Whatsoever is
read concerning Assyria or Egypt, or Babylon; whatsoever is read concerning the
labyrinths; finally whatsoever is read of the entry of hell, and of the
brimstone woods of hell, being applied to this hell it is a fable. Here is the
turretting, and terrifieng Nimrod. Here is Semiramis with her quiver, here is
Minos that cannot be entreated. Here is Radamantus. Here is Cerberus that
deuoureth al things. Here is Pasiphae lieng with the bull, and the mixed kind,
as says Maro, and the child having two shapes. Here is Minotaurus moniments
of lust not to be named. Last of all you may see here whatsoever is confused,
whatsoever is black, whatsoever is any where horrible, or is feigned so to be:
and to be brief, a sink of all wickedness and shameful things. What says our
pope to these things? Let us hear the praise of the city of Rome, out of the
chapter fundamenta 17. de elect in vj. Rome, says he, is an holy nation, an
elect people, a priestly city, and a princely, by the holy sea of S. Peter
made the head of the whole world. Was there ever any so shameless a baud or
beast, out of whose mouth came a more shameless saying? Or what shall we say
of our Franciscan friar, who cares for those things that are done beyond the
Alps: who regards not what things be done at home? Seeing Paul has
ordained, that he that cannot govern his own family, have not the government
of the church committed to him. It follows. Casting down from their throne
those that are mightier, he throws them down even to the ground, as
ministers of proud Lucifer. How madlie the drunken friar inuadeth the place of
Isaias *, which does properly Chapter 14.
concern the popes of Rome, and the universal priests of the church? For
Gregory the great, does plainly testify, that under the person of
Nabuchadnosor the universal pope is described. For in hell there are brought in
the damned kings and princes, coming out as it were to meet the pope, and to
welcome him coming unto them after his death, and mocking him thus. Hell was
afraid because of thee against the meeting of thy coming, all the princes of
the earth that are dead, arise to thee. All the kings of the nations rise out
of their throns, and they speak unto thee on this wise: Art thou also become
weak as one of us, and art thou become like to us? Thy pride is drawn unto
the hell. O Lucifer, when did thou fall from heaven, thou son of the
morning, and art cut down to the earth, that did terrify the nations? But
thou said in thine heart, I will clime up into heaven: I will exalt my throne
above the stars of heaven. I will clime up above the height of the cloud, and
will become like to the most highest. Those that see thee, shall say, Is this
he that troubled the earth, and did shake kingdoms. Now let us hear Gregory
out of his fourth book of Epistles. chapter 82. where he applies that place of
Isaias, unto him that did profess himself to be pope and universal bishop. I
will clime up, says he, above the height of the clouds: I will be like to the
most highest. For what are all thy brethren, the bishops of the universal
church, but stars of heaven? Before whom whiles thou couetest to set thy self
by a word of pride, and to tread their name under foot in comparison of thee,
what else do thou say, but, I will clime up into heaven: I will exalt my seat
above the stars of heaven? Whom whiles your brotherhood despising them, does go
about to tread under foot, what other thing says it, but this which the old
enemy says, I will clime up above the height of the clouds? Al which things
when I behold weeping, etc. By which words it is understood, that the place of
Isaias concerning Lucifer, cast down into the nether most part of the earth,
and of his cruelty thrust down into hell, does not belong to the most noble
king of Navarre, (than whom the sun beholds nothing more meek, more
gentle) but unto our Polyphemus Sixtus the fifth, and unto his pride in treading
underfoot the majesty of kings. But if we must cut the throat of this giant
with his own sword, lo, we have a plain text in his own decree, * where it
is thus written. Lucifer de poeniten. did 2.. qui vero reprobi.
whiles that he presumed of himself in pride, he was cast down from paradyse
into hell. Also *: Whiles Nabuchadnosor waxing proud in 23. q. 5.. hinc
notandum.
his heart, said, Is not this Babylon which I have built, etc. God did
forthwith change his reasonable mind, and he changed him into the form of
beastlines, so that flieng from men, he lived with beasts. Which words he
recites, referring them unto the pope (which we will have especially noted) and
he commends Ludouike of Rome *. But now let us proceed in cons. vlt. number. 2.
to the rest, after we have added that one thing out of the 38. leaf of the
book of the Conformities, because mention is made of the seat of Lucifer. The
peace making Friar being caught up into heaven, whether in the body, or
without the body God knows (let the readers consider how wickedly the vile
munk does mock the words of Paul) and he saw in heaven many seats, amongst
which he saw one higher than his fellows, bedeckt with precious stone. And he
heard a voice saying to him: This was Lucifers seat, and in his place shall
humble Francis sit. And this surely is that, which we said before, that Francis
Bernardo together with the rest of his stage plaiers and comicall mates shall
have a place in Lucifers kingdom: so that we need not greatly dispute whether
Francis or pope Sixtus the fifth, a bishop of the order of Francis, is worthy
the seat. It follows in the bull: According to the care for all chruches,
people, and nations that lies upon us. Good Lord! What a burden has our great
cowled Friar taken upon him, seeing he has taken up upon his shoulders the
care both for all churches, and people, and nations. We will hereafter cease to
wonder what is the cause, that painters have in his image painted the form of
one that stoupeth. Scarce Atlas, who they say held up heaven, did bear a
heavier burden. What shall then become of us, if the pope begin to faint and
fail under that so great a burden, which he complains to lie upon his
shoulders alone? They say that the cause of a certain melancholy persons
grief, was, because he was afraid, least Atlas, who had so long borne so great
a burden should at length sink under it. But we think it good to set down in
this place a certain pleasant narration of William Budeus a man (as I said
before) that loved his country, and was very learned, touching these Atlasses,
out of his fifth book De Ass: A certain pleasant and merry preacher, says he,
was wont not long ago, to cavil at them, and to say, that they seemed to him
to be such as are those corbat images in churches, which are set upon posts or
pillars. For as we see some of these images as it were yielding under their
burden, which are either in stead of corbats, or else they reach without the
mortesses of the corbats, and they seem to one that beholds them, as if they
took great pains, and swet with bearing the work: whereas indeed they are
without feeling, and they help the strength of the stones nothing, howsoever
they seem to take great pains: so we see these Atlasses set and placed upon
the very tops of the pillars in the temple of the Lord, having indeed that
false honor, and majesty of titles like reverend old men, and their custom is
to pretend holiness, and to bear a fair show of reverend old men, that
underprop the Lords sanctuary: but when we behold their blockish ignorance or
dissolute carelesnes, it is evident that they do no more good than images of
stone. But it seems that we ought not to omit that, which Antoninus
archbishop of Florence, whom we have sundry times before mentioned, has taught
us, that when as long ago the pope began to faint under so great a burden,
there were some found that did underprop him with their shoulders, namely
Dominican Friars. For he writes thus *: Dominic Histor. part. 3. tit. 23.. 3.
fol. 191.
went to pope Innocentius, and prayed him to confirm his order of predicants.
The pope showed himself at the first hard to be entreated: but upon a certain
night in a revelation showed him by God, he saw in his sleep that the ioints
and couplings of the Laterane church were as it were loosed, and did threaten
that it would shortly fall. Which when he beheld trembling, and also sorrowing,
the man of God Dominic came to prevent it, who setting to his shoulders, he did
uphold all that frame that was like to fall: at the strangenes of which vision
whiles he did wonder, and wisely understanding also the signification thereof,
he did ioifully accept the petition of Dominic: anno Domini, 1210. Thus says
he. But what if the Dominicans also who have now more than three hundred years
with their shoulders underpropped the papacy that is like to fall, do also
begin to faint, and to be weakened? There is another helping pillar found. For
the Jesuits are risen of late, that they being sound and fresh may aid the
weary Dominicans. So that the matter is now brought to the third rank (as it
is in the proverb.) Who being now weakened, the pope is descended to the vain
thunderbolt of excommunications, mistrusting the principal matter. It
follows in the bull: That not only the times of our service, but also all
times to come may bring peace to all parts of Christendom. We spoke before of
this kind of service. Which we proved to consist therein, that kings and
emperors do hold the popes stirrup when he alighteth from his horse: that they
wait upon him when he enters into cities, like pages: that they give him
divine reverence and worship as he sits in his princely throne: and that
lieng prostrate upon the ground, and lieng at his feet, for testifieng their
bondage they kiss his shoes. But what words are these: At this time we
condemn heretics, that the times to come may bring peace to Christendom?
Would our Sixtus unless he had been full gorged, well whitled, and stark
drunk, not rather have written: That in time to come we may bring peace to
Christendom? But let us proceed to the rest of the oracles of this bull. For
he adds afterward: In the realm of France Christian religion has at all
times been in force, and so great has been the godliness, faith, and devotion
of those kings, so many have been their good deserts toward the church of
Rome, that they had from it the surname of most Christian. If always Christian
religion has been so greatly embraced by the French kings, why have so many
popes so and so often molested so many kings of France with these most mad
curses and proscriptions of theirs? Surely this was the reward and thanks which
the popes have repaied for so great merits of the French kings toward them and
their sea. For what power soever the popes have, it is evident they had all
that by the benefits and great liberality of the French kings, and especially
of king Pipinus, and Charles the great, and Ludouike surnamed Pius: as we
showed before. It follows: We are compelled to exercise our weapons that are
not carnal, against two Sons of wrath Henry sometime king of Navarre, and
Henry sometime prince of Condie. Surely if any man do not remember by the sword
of Julius the second, whereof we spoke before, that the weapons of the popes
are not carnal, or fleshly, but of iron, and (as Boniface the eight says)
material, yet shall he know this by these words of the same Boniface: *
Surely, says he, he that denies that Peter's in c. vnam sanctam. Extra. de
maiorit. and obedient.
sword is temporal, he does ill mark the word of the Lord, who says: Turn
back thy sword into thy sheath. Therefore both swords are in the power of the
Church: namely, the spiritual and the material sword. Was there ever any
Sannio more ridiculous in any comedy than Bonifacius, who says, that Peter's
sword, which inasmuch as he was a fisherman he then peradventure had at his
girdle, was such a sword as Paul writes was given by God to magistrates, that
they might punish wicked and condemned persons? Furthermore, what great
doltishnes is this, because Christ forbids Peter to use his sword, and
commands him to put up his sword into his sheath, which he had drawn, to
reason thus: That, therefore it is lawful for the popes to use the material
sword? Therefore let our Sixtus look about him, how he can wind out himself
out of this repugnance: that the popes weapons are not carnal, and that the
pope has power of the temporal sword, the material sword, the iron sword.
That the popes weapons are not of iron, but that the king of France is
commanded by the pope, to pursue the king of Navarre his nearest kinsman with
sword, arms, and camp: and to execute this his sentence in such sort, that all
France may be filled with burnings and murders. For this is the very same which
Boniface writes in the same place: that The spiritual sword is exercised by
the church, the temporal for the church, the former by the hand of the priest,
the latter by the hand of kings and soldiers, but at the beck and sufferance of
the priest. These be the words of pope Bonifacius written out in as many
letters *: least any man ex d. c. 1. de mayor. and obed.
should doubt, but that kings must be ready in arms at the popes beck, as
fencers at the beck of the master of fence, and that they must lay down their
weapons, when he beckeneth to them again: that no man I say, may doubt, but
that the most cruel and fierce tyrant pope Sixtus the fifth, who in this place
calls the king of Navarre and the prince of Condie by a new and strange kind
of reproach, Sons of wrath, denounces to al French men, sword, fire, torture,
torment, plague, destruction, and finally an utter overthrow. We are all indeed
by nature sons of wrath: as says Paul, Romans 3. and Ephesians. 2. But the pope is
a son of wrath by judgment, malice, and will. But what is that which he does
often repeat in this bull: Sometime king? We shall afterward see more touching
his kingdom. But by what right has our Henry lost his name of king? by the
same whereby a Sharuebug a scholar of Francis Bernardo does in this bull call
himself the monarch of the church? Woe to thy head, detestable vile-thiefe, and
most holy Antichrist. Thou do boast and rejoice that thou art called God:
as we have showed before. Thou have kings and emperors in stead of bondslaues:
thou desire to have divine honor given thee by them. If any man deny to
thee that servile idolatry, shall he loose the name of a king or prince? Let
us hear how greatly Saint Bernard detesteth this Antichrist in his sixth sermon
upon the CXCI. psalm. The very offices, says he, of the dignity of the holy
Church are gone into filthy gain and the business of darkness. Neither is the
salvation of souls, but riot of riches sought for in these. For this they will
be bounsed, for this they frequent churches, they say masses, they sing psalms.
They strive impudently for bishoprikes, archdeaconries, abbats places, and
other dignities, so that the revenues of the Churches are wasted upon the uses
of superfluity, and vanity. It remains that the man of sin be revealed, the
son of perdition, a devil not only of the day, but also of noone day, which
is not only transfigured into an angel of light, but is extolled above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped. By which words our Sixtus is showed
to be Antichrist, not yesterday, or to day, or sometimes, but to day, to morrow,
the next day, and so long as he shall retain his tyranny, which he exercises
in the Church of God wickedly and ungodly. It follows in the bull: He
followed errors and heresies from his youth, until such time as being by the
exhortations of many converted to the church of Rome (as it was thought) he
abiured publicly all his heresies in the church at Paris. What words be these,
From his youth? Seeing that he received that religion in a manner from his
cradle, and almost with his milk, which this our hangman dare call heresy.
But that is much more absurd, He which was falsely thought to be turned from
heresies, condemned those heresies. For how can he be said to have changed his
former opinion, who is falsely thought to be converted? And whereas our cowled
Friar bableth of abiuring, we must make that a little more plain.

The young man being scarce one and twenty years old, being lodged by the king
his cousin, was called out of his bed naked long before day, he was brought
amongst fearful swords, and such as were wet with blood, he did and pronounced
quiuering and shaking, those things which he was commanded to do and pronounce:
he told pope Gregory those things by his legates which he was commanded to tell
him. Was that law received ever in any part of Barbary, that those things that
were thus done, should either be counted firm and sure, or that they should be
thought to be done from the heart? That is an old and a true saying of doctor
Baldus: The holy Ghost put this into the mouth of the praetor: That which is
done through fear will I not count firm. Also that: The presence and much more
the threatening of a prince and mightier man causes true fear. Thus writes
Angel *. And also Abb. Sicul. in his 3. cons. in cons. 223. and cons. 378.
vol. 2. Therefore the holy scripture does witness, that Peter the apostle
being terrified by the voice of a silly woman, did deny God even with all
cursing: but for so much as it was evident that that was done through fear and
terror, he did easily obtain pardon at the hands of God. The Canonists report
that pope Marcellinus being terrified with the fear of the painims, did burn
incense in the idol sacrifices, but yet that it repented him afterward of his
fact and heinous offense *. Why C. nunc autem. did. 21.
shall that which is done for fear, be excused in the pope, who professes
himself to be the pillar of Christian religion: and shall it be counted firm
in a young man, compassed about with fearful swords, dropping as it were with
blood? It follows in the Bull: The same Gregory giving credence to the
letters of the king of Navarre, as of a king, absolved him from the censures
given upon him, taking from him all inhabilitie. The pope would have these
words to be of importance: As of a king, as if the authority of kings letters,
letters patents, and edicts ought to be most firm. In which place we would
gladly know of him, whether he were always an author and perswader, that the
letters and edicts of kings should always continue firm? Of which thing there
shall always continue in all nations, and amongst all people of the world,
shall I say, a remembrance or a most shameful infamy. But seeing pope
Gregory the thirteenth is said to have been so great a doctor and professor of
law, ought he not to have remembered, that no authority ought to be given to
letters and instruments wroung out by violence and fear *? It follows: He
dispensed that notwithstanding l. si donationis, 7. c. de his quae vi and metu.
causs. l. interpositas. 13. C. trans.
the lets of the third, and peradventure of other degrees of consanguinitie
between them, they might contract matrimony together, as they did contract it
in the face of the church. It can scarce be uttered how many tokens of folly
and popish fondnes appear in these few words. The first is in that, that he
says, that the king of Navarre, his matrimony was contracted through his
grant and dispensation, after that the same king had abiured religion. Let us
return unto the computation of the time. The cardinal of Bourbon uncle to the
same king, in the year 1572. the seventeenth day of the month of August,
after a mass celebrated in the chief church of Paris, with great pomp and
solemnity, yet at four of the clock after noone, did celebrate that
matrimony in the presence of the king of France, Charles the ninth, and of his
two brethren, and in a great assembly of princes. Then followed the massacre
of Paris upon the feast day of S. Bartholomew, that is upon the four an
twentieth day of the same month of August. But the king of Navarre did abjure
many days after. But some peradventure will say, the dispensation of pope
Gregory was brought after that abiuring, at the entreaty of the cardinal of
Bourbon. Whether was it then brought, that it might be lawful to contract the
matrimony, which was contracted and ended so long before: or rather that being
not lawfully contracted before, it might now be confirmed by the popes
authority and dispensation? If to the end it might be Libro aduersus Faustum.
25.
lawful to contract it, the popes power is greater, than that which the
divines, philosophers, and lawyers do grant to almighty God, that things that
be past can be changed, that, that which is done can be made undone: as
witnesses Augustine Lib. de legi. 2.
, Plato Arist. moral. ad Nicomachum. 6. c. 2. Nouel. de aequalit. dot.. 1. l.
in bello. 12.. facta. D. de captu. l. verba. C. de testam. l. verum. D. de reg.
iur.
, Aristotle *, I will speak boldly says Hierom, that though God can do all
things, yet he cannot raise a virgin after her fall. c. si Paulus, 32. quaest.
5.
Therefore, as I said, there is greater power granted to the pope than to God:
who causes that matrimony already contract, finished, celebrated, and ended,
was yet notwithstanding neither contract nor celebrated. But if the pope
dispensed, that wicked matrimony, and such as was contract contrary to the
laws of the church, celebrated, and ended, might be counted firm and good
through his authority: let us beware, least he condemn the most mighty king
of France, and his most honorable brethren, and the queen their moother of
most cruel wickedness: by whose direction, and who being authors, and
counselors, that matrimony was contracted. Furthermore, he condemns all the
princes of the blood royal, and all the chief nobles of the realm of France,
which were present both at that contract, and also at the mass celebrated at
four of the clock after noone, and with their presence did set forth the
solemnity of that matrimony. But the pope does with these words wound none so
deeply and sharply, as the foresaid most noble prince, the cardinal of
Borbon: who, he says, did celebrate that matrimony between his nephew by his
brother, and the king of France his sister, contrary to the holy canons: to
omit the bishop who soong the mass with so great solemnity in the chief
church of Paris: and the deane and the subdeane which soong together with him:
the canons of the same church, and the other musicians and organ plaiers, which
bare them company: all which, if that matrimony were wicked and incestuous,
the pope ought either to have excommunicate, or else to have absolved from the
censures and penalties which they had incurred. Who is he that can abide that
barbarous and fierce arrogancy, that a disciple of Francis Bernardo, dare
condemn a king, whom he bosteth to have been called by him, most Christian, of
so great wickedness: and to say that he procured the incestuous and wicked
marriage between his sister and kinsman? And now who is he of so great a number
of cardinals, that can patiently abide that this Franciscan should offer this
reproach to the memory of the former pope Gregory, that he should say that he
granted license to the sister of the most christian king, to marry with a
notorious heretic: that he did either no^ grant that liberty to the heretic,
or else that he did it after he had abiured? Does he not in these words flatly
mock Gregory being dead: as if he had been another pope Celestine, whom John
Andreas, Baldus, Jason, and others do write to have been a beast, because in
the morning he granted grace, and in the evening he revoked it: whereupon the
cardinals, though they knew that through foolishnes he had renounced the
papacy, yet because he was a beast, they did willingly accept his
renountiation: and they created Boniface the eight, who is depainted to be a
fox in his entry, a lion in his sitting, and a dog in his fall? Baldus writes
thus in as many words *. But if we must come nearer, in c. 1. de nature feud.
Jason. in council. 145. circa primam, nu. 2. vol. 2.
what I pray you will our vncowled friar say, and set down touching that old
and famous contention of the popes, one whereof, namely, Celestine the third
granted power to either party of a married couple, to contract new matrimony,
if the other were fallen into heresy: another, namely Innocentius the third
does not grant it *? But the impudent fool will c. quanto, Extra. de diuort.
answer, first, that which we said before, that there be but few friars found
that are good canonists: secondly, that though pope Boniface the eight said,
that the popes do contain all laws in the chest of their breast *: yet Baldus
wrote no less truly, c. 1. de constit. lib. 6.
that though the pope, inasmuch as he is pope, is doctor of both laws, yet he
is for the most part doctor in authority, not in knowledge: as says Jason *.
Therefore let in l. praescriptione, col. 2. C. si contra ius vel vtilit. pub.
the first folly of this article be showed thereby, in that the pope durst
say, that wicked matrimony was contract by the will, study, and authority
of the kings, and of the queen their moother. The second is understood
thereby, in that he writes that he dispensed, that that matrimony might be
contract, because of the abiuration aforegoing, which was ended so long before
that abiuring. The third thereby, that he says that he dispensed that
matrimony once contracted should be contracted again: furthermore, as if
lawful acts, such as it is evident matrimony is, could be iterated. For as
touching that he says concerning the second degree of consanguinitie, we shall
hereafter in a more fit place show how this comes to pass. But now let us
see some more things. He sent John lord of Duratium his orator, that he should
make promise for his repentance and conversion, in the sight of the seat
apostolic. Look out of what shop the letters came, out of the same came that
legate: namely, from those which threatened death to the young man, being taken
and terrified with weapons, unless he would obey them to say as they said.
But I pray you what manner riddle is this, In the sight or presence of the seat
apostolic? Whether was there some seeing and eied seat carried thither, or is
it that which the popes call Stercoraria or the dunghill, in the pontifical
book, others Testiculatrix, or that whereon they grope them, from which they
give sentence either of the ability or inabilitie of the new installed pope?
And surely it pleases us well to recite that pleasant jest concerning the
Stercoraria or dunghill seat, out of the first book of the popes ceremonies,
Sect. 2. c. 3. The pope that is created is led by the prior and Chanons of the
Laterane church unto a seat of marble, which is called Stercoraria or the
dunghill, and there they make him sit down: unto whom the cardinals come and
lift him up honorably, saying: He raises the needy out of the dust, and
lifts the poor out of the mire: that he may sit with the princes, and
possess the seat of glory. Then rises the pope, and takes out of the
treasurers lap that stands by him, so much money as he can hold in his fist,
wherein yet notwithstanding there may be no gold at al, and throws it among
the people, saying: Silver and gold have I none; but that which I have, give I
thee. Whether do we think that this is folly of the popes, deserving to be
laughed at, or rather a detestable custom of profaning the word of God? But
let us hold on in the bull, it may be we shall find foolisher things. It
follows: But he, as he was of a diverse and inconstant mind, did shortly after
fall away from the catholic faith, and from due obedience toward the
apostolic sea. Whether then may we call this folly or madness? The king of
Navarre was falsely thought to have returned to the obedience of the sea of
Rome: and the same being of an inconstant mind fell from the same. Yea truly
there appeered great and altogether singular constancy in that young man, who
being day and night beset with armed men, did yet notwithstanding continually
seek means to escape, that being free and at liberty, he might detest that
which he had done being enforced by violence and fear. It follows: He has
often raised up heretics, rebels, and seditious persons to bear arms against
the most Christian king, against him and the rest of the catholics. This Latin
of the popes, agrees with the rest of his subtilties. The king of Navarre
raised heretics against the most christian king, against him and the rest of
the catholics. But let us rather mark the meaning of these words. For the
king of Navarre did never bear weapon against the most Christian king: but
against the popes conspirators, and the companions of the popes tyranny, his
adiutors, and ministers: and finally against the authors of perjury and
treachery: as the king himself has most plainly testified in very many
edicts tending to pacification. Therefore our chief cowled friar, does wicked
injury in this place to the most mighty kings of France: seeing he durst
charge their majesty with lieng: by whom it has been so often declared in
edicts tending to pacification, that those that took part with the king of
Navarre and prince of Condie made war not against them, but that it was taken
in hand for preservation of their dignity and state. It follows: He has
compelled his subjects with threatenings and strokes * to take the same
capescere impietatem.
impiety. To take the same impiety is a kind of popish eloquence. But that
any man was enforced these twenty years to change his religion, either by those
that took part with the King of Navarre or Prince of Condie, is as true, as it
is certain and sure, that never any beast in the brothelhouses of Rome was
more impudent than Sixtus the fifth in pouring out lies. Though it be well, and
we must thank this pope, that he accuses those by whom silly captives were
enforced by threatenings and stripes to change their religion. For as
Lactantius wrote most truly, religion cannot be enforced: the thing must be
done rather by words than stripes. But because Lactantius does so dispute in
that place, that he seems purposely to handle the cause both of the king of
Navarre, and also of the French churches, it is worth the pains to hear his
reasons. The adversaries, says he, do feign that they give counsel to godly
men, and that they would call them back to a good mind. Do they then seek to
do this by any speech, or by any reason they render? No surely: but by violence
and torments, O strange and blind madness! it is thought there is an evil mind
in them, which go about to keep faith: but in the hangman a good. Is there an
evil mind in those which are plucked in pieces contrary to the law of
humanity, against all right? Or rather in those, which do these things to the
bodies of innocents, which neither most cruel robbers, nor most angry
enemies, nor most furious barbarians have at any time done? And by and by
after: And because they can do nothing by violence (for the more the religion
of God is depressed, the more is it increased) let them rather deal by reason
and exhortations. Let the bishops, and such as are priests, and prelates of
religions come forth. Let them call us together to an assembly: (These are
the daily requests of the king of Navarre, and such as have often been
delivered to the king of France.) Let them draw out the sharpnes of their wit.
If their reason be true, let it be brought: we are ready to hear if they
teach us. Surely we give no credence to them so long as they keep silence, as
we yield not one inch when they rage. Let them imitate us, or let them lay
down the reason of the whole matter. For we do not intise as they object: but
we teach, allow, show. Therefore we retain no man against his will. For he is
unprofitable for God, which wants faith and devotion. And yet no man
departs, the truth her self retaining him. Let them teach thus, have they
any confidence of the truth, let them speak, learn, I say let them be so bold
as to dispute any such thing with us: surely the old women whom they contemn,
and our boys shall now laugh at, and mock their error and folly. What fitter
thing and more appertinent to the state of these our times could Lactantius
write for the king of Navarre, and French churches? He proceeds: Butcherie
and godliness are greatly contrary: neither can either truth be joined with
violence, or justice with cruelty. Thus far goes Lactantius. whereby appears
plainly how well the laws of those old churches, and of our churches agree
together. It follows in the bull: He sent a certain dear friend of his being
furnished with wicked policies, without the borders of France, by whom he
imparted his wicked counsels with the chief heretics: and he provoked their
forces and arms against the catholic religion, and the power of the bishop of
Rome. It is nothing appertinent to declare whom our friar means in these
words: only we will say thus much. Though he whom he calls the dear friend
of the king of Navarre, holds a place meet for his birth, among the greatest
noble men of France, and pope Sixtus the fifth came of late out of the beggerie
and filth of friars, yet will not that noble man disdain to charge him with an
impudent lie: and to send him (sir reverence of the hearers) this paper of
defiance, if he will have any, taken out of the 51. leaf of his conformities:
The devil tempted Ruffine, saying: Thou art damned, and Francis himself is
damned, and whosoever follows him, is deceived. Which when Ruffinus had told
Francis, Francis answered: If he appear again, and say any thing again, tell
him, namely the devil: Open thy mouth, and I will untruss a point in it.
Afterward as Ruffinus did pray, the devil appeered to him again, in the likeness
of Christ, saying: Brother Ruffinus, did not I tell thee that thou should not
believe the son of Peter Bernardo? Why do thou vex thy self? and
streightway Ruffinus said to him, Open thy mouth, and I will untruss a point
in it. Then the devil being displeased, departed from him in a rage, and with
a tempest. Sir reverence (as we said before) of the hearers. But the impudent
mouth of that friar should have been stopped with this short answer. For
neither did that noble man at any time make any mention of making war, before
either any kings or princes: but only of establishing love and brotherly good
will amongst the reformed churches. Though, who does not see, how profitable it
is for all Christendom, that that wicked and bloody murderer of the Church
of Christ, that author and defender of feigned religions, that he who is
convict of treading under foot the majesty of kings, and the most certain
firebrand of our country, should be quite rooted out of the land of the
living? It greeueth him indeed to be robbed of so great tributes, which
heertofore he had out of Denmark, Sueueland, England, Scotland, Germany, and
Heluetia. But the noble man, whom in this place he touched, says, that he was
never so mad as now, when he is like to loose the realm of France: and that he
does the same which the asses that are fed with hemlocke are said to do in
Thuscia: of whom Matheolus writes, that the fall so fast asleep, that they
seem as dead: so that the countrymen come oftentimes to flea them, and have
almost taken off half the skin before they are awaked. But when they come to
the back, then at a sudden they start upon their feet, and having the one
half of their skin hanging about their heels, they make an evil favored
braieng: so that sometimes the countrymen are sore afraid. The howling of pope
Sixtus seems to be like this at this time, being spoiled almost of half his
kingdoms, and being out of hope of the rest, and being now ready to put his
neck in the halter to hang himself, unless most mighty kings and princes, for
restoring his power, do fill poor France with murders and burnings. But let
these things hitherto be spoken concerning the protestation of the king of
Navarre. And as for those things that are spoken properly and apart by
themselves against the dignity of the prince of Condie, we take them to be
sufficiently refuted with this common answer. The pope charge him that he
came of parents, which were both of them heretics. As it is an excellent thing
to be commended, but of a man commendable: so it is an excellent thing to be
discommended, if it be of a discommended, and discommendable knave: such as it
is evident that both this cowled baud is, and I cannot tell what other slaves of
his the cardinals: who have so hammered and wrought that thunderbolt at Rome,
as the Cyclops did sometimes forge thunderbolts for Jupiter in the mountain
Etna. For who does not understand to what end this wicked reproach touching the
having of two heretics for his parents, uttered properly against the prince of
Condie, does tend? For there is a rule among the canonists, that no
ecclesiastical dignity be granted to the sons of heretics unto the second
generation *. Therefore no doubt, our Sixtus C. quicunque. Haeretici, etc.
statu. De H. erit. in 6. gloss. in c. 1. in verb regnum. Extr. de praeb.
does prepare this way by the counsel of certain poyoners to take from the
most noble prince Charles, brother to the prince of Condie, and coming of the
same heretical parents, his cardinalship and benefices: which we hope he will
easily mark, such is his wisdom. But let us now proceed to the rest of the
sentences of Sixtus his bull. For a few lines after, the pope hitteth the same
prince of Condie in the teeth with his dispensation, that it might be lawful
for him to marry his most noble kinswoman. What blindness of mind appears in
such an impudent lie? The prince had contracted that matrimony certain months
before that dispensation was brought from Rome. He never asked any
dispensation: but being hedged in with armed men, which did command him, that
he should with his hand subscribe an epistle by them written, and desiring a
dispensation, he obeyed against his will: even in like sort as we noted before
in the king of Navarre, cousin to the same prince. But it is worth the pains
to consider, what manner liberality this was in the pope, that he should grant
leave to the prince to marry his cosin-german: which matrimony is not
forbidden, either by the law of God, or by the civil law: for in that book
before mentioned, the title whereof is, The Taxes of the apostolic penance, the
popes absolution, for him that has contracted in the fourth degree, is taxed
only at seventeen grosses. For in the 37. page it is thus written; A
dispensation for the fourth degree of consanguinity, for marriage to be made or
made ignorantly, gross. 17. For the third and fourth degree, gross. 27. For the
fourth and fifth, gross. 27. and he must agree with the popes treasury. But if
they have contracted themselves wittingly, and have dispatched it, gross. 21.
and in like sort for affinity, gross. 29. What? has not the pope now sometimes
dispensed contrary to the manifest inhibition of the laws of God, that it
might be lawful for the uncle by the father or mother to contract matrimony
with the brother or sisters daughter? Which notwithstanding ought to seem so
much the less strange, because pope Martin the fifth, entering into consultation
with his doctors and divines (as says the historiographer) dispensed with a
certain person, that he should take his own natural sister to wife. For
Antoninus of Florence has committed to writing this sacrilege in l si tibi
filius, and l. si paterfamilias.. in arrogationibus D de adopt.
: of In sua sum. 3. par tit. 1. ca 11. quod papa.
whom Angel. de claua makes mention, and follows in his sum, in the word
Papa, and Nicolas Boethius in his 20. counsel. vtrum papa, number. 26. And because
the pope has begun to speak of dispensations, we must not pass over even
that other famous dispensation, that it may be lawful for a friar, laieng
aside his cowle for a time, to marry a wife for a certain time: namely, until
his wife be with child, least the noble stock do die without issue; upon that
condition, that so soon as he has a child, then the father, letting down his
ears, do return to his cowle. Touching which thing we may see Baldus his
testimony Johan. Andr. in c. actus legitimi, and in c. semel Deo, de reiur. in
6. Innocent. in c. cum ad monast. in verb. lic.
, John Andreas and ibi Panormitanus de stat monach. Petr. Ancha in con. 339
parum du bitationis. Marian. cons. 13. praesens consultatio, and con 28. circa
pri^^^n.
, Panormitanus *, who does also cite others more ancient *. William Benedict in
c. Raynutius in ver. qui cum alia, number. 26. part. 3.
. who notes that the popes power is to dispense that a marriage may be made to
last only for a time. Therefore such was the popes liberality in permitting
to the munks to be married only for a time, because he had learned out of the
apostle Paul, that it was honorable amongst men of all orders. But on the other
side see either wonderful great nigardlines, or severity of the same man.
For pope Callistus 3. (says Boerius) refused to dispense for a deacons
marriage, who alleged that he had not the gift of continency, and that he
could not resist the law of the flesh, ne yet want a wife: though cardinal
Senensis did at that time make entreaty for him, who did afterward succeed
Callistus, being called Pius the second: as he witnesses in his epistles made
in the time of his cardinalship: writing to that his friend, that he must wait
for another pope that may be better. Which history the same Boerius recorded
in the same 20. council. Therefore let thus much be answered to that
exprobration of the dispensation. For as concerning the last part of the popes
declaration, wherein the foresaid princes are jointly crushed with the popes
potguns, are excommunicate, proscribed, and their kingdoms, dominions,
dukedoms, principalities, and jurisdictions adjudged to him that can first get
them, we have sufficiently declared before, that the most part of Christendom
makes like account long ago of this kind of trifles, as the most professors
of the popes religion make of the miracles of Bernardo and Dominic at this day:
which religion notwithstanding is so stayed up with the orders of the
Franciscans and Dominicans, as with most strong pillars, that if they should
suffer those pillars to be undermined, they might think that their religion
were quite undone. But it seems that we must speak somewhat more largely of
those vain thunderbolts of the popes, long ago contemned and counted as nothing.

Of the vain and contemptible thunderbolst of the popes.
FOr to cite a few of many testimonies, when pope Boniface the eight had
proscribed with this same ancient boldness, Philip the fair king of France, the
king having assembled a parliament, did decree according to the sentences of the
orders, that the filthy legates of the pope, being reproched and ill
entreated, should be banished out of the borders of his kingdom. Boniface the
pope, says Laurentius Valla, who deceived Celestine with trumpets that he had
put into a wall, deprived the king of France of his kingdom of France, and
judged that the kingdom it self (as if he would execute the donation of
Constantine) was and is subject to the church of Rome. What? with what mind
did king Philip suffer this his madness? It seems more fit to hear the whole
matter out of the words of Platina himself. Boniface, says Platina, sent the
archdeacon of Narbon to tell the king, that he should set at liberty the
bishop of Apame. If he would not do that, he should say in the hearing of all
men, that the kingdom of France was turned over to the church, and that he
should add a curse, and should absolve all the French men from their oath taken
to the king. (Is not this the very same form of proscription, which our mad
headed Sixtus, has used in proscribing the king of Navarre, and prince of
Condie? Platina proceeds: But in the mean season, says he, Philip king of
France taking the arrogancy of pope Boniface impatiently, holding a great
assembly of ecclesiastical persons and noble men at Paris, and setting down
the injuries that he had received at Bonifacius his hands, and his ambition,
and wicked subtilties to get the popedom, which he held unjustly; he appealed
unto the sea apostolic, which was at that time (as he said vacant) and unto
the next council that should be held. Wherewith Boniface being smitten, holding
a general council, he makes Philip and his kingdom subject to Albertus the
emperor, whom he had rejected and put back in the beginning of his popedom.
But then Philip willing to tame his pride, sent Sarra Columniensis, known in
part of Massilia, and redeemed from pirates with Nogaretius a most faithful
French knight, to Rome, for this cause (as he did openly declare) that they
might publish his appeal. For he had another purpose in his head. For Sarra
entering into Italy apparelled like a serving man, having gathered together his
friend, out of all parts, sends Nogaretus before to Terentine with two
hundred horsemen, being French men, and hired out of the camp of Charles
Valesius, that they might aid him from thence, if need should be. But entering
by night secretly into Agnania, having the Gibellines to aid him, whom
Boniface had long and greatly vexed, he caught the pope in his fathers house
fearing no such thing, after he had brok up the gates, and he brings him
captive to Rome, where 35. days after, he died for sorrow. Thus writes
Platina, where he adds also that of John Andreas and Baldus, that he is as a
dead dog, who entered like a fox, and ruled like a lion *. In which place, Bald.
in c. 1. de not. feud.
it seems we ought not to omit that which our cowled friar has left in
writing in his book of conformities, * in these words. Fol. 103.
Pope Vrbane the fifth, swore to destroy our order, but he died shortly after:
pope Bonifacius the eight caused many bulls to be made, all of one tenor, that
the friars minors should be dispatched, as the te^plars, that our whole order
might be destroyed in one day. Before he could send them, he was taken
prisoner, the bulls were burned, and the pope himself died miserably. But
omitting trifles, let us see to other things. Surely by these things we
understand, that even at that time, that is in the year M. cccvj. these mad
and furious proscriptions of the popes were contemned of the French kings, and
counted as nothing. Neither was the virtue and courage of king Charles the
sixth, inferior, about the year M. ccccxviij. For as we understand by the
records, of the senate of Paris, and both French and Germane chronicles, so
soon as Martinus the fifth was made pope in the council of Constance, being
not content with so many and so great tributes, upon which two former
Antipopes, and also three former Antipopes, and a little before four Antipopes
relieng, had nourished deadly wars amongst them almost for the space of forty
years, he began to command moreover new tributes, in the churches, and
especially of France. Which message, after the king had received, he determined
forthwith to have a parliament according to the custom. In that assembly
after the matter had been long time hard and debated, a decree was made, that
that new kind of the popes exactions should be inhibited. Which so soon as
pope Martin knew, he sent forthwith legates from his train into France, to
inhibite principally all the city of Lions from all holy things. This was
wont to be the force of those inhibitions of the popes in that time of
darkness, (if happily any man knew it not) that they shut up all the church
doors, there was no mass said, there was no use or exercise of any religion,
there was also no ringing of bells. Only so? Yea surely those that were dead
might not be buried in churchyardes. Wherewith it cannot in words be vttred,
how greatly men's minds infected with superstition, were terrified. What did
they then? Forthwith according to the authority of the public assembly, and
the decree of the senate of Paris, it was pronounced, that that curse should be
counted as nothing. Let them remember, let the^ think upon, let them meditate
upon these things, if there be any in our country of France either so ignorant,
and unskillful of things, or so evil affected toward mighty princes, that they
think that this foolish and ridiculous proscription of our cowled friar is of
any importance: especially at this time, wherein the hypocrisy of the popes is
laid open almost to all Europe. For our Peretus does as snailes use to do when
winter is over: when they feel the heat of the sun, then they thrust out
their swelling necks and two horns out of their shells, wherewith sometimes
little children are terrified. So he has long time couched in his munkish den,
enduring hunger miserably begging from door to door. Now when he sees that
he is advanced to so great honor, he casts his cowle from about his ears, and
does proudly show forth his horns, and he hops that he shall therewith
terrify princes and kings. But as we have already said, most Christian
princes know the blindness of those beasts: they have learned long ago what
difference there is between a lion and an ass of Cuma: neither are they
moved either with the gaping mouths of Antiks, and with the teeth making an
hidious noise, or with other childish bugs of the same sort. It is recorded
that that our French king, of whom we spoke even now, Charles the sixth, did
with like courage despise the vain thunderbolt of the pope, about the year of
Christ, M, CCCXXX. For when he was proscribed by pope Benedict the 13. because
he had forbidden certain new and unaccustomed exactions of pope Benedict, he
decreed according to the sentence of the public council and orders, that the
popes legates, which had brought into France that bull which was fearful to
women and children, should suffer this ignominy at Paris: first, that about
ten of the clock in the forenoone, about which time the Senate of Paris uses
to be dissolved, being brought to the greeses of the palace, having some
bishops standing by them, and a great many of priests, being naked and holding
in their right hand a burning torch, they should openly confess the wickedness
they had committed: and should humbly crave pardon for the same. Then, that
being clothed by the hangman with garments painted to their reproach, and having
that popes arms turned in in reproach, and being carried in a dirtie cart
through the chief streets of the city, they should be set to be laughed at
of the common people. Which thing to have been done, and also to have been
quickly put in execution, the moniments of the Senate of Paris do declare, and
it is also reported by Paponius. Also In lib. Arrest. 1. tit. 5. Artic. 27.
the authority of Baldus is extant against that rashness of Benedict the 13. in
c. olim. col. penult. Extra. de rescript.
who sharply and courageously inueigheth against the Antipopes of that time:
whereof this Benedict had his sea at Auenion; the other, namely Boniface had his
at Rome: and the former of these he called a bellowing ox, the latter a
warring beast: and he inueigheth against both most sharply and most freely.
Moreover, there is extant in Theodor Nehemius * an epistle of the University
and study of Paris, where Tract. 6. c. 17.
this first request is made, that The popes letter made like to a bull be rent
and broken, as injurious, seditious, fraudulent, and offensive to the kings
majesty, with protestation to proceed unto greater things: and let all
suggesters, fauters, receivers be taken and kept to be punished, and corrected
according to the canons. Like courage appeered in the Florentines against pope
Sixtus the fourth, whose name this Sixtus the fifth thought he might take, and
also imitate his example: who came out of the selfsame seminary of Bernardo.
For when he had proscribed the Florentines for that traitorous bishop of whom
we spoke before, whom they hanged out at the court window, and had given them
to Ferdinando king of Sicilia for a pray, the Florentines contemning the popes
vain thunderbolt, and taking to them the duke of Ferrarie to be their partner
in war, they beat down the madness of the furious and fierce vncowled friar:
and enforced him with war and arms, to reuerse his curse. Which history
Raphael Volateranus records in his fifth book of Geographie. Furthermore,
there is extant the council of Francis Aretinus a lawier, being at that time
very famous and noble: wherein defending the cause of the Florentines, he uses
these words: The crime wherewith the worthy man Laurentius de Medicis is
charged touching rebellion, is so manifestly refuted, that I am ashamed of the
voice of the pope in this point. For in his letters written to the same
worthy man, in the month of September last past, it is declared, that as
touching that crime he counts him as innocent and giltlesse, and that he had
no sinister suspicion of him. Then most holy father, see you to it, why you,
after a few months do heap up so many and grievous crimes against him. It is
not for me to set my face against heaven, only I will say thus much: It is not
honestly done of him that sits in the throne of God to use so great
variety. Thus writes Aretinus in his 163. council, as John, number. 3. Time
should fail us, if we would seek to prosecute the princes and nobles, who
have contemned these proscriptions, and vain thunderings, thunderbolts,
lightenings of the popes, even in former times, in so great mistines and
darkness. The emperor Otho the fourth was proscribed by Innocentius. Henry the
fourth by Gregory the 7. Henry the fifth by Pascalis the second. Friderike the
first of Sueueland, by Adrian the fourth and Alexander the third. Philip son
of Friderike the first, by Innocentius the third. Friderike the second by
Gregory the ninth, was excommunicate not once nor twice, but thrice. Conradus
the fourth by Innocentius the fourth. But as touching the first beginning of
this madness and boldness, from whom it first came, the Germane historiographers
do not sufficiently agree. Indeed Otho Frisingensis refers it unto the
year, CIC. lxvj. wherein William king of England was proscribed by pope
Alexander the second *. Lib. Chron. 6. c. 35.
I read, says he, and read again the famous facts of the kings and emperors
of Rome, and I can find none any where that was excommunicate before him. But
John Tritemius writing concerning the emperor Henry the fourth, says: He was
excommunicate by Gregory In Chron. Hirsaug. cap. 4.
the seventh, and was deposed from the empire by the synodal decree of the
bishops: though he cared not for it. But he is the first amongst all the
emperors that was deposed by the pope. But howsoever it be (for it is not
greatly appertinent to that we have in hand, what time this insolency of the
popes began) it is evident that in all ages there were very many courageous
men, which despised these thunderings of the popes, as squibbish thunderbolts,
and old bussings, and as fray-bugs to fear children.

Of the kingdom of Navarre betrayed by the pope.
ANd it seems that we ought not to pass over in silence in this place, that
curse, wherein the king of France Ludouike the 12. was proscribed together with
John king of Navarre his kinsman and subject. For in the year M. DXI. at which
time that war, whereof we spoke before, waxed hot between pope Julius the
second, and Ludouike the 12. king of France, who was called father of his
country, and that same furious tyrant went about to terrify him with his
vain thunderbolts, and had made his kingdom a pray and spoil to him that
could get it, John great grandfateer to this our Henry reigned in Navarre. He,
forasmuch as he both was in the realm of France, and was neighbor to the
French king, and also by reason of the great fees he had in his realm was his
client and vassal, was requested by king Ludouike, that he would aid him
against his enemy, according to the right of senioritie, and ordinances of
serviceable clientships. The king of Navarre being not unmindful of his duty
toward the king, having with all speed mustered and gathered bands of footmen
and horsemen in his kingdom, he brought so great an army into the borders of
France, that he left his realm in a manner naked and destitute of men. Which
thing being known, pope Julius determined forthwith to deal by messengers
with Ferdinando king of Spain (to whom he then first of all gave the surname
of Catholic, anno 1492.) that with all speed he should make ready an army,
and should invade the dominion of the king of Navarre who was absent: and he
promises that for his part he would both proscribe Navarre for an heretic and
schismatike, and would also give him his kingdom for a reward. Ferdinandus
having gotten so fit an opportunity to do an exploit, determined not to be
wanting to himself. After the curse was pronounced and published against the
king of Navarre, he assembled his forces: and entering the borders of the king
his neighbor being absent, he took first the principal city of the kingdom
named Pompiopolis, and then afterward the most part of the whole realm: having
(as we said) pope Julius for his author, a good one, and without all doubt a
fit one: if in the rule of the law, wherein it is written, that He possesses
unjustly, which possesses having the praetor for his author: it were written
the pope for his author, in stead of the praetor for his author. Soon after the
king of France, being not ignorant that the senior ought to deliver his vassal
from the danger of that event (which thing even Bellaius Langaeus sometimes a
most excellent light of France does plainly testify in his first book of
commentaries) sent his army to recover Pompiopolis, over which he set as
captain Dunosius chief governor of Aquitania, and duke of Longouilla. But it
seems more convenient to defer until some other time, what happened both at
that time, and many years after: and to set it down in a book written of
those things. For it is sufficient for us to understand at this time, that the
king of Navarre great grandfather to him that now is, was spoiled of his
kingdom for none other cause, save only because he aided as he ought, the
king of France his neighbor, his senior, being excommunicate by pope Julius,
proscribed and pronounced to be an heretic and schismatike. Whereof not only
the French historiographers are witnesses, and amongst these Arnoldus Ferronus,
and Bertrandus Helias, but also the Italians and Spaniards, and chiefly Stephen
Garibaius, in his 29. book. Francis Tarapha, and Anthony Nebrissensis in his
book concerning the war of Navarre *. In which places me thinks we 1. c. 1. 2.
3.
should not omit the arrogancy of a Spanish peasant (as we say commonly) who
railed upon and slandered the most wise, and moderate king of France that ever
was, and that in these words: Ludouike, says he, the French king, a man most
inconstant Chapter 2.
after the manner of his nation, being not content to keep himself within his
own little skin, that is, within the borders of his own kingdom, set his mind
toward Italy. And shortly after: Therefore pope Julius the second being
angry, took the sword out of Peter's hands, and drew it against the rebellious
and stubborn: he declares them to be schismatiks, and therefore heretics: he
makes their goods common: for the execution of which sentence he calls upon
Christian princes, and chiefly upon our prince. Also chap. 3. Therefore the
governor of the country of Spain, fearing the rage of the French men, does
exhort Henry king of the Britans (to whom Aquitania did belong) to require it
again by war: and that he might have iuster cause to ask it again, the
apostolic authority comes between, whereby he depriueth the French king of
Aquitania (let the senators and kings counselors in France mark) and gives
it to the king of Britane to possess and enioie. And by and by in that place
where he brings in the pope conferring with his cardinals: The king of Spain
(says he) must be helped. We must draw out both our swords against the common
enemies of all good men the kings of France and Navarre: and whiles that we
whet the one, that is the secular, in the mean season let us bend the other,
namely the spiritual, against the necks of schismatiks. Therefore by the common
decree of the cardinals, the king of Navarre was declared to be a schismatike,
and therefore an heretic: because being often admonished he was waxen
stubborn, and he did openly profess that he was French. He was fined in his
kingdom and all his goods: not only he, but also his wife, and his sons
with all their posterity, and all his right of being king was translated unto
Spain. The Spanish Nebrissensis says thus in as many words: whereby we
understand, by what right, by what author, and for what cause, the king of
Navarre was robbed of his kingdom. Indeed Guicciardin in his 11. book of his
Italian history sets down his judgment touching this matter in these
words: When the king of Spain, says he, could not affirm that he did
lawfully possess the kingdom of Navarre for any other cause, or by any other
title, he reasoned that he had possession by the right of the popes
commandment, and authority of the holy sea. For the pope being not well
content with things that fell out happily in Italy, had a little before
published a decree against the king of France; wherein calling him no more most
Christian, but most noble, he made him, and all that took his part, subject to
the penalties of heretics and schismatiks: and having granted power by right to
take and enjoy their goods, kingdoms, and all that they had, he declared them
to be condemned. To the same effect also writes Arnoldus Ferronus a most
learned historiographer in matters of France, and sometimes senator of the
Parleament holden at Bordeaux, in these words: Ferdinandus, says he, king of
Spain, so soon as he understood of the league made between the kings of
France and Navarre, turned his forces prepared against the French king, against
the king of Navarre: and this was the cause that Ferdinando did cast out the
king his neighbor: though he did also pretend another, because both the king of
France, and those that did aid him, were pronounced accursed by the popes
edict, and their kingdoms were made common. Thus writes Ferronus, whereby we
may conjecture, what great danger hangs over the most noble princes of
Germany, and so consequently over all the kings of Europe, by reason of that
so near a conspiracy of the popes, and the Spanish inquisition. For by this
short cut any munke, so he be of a crafty and subtle nature, having tarried
some time in Spain (as this our Sixtus) and having been conversant with the
inquisitors of Spain, may make such a bargain and league with them, that if
through their favor and commendation he may obtain the popedom: then he may
pronounce what king or prince soever he will, a schismatike or heretic taking
to him any occasion: he may adiudge to them his kingdom, opened and committed
as a fee to the sea of Rome. Therefore we are to wish, that we may once have
some king given us, that may be of a valiant courage, that he may thrust this
whore of Babylon out of her seat, and may at length rid the Church of Christ
from so long and miserable servitude, and restore her to her former liberty
and dignity: which courage that king of ours Ludouike the twelfth, who was
called the parent of the country, being weary of that bondage, took upon
him; when after that furious curse of pope Julius, he commanded French crowns
to be coined in France with this inscription: Ludouike 12. by the grace of God
king of France: duke of Mediolanum. And then on the other side the arms of
France and Mediolanum joined together, with this inscription: I will destroy
Babylon. Of which name if happily any man be ignorant, let him read the
Revelation of John, chapter 17. and Hierom in his catalog, where he makes mention
of Mark, and writes plainly, that Peter did figuratively understand Rome by
Babylon in his former epistle * Chapter 5.
. Also in the prolog of his book touching the holy Ghost, where he does
plainly call Rome Babylon, and that purple whore, which is described in the
Revelation. Which thing he does likewise confirm upon Esaias, c. 14. and again,
c. 47. and unto Aglasia in the 11. question. For which cause Paula also and
Eustochium in that epistle, which they wrote unto Marcellus, do in like sort
call Rome Babylon: and no whit more obscurely Hierom in his epistle: When I was
at Babylon, says he, a citizen of the purple whore, etc.

The conclusion of the former protestation.
THese things therefore being thus set down, it remains that we conclude this
reason: Seeing pope Sixtus the fifth has been condemned by the most part of
Christendom, of seven most grievous crimes, namely of impiety, of using
tyranny in the Church, of corrupt religion, sacrilege, treason, rebellion, and
forgerie: and seeing that having followed the insolency, boldness, and cruelty
of those that went before him, he has published this most mad decree contrary
to all laws divine and humane, using false allegations, and that without any
judicial order, yea foolishly, blockishly, and impudently, against the most
excellent king of Navarre, and most noble prince of Condie, and has burdened
them with filthy and geason reproaches of words, forasmuch as he called them
sons of wrath, obstinate heretics, notorious, relapsed, such as lie tumbling
in filth, rebels against the most Christian king, persecutors of the Church, a
detestable issue, traitors against God and man: and did for these causes
deprive them of their principalities, dukedoms, lordships, fees, and all
honors, and of the right of lawful succession in the realm of France: and
forasmuch as this his old and outrageous boldness of abiudging and adiudging of
kingdoms, does plainly appertain unto all kings, princes, and potentates of
Europe, and it is to be feared least those that shall be desirous of other men's
kingdoms, will lay wait for peaceable and quiet princes hereafter, by this
policy of excommunications or proscriptions: for these causes the foresaid
princes protest, that the same pope Sixtus the fifth is to be counted a wicked,
perjured, sacrilegious person, a tyrant, an author of feigned religions, a
cruel and bloody murderer of the Church of Christ, an importunate and wicked
enemy of religion, and to be most assuredly Antichrist: and that al monarchs
of Christendom, kings, princes, potentates, and those that have any government
or lawful power, are to be requested and earnestly entreated, that they will
help these most royal princes to suppress the fury of this fierce tyrant,
and to break in pieces his cruel and furious assaults: and that they will lay
their heads together, and join together their forces to extinguish that plague
of mankind, and to deliver the Christian commonwealth from that monstrous and
deadly monster. In the mean season, that the foresaid pope Sixtus the fifth
ought, for his intolerable reproachful words, which he has powered out against
our foresaid princes with a beastly mind, to be accounted and called of al
Christians, a most hidious monster, a most filthy monster, and a monster not
worthy to be bestowed even in the farthest parts of the world, but such a one
as ought to be banished out of the coasts and borders of man's nature, as a most
certain, notorious, and manifest Antichrist: to whose accursed head all
Christians ought to wish an evil plague, ruin, and destruction, that so long
as any breath shall remain in his accursed body, so long he may be to all the
godly Anathema Maranata, as says the holy Ghost. And least happily any of us
do think this to be a new and unwonted kind of curse, we will desire the
readers, that they will first of all remember those places, which we cited
before, specially out of the books of Saint Bernard: where the papacy of Rome
is flatly, plainly, by name called Antichrist, the son of perdition, the man
of sin, a devil not only of the day, but also of the noone day, who is not
only transfigured into an angel of light, but is extolled above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. Now Hierom calls Rome Babylon, and the
purpled whore. Secondly, that they read and attentively consider the most
holy sanction of the popes decree *, where it is ordained, In c. 2. did. 23.
etc. si quis pecunia, did. 79.
that He which by money, or favor of men (such as it is manifest this friar had
in the west parts) or by tumult of the people, or by any policy (that is, by
ambition and evil arts) shall attain to the papacy, let him be accounted not
apostolical but apostaticall, and let him together with his fautors and
followers be cast out of the bounds of the holy Church of God, being thence
separated, as Antichrist, and as an inuader and destroier of all Christendom.
Whereto the canonists durst with great consent subscribe, and openly profess
thus much, that The pope being chosen otherwise than canonically, is a devil,
and has not the keys of heaven but of hell. For these be the words of Felinus
*. Let them furthermore In c. Ego N. de iureiur.
consider, that all the popes, cardinals, and bishops which have borne rule in
the church of Rome more than an hundred years, came assuredly out of the
seminary of schismatiks and apostataes. For it is now almost an hundred and
fifty years ago, sithence the council of Basil was kept and held with the
great desire and will of all Christian estates. It is well known that never
any council was called, had, and kept in the church of Rome with greater
solemnity, than this. For it was both called by the decree of two popes,
namely, of Martin the fifth, and Eugenius the fourth, and also it was held,
their legates being presidents. Eugenius being cited and called out of the same
council after that they had solemnly heard the cause, he was at length convict
of fraud, iuglings, crafty conueiances, and factions against the liberty of
that council, and so put from the popedom, and disgraded as a schismatike and
revolt, together with all the cardinals and bishops, which took his part. And
Amedaeus duke of Sauoy was put in his place. Let us hear what manner end this
tragedy had. Soon after the same Eugenius being condemned, deprived,
disgraded, was through the favor of certain princes restored to his sea, and he
likewise restored with him all the cardinals and bishops that took his part.
And Amedaeus, having (though against his will) a cardinals hat given him, did
resign his popedom. Let grave men and such as are of courage now consider,
whether according to that most holy function of the popes decree, whereof we
spoke even now, they be to be counted apostolical or rather apostaticall:
whether they have the keys of heaven or of hell, who arising out of that
seminary of the Eugenians bear rule in the church of Rome in these times.
Which, that it may more commodiously be judged, it is worth the labor to hear
and know the opinions of the doctors and lawiers, who have written somewhat
touching this matter, and first of all of Ludouike of Rome, who was present at
the council of Basil, where he wrote the last council, whose words are these
*: If the number. 15.
shepherd of shepherds offensiuely governing, and inordinately handling the
church, being admonished by the church, do not forthwith repent, yea continue
in his insolency of government, he may and ought to be put from his office.
For seeing he honoreth not the church, admonishing him wholesomly; neither
shall he then deserve to be honored of the church: so that it should tolerate
him governing offensiuely, and being incorrigible: being an argument of that
which the orator Domitius says: and Hierom reports in his epistle to the
Neopolitanes, saying thus: Why then should I count thee as my prince, seeing
thou do not take me for a senator? * Therefore the truth is, that the pope
did. 95. c. esto subiectus.
offending the church notoriouslye with his crimes, and remaining incorrigible,
may be accused to the church, and by the same be uncased of his popedom. Which
conclusion is showed farther thus: The pope standing in a notorious crime that
offends the whole church, and being unwilling to cease of, falls into
suspicion of heresy *. He that lives rebelliously, and refuses c. nullus.
did. 38. sic dicente.
to learn and do good things, is showed to be a member rather of the devil
than of Christ: and he is showed to be rather an infidel than a believer. Thus
says Ludouike of Rome, who, as we said, was present at the council of Basil
with great authority. Where be those that dispute, that they are and ought to
be counted heretics, which set themselves against the popes tyranny? Which
think that his outrageous boldness in proscribing kings ought not any longer to
be borne with? Which detest the impiety of Sixtus the fifth, in maintaining the
feined religions of Bernardo and Dominick? But now let us cite another
authority of the same notable man out of the same council: for shortly after
*, he number. 17.
says thus: If natural reason tell us, that an incurable member that
infecteth the whole body ought to be cut off for the safety of the whole
body: in like sort civil reason ought to tell us, that an incurable member
that infecteth the whole mistical church, must be cut off, that the rest of the
body be not infected or offended: and consequently the pope: (let vprightnes
of minds be used in reading these things, and let these words of Ludouike of
Rome be compared with that our curse and detestation:) who though he be a
principal part of the church, yet is he also a member of the body of the
church, according to the gloss. * Also the reason of the scripture of God in
c. ecce, 93. did.
persuadeth this, approouing the asseueration of Caiphas the chief priest, who
said: It is expedient that one man die for the people, and that all the people
do not perish: seeing that though he were pope placed to govern the people,
yet ought he not to be their ruin: says text. 11. q. 3. ita corporis. Yea he
is worthy of as many deaths, as he sends over examples of destruction to
his subjects, says text. eadem cause. and q. in c. praecipue. For as it is a
laudable and discreet thing to give reverence and honor to superiors, so it is
a point of vprightnes, and the fear of God, not to cast behind us by any
dissimulation the things that are in them, and need any correction: least the
disease go through the whole body, if the sickness be not cured in the head,
says text. 2. q. 7. c. sicut inquit. This conclusion is also proved by the
text. in c. in canonibus, 16. q. 1. and in d. c. sed illud. So likewise he
ought to be banished out of the church, who is not amended by the admonition of
the church: as the Lord says, Take away evil from among you. For those wounds
must be launced, which feel not the softening of the medicine argum. de iudic.
c. cum non ab hom.
. Thus writes 82. did. c. quia aliquanti 1. q. 1. c. reperiuntur.
Ludouike of Rome word for word. Whereby, being compared with that our
detestation, upright readers may judge, whether justly or unjustly we have so
boldly accursed the tyrannous boldness of that pope. Moreover, to that complaint
of Ludouike of Rome agree those things which cardinal Zabarella wrote about
the year, M. ccccvj. in his treatise of schism, number. 20. For every notorious
crime of the pope, says he, if he cannot be reformed, and do offend the
church, he may be accused, because he is accounted as an heretic in c. olim.
col. pen. extra. de rescrip.
: for this incorrigiblenes not. in gloss. 40 did. c. si papa.
concerns the cause of faith: as in the same gloss. And if it so fall out,
that these men defend themselves by their temporal power, they may be bridled
for the fact, even by secular power *. Thus says Zabarella. But Baldus *
writes more breefly thus: Against the pope abvsing his authority, we must
first use words (that is, admonitions:) then herbs, (that is, threatenings:)
thirdly stones: and that where the nature of virtue is not sufficient, the aid
of arms must be of force there. And to the like effect writes Jason in his
95. council, requisitus. col. 4. It is lawful, says he, to resist the pope
when he offends the church, and he is not to be borne with c. etsi illa, 1.
q. 7. etc. sunt. quidam. 25. q. 1.
. Also Innocentius in c. inquisitionis, de sent. excom. and in c. quanto, de
consuetud.
. And the Abbat in c. cum teneamur, de appellat.
. Also Hierom speaking of the pope in c. non omnes episcopi. 2. q.
, says: that Unsavory salt is good for nothing, but to be cast out at doors,
and to be trodden under foot of hogs. Thus writes Jason, with as good courage it
seems, as either Ludouike of Rome, or Zabarella: though notwithstanding they
wrote these things in Italy, and in so great darkness of the church of Christ.
And to the same effect speaks Philip Decius in his council, 151. maximi
ponderis number. 4. vol. 1. When says he, the pope is incorrigible in any
notorious crime, by reason whereof the church is offended. glo. in terminis in
c. si papa. 40. did. he holds that the pope may be accused: and out of that
gloss there was a great foundation laid against Eugenius the fourth, in the
council of Basil: and that gloss is commonly holden by all: as the abbot
says in c. significasti: de elect. and in disput. episcopus quidam and rector.
where he says, that the whole world approves that gloss, and Ludouicus of
Rome approoueth that gloss by many reasons. in council. 523
First because the pope that persisteth in a notorious crime, and will not be
reformed, falls into suspicion of heresy. 38. did. c. fin. 86. did. c. si
qui sunt. etc. fin. de poenit.
But the pope may be accused for heresy d. c. si papa.
. Therefore for such a crime. Secondly because a bishop is removed from a
particular church, that the offense may be taken away, as Innocentius notes:
in c. cum pridem, de renun.
it seems we may say the same of the stronger in the highest bishop, in whom
the universal church is in danger. Thirdly by the authority of the Gospel.
If thine eye or thy foot offend thee. Whereupon the text says finely, in c.
illud sane, 24. q. 3. For it is expedient that one man die for the people, and
that all the people do not perish. Therefore let that pope that cannot be
reformed die ciuilly, that all the church do not perish, because the pope being
set to govern the people, ought not to be their fall: as the text says 11. q.
3. in c. ta corporis.
. For he is worthy as many deaths, as he sends examples of perdition to
those that are his 11. q. 3.
. Which things seeing they are so, we conclude again without delay, that not
only the excommunication of the foresaid pope Sixtus the fifth is to be counted
as nothing, by reason of the insufficiency of the rash judge, the allegation
of a false cause, the want of judicial order, and the folly of the sencence
conceived: but also to the end the curses of the same pope Sixtus may turn upon
his own pate, he is convict of seven most heinous faults, and that by most
assured testimonies, and therefore ought to be hereafter accounted of all
Christians, an execrable and detestable Anathema Maranata.

Amen.
THE DECLARATION OF OUR MOST HOLY LORD POPE SIXTVS, Against HENRY BORBON the
supposed King of NAVARRE, and also HENRY BORBON, the pretensed Prince of
Condie, being heretics, and also against their successors: And the deliverance
of their subjects, from all duty of fidelity and allegiance.
For the perpetual memory of the thing.
THe authority granted to Saint Peter and his successors by the infinite power
of the eternal king, surpasses all the powers of earthly kings and princes,
and standing upon a firm rock, and being not turned aside from the right
course with any contrary or prosperous blasts, it utters such judgment
against al men, as cannot be shaken: and does diligently provide especially
that Gods laws may not be broken, and if it find any resisting Gods
ordinance, it does sharply punish them, and casting down from the kingly seat
even those that are more mighty, it throws them down even to the lowest part
of the earth, as ministers of proud Lucifer. Wherefore according to that care
for all churches, and people, and nations, that lies upon our shoulders, that
the salvation of their souls may especially be provided for, and that not
only the times of our service, but also all times to come being purged from
wicked and detestable monsters, may bring peace and rest to all parts of
Christendom: and especially to the most ample realm of France, wherein
Christian religion has so flourished always; and so great has been the
godliness, faith, and devotion of the kings thereof; so many have bin their
deserts toward the church of Rome; that they by full good right had from the
same the most glorious surname of Most Christian; and also that we may never be
accused before God for neglecting the care of our office, we are at this time
compelled to exercise the weapons of our warfare, which are not carnal, but
mighty through God to throw down strong holds, against two sons of wrath
especially, Henry Borbon sometimes king of Navarre, and Henry Borbon sometimes
prince of Condie. For that king quondam, has followed from his very youth the
errors and heresies of Calvin, and has so long showed himself a stubborn
patron thereof, until being converted (as it was thought) unto the catholic
and apostolic faith of Rome, by the godly, and often exhortations of Charles
the ninth of famous memory king of France, and of our most dearly beloved
daughter in Christ Queen Katherine his most godly mother, and also of our
well-beloved son Charles, of the title of S. Chrysogonus, cardinal priest of
Borbon his uncle, and of Ludouike duke of Mompenser, and by most manifest
exhortations of divines of excellent learning and virtue; he did openly in the
church at Paris condemn all heretical opinions contrary to the catholic
faith, he accursed them, and abiured them, and did openly profess the
catholic faith; and having sent sundry times his letters to pope Gregory the
thirteenth our predecessor, of blessed memory, wherein he now acknowleging the
same our predecessor to be supreme head of the church, humbly besought him, that
he would vouchsafe to accept the confession of his repentance, conversion, and
obedience, and to grant him pardon for those things that were past, and also
the grace of remission: firmly promising that he would continually keep
soundly, and inuiolably the catholic faith. To the which letters, as being a
kings letters, our predecessor giving credence, and being moved with the
bowels of fatherly love, and also being persuaded with the most grave
testimony of the king, of the Queen his mother, of the cardinal, and duke
aforesaid, touching such his conversion; absolved him, confessing his former
errors and humbly craving pardon, from the crime of heresy, and from the
ecclesiastical censures which he had therefore incurred; and he admitted him
into the bosom of the holy mother the church, and into the fellowship of the
faithful, taking from him all incongruitie. Nay furthermore that he might be
bound with a more strait and firm bond, he dispensed with him and Margaret
sister to the said king Charles, who being borne of that most Christian stock,
and being well brought up, was thought to be able easily to keep her husband
in his duty, and in observing the catholic religion, that notwithstanding the
lets of the third, and peradventure of other degrees of consanguinitie between
them, and also of spiritual kindred, they might contract matrimony between
them, as they did contract it in the face of the church; and that done, after a
few months he sent John Lord of Duratium his orator to our said predecessor,
that in his behalf he might promise concerning his repentance, conversion,
faith, and constancy in presence of the sea apostolic; and after that a
public, and solemn consistory was made for him in the kings hall according
to the custom, in the assembly of the cardinals and prelates of the holy
church of Rome, and in a great concourse of others having professed all the
foresaid things, the same Henry was admitted as a king lately converted to the
faith, and as catholic, the whole city reioicing, and triumphing, and giving
great thanks for the sheep that was found and recovered. But he as he was of a
diverse and inconstant mind, falling away shortly after from the catholic
faith, and from due obedience toward the apostolic sea, and from other things
professed by him expressly and with an oath, and turning back to that filth
wherein he tumbled before, withdrawing himself secretly from the most christian
king, and having gathered together in a place, a good way distant from the
kings court, so great a multitude of wicked heretics, and of wicked men of that
stamp as he could, he openly revoked there all those things which he before
had done concerning the detestation of Caluinisme, the abiuring of all
heresies, and the profession of the catholic and apostolic faith of Rome:
testifieng that he did profess Caluinisme, as he professed it, and has
always sticked to that heresy with an obstinate and hardened mind; and living
therein until this day, he has raised up sundry times heretical rebels, and
seditious persons (whose head, captain, and defender he has always been in
France, and also a most earnest fauorer of outlandish heretics) to bear arms
against the foresaid Charles, and also against our most deerly beloved son in
Christ Henry the most Christian king, though he ought to have reverenced him,
as his king and master, to have loved and followed him as his wives brother, I
say, forgetting all duty and godliness, he has raised them up against him and
all catholics, he has gathered most deadly armies, having gotten unto him
heretics of other nations, by whom all places every where are defiled with the
bloody murders of godly men, holy temples are polluted and pulled down,
priests and religious men are slain with torments: furthermore, he has taken
the cities and fortresses of the catholics, partly by policy, and partly by
force and arms; and in them has he forbidden and taken away the rites of the
catholic church, he has appointed heretical ministers, and preachers, he has
enforced the citizens inhabitants to tread in the steps of the same impiety,
even with threatenings and stripes. But thinking with himself that he had not
yet don enough, amongst others he sent a certain dear friend of his,
furnished with his wicked subtilties, without the borders of France to diverse
places, by whom he imparted his wicked counsels with certain chief heretics,
and he provoked their strength and forces against the catholic religion, and
the power of the bishop of Rome; also he caused certain secret conuenticles of
heretics to be kept in diverse provinces; at some whereof (whiles those most
unjust leagues against the catholic faith, and principally against the
churches, clergy, and all the catholics of the realm of France were handled)
he himself was not only present, but also a principal actor therein. And as
for Henry Borbon prince of Condie, having two heretics for his parents,
forasmuch as they during their whole life had obstinately cherished the deadly
opinions of Calvin, and the ministers thereof, he following the heresies of the
same his father and mother, did commit like offenses being but a yongling:
afterward with like endeavor as the other Henry used, taking the way of truth
through repentance, and humblenes of heart (so much as could be gessed) and
detesting likewise, and abiuring publicly all errors and dotings of heretics,
he professed the catholic faith, as is said before. Which things being brought
to the same popes ears, and like intercession being made for him, the same our
predecessor absolved from heresy and such censures, him, and Marie sometimes of
Clieue his pretensed wifc, being at that time infected with the same crime of
heresy, being in like sort penitent, detesting, and professing; and he
received them into the bosom of the catholic church, and company of the
faithful: yea moreover he dispensed with them, according to the abundance of
his fatherly love, that they might contract matrimony between themselves
notwithstanding the let of the second degree of consanguinitie, wherewith they
were holden both of them. But he shortly after returning unto his old impiety,
and entering that most wicked way, wherein the footsteps of Ludouike of Condie
his most wicked father, a persecutor of the catholic church had trodden, and
walking in the same footesteps, he likewise showed himself a captain and
defender of the same heretics and wicked persons of the said realm of France,
and also an author of civil wars and seditions: he conveyed into France bands
of heretical soldiers being strangers, he assaied to besiege towns and
cities, he overthrew churches, he did profane and destroy holy things; he did
most cruelly murder priests; and appointing in their places ministers of
wickedness, he commanded their perverse doctrine to be published and retained:
and finally he used all kind of cruelty and sauagenes, as well against Gods
ministers, as also against other professors of the catholic faith. All which
things forasmuch as they be manifest, public, and notorious: and forasmuch as
we do fully and perfectly know especially by the process made in the time of
the same pope Gregory our predecessor, of blessed memory, and by many other
documents, and most grave testimonies, that Henry sometimes king, and Henry
of Condie aforesaid are guilty of the notorious and inexcusable crime of
heresy, and that they are relapsed into heresy, and also that they are
guilty of favoring heretics; We being enforced to draw the sword of vengeance
against them according to the duty of our office, are very loath to do it,
because we must for these offenses turn it against this detestable and
degenerate issue of the noble house of Borbon, wherein there has always
appeered sincerity of sincere religion, and worship of virtue, and obedience
toward the apostolik sea. Therefore being placed in this high seat, and fulness
of power, which the King of kings and Lord of lords himself has given us
though unworthy, by the authority of almighty God, and of Peter and Paul
his Apostles, and by our own authority, and by the council of our reverend
brethren the cardinals of the holy church of Rome; we pronounce and declare,
that Henry sometimes king, and Henry of Condie aforesaid, have been and are
heretics, relapsed into heresies, and impenitent; also captains and favorers,
and manifest, public and notorious defenders of heretics, and so to be guilty
of treason against the majesty of God, and to be such enemies of the true and
sound Christian faith, that they can defend themselves by no cunning shift or
excuse, and that therefore they have damnably incurred the sentences, censures,
and punishments contained in the holy canons, and constitutions apostolic,
and in the laws general and particular, and such as are due to relapsed and
impenitent heretics, and specially that the same have been and are deprived in
law, Henry sometimes king, namely, of the pretensed kingdom of Navarre, and of
the part thereof, which he has as yet enioied, and also of Bearne: and the
other Henry, of that of Condie, and either of them, and their posterity of
all and whatsoever other principalities, dukedoms, lordships, cities, places,
and fees; and also of such goods as they have taken to keep, promising to make
them better than when they had them; and moreover, of dignities, honors,
functions, and offices, and princely palaces, and jurisdictions, and rights,
which they hold de facto, and whereto they have had right by any manner of
means, or do pretend right; and that they have therefore made themselves
unworthy thereof: and that they have been and are incompetent and incapable to
retain them, and hereafter to obtain any such. And also that they are in law
deprived, incapable, and disabled from succeeding in whatsoever dukedoms,
principalities, lordships, and kingdoms, and specially in the kingdom of
France, wherein they have committed so many cruel and wicked crimes, and in
lordships annexed to the kingdom it self, in jurisdictions, and places, and
in the rest of the goods and things aforesaid, and to get them by any other
means whatsoever, like as also of our abundant power, and so much as is
needful we deprive them and their posterity for ever, to wit, Henry
sometimes king, of the kingdom of Navarre, and of that part thereof, and of
Bearne, and the other Henry of that of Condie, and either of them and their
posterity of al other principalities, dukedoms, lordships, fees, and of all
other goods and substance; and also of the right of succeeding and getting,
and of all and singular the other premises: and also we make them and their
posterity unable for ever for them, and to succeed in any principalities,
dukedomes, lordships, fees and kingdoms, and by name in the kingdom of France,
and in all the foresaid things annexed thereto, supplieng all defects of right
or fact, if any have happened in the same. And also that the nobles,
feudataries, vassals, subjects, and people of the realms, dukedoms,
principalities, and other lordships aforesaid, even such as acknowledge none
other superior, and all the rest which have by any manner of means sworn to
them, are absolved from all such oath, and altogether from al perpetual duty of
lordship, fidelity, and allegiance, as we by the authority of these presents
do absolve and deliver them all, as well generally as particularly; and we
command and forbid that all and every of them, that they presume not to obey
them, and their admonitions, laws, and commandments: those that shall do
otherwise, we insnarle in the sentence of excommunication by the very same.
But as for our most well-beloved son in Christ, Henry the most christian king
of France, we exhort, beseech, and also admonish him by the bowels of the
mercy of Jesus Christ, that being mindful of the most excellent faith and
religion of the kings his auncetors, which he has received from them, as an
inheritance far better than the kingdom it self, that being likewise mindful
of that oath which he solemnlie took at his coronation, touching the
extirpation of heretics, he imploie himself by his authority, power, virtue
and courage altogether princely, to execute this our so just a sentence, that
in this likewise he may show himself thankful to almighty God, and may
perform due obedience to his mother the church. Furthermore we command and
charge all our reverend brethren the primates, archbishops, and bishops,
throughout the realm of France, Navarre, Bearne, and other places aforenamed,
in the virtue of holy obedience, that so soon as the copies of these letters
shall come to their hands, they cause the^ to be published, and to be brought
to effect so much as in them lies. And we will that the same our present
letters, be set up and published upon the door of the cathedral church of the
chief of the apostles, and in the side of the field of Flora of the city, as
the custom is. And that there be like credit given both in place of judgment
and elsewhere, in all places, to the copies thereof being printed and signed
with the public notories hand, and sealed with the seal of the
ecclesiastical prelate, or with the seal of that court, which should be given
to these presents if they were exhibited or showed. Therefore let it not be
lawful for any man at al to infringe this writing of our pronountiation,
declaration, privation, inhabilitation, suppletion, absolution, liberation,
commandment, inhibition, innodation, exhortation, request, admonition, mandate
and will, or to contrary the same with rash boldness. And if any man presume
to attempt this, let him know that he shall incur the indignation of almighty
God, and of his blessed apostles Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome at S. Marks in the year of the incarnation of the Lord, one
thousand, five hundred, fowerscore and five, the fifth day before the Ides of
September, in the first year of our popedom.

A. de Alexijs.

Ego Sixtus cath. Ecclesiae Episcopus.
Ego Io. Anto. Episc. Tusc. Card. Sancti Georgij. Ego M. S. Car. ab Altaemps.
Ego Iu. Aua. Car. de Arag. Ego P. Car. Sanctacruscius. Ego Gulielm. Car.
Sirletus Ego Mic. Bo. Car. Alex. Ego Lud. Car. Madrutius. Ego N. Card.
Senonensis. P. Card. Deza. Ego Ant. Card. Carafa. Io. Ant. Card. SS. Quatuor.
Io. Ba. Card. S. Marcelli. Aug. Car. de Verona. Ego Vin. Car. Montis Regalis
Ego M. Car. S. Stephani. Scipio Car. Lancelotus. Ego Fer. Car. de Medicis.
Phil. Vast. Card. Came. Iul. Ant. Sanctorius Car. Seuerin. P. Card. Caesius. Ego
Hier. Card. Rust. Ego. Io. Hie. Car. Albanus. Ego Vince^. Car. Gonzaga. Ego Fr.
Car. Sfortia S. Nic Alex. Card. de Montealto.
In the year since the nativity of the Lord one thousand five hundred,
fowerscore and five, the thirteenth indiction, and in the 21. day of the month
of September, in the first year of the popedom of the most holy father in
Christ, and our lord L. Sixtus the fifth by the providence of God pope, these
letters were written out, set up, and published in the Cathedral church of the
chief of the apostles of the city, and in the side of the field of Flora, by
us Hierom Lucius, and Nicolas Talliet Cursitors to our most holy lord the pope.

Io. Andreas Panizza Mag. Curs.
Ioannes Caijanus Cur. Card. Camerariae Apostolicae Ibotus Full.
Faults escaped.
The first number signifies the page: the second the line.
Page 2. Lin. 2. clients. 7. 2. the Clementines. 9. 19. Pope Symmachus. 17. 10.
Church. and 23. Lateran. 38. 13. bring serious effects. 39. 19. At Perouse. 41.
27. Antonine. 62. 14. the archbishop of Toledo was suspected of heresy by the
Spanish inquisition. 74. 17. when. 92. 19. markets. 98. 9. Pope Pius. 100. 17.
curses. 112. 11. prouiso. 127. 16. Cuspinianus. 133. 4. feudall inuestitures.
ibid. 12. read. Alexander the servant of the servants of God. 137. 18. Trier.
and Mentz. 138. 2. At Aquae in Arduenna. ibid. 13. Aquisgranum. 145. 22. but
how worthy a king. 147. 1. counsel. ibid. 8. Millaine. 159. 3. in the
territorte. 164. 9. Furies. 183. 14. by Theodore legate of the holy church of
Rome. 184. 23. Melchiades. 186. 17. in Paris. 191. 24. give. 193. 6. Not as
Lords over.


