THE SAINTS LOSS AND Lamentation

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL of the Worshipful Captain HENRY WALLER,
the Worthy Commander of the Renowned Martial Band of the Honorable City of
London ^

To the Right Worshipful, the President, Captains and Gentlemen, exercising
Arms in the Artillery Garden of LONDON, Righteousness, Strength, and Peace.
Renowned Worthies,
THe honor which I bear you next my God, my King, my Church, by the entreaty
of some of you has now forced this rude piece into public view. I Will censure
it, to save others the labor, far, unworthy of so many ears and eyes that
it had and is like to have, and by my own judgment, once having the censure
of the ear, it should never have come to the second of the eye; but others
have passed it, and thus much I dare say for it, it is truth. The end of its
coming to you is twofold; 1. To mind you of your weakness; death has made a
shrewd breach among you, and set upon you in the very front, nor in the rear,
and stro^ke as the very body, not at the flanks, your chart is unwheeled, and
your horsemen thrown; (...) your Captain is taken off your ^eads. O^ (...)
soul is heavy while I speak it. 2. To repa^^^ your strength, and there is but
need of it, Me thinks I see Micaiahs vision, the host of Israel scattered as
sheep that have no shepherd; Should the host of the Lord (...) thus? Come and
let me counsel you; Profanenes, Pride, and Discension are enough^^ scatter an
army, that lie as thick at grasshoppers, as dust into the wind; when Holiness,
Humility, and Love set (...) as walls about them, that they fear (...) force:
I (...) accuse you, but as my belo^ed br^th^^^ I (...) you. Take heed that the
unholy thing (...) not found among you, walk humbly toward God and man, be
not all Captains, and love as brethren, keeping the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace; Then ask jointly of God a Captain, and ask in faith, he will
appoint a man to go before you in righteousness, courage, and the fear of the
Lord. having thus to you, I would also, were I worthy, send a word about this
matter t our Honored Senators; Be sure ye judge for God in this great business,
and account it not your smallest Honor, if ye something deny your selves for
the glory of God, your Cities flower, and your countries good; al which lie
engaged in this design. These might I see effected, your Captain, and your
strength revived, my God in both glorified, I should have content enough,
though many censures. For this I come forth, though I die, yet if the name of
that Honored head may live, whose praise with God is far more glorious,
though I suffer yet if ye may be the better and the stronger for it, it is my
great reward. The care of this your strength I shall ever commend to the Lord
of Hosts, he strengthen you in righteousness, guard you with salvation, make you
victorious by faith, and triumphant conquerors in his glory: In him I r^st,

Your hearty Orator, and fellow-Souldier in Christ's Artillery, GEORGE HVGHES.

THE SAINTS LOSS AND LAMENTATION.
2. King. cap. 13. ver. 14. O my Father, my father, the charet of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof.


THis doleful cry I hear but twice repeated in these sacred histories, and
both times at funerals. First, this dying Elisha himself sings this burden
of lamentation at the funeral of his father Elijah (for it was his funeral,
an heavy parting from his son, and from the earth, though with a more glorious
transportation in a fiery charet by fiery horses, and through a whi^^e-wind
into heaven) his son can do no less at this sudden and admired change, than
lament him, O my father, my father the charet of Israel and the horsemen
thereof. 2 Kin. 2.12.
Secondly, this honor had the same Elisha at his change, when he was now sick
unto death, from the mouth of Ioash an idolater indeed, but yet a King, who
acknowledges himself a son also to the dying Prophet; and now coming to
visit his father in his sickness, and perceiving that death was sent for him,
and he must loose him, he weepeth over his face, and cries bitterly, O my
father, my father, the charet of Jsrael and the horsemen thereof. Hear it once
more, and it is the burden of this days lamentation, neither untimely, I hope,
nor unseemely; not untimely, for it is at a funeral; nor unseemly, it being the
funeral of so honored an head, by whose death I dare speak it, I would we
might not feel it, there is a charet unwheeled, and an horseman thrown this
day in Israel. It is true here is neither King nor Prophet to be lamented, yet
a father of many sons in as great a right as Eliah of Elisha, or Elisha of
Ioash, such as a fatherly respect has made children, and want of this father
has made lamenting orphans; yet a man of God, a righteous soul zealous for
the Lord of Hosts, in whom God had placed not a small part of the Strength of
Israel; blame us not then if we take up this lamentation, and cry, O my father,
my father, etc.

The words are the natural notes of a burdened soul, and the bitter
expressions of a mind oppressed, laid out by griefs peculiar Aposiopesis.
Rhetoric, outcries, and broken distracted speeches; O my father, my father;
and there he stops, O the charet of Israel, and the horse men thereof, and then
he stays; the mind doubtless had something else to vent, but grief smothers
it, and the weeping passion will not let it out. My defense is from my text, if
I^be broken and confused, grief cannot speak otherwise, and mournes like such
sermons best, whose companion and preacher I am at this time. Yet if y^ desire
a fuller sense of these distracted outcryes, and a more perfect resolution of
these broken speeches, think my soul now to be in their souls stead, and let
me personate a while El^shah to E^^ah, or I^ash to Elisha, not in his
wickedness, but his lamentation, and me thinks, if geiese would suffer me, I
could tell you what they would have spoken. O my father woo is me, my soul is
sorely troubled for thee; Alas what shall I do oh my heart, my heart aketh,
and my souls even ready to be powered out, I can have no rest; for my staff is
broken, and my father is quite taken away from me. O my father, What do I stay
behind for a poor forsaken orphan? O how happy should I be, if death would do
me that favor as to bring me now after thee? O my father, my father; or I
would I only had lost a father and were a mourner alone, that I might yet
find others to comfort me; but on which side soever I look, I see none but
mourners, oh my heart is almost broken, All Israel laments and cries bitterly
after thee, for their charets and horsemen are fallen, because thou art
departed from them: brinish tears have besmeared all faces, Israel Gods Church
sits as a desolate widow, and heavy burdens are sounded in all her coasts,
woe is us, how is the glory of Israel this day decayed? how are her charets and
her horsemen confounded? how is her strength become feeble? for thou art taken
from us. O my father, my father, Melioripsi Israel eratin cratione sua curribus
and equitibus. Calv paraph.
who were a greater safeguard unto us then all the charets of Israel or the
horsemen thereof: Oh thou strength of Israel, our bowels are turned within us,
we are sorely grieved for thee!

That we may yet speak more profitably from the text, it will be good to
rank these outcries into some method, though indeed grief be so unruly, that
it is no easy matter to keep it in order; nevertheless we will tie it up a
little, and if we can look with dry eyes upon the text these two things are
obvious to our consideration.

1 The person produced in this mournful scene. 1 The mourner Ioas^ King of
Israel. 2 The bemoaned Elisha the Prophet now a dying man.
2. The lamentation it self made over him, whereof we read 2 The manner of it in
the doubled, broken, and distracted repetition, O my father, my father! 1 The
matter of it which was a 2. fold loss. 2 Of a father, o my father! Of the stay
and str^gth of Israel, ^ the Charet, etc.


First the persons here presented in this mournful act are Ioash the mourner,
and Elisha the sick dying and lamented father; as we look upon them, and eye
them more narrowly, we will forget them in their more special callings either
Ioash to be a king, or Elisha to be a Prophet, this will be of no great use
unto us; more profit we may expect in the diligent view of their general
conditions, according to the description which the Spirit gives of them. Of
Ioash, who comes down to weep over the face of this departing Prophet, we
read, 2 Kin. 1 3.11.
He did that which was evil in the ssght of the Lord, he departed not from all
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin but he walked
therein. What could be said worse of a man? He was as wicked as any, it was
his trade to sin, nay more, he was as bad as the worst, a conspiratour with
that Jeroboam the son of Nebat the most abominable idolater that ever
breathed on the earth. Of Elisha again, who lay now sick unto death and is
here lamented, we read, 1 Kin. 19 16.
he was the anointed of the Lord, on whom the Spirit of Eliiah was doubled
after his departure, 2 Kin. 2.9, 10.
he was a zealous champion for the Lord of Hosts, a righteous soul, an
heavenly Saint, and a deadly enemy to Ieroboams sin and his idolatrous brood;
yet this Ioash comes to this Elisha in his last sickness, weepeth over his
face a^ now departing, and cries after him i^ this pitiful lamentation; O my
father, my father! Mat 11, 19^
It is true that wisdom is justified of her children, and as true th^^ God
makes her to be justified of her adversaries also, even of them that hate her.
The righteous soul departs lamented, desired, honored by the very enemies
of righte^^snesse: It is a strange sight to see the same man a murderer, and a
mourner at the same funeral, or any one to lament that person upon the biere
whom he hated to the death, and was ever restless until he had laid him
there, yet nothing more common between the righteous and the wicked. It is the
cry of the ungodly against the inst, while he lives, kill him, stone him,
away with him from the earth, he is not worthy to live; but when he is dead
indeed, the same mouth desires him, justifies him, surely this man was the
Son God: 2 Samuel 3.27. 31, 3^.
Look upon Ioab but in his treachery, he hated Abner in his soul, he sends
good greetings unto him, takes him aside at his return, smites him and kills
him, can yet expect him now before Abners hearse, renting his clothes, clad in
sack cloth, lamenting and whining as a mourner? yet thus we find him.

Who would think that Ioash should be a mourner at Eliah's funeral, he a
conspirator with Jeroboam, this a righteous Prophet of the Lord of Hosts? yet
here he is, and weeps and cries with a bitter mourning, oh my father, my
father! But why weepeth he? and how is it that he comes to do the Prophet
this honor at his death? Is it because he loved him, as Christ wept over
Lazarus? I dare not say so, no not so much as think so, that a man of Belial
could so sincerely affect a Son of God, and should not question it, but for
some who are yet contrary minded. An hic anime st^cere honoreus illum prophetae
detulerit, aliqui in quaestiouem vocant, etc. Mihi vero frustra videtur queri,
quandonen erat causa qus moveretur ad estentandum, Ioh. Wolph in tex,
It is therefore commented by one thus; Some doubt whether Ioash did this
honor to the Prophet in his lamentation with sincere affection, etc. But it
seems to me not worth the questioning, when now he could be moved by no
cause to flattery.

Yet (with good leave) it seems otherwise to other pious and learned
judgments, and I think upon better reason. Had Ioash been in Elisha's stead,
a dying man, I should think, as the Author do^^, there were then no cause of
flattering, but Elisha was now dying, and Ioash lusty and lively; and I doubt
not, but an ungracious son for a blessing or a portion may flatter his father
upon his bed of death, nay, sooner then, when most unlikely to be discovered.
But not desire his life as Ioash did; yea earnestly desire it, and bitterly
bemoane the loss of it, if his safety and peace depend upon it, as the health
of Ioash and his kingdom upon Elisha did; there was then cause enough of
flattery. The desperate patient cares not for the mannay perhaps does truly
hate him, yet heartily desires his Physician, loves his physic and his
skill, and bemoaneth himself when he wants them; he loves not the man then,
but he loves his own life. Let Ioash look upon Elisha as a righteous Prophet
crying down his sin, and beating down Ierob^ams altars, and he cannot endure
him, he hates him to the death, yet when he sees him as a father on whom all
his dependence is, he earnestly desires him; he loves not Elisha then, but he
loves his father, and scarcely can I believe he weepeth for him, because he
loves him, or that this lamen cation is from sincere affection. Why then does
he thus bemoane him, and do him this honor as to weep over his face but at
the thought of his funeral, while he was yet alive? Negatively we have
answered, it was not because he so entirely loved him, and positively we now
reply, these considerations might move Ioash or such a wretch as he, to bemoane
Elisha's loss, or such a soul as this.

First a partial conviction of some good in the righteous soul commendable
and desirable by the very enemy, for howsoever wicked men are not so far, nor
so fully convinced of righteousness, as truly to affect it, and earnestly to
labor after it, yet such a conviction there is most commonly which stops their
mouths against it, and makes them to wish for it a^aine, when once they want
it. It fares as with the God of righteousness, so with the people of
righteousness in this (...). His very eternal power and Godhead, the
invisable things of him are so cleer^ly seems by mere Naturalists; Romans 1.20.
yea by the whole world, that it is not grievous unto them to confess him to
be God, howbeit all this while they glorify him not as God, nay, ver. 21.30,
they are the very haters of God, so vainly are they convinced of a deity; yet
again when God is departed from them, and executes his just judgments upon
them, they cannot but justify him in his proceedings, and bewail themselves
for the loss of him when he is gone: Such sparkles of divine knowledge are
left in corrupted man, and are kindled something more by education within the
bosom of the Church: God may be thus known by his enemies, but never honored
or desired before he turn away in wrath and hide away his face in
displeasure, then Saul will seem to honor him, 1 Samuel 15.25.
though erewhile his rebellion branded him for an enemy. Such entertainment and
esteem in the world have his servants likewise; as they partake of the
goodness of their God, to they do of his usage also amongst men: Their piety,
uprightness, humility, and continual study of doing good convince the very
enemy, and force a confession of their goodness; yet hate they them to the
very death, though afterward their heart smite them, and when they are taken
away, they cry for them, alas my brother! The Son of God fares no better,
his righteous conversation doubtless convinced the world of his innocence.
Pilate proclaims it before judgment, Mat. 27.23.24.
What evil has he done! yet he has enmity in himself against him, and to
do the Jews a pleasure he casts him and condemns him; nevertheless at his
death he does him this honor again to proclaim his righteousness, I am
innocent of the blood of this just person. Its strange to see with what
violence and ravenous desire of blood Saul hunted David, he is convinced of his
innocence, yet he cannot love him, but pursues him to the death, and after
that he had murdered him in his heart, his conviction drives him to this
confession. ^ this thy voice, my son David? I have (...), return my son
David, 1 Samuel 26.27. 12, 25.
I will (...) more do thee harm, I have played the soul ^^^^^red
exceedingly. Thus precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints,
Psalm. 116.15.
and such God makes it to be in the sight of men also. That wretched Balaam,
that cursed sorcerer confesses this to the eternal honor of the Saints, of
whom he gives no other commendation than to wish his soul in their souls
stead, Numb. 23.10
Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last and but like his; and
yet who a more deadly enemy to their lives than he? This lamentation therefore
of Ioash upon Elisha, might be forced by conviction, not invited by affection.

Secondly, self-love might reach him this mournful note, himself was like to
be the greatest looser by Elisha's death and no wonder then if he make the
greatest lamentation. If we observe the story, Ioash was at this time sorely
distressed, because of the Syrians; they had made the people of Israel in the
days of Jehoahaz his father like the dust by threshing, and were yet
domineering over them, Ioash had no great strength lest him of his father to
defend himself or offend his enemies, and now Elisha is departing too, his
father, his oracle for advice, and counsel, his strength and safeguard of
himself and kingdom; the charet of Israel and the horsemen thereof were now
falling, and now he and his people in all likelihood exposed to the tyranny of
the merciless Syrians; can he love himself so ill, think we, as not to mourn
and weep, and cry, O my father? A parallel no this we read betwixt Saul and
Samuel, a wicked King, and a righteous Prophet; Samuel may declare the word of
the Lord unto him, but Saul reiects it, and in his heart disdaineth both the
Prophet and his message: he harbors an enmity against God and him in his
flesh, and cares not how little he sees him, he being now his greatest
eyesore: yet when Samuel is gone indeed; 1 Samuel 28.3.6. 14, 15.
grievous distress befalls him, and now he wants him, Oh what shall he do
for his Samuel? more worth were he at (...) time than his crown unto him;
(...) he beshreweth himself, he honour^^ him and desires him: nay when he was
sore distressed, the Philistines made wants against him, God was departed from
him and answered him no more neither by Prophets, nor by Vrim, nor by (...),
then would he scrape Samuel out of his grave: yea rather than fail, he goes
to the devil for him, and when he sees him he stoupeth, and boweth himself
to do him honor, though in the event he was mistaken, worshipping the devil,
and not Samulel) yet all this while he loves not the Prophet but himself.
This honor have all Gods Saints, Prove. 11.30.
that they be trees of life, not only living themselves, but also giving life
and diffusing their good wheresoever they come; and though they are (...)
by-words and signs of contradiction, the very marks, whereat the scorns and
scoffs of worldlings are bolted for their abode in this theater, yet whence
they are transplanted, they are missed, and wished for, not for themselves, but
for the good which follows them. Self-love is enough to make a man act the
friend, though otherwise in his heart he be a deadly enemy, and so do the
wicked be-friend the godly, honor them and desire them, because they love
themselves.

I have now but two words to speak to each party, Ioash and Elisha, the
mourning king, and the lamented Saint, then they go out, and we proceed. Use 1.
First I have a message to thee oh king, not a dagger for a private stabbe, but
a word to smite thee with in the open sun, Judge. 3.20.21.
even before the face of all Israel. Is this the voice of Ioash over Elisha, O
my father, my father? Whence learned thou this note, thou painted Sepulcher?
Do thou conspire with the wicked against the Lord? content and delight thy
self in Ieroboams life? and come thou to be a mourner at Elishas death? God
will judge thee, thou cursed hypocrite. Oh how does the fire of the Lord burn
within me, and the zeal of the Almighty kindle against these wicked wretches?
Woe unto you, ye viperous generation of hypocrites: what make ye at the
righteous man's sepulchr^^ what aileth you to rent your cloath^, to walk in
sackecloath, to weep and lament before his biere? Do ye loath, dislike, and
hate his life? and yet (...) him at his death? Do ye honor, hove, and desire
his end? yet his life and graces discommend? Do ye build and paint, and guild
his tomb? and yet your hands imbrued in his righteous blood? ye are witnesses
against yourselves; Mat. 23.17.33
Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?
For ye well deserve it, that hate the God of righteousness, and his righteous
servants, notwithstanding ye are convinced, that ye should glorify him, and
honor them, ye are your own judges, that your condemnation is just.

Secondly, verse 2.
I have an errand to Elishas also, the dying Saint, and the righteous soul,
Isa. 3.10. Psalm. 37.37. Phil. 1.21.
and it is a message of peace, Say unto the righteous it shall be well with him;
his end is peace, and as his life was Christ, so now his death is his gain.
Comfore your selves then ye people of righteousness, ye holy nation: what
though for a while Balaam conspire against you, Shimei curse you, Number. 31.16. 2 Samuel 16.5. 1 Samuel 22.9. Act. 26.24. Ioh. 15.19.
Doeg accuse you, slander you, Festus think you mad me^, because ye are
Christians, and the world judge you to death as the worst of men not worthy to
live; yet wait but a little, Balaam shall wish your happiness, Shimei shall
bless you, Doeg shall justify you, Festus shall be convinced of your
wisdom, Heb. 11.38.
and the world shall desire you again, of whom it shall not be worthy. Only
expose not your selves to Balaams conspiracy by sinning and forsaking the God
of righteousness; stand not still, neither go back for Shimeis cursing;
Fear not to walk with thy God for all Doegs slanders, Think not worse of your
selves for Festus his rash judgment; and fall not down before the wicked,
though the world condemn you; Patience and Resolution now become the Saints:
Armed with these ye shall stand steadfast, glorify your God, and honor your
selves in the face of all Israel; The eye which seeeth you, shall bless you,
and the ear which hears you shall give witness unto you nay yet farther,
that very mouth that curses you, shall bless you, that heart which hated you
surviving, dying shall lament you, and that soul which abhorred you, shall
desire you again (...) my brother, or as Ioash here cries after (...) lisha, O
my father, my father! This is the honor of Gods Saints, whose losso (...)
lamentation now follow.

O my father, my father! I have done with Ioash, this lamentation is none of
his by right, his heart did never beget it, though his tongue had learned to
speak it; the is indeed Elisha's own, which he (...) heavily at the parting
with his father E^^^iah, and is here taken up by Ioash (...) himself, but
sounds more harshly from such a iarring instrument. He^^e we ^ then from the
Authors mouth and (...) how he acts it, we shall see the lively emblem of a
perplexed soul; though we hear the voice only, it is enough to make us
conceive the doleful gesture of the Actour, though we see no body; such
distracted outcries, oh my father, my father and then to stop; O the charet and
the horsemen; and to say no more, can present no other shape unto us than torn
clothes; wringing hands, swollen eyes, besmeared face, and sobbing heart, a
man full of sorrow, and overburdened with grief unspeakeable. It is a woeful
spectacle to look upon, and enough to moove a flint, that would but view it
seriously, to weep for company: and I confess, it is not easy to forbear
while I relate it. That we miss nothing which may concern us to make us
fellow-mourners with this distressed soul, the lamentation implies 2. things
remarkable.

1 The manner of it, It is doubled distracted and broken, the natural
symptoms of a soul overcharged with grief. 2 The matter of it, about which
it was, a double loss. 1 The loss of a father, O my, etc. 2 The loss of
strength, charet, and horsemen.

The manner is the doubling, Repetitivest deloris oftensie des^paratione.
Carthus, in 2 Reg. 2.
distraction and abruptness of these cries, all undoubted notes of an
unexpressible grief; and in relation to the matter (...) ground expressed, it
reads us this ^^^son. Prove. 11.10.
It is true that when the wicked perish, there is shouting: but when the
righteous man falls, there is bitter weeping, doubled cries, and pitiful
exclamations, Alas our father, or our brother, we are sorely distressed for
thee. It may be (...) cast in, Eliiah and Elisha were famous Prophets in
Israel, and this bewailing seems rather to be for such than for righteous
men. To cast this out again as easily, It is confessed indeed, that the
Prophets were accounted fathers in Israel, yet denied that they were thus
lamented because Prophets; Righteousness only adds this honor, that the
loss of them should be so bewailed, whilst many other Prophets die both
undesired and ^^lamented. Dignities may command ^ forced service and a formal
honor from inferiors, yet all this while they are a burden under which they
groan, and die they may, yet be never missed, and not a mourner for them unles
in a gown or cloak. It is neither king nor Prophet, but righteousness that
makes the loss so heavy, and the mourning so bitter; only these bring their
additions to the lamentation; the loss of a righteous man, the City does
bewail as a mother, the deceased child, who yet is comforted by her husband,
that is better then ten children unto her, but at the loss of a righteous
King, or a righteous Prophet, she sits as a widow or as an orphan, rents her
clothes, teareth her hair, and cries over them, as a wife over her husband,
or a poor child after its dearest father, that cannot be comforted. It is
true, 1 Kin. 14.19. 1 Kin. 1.22.37 Ierem. 22, 18.
when Jeroboam, Ahab, or Iehoiakim wicked Kings were cut off, we see no great
loss, and therefore we have no great lamentation, the City is quiet and no
whit moved, none cries so much as alas my brother! 1 Kin. 14.13.1^.
But Ab^ah, Ieroboams son, though a child, is lamented of all Israel, because
(...) found some good thing toward the Lord, (...) when good Josiah falls,
Jerusalem ^^^teth wringing her hands like a (...) widow, and Jeremiah and al
(...) bitterly after him: 2 Chr ^.35.24 25.
yea such a (...) it is, that unto it the Prophet makes (...) al o^ the
Convents mourning, It (...) us the mourning of (...) in the ^^^ley of Megiddo,
Ze^h, 12.11.
where that good King I^^ah was slain. When Hananiah, (...) Amaziah, false
Prophets die, all is still, (...) is no wailing for them, nor mention (...)
them, unless to curse them, for the (...) is eased of a tedious burden with
them but when Samuel, Eltiah, or Elisha (...) taken away, 1 Samuel 25.1. 2 King.
1.12. 2 Kin. 13.14.
heaven hears the sighs and sobs, and groans of mourners, all (...) bemoane
the loss of these, oh our father our father! Once more, when a curs^^ Shimei,
or a wicked Shebua, or a churli^^ Nabal are cut off, there is no miss of them
nor weeping for them: But when an innocent Abuer, or good Barzillas, or a
faithful Imathan depart, their funerals hat^ troops of mourners, and many
sad cries after them, Ah woe is me! 2 Lam, 3.33.38.
Dei^ Abner (...) dies? Alas, there is a great man (...) this day in Israel:
Or else, 2 Samuel ^ ^5, 26.
O Jonathan (...) the high places, I am distres^^^^ (...), my brother Jonathan.
All this depends upon the succeeding matter, the (...) of the lamentation about
which (...) all these cries are not about nothing, but there is a father, or a
charet, or horsemen fallen, for which these pitiful exclamations are doubled:
In the text, the whole matter of the lamentation fell under a twofold
consideration, Good Elisha, ^ither as a father to Ioash, or else as the charet
and horsemen of all Israel; the loss of these may deserve a woeful
lamentation, and because they lie in this subordination to the precedent
mourning, Flebat loas de lens se ac regula suum tanto patrono privend^ tan^^
^^^^iliari^ and auxiliarie destituendum, tam sanctissimo and fidilissimo mox
cariturum tutore, prophetae, ac patre. Carthus in tex^
I shall lay them down in their order the sufficient grounds thereof, and then
close up al with a useful application.

O my father: my father! Blame not the mourner, if you hear him passionate, it
is his father whom he bewaileth, the nearer the relation, the more sensible the
loss, and more heavy needs must the lamentation be. (...)
Whilst I (...) father, (...)
or brother, or friend (...) it may touch my (...), and perhaps my heart too so
far as to bid my (...), I am sorry for it, and (...) over; but when my
friend, my brother, my father it taken off my head, I the^ (...) the stroke,
and (...) mourn (...) was Shiah to Elisha, and Elisha to (...) blow which cuts
off the father, cannot but make the child's heart do, no (...) then, Isa. 57.1.
unless that heavy (...) have befallen them, that no man (...) to heart, when
the righteous perishes.

But upon what ground has Ioash this relation to Elisha? was it not from his
calling, that he was a Prophet, rather then from his righteousness that he
was so good? whence then is this relation given to the righteous? or he might
be a father to Ioash only; how then arises it, that the righteous are such to
then Cities?

To answer these quaeries, and to clear the truth. First, that Prophets had
the appellation of fathers it is not doubted, false as well as true might be so
called by their bastard brats (as the Romish ghostly fathers are at this day by
those whom they have begotten to be limbs of Antichrist, and children of
perdition) and yet be such fathers whom the children may be bound to curse for
the inheritance which they have left them, but have little or no cause to weep
and bemoane the loss of them. Gray heads also are fathers, and a crown of
glory, much to be honored, if it be found in the way of righteousness. Prev.
16.31.
Righteousness only adds this to the Prophet, that it makes him a desired
father: Kings, Prophets, and Magistrates that speak and rule in righteousness
are more properly indeed the nursing fathers of Kingdoms and Churches, yet can
it not be denied but a poor wise man also may prove the foster father of the
City; and so all the generation of the righteous, if not so properly called
fathers, yet are they in very (...) relation, brothers and faithful (...)
friends, and brothers may be in (...) of fathers, and a friend (...) ^^ther,
Prove. 18.24. whose loss cannot (...) heavily afflict the City, and make them
mourn. Again, though Elisha (...) called father of Ioash, yet of Ioash as a
king who should be the father of his subject, nay of Iaosh as a wicked king,
and therefore Elisha father of his kingdom also; and such are the righteous to
their habitations, yea to the very wicked also. But how does Elisha prove
himself to been father? Surely in these three particulars, though not in all
to Ioash himself, yet to some souls in Israel, 1. In Generation, 2. In
Counsel. 3. In Providence; as the righteous also do unto their neighbors.

First, he was a father in generation, I mean, not natural, but spiritual,
by which he begat, though not Ioash, yet others doubtless to be the sons of
God; and these stick so close, that when God strikes their father off their
head, they weep bitterly indeed, and are hardly comforted. This honor God
does to his Saints on earth, that though the Spirit only beget again to God,
yet the instrument is called the father. It is Saint Paul that claims this of
his Corinthians; Though ye have 10000 instructers in Christ yet have ye not
many fathers; 1 Cor, ^, 15,
for in Christ Jesus have I begotten you through the Gospel. Primarily God thus
honors his Prophets, and ministers of the Gospel, yet not exempting any
Christian from this isntrumental begetting again to God; [ viz. by their
private Christian admonitions and instructions, and their godly life] which
doubtless makes a most near tie between the soul begetting, and the soul
begotten, that will not be loosed without bitter mourning.

Secondly, he was a father in counsel, and that to Ioash, though it took but
little effect with such an ungracious son; yet he leaves not to do it upon
his dying bed; He advises Ioash to shoot the arrow of the Lords deliverance,
and he shootes, to smite the Syrians and he smites, but very foolishly, only
(...), and the man of God was (...) with him. Gen 45.8.
Such a father did God (...) Joseph to Pharaoh; and such makes he^^^ righteous
to their neighbors: they (...) counselors for the peace and good of them
among whom they live; and this makes a knot not easily broken without groans.

Thirdly, he was a father in his careful providence for his sons safety and
his kingdoms security. It was a worthy inheritance which he left behind him;
had his son had so much grace as to have made good use of it; and other
precious blessings, no question, he left to him other children, which kept the
witness of a loving father Iosephe providence proves him a father indeed,
which kept Pharaoh and his Court, and his kingdom, and his neighbors alive
through so many years of famine. Saint Paul notes it as the propriety of
fathers, 2 Cor. 12.14.
by which also he desires to approove himself to his Corinthians, I will not
be burdensome unto you, though I am your father, for the children ought not to
lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children; and so he did ^ay up
many a prayer, and many a blessing for them, which they were yet ignorant of.
So do the righteous also prove themselves fathers, by getting many good
blessings together temporal and spiritual, and leaving them behind to many
naughty children which they little thought on, less fought for; It is
remarkable therefore when Israel grieved the Lord, and Judah often times provoked
him yet he showed mercy unto them, and did them good, for his covenant with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob their fathers, who had entreated him long before: and
this must needs so unite them to their posterity, that they cannot be divided,
but even their heart strings crack being overburdened with sorrow, because
they are not To sum up these parcells in one, and use it, as it is an
argument to enforce these lamentations at the just man's funeral. If the breach
that God made upon Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6.7.
a servant of the family troubled all Israel, and made David's heart ache; alas
what trembling and mourning shall there (...) when God shall cut off the
friends, the children, the brethren, the fathers of it^ (...) have a father cut
off from the head of a child, none knows the loss, but an ^^phan, and he can
bewail it, from (...) sense of the breach of that natural (...) between
them: and spiritual orpha^ can do no less, their loss being no wh^^
inferior, thus the very thought of the^^ fathers departure, Act, 20, 37, 38.
makes Saint (...) ^^phesian children to make great (...), they wept sore, and
sorrowed much to think they should see his face no more. To loose a faithful,
wholesome counsailour, a careful provident father, on whom ones life depends,
Isa. 3.^.
is no slight judgment, no small loss, and therefore deserves no little
lamentation: Such are the righteous, such their loss, and such may we expect
should their mourning be. This is the first part of the burden, the second
follows.

O the charet of Israel and the horse^^^ thereof. This is the very sting of the
lamentation, and it pricks to the heart indeed Israel was now like to lose her
charet, and her horsemen, and then lying open to the merciless tyranny of the
Syrians, could expect nothing but bloody massacres, and woeful desolation;
(...)
oh what a bitter lamentation do we think would be in the coasts of Israel,
when cruelty breathed forth nothing but death, and there could be no
resistance? The vulgar reading shall not stay me (the charet of, Israel and
the driver thereof) though it be a fair occasion for the Cardinals corrupt
gloss (a charet to carry Confessors, and a Dr^ver to prick on the sluggish
cattle.) Currus Confessorum suppertetione, Auriga discreta pigr^rum
stimulatione; quasi sibilo blandae excitationis. Hug. Card, in tex. In hebras
hab^tur C^rrus Israel, and militia eius, i.e. potentior ad defensionem Israel
quam militia cum curribus bellicis. Ex Rab. Sal. citat Lyra in 2 Reg. ^. 12.
It likes me better to keep close to the original, and that Lyra confesses
it to be more consonant to the Hebrew text (the charet of Israel and the
horsemen or soldiers, or the Artillery thereof because he was more for the
defense of Israel, than their military troops with warlike charets. Having
this help from an adversary, we shall not stick long in searching for truth
here: It is clear in histories both sacred and profane, what strength of
people ancient time placed in charets, and how weak they accounted themselves
(...) out them; Josh. 17.16.18
The children of Joseph (...) therefore fearful to encounter with the
Canaanites in the valley, Judge. 1.19.
because they (...) charets of iron; and Judah could (...) drive one the
inhabitants of the (...), because they had charets of iron; The whole strength
of Syria for the most (...) consisted in these warlike instruments (...) Iabi^
king of Canaan with these terrified the children of Israel, Iod. 4.3. (...).
Xenoph.
for he had (...) charets of iron. In succeeding time Israel learned this
strength of these nations, and they make charets also to join battle with
their enemies: 1 Kin. 10.26.
Solomon had a thousand and four hundred charets, and twelve thousand
horsemen, 1 Kin. 22.34.
and Ahab dyed in his charet at Ramoth Gilead: Happy had it been for them if
they had not put too much confidence in this strength. The same were in great
account with the inhabitants of Asia and Africa; and as these, so horsemen were
in little less esteem, of whom we read two sorts were formerly in use.
Equites cataphrasti,
Some were so covered and overclad with armor, that, as David in Saul^
harness, they could scarcely move with it, unfit for any exploits of activity,
and yet of good use to break ranks and disorder the battle, and put the
enemy into a confusion: Others were of lighter burden, more nimble and active
for fight, Equites levi^ris armatura.
and these were the special and ^^ine combatants, by whose agility or
heaviness the honor of the field most commonly was either got or lost: so
that in a pitched field or a place capable of their march, a great army of foot
have been accounted weak without them. In short, charets and horsemen have
been thought the very sinews, and strength of States, and Kingdoms; such was
this holy man of God to Israel, the very pillar and strength of Church and
nation; blame them not then if they so heavily cry after him. Such honor
likewise have all Gods Saints; Eccl. 9.13.14, 15, 16.
This wisdom J have seen under the sun, and it seemed great unto me: There
was a (...) ^^ty, and few men within it, and there (...) great King against it,
and (...) built great had works against it (...) found in it a poor wise man,
and he by the wisdom delivered this City, yet no (...) that same poor man;
Then I said, wisdom is better then strength. A conclusion very firmly
gathered from the premises; ponder we them a little, and we shall see it.
Solomon gives us this not as a common observation, but as a thing notable and
very remarkable above most things in his experience, the benefit and yet the
neglect in the world of this godly wisdom, which is our righteousness, or
the fear of the Lord, It is great unto we. And it deserves no less than a
serious note, mark we but the opposition (I here was a little City) and (a
great King came against it, etc.) this no small disproportion, again (there
were but a few men within it) and yet (he built great bulwarks against it) this
was greater, and little hope could the City have to subsist long upon such
unequal terms; yet now in this great improbability of safety (there was
found in the City (...) poor righteous godly wise man) and he defeateth this
great king and his great bulwarks, he delivered the City, not by weapons of
war, but by his wisdom. or righteousness; therefore however the world esteem
of it, the wise Preacher concludes, wisdom is better then strength, or it is
the strongest defense of all; this has its undeniable truth, whether we read
it as a parable, or an acted history. In the map which the Prophet draws of
Judah, Gods holy place, he thus deciphers the strength of it, Isa. 26, 112, 3,
4
We have a strong City, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks; and
what surer defense than Safety it self? its Canon-proofe and a wall
impregnable? but who the inhabitants? Surely the righteous nation which keeps
truths enters in and dwells there, and their Jehovah is their rocks of ages,
or everlasting strength. This is very strange, and who almost believes it? may
a man ask, where lies this strength of Sampson in the righteous? their faces
promise as little or less than other men. with God through Christ, which (...)
it were possible for the world to (...), they would become weak, and (...)
other men; but whilst this lasts, (...) theirs, heaven is theirs, they have
(...) of angels for their assistance, and to (...) more punctually, their
strength is (...) in these particulars.

First in the power and wisdom of their Captain, their reconciled God; his
counsel shall stand though all the ^^^phels in the ea^^h conspire against him,
and his power is irresistible, though all the kings of the earth bandy
themselves to fight with him; and how safe must the holy ones be, Prove. 18.10.
when he is their Sanctuary? The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the
righteous runs into it and is safe, or set aloft; free from gun shot, where
they may sit and laugh, and the enemy cannot hurt them. This tower goes with
them whithersoever they move, where they abide, the very name of that place is,
Jehovah Sha^mab, Ezekiel, 48.33.
The Lord is there; and in whomsoever the strength of Israel is, they must
needs be a strong defense and guard to their City, their Church and state.

Secondly, in the spirituality of all their forces and munition, whereby they
offend and grieve the enemy, yet are not discerned, that they should be
avoided, or repelled: Their Captain is a Spirit, and therefore mocketh his
enemies in his intermination of the perfidious Jews; We unto them that go
down to Egypt for help, Isa. 31.1.2, 3.
and stay on horses, and trust in charets, because they are many, and in
horsemen, because they are very strong, but they look not to the holy one of
Israel, neither seek the Lord: yet he also is wise and will bring evil, and
will not call back his word; but will arise against the house of evil doers,
and against the help of them that work iniquity; Now the Egyptians are men and
not God, and their horses flesh and not spirit, when the Lord shall stretch
forth his hand, he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall
down, and they all shall fail together. For there can be no resistance, a
spirit fights against them, and alas they cannot see either to offend him or
defend themselves. Again, their soldiers and ministers are spirits, Heb.
1.7.14.
the Angels which serve them, 2 Kin. 19* ^5.
and are for guard about (...) one of them went out in a night and (...) in the
camp of the Assyrians an hundr^^ four score and five thousand men, (...) was
never perceived; It is a pitiful (...) to be smitten, and never know whence
the blow comes, help or defense cannot be had against such an adversary.
Once more their weapons are spiritual, and therefore cannot be warded off
faith and prayer powerful instruments, whereby the weakest women have been the
greatest conquerours: Heb. 11.34.
Through faith the Apostle witnesses the righteous have put to flight the
armies of the aliens, or forrei^^ enemies; this is a sure weapon which they
were never able to strike out of the believers hand, and this was his victory,
or conquering piece. Ezod. 17.11, 12^ 13, 14, 15.
By prayer also Moses kept off the blows of Amalek from Israel, and gave them
a fatal overthrow; so that God commands him to write it for a memorial in a
book, not only the conquest but the means and weapon which Moses does, and
erecteth also an altar, whose name he called Jehovah (...) ^he Lord my banner,
as a pillar for the eternal memory of faithful prayer. In this the Paraphrast
put the strength of Elisha, Thou art better by thy prayer to Israel than charet
or horsemen. Melior erat Isratioratione sua, etc. Called. Paraph
Spiritual forces are thus irresistible, therefore they are very strong; and
such is the strength of the righteous.

Lastly, 3.
in their unexhausted provision, which continually maintains their strength,
that they need not fear a decay thereof. The righteous always pitch by that
little river, whose streams make glad the City of God; of which, Psalm 46.4.
though they be faint and weary, if they do but drink, their strength
returns as Sampsons, Judge. 15.19.
and they grow mighty and strong again. This river is no other, but the water
of life, the word and Gospel of Jesus Christ, it is meat and drink to the
believing soul; and if he chance to faint, he gets strength from thence to
his faith, and if his hands grow feeble, he drinks, and stretches them forth
again mightily in prayer; and so long as he is able to wind his weapons, his
strength will be unresistable. Happy that City, that nation, that Church, that
has such mighty men (...) champions, their strength is admirable, and they
shall not be ashamed to (...) the enemy in the gate. Such soldiers, such
champions, such walls, such bulwarks are the righteous to their places, our
conclusion then is necessary, their loss must be very grievous, and their
lamentation deservedly very bitter. I have now but three words to speak to
Ioash, to Israel, and to Elisha, to the wicked to the Church, and to the
righteous, and I close with the text.

O Ioash thou art a mourner at Elish^^ death, Use 1.
but who, think thou, will lament at thine? The righteous indeed fall, and
the City is moved, all cry after him, and the streets ring with their
lamentations; but the wicked are cut off, and all is still, they are neither
missed, nor desired, nor lamented. We will not cross he proverb, yet may we
limit it, Eccl. 2.15.
So dies the wise man, even as the fool; so dies he indeed for the nature of
his death, his soul is separated from his body, but not so for the manner,
issue, and consequents of his death; he dies a wise man, but this a fool, he
like a Saint expecting to rise again gloriously, but this as a beast which
perishes for ever, he dies and is lost as a pearl, this and is never missed,
like carrion, he is taken away and bitterly lamented, but this is cut off, and
not so much as desired. Will ye see how they use him when he is gone? It was
Iehoiakims case son to Josiah king of Judah, a wicked wretch whom God thus
cursed, when he was dead. Ier. 22.18, 19 Non plangent eum vae ob fratrem meum,
vae ob sororem, non plangent eum, vae ob regem, vae ob regnum eius; Sicut
proiiciunt cadaver asini, sic proiicient cadaver eius, lacerabitur and
proiicietur, ultra portas Jerusalem. Calv. paraph.
They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother, or ah sister, they shall
not lament for him, saying, Ah Lord, or ah his glory, He shall he buried with
the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.
Read here and see your doom, ye generation of evil doers, though ye be the
sons of kings and children of Princes, yet your iniquities make you stink,
ye die and are dragged, and tumbled out like carrion; this is your sentence
from heaven. It is the curse of folly to be buried like an ass.

Secondly, Use 2.
O Israel how art thou beholding to Elisha? Thy child indeed; yet thy father,
thy guide, thy counselor, thy charet and thy horsemen, thy sinews, thy very
strength and safety: and (...) this why do thou not love him? oh how would I
weep over thee with Ierusalems lamentation? O Israel, Israel, thou that
keep the oracles of God, and call thy self by the name of his Church,
why art thou weary of thy righteous Princes, thy righteous Prophets, thy
righteous soldiers, and righteous people? thou seem not to regard though
they be persecuted, killed, and stoned; oh that thou would consider in this
thy day the things which concern thy peace, before they be taken from thine
eyes; thy peace, thy safety, thy strength is in thy righteous members, and
do thou so slight them, while thou now inioyest them? Woe is thee, thou will
be feeble when they are gone, then shall thou weep bitterly, and they will not
be. How is it that thou art become unnatural? thou forsakest thine own, and
thou harbourest strange children: can salvation be thy walls, when
unrighteousnes and oppression are among thy rulers, profanenes among thy
Prophets, strange altars in thy temples, and idolatry in thy habitatations?
Alas thy leanness, thy leanness! thou art become weak and feeble, and thy
destructions are now upon thee. Were I worthy to counsel thee (yet I may call
to thy remembrance Gods counsel unto thee) O that righteousness might abide and
rule in thy habitations, that thou would ingrave it on thy Nobles, on thy
Judges, on thy Prophets, on thy Captains, and on thy Soldiers, that in thee
might dwell only a people of righteousness, then should thou be as the strong
City which the Lord has founded, salvation should be thy walls, the name of
Jehovah thy tower, thy rereward, and thine everlasting strength; thou should
be built as on a rock that can never be shaken, and be established as mount
Sion, Gods holy place, which shall never be remooved.

Lastly, is Elisha among the sick, Use 3.
and maimed, and cripples, and feeble? what do thou here Elisha? How
come thou thus tired and weak and faint, thou righteous soul, thou strength
of Israel? have thou bin dallying, and playing the wa^ton in the harlots lap?
are thy locks sho^^, oh Sampson? and have thou betrayed thy strength into the
hands of thine enemies? Have thou lost thy Captain, thy Assistance, thy
weapons? where is faith now? where is that Almighty prayer that opens and
shuts heaven, that calls for legions of Angels? Alas thou have sinned, and
thy God is hidden from thee, and thy confederates dare not come near thee,
thou can not hand before the enemy, nor wind a weapon for thy defense; thy
strength is become weakness, and thou have made thy self a scorn to the
adversaries, whom thou have sometimes wounded? Should thou thus tempt God and
fall? this is thy rebuke; yet let me advise thee too. Come shelter thy self a
little under the wing of thy redeemer, stay there while thy locks are grown,
thy Captain will come that way, then lay hold on him, thy forces go along
with him, gather them together, draw out thy weapons again, and begin to use
them, let faith pitch it self upon thy God through thy Christ, tell him, thou will throw thy self upon his power, and faithfulness to preserve thee, let thy
prayer set upon him mightily, and give him no rest, until he come again, and
renew tsty strength like the Eagles. Then comfort thy self (oh thou charet of
Israel and the horsemen thereof) the eyes of all Israel are upon thee for their
strength, thou mighty man of God, they weep with bitter lamentation when thou
art taken from them, and should thou quail for any adverse power? Consider
thy strength, thou have power to combat with hell and overthrow it, to grapple
with death, and to defeat it, to make the grave tremble, and open unto thee,
that thou may arise again and come forth a conqueror. Death may humme
about, but it is a drone, it has no sting, sin may make a bluster, but it
has no strength, hell may belch forth great words, but it is already
vanquished to thy hand, and the grave may threaten much, but it can do nothing
against such a mighty man as thou art; thou have now nothing to do, but
resting in Jehovah thine everlasting strength sit down and sing; Death is
swallowed up in victory, (...) death where is thy sting? oh grave or (...)
where is thy victory? The sting of death is (...), and the strength of sin is
the law; But th^nk^ be to God, who has given me victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

I have now done with my Text.

I mistook, I have not yet done, I must have one cursory more over it for this
heavy and sad occasion, then I close up indeed: yet the corrupt custom of our
days makes me almost afraid, when men of corrupt minds, enemies to godliness,
and children of their father the devil must be made Saints at their
funerals, and though all their life time they have been tracing down to
hell, yet at their death they are posted from the pulpit in a charet into
heaven, but it is a windy one that breaks in pieces, and lets them fall down
again, before they come half way thither. Nevertheless, I see the holy
Fathers have used to give record of the graces of the Saints deceased, and to
spread their names as a sweet ointment among their brethren, and it is very
commendable, if faithfully performed, and not abused to paint devils; with
this care I shall proceed by Gods help to perform this last duty for this
honored brother, and it must be with care: for there are two eyes upon me
very extremely opposite, Envies and Affections, that, would have nothing said,
this perhaps too much; I shall not fear to displease either, so I may please
my God, by whose blessing I now begin, You will pardon me if I keep not the
common method, to begin from his descent and parentage though that of worthy
and honest rank, not to be neglected (if I should keep that order;) but me
thinks, it is ^^proper praise from another worth, Sedgenus and proav^, and
quae non f^ci^sus ipsi vix ea nostra voc^.
I desire to let him have his own, and to (...) him, where he comes within
my (...) as a righteous soul, and nothing ^^ere certain than that he was
borne a (...). His transplantation therefore into this City is my beginning,
Mr. Richard Stocks.
and his fruitful growth under the labors of a Reverend Minister now with
God, (...) gave full testimony, that he was a (...) of righteousness indeed;
thence (...) up to show forth the power of righteousness in the places private
and public whereunto God called him.

He was a righteous husband, I (...) no more of this, lest I provoke bitter
lamentation. He was a righteous master^ his servants feel it, from whose
heads, God has taken off their master this day. He was a righteous father, not
to his (...) alone, they are too little to have experience of it, but to
orphans and fatherless was he father, a guide, and counselor; my own loss
is with theirs, bear with^^^ if in the sense of it I bewray my infirmities; as
David for his son, O my father, my father, would to God I had (...) thee, O
my father, my father! He was a righteous friend to many, I give but (...)
instance of it, his reconciling difference almost every day, his hands were
(...) ever out of an arbitration, which (...) without partial respects to any
that (...) him a judge over them, I know I (...) many witnesses to this, who
now want him.

In his more public offices, he was first a righteous soldier squared by
Saint John's rule, he would do violence to no man, nor put any man in fear;
Luke 3.14.
in this condition he took a good degree, he was a Captain and a righteous
Commander; the virtues of a Commanders majesty, wisdom, meeknes and love
surely made him one; disorder, as there must be among soldier sometimes,
could never make him passionate; he was a man of such admired moderation, He
crossed the rule of that rash commander, (It is folly to entreat, where a man
has power to compel) (...) Hesiod p. 41.
He found it better governing by love: this made the flower of the Cities, yea,
of the kingdoms Artillery, so unanimously subject to his command. Let me mind
you (ye worthy soldiers) know ye not that God has taken away your Captain
from off your heads this day? and can ye do less than cry after him (O our
charet and our horsemen?) I know sorrow has filled your hearts; yet, by the
way let me advise you, be not overcharged, that you forget your calling; but
when ye (...) weep over this your honored head, and lamented before his
hearse; Ah our father, ah his glory; wipe your faces, (...) and to work again
for God, pray for^ double portion of his spirit upon some of your brethren, and
choose him, who may go before you in wisdom, and courage, and the fear of
the Lord.

I am now at a stand, An arma, A^ ^^g^ cedat? whether he were better soldier,
or better Citizen? His wisdom, his courage, and his impartial carriage in
the City affairs, which might concern him, bear record, that he was not only
a good man, but a good Citizen; his worth provoked the City, Quid in illa
virtutum, quid, ingenii, quid sanctitatis, quid puritatis invenerim vere^^
dicers, ne fidem credulitatis ex ceda^ and tihi mai^rem delorem intutiam
recordanti quanto bon^ caru eris. Hier. Mar. ep. tem, 1.
not only to call him to her common counsel, but to design him to a more
honorable place in the High Court of Parliament, where he manifested himself
to be a righteous servant to his King to his Country, and to his City, I must
stay, least (as S. Hierome writes to Princip^^ of Marcella a widow) if I should
tell all, I should either seem to hyperbolize, or oppress your hearts the
more; when ye see what a great good ye have lost. In this honor for his last
time he lived, and died. Ye may expect now in my hand a catalogue of good
deeds: but I have none, the reasons these. 1. It was his his care to give to
God in his poor and in his ministers, the portion of his estate while he
lived; yet dying he has given as well as living. 2. It was his mind not to
have a trumpet sounded at his death, and I fulfill it. I must leave him, he
will be gone; it was my portion to commend his soul in the last breath into
the hands of his faithful redeemer; and his body I must commend to the earth,
in the assuted hope of his joyful resurrection; Only two things I would
commend to you, and then your selves to God. 1. The honor of his name, let it
be as a sweet ointment among you in everlasting remembrance; he was your
strength, your charet and horsemen. 2. The imitation, his righteousness, his
wisdom, his godly courage; ye see his reward, he is now with God at rest, his
work is done: our hour (...)


