GREAT BRITAINS RESVRrection: Or the Parliaments passing Bell.

BY WAY OF PSALMODIE, AGAINST the tryumphing of the Papists, in their seven
Psalms.

And in imitation of the song of the three Nobles of Israel, delivered out of
the fiery Oven of Babell.

By William Hubbard, Chaplain to the Kings Majesty, in his Highness Tower of
London.

Hos. 14.10. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? and prudent,
and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are righteous, and the just
shall walk (...) them: but the wicked shall fall therein.

Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Arthur Johnson, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the white Horse. 1606.

To the right Worshipful, Sir William VVaade Knight, Lieutenant to his
Majesty, in his Highness Tower of London: Grace and favor with God and man, be
multiplied in Jesus Christ.
I H^^^ made bold (right Worshipful) to dedicate this Hymn and general
sacrifice of compunction and thanksgiving, to your name and memory, both as a
tendering of my particular office to you and yours principally: and because God
has made you so general a man for the common good, being so learned,
religious, and habitually prudent from the chief school of high wisdom in
our estate, the bourd of his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, and a
most sufficient servant of King and Country in this place: whereupon I begin to
conceive strong hope, that the Lord has sent you amongst us, not only for
these dear and present times of this new generation of gun* powder men in this
place, in which your dexterity and service is apparent to all, but to be valued
of them who are able to give it his due weight and poise, without diminishing
any grain of such a mineral better then gold: Tower ministry.
but for establishing also the Church and government here unto posterity, which
has been the sin of omission in many before you: and now needs some
Zerubabel, or Nehemia, Zach* 4.7.10. Noh. 13.4.7.8.
a restorer after so many exigents, as it has been driven unto in the
ministeries of the same, being driven out of their possessions, and old
indowments, in the midst of gold and silver, Jewels and Plate, as Tantalus in
the miast of water, wanting water: where rather the support should be certain
and liberal for Gods honor, and the Kings, for the attendance of such an one,
as both may inform the officers and servants there, and inhabitants besides,
to the number welnigh of 400. communicants (aggregated thither, and escaping
scot and lot else where, who enjoy all divine rights for themselves and their
families at the Ministers hands, and as though their souls were worth nothing,
or free of heaven, Pro. 3.9.
honor the Lord with no part of their substance) and may at times also by
moderate dropping of his words upon the Prisoners, Ezech 21.2.
rather then at or a little before their death (for their error came not in a
moment, Conference with prisoners.
nor is Christian regeneration ripened but by degrees) instruct the contrary
minded with patience, as the ample says: trying whether God will give them
repentance at any time to know the truth, 2. Tim. 2.24.25.26.
that they may come to amendment out of the snare of the devil, of whom they
are held to do his will* which place of scripture I confess I have long time
much made of. In which kind my poor labors have not been in vain in the
Lord, both to the reclaiming of diverse, and to the discovery of matter
beneficial to the estate: which I think some of their honors have not forgot,
glorfied be the name of him that has his chair in heaven, and teaches the
heart. In all which ripe and sweet fruits of your faith, In veni lateritiam:
reliqui marmoream.
that you may increase with the mighty increases of God, my hearty prayer is,
that so you may be eminent daily in this your whole so careful a charge and
employment, in this royal Castle, the key of the kingdom: that you make that
marble, which you found brick: that that which was planted with wild figs, you
may establish with Cedars: finally, so to wade thorough this whole cumbersome
and uncertain sea full of many new monsters, as that you may have an Olive
branch still in your hand, and with an vncorrupt mind lift up your head to the
head of all with holy ouation, saying. I have run my full race: 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
I have fought a good fight: I have kept my self in the faith, and others:
Clavum et clipeu^ tenui. Amen.

Your Worships in his best offices and services ^or the Church, William Hubbard.

To the devout and Christian Reader.
A Foundation and direction of expressing my thoughts, by way of Psalm, has
been the Apostles holy canon and sanction: Col. 3.1^.
Let the word of Christ dwelt in you plenteously in all wisdom* teaching and
admonishing your own selves in Psalms and Himnes, Why this treatise by way of
Psalm.
and spiritual songs. And I find that our Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
after he had kept his passover with his disciples, and washed their feet after
supper: Ioh 13.2. Math. 26.30.
and instituted and performed the sacrament in an excellent sermon or
sermocination reaching from John, cha. 13 31. thorough the whole 14.15.16.
chapters, with a prayer annexed, containing the whole 17. chap. he thought not
this heavenly feast and banquer, sufficiently furnished, unless he closed up
their spiritual stomach with a Psalm, as some precious marm^let^ For so says
the scripture: When they had sung a Psalm, Math 26.2.
they went out into the mount of Olives. A most Christian exercise, and too
much neglected among professors. Others in great variety of invention in
verse and prose, in Latin and English, in sermon and otherwise, have traveled
in this argument laudably and fruitfully: some memorably even by the voice of a
doleful Pyramid demolished in France, craving restitution in noble great
Britain: yea the Theater and English Roscius himself has pourtrayed this
work of God, and set it aloft, tanquam in arce Phidiae, as it were in the
turret of the famous caruer Phidias, to the view of all men. But I took this
course, the rather, because I observe the friends of the Romish Pioners, to
have had a secret seauenfold Psalmodie, as a claudestinarie orison from hand to
hand, in which they solace themselves with strange notes, and tunes, and
ditties, and hopes of news: Select sentences out of the Popish new Psalter.
In their 4. Psalm.
as in an insolent Paean, triumphing before hand, for a Iubily and golden day
at hand. I will set down some of their words, because the book is not in
many hands. And I by a good friend came by the most of it. Of innocent King
Edward, thus they speak: England, ah ungrateful England, forgot the living
God, and felt the curse of having a child to her King.

Of our late Queen, of thrice blessed memory, thus they seem to say: The
nobility to their own utter extirpation shamefully forsook their Bishops,
without assistance.

Of our noble Sovereign they seem thus: Alas, O Lord: that thou have suffered
a parching wind to blow from the North:

Which made the boughs of thy planting to wither, and the flourish thereof to
decay:

And yet as it were recomforting themselves, thus they seem to prophecy.

In a moment can thou crush her bones, and lay her pride in the dust:

And: The earth is infected with the wickedness of the Inhabitants, and cries
unto thee for vengeance:

And possibly would swallow them as it did Ch^re and his company: were it not
for thine elect sake:

Revenging fire of Sodom and Gomor might be justly feared:

And: Confirm the heart of those thy laborers: endue them with strength from
above, and give success unto their endeavors:

Again: Embolden our hearts with courage, to concur with them freely in
furthering thy service.

And in another place: Confirm your hearts in hope, for your redemption is not
far off. In their second Psalm.


The year of visitation draws to an end: and Iubilation is at hand:

And: Jerusalem shall be built up again: and the second glory thereof, shall
be greater then the first.

And: Righteousness shall prosper, and infidelity shall be plucked up by the
roots.

God will arise as from a long slumber, and establish again the arc of his
sanctification.

And: The root which has waxen old under ground, man shoot up again as a
fresh plant by the river side:

False error shall vanish as smoke:

And they which saw it, shall say: Where is it become?

Just judgment and holy laws shall be restored, etc.

Again: His tabernacle he will spread again; and dwell amongst us as in times
past.

And: Sacred songs shall break their long silence, the lamp of our Lord shall
be (...).

And: The resemblance of heaven shall be renewed, the resemblance of hell shall
be destroyed.

England shall be called a happy Realm, a blessed Country, a religious people.

Those which knew the former glory of Religion, shall lift up their hands for
joy, to see it returned again.

Those that never saw it shall be stricken with admitation: wishing that they
had sooner known the truth: condemning their fathers which forsook it.

Men shall say of it, one to another: here is indeed the house of God, and
the gate of heaven.

How great diversity is between truth and falsehood, devout solemnities, and
counterfeit ceremonies?

From the East point to the West, men shall confess their errors.

They which thought themselves wisest, shall say they knew nothing:

Gladly shall people walk in their ancient steps of truth and equity, etc.

The Prince of peace will break the exactors rod. etc.

No longer will he dissemble the oppression of his people*

He is bent to revenge their cause.

The daughters of Babylon shall be cast down: and in the dust lament their
ruin.

Proud heresy shall strike her sail: and groan as a beast crushed under a
cart wheel.

Again: The omnipotent has sworn to make her stoop: and that he will abase
her haughtines.

Again: The memory of novelties shall perish with a crack: as a ruinous house
falling to the ground.

And: He will come as a flame that bursteth out beyond the surnace.

His fury shall fly forth as thunder: and pich on their tops that malign him.

Again: A second Cyrus has he stirred up: confirming his Scepter for the good
of his people.

He shall likewise bring the Infants of Sion from all quarters of their
banishment: Joyfully shall they return from foreign lands.

And those Countries, where now they harbor, shall find succor in this I Will
for their necessities.

Again: The tempestuous night being passed: a perpetual day shall be our
comfort.

His truth, his justice, his Priests, his sacrifice shall be no more taken away.

I have been the larger: that the reader might see, and observe the Papists
expectation out of their own many words without equivocation. But Mutatis
mutandis the prophecy shall be inuerted upon themselves: as is in part
already: Magnified be the name of God therefore.

Now for this my method, as it were a letanie or procession: and a kind of
spiritual preambulation thorough the whole England, as men do to keep their
bounds: so we to see in particular and general how much we are bound to God:
Exodus 15. ^ud. 5.
we have excellent presidents to omit Miriams song, and Deborahs, which both
stand upon the resolution into particulars: but in David, himself more
notably: David the sweet singer of Israel, the king of singers, first Psalm.
136. which used to be sung of the Levites in the temple: 1. Chro. 16.41.
In which Psalm as it were by a logical or theological predicament, he
beginning with the great works of GOD in general, he after divides his
thoughts into the works of creation, and administration: Ode Epae^^ticos, e
antistrophos.

Why repetition.

Presidentes of particular recapitulation, and a burden of words in songs of
thanksgiving See also Psalm. 118. in the beginning.


he goes from the heavens to the earth: he particularizeth in the great
lights the sun and the moon. In the works of administration he exemplifieth
in the Lords destroying Aegipts first borne: in bringing Israel out thence: in
cutting sea into two parts: in bringing Israel thorough the midst: and not at
the shore and in some shallowe place: In overthrowing Pharao and his host
there: In leading this people thorough the Desert: In smiting great kings for
their sakes: particularly Sihon and Og: in giving his people their land: in
remembering not their misery only, but in feeding all flesh. The burden of all
which to every verse is: The mercy of the Lord endures for ever.

That is to say: Gods mercy appeared not then only and in those particulars,
but for ever: And that these particulars were stakings down, that they had had
Gods mercy from time to time, and might be sure of it for ever: even as Esaias
the Prophet says: Hear, Esaias, 55.
and your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with you:
the sure mercies of David: What is this else, but you shall be as sure of my
love as ever David was: And in a nearer example, A ^. president.
Psalm. 148. he rangeth and marshalleth the creatures in order, with redoubling
the same words: praise him all ye his Angels: praise him all his armies:
praise him sun and moon: praise him heaven of heavens, and ye waters that be
above the heavens, let them praise, etc. praise ye the Lord from the earth,
Dragons, depthes, fire, hayle, snow, vapors, winds, mountains, hills, beasts,
creeping things, and feathered fowls, Kings and all nations, Princes, and all
Judges of the earth: young men and maids: old men and children: Let them
praise the name of the Lord, etc and why all these? For the particular mercy
(says David) in exalting the horn of his people. Even as Esaias on the other
side in the impenitencie of the people contesteth heaven and earth: Esaias. 1.2.
attesteth Ox and Ass against Isreal's ingratitude.

And hence no doubt was deduced the canticle of the three children, though
apocrypha, The song of the three children: O all ye works of the Lord, etc.
yet very ancient, and inserted for the worthiness of it into the liturgy of
the Church of England. Where the three great noble men and rulers of thy
Provinces themselves personally stand forth, and beginning from the general
works of God, descend to specials: in heaven to Angels, sun and moon: and
pass along the clouds in their spirits, to showers, winds, fire, heat,
winter, summer, dewes, and frosts, ice and snow: and knock at the door of every
creature in the earth: mountains, green things, wells, seas, floods, whales;
fowls, beasts, particularly summoning men: more particularly Israel: among
them the Lords Priests and servants: the souls of the righteous: and humble
men that walk with God, and endure any thing or every thing for him: O'A^aria,
Azaria and M^^ael: do you praise the (...) the Lord.
and by name they call upon themselves: As though all the creatures were
obtested to help them to praise God, and to acknowledge this Creator and
preserver of them: and that they who had the chief deliverance, though men of
care, knowledge, and understanding in all learning and wisdom, yet were
insufficient without worlds of help. Dan. 1.17. and 2.17.18.
Therefore as God presented all the creatures before Adam their Lord and owner
under God: and at another time all the creatures of the earth before Noah, Genesis
2, 19.20. and 7.14.
their preserver under the same God: And as Landlords have their tennants to
show their poll, and to pay head silver to their Lords in their Courts yearly:
And as seamen scaping shipwreck, offer vows, Jonas 1, 16.
and hang up tables of deliverance: so have I endeavored by these holy
examples, and the like to present in all humble duty all degrees and estates
before this Lord their preserver, with crowns of salvation on their heads,
palms of victory in their hands, Psalms of thanksgiving in their mouths.
For when the funeral men of Rome tolled our last knel among themselves: To the
Parliaments passing Bell.
so certainly that they thought all the Physicians of great Britain could do
her no good: and that God himself had forsaken her: saying, now the Protestant
shall die, and his name perish: did not the Lord of life cause the bell to stay
on a sudden: Psalm. 41.5.
and has he not spirited her again with a fresh life, Great Britains
Resurrection. Heb. 11.19.
and made her the daughter of a joyful resurrection. As it is said of Isaac,
that Abraham after a sort received him from the dead, when he was so near unto
death and yet delivered. My meaning was to stir up all our spirits, mine own
and others, and to keep us somewhat waking, least security the bane of all
should creep in. For if right use be made of this: what does let but we may
write: Aeterna Britannia magna: wherein no doubt a princely and honorable
monument from this Senate in a festiuitie ordained for ever to be kept (which
shall be like a marble pillar, with a real, Parliament holy day.
and compendious inscription of the matter and occasion engraven walled about,
and a keeper of it as of other monuments for all to visit) to Gods glory and
increase of our faith and repentance, shall revive our anniuersarie thankfulness
to all posterity. And me thinks I observe a new edge upon many lovers of
religion since, Romans 10.19. 1. Sam. 5.4. Vt ingulent homines sargunt de nocte
latrones: vt temet serves non expergiscere? Thieves rise by night to kill: and
thou to save thy self by waking have no will.
when they see God has so provoked them by a foolish and idolatrous people
desperately zealous for the setting of Dagon, that thereby with greater
inflamed hearts the friends of Sion labor to resetle the ark of God upon our
center for ever. In which for my part I cannot but praise God for the fervor
and ardent spirit of the most honorable and zealous lower house, like the
spirit of famous Martin Luther, and a fiery conglobation in their holy and
devout dispositions in many notable propositions, and yet also give God most
hearty thanks for the grave, moderate, and mature considerations of the most
honorable and high part of the upper house, as the sage spirit of melancthon,
and a refrigeratiue constellation: whose operations and influences shall by Gods
grace have heavenly and mighty effects very beneficial to the public good in
due time, and their sweet aspect and loving respect unto one another, and to
the whole by their happy and peaceable conjunction shall profit, upon further
occasions that which is behind of their faith, wisdom, and zeal, which shall
be the better effected, if we could all go one way. For I perceive in many
cases, as the Lamprey and serpent engender, so some professors so named (for I
except the grave, humble, modest, and fatherly, whom I know many) and the
Papist with diverse ends join to debase him, that without respect of factions
in his honest simplicity and plainenes, opposes himself to two extremes:
Aristotle li. 1, eth. ca. 6.
Great was the light of wisdom, that shined in the Gentiles: He that will
preserve truth, must not only confute other men's opinions, but his own. And
would to God al sides could learn of the fountain of wisdom, not to do any
thing for displeasure against any supposed tares, Math. 13.
as to pluck up wheat: and all sides so to deny themselves and their own name,
that we might think it no disgrace, but good devotion to say in a common
voice: Thy name be sanctified, Math. 6.
O Lord, whatsoever become of our name. And here I most humbly desire as in
this last passage, so in the whole process the friendly christian and
charitable construction and indulgence of all men: wherein any thing by omission
or addition is mistaken, which in such variety of degrees to sort every one
with their proper attributes and offices is easy for a contemplative man,
laboring according to this place and my function, to be a remembrancer among
many: knowing that as in a race though men run swiftly of themselves, yet the
clapping of hands of other obseruers, and of them that blow the trumpets,
adds a new courage and vigor to them. The sum of my desire is: Cantic. 4.2.
that all our people of great Britain hereafter may be like one flock of
sheep, as the holy Ghost speaks: as in good order come up from their
washing: a peculiar people abundant and zealous of good works: every one
bearing twins and none barren among them: Tit. 1.14. 2. Cor. 5.11.
that our Church knowing, the terror of the Lord, hereby as Christ speaks,
may be purged, and bring forth more fruit; that it may grow as the Lily, and
have roots of Lebanon: Ios. 15.2.3.
that she may look forth from her sleep, Hos. 14.5, 6, 7.8.9.
as the morning fair as the moon, pure as the sun, terrible as an army
with banners, that all the world may confess: what nation is so great unto
whom God comes so near in all that we need, Cantic. 6.9.
even before we call upon him: What nation so great, Deuteronomy 47. Esa. 65.24.
that has ordinances and laws so wise and so righteous, as they have set out
in this their day. Amen. April. 29. 1606.

Faults escaped.
SEction 1, line last, for reseueth. read, and reserueth. sec* 5, l. 9, read
sulphurous, ibid. li. 23, read has for have, sec: 6, in margin, for
ornatumque, read ornatum, 16, d, for a deo, read ad eos, sec: 16, li, 14, read
leprous, sec. 19, li. 9, read wheels, sec: 21. li, 15, for hours, read
hoardes, sec* N. li. 16, Goteham, sec: 22, li. 23, at this sign * left out:
who meant to have the incustodie: and 25. read volies, sec: 25, li. 9, f. 1
Fsaac also, Isaac alone, sec. 29, li. 17, Parliaments petition, and li. 58.10,
11, etc. sec* 30, li. 30. read praise, sec. 32, third page, for chests, read
clefts sec. 33. li. 4. read train and 2. p. all dimensions. sec 39. page. 2.
in fine: read marvel.

Sec. 11. after the word practice: also all the (...)* Academia: scholars and
children of the famous Kings school of Westminster, who like the male children
of Israel by this Italian Pharao, had like to have been consumed in a deluge
of fire, and as the innocent Babes of Bethlehem to be slain by the Romish
Herod, in despite of young Christ amongst us.

The Author is named Habbard for Hubbocke, without direction indeed, but not
without providence, as being the ancient and rightful title of the family:
though he refuses neither.

Great Britains Resurrection.
O Thou mighty James, King of great Britane, France, and Ireland: whom GOD
has advanced so peaceably to so many united Kingdoms, upon so variable a
change, without any sensible alteration, to the admiration of all the world:
and seemed to have rooted thine estate, by blisfull and much royal issue: by
amity of Foreign Princes, by great love and loyalty of subjects: that it was
thought not able to be removed: (thou Lord of thy only goodness, Psalm. 30, 7.
had made his rock to stand so strong) and yet in one moment GOD hiding his
face, all had like to have been dissolved with one blast of powder, if the
same merciful God had not withhelde the breath of his wrath: Esa. 30.33.
which is a river of brimstone, to kindle this Topheth, a pit prepared of old,
a place deep and large, the burning thereof is fierce fire, and much wood: do
thou according to thy excellent and rare Princely learning and judgment
(whereof Kingdoms, Universities, 2, King. 10.28
and Foreign Ambassadors, are witnesses) with zeal as Iehu, root Baal out
of Israel by one act: open the window of the Parliament as Ioash his window,
at the counsel of Elizeus: 2. King 13. in the end.
Smite the Syrians not twice or thrice, but six times, until thou have utterly
consumed the^: bless thou the Lord with all princely offices of piety and
justice, more and more to the saving and comfort of all thy people. Psalm.
144.10.
Acknowledge that it is tree that gives deliverance to Kings, rescueth the
anointed his servant: praise him and magnify him for ever.

Anne, who have forsaken thine own Country and native soil, and come into
foreign parts to partake in all thy youth and beauty, the same lot with thy
Regal Lord: behold how when the daughter of England did homage unto thee, Psalm.
45.14.
with all the rich before thy face with presents: and thou wentest out in all
honor and singlenes of heart, to behold and rejoice in the solemnity of so
great an estate, which God had so miraculously cast into your lap without your
hands: when these unmerciful bouchers of Rome hardening their hearts, meant to
have buried thee in one grave with thy royal husband, or rather torn in
pieces: (I abhor to speak it) without all burial (which was afforded to Kings
daughters, though never so evil:) even then thy life was dear and precious in
the eyes of the Lord, 2. King 9.34.
and his tender care was over thee: do thou therefore bless the Lord, and
serve him more and more with one heart jointly, with this thy princely Lord and
husband: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O Thou most noble Prince Henry, the staff of Deuteronomy. 22.6.
and fruit, parent, and child in one day: to kill damme and young in one
nest: Exodus 23.9.
to extinguish present and future: as it were seething tender Kidds in mothers
milk, against Law of GOD and nature: Lam. 3.27.
Do thou still bear the yoke of the Lord in all steadines and stedfastnes as
most comfortably thou do to all our joy: in these first fruits of thy
days: Remember still thy Creator in the days of thy youth: Eccles. 12.^^
and never forget this Preserver in all the days of thine age: bless thou the
Lord, in all thy princely family, as holy and zealous young Josias, praise him
and magnify him for ever.

O Ye Honorable Counsailers, and Potentates, Psalm. 18.7.^. Psalm. 29.1.
at whose nostrills are kindled hailestones and coals of fire: but that the
Angel of the everlasting counsel did interpose himself) In the book of
public thanks: The K. 2. speech in Parliament. My L. of Salis. at the arraig^
and in his answer to the Pamphlet.
as you the Sons of the mighty, have given this glory to God: and do freely
confess that all this saving health was from him alone: that GOD did all as a
friend that does a pleasure, which his friend knows not, until he feel the
comfort of it, that it is done: (for notwithstanding the noble virtues and
vigilancie of Abner, and undoubted fidelity of all the Kings servants, 1. Sam.
26.16.
round about him, on the right hand and on the left, pot and spear had been
taken from the Kings head: Gal. 1.16. Pro. 20.18. Apoc. 4.10.
Arc and Scepter from us in one hour:) do you more and more consult with God
in this and all other deliberations, and not with flesh and blood: that his
statutes may be your Counsailours: That he may establish all your thoughts by
his counsel: long may you live in all grace and honor, according to your
great place and trust: do you as the 24. Elders, fall down, and throw down
your crowns, of wisdom, intelligence, policy, vigillancie, government,
before him that lives for ever: bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify
him for ever.

Apoc. 1.20.
as the Angels and Presidents of the seven Churches of England among us: the
grauities and presence of Superiors in the Church, have been regarded of the
profane and barbarous tyrants of the earth, and bloody Soldiers: Alexander
the great at the sight of Iaddus the high Priest, As Percie, understanding the
B. of Saint David's to be sick. 1. Pet 2, 25. Job. 21.16.
spared Jerusalem: and yet of these Sulphurous helhounds, you were more eagerly
sought after to the fire, and they rued if any of you should be away: do you
honor this Lord the great Bishop of our souls, with further care and love to
all the sheep and Lambs committed to your charge: And with all your power do
ye exalt the standard of his glorious Gospel, in all places of your
Co^missions: have in your fatherly wisdoms as much patience as you can to
your inferior brethren of the Ministry (notwithstanding some of their
intemperate exulcerations) for the common service of the Gospel sake: their
places and times cannot reach to the maturitie of experience, which your
wisdoms has attained: behold also, they are keen against an enemy: Phil.
3.15.16.
whom though difference have divided by names of discord, yet the enemy would
have made no difference of slaughter of you both: bear as you may with their
improuidencie, till God reveal further unto them: (which moderation time has
bred in many: and is not profiting in wisdom and judgment, a part of our
growing to the ripe age and stature of Jesus Christ;) that whereunto we are
come, we may proceed by one rule, even to mind one thing which is
necessary: Luke 10.42.
Do you stand in the gap in your pastoral and sage wisdoms and zeal, to
turn away the Lords wrath, which yet is not ceased: bless you the Lord,
praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Ye Nobles and Peers of the Realm, the pillars Esa. 2.12.13. Cant. 3.7.
was to be upon every thing that was exalted: upon all the Cedars of Lebanon:
upon all the Oaks of Bashan: and upon all the high mountains: and upon all
the hills that are lifted up: upon every high town, every strong wall, even
upon all the strong men that are about the bed of Solomon, all the valiant of
Israel, who handle the sword and are expert in war, and upon every one, that
has his sword upon his thigh for any fear: Esa. 2.12.13. Cantic, 3.7.
these, even your selves, the cruel instruments of Nabuchadnazzer of Rome,
would have consumed as the three renowned rulers of the Provinces, Dan. 3.19.21.
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, in one fiery Oven, heated to the seventh
degree, in your habites, Liuie dec. 1. l. 1. Senes triumphales co^sulates, qui
curules gesterant magistratus, ^t in fortunae pristinae honoru^. que aut
virtutis insignibus morere^tur, augustissima vest vestiti in medio aediu^ in
eburneis sellis sedere: Galli haud secus qua^ venerabundi intueba^tur sedentes
viros praeter ornatu^ que habitu^que humano augustiorem, maiestate etia^, qua^
vultus grauitasque oris pre se ferebat dijs fimillimos: ad eo ^^luti simul^chra
versi stabant, etc.
roabes, coats, and shoes, as they were, as the Scripture notes: and yet the
Infidel galls under Brennus, reverenced the faces and vestures of the Fathers
of the Senate in the capitol of heathen Rome: Behold the Lords great
deliverance over you: his holy Angels among you, so that no smell of fire upon
your garments, nor a hair of your heads singed: do you therefore and your
posterity, and all your retinue: Bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

O You grave Judges and Fathers of the Law, and Sages of the Land, whose doom
was so near without all course of judgment, and trial of Law: which you
afford to the meanest creature, and most grievous offender: do you put on
Justice as a roabe: Let equity be a covering as a Crown: break the power of
the oppressor, and let the innocent go free: that Justice may not be as
Wormwood, nor judgment as gall: but truth may run down as a mighty stream
every where: Do you bless the Lord, the chief Judge of the world, who has
delivered you from so great and sudden a judgment: Bless him, I say, in all
your Courts, in all your benches,

O You the learned and prudent Masters of the Psalm. 147.7.
the fowlers taken and your soul delivered: Do you tremble and serve this
great God, and King, and your Country, with all good care and sound conscience,
as before the Court of conscience in heaven in greater degrees: Fulmen petit
culmen. The thunder strikes the higher.
(for if his wrath had been kindled a little, what could great and high place
and presence do good:) behold the thunder smites the tallest tops? Do you
therefore fear this great GOD, break out into voices and vows of laud and
thanksgiving: bless you the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever.

O You worthy Knights and Burgesses, who represent Sir Th. Smith de Rep. Aug.
and were to be a short ransom for a small Interim with your bodies, for the
bodies of the Countries, who looked when their turn came to be devoured also:
As Ulysses of Polyphemus: when the rest were devoured before him. Heb. 12.29.
Be you faithful between them, who commit their welfare unto you and this
God: who though he be a consuming fire, and your house was as a burnt
sacrifice, Leuit. 6.9.
soking upon the fire almost to the last night: yet he has not burnt it, nor
touched our estate, as brittle and combustible as the fiery bush in the
Desert: Exodus 3.2.3.
but gloriously showed himself in the midst of you for your safety, as in the
vision to Moses. Wherefore put off your shoes as he did: lay aside all
earthly treadings awry in love of your selves, and your own pelf: Gal: 2.14.
go not with a splay foot to the Gospel of peace: and if indeed you seek
the Lord with all your hearts in the propagation of the Gospel, by a preaching
Ministry thorough the Land: as I am persuaded very many do: then stick not
some of you to return the impropriations in your own power back again to
the Church, as some honorably have done heretofore: H.E. of Hunt. Sir Fr. K.
M. Aldersey, etc.
and others offered to do the like in your very own house of Parliament: and
some with their money has purchased some of the^ to the Church: and were they
not the ancient patrimony of Christ? Did not Queen Mary in her dark days
and ways give example? See Acts of Parlia.
and by act of Parliament make restitution of the appropriations annexed to the
Crown? It well becomes the zealous this day, some to stand forth, as
Zaccheus after so long detinue: Luc. 19.9.
Seeing this day salvation is come unto their whole and particular houses, and
they become the sons of Abraham, Genesis 22.10.11
all of them as Isaac saved from the knife, by an angelical hand, to deliver
possession of the Lords inheritances: some to offer liberally, as Araunah the
Iebusite, did like a King, as is recorded to the shame of Christians: 2 Samuel
24.23.
Some as Nehemiah, Neh. 5.8.10.11
to depart from their own for some time to redeem the Churches portion back
again, as he and his servants did forbear the purchasing of lands for
themselves, to supply public wants: Others not stick to abolish diminutiue
rates, and unequal disproportionate compositions, whereof peradventure many
have stolen upon the Church: and to reduce the tithes to their primitive
vncorrupt kind, or among you to take some effectual way in the variety of
your high and exercised wisdoms, for a liberal maintenance of a preaching
Ministry (without which the discourses of it, are clouds and claps of
thunder, without the sweet dewes and drops of early and later rain:) and
indeed a rich sacrifice of those sorts upon this return of you all, from the
gulf of such a death, would be an undeniable constat of your zeal and piety
to all posterities, and an acceptable performance of a holy vow to him, who
has spared you all, and taken nothing from you. And so in the name of God go
on with all your courage, zeal, obedience, and fidelity to GOD and man:
bless you the Lord, praise him, and magnify him* for ever.

O Ye eloquent and skillful Sergeants, and Counsailours Ose. 4.8. Ier. 5.27.2^.
it must needs be live of the sins of the people: as a cage is full of birds,
so are their chambers full of deceit. Thereby they are become great, and waxen
rich: they are waxen fat and shining, and though they do not justly, yet they
prosper: whose heat of contention to multiply strifes and Clyents: pluralities
and totquots of Cases and Causes: that it seems to resemble the troublesome
knots of the old Popish schoolmen, to make things more pletted, perplexed,
and intricate: and yet thereby they heap up money and fees, which delivers
not in the day of wrath, but inkindleth it rather: now that you are all
delivered from destruction, which was so near unto you also in the very tents
and pitched fields of your variance, ^ob. 29.16.
and in that place, that is witness of all your integrity: whether you sought
out the cause diligently as holy Job did, Pro.
to buy the truth, and sell it not; or otherwise of your untrustiness: wrest
not the Law: accustom not to speak against your conscience: Romans 7.12.14
take heed it be not said of some of you: as in another sense: the Law is
holy, and just, and good, but I am sold under sin: even every one that so
often plead at so many bars: remember this great bar and tribunal seat
to which you were to come, not so prepared, as else you would: extol this
mighty GOD of your deliverance: let godliness be your chiefest gain, and the
right and peace your greatest joy: 1. Tim. 6.6.
bless you the Lord in all your takings and speakings: endightings and
counsailings: complainings and defendings: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

that assemble to hear, and observe the experience and maturitie of the
ancient, and to furnish your selves for future time: who had like to have
been oppressed in your minorities, and in the very great hall and common
school of your practice, and at the feet of them that teach you: but that the
Lord protested for sinful England as for great Niniuie: to save six score
thousand alive, that knew not the right hand from the left; ^onas, 4, 11. Esa,
65, 8.
to preserve you as a cluster of Grapes, hopeful of wine: of which one says,
destroy it not: there is a blessing in it: Do you therefore laud this Lord, who
is your God from your youth, and let him be your God unto your age: bless you
the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Ye Suitors and Clients, and Sollicitors of the Gal. 5, 15.
to eat up one another: and travail far, and often to consume your times and
families: Psalm. 120.4.
and blow the coals of Juniper upon one another, facing and defacing your
selves mutually to maintain these fires: behold the day of the Lord upon you:
like Plaintiff, like Defendant: like giver, like taker: like Clients like
pleader: Esa. 24.^.
one Beasom of destruction to sweep away all that hunt their brethren with a
net, and lay snares to catch men: but that God is more patient to us all, Ier.
5.16.
then we are to one another: who did suddenly blow the retreat from this
great slaughter: else a man of you had not been left alive: therefore fear
this Lord, the God of peace, and love, and comfort: Phil. 4.5.
let your placabilitie be known unto all men: the Lord is at hand: bless
thou the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Ephesians. 6.5.6. 1. Cor. 7.23.
let it not be in eye service, but in singlenes of heart: you are bought with a
price, hereafter be servants not only of men, but of this God; who has
delivered you from this common lot of misery: bless I say, and curse not:
deliver your selves from the common condemnation: fashion not your selves
according to the world, in the prophanenes of too many Seruitors, Romans 12.2.
mispending time and life: forgetting God and religion: remember the judgment
of old: not a servant of Noah or Lot, saved in the watrish and fiery
destruction of their times, Genesis 7.23. and 19.20.
and yet you preserved at this time: therefore bless you the Lord your
preserver, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Westminster, with all the confines and skirts of the liberties thereof, or in
any reach, whether this whirlewinde of Gods wrath should have reached by land
or by water: Behold you also were the children of death: Job. 1.19,
and your houses appointed to desolation, as the houses of Jobs children: by a
strong wind, on a sudden: even peradventure whilst you were eating and
drinking, and taking money: Exodus 33.8.
therefore rise up in your degrees, and worship as the Israelites, every man at
his tent door: bless you also the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O All you open and secret Papists and Catholics Achab at the Court gates of
King Iehu: 2. King. 10 7*9 2. Sam. 3, 28.
it was clear who had done it: David and his Kingdom had been guiltless
before the Lord for ever: your brethren and fellows had done it: acknowledge
them the scholars of Pope Hildebrand, who when Henry the third the Emperor,
used to pray in S. Mary's Church in mount Auentine, hired one to lay great
stones on the beams to let them fall on the Emperors head, which he hasting
to accomplish, a huge stone drew him down, and crushed himself to pieces. They
also would have caused you to have passed through the fire, as a sacrifice to
Moloch: 2. King. 23.10. ^enno card. in vit.
and have used you as Moabites. They would have made you their martyrs, before
your time: you should have been lickt up in the common flame: Come you
therefore out of Babylon; Lo how she rewards her children, like the harlot
mother, 2. Cor. 6.17. 1. King. 3 19.
who in Salomons days ouer-laid her own child to death, and yet would have
the live children of the true and natural mother in her keeping. Touch no
unclean thing: do you try the spirits hereby, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
and judge them to be ravening Woolfes: Math. 7.15.
know them by these ripe fruits of red and scarlet sins, of horrible, and
unnatural, and universal murder: and join with us now at last in the
sincere profession of Gods word alone, which God has defended in your eyes,
and experience, so often of old, and now freshly: do you now come out of the
fire with fear, and make a perfect vow as Naaman, Iud. ver. 27.
to offer to no other God, and to bless the Lord God of the Protestants; even
the God of Paul, 2. King. 5.17. Act 27, 37.
for whose sake God spared two hundred seventy and six in the same ship, to
praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Math: 24, 2. P^al. 137, 7. Leuit. 14.45.
Crying down with it, down with it, even to the ground: abhorring not the men
only, but the place also as a leaporous house, and vowing to make it waste as
a wilderness: do you consider, and be not inanimate and altogether mute, Rom:
8.19, 20.
but as the creature that lifts up his head for the day of redemption,
spirited with a feeling of your preserver: that they which visit your
monuments, and come to see your ornaments; may go about you, Psalm. 48.12.
as of old about Syon, and tell her Towers, mark well her bulwarks, and
consider her walls: and see not a stone moved, Psalm. 102.14. Psalm. 7.
or a piece of timber shaken: GOD has taken pleasure in the stones of your
foundations, and has had pity on the dust thereof: as for your enemies he
has trod down their life in the earth, and laid their honor in the dust. Do
you stand and continue to tell posterity, as a steadfast and speaking pillar to
admonish the members of that body, all that come under your roof hereafter,
there to intend him only that delivered them: Esa. 10 1, 2, 3.
and not to tempt this jealous God by any sinister decree: whose wrath had like
to have vomited us up, a luke warm nation, Apoc. 3, 15, 16. Math: 3, 12. Zeph.
2.2.
neither hot nor cold out of his mouth: and who had his fan in his hand, to
have burnt us up a people not worthy to be beloved, as chafe in one day: so
that all may with tears and fears, accusing and judging our selves, get us to
our God right humbly: and learn here above all places, especially of estate,
with voices, suffrages, and decrees of holiness and justice, to bless this
Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Ye ancient monuments and Tombs of the have had your parts rend up with
this blast, as malefactors in a new execution: and dislodged out of your
honorable houses of rest: your corpse disturbed, and your ashes scattered by
this Plutoes and hellish confusion of Babell, and terrible earthquake ploughing
up all before them, and making furrows in the hard rocks: do you therefore
lift up your heads, Math 27.52.53
and rise up as the bodies of the righteous out of the dust, at the death of
Christ: and bless this Lord, who lets you rest the rest of your time, even
a little time, Apoc. 6.11:
expecting a joyful and speedy resurrection with all the Saints of God, and
all your people succeeding you together, to praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

2. Pet. 3.10.
and heaven it self vanishes as a scrowle: and the works of the earth are to
be burnt with fire: do you flourish and revive out of your places, not to be
intanglements and encumbrances, or tedious tarriers, with dilatorie pleas,
respiting the cause, or respecting the face of any: that all men that have to
do with you, may more bless God that loves peace and equity, and is a God
of order, 1. Cor. 14.33.
and not of confusion, that there remains evidence of truth, and that the land
marks are not removed, as the Devil would have had it: Deuteronomy 27.17.
and therefore be the more inflamed, in all honest and true dealing to praise
God, and magnify him for ever.

O You Chariots of the mighty, and Coaches, Iud. 5.10.
together with the white Steeds and Palfreyes, 2 King. 9.2^. Psalm. 33.17.
that run as the horses of Iehu: who had perished in the same deluge of
fiery destruction: or been stoned or pressed to death with your masters and
owners. A horse had been a vain thing to save a man: the glory of outlandish
Coursers: the neighings of horses, and the pride of the rattling of the wheel
had vanished: do you who as creatures, are subject to vanity, Romans 8.19.20.
until the revelation of the sons of God be; and your deliverance from the
bondage of corruption: acknowledge in your degrees, that the judgment of the
Lord is like a great deep: he saves man and beast: Let man and beast
therefore, Psalm. 36.6.
bless this Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Thou glorious and triple Court of great Britain, bravery, if this plot
had taken effect: do you all learn to love the Courts of the Lords house,
counting one day better spent there, Psalm. 84.10.
then any in the tabernacles and chambers of ungodliness: wish there rather to
peep in at the door, then otherwise to have free ingresse into the privy
chambers of Princes: Alas, what could the bed chambers, the withdrawing
chambers, and privy chambers of Princes have auailed you: 1. King. 22.25 Ier.
9.21.22.
when you should have run from chamber to chamber, to hide you your selves:
and yet no chamber could have hid you, when the foundations of the earth had
been discovered: when as no bar could have shut out destruction: death would
have scaled every wall, and climde in at every window: Isa. 28.17.18.19.20.
Judgment had been laid to the rule, and righteousness to the balance: this
thick hail, pel mel would have swept away every vain confidence, and this
breaking in of a fiery sea, had ouerflowed the secret places: every covenant
with death should have been disanulled: the agreement with hell could not
stand: this scourge should have run over, and have passed thorough: all
should have been trod down by it: when it passed over, it should have taken
you away: and it should have passed every morning, and in the day, and in the
night: and there should have been only fear, as Esaias speaks: every bed
should have been too strait, that it could not suffice, and every covering
too narrow, that none could wrap himself, but that this mantell of woe had
infolded every one: do you therefore fear and tremble, and worship with holy
worship, this GOD, that has made fast the bars of these gates: and blessed
all within them from this curse so near unto you: Psalm. 147.13.14.
let there be a new heaven and a new earth among you: Esa 65.17. and 66.22.
Apoc. 21 1.2.
make a solemn vow to have clean hands hereafter, and to banish so dear
corruption from the regal palace, especially in Church matters: be free
spirited: embrace ingenuitie and plainenes: abandon shifts, gloses, and
flattery: 1. These. 4.6. Psalm. 15.2.
(for the Lord is the auenger of these things:) Speak the truth every man
from his heart: pity the attendance of suitors with speedy dispatch: that
remedies be not worse then diseases: (for a lingering sickness is worse then a
timely death:) finally, promote Gods glory, not your own ambition, with all
your means and access: make not sad the heart of the righteous; Ezech. 13.22.
Psalm. 16.3.
but give grace and honor to the Saints, and them that excel in virtue: so
bless you this Lord, as you look for his blessing, and fear his curse: praise
him, and magnify him for ever.

O Thou famous City of London, of old called Augusta, and Emperesse of the
land, Holinshed. pa. 104. and 247. e^* Polid. and pa. 731
and chamber of the Kings and Queens of England, the head and mother of the
Cities of the land: the nurserie of religion and fidelity: the storehouse of
the good Subjects: and the nest of the wealth of the realm: and therefore the
more maligned of the Enemy, whose elders are as Barrons and Chapmen, Esa. 23.8.
the nobles of the earth, whose peace they so much envied, whose strength and
loyalty they feared: whose wealth the fingers of many insatiable cormorants,
itched to be meddling with: intending no doubt all merciless rapine, dishonor,
and villainies, not to be named, toward thee. How should thy hidden and secret
hours have been sought out, Ob^d. ^.6.
and thy treasures searched at full* Remember what Goteham a Priest, and
predecessor of these imagined against thee: Simonides in Tullie. 2. de orat.
cum obtritos humare vellent neque possent inter noscere: ex eo quod meminisset
quo ^o^u^ loco quisque cubuisset, demo^strator vniuscuiusque sepeliendi fuit.
Simonides when as some would have buried the^ that were ouerlaide in the dust
upon the fall of a house, and could not discern them: thereby that he had
remembered in what place every man sat: he was able to give direction for the
burial of every one in his degree.
did he not toward his death wish fire and brimstone upon thee from heaven,
which these were setting from hell? thou should have been (if not sacked)
yet so cumbred with fears and fresh incounters at home, and news of
slaughters abroad, wars and rumors of wars, that thou could scarce
seek out the bodies of the dead to gather the Princes and Nobles out of the
dust and rubbish: do thou betime repent of thy prodigality, deliciousnes, and
wantonness, thy covetousness, and hypocrisy, and every other sin: pray for
sound judgment, to discern true and wholesome doctrine: and beware of
humors: learn to honor with a perfect heart, with all thy peace, plenty, and
strength, this Lord that keeps thee (the only watchman of the City: whose
eye never winketh nor is weary, for he that keeps Israel, neither slumbreth
nor sleeps) bless thou the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Thou famous Cittadle, the royal Castle of the Tower of London, the first
footing of Coronation of the Kings and Queens of this land, and the possession
taking, and earnest of the rest of the Dominions and an enemy to their
enemies: a vowed companion, and comfortable neighbor to the honorable City
of London, the sinews and joints of our warlike provision, and commander of
peace: the fear of the rebellious: the aim of the enemies eye: the
expectation and care of all true subjects: how should thou have been used
sore against thy will against thy dearest friends? the mischievous designs
against thee, the most wise, prudent, Sir. W. Wade.
and religious Governor within thee: The industrious and vigilant officers and
attendants there: (whose surprising they devoured in their first hopes) he
knows best who is thy Fort and Tower: Pro. 18.10. Psalm. 61.3. Psalm. 31.2.3.
Psalm. 63.19.
whose name is a strong Tower, and delivered us before our dead hearts could
run unto him: who brought the pray unto thy lap, and took captivity
captive, and gave them into thy custody: Be thou like the Tower of David, as
it were the ^eck o estate, built for defense with all thy thousand shields, and
all the targets of the strong me^ that hang therein: the Tower of Lebanon that
looks to Damasoo*
do thou and all thy Ministers instruments store and furniture with triumphs
and trophes, with voties and peales of joy and thanksgiving, bless this great
Lord thy keeper, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Ye Towns and Countries, who tasted of the headless skirmishes, and
suddainnes of the brutish fury of these enemies of Sion, and the haters of the
peace of Jerusalem, the very same fatal time by their desperate insurrection
among you, above all other shires and places: do you (I say) as sons Warwick
sh. Worcester sh. Stafford shire. Ezech 16.6.
unto whom the Lord said, in your blood line: you saw the enemy, but felt no
harm: their letter prophesied safety in the Country, but against their wills:
do you therefore bless this great God, that blesses you the more for Balaams
cursing; Ios. ^4.10. Grant, Percie, Gates by, and the ^. Wrights, Tressam,
Gar^^ts man. Oue^.
who scattered their forces, diminished their power: and so quickly quelled
them in causing their own power to brand them in the faces, and all their
purposes to be defeated without any great pursuit, and some of them to perish
in the very act of their own sin; some to languish with grief, others to
kill themselves: and all their mischief to return upon their own heads:
bless you again and again this Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Israel, and feeders of the sheep of the Lords pasture; Apoc. 9.3.
whom these smoakie locusts of the bottomless pit, these ravenous Wolfes
greedy of the prey, most abhorred: to place their own Baals Priests, and all
the sacrificers of the Groves and hill-altars in your rooms, and so to devour
the Lords inheritance: your safety and ministration they envied; your families
they vowed to shame and misery: Apoc. 15.3.
your persons to certain and more cruel destruction above others, by a
special marshal at arms, appointed utterly to extirpate you: Let your Harp be
in your hand, and Psalms of Moses and David, and the lamb in your mouths:
rejoice over her all you Prophets and Apostles: Apoc. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 33.8.
for God has done your judgment on her: Let Vrim and Thummim be for ever with
you: Exodus 32.27.
gird the sword of the spirit about you, to destroy all spiritual and
corporal Idolatry: think it not now a time to strive for complements, and to
enforce odious exasperations, and antichristian comparisons against the
reverend Fathers, when as you lee your souls and their souls, and the soul
of religion it self is sought after: making less of your lives, then of the
least of their ceremonies, Romans 8, 30.
having as little conscience to kill you all, as to slay a sheep: behold the
scope of Divinity is a large field, Christ crucified is a spacious argument;
urge that, and walk in that, and forbear other impertinents: See you not that
the resolution of our state hates Antichrist, with a perfect hatred, this 48.
years, and is therefore hated vnreconcilably, as being in it self the most
Euangelical monarchy in the world, and a sanctuary of refuge for all the
professors in the earth under her shadow: let this whet your courages, and
set an edge on your zeal; and teach you spiritual discretion, to go with one
shoulder to ruinate Babel, and not be divided in your selves in your several
stations: Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently: ^er. 49 10.
Let your voices and spirits declare in all the congregations, that the Lord
himself is a Champion for the house of Aaron: Psalm. 115.10.
a defender of the tribe of Leui: and that he holds all the stars of all
our Churches in his own righthand: and that his mercy to that function
endures for ever: Celebrate you the Lord of the harvest, so benign and
gracious unto you: and remember him that said, Luke
Occupy till I come* and so much the more, because the enemy is so busy: Let
the house of Aaron then, and all the tribe of Leni, bless this Lord, their
special Lord and Master, and patron: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Isaac also, but as Abraham also, even the father and children, Apoc. 13.
and the very servants at the foot of the hill: how would not Rome have bragged
over you as a Lady and Conqueresse: who shall not fear the beast, and worship
his image, or take his mark in his forehead or right hand: But the Lord caused
the knife to stay, that was so near the throat, and made the Ram that pushed
at you, to be taken in the thicket of his own devises: Math. 10.16.
and to be a ransom for the innocent Lambs of his flock: be wise hereafter, as
serpents, think not they have done. Beware the dog that barketh not: who
said, they shall not know, N^h* 4.11*
nor see until we come into the midst of them, and slay them: do you bless
and honor this God of your life and belief: adorn his glorious Gospel in
your selves and families so much the more: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

2. King: 10.27
favors and honors above others, Manors, and demeanes, and children, and
call the lands and houses by your names: that have ships and shops, and
storehouses, and warehouses, Psalm. 17.14.^.49, 11. Luke 12, 20.
and wealth laid up for many years: Lo in one moment your soul gone, and
whose should all these have been? how quickly should all have been turned,
returned, and ouerturned, Ezech. 25.27.
in an hour therefore let thy teach you not to trust in uncertain riches, but
in the living God: to treasure up religion, 1. Tim: 6, 17. Math. 6, 17.
not pelf: to confess all to be transitory: learn hence the contempt of
the world: Luke 21.34
and to be provided, that the day of the Lord come not as a snare upon you:
Luke 16.9.
make friends of unrighteous Ma^^^^ in this life, that you may be received into
better tabernacles: yield it to be true, the world passes, 1, Pet. 1.23.24.25.
and the iolity thereof, and all flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof is
as the flower of the field: only the word of God, and them that are begotten
by it, 1. Ioh. 2, 17.
abide for ever: do you therefore he reafter in all your graces and places,
countenance, and maintenance, wealth and store, for this so great patience
toward you: bless this Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Ye that take pleasure in pleasure, (though to Gods displeasure) and in your
own voluptuousnes, greater honor and pleasure for the creature to be joined
with the Creator, who is bless for ever. Learn in all your pleasures and
contentments, to remember this Lord, who speaks suddenly of a parliament,
Ier. 18.7.
a kingdom, a nation, a city, a town, a family, a man, a woman to pluck up,
to root out, to destroy, as suddenly as the Potter dasheth in pieces, Prou.
1, 25. Romans 2.4.5.
a vessel of clay: despise not counsel: refuse not instruction: neglect not
the riches of Gods bountifulnes, and long suffering, which loves not to take
you tardie, and at advantage, to undo you in the Act of your sins, 2, Pet.
3.9.
but leads you to repentance: harden not therefore your hearts, nor heap not
up wrath against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the just judgment of
God, who will reward every one according to his works, put not off from day to
day: for you know not how, nor when, nor by what means he comes: and when he
comes, he comes as a whirle-winde, and laugheth at the destruction of the
ungodly: Pro. 1, 26, 27.
Be sober therefore and watch: bless you the Lord, praise him, and magnify
him for ever.

Psalm. 58.1.
know that there is a God that judges the earth: and has means to deliver
his from temptation in the very flames, as he did Lot in Sodom: 2. Pet. 2.9.
that the wicked shall not have their wills on them, nor one of their bones be
broken: and that the stones are at league with them; Psalm. 34.20. Job. 5, 2, 3.
Psalm. 11.6.7.
but upon the ungodly he reigns snares, fire, and brimstone, storms, and
tempests, as thick as hail, this shall be their portion: even hence learn to
bend your selves to some lawful calling, and be content with your estate, and
thereby to bless the Lord: Luke 3, 14.
praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O You hard hearted Papists, and indurate hypocrites, 1, Tim. 4.2.
whose consciences are seated with hot irons, to make the commandment of God
of none effect, whereas he strictly forbad murder: to establish your own
traditions, which you call the catholic religion, you spare no blood: where
are your brags of ^8? of the late Queens death of happy memory, and of this
infernal tragedy? where are your hallowed altars to be erected in Paul's?
Their words and confessions.
the threatenings against our bibles? promising of marriages to your friends, and
sharing offices and honors as you would? Where are your seven Psalms to pray
for prosperity, when that crack should have been? your letters exhortatory,
praying until that fatal Tuesday: then totnam to be turnde French? Apoc. 16,
5.14, 18.
your public prayers beyond seas in general, for success to the catholic
parliament, petition of blood? Shall not the angel of the fire protest against
you? Lord thou art just, which art, which wast, and is holy, because thou have
judged these things: for they shed the blood of the Saints, and Prophets (and
had still an insatiable dropsy upon them, thirsting after more) and therefore
have thou given them blood to drink: for they are worthy: and another Angel
answer by alternation: even so Lord God almighty, true and righteous are thy
judgments: Be still once at length, take Gamaliels wholesome counsel: be no
more fighters against God: Act. 5, 38.
consider whether this counsel be of God: Act. 9, 5.
take Christ's own counsel: Kick not against the prick: Remember S. Peter's
words: Let none suffer as a murderer, testify and bear witness against us:
you mislike our parliament and proceeding, and what a manner of one should
yours have been: should not your parliament have been as a mighty strong
wind rending mountains, and tearing rocks, or as a fearful earthquake or
flaming fire: and yet the Lord not with you: though you bragged as Rabsakeh:
are we come up without the Lord, who has conducted us, 1, King, 19, 11.
and concurred with us to this very place to destroy it? 2, King. 58, 25. 1,
Pet. 4, 15.
yea the Lord said unto us: Go up against this parliament, and destroy the
land: whereas our parliaments have been in a still voice unto you only to
have you still: without any disposition to disquiet you* without that very
necessity of our lives (God pardon us for it) by some new ouert action, and
restless practice of yours, drive us to make law afterlaw, which yet were
slackly executed by us: See O you seduced souls: is this their alms, prayers,
hospitality, fasting, good works: who persecuteth now? who is the Lamb, and
who the Wolf? the old proverb shall cease: Punica fides: and Papistica fides
shall come in place: Carthage of old was: now Rome is broke forth: Is this
your petition, catholic? Is not this tolere, non tolerare: not toleration of
religion, but killing of the men: See Gods hand against you, be still at
length, and know that the blood thirsty shall not live out half their days:
Psalm.
open your eyes to see the mysteries of Antichrist fulfilled, and sore plagues
in these days poured upon them that worship the beast; Apoc. 16.2.
lay it to your hearts: how as Pharaoh he oppresses you with sore work to
undo you and yours, how many families of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen, he has made desolate, making some of them pioners, and laboring
men in story and clay: forsake him by so many warnings, so many of you as
belong to the Lord* as for the rest, he that is ignorant, let him be ignorant
still: he that is obstinate, Apoc. 22.11. 1, Cor. 14, 3^.
let him be obstinate still: fulfill the measure of your condemnation: let your
profession be a snare, a net, Romans 2^, 8*
and a stumbling block, for a recompense unto you: let their eyes be darkened,
and bow down their backs always* If our Gospel be hid, 2, Cor. 4.3.
it is hid unto them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded
their eyes, least the light of the glorious Gospel, which is the Image of God,
should shine unto them: and yet know, Exodus 14, 17. Psalm. 110.2.
that God who got honor of Pharao and all his host, who has foiled you so
often, will reign in the midst of his enemies: Esa. 1, 24.
he will ease himself of his adversaries, and be avenged of them that hate him
the will be exalted in justice over you, and sanctified in judgment, even
Abimelech shall confess that God is with Isaac, Genesis 26.27. Psalm, 58.11.
whom he before drive a way: yea the nations shall say: there is a fruit for the
righteous, and a God that judges the world: Esa, 6, 3:
the whole earth shall be filled with his glory, he will be blessed, and
praised, and magnified forever.

Sion: Joel. 2, 15, 16.
gather the elders, assemble the children and sucklings: let the Bridegroom
come forth of his chamber, and the Bride out of her closet: and see the work
of the Lord, how he has delivered you from ransacking, rifeling, and miserable
impouerishment, and destruction. Behold, was not the Angel come out of the
temple of heaven already with a sharp sickle: Apoc. 14, 17.
and had not the other Angel, that had power over the fire, called unto him
with a loud cry, though we as deaf Adders heard it not: thrust in the sharp
sickle, and gather the clusters of the Vineyards, of great Britain (for her
grapes are ripe, that they may be cast into the great winepresse of the wrath
of God, to be trodden in every Town, Hamlet, and City:) but that the Lord
repented him, and yet we do not repent us: Seek you the Lord therefore, in
all your labors, trades, grounds, fields, cattle, callings, and degrees:
preserve Gods fear: promote his glory: confess him to be a Father to the
fatherless, husband to the widdowe, and a deliverer of the simple and
harmless of the earth: Job. 1.5.
and set your selves henceforth (as Job, in his family, so you in yours) to
offer sacrifices of prayers and psalms to the Lord, according to the number of
you all, least there be sin found in your trades and dealings: some sins of
lying, cousoning, swearing, false measures, or weights: or some corruption of
vice in you, or your children, and servants: as fatherly Job suspected and
feared his own house: pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers
into his harvest: pray and pay duly, Math. 9, 3^.
that God may have his right, and bless you the Lord every way, praise him,
and magnify him for ever.

O Thou entire and whole Court of Parliament, Lectis^ernium institiae: caput
publici consilij.

The spread bed of Justice: and head of public counsel. Psalm. 101.1.


the open theater of all our actions: the Senate house of grand estate: the
chiefest counsel of imperial law: and the sanctuary of highest appeal, and
decision among subjects: the marrowe of wisdom, and crystal confluence of
clergy, nobility, and gentry: the center of understanding, and riches of
experience from all sides: sing for ever a song of judgment and mercy unto our
God, as one man together: they intended no place in the first place, but this
place of Parliament: no persons but Parliament men to destruction: in other
judgments, as plague, famine, war, the meaner sort oftener go to wrack, but
here they shot at the fairest flock together: Luk 13, 1.
As Pilat mingled blood and sacrifices together, so they (O horrible
indignity) meant to mingle blood and dust together, and to make mortar of the
choicest blood in our land, Apoc. 8.8.
to build their Babell with. Babylon I say, meant to make that worthy house as
the mountain set on fire and tumbled into the sea, like an Ae^^a spit-fire,
Ezech. 24.3.4.
flaming gobbets of fire upon her own friends and children: to make it as a
pot, as Ezechiel speaks: having cut you as flesh to the pot, to sees every
good morsel therein: to make that reverend place, a very shambles, Josephus.
having got, as Herod all the nobles of Jury into one Amphetheater, to run
and stream with the finest and purest blood: Ezech. 22.19.
to make it as a melting house, as the same Prophet threatens: to new found
our Church and Commonwealth: to make our Princes and noblemen of Sion, Lam.
4, 2.
who wear fine gold, to be esteemed as earthen potshards: the founder and
metal men of Rome, esteemed you all no better then lead, iron, and brass: and
put you all in one furnace: ye the Lord himself seemed to have barrelled up
wrath against you, Ezech. 22:19.
as they had barrelled powder: as though he had directed them to begin at no
place but there first, Ezech. 9, 6.
as he said once, begin at my sanctuary, and at my ancient men which were
before the house; so here begin at my parliament: as though the Lord meant to
make that grave place, like Kibrah-Hattanah, Psalm. 78.31: Number. 11, 34.
the graves of lust: that whilst the word was yet in your mouths, the wrath of
God to come upon them: to slay the strongest of them, to smite down the chosen
men in Israel, as though the Lord had appointed a sacrifice in the place, and a
great slaughter, Esa, 34, 5, 6, 7.
as in Bozra of old: the earth to be drunken with blood, and the dust to be
made fat: even a sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, Ezech. 39.17, 18
with many dishes of the blood of the valiant, and blood of the great ones:
like the Lords great supper in the Revelation, Apoc. 19, 17, 18
for all the birds to come unto it: but the Lord has spared his own people,
and poured out the blood of our enemies, and lifted up their carcasses for
every bird to peck on: and behold, you all are as a brand not touched by the
fire: Ezech. 39.^. Zach. 3.2.
He threatened to take up huge and mighty stones, but would not let one of them
be cast at you: he laid fuel, but would not let it kindle: He filled the pot,
but would not let it seethe, nor any morsel be divided to put within it: He
brought the sacrifice to the horns of the altar, but would not slay it: but
gave your enemies into your hand: And in the same place divided their heads and
quarters, where they meant to have rend in pieces yours: GOD has scattered the
bones of them that besieged thee: Iud. 7, 25. Apoc. 3.9.
he has slain Orob and Zeb in their own rock and wine press: and herein
is the Scripture fulfilled: I will make thy enemies come to worship before
thee, Psalm. 33.5.
and they shall know that I love thee: take full warning at such a caveat, as
one body, why the Lord seemed to come to your pauilion, and why he knocked at
your door: And in particular, let every soul among you look to the reckoning
that GOD has with you: 3, Sam. 7, 9. 2, Sam. 6, 12:
cast about as David with Nathan concerning the temple: And at another time in
the imperial assembly for reducing the Arc, when something had been
forgotten before: follow on and proceed with the Lord, In the letter.
that they may be Prophets against themselves: God and man by your concurrence
to punish the wickedness of this time: (and what wickedness has any age or
chronicle observed greater?) that they may receive a blow in parliament in
deed, and yet no stirring before hand on our part: Apoc. 2, 20.
and that they may see none hurt them, but themselves: Consider that these are
no^t old, outworne, and ouergrowne Papists: but bred in our time, and under
our improuidence (God impute it not unto us) take full order that Iesabel be
permitted to teach and seduce no more: deal faithfully between GOD and his
people, least a worse thing come unto us: behold God provoke you on pain of
your lives: the Country reposeth trust in you, the Churches depend on you: and
the eyes of all the world are upon you, to see the fruit of your wisdom in
thorough orders for your own safeties and Gods glory: else we shall be as a
reproach among all nations, and as a ship of fools in a calm sea and sound
bark, and no enemy to board us, to miscarie in the haven, by not providing
for a tempest aforehand, with this inscription over us: Thy destruction is of
thy self, O England. Be this spoken to no dishonor of so grave a Senate, that
has made so worthy proceedings already: but to stir up all to pray* that
God may enspire effectually, that neither friend may miss any comfort, nor
enemy have hope, or cause to joy: Surely GOD that offered to make a great
nation of one Moses, Exodus 32.10.
is able to raise up parliament men of stones: and indeed did not the beams,
and timber, Abac. 2.11.
and stones of the parliament threaten wrath: Seek therefore the Lord with a
perfect heart, set up a Pyramid to thy God, and a pillar of memory as Abraham
did: That God has been seen on your mount: Genesis ^2.14.
erect a new monument where they would have destroyed all the old monuments:
as Nebuchadnezar, make and publish general decrees, make the signs known
abroad, that the high God has done unto thee, Dan. 3.32.
that there is no other God that can deliver ye, as our God: as the dedication
of a special holy day for this purpose declares already: have war with
Amalech for ever, remember the Lords charge: forget not: forget not. Deuteronomy.
25.19. Apoc. 18.6.
And as another scripture directs: Reward Babylon double into her bosom:
remember him that says: Take us the little Foxes. And again: Cant. 2.15.
Psalm. 137.8.
Blessed shall he be that takes the children of Babylon and dasheth them
against the stones: take order that all flesh in all our dominions, Luke 3.6.
by the preaching of his word, may see the salvation of this God: that children
unborn may seek the God of their Fathers, and all of us in your behalfes, for
so wise, zealous, and provident Counsel, Psalm.
as the oracle of God, may bless the Lord God, praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

O Thou whole Kingdom of England, thou careless Laish, now this eight and
forty years: Judge. 1^.7. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 3.
when thou saidest within thy self, Peace, peace, strength, strength, amity,
amity, unity, unity, lenity, lenity: Lo a snare as sudden as the travel
of a woman: the Lord came against thee: the true God stole upon thee as a
thief: loss of children and widowhood, should have come upon thee in one day:
Apoc. 16, 15.
the portion of Babel in her perfection: the morning thereof thou should not
have known: Apoc. 18.8. Esa. 47.9. In the Q. declaration. 1662 Apoc. 14.
thou wast as near to hauock, as thy sister of France, on the other side of
the water: upon whom came an inundation of blood, as it were to the horses
bridles, to destroy an hundredth thousand at one time: the walls and roof of
Dagon fell down upon Philistines 3000: Iud. 16.27.
1, King. 20.30.
the buildings of four whole Cities of Sodom oppressed their owners: one wall
falls upon 27000. of Syrians: Ierichoes walls come tumbling down: but
Englands are spared. Thou art let go as a escape got, or living sparrow, Leuit.
14.52.53.
from the death in hand: thou have not lost not one man in all thy Tribes: do
thou therefore exalt, Psalm. 144.14.
set up, and bless this thy God that loves thee dearly: by prolonging thy
peace in thy borders, and preventing this crying and complaining in thy
streets: else had thou been, yea and shall be a woeful spectacle of
misery, and an incomparable example of calamity to all the world: should not
thy times have been as in the days of Noah? some taken eating, some drinking,
some in marrying: and knew nothing till the flood of vengeance came? as in the
days of Lot: some building, some planting, some buying, some selling, and the
fire disturbed all their works? Math. 24.58.61. ver. 40.16.17.18. Luk: 17, 28.
as in the day of Jerusalem: some taken flying: of two in the field one hit,
the other scaping* some in the house, not suffered to come down: others abroad
not suffered to set any thing out of the house* some taken in the Inn as
Moses: some near the gardens, Exodus 4, 25. Number. 22.24. Number. 25.14. Iud. 9.
as Balaam: some in the tents of whoring, as Zimri and Cost: some as Abimelech,
having come near the door to have his brain broken with a stone: some taken
lying in receiving bribes as Gehezi: 2. King. 5.26. Act. 5. Dan. 4.52.
some robbing the Church, as Ananias and Zaphira: some walking in the Tarasses
as Nebuchadnezar: some drinking with co^cubines, as Baltazar, etc. Lord how
many hearts had been discovered? how many hypocrites dismaked? faint and
frail men laid open: some weak would have proved strong? some strong, would
have proved weak: the reputed faithful, might have been unfaithful: the
trusty, might have become treacherous: men taken to be quiet, might have been
outrageous: many that make fair weather, would have been glad of this storm:
they that seem content with their own, would have taken part in the common
spoil: how many private quarrels would have been revenged under public
visors? how many that seem Protestants, would have appeared Papists how many
wise would have proved foolish; and at their wits end? how would the base have
presumed against the honorable: Esa. 3.5. Amos, 3, 11.
the young against the aged: who could have been sure of life or goods, or
wife, or child, one hour? what house not rifled? what virgin not ravished?
what wife not defloured? every Town and Country should have been filled with
woe and lamentation, and astonishment: Winter houses and Summer houses had
been demolished: the great houses smitten with breaches, the little with
chests, as Amos speaks. It should have been a day of darkness and blacknes,
none like it from the beginning, Joel. 2, 2.
neither any more such to the years of many generations: the land before it as
the garden of Eden, after it a devouring wilderness. And surely it parliament
shall take all course for safety, that possibly the highest reach and extent of
man's wisdom can compass, yet if we be not reconciled to GOD, Apoc*, 19.29.
and return with all our heart: It we be not zealous to amend: lo he
stands still at the door and knocks, our safety is no safety, and our
reso^e is but a repriuall to a greater assizes: (...) England therefore say
unto her God: Job. 42.5, 6.
heretofore I have heard of thee by the hearing of the care, but now mine eye
sees nearer then ever, therefore I abhor my self in dust and ushes: Let the
enemy never have his hope, that the iniquity of England is fulfild.
Porerierius in Genesis 15.
Let England, seeing she is newborn, be a new creature: Let England say, the
mercy of God to it indureth for ever: and that her deliverance surpasses all
the deliverances of Gods first borne Israel: let her proclaim to all people:
Come and see, Psalm. 66.6.
and hear, what GOD has done for me and my children: help me all ye nations:
and join with me to bless this Lord, to praise him, and to magnify him for
ever.

Psalm. 107.24.
you see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in these deep devices: further
then is fit for every one to know, and which time will more reveal and make
bare and naked: Heaven is high, earth is deep, and the heart of the King who
can find out? Pro. 25.3.
you see the dungeon of traiterous hearts: and have pierced into the bottomless
hell of Popish and Jesuitical practice, by their own books, writings, and
confessions: you see the labyrinth of their windings and turnings, and all the
false doors of equiuocating souls, more intricate, then their hiding chambers,
in their couerts, and dens, and secret lurking places: you see the power of the
Lord to confound them, whilst we imagined no ill his wisdom to let them run on
till they should be out of breath: like a good Surgeon, not to lance the
wound, til it grew to a head, and the botch ripe, to break with too much bily
matter: Psalm. 9.15, 16.
you see the justice of the Lord, who has made himself known by executing
judgment, they are sunken down in the pit, that they made: in the net that
they hid, is their foot taken: the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands O meditate and mark.
Higgaio^ Selah: you see the mercy of God triumphing over all his works:
arguing and disputing in his love, concerning us: How shall I deliver thee up,
O little England? How shall I deliver thee, Ose. 11.8.9.
O great Britain? how shall I make thee as Admal? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim: mine heart is turned within me: my repentings are rolled together: I
will not execute the fiercenes of any wrath, I will not return to destroy: I
am God and not man, the holy one in the midst of thee: behold, I would have
fined thee, Esa. 48.8, 9.10.
but not as silver: yea, I have saved thee out of this fiery furnace of
affliction, for mine own sake, for mine own sake have I done it: for my names
sake have I deferred my wrath: for my praise have I refrained from thee, that I
cut thee not off: you therefore that see more (as the cunning eye in pictures,
the skillfull ear in music discerns more then the vulgar sort:) you that
see the length, the breadth, the depth, the height, and at the dime^sions of
Gods works here above others: rise up higher in your spirits: by their
subtilty, right honorable, be more and more wise as serpents, for the state,
and to preserve honorable plainenes in the simplicity of Doves, in holy
conversation for your souls health: and for blessing of your policy: so
bless you this Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Thou noble Lord, that high Montegle of honorable Dan. 5.5.25.
and ancient renowned house, predestinate above all other, to be a most happy
instrument of thy sovereign and Countries safety: consider and ponder
according to thy ingenuous honor and right loyal wisdom, this great work of
God, in the very fingers of that man's hand, that was author of the letter: the
writing proved to be like the writing upon the plaster of the wall, in the
Palace of King Baltazar, when he thought all sure: and yet that night he lost
kingdom and life: Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin: Mean, God has numbered and finished
you: Tekel, thou art weighed in the balance, and found too light: Pare^: thy
kingdom and plot divided and scattered, and given to thine enemies: the
letter, made love and nature work toward thee alone, whose very fountain and
springs were stopped up, and shut close to all others: and yet out of that
ground, their blinded hearts and infatuated minds might have gathered, that if
blood or alliance, or any other respect ought to have moved them to have bowels
and feeling toward thee, it might have led others to have had tenderness
toward others also of their friends: yea, even to all England the common
parents of us all: and to every son and daughter of the same: Romans 1.22.
but that seeming to be wise, they became fools: Prou.
and the scripture must be true: the mercies of the wicked are unmerciful:
their bowels the seat of mercy, are cruel: if they that are evil, can give
good things to their friends, Math. 7.9 10.11
not stones but bread, not scorpions but fishes: how much more shall not our
heavenly Father, who made all, even pity all, and love the images of his own
creation, the works of his own hands? who has better right to every one of
us, then any friend has to his friend in any bond of nature: for he has made
of one blood, even all mankind, Act. 17, 26.
to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has assigned the bounds of their
habitation: we are all the generation of God: in him we live, we move, and
have our being: Do thou wisely consider, the Lords love to thee, and observe
prudently withal, their leaden rule of their false love: for no good patriore
can abide himself to be loved, when his Country is hated: observe the wisdom
of God, to produce out of common hatred, particular love: out of particular
love, general safety in his mighty power: notwithstanding, vows, oaths, and
sacraments of secrecy to set our sworn enemies to indight for our good: to
make their fingers write peace, whose hearts hatched war: to order in his
wise dispensation, such a spirit of zeal and caution in you: do thou
reverence this great God, in a true sense and sound spirit of discerning
spirits, that has honored thee with so great service: suggested and gave
grace to make the best use of it (as they prophesied in another meaning)
namely, to be a great savior to Prince and Country: and yet remembering what a
holy father said: Marie the great instrument of all Christians good: she was
more blessed by believing Christ, then by bearing him: by receiving him in her
heart by faith, then by conceiving him in her womb: do you my good Lord, make
this a means to increase your faith, and resolution of conscience in the best
manner: bless you the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Mary's days they burnt many, but at many stakes, but here they meant to
burn us all at one stake: Documare ad cadem.
amongst the Romans they put the tenth man only to death in a general
provocation, here nothing would serve but a general slaughter, even the
abomination of desolation, over so many sacred persons, and so holy a place:
Let all them then that thus should have died together, learn holy feruencie of
their enemies, to strive for the common faith, to give honor and obedience to
whom it is due: Care and defense, to whom it appertains: let all them in union
of spirit, and the holy communion of Saints, with an indissoluble knot of
truth, peace, concord, common comfort and society: live, and love, and die
together in an holy association in the quarrel of the Gospel, and defiance to
Babylon, in the maintenance of one God, one Christ, one spirit, one faith, one
truth, one baptism, one communion, one King, one people, that so living and
dying together, we may with one heart and hand, one faith and truth, one mind
and mouth, ever bless one Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O All you Churches of the Lord in any part of the Apoc. 1.13.
all whose territories and tents they hated deadly as us, professing their
wills and skill, an eager desire to let some of them blood again, as they did
heretofore in France, being cunning to destroy: be you the more rooted in
your holy faith: resolved with all constancy in your religion, and established
in your spirits, to serve so provident a God in one uniform profession of
truth with us, for which God has given so glorious a sentence, that all
variance set aside, God may persuade Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Shem,
Genesis 9.27. Apoc. 20.^.9.
and Canaan to be servant to them both: and cast our selves into a perfect knot
of love, to make defense against Gog and Magog, that gather themselves from the
four corners of the earth, to compass about the tents of the Saints and the
beloved City, that so as one flock we may acknowledge one shepherd: and
incessantly bless him, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Ye mighty Lords and Emperors of the world, have fulfilled Gods will in
upholding the City on seven hills so long, Apoc. 17.16.17
better then her own hills could uphold her: and now, God puts in your
hearts by this warning what you are to look for, if you please not this
scarlet woman, as some of your most ennobled aucestors and progenitors, have
tasted in all your quarters, with the loss of their dearest lives and best
kingdoms: she sits in Vatican, and with her vaticinies and prophecies,
sends you and yours from the Castle of S. Angelo to death, as the Alastor and
destroyer of the world: She keeps her latitat in her laterane, living a
shadowed life, and sets others to that work to which she puts not her
finger: wherefore stir up your heroical spirits, prepare your selves to
fulfill the rest of Gods mystery prophesied before, that ten Kings should
join in one consent against this whore of Babel, who commits states
together, to kill one another for her: Proclaim a sacred war against her, to
show your holy hatred of her; that Sion may rise, and Babylon may fall, Apoc.
1^, 11.
and her smoke may rise up more and more: do you begin to bless this Lord,
who has showed by this example to all the world, that he specially loves the
lives of Kings and Princes, and Counsailers of estate: and therefore do you
your uttermost (and what cannot Kings do) to set forth the laws of this King
of Kings in all your Realms: show your selves to be Kings and free men, not in
bondage to any, but restorers of the world, according to your great power: can
you have a better time and occasion? see the stirring and ready affections of
many Kings, Potentates, and States, to concur with you: bless this Lord GOD,
of whom you hold your crowns, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O Ye holy Angels and celestial creatures, that excel Psalm. 103, 20.
you that fulfill his commandments, and hearken perfectly unto the voice of
his words: whereas we upon earth are all short, you that pitched your tents
about the parliament house, and all our tabernacles, Psalm. 34, 7.
that looked so faithfully and lovingly to your charge, so that no foot did
stumble at any stone: bless you this Lord forvs, and with us, in all your
heavenly queers, Psalm. 91, 11, 12.
praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O All you people of the word, Jews, and Christians, more hardening, nor
piety to the memories of the dead, nor awe to any living, what opinion the
world should have of such incendiaries: nor fear of any to revenge it: nor
care of posterity, to confound men's estates and rights, by destroying their
deeds and writings in the fire: nor thought of justice to let men have a
lawful trial: nor abhorring of cruelty in the multitudes of the slain: nor
barbarousnes in the manner of death, or rather in so many manners of death,
burning, drowning, stoning, beheading, quartering, pressing: nor touch to the
rufull scriching and howling, of the maimed, bruised, wounded, and not slain
outright: nor charity to send men to hell, as they thought, without time to
ask mercy: nor forecast of peril to them and theirs, if they should be
discovered: nor any thing in heaven, earth, or hell: this world, or the world
to come, could move them, some being of great birth and wealth, some of zeal
and professed religion, some of the priesthood of the Roman faith, and all
naturally of this Country and nation, but that they complotted, contrived, put
in practice to their uttermost power, the most devilish murder, butchery, and
massacre, that ever Satan hatched from the beginning of the world, from the
shedding of the blood of Abel the righteous: at which we that escaped admire,
and adore him that saved us: they that hear it are amazed, and astonished: and
can scarcely believe that any such thing was, but that it is apparent as the
sun in the firmaments which all nations do now ring of, and is ready for
every Chronicle, as the new manuell of the world, both in attempt and
deliverance, to show the odiousnes of bloody and woluish Rome: and the
sovereignty and fatherly love of God to mankind, and especially to the English
nation and protestant Churches there: Do you therefore, O all you people,
tribes, kindreds, and nations of the world, and all ye works of the Lord in all
places of his dominion, Psalm. 103.22. Psalm. 150.5.
do you I say, speak good of the name of the Lord: let every one that has
faith, let every one that has breath and common feeling, and sense of
humanity, and loves the lives of men in the common affection to mankind:
glorify GOD, that loves to save many people alive, and hence learn to abhor
the Abadon, the Apollyon, and Romish destroyer: Apoc. 9.
and to honor this God of our life, who holds all their souls in life, let
them bless this Lord in their Countries and Regions, praise him, and magnify
him for ever.

O All you people that hear me this day, or shall Psalm. 203.1, 22.
bless thou not only in word and writing, but in deed and truth, this holy
name of the great defe^der of our precious faith: praise him, and magnify him,
not now alone, but continually, and for ever and ever: Amen, Amen. Alleluiah.

FINIS.

