CERTAJNE SERMONS Made in OXFORD, Anno Dom. 1616. Wherein, is proved, that
Saint PETER had no Monarchical power over the rest of the Apostles, against
Bellarmine, Sanders, Stapleton, and the rest of that COMPANY.

BY John Howson, DOCTOR in Divinity, and PREBENDARIE of Christ-Church; now
BISHOP of OXON.

Published by Commandment.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Pyper. 1622.

LVKE 12.41.42. etc. Then Peter said unto him, MASTER, tellest thou this
parable unto us, or unto all?

And the Lord said: who is a faithful Steward, and a wise, whom the Master
shall make ruler over the household, to give them their portion of meat in due
season?

Blessed is the servant, whom the Master, etc.


1. IN this short Parable our Savior delivers the qualities requisite for a
good Steward, and the ample reward, which shall be given him: and secondly the
faults obseruable in an evil steward; and withal, the punishment that is due
unto him.

2. The qualities required in a good Steward are many: 1. He must be fidelis,
faithful. 2. He must be humble and serviceable to his Master; for he is but
aeconomus, or seruus, a Steward, or Servant, verse 43.3. He must be Prudens,
wise. 4. He must not be an intruder, but lawfully called by his Master: Quem
constituit Dominus super familiam suam, for the Lord makes him ruler over his
household. 5. He must be diligent, and careful in executing his office and
function, Et dare in tempore tritici mensuram, and give them their portion of
meat in due season.

3. The particular circumstances of the reward, as also of the evil steward,
and his punishment, I will note hereafter; August.
for as S. Augustine said, Haec pauca de multis breuiter perstringo, ne
propositum operis mei nimia longitudine (diuisionis) impediam: For before we
come to speak of the qualities of this Steward, we must find our, who the
Steward is.

Hilar. de Trin. lib. 1.
4. The ancient Fathers, Qui dictorum intelligentiam expectant ex dictis potius,
quam imponunt, who rather collect the meaning out of the words, then impose a
new sense upon them, do commonly understand the Apostles, and the Bishops
their successors, to be the Steward here described. Thus Ambrose super locum:
Hilarie super 24. Math: Jerome super locum: Chrysostom. lib. 2. de sacer dote:
Theophilact super locum, etc. Thus also the interpreters, and commentators of
the Church of Rome, Beda, Thomas, Gorran, Abulens. Caietan, Salmeron, and
Iansenius. But when those of the Church of Rome come to matter of question, and
controversy, they behave themselves like Poets (who (as Seneca notes,) Non
putant ad rem pertinere verum dicere; Sen. de benefit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
sed aut necessitate coacti, aut decoro corrupti, id quemque vocari iubent,
quod belle facit ad versum,) and name him the steward, who best fitteth, in
their opinion, the business in hand.

5. Thus Bellarmine, Bellar. de Cler. lib. 1. cap. 14.
when he proves against the Presbyterians, that Bishops are superior to
Priests, iure diuino, tum ordinis potestate, tum jurisdiction, alleges for
one proof this parable, as S. Matthew delivers it, Quis est seruus fidelis and
prudens, etc. Who is a faithful servant? etc. and says fairly and truly,
Haec verba Hilarious, and coeteri patres, de Episcopis dicta esse volunt;
Hilarie, and the rest of the Fathers, will have these words to be understood of
Bishops; and so proves the superiority of Bishops above Priests. But when he
disputes against us Protestants, for the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome, then
this Steward is the Pope; and although (says he) Ambrose, Hilarie, and Jerome,
understand it of the Bishops generally, yet surely the Scripture entendeth the
Popes Monarchy. Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. 17.
Quamuis patres (says he) non loquantur express de Episcopo Romano, tamen
sine dubio sententia scripturae illa est; Although the Fathers speak not
expressly of the Bishop of Rome, yet without doubt that is the meaning of the
Scripture.

6. Sine dubio sententia scripturae illa est? Nay, it will not be carried with
so slight a proof as Sine dubio. The Popes Monarchy over the Church, over the
whole Christian world, is a matter of highest moment; Non coniectura sed
manibus, and oculis tenenda; we are like S. Thomas, we will see it with our
eyes, and feel it with our fingers, it must be made sensible, before we will
grant it. Tullie says, Cic. offic. lib. 3.
Turpe est dubitare philosophos, quae ne rustici quidem dubitant; If every
vulgar interpreter, together with the Fathers, had delivered that sense, it had
been a shame for so great a Divine to have doubted of it: but the Fathers (he
confesses) understand it of Bishops indifferently: and no late expositor, that
I have read, once dreams of the Pope; and yet, sine dubio sententia scripturae
illa est, Without doubt that is the meaning of the Scripture.

7. It is but a rhetorical trick, Id sumere pro certo, quod dubium, controuer
sumque est, not to doubt of that, which he knows is controuerted. Eorum quae
constant (says Tullie) exempla ponenda; Cic. de Invent. lib. 1.
eorum quae dubia sunt, rations afferendoe: seeing he knew this interpretation
would be especially controuerted, he should have kept on his course, and have
brought proof and reasons for it, and not tell us, Sine dubio sententia
scripturae illa est, Without doubt that is the meaning of the Scripture: If he
thought it did constare, and were evident to his party, yet exempla posuisset,
he should have brought some certain and undoubted examples or authorities for
our satisfaction, from Greek Fathers, or Latin, or Councels, etc, as his
manner is.

8. There are two faults much used inter Polemieos, the writers of
controversies, which are very offensive to ingenuous readers; and no marvel,
for, Quibus rebus animus quasi debito fraudatur, offenditur; The mind of man
is offended, when it is defrauded of that, which is due unto it. Tullie says,
that both these faults are ridiculous. Ridiculum est, quod est dubium, Cic. pro
Quint.
relinquere incertum; (says he) It is but a mockery to pass that over
without proof, which is doubtful: And again, Ridiculum est, quod nemini
dubium est, iudicare; It is also a ridiculous mockery to use many proofs and
reasons to confirm that, which no man denies.

9. The former trick is here used by Bellarmine, but because this assertion,
this sine dubio, is very thin, and pellucet, and we may discern great
weakness through it; he uses inexpiable frauds to abuse this Text; and
first he has this slight to deceive his readers. That, whereas disputing
against the Presbyterians for the superiority of Bishops, he says, Sanctus
Hilarious, Bellar. de Cler. lib. cap. 14.
and caeteri patres de Episcopis haec verba dicta esse volunt; S. Hilarie, and
the rest of the Fathers, will have these words to be understood of Bishops, of
all indifferently; alleging a consent of Fathers: when he disputes for the
Popes Monarchy against us (finding himself much crossed by that general
consent of interpretation) he concealeth it, and alleges two or three
Fathers only for that opinion, as if there were no more of that mind, without
and caeteri, as before: and then he opposes his own credit to them (as if
he were a Geometer, Qui non suadet, sed cogit,) saying, Sine dubio sententia
scripturae illa est; Whatsoever those Fathers say, this is the meaning of the
Scripture, Vti Episcopi particulares sunt summi aeconomi in Ecclesijs suis, ita
Romanum Episcopum esse summum aeconomum in Ecclesia vniuersa; As particular
Bishops are the chief stewards in their own diocese, so the Bishop of Rome
is the chief steward in the universal Church.

10. In which words I observe a second slight, which is this: That whereas the
Text says, Quis est fidelis aeconomus and prudens, etc, he seems to read,
Quis est summus aeconomus, etc. affirming out of that place, that every Bishop
is summus aeconomus in Ecclesia sua, and so by consequent the Bishop of Rome is
summus aeconomus in Ecclesia vniuersa. But if he would have concluded fairly,
and said, Quilibet Episcopus est aeconomus in Ecclesia sua, ergo, Romanus
Episcopus est aeconomus in Ecclesia sua, id est, Romana: sine dubio sententia
scripturae illa fuisset. Or thus, Quilibet Episcopus est summus aeconomus in
Ecclesia sua, ergo, Romanus Episcopus est summus aeconomus in Ecclesia sua, in
his own peculiar diocese of Rome; the word summus being understood univocally
in the antecedent, and consequent, sine dubio sententia scripturae illa
fuisset; without doubt that had been the meaning of that Scripture.

11. But to conclude thus, Quilibet Episcopus est summus aeconomus in Ecclesia
sua, ergo, Romanus Episcopus est summus aeconomus in Ecclesia vniuersa, as it
has no consequent or warrant from my Text, wherein there is no word of summitie
or universality, so it is false, fallacious, and equivocal: for summus in the
antecedent, applied to every Bishop in his diocese, has only the force of a
comparatiue, as if he should say, a superior in his Diocese, who may have an
Archbishop, or Patriarch above him, as well as Priests and Deacons, that are
his inferiors; but summus in the consequent applied to the Pope, is taken
superlatiuely in the proper signification, Cic. Tusc. q. l. 2.
which Tullie gives it, Summum est, quo nihil est superius. Summus in the
antecedent is Aristocraticall, and admits many fellow-Bishops and equals, who
are all Summi, and Optimates in the Church of God: but summus in the
consequent, or in the Pope is Monarchical, both Caesar, and Pompey, Quo nemo
superior, cui nemo aequalis. Summus in the antecedent has ordinariam
potestatem only over his diocese; but summus in the consequent has
plenitudinem potestatis, to do what pleases him, without council, without
control, without Law, in the universal Church; potestatem despoticam, or
(...), which is not allowable in the Church of God. So that S. Matthew, and S.
Luke (as he thinks) mistook our Savior, when they read, Quis est fidelis
aeconomus? for, he either said, or meant, Quis est summus aeconomus? for, sine
dubio sententia scripturae illa est; he meant (says Bellarmine) the great
Pope, or Monarch of Rome.

12. A third slight he has to corrupt this Text, which carries it more
directly to the Bishop of Rome, and that is, by appropriating these words to S.
Peter: for all S. Peter's prerogatives (they suppose) run as directly into the
sea of Rome, as all maine rivers into the Ocean. This is a flat contradiction
to that received interpretation, which Bellarmine urges against the
Presbyterians, Hilarious and caeteri patres de Episcopis dicta esse volunt; for
by this new gloss all other Bishops are directly excluded.

13. In his first book de Pontifice Romano, De Pontif. Romans lib. 1. cap. 9.
(where he affirms, Regimen Ecclesiasticum praecipue Monarchium esse debere)
in his fourth reason, which is drawn from the similitudes, whereby the Church
is described in the Scriptures; among other things (says he) the Church is
likened to an house, which has vnum Dominum, and vnum aeconomum, as it is Luke
12. Quis est fidelis dispensator and prudens, quem constituit Dominus? etc.
Quae verba (says he) dicuntur Petro; these words (says Bellarmine) are spoke
to Peter.

14. That S. Peter moved the question that occasioned this Parable, is evident
in my Text; but he did it (as the Interpreters say, Iansen.
and namely Iansenius) omnium Apostolorum nomine, vt solet: as also he
answers sometimes in the name of the rest, Aug: de verb. Dom. ser. 13.
as S. Augustine observes; Petrus in Apostolorum ordine primus, in Christi
amore promptissimus, saepe vnus respondet pro omnibus; vnitas in multis. Peter
the first in the order of the Apostles, and the readiest in the Love of Christ,
answers oftentimes one for all; showing an unity in the many. And S. Cyril
gives reasons, why it should be so: and here the Text implies that Peter did
speak for them all; for he says, Domine ad nos dicis parabolam hanc, an ad
omnes? And if the question were made in the name of them all, it is likely the
answer was made to them all.

15. Bellarmine answers, that Peter asked the question, Et respondit Dominus
Petro, Quis putas, etc. and then he glosseth it thus; Tibi o Petre inprimis
dico: I speak only to thee o Peter; for inprimis here signifies not
especially, but only; for (says he) by certain words of the singular number
used in this Parable, Dominus aperte indicat, se vnum seruum toti domui
praepositurum, qui a se solo iudicari possit; the Lord does plainly show, that
he will set one servant over the whole house, which servant he only reserues
to his own judgment.

16. But not only this gloss, Tibi o Petre inprimis dico, corrupts the Text,
but the words of the Text are corrupted by Bellarmine, who says, Respondit
Dominus Petro; when the Text has barely, Dixit autem Dominus, without
mentioning Peter. And if there had followed so great a consequent upon Peter's
moving the question, and our Saviors answer to him by name, as the Monarchy
of the Church; St. Matthew would not have omitted that circumstance.

17. But admit that the Evangelist said, Respondit Dominus Petro, and that our
Savior made answer to Peter; yet it is not spoken of Peter, but of all.
Bellarmine knew this might be replied, and therefore he adds, Haec verba
dicuntur Petro, and de ipso Petro, these words are spoke to Peter, and of Peter
himself; and for proof he brings Chrysostom, and Ambrose, Certe (says he)
hunc locum diserte explicat Chrysostomus de Petro, and successoribus eius, Lib.
2. de Sacerdot. circa principium; Cui Ambrosius assentiens, etc.

18. He quoteth S. Chrysostom curiously, the book, and the part of the
book, but alleges not his words; and no marvel, for, Certe hunc locum
diserte explicat Chrysostom. de discipulis Christi, non de ipso Petro; certainly
Chrysostom does expressly interpret this place of the Disciples of Christ, and
not of Peter: for not far from the beginning of that second book he says,
Chrysostom. de Sacerd. lib. 2.
Dominus cum discipulos alloqueretur, ait, Quis est fidelis seruus, etc, When
our Savior spoke to his Disciples, he said, Who is a faithful servant, etc.
And although he say not far from the beginning of that book, Christus curam
ouium tum Petro, tum successoribus Petri committebat, (which may be verified of
any other of the Apostles) yet he offers not to prove that by this Text; but
comforts his friend S. Basil (who was newly made Bishop, and repented himself
of accepting it; charging S. Chrysostom, that he by sleights had drawn him
into it; (Longa est narratio, longae Ambages,) You cannot understand that
second book, except you read over very diligently the former;) he comforts
him, I say, by telling him, that if he proved to be fidelis dispensator, and
prudens; that is, a good Bishop, not a good Peter, not a good Pope, but a good
Bishop in Greece, and performed well the feeding of his flock, which would
argue his love to his Master; then he should receive the reward mentioned in
this Parable, Super omnia bona eius constitueret cum; and so interprets this
Text of the Disciples in general, and the Bishops their successors, as other
Fathers do: Thus have we a good Chrysostom falsely alleged, to sway an ill
cause.

19. To S. Chrysostom (says he) Ambrose assents; but this Ambrose neither
names Peter, nor yet this my Text: but in his Commentaries upon 1. Tim. 3. he
has those very words quoted by Bellarmine, Domus Dei est Ecclesia, Ambr. sup.
1. Tim. 3.
cuius body rector est Damasus; which will never prove by any consequent that
these words were spoken by our Savior, Petro, and de ipso Petro, though we
should yield to the Pope all Peter's prerogatives. Bellar. lib. 2. de Council.
cap. 17.
But what author (think you) is this? In his second book de Concilijs, he
alleges him with S. Chrysostom, to this very purpose, and there calls him
Ambrose, as the other Chrysostom; but here he says with addition, or rather
detraction; Ambrosius, vel quicunque est author illius Commentarij: You must
value him high, because he is coupled with Chrysostom. and then they opposed to
S. Hilarie, and all the Fathers.

20. But when Bellarmine speaks not Polemice, but historice, when he has him
alone in a corner, and makes no use of him, he tells us, that in these
Commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistles, which are found in St. Ambrose his works,
Sunt non pauca, Bellar. de scriptor. Eccles.
quae Pelagij errores continere videntur: and thinks, that the author of them
was one Hilarious, not Arelatensis, nor Pictauiensis, but Hilarious Diaconus
Romanus, qui Luciferi scisma propagauit: A good author (no doubt) who favored
the heresy of Pelagius, and the scisme of Lucifer Calaritanus.

21. Thus we may see, that these wranglers, Hilar. lib. 1. de Trin.
in controversies, non referunt seusum, deliver not the received sense of the
Scripture, sed afferunt, but they vary it at their pleasure, as best fits their
purpose. This Steward was first, all the Bishops and Prelates of the Church, as
Hilarie and all the Fathers are said to affirm: Secondly, He was every Bishop
in his private See, and the Bishop of Rome in the universal Church; Et sine
dubio sententia scripturae illa est: Thirdly, It is Peter alone; and so
consequently the Pope: and to prove it, a true Chrysostom is alleged falsely,
and a false Ambrose is alleged vainly, Et talibus fundamentis tota domus
nititur; And upon such foundations as these, their whole edifice relies.

22. But because these three false pillars are too weak to support so high,
and ample a building (as the Popedom is now,) upon the foundation of this
Text, he adds a fourth slight, to deceive his readers. We all confess
jointly, that Ecclesia vna est, Cyprian de unit. Eccles.
(as S. Cyprian says) there is one Catholic Church, Quae in multitudinem
latius incremento foecunditatis extenditur; Which by a miraculous increase, and
fecundity is extended, and divided into many particular Churches. There is vnum
Lumen, one great Catholic Light; but multi radij, many beams of that great
light. Arbor vna tenaci radice fundata, One maine Catholic tree fastened, and
founded with a sure root; and there are rami arboris multi, many branches of
this Catholic tree; Finally, vna gens, one Catholic nation or kindred, who
were first called Fideles, and afterward Christiani, Christians, at Antioch;
Et multae familiae, many particular families, or Churches: Now, because
Oeconomus, quem constituit Dominus super familiam suam, does literally or
naturally (as Bellarmine confesses) by the interpretation of Fathers, signify
every Bishop in his peculiar Diocese, in his peculiar Sunne-beame, in his
peculiar branch, in his peculiar family, and so consequently the Bishop of Rome
in his Diocese only, or particular family. That the Text may reach home to
the establishing of the Popes universal Monarchy, and prove, that he is
Summus oeconomus in Ecclesia vniuersa; He adds unto the Text, as before a
word of Summitie, or Supremacy, so now a word of Universality, that as before
he made him by a slight the supreme Bishop, Supra quem nemo, He might make
him an universal supreme Bishop, Qui supra omnes, an universal Monarch over
all the Church.

23. For Bellarmine disputing against Barkley, for the maintenance of the Popes
universal supremacy, perceiving that Familia, one only Family, signified by
the word of my Text, was not spacious enough to entertain that great Monarch
universal: But if his Cardinals should attend him, they would compass him in,
Et coarctarent eum vndique; Luke 19.43.
He inlargeth it as much as may be, Bellar. cont. Barc. cap. 34.
Et dilatat terminos vsque ad Euphratem; and says, that the Pope Constitutus
est super omnem familiam, Cap. 34. And again, Cap. 24. Jb. c. 24.
Qui toti familiae proe est. And so where our Savior said, Quis est fidelis
oeconomus, quem constituit Dominus supra familiam; He chops, and changes, and
adds to the Evangelist, and makes him say; Quis est summus oeconomus quem
constituit Dominus supra omnem familiam, or supra totam familiam; and so beats
off the Text from the confirmation of Bishops in their particular Churches, and
Families, as he applied it against the Presbyterians; and abuses it by
corruption, only to establish the Popes universal Monarchy.

24. I stand not to urge the vanity of this addition, or corruption done of
purpose to make the word stretch to the universal Church; but Sine dubio
familia, and tota familia, are both one, and imply but one part of a stock or
kindred: For among the Romans, Gens, or Genus, was the whole kindred; Familia,
or Stirps were the diverse branches. Genus was referred ad nomen; Familia ad
cognomen. Cornelia gens, was the name of one whole house or kindred; Scipiones,
Lentuli, Dolabellae, Cinnae, Scyllae, were cognomina, or familiae gentis
Corneliae: So that as Familia Scipionum, and tota familia Scipionum, is all
one, and neither of both comprehends Gentem Corneliam, of which there were many
other families: So here familia, and tota familia, is all one, and neither of
both properly signify Gentem Christianam, the universal Church, of which
there are many particular branches, and families.

25. And it seems that the Holy Ghost would have this observed; for when the
Apostle would express the universal Church, he used not (...), which is
found in my Text, (which Beza noted well, and with him Salmeron, and before
them both Caietan, to signify famulitium, the servants, or inferior part of a
family, not a family, as Bellarmine reads for his advantage,) but the holy
Apostle uses a word which signifies gentem, an whole stock or kindred,
consisting of many families, Ephesians. 3.14.15.
saying; I bend my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, (...), Of whom
the whole nation or kindred, both in heaven and earth, are denominated
Christians.

26. Here now, when the Holy Ghost would express the universal Church, he
says, (...), (which word (...), Beza Annot. sup. Ephe. 3.
says Beza, signifies (...), tota collectiue, as in some other places,)
(...), not (...): which word (...), as the old vulgar translates, is
paternitas; as S. Jerome, parentela; as Erasmus, cognatio a communi patre; and
as Beza, familia; but taken largely, as he acknowledges in his notes, when he
says Familia, id est, Gens, quae communem vnum patrem familiae habeas, vt sane
habet Ecclesia in Christo coaptata.

27. And this Greek word (...), whereby the universal Church is noted, is so
significant, that it troubled the Interpreters (as you see) to express it with
a fit Latin word; and therefore every man varies upon it according to his own
sense: so that it is no great marvel, if the vulgar translator retained still
the very Greek word, Psalm. 95.7.
Psalm. 95. Afferte Domino patriae Gentium, afferte Domino gloriam and honorem;
Which I reading often, took it for the Latin word Patriae, the countries of
the Heathen, till I observed that the Septuagint read (...), for the people;
(...); And because the old vulgar thought the word, familia, would not reach
home, if he should say, familiae gentium; and he would not read gentes
gentium, for the Cacophonie and equivocation, he continued the Greek word
saying, Afferte Domino patriae gentium.

28. But with this trick of corruption I note not Bellarmine, though he
reads familia for famulitium, for famulitium a part, and an inferior part,
the servants of the family; familia, an whole family, of Wife, Children, and
Servants, because the old vulgar does read so; and he takes him, and leaves
him, for his best advantage: But I stand somewhat the longer upon this note,
because Bellarmine, Sanders, Stapleton, and other, work great wonders out of
this word Familia, to maintain the Popes Monarchy; though it be falsely
translated for Famulitium, Familia; and then for Familia, tota familia, and so
abused to signify the universal Church.

29. A fifth slight which Bellarmine uses to abuse this Text, and corrupt it,
to maintain thereby the Popes Universal Monarchy, is in his book de Council
authoritate; where he has this proposition; Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Summus Pontifex simpliciter, and absolute est supra Vniuersam Ecclesiam, and
supra generale concilium, ita vt nullum in terris supra se iudicium agnoscat.
This proposition (says he) is fere de fide; no, not so; it is rather vere de
blasphemia: For is not this proudly to usurp the title, and style of our great
Master? For is not Christ Jesus only Summus Pontifex simpliciter, and
absolute, supra Ecclesiam vniuersam, qui nullum supra se iudicium agnoscat?
What difference between this prerogative of the Pope, and that of our Savior,
Ephesians. 1. where it is said, Ephesians. 1.22.
that God (...); He made our Savior (...), Summum Pontificem, or caput
simpliciter, and absolute, (...), to his whole Church; (...) over all men, and
over all things, as the Vulgar of Christ; and as Bellarmine of the Pope, Supra
vniuersam Ecclesiam.

30. What? not enough to be Primus, which may infer a Primacy, which the
ancient Church granted; but he must be Summus; 4.
Similis ero altissimo, which intends a Monarchy, and our Savior detested,
when he said, Reges gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic; Kings are
great Monarchs, not you my Apostles, much less your successors.

31. What? not enough to be Primus Episcopus amongst many, 20.5.5.
quos constituit Dominus regere Ecclesiam; but he must assumere sibi honorem,
vt fiat Pontifex? Which our Savior assumed not, but received it from his
Father, when he said, Filius meus es tu? Which style of Pontifex is given to
none of the Church of Christ, but to himself only in the New Testament.

32. What? not enough to be Pontifex (...), but he must be summus Pontifex, a
style never appropriated, nor used to any in the Church of God, either in the
Old, or New Testament? For in the Old Testament the high Priest was barely
called Pontifex, Leuit. 21.20.
as Leuit. 21. Pontifex, id est, Sacerdos maximus; not Pontifex maximus, or
Pontifex summus. And in the New Testament our Savior only has an Epithete
added to it, which is given in comparison of Aarons high Priesthood, to note
that Christ's Priesthood excelled it: But that high and extraordinary style but
once used, and to our Savior only applied, is not equal to this of the Pope:
For the Apostle calls our Savior but (...); Qui penetrauit coelos, Heb. 4.14.
Iesum Christum filium Dei, habemus Pontificem magnum: We have (says he) a
great high Priest, that is passed into the heavens, JESUS the Son of God: But
Bellarmine in this proposition tells us, that we have the Pope Pontificem
maximum, two degrees of comparison above our Savior, which is in English our
Highest high Priest.

33. What? not enough to be Summus Pontifex, with certain additions of
reference to our Savior, but it must be absolute? not comparate, but
simpliciter? not in vniuersa Ecclesia (which words though they be high, may
carry a moderate sense of Primacie, among many, who are Episcopi in vniuersa
Ecclesia,) but he must be Pontifex summus simpliciter and absolute, supra
vniuersam Ecclesiam, an highest high Priest over all the Church, and usurp a
Monarchy?

34. But I will not farther exaggerate this Luciferian proposition: I speak
this by the way ex abundantia cordis; and conclude with S. Bernard, Ser. 69.
super Cant.
Audet quis peruadere locum vnigeniti tui? O good God, does any man dare to
challenge the place, and prerogative of thy Son, thy only Son? etc.
Praecipitetur, O cast him down headlong, as Lucifer from heaven. Ponit sibi
sedem in excelso? Does he make himself a Monarch in thy Church? Subuertatur
cathedra pestilentiae, and let all that behold it, say, Numquid iste vir est,
Es. 14.16.
qui conturbauit gentes, and concussit regna? Is this he, that so troubled the
world, and the kingdoms thereof, to establish his Monarchy?

35. But let us consider, how Bellarmine proves this proposition; for thereupon
depends my note. What? by Scripture? no, it contradicts the very phrase of
the Scripture. How then? by Fathers? no, Tertullian scoffed at the title; St.
Gregory detested it. What? by bare reason? no, he knew well enough St.
Augustines rule, Aug. Epist. 56.
Quasi regularis est omnium haereticorum temeritas, conari stabilissimam
authoritatem fundatissimae Ecclesiae quafi rationis nomine, and pollicitatione
euertere. It is the usual rashness of all heretics, to strive to overthrow
the most firm authority of the most established Church, by the name and
promise (as it were) of reason. How then will he prove it? Ratione in
scripturis fundata, and founded upon this Scripture, my very Text.

36. We can ask no better: for Bellarmine maintaining a good cause against the
Anabaptists, and Arians of Transiluania, viz. Licere Christianis gerere
magistratus ciuiles, That it is lawful for Christians to exercise civil power
and authority; he proves it happily ratione in scriptura fundata, by reason
founded on this Scripture, Bellar. de Laicis, lib. 3.
after this manner. Non repugnat libertati Christianae praefectura, vel
subiectio Ecclesiastica, Ecclesiastical government, or subjection, is not
repugnant to Christian liberty; as appears (says he) Math. 24. Quis est
fidelis seruus, etc. Who is a faithful and wise servant, whom the Master shall
make ruler over the household? Ergo (says Bellarmine) non repugnat praefectura
vel subiectio Politica, therefore Political government or subjection is not
repugnant to Christianity. You see how in a good cause he can dispute well,
Ratione in hac scriptura fundata. If now it be as lawful to have one spiritual
Monarch, the Pope, over the whole Church, as to have temporal Kings and
Monarchs in their several Kingdoms, and that the reason be also in hac
scriptura fundata, it will force as far as the other does: But if you examine
it, you will find that he does super alienum fundamentum aedificare, build
upon reason altogether auerse from this Scripture.

37. His proof, or reason is this. Omnia nomina, quae in scripturis tribuuntur
Christo, vnde constat eum esse supra Ecclesiam, eadem omnia tribuuntur
Pontifici. All the names which are given in Scripture to Christ, whereby it is
manifest that he is over all the Church; all those are given the Pope; he might
have added, and greater names too; for Christ is called Pontifex magnus, and he
calls the Pope Pontificem maximum, or summum: He proves that reason by an
Induction, and takes one instance, or example, out of my Text: First (says he)
Christus est pater-familias in domo sua, quae est Ecclesia; Pontifex in eadem
est summus aeconomus: Christ is the Master of the family in his own house,
which is the Church, and the Pope is the chief Steward in that house. If this
reason had been founded upon this Scripture, he should not have said Summus
aeconomus, but aeconomus only, that Summitie of his is not in this Scripture,
nor founded here: in this Text his ministry, or service is founded. But as
some Philosophers said, Cicero.
In cerebro animi esse sedem; So Pontificis summi seeds (whom they make the
very soul of the Church) is not found in my text, but in laborante cerebro, in
some brain, that is greatly distempered.

38. Here now (you see) is, corruptor stylus, the word or style of the
Scripture corrupted, and Summus put in stead of Fidelis; but let us go on, and
we shall find also, Tortul.
that there is adulter sensus, the sense of the Scripture strangely
adulterated; for (says he) Christus est Pater-familias in domo sua, quae est
Ecclesia: Pontifex in eadem domo est summus aeconomus, id est, Pater-familias
loco Christi. Christ is Master in his own house, which is the Church; the Pope
is the chief Steward in that house; that is, the Master in stead of Christ.
Observe, I pray you, Oeconomus, id est, Pater-familias loco Christi; a Servant,
that is, a Master.

Cic. de divine. li. 1.
39. Tullie says, Vbi sunt multa ambigua, multa obscura, explanationes
adhibendae sunt interpretum; Where there are many things doubtful, many
obscure, the expositions of Interpreters must be added. If there be any
obscurity, any equivocation in the word aeconomus, the Evangelist explaines it,
and makes it univocal in the next verse; we need not Bellarmines
interpretation, aeconomus, id est, Pater-familias: for the Evangelist says
aeconomus, id est, seruus, (...), a servant; and as if the holy Ghost would
prevent this interpretation, so prejudicial to our Savior, and to his Church;
speaking of the same man, he calls him once only, and that in this Text
aeconomum; but he calls him seruum, Mat. 24.
four times in the five next verses. And S. Matt. delivering the same Parable,
never calls him aeconomum, but (...), ever. (...), even four sundry times in
the same Parable; And yet Bellarmine dares say aeconomus, id est,
Pater-familias loco Christi. Vtricroditis? Give you credit to the holy Ghost by
the pen of two Evangelists, who say eight times aeconomus, id est, seruus; or
to Bellar: who reads aeconomus, id est, Pater-familias, or dominus, as it is in
the Text?

40. O fratres Censore opus est, an Aruspice nobis? Juuen.
Whether have we more need of an Index, or Ignis expurgatorius, to quit the
world from these blasphemous corruptions: or some wise South-sayer to inform
us, what these monsters portend? there were here-tofore certain Augures, as
Tully notes, Cic. ad At. l. 13. Epist. 12.
Qui Iouis optimi maximi interpretes, internuntijque fuerunt: but there are now
in Rome certain Cardinals, Qui Pontificis summi interpretes, internuntijque
sunt; who interpret the Scriptures only for the Popes honor, and send abroad
their books about the world, as the Popes Nuntios, or Internuntios, only to
uphold that monstrous informed double-faced Monarchy; which is in effect to rob
Christ of his kingdom: for the Pope is created Summus aeconomus, id est,
Pater-familias loco Christi; or Dominus, as it is in my Text; and we say
truly, Regnum non capit duos, but one will endeavor to thrust out another.

41. Me thinks the Cardinal, when he sees in the Scripture, that our Savior
is but Pontifex magnus, and the Pope thus created Pontifex summus, should
esteem the name of Dominus, or Pater-familias, too high for our Savior, and
that he usurps a place above his degree; and should therefore say unto him,
as it is Luke 14. Da huic locum, SIR, you take your place too high, for you are
but magnus, here is one that is summus in the superlatiue degree; he is become
Pater familias loco tuo, let him take your place: and as the Jews said before,
Venient Romani, and tollent locum nostrum, and gentem; so he should say to our
Savior, Venit Romanus, and tollit locum tuum, and gentem: The Pope is come,
and does rob thee of thy place, and pre-eminence, and of thy people also; for
he is become Dominus, and Pater familias loco tuo, and all thy attendants,
Archbishops, and Bishops, are become his servants, and men of his family.

42. And here observe the nature of pure ambition: he is not satisfied with his
own honor and exaltation above his degree, except Bishops, his equals, and
men of his own rank be humbled, and debased: As if he should say, Me oportet
crescere, vos autem minui; Of a Steward I must be made Pater familias, or
Dominus, and you of stewards must become my Servants, de famulitio, men of my
family: I must be removed to the highest seat, you must be thrust down to a
lower form.

43. Peradventure you may imagine this to be some verbal amplification only.
Devisib. Monar. lib. 6 c. 4. Vide etiam Bellar. de Pontif. Romans lib. 1. c. 18.
Not so. Sanders tells us plainly, that Reliqui discipuli, post Christum,
etiam velut de familia, and comitatu Petri habentur: All the rest of the
Apostles or Disciples are, as it were, seruing-men and attendants upon St.
Peter, next after Christ: and therefore by consequent all Archbishops, and
Bishops, are also servants and attendants upon the Pope; for he chalengeth to
his Monarchy whatsoever prerogative St. Peter had, though there is not extant
any writing either of Scripture, or the ancient Church, which may serve for any
evidence of the maine conueyance of that Primacie (whatsoever it were) that St.
Peter had, to the Bishop of Rome; but their plea is prescription, or
possession, from the time of Saint Peter.

44. But how will Sanders prove this proposition? even by evidence of
Scripture; for (says he) when St. Mark had showed the calling of Peter,
Andrew, James, and John, he tells, Marc. 1.
how Jesus went into a desert place to pray, and (says he) Prosecutus est eum
Simon, and qui cum eo erant, (...); and this phrase (says he) is thrice found
in the Gospel; (...), and then makes this inference: Quid aliud significat
illud (Qui cum Simone erant) nisi reliquos discipulos, post Christum, agnouisse
Simonem velut ducem, aut Rectorem suum? If we grant so much, yet Dux, or Rector
implie not a Monarchy; nor that they were de familia, and comitatu eius, but
rather a Primacie amongst them, who otherwise are equal, as the Apostles were:
For Cyprian says, Cyprian de unit. Eccles.
Hoc esse coeteros Apostolos, quod fuit and Petrus, pari consortio praeditos
and honoris, and potestatis; yet he acknowledged a Primacie in Saint Peter.

45. But this Scripture proves not so much as a Primacie; for say they, his
Monarchy, or Primacie, was not begun while his name was Simon, Stapleton
relect,
but when his name was changed to Peter; and that after the change he was but
once called Simon, but commonly Peter. And when he says, Reliquos discipulos
agnouisse Simonem, velut Ducem, and Rectorem suum, it is most false; for they
ceased not to strive for the superiority, till our Saviors Passion: and James,
and John made just account of it, as the next of his kin, if this great
Monarchy had gone by succession. And St. Chrysostom observes, that long
after this the Apostles were offended at the very suspicion of Peter's Prelacie,
when our Savior paid the tribute for himself, and Peter only; Chrysostom.
super Mat. cap. 18.
for says he, Quando certos praeferri conspexerunt, nihil tale passi sunt; cum
vero ad vnum delatus honor est, tunc nimirum doluerunt: When they perceived
certain of the Apostles to be preferred, it never troubled them; but when the
honor was conferred upon one only, then it grieved them.

46. Neither are the rest of the Apostles so distinguished from St. Peter, as
Sanders implies; who reads, Prosecutus est eum Simon, and qui cum eo erant,
joining the word of the singular number to Peter only, and so distinguishing
the Apostles from him, as servants from the Master; for the Evangelist joins
them together, with a word of the plural number, (...), Petrus, and qui cum eo
erant, prosecuti sunt eum, as fellows, and equals, all of one company.

47. Having thus usurped the Monarchy over the house of God, and made himself
Dominum, and Patrem-familias, and subjected all the true and lawful Stewards,
the Bishops, and Prelates to his service; and from being his fellows, made
them de familia, and comitatu eius, as Sanders said; he claims to himself as
his right, the custody of all the Master-keyes of Gods house. And first Clauem
Scientiae, the keye of Knowledge, which so opens to him only the door of the
Scriptures, that he cannot err in expounding them. Secondly, Clauem, if not
putei abyssi, yet abyssi, the keys of Purgatory, which is next door by; where
he lets loose the souls by his Indulgences, and pardons. Thirdly, Clauem
potestatis, which Bellarmine calls clauem David; Quae aperit, and nemo claudit;
Es. 22.
claudit, and nemo aperit; that is, Summam potestatem, Bellar. de Romans Pontif.
l. 1. c. 13.
in omnem Ecclesiam: which is his absolute Ecclesiastical Monarchy,
Potestatem depositionis vnius, and institutionis alterius. Fourthly, Clauem
Iurisdictionis, whereby he chalengeth to himself all Jurisdiction, and from
himself only deriues it to others; affirming, Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 1.
c. 24.
Omnem ordinariam Iurisdictionem Episcoporum a Papa immediate descendere.
Finally, Clauem Ordinationis, whereby he claims to himself the original
power of consecrating Bishops, and ordering Priests, De Romans Pontif. lib. 1.
cap. 23.
etc. for Bellarmine tells us, that St. Peter only was consecrated a Bishop by
our Savior, and all the rest of the Apostles by Peter: so that all orders come
first and originally from Peter, and now by prerogative from the Bishop of
Rome: and other the like vanities.

48. And thus you see the Popes absolute spiritual Monarchy, to be founded
partly upon the manifold corruptions of this my Text; Quis est fidelis
dispensator and prudens, quem constituit Dominus supra familiam; which is most
monstrously transformed, thus: Quis est summus dispensator, or, summus
Pontifex, qui constituit seipsum Patrem-familias, or, Domium supra totam
familiam collectiue, or, supra Omnem familiam distributive; or, supra Omnes
oeconomos, id est, Praelatos and Episcopos, qui facti sunt quasi de familia,
and comitatu eius.

49. When he has thus seated the Pope in the throne of his spiritual
Monarchy, Bernard.
Mentitur iniquitas sibi, that by virtue of this Text thus corrupted, they may
give him a name or prerogative above all kings, and Emperors; that so in
nomine eius omne genu flectatur, at his honor and prerogatives all knees should
bow, both temporal and spiritual, upon the face of the earth: And therefore
having created him by these corruptions Patrem-familias, they compare him with
Kings, and prefer him before all temporal Monarchs; affirming, that Kings
hold it but in fee, and (as it were) at the pleasure and will of the people,
and may be deposed, and forfeit their estates: but the Popedom is directum
Dominium, held of God immediately, a firm and safe tenure; and that also by
the virtue of this my Text.

Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 16.
50. For Bellarmine endeavoring to prove, Summam potestatem non esse in
concilio, sed in Papa: fearing peradventure, least we should argue thus out of
his false principles, Summa potestas est in regno, non in rege; Ergo, Summa
potestas est in Ecclesia, vel concilio, non in Papa: That you may not think
(says he) that the Church which is Regnum Christi, is like to other Kingdoms
of the earth; comparatur familiae, it is likened to a family by our Savior,
saying, Quis est seruus fidelis, Mat. 24.
and prudens, quem constituit Dominus supra familiam, etc. and compared also to
an house in the Epistle to the Hebrews; Heb. 3.
Moses erat fidelis in tota domo Dei tanquam seruus; Christus autem erat
fidelis in tota domo sua tanquam dominus. Here you see (says he) the Church
compared to an house, and to a family; would you expect, that he should
implie a prerogative to the Popedom, above the prerogative of Kings, because
the kingdom of Christ, which is his Church, resembles rather a family, or an
house, then a Kingdom? Quid non speremus amantes? yet he endeavors it, and
after this manner. Constat Patrem-familias non habere a familia vllam
authoritatem, sed ex se; quia ipse a familia non constituitur pater, sed ipse
facit sibi familiam, gignendo liberos, emendo seruos; It is evident, that the
Master of a family receives not any authority from the family, but has it of
himself; because he is not made the Master, or Father, by his family, but he
makes a family for himself by begetting Children, and buying servants. This is
very true in our Savior Christ, who is the true Pater-familias, and has
espoused the Church, and begotten many Children by the seed of his Word, and
purchased many Servants by the price of his Blood: but the inference is not
made of him, but of the Pope, as appears by the style. Vnde (says he)
Pater-familias etiamsi pessimus sit, Staplet. relect.
(an Epithete belonging well enough to the Popes, who, as Stapleton confesses,
have wallowed in all kind of wickedness,) Vnde Pater-familias etiamsi pessimus
sit, nunquam potest a familia iudicari, vel expelli, sicut potest Rex, quando
degenerat in tyrannum. Whereby it is evident, that the Master of the family
(though he be never so wicked) cannot be judged, or expelled by his family, as
a King may, when he degenerates into a tyrant. A wonderful privilege
achieved by a false, counterfeit, corrupt gloss, set upon this Text, Quis est
summus oeconomus, id est, Pater-familias, for, Quis est fidelis oeconomus, id
est, seruus, whereby the Pope sits immovable, iniudicable in his throne,
etiamsi pessimus sit, and Kings, and Bishops, who are (as it were) of his
family, if they degenerate, or fit not his humor, may be deposed.

51. Thus, as the Psalmist says, Adhaerere sibi fecit sedem iniquitatis: Psalm.
93.20.
he is now fastened to his chair of iniquity, with a ten-penny nail. But who
can imagine the privilege of a common house-holder, or Pater-familias, to be
greater then the prerogative of an absolute Monarch? This rule holds not but in
the Church of Rome, wherein if a King be excommunicated, he may forfeit his
kingdom; but if a Subject, or Pater-familias be excommunicated, his
inheritance is not touched. So that, as it was better and safer to be Herod's
Swine, then his Son, as the Proverb is; so it is safer to be a Swine-heard,
or any private Pater-familias in the Church of Rome, then the highest Monarch.
And now we find the reason why the Pope rather favors Patres-familias, then
Reges, Subjects, then Kings; even because he has purchased a privilege
beyond Kings, by usurping the title of Pater-familias in the Church of God.

52. This assertion of Bellarmine is so dangerous to be spoken, that it may not
be passed in silence; and yet so full of absurdities, that the time will not
serve to confute them at large. I will therefore only enumerate some chief of
them, for, enumerasse, est confutasse. For first, the Pope is not
Pater-familias, but oeconomus, or seruus, as other Bishops are; his holy, and
reverend predecessors of the purer times had but a Primacie; not above, but
among other Bishops, as the nature of an Aristocracie does require.

53. Secondly. Papa non habet vllam authoritatem a se, sed constituitur Papa a
Cardinalibus, by whom he is chosen. And although Sanders say, Alios Episcopos,
primum Pontificem nec vegetare, De visib. Monar. l. 3. c. 7.
nec confirmare; yet Cardinal Paleottus (who maintains the Popes Monarchy,
as resolutely as he) tells us, that Quidam non insulse dicebat, (he durst
scarce speak it in his own name) sicut potentiae vegetatiuae tres sunt actus,
sieve officia; quae sunt Generare, Nutrire, Augere: sic Cardinales dicuntur
quodam modo Generare Papam, Paleot. de Consist. part q. 5.
dum illum eligunt; Nutrire, cum illi dant consilia; Augere, dum opere ei
praesto sunt, eidemque suffragantur: so that he takes his power and authority
from the Cardinals.

54. Thirdly. Papa, si pessimus sit, potest iudicari, and expelli: The Pope, if
he be very wicked, may be judged, and deposed even by his Cardinals, and that
by his own reason: For therefore (says he, though falsely) Kings may be
removed, Quia potestas Regis est a populo, and the reason thereof is, Quia
populus facit Regem: so we may say, The Pope may be removed, Quia potestas
Papae est a Cardinalibus, Bellar. de Council. l. 2. c. 17.
because the power of the Pope is from the Cardinals; and the reason of it is,
Quia Cardinales faciunt Papam, because the Pope is created by the Cardinals.
But if he may not be removed by his Cardinals, yet it may be done by a
general Council, as some of his Cardinals, and greatest Doctors affirm.

55. Fourthly. Absolute Kings, or Monarchs, who have plenitudinem potestatis,
fullness of power, cannot be removed by the people for their defects: for,
Potestas haec non est a populo deriuata, This power is not derived from the
people, but from God, Per quem Reges regnant; By whom only Kings reign, as
appears in the people of God; where Saul was made King immediately by God,
and deposed by him only: and afterward David, and his posterity placed in his
room, and by God immediately. This is evident also among Christian Kings, who
reign by inheritance, and succession; where there is no interregnum at the
death of the King, for the people to practice their power in; but his Son
immediately reigns in his stead. For the chief power is not raaicaliter, or
suppletiue in regno, that is, in the people of the Kingdom, as Bellarmine
thinks; but in regno, that is, in the Kingdom it self, in iure regio, in the
right of Kings, and their issue, who hold it from God, and so are to be deposed
by him only.

56. Fifthly. Those Kings or Emperors, who are made by lawful Election, for
their lives only, and seem to some to be rather Primates in an Aristocracie,
then Kings in a Monarchy, though they be chosen by the Optimates either of
Kingdom or Empire, cannot yet be deposed by them; for although by unanimous
consent, and common constitutions, and the Laws of their Country, they have
power to advance one of their fellows, and equals, and to make him their
King; yet when he is once regularly and lawfully possessed of the Crown, they
have no power over him, but he is as absolute, as if he were placed
immediately by God: as Optatus told that scismaticall Bishop Donatus, Super
Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus, Optat. l. 3. Cont. Parmen.
qui fecit Imperatorem, There is none above the Emperor but only God, who made
the Emperor; and yet that Emperor was elected by the people.

57. For there is in every King by the law of Nature, a certain power, which
is called Ius regis, 1 Samuel 8. and Manus regia, by Homponius, 1 Samuel 8.
and many worthy Ciuilians, Pompon. l. 2. orig. Iur.
by which power they may govern Sine certa lege, sine certo iure, but not sine
aequitate, and iustitia. This power Romulus had, who began his own Kingdom;
and the Kings of Latium, and Hetruria; also the Kings of Asia, and Greece, who
were called (...), meek and gentle, who ruled by their word; as Homer calls
Ulysses (...): which word some derive of (...), verbum, as if he were, (...),
one that ruled all by his word. For which reason when they in Rome would elect
one to have the place and power of a King, though but for a short time (which
name they abhorred, and were content fictione lenior is nominis in Regem
incidere) they called him first Dictatorem, one, whose word should stand, as it
were a Law; and after that Imperatorem, a Commander, like the Centurion, who
shall say to the people, Go, and they shall go, etc. As also the Assessors of
the Sanedrim, among the Jews, were called by the Latinists Verbistae, because
their word was a Law to the people.

58. This Ius Regis, or Regia manus, was in Augustus as soon as ever the
people of Rome chose him their Emperor; so that his election by the people did
nothing diminish the kingly power in him, or made him any way subject to them,
as Bellarmine would teach us. And therefore that power which our Savior
expresses by (...), Mat. 20 25.
and (...), as proper to Kings of the Nations, that is, to all Kings, (for
there were then no kings, but of the Nations) the Romans called (...), an
inbred or inherent power in the King: Liberum arbitrium Regis, or potestas
arbitrij, by which Kings have governed exceedingly well.

Dion.
59. And therefore Dion in the life of Augustus, calls him (...), one that had
absolute power to make Laws, and might give judgment ex rationis placito,
which judgments were therefore called Imperatoris placita, or (...), as Dion
testifies; and had the force of a Law, or imperial constitution; such a one
was that Edict, which S. Luke mentions, and was sent out at our Saviors
nativity, Luc. 2.
that all the world should be taxed. And this Ius Regis, Joseph. de Antiq.
or Regia manus, or (...), (as Josephus calls the Empire of Rome) brought forth
plenitudinem potestatis, motum proprium, certam scientiam, Indulgentiam
Principis; phrases which signify the absolute power, which is in all
Kingdoms, and absolute Monarchies.

60. Absurd therefore it is, which Bellarmine says, that where the people
choose the King (which he falsely holds to be general radicaliter) there the
people may depose him: for although, where there are elections, the people, or
the Optimates, or both, may give Ius ad Regnum: yet Ius Regis, or Regia manus,
or (...), or Ius in Regno, was not in their power to give; but falls to the
elected King iure diuino, or by the Law of nature, and no man has right to
deprive him of it.

61. Thus you see one maine pillar of the Popes pretended Monarchy (which is
founded upon the manifold corruptions of my Text) utterly demolished: but
because, Non annosa vno quercus deciditur ictu, Such an old Oak of five
hundred years increase, from Gregory the seventh; or a thousand years
standing, from Phocas the Emperor, though now it be doted, will not be struck
down at any one blow, nor so many roots and foundations be blown up with
one only breath. Secondly, because Stapleton says, that St. Peter's, and the
Popes Monarchy, which is founded (says he) upon our Saviors verbal
institution, Non vno tota momento, sed gradatim, Stapleton relec. cont. 3. q.
1. art. 1.
and per parts a Christo facta, and tradita est, was not made and delivered
all at one time by our Savior, but it was given by degrees, and by parts: and
therefore as it was instituted by degrees, so it must be manifested and proved
by degrees, and so necessarily by degrees be confuted. Thirdly, because Gretzer
tells us, Gretz. defens. Bellar. l. 1. c. 23. de Romans Pontif.
that the prerogatives of St. Peter do not prove his Monarchy, Si
considerentur solitary, and non iunctim, If they be considered apart, and not
jointly: and therefore to disprove any one of his prerogatives, is not much to
the purpose. Finally, because they falsely object, that they being tied as a
Bear to the stake, to defend those propositions which are delivered in print,
and so professed to the whole world; we take no fast hold, nor come to
handy-gripes, but a snatch and away, like the dog at Nilus, Qui bibit, and
fugit, for fear of a Crocodile. I will therefore at my next opportunity join
issue with them; and prove, first, That the Apostle St. Peter had no Monarchy
over the Apostles, or Church of GOD, as Bellarmine, Stapleton, and Sanders,
teach. Secondly, That Saint Peter had a Primacie of order, as in an
Aristocracie, amongst the Apostles, who were his equals; and that by the
testimony of the ancient Church. Thirdly, That the ancient Bishops of Rome, of
the purer times, neither had, nor challenged any Monarchy in the Church, or any
part thereof. Fourthly, That by the judgment of the Fathers they had the
Primacie among other Bishops. Lastly, That this Primacie is not fastened to
that See, but may for their tyrannies, and usurpations upon Churches, and
Kingdoms, be removed from it, and conferred on another.

62. My conclusion should be (if the time did serve) with an exhortation, to
beware how we undertake the defense of any untruth, either in Religion, or
Morality, considering that neither the honor, wit, or learning of this great
Cardinal can possibly maintain it; but vni sustinendo mendacio necesse est
accumulari plura, Untruths are only maintained by untruths, and one corruption
or falsification begets another. Truth and a good cause are fairly defended,
sua claritate (as Lactantius says,) by her own clearenesse. Via illa mendax
(says he) the way of lying, and falsifying, and corrupting, etc. Via illa
mendax, quae ducit ad occasum, multos tramites habet, That false, deceitful
way which leads to destruction, has many cross ways, and many tricks too:
but being examined (as you see) shame follows after; and as he says, Ab
aniculis, quas contemnunt and a pueris nostris, error illorum, and stultitia
irridebitur; Their error, and folly shall be laughed at by our old women, and
children, whom they scorn.

63. God, who is the author, and defender of truth, and revenger, and reuealer
of falshoode and lies; so possess your hearts with the love of truth, that it
may be the scope and end of all your studies, and actions; and at length direct
you to that true way, which leads to the true everlasting life: This GOD
grant for Christ Jesus sake; to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost be all
honor, glory, praise, and dominion, for ever and ever. AMEN.

THE SECOND SERMON.
Luke 12.41.42. etc. Then Peter said unto him, MASTER, tellest thou this
parable unto us, or even to all?

And the Lord said: who is a faithful Steward, and wise, whom the Master shall
make ruler over the household, to give them their portion of meat in season?
etc.


1. I Have heretofore divided this Text into certain conditions, requisite for
a good Steward; but because we are to enquire Quis sit, Who he is, before we
come to the question Qualis sit, What his qualities and conditions are: I
showed you that Bellarmine disputing against the Presbyterians, affirmed out of
St. Hilarie, and the rest of the Fathers, that the Bishops and Prelates of the
Church were this Steward: but discoursing against Protestants, Cic. de Orat.
Tanquam Academicus nonus, qui contra omnes dicere solebant, he makes the Pope
this Steward, imagining these words to be spoke to St. Peter only: and to that
purpose he corrupted, as I then noted, every circumstance of this Text; for (as
St. Augustine says, Aug. li. 83. quest. q. 69.
) Non possit ijs error oboriri, palliatus nomine Christiano, nisi de scriptur
is non intellectis, aut malitiose expositis.

2. This counterfeit column of the Popes Monarchy I then shook asunder; but
it is seldom seen, Cicero.
that in vno praelio fortuna Reipub. disceptat: and this Monarchy was not
collated by our Savior with any one speech, or at any one time, as Stapleton
says, but by many and sundry donations: nor the great prerogatives, which
were given to St. Peter, and so consequently to the Pope, are to be considered
solitary, but iunctim, as Gretzer says; wherefore they must be confuted
severally, and (...) (as Tullie has it) exactly, Cic. de Orat.
and with a just proportion, Vt verba verbis quasi demensa, and paria
respondeant.

3. But because all the reasons, and arguments, which the Jesuits now make in
defense of this Monarchy, by virtue of any prerogative Monarchical, which
they attribute to St. Peter, Adiunante misericordia Domini (as St. Augustine
says) antea sunt (antiquorum) patrum praeuentione refutata, Aug. cont. epist.
2. Gaudentij lib. 2. cap. 6.
quam illorum circumuentione prolata, are prevented by the ancient Fathers
interpretations, before we could be circumuented by their objections, as
appears by sundry answers, which have been framed of late; as also because
it is an argument more beseeming many volumes, then a few Sermons, I will
therefore, as I then promised, prove to all indifferent hearers,

First, that S. Peter had not any Monarchy over the Apostles, or Church of
Christ, by our Saviors institution.

Secondly, that St. Peter had a Primacie of order, as in an Aristocracie, among
the Apostles; who were his equals, as the Fathers affirm.

Thirdly, that the ancient Bishops of Rome, of the purer times, neither had,
nor challenged any Monarchy over the Church, or any part thereof.

Fourthly, that by the judgment of the Fathers, they had the Primacie among
other Bishops.

Lastly, that this Primacie is not fastened to this See, but may for their
tyrannies, and usurpations over Churches, and Kingdoms, be removed from it,
and conferred on another.

4. The first is, that our Savior bequeathed no Monarchy to S. Peter, nor to
his Church; and so consequently, that the spiritual government is not
Monarchical.

5. This argument has been copiously, and learnedly handled of late; but
especially by those two worthies of our Church, the most learned and reverend
Bishops of Winchester and Rochester: D. Andrews. D. Buckerige.
of whom I may say, as Tullie did of Carneades, Tul. 2. de Orat.
Nullam rem defenderunt, quam not probarint; nullam oppugnauerunt, quam non
euerterint. But although all former doubts have been sufficiently cleared, and
determined, yet some new proofs may ever be added, and withal, vsus, and
inuentorum ab alijs scientia, and dispositio, the use, Sen.
and knowledge, and disposing of those things, which are found out by others.
As there are medicines enough set down by Antiquity to cure sore eyes, so
that our Physicians need not labor for more: but yet there is somewhat left,
wherein they may exercise their best endeauours, and studies; because (as
Seneca says) Sen. Epist. 65.
Haec morbis and temporibus aptanda sunt, hoc asperitas oculorum conleuatur;
hoc palpebrarum crassitudo tenuitur; hoc vis subita and humor auertitur; hoc
acuitur visus.

6. And as St. Bernard said to Eugenius of doctrinall or moral matters, and
the reformation of the Church, Non plane totum quiuere emundare prophetae,
aliquid filijs suis Apostolis, Bernard de Consid. ad Eugen. l. 2. c. 6.
quod agerent, reliquerunt; aliquid ipsi parents nostri nobis: sed nec nos ad
omne sufficiemus; aliquid profecto nostris relicturi sumus successoribus, and
illi alijs, and alij alijs vsque in finem: so in our ordinary controversies and
polemicall questions, Multum egerunt, qui ante nos fuerunt, sed non omnino
peregerunt, because there are daily some fresh replies, and assaults, which
yield some occasions to other men's labors. But to the matter proposed.

7. It is confessed on all hands, that the spiritual power, as we truly call
it; or spiritual Jurisdiction of the Church, as the Papists term it
improperly, is that only, which it has received from our Savior himself,
the first founder of it. Manifestum est (says Franciscus Syluestris in his
commentaries upon Thomas Contra Gentiles) quod Christus ipse regimen Ecclesiae
suae instituit, Fran. Syl. l. 4. c. 76.
non autem ipsa Ecclesia, aut populus Christianus; neither Popes, nor
Emperors, nor other Christian Kings appointed the spiritual regiment of the
Church, but our Savior only: and Sanders says, Ecclesia neque agnos quidem,
Sand. de visio. Monar. l. 1. c. 6.
et oues per autoritatem suam, absque Dominica institutione per Sacramentum
Baptismi operante, creare potest: quanto minus per se potest creare pastores,
and Doctores? etc. The Church of her own authority can neither make Lambs
nor Sheep, without the institution of Christ working by the Sacrament of
Baptism: by how much less then of her self can the Church create Pastors and
Doctors? The Spiritual regiment therefore is to be sought for in the
Scriptures only. The temporal power, and truly so called Jurisdiction of the
Church, some derive from our Savior only: some from Christian Emperors, and
Kings: and some from both.

8. Of the first kind, who derive the temporal power from our Savior only,
are the Canonists, and Bartholus the Ciuilian, and Bozius, and those other
ordinis oratorij, who hold, that our Savior was the temporal Monarch of the
world, and left his Monarchy to St. Peter etc. as appears in the Canonists,
and Canon Law: Cap. 10. 32.
Quae iura valde bona sunt ad hoc, as Aluarez tells us, in speculo summorum
Pontif. and Regum: and no marvel, for they were made by the Popes themselves,
and glossed by their flatterers. This opinion is refelled by Bellarmine, and he
needs no help of us, vallatus auxilio pugnatorum, Jos. 8.16.
being assisted with that whole society, who fight jointly with him.

9. They who derive the temporal power, which the Church possesses, from the
bounty and liberality of Christian Monarchs, are the Protestants, supportantes
sibi inuicem in veritate, jointly maintaining this truth by plain evidence of
vncorrupt Antiquity, acknowledging by whom every great privilege was given;
as in place shall be proved.

10. Now the Jesuits, and that crew, vigilantes animi, and domini
necessitatibus seruientes, being very vigilant, and careful to serve their
Masters turn, challenge this temporal power to their Lord the Pope, both from
our Savior, and from Christian Monarchs: a part only from Kings and Emperors,
and that directly; but another part, whereby they challenge power, and
authority to excommunicate Kings, and deprive them of their Kingdoms (which
cannot be done, but by temporal power) from our Savior ex consequente, and in
ordine ad bonum spirituale: but that is indirecte. Distinctio necessitati
debita, a most necessary distinction, for it is the only supporter of the
Popes temporal Monarchy; for the Canonists opinion, as too gross, is
exploded by them.

11. But this reedie, and arundineous supporter is so shattered and torn by
our reverend Prelates, fustibus argumentorum, as St. Augustine calls them, that
we may daily expect the downe-fall and ruin of that Monarchy: and of this
distinction also we shall speak hereafter.

12. But the spiritual power of the Church is acknowledged by Canonists,
Jesuits and Protestants, to be derived from our Savior only: for the Church
had spiritual power, before it had Kings to be Patrons and Nurses of it; and a
certain government, and Governors to exercise that power; nec auxilia a
Regibus terrae, religionis Christianae propagandae, aut defendendae gratia
petijt; neither did it entreat aid of the Kings of the earth, either for the
propagation, or defense of Christian religion: and of this spiritual power is
our question.

of the Church, or no; for as Suarez notes well; Cum Dominus Apostolicum munus
creabat, Suarez. de Leg. l. 4. c. 4. n. 19.
necessario supponendum est illud munus cum omnibus necessarijs, ad
conuenientem vsum eius ordinatum fuisse; when the Lord instituted the
Apostolical office or function, we must needs suppose, that he ordained all
necessaries, that were conuentent, and useful for that office: we confess
both that this Church is Castrorum acies ordinata, an army well ordered; Cant.
6. Acts 20.28.
Et spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam, the holy Ghost has set
Bishops to govern the Church.

Ecclesiastical government be spiritual, and distinct from the Political:
for we both confess, that the Church had no several government of it, or in
it, for a long time; but spiritual governors only, Romans 12.8.
who did not Proeesse in dominio, but in solicitudine, excel in power, but in
diligence.

absolute and free Monarch of the whole Church triumphant, and militant; for
both of us acknowledge him to be our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Ps. 2.6.
Luc. 1.33.
Qui constitutus est Rex super montem sanctum Domini, Psalm. 2. Et regni huius
non erit finis, Luc. 1. and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, whether we
intend extent of place, or continuance of time: but our question is, whether
our Savior appointed over his militant Church one Steward, oeconomum vnum,
viz. St. Peter, as the Papists hold, as the sole spiritual Monarch of it,
from whom all spiritual power should be derived; or many Stewards, viz. the
twelve Apostles, and their successors, as equal and joint commissioners from
him.

16. This word Monarcha, or Monarchia, which is the Praedicatum in our
question, is no ancient Ecclesiastical word, but nouus and ascriptitius ciuis,
and but lately admitted into the Church government, or spiritual
commonwealth of Christ Jesus: it was never found in the Fathers applied to the
Church (I think I may be bold to say) for more then a thousand years; not
very frequent till our age, in which Sanders wrote his visible Monarchy. Now
Franciscus a victoria, Francis victor. Relect. 7.
sets down this rule: Theologis non licet in suis disputationibus, sicut
Iurisconsultis, aliquid insolens, nouum, and inauditum, contra maiorum
autoritatem asserere. It is not lawful for Divines (as it is for Lawyers,) to
maintain any thing, that is strange, new, and unheard of, against the
authority of the Fathers. Notwithstanding this Non licet, Sanders, Stapleton,
Suarez, Bellarmine, Gretzer, with that whole society, or rather conspiracy,
take upon them the defense of this Monarchical, Papal Church-gouernement: no
doubt directly against their consciences, and certain knowledge; as may
appear by their slye, subtle, and various defense of it.

17. For Bellarmine entitles his books plainly De Romani Pontificis
Monarchia, but with fear, and a kind of blushing; Cic. Bellarl. l. 1. c. 19.
Verecundiam timiditas imitatur, fear imitates bashfulnesse; for when he comes
to the issue and heart of the question, he changes his copy, as if he should
say, Timide dito, sed tamen dicendum est, though I fear to offend my violent
brethren, yet I must affirm but this only, Ecclesiasticum regimen praecipue
Monarchicum esse debere, which is the title of that ninth chapter: praecipue
Monarchicum, a word slyly put in, that when he is pressed hard with any
argument, he may slide instantly into the Primacie, which we deny not;
confounding for his advantage these two questions of the Monarchy, and
Primacie; a common practice among them all; that if they be urged hard, they
may after the manner of unconstant heretics, rapide ad vnum delabi, slip
suddenly to one of them: and again, when they see their time, and advantage,
cito in alterum confluere, return quickly to their first error.

18. But there is no Monarchy in the world praecipue Monarchicum: if it be
Monarchicum, it is absolute Monarchicum; and whatsoever is found in it either
Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, it is by the favorable and free concession
of the absolute Monarch; as we see in this Kingdom, and others adjacent: and
the Monarchs bounty and grace, who yields so much for the ease, and good of
his people, must not prejudice his absolute prerogative, or give to his
government a new, forged, or commentitious title: for multari Monarcham
diminutione aliqua honoris, contumelio sum est; it is a high disgrace to
deprive a Monarch of the least part of his honor.

19. Notwithstanding, Gretzer (who has commandment from Claudius de Aqua
viua, general Governor of that society, to second Bellarmine in all his
attempts, and observes in his own writings these two qualities, temere
dicere, and astute reticere, to speak confidently in his greatest weakness,
and conceal subtly his adversaries strength) seeing Bellarmine urged by
Danaeus (proving the Church government not to be Monarchical, and himself
not able to make it good) as one full of clamor, and indignation, cries out
like Mars in Homer, having taken a wound, Gretz. l. 2. defen. Bellar. de.
Pontif. Romans li. 1. ca. 9.
Vbi vnquam scripsit Bellarminus Ecclesiae regimen esse Monarchicum plane, id
est, pure, sine vlla admixtione ex Aristocratta, and Democratta? Where did
Bellarmine ever write, that the government of the Church was plainly, that is,
purely Monarchical, without any mixture of Aristocracie, or Democracie?

20. We will answer him briefly. Wheresoever Bellarmine calls the regiment of
the Church Monarchicum, or S. Peter, or the Pope a Monarch simply without any
diminishing particle, there he says, the regiment of the Church is plane and
pure Monarchicum; and the Pope is plane and pure Monarcha. But that we may,
Cic. in Top.
Vi nominis argumentum el^cere, the etymon of the word (...) implies not only,
that one, but one alone, solus, does govern the state plane and pure: besides
Bellarmine entitles his book De Romani Pontificis Monarchia, without any
diminution; and holds it affirmatively, and says that St. Peter was Primus
Ecclesiae Romanae Monarcha; Gretz l. 2. c. 2.
and Gretzer says, Monarchia, and Monarcha supremam, and ab alio independentem
authoritatem denotat; which admits neither Aristocracy, nor Democracie to be
mixed with it; for then it were not sola, nor independens: and after that
absolute manner he defines St. Peter's spiritual Monarchy, in his eight
Chapter.

De Pontif. Romans lib. 1. cap. 9.
21. And when Bellarmine says, Papam habere plenitudinem potestatis, si
comparetur cum Episcopis, which notes the intensiue power: and Papa est
praepositus toti orbi Christiano, in that fullness of power; and notes the
extensiue power: and that he has totam and plenam eam potestatem, quam
Christus ad Ecclesiae vtilitatem in terris reliquit, which is a plenarie power;
and many the like: what does he else, but in plain terms auerre the
government of the Church, and the Popes power to be plane, id est, pure
Monarchicum? For the power Aristocraticall in other Bishops, or Democraticall
in inferior Priests, is not intended by Bellarmine, to be with admixtion (as
Gretzer calls it) with the Popes government; but by subordination to the Popes
power, or emanation from the Popes power, as Suarez says: with which
subordination, De Leg. l. 4. c. 4.
or emanation Aristocraticall, or Democraticall (as they hold it) the Church
regiment may be plane, id est, pure Monarchicum.

22. Tullie says, Do Natu. Deoru^ lib. 3.
that a man may wrong a good cause by ill handling it, Rem minime dubiam
argumentando dubiam facere, as no doubt the rest of the Jesuits will censure
Bellarmine for halting, as it were, between the Monarchy and Primacie;
whereas they are resolute, obstinatione quadam sententiae, that the Pope is
plane and pure a perfect and absolute spiritual Monarch.

23. For Suarez (a chief Captain of that coniuration) affirming that our
Savior gave to S. Peter Munus Apostolicum, and Potestatem legislatiuam, De
leg. l. 4. c. 4. n. 15. and 16.
vt ordinario Pastori, cui succedendum erat: alijs autem Apostolis tanquam
Legatis vitalitijs, as he calls them, Legates for their life, (another
distinction, which is necessitati debita, as necessary as the former; without
this, the Popes Monarchy cannot be maintained) proves it thus: Because (says
he) it stands with reason, and congruitie, that it should be so. Quia hic modus
institutionis est magis consentaneus perfectae Monarchiae, qualem esse Christi
Ecclesiam Catholici intelligunt. This is the Catholic opinion (as Suarez
affirms) that the Church regiment is perfecta Monarchia, that is, plane and
pure, which Gretzer denies; and not praecipue Monarchicum, which is Bellarmines
scutum occulium, his rustie shield hanged up in a corner, as a ready defense
against a powerful assault; but being surueied, it is found not scutum, but
cribrum, not a shield, but a sieue, which will bear off no blows, nor hold
any water, as the Proverb is.

24. This difference and inconstancy of opinion argues strongly the weakness
of their cause, and insinuates, that the Church is no Monarchy: but because it
is the Catholic opinion (as Suarez says) that it is a perfect Monarchy,
which we absolutely deny: we will search to our ability the truth of the
business, which admits no other then Scripture proof; seeing it is confessed
on both sides, that the regiment of the Church is of our Saviors institution.
We will therefore consider, what he has ordained concerning this regiment,
either by plain terms, or by necessary consequence: for whatsoever he has
said, or done in the Scripture, Ser. 109. de Tempore.
(as St. Augustine says) Vox est Christi dicentis, obserua.

25. It is granted, that the Kingdom of Judah was Monarchical; but being taken
from them by the Romans, their only hope was on the Messiah, whom they expected
a long time, Luc. 2.25. Luc. 2.32.
as the consolation of Israel, Lu. 2.25. as the glory of Israel, verse. 32. as
the redemption of Israel, Ioh. 24. John 24. Acts 1.
that is, Qui restitueret regnu^ Israel, Act. 1. which both Jews and Gentiles
understood of their temporal kingdom: for the Magi enquired, Vbi est, qui
natus est Rex Iudaeorum? Mat. 2.
and brought presents used to be offered to Kings: and Ioh. 6. Joh. 6.
the people would have taken him up, and made him a King: and the chief
Priests cry Mat. 27. Si Rex Israel est, Mat. 27.
descendat de cruce, etc. and in this error all the Apostles continued jointly
without exception, all the time that he lived on earth; and they were in
continual strife, Quis eorum mayor esset, who should be the greatest in this
Kingdom after him: neither could this carnal opinion be wrought out of them
by our Savior, till experience showed the contrary after his passion.

26. Now our Savior being to erect a spiritual kingdom, that he might
remove all occasion of strife, and contention, of pride and ambition, chose for
his Apostles twelve men of equal condition, who should succeed him in the
government; and least peradventure any one might be of better parentage then
another, his Law was, that they must forsake Father, and Mother, and all their
kindred: and if richer then other, they must forsake House and Land, Ship and
Nets and all, and so follow him. So that our Saviors first care was to strippe
them, as it were, naked of all they had; that finding no difference, or
pre-eminence among themselves in worldly faculties, they might all appear
equal, and of one condition.

27. Having thus equalized them, and freed them from all worldly respects; he
diuides his spiritual gifts, and endowments, the spiritual offices, and
honors of his Church, indifferently among them. He gave to them all the office
of Apostleship; he made them all equal, and joint governors of his Church;
he sent them out indifferently two and two to preach: he gave them all alike
power to work miracles, and to cast out Devils, and to cure diseases, that
there might be no emulation among them: he washed indifferently all their
feet: they had all alike power to bind, and to loose, to remit and reteyne
sins: he promised his presence, and Holy Ghost indifferently to them all; and
in this paritie, and equality, he founded his Church.

28. Notwithstanding, as in temporal Kingdoms, in an equality of honor and
state given unto many by the absolute Prince, some yet are more employed then
others; some, as it seems, better favored then others, and more beloved: so
it happened in this spiritual Kingdom; for most conference passed between
our Savior, and St. Peter, and most love was showed to the Apostle St. John,
and more familiarity and secrecy used with Peter, James and John, then with
the rest: and yet all stood upon their equallity, and neither challenged, nor
yielded superiority to other.

29. For self-love, and a conceit of equallitie of place, and desert, in their
love and service to their Master, made every one think himself capable of
that Kingdom, which they carnally conceived, notwithstanding particular
favors were done unto some. For after that great promise made to St. Peter,
Mat. 16. Mat. 16.19.
Tibi dabo claues, to thee will I give the keys (which the Pope makes the
first promise of the Monarchy to St. Peter, and his successors) the Apostles
conceived no such thing; but questioned after that, Quis eorum mayor esset, who
was the greater of them? So though Peter, James, Io. 17.
and John had been especially taken apart to see the transfiguration: and they
three only severed from the rest, to be present at the raising of the daughter
of Iairus; Marc. 3.37.
yet there was contention afterward among them, Quis eorum videretur mayor, not
which of them three should be the greater, but Quis eorum, which of the twelve
should be the greatest: so also though the tribute was paid for our Savior,
and Peter, Mat. 17.
Mat. 17. and greatest affection was showed to John, when he leaned on his
Masters breast, Ioh. 13. Joh. 13.
yet the contention continued, Quis eorum mayor esset, not which of those two,
Peter and John, Luc. 22.
but which of the twelve should be the greater, even after the last Supper. And
when our Savior had satisfied them, that there was no such superiority to be
expected among them, he continues still his special favors to Peter, James,
and John: and the same night taking them apart, Mat. 26.37.
coepit coram eis tristari, and mastus esse, he began to be sorrowful, and
very heavy before them: testifying that those extraordinary actions were not
any argument of supremacy, or Primacie.

30. This behavior of the Apostles, contending so often for the first place,
which they thought to be Monarchical, according to the form of the government
of the Jews, gave occasion to our Savior to speak diverse and sundry times of
this question.

31. If it be demanded, why the Apostles contended so often among themselves
for the first place; you shall find diverse reasons given by reverend
Antiquity, and urged by some late Writers; and namely, that it was in reg^rd
of the special favor to St. Peter, in giving him the keys, and in paying
tribute for him only, etc. But saving my reverend respect to my betters,
Jansen.
I rather think, that the foreshewing so often his death, and passion, caused
them rather so often to question the succession.

Capernaum, he foretold his Disciples his death, and passion; after that they
disputed (as St. Marc. 9.34.
Mark says) (...), quis eorum caeteris esset mayor, who should be the greater
of them: For when they heard that he should die, then they thought of his
successor: for (as our Savior told them) adhuc sine intellectuerant, Mat.
15.16.
as yet they were without understanding, Mat. 15. and also Luke 24. they were
tardi ad credendum, Luc. 24.25.
slow to believe, what was written by the Prophets.

Mat. 20. he foretold his death and passion to them; and then (says S.
Matthew) the mother of the Sons of Zebedee entreated for the prime seats in
his kingdom; Mat. 20.21.
and thereupon grew another contention among them.

Luke 22. when they expected his passion, even at the last Supper, Luc. 22.24.
facta est contentio inter eos, there was a strife among them, which of them
should be accounted the greatest; and our Savior instantly every time
quenches the heat of their ambition, and contention, with a present answer.

35. At Capernaum hearing their contention, he answers, Si quis vult primus
esse erit omnium nouissimus, Marc. 9.35.
and omnium minister, If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of
all, and servant of all: allowing no desire of superiority among them, who were
to be equals in his kingdom of the Church; which was well performed in the
primitive purer times, when (as S. Augustine says) Multi, vt Episcopatum
susciperent, Aug. Epist. 204.
tenebantur inuiti, Many were constrained against their wills, to take
Bishoprics. And I do not find, that any man among the Apostles, or their
first successors, affected any first or chief place in the Church, before it
was endowed with honor and lands; neither was there any reason, why they
should desire it, all circumstances considered; except charity enforced them
for the good of the Church; and then he took the government, who was called,
and chosen, and not he that aspired, and sought the first place.

36. How then does the Pope observe this rule, who will not only be first
among Bishops, but the Monarch over all Bishops? Gorran.
Gorran simply shows us a pretty slight to elude this rule; for, says he,
Hinc Dominus Papa, omnium Christianorum vertex, scribit se seruus seruorum Dei;
Hence it is, that our Lord the Pope, who is the top, or supreme of all
Christians, writes himself the servant of the servants of God; and that (says
he) after the example of Christ, of whom the Prophet says, Vidimus eum
nouissimum virorum, Es. 53.3.
We have seen him the last of men. But our Savior says not, Qui vult primus
esse, scribat se nouissimum, He that desires to be first, let him write
himself last, but erit omnium nouissimus, and minister omnium, Marc. 9.35.
he shall be the last of all, and the servant of all: And if his great
Cardinals should see the Pope indeed so humiliated, as our Savior was, and is
there expressed by the Prophet Esai, who fore-sawe his passion, Es. 53.3.
and describes him to be Nouissimum virorum (opinione omnium) the meanest of
men, in all men's opinion, as the Gloss says; and virum dolorum, and scientem
infirmitatum, a man full of sorrow, and acquainted with infirmities; they would
soon (even to his face, which St. Peter did not) renounce their great Monarch,
and abjure his acquaintance.

37. I pass over the sensible example, which our Savior used to his Apostles,
by taking up a little child in his arms, as a pattern for them: for by the
little child he took in his arms, affirming that the Apostles must be like
unto such, he reproved their ambition and strife for the Monarchy, because
(as S. Chrysostom says) A vana gloria and inuidia paruulus mundus existit,
Hom. 59. in Mat.
and a concupiscendo Primatum; A little child is void of vainglory, and
envy, and desire of the Primacie: Cyril.
and as Cyril says, Puer non ambit honorem, non nouit cuiusuis praerogatiuae
modum, A child sues not for honor, he knows not what belongs to any
prerogative: for this is not in sensu primo, an instruction to humility by a
positive doctrine; as many Divines think it to be, commenting on this place;
(for little children are not vere virtuo^i, vere humiles, truly virtuous,
truly humble, and in that to be imitated:) but it is a negative doctrine,
forbidding all strife and contention for place, and Prelacie in the Church; and
insinuating, that they should be as free from ambition ex rationis rectitudine,
by the rule of reason, as little children are ex imperfectione naturae, through
natures imperfection.

38. The second coffeehouse and contention about the precedencie, or
maioritie, was when the mother of James, Mat. 20.21.
and John, desired the first places for her Sons, one to sit on the right
hand, the other on his left in his Kingdom; discovering in plain terms, Mat.
20.21.
that they strove for a Monarchy; as the Pope now does.

39. Our Savior perceiving, that the rest of his Apostles, out of their
particular ambition, indignati sunt de duobus fratribus, Verse 24.
were moved with indignation against the two brethren; answers as he did
before, Qui voluerit inter vos mayor fieri, Verse 26.
fit vester minister, Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
servant: but as in the former contention he proposed a little child, whom in
their neglect of honor they should resemble: So here he proposes unto them
the Kings, and Monarchs of the world, whose power and regiment they should not
expect. You strive (says he) for the first place in a Kingdom, but Reges
gentium dominantur in eas: and qui maiores sunt, potestatem exercent inter eas,
Mat. 20.25.
The Kings of the Nations exercise dominion over them, and they that are great
exercise authority upon them. Vos autem non sic; but it shall not be so among
you, setting down in plain terms my negative; The government of the Church
shall not be Monarchical.

40. And it is probable, that our Savior foreseeing, that this would be a
great question to exercise his Church, does therefore double this answer, and
uses it again at their last contention, even before his passion, as his last
determination of it, for them, and all their successors to take notice of. Luc.
22.25.
Reges gentium dominantur eis, and qui habent eas in potestate, benefici
vocantur: Vos autem non sis. You must not be Kings, you must not domineere, The
government of my Church is not Monarchical, nor like the government of the
Kings of the World.

41. Bellarmine seeing this clear evidence against this pretended Monarchy,
and feeling the wait of it, thinks all would be well, if he could decline the
force of this blow, and therefore falls to his accustomed shifts, and says,
that a Monarchy is not here denied, but the corruption and deflexion of a
Monarchy into tyranny: for he says, Bellar. de Romans Pontif l. 5. c. 10.
Dominum illis verbis non prohibere dominatum, qualis esse potest principum,
and regum piorum, sed qualis est Regum ignorantium Deum, qui tyranni potius
sunt, quam Reges; God forbids not such government as godly Kings and Princes
use, but the government of such Kings as know not God; who are rather Tyrants,
then Kings.

42. But see his inconstancy, and thereby the weakness of his answer: here
he says, our Savior forbids a tyrannical, not a regal government, unto his
Church: but in his third Book he affirms, that our Savior denies both;
Bellar. de Pontif. Romans l. 3. c. 23.
prohibet (says he) dominatum regium, atque tyrannicum ijs, qui Ecclesiae
proeesse debent; he forbids both regal and tyrannical dominion to all those,
who must govern his Church. But lest he should enter his action of injury, for
charging him wrongfully with a contradiction (which were a great blemish to so
valiant a Champion) I do imagine, that in this place he does confound regium
and tyrannicum, and makes them Synonimaes, in hatred and detestation of Kings
and Monarchs; being one of that number, 2 Pet. 2.10.
which Saint Peter says, should be (...), despisers of domination, and
government; Jude 8.
and Saint Jude, (...), blasphemers, and slanderers of regal Majesty; and
truly that same vis Iesuitica, and ipsa professio maledicendi, do seem to
undertake and promise so much.

43. But the former interpretation, if these two be different, makes well for
his purpose; and that sense (says he) is evident; Patet. How think you? By
the interpretation of our Savior, or his Apostles, or the ancient Church? No;
but yet clearly enough ex verborum Graecorum proprietate, by the proper
signification of the Greek words. But that is no sure rule; for we always may
reason from the use of a word in the Scripture, not from the propriety.
Sometimes we must admit a Metaphor, or an Allegory, and dispute from a
figurative, and not from the proper sense of the word: for, as Saint Augustine
says, Aug. trac. 47. super Johan.
Per similitudinem Christus multa est, viz. petra, ostium, lapis angularis,
etc. quae per proprietatem non est; Christ is many things figuratively, which
properly he is not, as namely a rock, a door, the corner stone, etc.

44. But we will admit it for this place; the propriety of the Greek word
shall bear it. Matthaeus non ait (says he) Reges Gentium (...). i.
dominantur, simpliciter, sed (...). i. violenter dominantur: therefore not
Regal, or Monarchical government is denied, but tyrannical only. But
though Saint Matthew say not (...), yet S. Luke speaking of the same business,
says from our Savior, (...): so that we may reply to Bellarmine, Lucas non
ait, (...),.i. violenter dominantur; but (...) dominantur simpliciter;
therefore by his own interpretation, not only tyrannical, which is he
corruption of a good regiment; but Regal, and Monarchical, which is a perfect
kind of regiment, is denied the Apostles, and Church of God: in Saint Matthew
the tyranny, in Saint Luke the Monarchy.

45. Bellarmine could not be ignorant, that Saint Matthew used one word, and
Saint Luke the other, in the same argument: Sed quid prodest videre eum
veritatem (as Lactantius says) quam nec defensurus est, Lactan. l. 2. c. 3.
nec secuturus; what is it the better for him to see, and know the truth, which
he will neither defend, nor follow? He plays on the advantage, and supposall
either of the ignorance, or negligence of some supine Readers.

46. But lest he should reply (yet without all show of reason) that Saint Luke
is to be interpreted by Saint Matthew, rather then Saint Matthew by Saint
Luke: First, we allege, that he has not our assent, that (...) signifies
tyrannical government: but we have his own confession, that (...) signifies
dominari simpliciter: therefore if the Holy Ghost intend the same thing by both
the Evangelists, as it is evident he does; then by both the words absolute
dominion, or Monarchical regalitie is forbidden: if they intend two senses,
then both the one and the other are denied, and we have our purpose.

47. Secondly, it is evident by the words of our Savior, Luke 22. that Regal
or Monarchical government is forbidden there: Luke 22.
For St. Luke says, Those Kings of the Nations, which the Apostles must not be
like, are (...), such as have power over them, and are termed bountiful; but
Potestas est quaedam magna perfectio; Abulens. sup. Mat. c. 20. q. 92.
nam de potissimis attributis diuinis ponitur, Power is a certain great
perfection; for it is one of the chief attributes of God: and the word (...)
is ever taken in bonam partem in a good sense. The curing of the man, which was
borne lame, is called (...), Acts 4.8.
Acts 4. and it is taken pro beneficio, for a benefit, 1 Timothy 6. 1 Timothy 6.2.
and (...) is applied to our Savior by Saint Peter, Acts 10. Acts 10.38.
(...): so that it is evident, that our Savior says, they shall not be like
Kings, no, not the best Kings, who take their denomination of liberality, and
bounty.

48. For bounty is a Kingly virtue, and maxim regium est, quos volunt, ad
honores extollere, and it is most princely for Kings to grace with honors, whom
they please: and they, whom Kings advance, must be honored by the people. Iac.
1^^.
Therefore when Saint James forbids us to honor them, which be rich, he makes
an exception to it, saying, Si tamen perficitis legem regalem, (...), etc. been
facitis. Verse 8 and 9.
Notwithstanding, if ye fulfill the Royal Law, etc. ye do well; but if ye
regard the persons, ye commit sin: Where Catetan observes, that rich men may
chance to be honored for two causes. Caietan super locum.
Altera est ex personarum acceptione, the one is out of a respect to persons;
that is, precisely because they are rich: Altera est ex lege regia, the other
is by reason of the Kings Law; that is, because (says he) they are placed in
authority by the King; or because they are the Kings Ambassadors; or because
the King has so commanded: as appears plainly in Mardocheus, of whom it was
said in his highest honor, Sic honorabitur, quem Rex honorare voluerit, Thus
shall the man be honored, whom the King will honor. And the Apostle gathers
this precept out of that rule in nature alleged by him, Diliges proximum tuum,
Iac. 2.8.
sicut teipsum, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: where the particle
sicut is used proportionaliter; as if he should say, Diliges proximum tuum in
gradu, in officio, in dignitate, in priuilegio suo sicut teipsum in gradu, in
officio, in dignitate, in priuilegio tuo.

49. This (...), or law of ciuility, which S. James mentions, is much
neglected in these days by the Anabaptists; who after the manner of some false
Apostles in S. Paul's time, so teach equality, that they acknowledge no
superiority, or civil difference in Christianity: so that, if at the
administration of the Eucharist, an Earl, Lord, or Bishop be present, they
take not any notice of them, nor observe Legem regiam, but begin to
administer to the next unto them, of what degree soever: as if Lex regia, and
the Law of civility, could not stand with Christianity, and the Law of true
spiritual liberty: whereas Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 6.1. and 2, tells those servants
and inferiors, who being Christians, neglected their duty and reverence to
their Masters, or Superiors, because either they were not Christians, or if
Christians, yet comprehended with their servants and inferiors under the name
of Brethren, or the Faithful (as the use was then at the first conversion of
the Gentiles) that by this conceit of paritie in Christianity, which was only
in spiritualibus; and by neglect and contempt of superiority, which is due by
nature in temporalibus, and in civility, Lege regia, by the Kings prerogative,
Nomen Domini, and doctrina blasphematur, both the name of Christ, and his
Gospel, and doctrine is blasphemed. For if they, who were newly converted,
should withdraw from their superiors in acts and ceremonies of Christianity,
that respect, reverence, and honor which was due unto them, the unbelievers
would have detested, vilified, and persecuted the Gospel, quasi aliena
inuadens, and Dominis, aut Regibus sua anferens: and therefore when in another
place, the same Apostle exhorts inferiors to be subject to their superiors,
and pleasing in all things; he tells them, that such behavior, and
civility, would be an ornament to their Christianity, and the doctrine of our
Savior.

50. Whether Caietans exposition be the true sense of that Text of S. James, I
do not determine: but surely it is very moral and mannerly: not like the
English marginall gloss, at the 23. of the Acts: for where S. Paul says
there, modestly in his own excuse, when he was charged to revile Gods high
Priest, I knew not Brethren, that he was the high Priest; Acts 23.5.
for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people: the
marginall note says, He made this excuse, as it were, in a mockery: as if he
should say, I know nothing in this man worthy the office of the High Priest.

51. Time serves not, nor this business to exagitate this uncivil note; but
these and the like glosses make many so insolent in their behauiours and
answers, both to civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrates, whom they relish not
well: because in their fancies they esteem them not worthy the office they
bear, or those honors the King has advanced them to; and so by consequent to
be no Magistrates, but subject to scoffs, and scurrill dicacity. But the
Ciuilians have this rule; L. dubitare c. de ^rimine Sacrilegij.
Dubitare de eo, an dignus sit, quem princeps elegit, sacrilegij instar est; It
is a kind of sacrilege to call his worth into question, whom the King has
preferred. Thus much by occasion of my second reason, why Monarchical
government is here forbidden, drawn from the name (...), which is proper to
Kings of the best note, and not unto Tyrants.

Peter teaches the Bishops, that they should not dominere over the Clergy, 1
Pet. 5.
(...): and St. Paul says, he neither might nor did dominere over the faith, 2
Cor. 1.24.
and the Christian religion; (...): which cuts off all absolute power and
Monarchical, which the Pope chalengeth, either over the Christian religion, or
Ecclesiastical persons.

propriety of the word, which Bellarmine chalengeth; we find not, that (...)
in composition adds force, or violence to every word; but what signification
so ever it has, Scapul^
in compositione aliquando retinet, aliquando amittit; as (...), and (...),
both of them signify to die, neither of them to die violently: and (...) used
by St. Matthew in this argument, and (...) used by St. Luke, signify both of
them absolute power, not sour, bitter, or tyrannical command: Beza sup. Mat.
20.25.
as Beza notes, that our word here (...), signifies only dominari in eas,
resoluta compositione, the composition adding no force unto it more, then is
found in the simple verb. It is Beza's annotation upon this place. If his
authority have no credit with them, let them consult the old vulgar
translation, which reads simpliciter, Dominari at both those Greek words,
resoluta compositione, as Beza does.

54. This, which has been spoken in answer to Bellarmine may serve to show
both the true sense of the words, and help to satisfy all the reasons, which
are made by others, to prove that this Text excludes not a Monarchy: for if
this double Canon of our Savior, or duplicated rule for his Apostles ( Mat.
20. and Luke 22. Vos autem non sic, you shall not rule as the Kings of the
world) be not transplanted, and removed from the siege of the Popedom, it will
batter down all that is built on that Monarchy, and the Monarchy it self
from the very foundation. Wherefore every one busily sets to his help to
remove it, and we must as earnestly maintain the assault.

55. Gretzer, as he is bound, seconds the Cardinal, GRETZER. Gretz. Antimpro
deliro. dos. 28.
and says in his Antimonie pro deliro, that our Savior does only forbid
dominatum violentum, and truculentum, and makes it an indefinite proposition,
and to implie a particular; as if our Savior said, Aliqui reges Gentium, etc.
Vos autem non sic: excluding from the Apostles the tyrannical government, not
the regal. Non dicit (says he) omnes Reges Gentium, sed indefinite, Reges
gentium; hoc est, aliquos Reges gentium: and then he shows his Logic; for
(says he) propositio indefinita constans materia contingenti, idem valet, quod
particularis.

56. But to be brief, and speak to the point: the proposition does not
consist of contingent matter, but of necessary: for, omnes Reges gentium
dominantur eis, and habent eas in potestate, All the Kings of the Gentiles have
dominion over them, and exercise authority upon them; and he that does not so,
or has not power to do so, Abulens sup. Mat. 20. q. 93.
is no King: and Abulensis says upon this place of Matthew, that both
Principatus gentium and Iudaeorum, (which were both one, as appears Deuteronomy. 17.
and 1 Samuel 8.) were here excluded from the Apostles, and from the Church
regiment; and so the matter being necessary, the proposition indefinite is
universal, forbidding the Church all kind of Monarchy that was in the world.

57. But Gretzer has a second shift to elude this Text, Ibid.
and says, Christus non dixit, Reges Christianorum, and fidelium, but Reges
gentium, and therefore the government of the Church may be Monarchical, after
the nature of Christian regiment, though not after the fashion of heathen
Monarchies.

SANDERS.
58. But we answer, that the regal government of Christian Kings, and those of
the Nations, is of one kind: and Sanders by occasion of these words so
confesses; De visib. Monar. lib. 2. cap. 1.
for, says he, Ciuilis potestas apud gentes, quae Deum non cognoscunt, eadem
reperitur, quae apud fideles Reges existit; licet Christus talem in suis
ministris esse noluerit, The civil power of the Nations, which know not God,
and of Christian Kings, is all one, although Christ will not have such power
exercised by his Ministers. The former part confutes Gretzer in terminis, who
thinks that the civil power of Christian and heathen Kings is not all one:
the latter part, viz. Licet Christus talem in suis ministris esse noluerit, you
would think also in plain terms to be our assertion, as indeed it is; but I
will not urge it, or charge him with such high treason against his great
Monarch. The Ciuilians say, Inciuile est, L. Inciuile, H. de Leg. and 5. c.
nisi tota lege perspecta iudicare. It is true, that he says plainly, The
regiment of the Church is not like the regiment of Kings, etc. but he has his
evasion too: as if he should say, Reges gentium, and fidelium habent originem
regiminis eorum vel a iure gentium, vel a iure civilly; The Kings of the
heathen, and of Christians, have the original of their regiment either from
the Law of Nations, or from the civil Law: Vos autem non sic, sed regnum
vestrum, vel regimen, tantum per mediatorem Dei and hominum, hominem Iesum
Christum dimanauit; With you it is otherwise; for your Kingdom, or regiment is
derived unto you only by the mediator of God and man, the man Jesus Christ.

59. Elihu was full of indignation, Job 32.3.
because Jobs friends, Non inuenissent responsionem rationabilem, had not found
a reasonable answer: but this answer is not only absurd, and nothing to the
purpose, if it were entertained, but false also, and Sanders herein more
subtle then wise: for we say truly, that the power of Kings, and the power
of the Apostles, and their successors, are both originaliter from God only: for
a Pope, or a Bishop, in respect of his own person, has his place designed to
him by Election, Confirmation, and Consecration, according to Ecclesiastical
Canons, and Constitutions; but his spiritual power is originally from God, by
the Law of the Gospel, per verbuminsitum, as St. James calls it; as also
temporal Kings either in state of election, or succession, have their
Kingdoms to themselves, or to their successors, iure gentium, or civilly, or
municipali: but they have potestatem regiam, whatsoever it is, originally, and
immediately from God by the Law of nature, per verbum innatum. And this the
Emperor acknowledges in his Nouelis, that ex vno eodemque principio imperium
and sacerdotium proficiscuntur, although in nature they be distinguished; cum
hoc diuinis, illud humanis praesideat.

CAIETAN.
60. Now, as Sanders will have it, vos autem non sic, id est, originaliter: so
Caietan will have it, vos autem non sic, id est, finaliter: both will have it
one form of regiment, which Bellarmine, and Gretzer deny; but Sanders makes
the difference in the Author, Caietan in the end. Sup. Luc. ca. 22.
Reprimit (says Caietan) ambitionem ex differentia inter principatum mundanum,
and Ecclesiasticum, penes hoc; quod finis Regum est dominari, and gloria; Vos
autem non sic: You shall have the same power which Kings have; but you shall
not use it to that end.

61. But the end of Monarchical principality is not domination, honor, and
glory; but bonum vniuersi, the general and common good, especially of their
particular kingdoms, by maintaining their Subjects in order, and peace, by the
rules of justice: Domination, or honor are but consequents of it, or adjuncts
to it; without which that end cannot be attained, but supernaturally, as it was
in the Church. For we may say as well to a King, as to a Bishop, by way of
advice, Seek not your own domination, or glory: which were not well said, if
honor, and glory, and domination, were the end of their government: for every
man ought to study, and endeavor, to attain that end, which is proposed to
his office. But if we should say to a King, as our Savior said unto his
Apostles, Qui mayor est, fiat sicut minor; Sir, if you will be the greatest,
we will bring you down, and humble you to us; it were Laesa maiestas,
violence offered against that power, and Majesty of Kings, which is instituted
and allowed by GOD himself: wherefore the Regiment Ecclesiastical differs
from the Regal, not only in this false imagined end, but in the kind, and
species of the regiment it self.

62. Now we will consider, whether the regiment of the Church, which our
Savior left to his Apostles, were conformable to the Monarchy of the world
and we shall find, that as the end of that regiment was supernatural, viz.
the salvation of the world; so the means to that end for the most part were
supernatural; Faith, and the Sacraments: and the power of the Governors
supernatural, reaching to the opening and shutting of Heaven; to the binding
and loosing of sins: wherefore he denied to his Apostles all such things as
appertained to the perfection of secular regiment, namely, Riches: Secondly,
Power coerciue; Thirdly, Honor and domination; that his Kingdom might not be
supposed to be erected by ordinary means.

63. First, for Riches; RICHES.
it was impossible the Apostles should be rich, having forsaken all their own
substance: 1. Impossible.
and the most part of Christians at first converted, being of mean estate, and
the collections which were made, were divided to such as were needy among them.

64. Secondly, it was not convenient they should be rich, for having no place
of abode, 2. Not convenient.
being sent as Commissioners over the World, they had no portage for store of
wealth, and the care of their riches might have stayed their course.

65. Thirdly, It was not safe for them to be rich; for the Infidels, 3. Not
safe.
who then persecuted them for their faith, would have took occasion of a
stricter persecution, to possess their riches.

4. Not for the credit of the Gospel. Arist. Ethic.
66. Fourthly, It was not for the credit of the Gospel, for the Apostles to be
rich; for as Aristotle says, Multa per diuitias effecta sunt, Many things are
brought to pass by riches: It was therefore for the glory of the Church, that
the chief rulers then should be poor, and possess nothing: that whatsoever
those first founders did effect, might be ascribed to the divine power
supernatural, and God only might be honored in the conversion of the
Gentiles, and the Christian Faith no way calumniated.

COERCIVE POWER.
67, The second thing, which is proper to Monarchs, is, potestas coercendi, a
power to compel men to be good, and just, either by Legal punishment, or by
Arbitrarie; where legal is wanting: from this power our Savior did quit his
Apostles, when he said, Mat. ^0.25. and 26.
Qui maiores sunt, potestatem exercent in eos, concluding, Vos autem non sic;
They that are great exercise authority over others: But it shall not be so
among you.

1. NO TEMPORAL PUNISHMENT
68. And therefore in those days men were not forced to goodness, or to the
Christian Faith, by punishment or fear, but by love and exhortation: and the
reasons were diverse; one is given by Origin, because, Sicut omnia carnalia in
necessitate posita sunt, Origin.
spiritualia autem in voluntate: sic and qui principes sunt spirituales,
principatus eorum in dilectione subditorum debet esse positus, non in timore
corporali: As all carnal things are necessary, but spiritual voluntary; so
those that are spiritual Governors, their dominion must consist in the
voluntary love of their inferiors, not in corporal fear: for the old rule
was, Fides cogi non debet, Faith ought not to be enforced, indeed it cannot be
enforced.

69. Secondly, the Apostles had no other Law to govern by, but the Law of
Christ, 2. NO LAW BUT CHRIST'S LAW.
which is not coerciue, nor imposes corporal or temporal punishment, either
particular, or general upon any crime: but uses only commination of hell
fire, and eternal torments; neither rewards it any virtue, but with promise
of Heaven, and the joys thereof.

70. Thirdly, In the Apostles time, the Christian people, who were subject to
them, were few; 3. NO IVRISDICTION.
and those not populus determinatus, belonging to this or that territory,
subject to the Apostles: but they were certain parts, or pieces of people, and
Nations, some of one Country, and some of another, who all were under their
lawful Princes, and Monarchs; and so by consequent the Apostles having no
territory, could have no Jurisdiction at all, either in ciuilibus, or in
criminalibus, neither over the lives, nor over the goods, nor over the bodies
of any Christian: and if they had usurped any such jurisdiction, they should
have suffered as Malefactors and Traitors, and so dishonored the Christian
Religion.

71. Fourthly, our Savior proposed his own principality over them, as a
pattern, or example of that power they should use: No other pattern, but our
Savior to follow.

Mat. 20.27. and. 28.


for when he had told them, that their government should not be that of the
Kings of the Nations: he adds, Qui voluerit in vobis esse primus, sit vester
seruus, etc. Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant; even
as the Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life
for the ransom of many: wherefore his Apostles were to use no other
Jurisdiction, or coerciue power, either in ciuilibus, or in criminalibus: but
yet exercised a certain discipline, as we may call it; and whereof we shall
have occasion to speak hereafter at fit opportunity.

3. EXCELLENCY and HONOR.
72. The third thing that belongs to Kings, is Excellency, and Honor, which
ever attend on Riches, and coerciue power: both which being denied to the
Apostles, they were exempt also from all worldly, and temporal honor, as
their Master was; except such as virtue procures in the hearts of the people:
but that is moral honor, not civil, such as we speak of; and is in Kings,
and given by Kings, as the Ciuilians term it, Per honorarios codicillos, or
per diplomata R^gum; upon whose only gift all civil honors, and nobility
depend.

Object.
73. If any man suppose, that the Apostles had this coerciue Jurisdiction,
because Saint Peter (as it seems) killed Ananias and his wife, Ananias and
Saphyra.
who lied to the Holy Ghost, and withheld a part of the price from the poor:
as also because Saint Paul delivered over the Corinthian fornicator to Satan,
Corinthian fornicator.
ad interitum carnis, etc. We answer, that those Apostles neither used civil
nor criminal Jurisdiction: Respons.
for Saint Peter did not put to death Ananias and Saphyra, but fore-shewed
their death: and so was neither their Judge, Acts 5.
nor executioner, but a prophet, who foretold that punishment, which the holy
Ghost would inflict.

74. And although the punishment of the fornicator seem to be an act of
Jurisdiction, and of secular judgment in St. Paul, who says, 1 Cor. 5.3.
Ego autem absens corpore, and praesens spiritu iudicaui, etc. And again,
Decreui eum tradere Satanae ad interitum carnis, I have determined to deliver
him up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh: yet this was not done by
virtue of any temporal Jurisdiction, but by miraculous power, (...): Verse 4.
for St. Paul did not command the Corinthian to be whipped, or to be banished his
Country, or to be fined; but commanded the Devil to assault him, and so to
torment him to death, Verse 5.
Vt spiritus saluus sit in die Domini Jesus Christi; that so the spirit might be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: which act proceeded from our Savior
immediately, because Devils are not executioners at man's command; so that these
punishments proceeded not from any temporal Jurisdiction: but St. Paul
inflicted punishment per modum orationis, and St. Peter, per modum
praenuntiationis, St. Paul by prayer, S. Peter by prophecy.

75. How then did they subiugate the whole world unto them? To omit that
supernatural means, which God used by the blood of his Martyrs, and by those
three forms of the gifts of the holy Ghost; Aug. de Trin. and unit. cap. 4.
the first whereof (as St. Augustine notes) pertinet ad ius Ecclesiasticum in
regenerandis; the second, in virtutibus, and signis faciendis; and the third at
the Pentecost, in dono linguarum, and by Confirmation, or Imposition of hands,
etc. they used two ordinary means; one was solicitude, and care to perform
their office; the other was sanctity, and holiness of life: All which S.
Peter delivers to the Church, and his successors, as he received them from his
Master Christ Jesus.

76. For in his first Epistle, not under the title of a Monarch, but of
Compresbyter, he exhorts his fellow Priests, 1 Pet. 5.
saying, I who am your fellow Priest, who glory not of any superiority, but in
this only, that I am a witness of Christ's passion, and a partaker of that
glory, which shall be revealed (which many understand of that glory which he
saw at the transfiguration) exhort you, Pascite, feed the flock of God, which
is among you, (...), not (...), taking the oversight thereof as Bishops, (not
ruling, and commanding as Kings) not by constraint, but willingly: not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: Neither as being Lords over Gods
inheritance; but being ensamples to the flock, etc. Which words (as S. Bernard
says) contain interdictum, Bern. de Consid. lib. 2. cap. 6.
and edictum; the interdict forbids three things, as Abulensis observes,
Coerciue power, Riches, and Domination; of which we have spoken: the edict
commands two things: First, Pascere, qui in nobis est, gregem Dei, the care,
and solicitude we should have to feed Gods flock. Secondly, Formas fieri
gregis, to be an example to our flocks in piety, and sanctity of life. These
also S. Paul requires; the former Praeesse in solicitudine, Romans 12. the
latter, Romans 12. 1 Timothy 3.
1. Tim. 3. Esse irreprehensibiles, and so a pattern of sanctity to the whole
flock.

77. The foundation therefore of Christian religion was not in riches, or
coercine power, or honorable titles; but in solicitude, and sanctity; upon
which Christian Kings and Emperors, as was fore-prophesied, built those high
turrets of honor, riches, Jurisdiction, and temporal power; which the Church
in due time afterward possessed, to the glory of our Savior, and the credit
of the Gospel; as shall be showed in due place: and by these means was
Christianity at the first propagated.

78. Now it is natural, that by what ordinary means Religion was first
dilated, it should also be continued by the same. Miracles, and those
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, which (as S. Augustine says) were given
ad incrementum Ecclesiae, De Trin. and unit. cap. 4.
vsque dum fidei semina iacerentur, are now ceased: and those things, which not
long after caused great progress in Piety, and Religion, namely, Continentia
vsque ad tenuissimum victum; ieiunia non quotidiana solum, sed etiam per
contextos plures dies perpetrata: Ang. de vtil. Creden cap. 17.
castitas vsque ad coniugij, prolisque contemptum: patientia vsque ad cruces,
flammasque neglectas: liberalitas vsque ad patrimonia distributa pauperibus;
aspernatio mundi vsque ad desiderium mortis: which St. Augustine confesses,
that few then performed, but fewer did well and wisely perform: Pauci haec
faciunt, pauciores been, prudenterque faciunt, says he: All these things,
which the people then favored, and loved, and admired; Et quod ista non
possent, non sine prouectu mentis in Deum, nec sine quibusdam scintillis
virtutum, setpsos accusabant: These also are all in a manner through the
increase of superstition, and manifold abuses, utterly abandoned; there
remains only solicitude, and piety, among the primitive ordinary means, to
continue Religion in that height and greatness in the Church of Christ.

79. But the defects of those former supernatural gifts have been in some
measure supplied, since the union of the Empire, and temporal government with
the Church and spiritual power, and by the bounty and liberality of Kings: who
prudently considered, that in this incorporation, as the Commonwealth did
partake the blessings that the Church could afford by maintaining temporal
peace and concord, and subjection to Kings (I speak nothing of the
supernatural blessing of regeneration, and the fruits thereof) so the Church
should communicate with the Commonwealth, out of their liberality, Riches,
Honor, and Temporal power, (but subordinate to them) according to the Law of
Nature, and example of all people, who had any feeling of Religion, and the
service of God, either by inbred light, or the custom of the Country.

80. But these Riches, Honors, and Jurisdictions, which are now added to the
Church, are things indifferent, good or bad, as they are used. Ipsa quidem,
quod ad animi bonum spectat, Bern. de Consid. lib. 2. cap. 6.
nec bona sunt, nec mala; vsus tamen horum bonus, for the honor and credit of
Christian Religion; but abusio mala, solicitudo peior, as Saint Bernard says.

81. It is certain, that they are great temptations and prouocations to men,
in this our frailty, oftentimes to exceed the bounds of Christian humility, and
moral equity: which gave occasion to that Proverb; Religio p^perit diuitias,
and filia deuorauit matrem: and at the first endowment of the Church it was
said, Hodie venenum effusum est in Ecclesiam, which so far infected many
Prelates thereof, that the outcry against them has been continual, even
from those primitive times; as appears in those Arian Bishops, who lived in
Athanasius days, Athanasius.
and were bipedum nequissimi, and so all along down by succeeding ages: some
ever complaining in that form, that Hugo Cardinalis uses upon that of Saint
Peter, Non dominantes in clero. Hugo Cardinalis.
Hoc praeceptum (says he) hodie transgrediuntur multi praelatorum, qui plus se
erigunt, quam possint; many Prelates at this day do transgress this precept,
who exalt themselves higher then they may, either by the Law of the Gospel, or
by the donation of Kings; Vt valde been competat eis illud Esaiae, Audiuimus
superbiam Moab, id est, Esai. 16.
Praelatorum, vel Clericorum carnalium, that the complaint of the Prophet Esaias
may very well befit them: We have heard of the pride of Moab (that is (says
Hugo) of the Prelates, and carnal Clerks;) Superbus est valde, he is
marvelous proud: but blessed be God for it (says he) superbia eius, and
arrogantia eius, and indignatio eius, plus quam fortitudo eius: and to that
purpose applies other places of Scripture, both of Jeremy, and Leuiticus.

82. But this abuse appeared most in the Bishop of Rome, who could not in the
first times, when the Church was yet unsettled, moderate the power of his
spiritual Primacie, (which was then of little force) as appears in Pope
Victors rashness, Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 23. hist. Eccles.
who threatened to cut off from the unity of Communion, all the Churches of
Asia, (...), for differing from him in the celebration of Easter: and in that
censure, which Tertullian gave of some of them, Tertul. aduers. Prax.
though himself deserved more to be censured; that they were In pace Leones,
in praelio cerui: and in that comparison, Cypr. Epis. 73. and habetur apud.
Aug. l. 2. c. 2. cont. Donatist.
which Saint Cyprian, and the whole Council of Carthage made with the Bishops
of Rome, saying, None of us makes himself the Bishop of Bishops, or does
compel his fellow-Bishops, Tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem: but
much less could they moderate that Papal Monarchical power, which they
usurped by degrees, after the Church was endowed, and honored by the
Emperors; but as Religio peperit diuitias, etc. as I said before; so Imperium
peperit Papatum, and Papatus deuorauit Imperium: by what steps and degrees,
both the one and the other were performed, is for a fitter time, and more ample
discourse.

83. Now in our conclusion we only urge that which we proposed, that the Pope
had not that tyrannical, nor Monarchical power (as he calls it, which he
usurps) from our Savior, or Saint Peter: we dispute not now from whence he
had it, whether by usurpation, or donation, but we say, as Saint Bernard said
to Pope Eugenius his face; Ber.
they have it not from Saint Peter: Esto (says he) vt quacunque alia ratione
haec tibi vindices; sed non Apostolico iure; nowsoeuer you have got it, you
hold it not by Apostolical right, as Saint Peter's inheritance: Non enim ille
tibi dare, quod non habuit, potuit; for he could not give that to thee, which
he had not himself. Argentum, inquit, and aurum non est mihi: Quod habuit, hoc
dedit solicitudinem super Ecclesia^; Gold (says he) and silver have I none: ^
Pet. 5.
what he had, that he gave, care over the Church; when he said, Pascite, qui in
vobis est, gregem Dei, (...), etc.

84. If thou say, though he left me not riches, yet he left me dominatum,
dominion and Monarchy, and do challenge it from God himself, De Mayor: and
obedient. c. Solite.
(as Innocent the third did in his Extrauagant) who gave command to the Prophet
Jeremy, who was but a type of thee, as thou take it, Vt euellat, and
destruat, and disperdat, and dissipet, and aedificet, and plantet: yet this
helps thee little; for nihil horum (says Saint Bernard) fastum sonat, aut
dominatum: Rusticani magis sudoris schemate quodam labor spiritualis expressus
est: Spiritual solicitude, and labor is expressed rather under this scheme of
rusticall work, and rural offices; here is nothing regal, nothing
Monarchical in that Commission.

85. Peradventure in this thy greatness, thou do think thy self more then
a Prophet, because thou hold, that the High Priest in the old Law had no
Jurisdiction. Si sapis, eris contentus mensura, quam tibi mensus est Deus, nam
quod amplius est, a malo est: If thou art wise, thou will be contented with
that measure, which GOD has meated unto thee; for that which is over and
above, proceeds from evil. Learn by this example of the Prophet, Praesidere
non tam ad imperitandum, quam ad factitandum, quod tempus requirit. Disce
sarculo tibi opus esse, non sceptro, vt opus facias prophetae. Thou have more
need of a Rake, then a Scepter, to perform the work of a Prophet.

86. If thou challenge thy Monarchy from Saint Peter, hear what he says to
thee. 1 Pet. 5.
Non dominantes in clero, sed formae facti gregis: and that thou may not
think, that Saint Peter spoke it in humility, not in verity; it is our
Saviors own voice in the Gospel, Reges gentium dominantur eorum, and qui
potestatem habent super eos, benefici vocantur; vos autem non sic.

87. It is plain, says Saint Bernard, whatsoever Bellarmine and his
fellow-flatterers say to the contrary, Apostolis inter dicitur dominatus, not
only tyranny, but dominion is forbid the Apostles. I ergo tu, and tibi
vsurpare aude, aut dominans Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus dominatum; plane ab
alterutro prohiberis, by our Saviors, and Saint Peter's constitutions: Si
vtrumque similiter habere voles, If you will hold them both by one and the same
tenure, Perdes vtrumque, you will loose both. And do not think thy se^fe
exempted out of their number, of whom God complains, Ose. 8. Ipsi regnauerunt,
Ose. 8.
and non ex me principes extiterunt, and non cognoui eos. For whosoever will
reign, and be a Monarke, without power from God, Habet gloriam, sed non apud
Deum: He may have glory with men, but not with God.

Aug. sup. Psalm. 95.
88. Thus you see, that (as Saint Augustine said) Quod modo dixi, iam dudum
dictum est; that which I speak concerning this usurped Monarchy of the Pope,
has been said long ago, in the height of his pride, by one who was inferior
to none of them, in solicitudine, and sanctitate: and because it was spoken
before oftentimes by the same Spirit, whereof we also are partakers by the
goodness of God, Nos illud tum diximus, we spoke it then: and quicquid modo
eodem spiritu nos dicimus, illi dixerunt, qui ante nos fuerunt; and whatsoever
we say now, by the direction of that Spirit, the same did they speak, who were
before us: for the same Spirit speaks the same in us both, though at sundry
times, and in sundry ages.

89. But that which has been said of the Pope, both concerning our Saviors,
and Saint Peter's interdict, of desiring Honor and Riches, and Dominion; as
also of their Edict of Humility, Solicitude, and Sanctity, reaches to the
rest of the Clergy of all sorts.

90. We must not forget our calling, and profession, it is Ministerium, and
must be performed with care, sanctity, and holiness of life. We must have
this Ministry ever before our eyes, in the height of our governments: when we
sit in judgment, when we prescribe Laws to others, our inferiors, or execute
them. The consideration of our Ministry, viz. that our Savior sent us
Ministrare, not Ministrari, as his condition was, will make us contemners of
honor in the midst of our honor; which otherwise no doubt is very hard to
perform. This consideration will serve us for a buckler against that deadly
dart, which the Prophet David shootes against us. Psalm. 84.
Homo cum in honor esset, non intellexit, etc.

91. Let us say to our selves, we were fellow-Ministers, and servants in the
house of God: What an honor is this to be exalted, and lifted up by the
blessing of Kings, by the favor of Bishops beyond our fellows? Who am I? or
what is my Fathers house? what is my worth? what is my service, that I should
be exalted above, and before others? Verily, he that said Amice ascend
superius, had a sure confidence, that thou would be his friend. If we be
found otherwise, negligent, slothful, not trusty in our Masters service; but
covetous, or proud, exalting our selves in pride, and tyranny over our
fellow-seruants, it will not succeed well with us. He that lifted us up, can
cast us down many ways; when it will be too late to complain, Psalm. 101.
as it is in the Psalm, Quoniam eleuans allisisti me. Saint Bernard therefore
said well, Non est, Bernard.
quod blandiatur celsitudo, vbi solicitudo mayor; Celsitude in our offices
threatens us dangers; solicitude in our Ministry, allows us for friends.

92. This solicitude in our Ministry, as I have said, is proposed to us by the
example of the Lawgiver himself, who was himself in the midst of the
Apostles, Luc. 22.
tanquam qui ministrat: and who can think himself in-glorious by the sole
title of Minister, wherewith the Master of glory has first signed himself?
and this was that, which Saint Paul gloried in more, then in the power of his
Apostleship, which was not inferior to that of Saint Peter, Ministri Christi
sunt, and ego; and brags not of any Riches, Power, Jurisdiction, but of his
labors, his stripes, his imprisonment, and the like.

93. For the true care, and solicitude of a Minister of Christ, does not stand
with a care of our own riches, honor, and Jurisdiction, which made Saint Paul
say, Philip. 2.19.
Neminem habeo, etc. qui de vobis germane solicitus sit; (...). Why so? Omnes
enim, quae sua sunt, quaerunt. These (Saint Augustine says) are not Filij, but
Mercenarij; they labor not for the inheritance which is promised, as Sons
do, but like Mercenaries for the wages of worldly riches, and honor, and yet
for all that will preach Christ continually. Aug. Tract. 46. in Johan.
Multi in Ecclesia commoda terrena sectantes, Christum tamen praedicant, and
per eos vox Christi auditur; and sequuntur ones non mercenarium, sed vocem
Pastoris per mercenarium; Many that are in the Church seek after earthly
commodities, and yet they preach Christ, and by them is heard the voice of
Christ; and the sheep follow not the hyreling, but the voice of the shepherd
by the hyreling. None of these (says Saint Augustine) who seek their own,
and not Jesus Christ's, will preach unto you, Quaere tua, and non quae Jesus
Christi, seek thine own, and not that which is Christ's. Quod enim male facit,
non praedicat de Cathedra Christi; inde laedit, vnde male facit, non vnde bona
dicit: so that no Minister (...) germane solicitus, who seeks for here by his
labor, and preaching, his own profit and honor; but whose solicitude is
joined with piety and sanctity of life; which, if you mark well, is seldom
found in mercenario.

94. Therefore Saint Peter, as you have heard, excepts against these mercenary
affections, and bequeaths us (as it were) per tabulas testatorias, first, 1
Pet. 5.2.
(...), a care, and solicitude to feed Christ's flock, (...), whose life and
safety depends on us: and secondly, that you might be germane soliciti, he
wishes you (...), Ibid. verse. 3.
to become exemplary forms, or formal examples of good life, and sanctity,
unto your flocks: and when that (...), that arch-shepheard, that Prince of
shepherds shall appear, you shall receive not as mercenaries, temporalem
mercedem conducentis festinanter exoptatam, the temporal reward of him that
hyres you, which is speedily desired; but as Sons, aeternam hareditatem
patris patienter expectatam, the eternal inheritance of the Father, which must
patiently be expected: not the glory of a golden triple Crown, which is now
fought for, but a Crown of Amaranthus, as the Apostle calls it Metaphorically,
Jbid. verse. 4.
(...), the incorruptible and neuer-fading crown of glory; which God send us,
for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom, with, etc. AMEN.

THE THIRD SERMON.
Luke 12.42. And the Lord said: who is a faithful Steward, and wise, whom the
Master shall make ruler over the household, to give them their portion of meat
in season? etc.


1. I Doubt not but hearing these words read, whereby Bellarmine challenges
the high- Stewardship, that is, the Church Monarchy unto Saint Peter, and so
consequently to the Pope, you remember, Quid in adiutorio Domini tractare
promiserim, Aug. de verb. Apos. ser. 31.
What by Gods help I promised to perform; which I shall not need to resume,
Aug. trac. 17. in Johan.
Ne adhuc eadem repetendo, ad illa, quae nondum dicta sunt, peruenire minime
permittamur; lest peradventure by repeating them, I should not reach so far
at this time, as I intended.

2. I then entered into the first part, which was to prove, that Saint Peter had
no spiritual Monarchy: in the handling whereof, Aug trac. 46. in Ioh.
Non sum dimissus coniecturae meae: I showed, that it was to be determined by
Scripture proof only; because the regiment of the Church is confessed by both
parts, to be only of our Saviors institution: and therefore I showed, Quid
fecerit, what he did to equalize his Disciples; and quid dixerit, what he spoke
by word of mouth, by occasion of their manifold contention for the maiority, or
precedence, (which they thought to be Monarchical) not once only, but by many
instances: first, that it was Aristocraticall, Luc. 22.26.
Qui mayor est, fiat sicut minor, etc. whereof I shall speak in fit place.
Secondly, that it was not Monarchical, Ib. v. 25.
for Reges gentium dominantur; vos autem non sic: and thirdly, I showed that
Saint Peter practiced no Monarchical power, seeing in the primitive times the
Church neither had riches, nor coerciue power, nor domination, or honor;
without which a Monarchy has no consistence.

Aug. in Jo. trac. 46.
3. Now (as Saint Augustine said) Nulla est necessitas aliquid aliud quaerere:
for this is sufficient to confirm us Protestants in the belief we profess:
Nulla est necessitas (says he) sed tamen est voluntas; not ambitiosa voluntas,
but iusta, grounded upon reason, and this rule of Tullie, Cic. 1. de Oratore.
Non sufficit id, quod intendimus, confirmare, nisi and id, quod contra
dicitur, refellere possumus; it is not sufficient to confirm our own
assertions, but we must remove those obstacles, which our adversaries cast in
our way, those grounds which ^^ey esteem fundamental: for the vulgar will
suspe^^ our truth and fidelity, until we discover our adue^^aries falsehood and
subtilty: Cypr. de vnitate Eccles. c. 2.
and no marvel; for Saint Cyprian says, Haeretici dum verisimilia mentiuntur,
veritatem subtilitate frustrantur, Heretics do even weaken and frustrate the
truth, by certain false shows, and similitudes of it.

4. Lactantius says, that as the way of wisdom, Lactan. l. ^. c. 7.
or truth, via illa sapientiae aliquid habet simile stultitiae, has somewhat
in it, that may seem to be folly, (for as he says in another place, L. 5. c.
15.
Sapientia suapte natura speciem quandam stultitiae habet; as Saint Paul says,
1 Cor. 1.18. 1 Cor. 1.23.
Verbum crucis est pereuntibus stultitiae; and Christus crucifixus gentibus
stultuia:) so also the way of error, Via erroris, cum sit tota stultitia
(says Lactantius) habet aliquid simile sapientiae, the way of error, which is
paued with f^lly, has some show also of wisdom in it, which sometimes
deceiues them that seem to be wise; and sometimes is used by them, who
discern the truth, to deceive the simple.

5. Card. Bellarmine in his Books, de Romans Pontif. Monarchia Ecclesiastica,
offers himself a leader, and guide in this way of error; but being Dux
praeuaricatox, and subdolus, now he leads them in one path, and then in
another, wheresoever he may find any show, any color of truth: sometimes by a
face of Scripture falsely understood, sometimes under the cloak of ancient
traditions; sometimes under the credit of the Fathers authority; sometimes
under the color of phylosophicall reason, sometimes with the counterfeit aspect
of logical definitions.

6. Now as all these kinds of proofs to an orthodoxe disputant, are viae, and
itinera veritatis, Lactantius.
the Churches high and strait way to lead us to Gods truth; so to them, who
are (...), as N^zianzen calls them, that is, falsely informed in the Christian
Religion, and false informers of other; they are diuerticula, and semitae, and
anfractus, by-pathes, corners, and diuerticles to lead men to error: and to
this purpose many times, Lactantius.
Dux iste coniungit omnes, Bellarmine makes use of them all: and most of them
run together, and meet in one center to maintain this false Monarchy, and
usurped tyranny.

7. Primum fraudis diuerticulum, as Tullie calls it, the first crafty shift
that I will observe unto you, is abigere homines per inanem fallaciam; which
the Apostle notes to be a quality incident to false Teachers, Colos. 2.8.
Colos. 2.8.
which is to divert men out of the way of truth by Logical fallacies, and
corrupting the definitions both of the Church, and of a Monarchy; by defining
the Church so, as it may fit their Monarchy, and by devising such a definition
of a Monarchy, as may fit their Church. For when the Empire became possessio
quasicaduca, Cicero.
and vacua, an uncertain and weak possession, in eam homines occupati,
imperatoribus otio, and luxu abundantibus, inuolauerunt: upon the power and
privileges thereof crafty and ambitious Popes usurped, whilst the Emperors
lived in sensuality and ease: and so by consequent upon the Church-gouernement
also; from which usurped possessions they cannot endure to be removed, though
Kings and Bishops now challenge again their ancient right, and native
prerogatives: and yet being not able to maintane it by Sword, they would hold
their possession by color of reason, and original right.

8. And taking this as granted by all reasonable men, which both Tullie the
Orator teaches us, that Omnis, C^. lib. 1. Offic.
quae a ratione suscipitur de re aliqua institutio, debet a definitione
proficisci, that every rational disputation takes the beginning from
definitions: And Aristotle the Philosopher; Dubia omnia contingentia de re
aliqua, ex definitione illius soluenda sunt, all doubts and questions, which
can arise in any business, may be dissolved by the definitions of them: they
use strange art, Et ea, quae natura diuersa sunt, definitionibus coniungunt,
they make the Church and a Monarchy, which are diverse by nature, one and the
same, and join them together by false definitions; Cic. cont. Rullam
as Corinth does conioyne duo maria maxim nauigationi diuersa, which run along
with two contrary streams.

9. For a Monarchy (as appears both by the Etymon, which is vnius solius
imperium, Arist. lib. 3. Polit. cap. 11.
and by Aristotle's definition) is that form of government, in qua vnus
praestantissimus vir rerum omnium potestate defungitur, which definition
Sanders does acknowledge. Sanders lib. 3. de visib. Monar. cap. 3.


10. The royalties or prerogatives of a Monarch, consist in two things; in
(...), in having power in himself, and of himself only; which is called also
(...), Manus regia, Ius regis, (...), plenitudo potestatis: and secondly, in
(...), universal government, and command over all his territories.

11. (...), or plenitudo potestatis, semper subsistit in regis capite, Fullness
of power does subsist in the Kings person; and the prerogatives which proceed
from it, as Ius nobilitandi, legitimandi, restituendi in integrum sententiam
passos, tam vitae honoribus, quam facultatibus; the power and right to advance
at his pleasure to honor and nobility; to legitimate, to restore to their
state, such as are condemned, both to their honors and possessions: These, and
the like are mere regalia, and diuisionem, vel communicationem non admittunt,
they cannot be divided with any, or communicated to any; for then he, to whom
it is communicated, or with whom it is divided, could not be (...), sub
alterius potestate, as all Subjects are, and ought to be under a Monarch, or
King, but (...), absolute of himself also.

12. The royalties which proceed a (...), from his dominion or government, are
often communicated to inferior Magistrates, and Presidents, and governors of
Provinces; as the use of tributes, Subsidies, and the like; not the imposing of
them, which are proprieties of an absolute dominion, such as Monarchs enjoy.

13. To this form of Monarchical government by encroachment and usurpation,
the Popedom is brought, dum Patres-familias dormirent; whilst Kings and
Emperors were fast asleep: but yet it must be challenged from Saint Peter, by
succession in his Stewardship: and therefore Bellarmine proposes this question,
and holds it affirmitiuely, Fueritne Sanctus Petrus primus Ecclesiae Catholicae
spiritualis Monarcha, whether Saint Peter were the first spiritual Monarch of
the Catholic Church.

14. And Gretzer he will prove it thus, Si quis est caput universal, idem iure
optimo Monarcha est, cum independentis potestatis plenitudinem possideat: at
Petrus fuit caput universal, ergo, Monarcha. Here is absolute Monarchy
ascribed to St. Peter, and so to the Pope. Here is vnus Princeps, (...); here
is regimen universal, (...); here is independentia, (...); here is plenitudo
potestatis, (...): and so by consequent as Suarez notes, potestas legislatiua,
Suarez de Leg. lib. 4. c. 3. n. 2.
and then by another consequent, Coerciue power: for he that has power to
make a Law, as Aristotle says, Ethic. 10.
has power to enforce it.

15. And hereupon follow to the Pope all the prerogatives and privileges,
Potestas dispensandi.
which naturally belong unto temporal Monarchs, as namely, Suarez lib. 6. de
Leg. cap. 12. n. 8.
Potestas dispensandi secum in suis legibus, quatenus illis etiam ipse ligatur,
A power to dispense with himself in his own laws, so far forth as they
concern, or oblige a King, which is only quoad vim directiuam, not coactiuam.
Quae sententia (says Suar.) communis est in summo Pontifice, holds in the
power of the Pope in Ecclesiastical Laws, as it holds in every temporal
Monarch, or King, quoad leges ciuiles, in respect of civil and positive Laws:
and therefore where-as the general rule is, Omnem hominem capacem ordinis,
Suarez Tom. 5. in 3. Tho. disp. 40. Sect. 7. n. 7.
esse etiam capacem irregularitatis: yet this exception must be put to the rule
in honor of the Pope, Si in terris habeat superiorem, if he be not a Monarch;
which they falsely affirm to agree with the Pope, to have no superior; so that
Licet contingat homicidium committere, irregularis non fiet, though he chance
to commit murder, yet he shall not be irregular: Quia cum irregularitas sit de
iure Pontificio, non potest ipsum Pontificem summum comprehendere, etc. quia
irregularitas pertinet ad vim coerciuam Legis, which reaches not the Pope,
because of his Monarchy, and absolute superiority over the whole Church.

16. And here-withall they infer another Monarchical prerogative to the
Pope, Imponendi tributa.
which is proper to Kings; which is potestas imponendi tributa, not only in
his own territories temporal, where he has directum dominium, as other
Kings have; but if it be necessary ad spiritualem finem, for a spiritual end,
as namely, to defend the Church from infidels, and heretics, potest summus
Pontifex imponere tributa temporalia; and the reason is given, quia sub ea
ratione habet supremam potestatem etiam in temporalibus; for by that reason he
has supreme authority over every Kings temporalties.

17. And for the same causes; as also in subsidium sibi necessarium, he may
direct impose tributes upon the goods of the Church, and reserve a part of the
tenths for himself, Suar. de Leg. lib. 5. cap. 14.
quia in illo ordine per se, and direct, est supremus princeps totius
Ecclesiae, and supremus dispensator bonorum eius. This Monarchical prerogative
Suarez maintains.

Potestas nobilitandi.
18. From thence also is drawn this Monarchical prerogative, potestas
nobilitandi, which in the Church is called potestas ordinis Hierarchici, which
is the power to create Bishops, Suar. de Leg. l. 4. cap. 4. n. 27.
Archbishops, and Patriachs: Qui ordo (says Suarez) non sine authoritate
Petri constitutus est: for (says he most falsely and absurdly, as shall be
showed in due place) all the Bishops, which were created by the other Apostles,
Saint Paul, Saint John, etc. and so consequently all since their time, have had
their succession, honor, and dignity, media authoritate Petri, Suar. Jbid.
mediate, vel immediate, and so consequently from the Bishops of Rome.

Potestas restituendi in integrum.
19. From thence also they challenge another prerogative Monarchical, which is
potestas restituendi in integrum sententiam passos, a power to free those that
are condemned; for he can absolve not only those, who belong to his definite
diocese, as he is Episcopus Romanus, but any man in the whole World, as he is
Pontifex Romanus, and Monarch of the Church: and that which is more, he can
absoluere defunctum a censura, and vti indulgentijs concessis pro defunctis:
and yet (which is strange) not exceed the bounds of his territories; for that
were absurd for any Monarch to challenge: wherefore to make that good, although
the use of those indulgences is on the earth, and granted to men in their life
for their present use, yet a certain effect of that use communicatur
defunctis, and acceptatur in coelis, is bestowed on the dead, and ratified in
heaven: quia totum hoc cadit sub territorium, and potestatem Pontifici
concessam, Suarez de Leg. l. 8. c. 26. n. 18.
both Heaven and Earth belong to the Popes territories, as Suarez says.

20. Finally, Potestas absoluendi ab infamia.
because it is found among the prerogatives of Kings, Quandoque absoluere
paenam, and non infamiam, quandoque and paenam and infamiam abolere, sometimes
to acquit from punishment, but not from infamy, and sometimes to pardon both
punishment and infamy; that no prerogative may be wanting to the Popes usurped
Monarchy, Tho. 2.2^. q. 68. ar. 4.
potest infamiam Ecclesiasticam remittere, says Thomas: which privilege being
harsh, the School distinguishes of it, and understands it de infamia iuris,
not facti: for labem illam, Soto de Instit. and iure, l. 5. q. 5. ar. 4.
quae turpi facto annexa est, nemo delere potest, as Soto concludes; no man
whosoever can wash out that stain of infamy, which by nature inhereth to a
foul wicked action: because (says he) Ad praeteritum non est potentia, If the
infamy be inherent by the nature of the fact, not positive by Law.

21. Thus you see if Kings had lost their prerogatives and royalties, where you
may find them, even in the Popes usurped Monarchy, where they are on foot, and
in daily practice, or contemplation. In which discourse I did somewhat the more
enlarge my self; that you might take occasion thereby, to enter into a due
consideration of them, and the natural grounds from whence they proceed:
because this age has many Monarchomachos, I may say Theomachos, in opposing
Gods divine institution, in the natural prerogatives, which belong to Kings.

22. For those Schismatickes in Religion, who affect Statizing, and Cantonizing
in the Commonwealth (which they would have popular) and superintending in the
Church, which they would have presbyteriall; do at their meetings private and
public, prefer as the only deformities of Church and Commonwealth, the
Monarchical prerogatives of Kings, and the Aristocraticall power, and
jurisdiction of Bishops, to be redressed: fondly imagining out of a kind of
affected and well-suited ignorance to their profession, that the natural
prerogatives of Kings, which are inbred in their Crowns, and the Evangelical
power of Bishops, which is ingrafted by the Gospel, should be abrogated by
positive Laws Civil, or Municipall; and that the bounty and liberality of
Princes, which affoords their Subjects an interest in the State both
Aristocraticall, and Democraticall, for the more ready and easy government of
the Commonwealth, may be held, and continued by prescription, without the
Kings consent against the Law of Nature; as now they hold many Lands and Tithes
of the Church: and as the Church now does, so the King ought also to loose, and
forgo his original right, and native prerogatives.

23. But as they teach for their advantage sometimes, that Nullum tempus
occurrit regi, in certain miniments and trifles (as we may term them) which
belong to the Law; so they should acknowledge, that Nullum tempus, and Nulla
Lex occurrit Regi, in those maine points, which touch his prerogative: and that
there is ever in a King (...), and (...), an inbred power, limited only with
justice, and equity: (...), absolute dominion, and universal command; and yet
(...) also, subjection to none, but to God only: Ius Regis, which cannot be
alienated, or communicated with any subject, no, not with the Kings Son,
without either renouncing, or dividing his Empire: plenitudo potestatis, which
cannot be emptied, or frustrated by the Kings consent, no, not for his own
time without right of reuocation: finally, manus regia, which cannot be
shortened without wounding his Majesty; which wound, though it be not so taken,
is deeper, and more dangerous in that prerogative, which is due by the Law of
Nature, then that which is granted by a positive Law. Huc vsque zelus meus,
Thus far my zeal has carried me. I return to the matter.

24. By this which has been spoken, you may perceive, that the Pope is made
an absolute Monarch, and has the prerogatives belonging to Monarchs: but all
this is usurpation, and abhors from our Saviors institution, and the
primitive practice: for a Monarchy was prohibited, as I have noted; Conc. 2..
35.36. etc.
and in the government Ecclesiastical (which was Aristocraticall) the
Apostles, and their first successors, enjoyed neither riches, nor coerciue
power, nor domination, or honor, or such Monarchical Prerogatives; and yet
there was among them in spiritual things, or do rerum consecratus, and omniae
inter se apta, and connexa, for the propagation of that spiritual government.

25. All which are by abuse now inueterate, dissolved, and a diverse government
by usurpation established: but because we enforce the first institution, from
which they cannot appeal, it being Apostolical by practice, and original of
our Saviors ordinaon; their art is (as I said) res difiunctas definitionibus
connectere; and devise such a definition for the Church as may fit with a
Monarchy; and such a definition of a Monarchy, as may sort with the Church,
vtramque rem falso naturae termino definientes.

26. For where the Church is described in the ancient Credes to be vna, Sancta,
Catholica, and Apostolica; without any other particular mention of the kind of
government; but that it is Apostolica, not Petrina only, discending by
succession from the Apostles in an Aristocracie, not from Saint Peter alone in
a Monarchy: and where Saint Cyprian describes it according to the government
to be Aristocraticall, Cypr. l. 4. epist. 9.
as we call it; saying, Ecclesia Catholica vna est, cohaerentium sibi inuicem
sacerdotum glutino copulata; The Catholic Church is one, consisting of many
Priests, or Bishops, joined together in one unity. And where Stapleton in the
intrinsecall and essential definition of the Church (as he terms it) makes
no other mention of the government, Staple. relect. cont. 1. q. 4. ar. 5.
but that it is legitime ordinata: and after in a full definition (as he calls
it) or rather description, has this only for the government of it, that it
is collectione, and ordine membrorum vna; which ordo, Sanders describes thus,
Vt iam inde ab initio Ecclesiae vnus Presbyter multis fidelium familijs, vnus
Episcopus presbyteris etiam multis, item multis episcopis vnus praefuerit
Primas: (for though he dispute for a Monarchy, he is glad in conclusion to
bring forth a Primacie) notwithstanding all these definitions, or descriptions
of the Church, Sanders de visib. Monarch. l. 1. c. 2.
which incline to Aristocracie; Bellarmine, (the first that ever I observed) to
strengthen his cause, puts the Pope and his Monarchy into the definition of
the Church, and says, Nostra sententia est, Bellar. de Eccles. mil. l. 3. c. 2.
Ecclesiam esse coetum hominum, eiusdem Christianae fidei professione, and
eorundem Sacramentorum communione colligatum, sub regimine legitimorum
pastorum: If here he had stayed, he had accorded with Saint Cyprian, and the
ancient Church, and modern writers in their definitions; but adding, Precipue
sub regimine vnius Christi in terris vicarij, Romani Pontificis, he corrupts
the definition, and joyneth subtlety and falsehood together; for it is false,
that the Bishop of Rome is Vicar to our Savior Christ, in his Monarchy over
the Church; and he is subtle, when he says praecipue, as I have noted
heretofore: for he holds (as I have proved) with Suarez, and the rest of the
Jesuits, that the Church is absolute sub regimine vnius Monarchae, absolutely
under the government of one Monarch: for, say they, the Catholics hold, that
the Church is an absolute Monarchy, and that the Pope is the Monarch.

27. Which subtletie also appears by the explication of that definition, in
the words following, which definition (says he) has three parts. First, the
profession of the truth: Secondly, the communion of the Sacraments: and lastly,
their subjection to their lawful Pastor the Bishop of Rome. Where that, which
seemed Aristocraticall in the definition (designing the Regiment of many
Pastors with one Primate) is omitted in the explication, and the whole Church
absolutely subjected to one Monarch of Rome.

28. But if there be vnius rei vna definitio, sicut and vnum esse, but one
definition of a thing, as there is but one essence of it: if a definition do
briefly and absolutely contain proprias rei alicuius qualitates, the proper
qualities of any thing; if the essential parts of a thing be ever the same;
then this cannot now be the true definition of the Church, because it was not,
neither could have been the definition of the Church in the Apostles times,
when they made their Creed, as Antiquity holds: for neither was Saint Peter
put then into the definition of the Church, from whom the Pope deriues all his
Prerogatives: neither was there seated any Bishop at Rome at that time, nor
certain years after, to put into the definition of the Church, while Saint
Peter was at Antioch, and at other Cities. But Bellarmine, who knew it to be
true art, Cic. de orat.
inuolutae rei notitiam definiendo aperire, would seem honestly, and finally
to determine this doubt, and resolve this question; but deludes the simple
supine Reader with a new, false, subtle, and counterfeit definition of the
Church.

29. Having thus by subtletie fitted the Church to a Monarchy, by thrusting
the Bishop of Rome into the definition of it: because the nature of the
Church-gouernement, which is Aristocraticall, will not bear that absolute
power of one Monarch: Cypr. de vnitate Eccles.
(for Saint Cyprian says, Hoc esse caeteros Apostolos, quod suit and Petrus,
pari consortio praeditos and honoris, and potestatis; that is, There was no
difference in dignity and honor, between the rest of the Apostles, and Saint
Peter; nor consequently between other Bishops, and the Bishops of Rome: but
only a matter of precedencie, and order, which is natural to all Societies,)
they do therefore frame out such a Monarchy, as may suite with this
Aristocracie, and College of Bishops, which Monarchy, as Bellarmine describes
it, requires, Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 3.
Vt sit in repub. summus aliquis princeps, qui and omnibus imperet, and nulli
subijciatur; which is a sufficient description of a true Monarch: but when he
adds, what kind of men are subject to this Monarch, he annihilates the
former description; for, (says he) notwithstanding this Monarch be summus
Princeps, and nulli subijciatur, and omnibus imperet; tamen Praesides
prouinciarum, vel ciuitatum, non sunt Regis Vicarij, sieve annui Iudices, sed
very Principes, his subjects, which govern his Cities or provinces, must not
be Lieuetenants, or annual Presidents, or Judges; but true and absolute
Princes, or Monarchs, as the chief Monarch is: qui and imperio summi Principis
obediant, and interim prouincia^, vel ciuitatem suam, non tanquam alienam, set
vt propriam moderentur; who must obey the chief Monarch, and yet do what they
list in their Cities, and Provinces.

30. This kind of government, or Monarchy, for ought I have read, is found
in Vtopia only: to be absolute Princes, Kings, or Monarchs, and yet to be
subject to another Monarch; which implies contradiction, to be absolutely
first, and yet second to another of the same order; to be sovereign governor,
and yet subject to a greater of the same society; to be a Monarch, and govern
alone, and yet obey a superior Monarch in his own estate; to be (...), and
yet (...); to be (...), and yet (...), collega: to have Ius Regis, and yet
arbitrium subditi: all which are abhorring from the nature of a Monarch, and
imply contradiction.

31. And where he does instance and affirm the like Monarchical government of
the Church to have been in the old Testament under Dukes, Judges, and Kings, it
is false and fallacious; for the government under Moses was (...), Joseph.
cont. Ap.
Dei imperium: that of the Judges, if it were not Theocraticall, was
Aristocraticall, not Monarchical: their power was limited to the wars only;
they had not the prerogatives, which were due unto Monarchs; nor that Ius
Regis, which is mentioned, 1 Samuel 8. they could not impose tributes, and taxes
on the people; their time was limited; they wanted these and many other
privileges, which belong unto Monarchs, as is proved by Abulensis, in his
Preface to the book of Judges.

32. But the government of the Kings was absolutely Monarchical, like that of
the Gentiles, as appears in Sam. 1.8. not like that Monarchy, which
Bellarmine here describes, where absolute Monarchs are subject to the chief
Monarch; for the Principes populi were not true Monarchs, or absolute Princes,
(as he requires them to be) but Tribuni, Exodus 18.
Centuriones, Quinquagenarij, Decani qui iudicabant plebem omni tempore: such
as Judges, and Presidents are under our Monarchs, and all neighbour-Kingdomes.
And the present government of the Empire (which he would have the Church
resemble) is not Monarchical, in respect of the Princes Electors, but merely
Aristocraticall, though he be in his own signiories an absolute Monarch.

33. But this Chimericall Monarchy is devised in the temporal state, to cover
the disordered Monster of their spiritual government: wherein the Pope is an
absolute Monarch, as also all Bishops are said to be; and yet subject to him,
as Gretzer confesses. Gretz. de Romans Pont. li. 1. ca. 8.
Nihil vetat (says he) quemlibet Episcopum in sua Dioecesi, vt caput, sic and
Monarcham vocari: cum eius potestas a nullo in eius Dioecesi, sed a solo
universally Pastore dependeat. Nihil vetat? Yes, the definition of a Monarch
will not admit it, which he gives before; viz. Independens plenitudo
potestatis: for the power of a Bishop with them is not independens, (...) but
depends on the power of the Pope: a Bishop with them is not (...) but (...)
under an higher power: he has not plenitudinem potestatis; appeals may be
made from him; tributes imposed upon him, his power suspended, and himself
excommunicated, and other the like; from all which Monarchs are free.

34. And yet, Nihil vetat Episcopum in sua Dioecesi sicut and caput, sic and
Monarcham vocari: and his reason is as absurd as his proposition: Cum eius
potestas (says he) a nullo in eius Dioecesi, sed a solo universally Pastore
dependeat. As if he should say; Nihil vetat, nothing hinders, why the President
of Ireland should not be called the head and Monarch of Ireland; because he
has his power from no man in Ireland, but from King JAMES in England, who is
absolute Monarch over all his Kingdoms: for so says he, Nihil vetat
quemlibet Episcopum in sua Dioecesi vt caput, sic and Monarcham vocari, cum
eius potestas a nullo in eius Dioecesi, sed a solo universally Pastore
dependeat: which yet is most true, being understood of our Savior, who is the
universal Pastor, and Monarch of the Church, from whom only, and wholly, all
the Bishops in the World receive their spiritual power immediately; but being
affirmed of the Pope, or Bishops of Rome, as Gretzer means it, it is not
only treason against our Saviors Majesty, and preregatiues, (for ipse est,
caput corporis Ecclesiae) but also intolerable blasphemy; Colos. 1.18.
and it inscribeth by a counterfeit definition in the Popes spiritual Crown,
that which is proper to our Saviors thigh and vestment, Apoc. 19.16.
Monarcha Monarcharum, that is, Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium, which is
the proper title of our blessed Savior, and not to be challenged by any
Monarch.

35. Secundum fraudis diuerticulum, the second slight, which Bellarmine uses,
is (...); depraedari, to steal away, or carry away the Readers, and deceive
them by Phylosophie: which is another dangerous slight, and the Apostle
exhorts the Colossians to take heed of this also. Colos. 2.8.


36. For they will prove the government of the Church to be Monarchical by
certain phylosophicall propositions deceitfully used: a Primacie among the
Stars. Sanders l. 1. c. 5. a Principality among the Elements, c. 6. amongst
Plants and Trees there is primum aliquid, c. 7. in all living creatures there
is found one member, which gouernes the rest ex vi naturae. c. 8. Birds which
fly together, have one Chief. c 9.

37. Again, Entia, nolunt male disponi, and therefore (...), Tho. 1. q. 103.
ar. 3. Tho. cont. Gent. l. 4. c. 76.
as Thomas says out of Aristotle, Metaph. l. 2. Again, Optimum regimen
m^iltitudinis, vt regatur per vnum, as the world is by God. Tho. cont. Gent.
All which, and a number the like philosophical reasons, either enforce only a
Primacie, or if a Monarchy, yet a Monarchy, only in temporalibus, in
particular temporal States, to be the best State, and intended by nature;
which we deny not.

38. But the spiritual government does not paralele, or participate with the
temporal in the form thereof: and therefore where Sanders says, Sanders l.
1. c. 3.
Vnus est Deus conditor, and gubernator omnium: ergo, Ecclesiasticum regimen
est Monarchicum: and if we deny it, and maintain an Aristocracie, then he
cease not. Criminibus terrere nouis, Virgil.
and threatens us that we do fauere multitudini Deorum, aut duobus tribusue
principijs, quae Marcion, Lucianus, Manichaeus, atque alij haeretici ponebant:
and where Bellarmine concludes, Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 4.
Monarchia simplex in imperio Dei locum habet; ergo, Monarchia est optimum
regimen, and so best fitteth the Church: for as Sanders says; Vt aliquid in
rerum natura excellens, and praestans fuerit, quo Christus Ecclesiam suam non
exornarit, id nunquam concesserit is, qui sano iudicio praeditus sit: and
whereas Bellarmine says, Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 4.
that if a man deny this his philosophical argument, he sees not, how we can
escape the errors and heresies of Marcion, and the Manichees, and the heathen
Poets, etc. That they, and all their conspiracy may perceive, that Non me ista
terrent, Cicero.
quae mihi ad timorem proponuntur, these Bugge-beares fright me not, I will
here join issue with them, and acknowledge that government to be requisite,
and settled in the Church, which is found in heaven, and yet that
Aristocraticall.

Tho. cont. Gent. l. 4. c. 76.
39. My first rule shall agree with Thomas, Ecclesia militans ex triumphanti per
similitudinem deriuatur; and for this time I admit of his reasons, namely, that
of the Church under the Law it was said to Moses; vt faceret omnia secundum
exemplar ei in monte monstratum: and of the Church under the Gospel Saint John
says, Apoc. 21.2.
Vidi ciuitatem sanctam Jerusalem descendentem de coelo: that is (as Aquinas
interprets it) the manner of government of the Church militant, both under the
Law, and under the Gospel, resembles the government, which is in heaven in
the Church triumphant: but in the Church triumphant one only governs, who
governs also the whole world, namely God: ergo in Ecclesia militante vnus
est, qui praesidet vniuersis, namely the Pope; and so the government of the
Church is purely Monarchical.

40. But Thomas, and his followers, Sanders, Stapleton, Bellarmine, should have
remembered, that we are not heathen, but Christian Philosophers; and that as
there is a Monarchy in heaven in respect of the one Godhead: so in respect of
the three persons it is an Aristocracie; three Persons governing all, aequales
per omnia, August. de temp. fer. 191.
natura, voluntate, potestate, aeternitate substantiae, as Saint Augustine
says; and yet the Father has primatum ordinis, and originis in respect of the
Son, and the holy Ghost, who yet are all aeterni and aborigines, as I may
say; so that, as there is found in heaven a Monarchy cum personarum
multiplicatione; so there is found an Aristocracie in the persons, with an
unity in the Godhead.

41. And according to this form and pattern is the government of the
militant Church, Si summis confer minora licebit: for as there is but vna
Ecclesia, one universal Church, so there is but Episcopatus vnus, only one
Bishopric in that one universal Church, and that indiuisus, not divided,
Cypr. de unit. Eccles. c. 4.
as Saint Cyprian has it; (as there is vna Deu as in heaven, and that
indiuisus) and yet there is a multiplicity of persons, that is, of Bishops, all
of one equal power, and authority, and dignity in the particular Churches of
that same one Bishopric; as a Trinity of persons is found in heaven in one
Dietie.

42. This one, and undivided Bishopric, Cypr. ad Anton. Epis.
in that one Church (which Saint Cyprian calls traditionem Dei, an old
tradition, even from God himself) has the whole world for the Territory,
Province, or Diocese; and every Bishop has full and equal power in the whole
Bishopric; though by Ecclesiastical constitutions every one be limited to
his several Province, or Diocese; and so seem to have power but in a part of
it: but yet (as Saint Cyprian says) a singulis in solidu^ pars tenetur; every
Bishop so holds a part, as that he has interest and full power in that whole
Bishopric, which spreads over the whole world.

43. Which appears both by the first institution, when our Savior said to
his Apostles in general, and to every of them in particular (that is, to
Bishops, as Saint Cyprian, Saint Ambrose, Mat. 18.19.
and Antiquity holds it,) Euntes docete omnes gentes; Go, and teach all
nations; and also by continual practice; for though now for orders sake, and
by Ecclesiastical constitutions, every Bishop be limited to his part, or
several Diocese; yet that this part is held notwithstanding a singulis in
solidum, so as he has an interest in the whole, is manifest by this; that
though he be bound by Ecclesiastical Laws, sedere, to sit down, and take up
his Seat, or Sea, in one definite place: yet if he be disposed, or commanded
for the good of the Church, Ire, and docere alias gentes, to go and teach
other nations, according to his original commission: he may perform his
Bishoply power with effect, wheresoever he lives in the whole world: which
argues, that the whole Church in solidum is his Territory; L. extra. ff. de
Iuris. omn. Iud.
for no man's power stretches beyond his own territory, and therefore the
Ciuilians say, Extra territorium ius dicenti, impune non paretur.

44. So that howsoever this vnus Episcopatus seem to be divided ab extra,
every Bishop having a part distinct by himself, which may make it seem many
Bishoprics; yet ab intra every particular part a singulis tenetur in solidum,
by the first institution: and every one has power in the whole, as it is
undivided, indiuisus; and continues for ever Episcopus vniuersalis Ecclesiae, a
Bishop of the Church universal.

45. Now as that one Monarchy in heaven has not the denomination in respect
of any superiority, which is found among the Persons in the Trinity, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, who are that one Monarch of the same
power, and essence etc. but is so called in regard of the world, and
celestial, and terrestrial creatures, which are subject to them: so this one
Bishopric is not Monarchical in respect of any superiority among those
persons, or Bishops, which are all equal in power, and degree, and make all
but one Bishop, and supreme governor (under Christ) of his Church, but in
regard of inferiors, Priests, and people, which are subject to them.

46. And yet, as in the equality of persons, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, which are all one God, there is found primatus ordinis in the
Father, which is Aristocraticall: so in pari consortio honoris, and dignitatis,
of all the Bishops of the Church, which make all but one Bishop of that one
Bishopric (for as Saint Cyprian says, Cypr.
Non ignoramus vnum Episcopum in Ecclesia catholica esse debere,) there is
found of necessity primatus ordinis as in every Aristocracie: because ordo, or
as Saint Cyprian says, Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
Exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur, which exordium the Fathers affirm to have
been in Saint Peter.

47. If this my brevity in this maine point breed any obscurity, and so does
not satisfy some intelligent Auditor by reason of the diversity of opinions,
concerning the first institution of Bishops: I will enlarge it in the proper
place, when I speak of the Primacie: thus much was said by Anticipation, and
by occasion of that philosophical argument, proposed by Thomas, and pursued by
the Jesuits for the Popes spiritual Monarchy.

48. Which argument resembles that of some Ciuilians, and Canonists, to prove
the like absurdity in the temporal state, Barthol. in Extrau. ad Reprimen.
Glos. in cap. per venerab.
viz. That the Emperor is the Monarch of the whole world; as Bartholus has
it, and the gloss; who allege these reasons, which Sanders and Bellarmine
have borrowed from them: (for Illorum sunt omnia, quae delirant Iesuitae,) as
thus. Non est credendum, quin Deus instituerit in orb optimum genus
gubernationis; because it is said, Psalm. 103.
Omnia in sapientia fecisti; sed illud est Monarchia, which resembles the
celestial government, ergo, Imperator est orbis Monarcha.

49. Again, quae sunt praeter naturam, debent imitari naturalia, at in
naturalibus semper vnus Rector; in corpore cor, in anima vna ratio: ergo, in
orb vnus Imperator, sicut vnus Deus; and other the like reasons, which are
applied to the Pope in the selfsame terms; mutatis mutandis, changing the
Emperor for the Pope, and the world for the Church.

50. But I conclude briefly of the Popes spiritual Monarchy over all the
Church, as Franciscus a Victoria does of the Emperors temporal Monarchy over
the whole world, notwithstanding all those reasons acknowledged by him. Fran.
Victor relec. 5. de Indis.
Haec opinio est sine aliquo fundamento: and therefore we may safely contemn
the one of the Pope, as Victoria the great Master of the Spanish writers, does
the other of the Emperor, without danger of Marcionisme, Lucianisme,
Porphyrianisme, and Heathenisme, and such terrors and monsters of heresy, as
they pretend to us.

51. And thus much of the second diuerticle, or bypath to error, which
Bellarmine uses to seduce his Readers; Colos. 2.8.
which is (...). I would add more, if I might not offend your patience; Bern.
but Breuis dies cogit breuiorem sermonem, this being one of the shortest days
of the year, requires a short Sermon. I will therefore conclude, beseeching
him, Aug.
sine cuius luce non est veritas, without whose illumination we cannot walk
forward in the way of truth, nor return from the way of error: that it would
please him to lead into the way of truth, all such as have erred and are
deceived: and so to direct our footsteps, that we seeing what is light and
truth, may by his light find out also, what is not truth, and so eschew it, to
the edifying of his Church, the discharge of our duties, and the salvation of
our souls; which God grant for Christ Jesus sake, to whom with the holy Ghost,
three Persons and one God, be ascribed all honor, praise, etc. Amen.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
1. YOu have heard of two sleights, that Bellarmine and his fellows use to
deceive their Readers; tertium fraudis diuerticulu^, his third by-way is, 2
Cor. 11.13.
(...), to be transfigured into the Apostles of CHRIST. And how is that done?
Vincent Lirin. tells us: Vin. Lirin. c. 37.
Proferebant Apostoli diuinae legis exempla; proferunt and isti, the Apostles
alleged the Scriptures to prove their true doctrine; and so do they to
establish their false Monarchy; which has ever been the practice of false
Teachers (whom the Apostle calls operarios subdolos) scripturis male
interpretatis errores suos astruere, 2 Cor. 11.13.
to fortify their errors by Scriptures misse-interpreted; by which slight
Satan did transfigure himself into an Angel of light, both when he deceived
our first parents, and when he assaulted our Savior Christ. For both he and his
Ministers know full well by their long practice, and good success in it,
Nullam esse ad fallendum faciliorem viam, quam vt vbi nefarij erroris
subinducitur fraudulentia, ibi diuinorum verborum praetendatur autoritas, that
there is no such ready way to deceive the simple, as to pretend the authority
of Scripture, fraudulently to underlay a nefarious error.

2. This therefore is the third slight, to abuse many Scriptures for
confirmation of this Monarchy so long usurped, and of late years (as it
seems) by common error established as just: but such is the nature of truth,
Greg. Naz.
Quae vt Esdrae, sic mihi potentissima videtur; which seems to me, as
heretofore to Esdras, to be most powerful; that they ever fail in their
conclusions, and instead of a Monarchy, which they affirm, they prove a
Primacie, which we deny not.

3. To this purpose, and with this event, or to little or no purpose, are two
and twenty Scriptures alleged by number, Cic.
and yet in tanto conuentu nulla est, quae rationem, numerumque habeat; amongst
so many there is none, that has either weight or reason: for though the Books
are, De Romani Pontificis Monarchia, and Petri, yet he confesses his proofs
to reach but to a Primacie: and he cannot be so ignorant, or with any reason
esteem us so, that we should confound a Monarchy and Primacie, and make them
Synonimaes, any more then Solus, and Primus are; whereof the one admits no
fellow; the other implies, that there is some companion.

4. Yet either pleading (as it were) simplicity, or presuming of our ignorance,
or mastred by the power of truth, he thus ranks, or diuides his proofs from
the Scripture: Mat. 16.
That the first place, Tu es Petrus, etc. and tibi dabo claues, Thou art Peter,
and to thee I give the Keys, pertinet ad promissionem Primatus, The Primacie
(not a Monarchy) is not yet given, but promised there. The second place, where
it is said to Peter* Ioh. 20.
Pasce oues meas, etc. Feed my Sheep, pertinet ad institutionem Primatus,
belongs to his institution, or inuesting into the Primacie; and yet no mention
of a Monarchy: and the other twenty Scriptures, which he calls the
Prerogatives of Saint Peter, pertinent ad confirmationem Primatus, belong to
the confirmation of the Primacie: So that nothing being intended here to be
proved but a Primacie, which we deny not, the whole discourse in that respect
is idle, and requires no answer, being only a fallacy in aequiuocatione
verbi, as he abuses it: who hops that a Primacie may pass for a Supremacy,
as he would enforce an Aristocracie to be a Monarchy; as before I noted.

5. But this seems strange to me, and indeed absurd, that the many-fold
confirmation of this Primacie is found before the Institution of it: as if
confirmation should go before Baptism; or the confirmation of a Kingdom
before the Coronation, or Institution into it. For the institution of Peter
into the Primacie is after our Saviors resurrection; Joh. 20.
and many confirmations of it both in deed, and in word, are noted by him to
precede his passion; of which sort are the ten first prerogatives, which
Bellarmine mentions in the 17. 18. and 19. Chapter of his first Book De Romans
Pontif, Monarchia: which is contrary to the rule of the Archdeacon, who is,
Panorm.
per excellentiam doctissimus canonistarum; who says, Aluarez. c. 1. n. 3.
Quod Dominus ante resurrectionem elegit Petrum in Principem, sed
confirmationem distulit post resurrectionem.

6. Of the Promise of this Primacie (or Monarchy, as Bellarmine calls it) made
to Saint Peter, Matthew. 16. Super hanc Petram, etc. and of the Institution of
it, Ioh. 20. Pasce oues meas, etc. which are the two main points in question, I
shall speak but very briefly; because those things, which I shall allege, are
so clear and evident, that it may seem a wonder, that so many so learned men
do oppose, or labor to obscure the sense and verity of them: and also
because the consequents, which they infer upon their false interpretations,
Dr. Andrews. Dr. Buckoridge.
have been exactly confuted by his excellent Majesty, and learnedly seconded
by that Nobile par Episcoporum of Winchester and Rochester, that there is no
need of any addition, or farther explication.

7. I speak not this to derogate any whit from the reputation, or honor of
Saint Peter; Honorabilius membrum in corpore Christi: Ber.
vas in honorem, plenum gratiae, and veritatis, who was to our Savior, as
Saint Stephen says Moses was to God (...): Act. 7.20.
De Petro quicunque detraxerit, necesse est, aut infirmitati, aut inuidiae
assignetur: whosoever shall detract from that blessed Apostle, it is to be
ascribed either to his want of judgment, or in envy to the overmuch honor,
or titles, which the Papists give him. Into which contradiction (I think I may
say malediction) some have fallen while in opposition to the ouer-large and
enforced prerogatives, which the Papists ascribe to Saint Peter, they bring
forth rationum copias, whole troops of reasons to prove his infirmities, and
imperfections; I think, I may term them with Tullie, copiolas; for if we
shall measure them by the interpretations of the Fathers, Cic.
Sunt extenuatissimae, et inopia bonarum rationum pessime acceptae.

8. The Fathers were so dainty of Saint Peter's credit, that Optatus having
occasion to mention his fault, in denying his Master: While I speak of it
(says he) Ipsius Sancti Petri beatitudo veniam tribuat, Optat. cont. Parmen.
l. 7.
si illud commemorare videar, quod factum constat, and legitur: and Saint
Augustine, when out of great affection to Saint Cyprian, he entered into a
comparison between him and Saint Peter, not simply, but quantum attinet ad
martyrij coronam, (for both suffered for our blessed Savior) he presently
checkes himself, that he might take occasion to explicate the comparison:
Caeterum vereri debeo (says he) ne in Petrum contumeliosus existam; Aug. de
Bap. cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 1.
quis enim nescit illum Apostolatus principatum, cuilibet Episcopatui
praeferendum? he feared, it might be a contumely to make any comparison;
wherefore he distinguishes, concluding thus: Etsi distat Cathedrarum gratia,
vna est tamen Martyrum gloria, though there be a difference in the honor or
grace of their two Chayres, or Sees, yet they may be compared in the glory of
their Martyrdom, which is one and the same, as Tertullian said, Tertul. de
Praescrip. c. 24.
Petrus Paulo in Martyrio coaequatur; Peter and Paul, and Paul and Peter are
equal in Martyrdom.

9. And Saint Augustine speaking also of Saint Peter's great fault in denying
his Master, which some in those days ex fauore peruerso excusare nitebantur,
affirming that it was no sin, and that in those words, Nescio hominem; Homo
nescio, quid dicis; Aug. in Joh. trac. 66.
Non sum ex discipulis eius: he denied not his Master; after he had proved,
that Saint Peter did acknowledge a fault, and reproved himself, and
consequently those perverse defenders; and vnde eos conuinceret, produxisset
lachrimas testes; (for as Optatus says, Nec doluisset, Optat. cont. Parm. l. 7.
nec fleuisset, si nulla interuenisset offensio) lest he should seem to fall
into the other extremity, or delight, viz. to search into the imperfections of
the blessed Apostle, he excuses himself, saying, Aug. Jbid.
Neque nos cum ista dicimus, primum Apostolorum accusare delectat; sed hunc
intuendo admoneri nos oportet, ne homo quisquam humanis viribus fidat.

10. Here we find observed by Saint Augustine, the two extremities we
mentioned; one used by the Papists, peruersus favor in excusando, and
extollendo: the other by some modern writers, peruersa delectatio in
accusando: These amplify Saint Peter's infirmities, and exagitate them by the
foul names of Curiosity, Superstition, Ignorance, Ambition, Arrogancy,
Wicked devotion, Lying, Rashness, etc. Sparing in their Commentaries, neither
Apostles, nor Prophets, nor ancient Patriarchs: a foul practice in the
Primitive Church, and not to be imitated without great offense: for to instance
in Saint Peter only, of whom we discourse; Valentinus accused him of
ignorance, in the business between him and Saint Paul, Tertul. de Praescrip.
c. 23. Cont. Marc. l. 4. c. 3. Cyril. cont. Julian. l. 9. infine.
Galat. 2. but Tertullian defends him. Marcion lays to his charge
preuarication and simulation; which accusation the same Tertullian remoues
also. Julian the Apostata condemns him of hypocrisy, whom Saint Cyril
confutes: to say nothing of Porphyrie, Hieron. ad Aug. Ep. 39.
who vilified Saint Paul, as Saint Jerome testifies: nor of the Maniches, who
slandered the Patriarchs of the old Testament; whom Saint Augustine defends in
his books against Faustus.

11. On the other extremity; the Papists ouer-extoll the favors, and dilate
and enlarge the Prerogatives, Cic.
which are given to Saint Peter, and in omni genere amplificationis exardent:
they transform the Primacie, which the Fathers afford him, into a Monarchy.
Bellarmine holds, that he was Primus Ecclesiae vniuersalis Monarcha, as I have
showed before: and Gretzer he will prove it, Gretz. defen. Bellar. l. 1. c. 8.
de Romans Pontif.
and gives him Monarchical independent fullness of power: whereupon follows
(...), and (...), and (...), potestas legislatiua for the whole Church, and so
consequently coerciua, as Suarez proves. They call him The Head of the whole
Church, The Type of the Church, The Lord and Master over the Apostles, and so
acknowledged by them; The Vicar of Christ. They say that Christ, and Peter, and
the Pope pro vno tantum Ecclesiae capite, reputantur: That the Apostles
received no power of jurisdiction immediately from Christ, but mediante Petro.
That the other Apostles received the power and authority to preach from Saint
Peter. That potestas clauium was given to Peter, as to the Head, to the rest as
to the members. That Saint Peter was called in plenitudinem potestatis, the
other Apostles in plenitudinem solicitudinis. That Saint Peter only among the
Apostles, was made a Bishop by our Savior Christ, and the others received
ordination from Saint Peter. That the Pontificalitie of the Priesthood in the
New Testament was originally from Saint Peter, and consequently all Orders.
That Saint Peter had ordinariam potestatem, which he left to his successor;
the other Apostles delegatam, which ceased with them. That after his last
Supper, and before his Passion, our Savior delivered the government of his
Church into the hands of Saint Peter, ne quam diu Christus esset in sepulchro,
desolata maneret, orbata capite, and Pastore. To conclude all in brief. They
say, that the power of Saint Peter differed from the power of the other
Apostles in five things. First, in modo dandi, and accipiendi; because power
was given to Peter ordinary; to the other Apostles ex speciali gratia, and to
themselves only. Secondly, in officio, for Peter was made Christ's Vicar, the
other Apostles had but power legantine. Thirdly, In the object of their power,
because Peter had power over all the Apostles; but the other Apostles had not
power one over another, but over the people, who were subject to them.
Fourthly, in the perpetuity of the power; for the power of the other Apostles
was personal to themselves only; but Peter's was perpetual to him, and his
successors. Fifthly, In the very essence of their power, for the authority
committed to the Apostles was potestas executiua, or (as Thomas calls it)
authoritas gubernandi, according to the Laws prescribed to them; such as our
Judges power is: but the authority given to Saint Peter, was potestas
praeceptiua (as Thomas says) authoritas regiminis, which is proper to a King
only.

12. These false and imaginary prerogatives, which the Schoolmen and
Jesuits ascribe to Saint Peter, Aluarez Guerrero calls aurea, Thesaur. Christ.
Relig c. 1. n. 60.
and gemmea, the gold and jewels in Saint Peter's Myter, and fundamentum totius
sacrae paginae, and totius sacrtiuris Pontificij, the foundation of the Popes
Canon Laws, and of the holy Scriptures: For indeed the Scriptures are not the
foundation of them, but to these propositions the Scriptures are wrested: but
the true foundation of them is the Popes Canon Law concerning his Monarchy.

13. Thus we see, that the one extremity has one quality of the Beast,
which is, blasphemare Tabernaculum Dei, Apoc. 13.6.
and eos qui in coelis habitant, To blaspheme Saint Peter, and the Saints,
which are blessed in heaven: The other extremity is a quality, or condition
of the horn of the Goat, which is, Magnificare (Petrum) vsque ad fortitudinem
coeli, Dan. 8.10. and 11.
and deijcere de fortitudine, and de stellis, and conculcare eas, and vsque ad
Principem fortitudinis magnificare: To magnify Peter above all the Apostles,
and his successors above all Bishops; to conculcate and trample upon all the
lights or stars of the Church; and to magnify Peter with the honor of his
Master, our blessed Savior.

15. I affect rather a quality of the Sea, which does medium terrae locum
expetere: that is, Cic.
I will run a middle course between both, Ne vera laus (Petro) detracta
oratione nostra, vel falsa affectata esse videatur. tolerabile erratum; and say
with Saint Cyrill, Cyril. com. Julian. l. 9.
that the controversy between Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, which is mentioned
in the Acts, and gave occasion of offense to such as would quarrel, was but
artificiocissima in illis dispensatio: (for, Non mihi tam been est, Tertul. de
Praescrip. c. 4. Jbid. c. 23.
immo non mihi tam male est, vt Apostolos committam:) Or with Tertullian, Si
reprehensus est Petrus, conuersationis fuit vitium, non praedicationis: Or with
Saint Augustine, Aug. Ep. 9. ad Hieron. Jbid.
that Saint Peter did Iudaizare (Gal. 2.) compassione misericordiae, non
simulatione fallaciae; or, as he says afterward; Non mentientis astu, sed
compatientis affectu, as the Fathers mollify with good reason, his other
infirmities: or else I will make use of them, as Saint Augustine did, when he
spoke of that great weakness of denying his Master, saying; Hunc intuendo
admoneri nos oportet, ne homo quispiam de humanis viribus fidat; Or say with
Saint Basil, Basil. homil. de Poeniten.
Tertio Dominum Petrus negauit; non hoc fine vt Petrus caderet, sed vt tu
quoque consolationem habeas: which moderation the Fathers observe in all his
infirmities; but especially Epiphanius in his Book called Ancoratus, Jn
argumen. Anchor.
(Quia instar anchorae ducit mentem de vita and salute perscrutantem) where it
seems to be (as it were) a necessary point of the Christian Faith, to speak
honorably of Saint Peter, and to extenuate, or excuse his imbecility and
weakness.

15. Secondly, I will grant any prerogative, which our Savior, and the sacred
Scriptures interpreted by the consent of the holy Fathers of the Church, have
given unto him. That, which I oppose, is the imagined Monarchy, which
themselves so inconstantly affirm, and so weakly prove. In affirming it they
are so ridicule inconstantes, that they confound the names of Monarchy and
Primacie (as I have showed before) intituling their books Of the Monarchy of
Peter, Conc. 2.. 17.
and the Bishop of Rome: and proposing in the several Chapters the proofs of
a Primacie; which is usual with Sanders in his visible Monarchy: and
Bellarmine when he gives this title to his ninth Chapter, Regimen Ecclesiae
esse praecipue Monarchicum, uses eight reasons, which prove only a Primacie.

Cicero.
16. Their proofs are as weak as a band of men, that have suffered
ship-wracke, eiecta, and debilitata; or like those infirmiores in exercitu, as
Gretzer confesses, which are entertained of necessity, Gretz. defens. Bellar.
l. 1. c. 17.
Cum omnes fortes esse non possint, etc. Et vt turba and numero exercitus
compleatur; out of S. Jerome, lib. 1. cont. Iouinian. c. 14. For (says
Gretzer) though S. Peter's Prerogatives be alleged to prove this Monarchy, yet
praecise ex ipsis priuilegijs qua talia, non colligitur Primatus, precisely out
of those Privileges (as they are such) a Primacie is not collected; much less
a Monarchy, which they pretend.

17. And again he says, Istae prerogatiuae non nude, nec crude inspici
debent, Ibid.
sed cum mutua ad se inuicem, habitudine, cum singularum circumstantijs, and
cum respectu ad potissima de Primatu testimonia: so that it is to no purpose to
confute them severally; they are the forlorn hope, and of those kind of
arguments, as Aristotle says, Quae non plus afferunt, quam similitudinem
veritati, quae probanda suscipitur; and being used only to prove a Primacie
(as appears both by Bellarmine and Gretzer) which we deny not: quae Augur
etc. Iniusta vitiosaque dixerit, irrita, Cic. 2. de Legibus.
infectaque sunto, those reasons which the prime Jesuits confess to be weak
and vicious, irrita, indictaque sunto, they are unto me as if never proposed.

18. The maine privileges, or the principalia testimonia, which are brought,
are only two; one is, Mat. 16.
Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam; and tibi dabo
claues; which they say, is promissio Primatus: the other is, Pasce oues meas,
etc. which they say, John 21.
is Institutio Primatus: some allege a third, et tu aliquando conuersus
confirma fratres tuos; and hold that the Primacie was there first instituted.

19. Now although these testimonies be alleged by Bellarmine and Gretzer,
Sanders, Stapleton, etc. to maintain a Primacie, which we deny not; yet
because they confound the words Primacie and Monarchy, and entend by these
places and texts of Scripture to establish a Monarchy: how far off they are
from the perfection of so high a work, I will show you by the weakness of
these foundations.

20. principalia testimonia (as they call them) were never interpreted of a
Monarchy, by any one of the ancient Fathers for a thousand years after our
Saviors coming in the flesh: neither were they ever urged to that purpose
before the quarrels between the Imperialists, and the Papists, between
Gregory the seventh, and Henry the Emperor, about six hundred years since,
as has been most learnedly proved by the right reverend Bishop of Rochester;
for (as I noted before) out of Aluarez, this Monarchy with them is fundamentum
totius sacrae paginae, which is alleged to that purpose; and not those
Scriptures the foundation of that Monarchy.

21. And ever since that controversy, the favorers of the Papacy would have
the world imagine, that our Savior made S. Peter and the Bishops his
successors, Monarchs formally, (after that manner that the Emperors of the
East invested their Magistrates, and supreme officers; Niceph. Greg. l. 9.
Nam cui public rerum gerendarum potestas dabatur, gladius vna cum sancto
Euangelio in manus tradebatur,) and that St. Peter had not only the Gospel
committed to him, but two swords for failing.

22. And the gloss alleging that for the Popes Monarchy, which the whole
Church understands unanimously, and necessarily of our Savior only God and
man, In extrau. vnam sanctam.
King of Kings, viz. Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo, and in terra, which
is power purely Monarchical; says impiously and blasphemously (though he
would seem mannerly) Non videtur Dominus discretus fuisse, vt cum reuerentia
eius loquar, nisi vnicum post se talem vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia
posset.

23. Who hearing this gloss, or interpretation, will not cry with Moses,
Leuit. 24.14.
Educite blasphemum extra castra; throw these blasphemous glosses and comments
out of the Church, and burn them; and examine upon the Scriptures the
expositions of the ancient Fathers, who lived before that quarrel, and then
you shall find (as St. Augustine said to St. Jerome,) that Incomparabiliter
pulchrior est veritas Christianorum, quam Helena Graecorum, Aug. epist. 19.
the truth delivered upon these texts by the ancient Fathers, is incomparably
more beautiful, then the meretricious false colors and collusions of the late
Church of Rome?

24. Petra, aedificare, claues, ligare, soluere, pascere, etc. Now Stapleton
prescribes us this rule, when we offer to prove the Church to be an
Aristocracie, Staple. Relect. p. 94.
Oportet non modo perspicua esse verba, quae rem tantam decidant, verum-etiam
tum praedicatione pastorum, tum fide ac moribus fidelium planissime fieri: we
with reason urge the same rule for their Monarchy; they must prove it not by
figurative, but by perspicuous words; now who can find a Monarchy
perspicuously in these words, Petra, aedificare, claues, ligare, soluere,
confirmare, or pascere etc? Were it not ridiculous to conclude, est petra, or
est pastor; ergo Monarcha est? etc. Secondly, they must prove it Praedicatione
Pastorum, and fide, and moribus fidelium, and so make it planissimum. But I
showed you in the former reason, that the first true Pastors for more then a
thousand years preached no such doctrine; and that the Apostles themselves,
and the primitive Christians acknowledged no such Monarchy in their practice
and manners, appears by this, that (...), the first converted Jews contended
against Peter for going to the Gentiles, and conuersing with them: (...), Acts
11.2.
that is, as St. Chrysostom reads, expostularunt. Now it is not good manners
to expostulate with Monarchs, no prescribing to him, who can proscribe. They
say it was humilitatis in Petro, to take it at their hands: but if those
Christians had acknowledged Monarchical power in Peter, they would not have
expostulated, or contended with him, or accused him of it, for that had been
contumacie against their superior: but accusationis, Vigor.
or expostulationis, testis est scriptura, non regiae Maiestatis, as Vigorius
observes.

25. Secondly, the Apostles acknowledged no Monarchy; Act. 8.14.
for Apostoli miserunt Petrum, and Iohannem in Samaria^; now he that sends
one, as it were an Ambassador, is greater then he that is sent, or at least
his equal. Bell. l. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 16. Sand. de visib. Monar. l. 6. c. 5.
Bellarmine answers, and so does Sanders, that a man may send one, over whom
he has no power; as par parem; and also an inferior his superior. But this
answer is not to the purpose; they must prove, that an Inferior may send a
Monarch.

26. Their first instance of par parem, that an equal may send his equal, is
in Herod, who is said mittere Magos in Bethlehem, Mat. 2.8.
over whom he had no power and authority. But to omit that, whether he had
power over them, or no, in his own Country, where they were strangers; We
answer, that though the Latin words be the same in the vulgar Translation,
Miserunt Apostoli Petrum, and Misit Herodes Magos, yet they differ much in the
Original, and in the sense of them: Act. 8.
for Acts 8. it is said, (...), of (...), the word whereof the Apostles took
their denomination, Mat. 2.8.
and office: but Mat. 2. it is said of Herod, (...), which two words, (...),
and (...), though in the Gospel they be used sometimes as Synonimaes, and do
both imply the sending of the Apostles; yet (...) is sometimes interpreted
dimitto, not mitto; as it is in Homer. (...), he dismissed me with the rest of
the Gods; and Beza so understands it in this place, Annot. super locum.
Ego existimo (says he) Regem illis a se dimissis blande and benign iter
demonstrasse; and translates it, and eis Bethlehem dimissis. But if Beza being
ours be of less credit with them, Barradius a Master Jesuit for
interpretation, says thus of Herod, Tom. 1. l. 9. c. 10. p. 494.
Post haec in Bethlehem hospites cum honor dimisit, vique ad se redeant,
precatus: so that this instance is to little purpose; for Herod dismissed with
honor, but sent not his equal on an embassage, or message, much less his
superior.

27 Which is the second instance; wherein it is said, that the rest of the
children of Israel, miserunt ad illos, that is, to the Tribe of Ruben, Gad, and
the half Tribe of Manasses; Jos. 22.13.
Miserunt ad illos in terram Galaad, Phinees filium Eleazari Sacerdotem, and
december principes cum eo: They sent on an embassage Phinees the Priest, the son
of Eleazar, and ten Princes with him: Cum tamen iure diuino toti populo
praeesset, says Bellarmine, and therefore the people may send their Monarch
upon an embassage. Proverb. 24.2.
But frauds labia eorum loquuntur; they deal fraudulently with us: for as
they read, Miserunt Phinees filium Eleazari sacerdotem, so others read,
Miserunt Phinees filium Eleazari sacerdotis: They sent not the High Priest, but
the Highpriests son; and then the matter is answered.

28. It is true, that the vulgar Bibles printed at Lions, 1574. read, Miserunt
Phinees filium Eleazari sacerdotem, but yet show, that there is some question
of it, and a variety in the reading, by putting in the Margent Sacerdotis: but
the more ancient Bibles printed at Lions 1516. which is about fifty years
before, Abulens. q. 10. and q. 16. Jos. 22.30.
read, Miserunt Phinees filium Eleazari Sacerdotis, and so reads Abulensis q.
10. super Ios. e. 22. and in the 16. q. he says, Phinees nondum erat sacerdos
magnus, quia pater eius Eleazarus viuebat: and if he be called Phinees
Sacerdos, Abul. Jbid.
as he is afterward, it is not per excellentiam, sed quia erat de stirpe
Sacerdotum.

29 But admit, that the High Priest were sent by the people; Abulens. sup. Number.
c. 25. q. 8.
and that he was Princeps in temporalibus, Prince or chief in the
temporalties, which belonged to the Levites; and in spiritualibus, and in
spiritual matters, which concerned the whole people, and exceeded all other in
wealth, and honor, and jurisdiction; yet was he no Monarch, but Maximus
iudicum, the Primate in an Aristocracie; or as the chief Justice among our
Judges, from whom (says Abulensis) non licebat appellare: and the government
of Israel being at that time (...), as Josephus calls it; and Joshua being
chosen out by God to govern under him extraordinarily (not as Kings govern
under God, but as Judges govern under Kings) the High Priest himself was
subject to him; and in the word Miserunt, he (that is, Joshua) is included, as
Abulensis notes.

30 So that Phinees being not the High Priest, but the Highpriests son; or
if the High Priest, yet no Monarch, but Maximus Iudicum, and so sent by the
rest of the Optimates, and Princes of the Tribes, who were his equals; or
jointly by them and Joshua, who in some case was his superior; this instance
avails not against that objection, The Apostles sent out Peter and John, ergo
Peter was not their absolute Monarch, but of equal honor with them, excepting
the Primacie.

31. When Caietane commented upon these words, Miserunt Petrum and Iohannem,
Caiet super Act. 8.
doubting this objection, he says to his Reader, Cum audis, Miserunt, ne
propterea Petri principatum neges: Fear it not learned Cardinal, we deny not
his Principality, or Primacie, but your pretended Monarchy, and yet hold,
That as the Optimates in a Monarchy, who have their honors by the favor of
the Monarch, and the great affairs and employments of the State committed and
delegated unto them, are ever to be directed, ouer-ruled, and commanded by the
Monarch: so in an Aristocracie the Primate, who has received his precedencie
from the Optimates, though the ordering of many and weighty causes be
especially committed unto him, yet in matters of greatest moment he is
ordered, and directed by the Optimates; and so was Saint Peter: for when the
Apostles divided the World among themselves, Peter was sent by them to Rome: he
sent not the other Apostles abroad into the world by his direction like a
Monarch; but he himself is sent with others, and by others also. Cum duodecim
Apostoli, Leo.
etc. (says Leo) imbuendum Euangelio mundum, distributis sibi terrarum
partibus suscepissent, Beatus Petrus princeps Apostolici ordinis, Ad arcem
Romani destinatur Imperij, etc. So also Baron: Tom. 1. an. 44. n. 26.
Ad totius mundi principem ciuitatem, Princeps Apostolorum mittitur, et ad
primariam vrbem orbis primus Pastor iure dirigitur: and the contents of that
paragraph is, De Petro Romam misso: and that this has been, and ought to be
the true state, and form of government in the Church, Vigorius proves unto
us at large; to whom I remit you.

32. And thus much by occasion of the second reason, viz. That all the words
and phrases, upon which Peter's Monarchy is founded, are Metaphorical, and
Figurative, and neither expounded by the ancient Fathers to implie a Monarchy;
nor so understood either in the practice of the Christian people, or the
Apostles themselves; all which Stapleton requires as necessary to prove an
Aristocracie, and so consequently we require as necessary to prove their
Monarchy. To which I add that rule of the Schools, Scriptura symbolica non
est argumentatiua, firm arguments are not drawn from figurative and tropicall
speeches, except the holy Ghost have explained them in holy Scriptures, or the
consent of the Church allowed of them; both which are here wanting: and so I
conclude with another rule of Stapleton: Regimen Ecclesiae, Ibid. page 94.
quod ad omnes, and singulos spectat, nunquam in obscuritate vocis alicuius
latere potuisse; for that which belongs unto all and every particular man to
know, ought to be as plain as Gods commandments; Abul. super Ios. c. 7. q. 64.
of which Abulensis gives this rule, Nunquam inuenitur in aliquo pracepto dato
a Deo modus loquendi Metaphoricus; sed aliquando in narrationibus rerum
gestarum.

great) in those words or phrases, Petra, claues soluere, ligare, pascere, etc.
was given indifferently to Peter, and all the Apostles, and in them to the
Church, but they are all originally and Monarchically, in our Savior: for
these royalties, and prerogatives proceed not from (...), or his fullness of
power, which cannot be imparted to any creature; but from (...) from his
dominion, and government of the Church, which may be delegated in a certain
proportion: and these he conveyed to the Apostles. Axiomata sua (says St.
Basis) Jesus largitur alijs, St. Basil. hom. de Paeniten. August super Joh.
trac. 47. Amb. super. Luc. c. 9.
Augustine says, Nomina sua; St. Ambrose says, vocabula sua: Jesus (which
name imports his humanity) imparteth his honors, his dignities, his names,
his offices unto other. Lux est; vos estis Lux mundi, inquit: Sacerdos est, and
facit Sacerdotes: Ouis est, and dicit, ecce ego mitto vos sicut oues in medio
luporum; Petra est, and Petram facit. Quae sua sunt, largitur seruis suis.

34. But yet he so disposes his honors, dignities, and prerogatives, that he
both holds the Monarchical power in himself, as he is man, and gouernes the
Church in his own person, sitting ever personally in the chief seat of his
Church, that is, in heaven (and no Monarch is resident at once in every part of
his Kingdom) and he is present, as all other Kings are, by his power,
direction, government, and officers till the end of the world, as other
Monarchs are till the end of their lives. It is he alone (not Peter, nor the
Apostles, nor Bishops, nor Priests) who makes perfect and effectual all the
Church Saraments. Ipse enim est, qui baptizat; ipse est, qui peccata remittit;
Tho. cont. Gent. c. 76. l. 4. n. 4.
ipse est verus sacerdos, qui se obtuli in ara crucis, and cuius virtute corpus
eius quotidie in altari consecratur: and this power is not given to the
Apostles, Abid. super Mat. c. 9. q. 30.
or Bishops formaliter, vt ipsi habeant; but ministerialiter, vt Christus per
illos operetur; as Abulensis distinguishes of the working of miracles. Now he
never substitutes a Monarch under him; that was never heard of among the
Monarchs of the world, and makes contra (...) fullness of power; and would
implie contradiction, or a division of the Monarchy, and we might say, Diuisum
imperium cum Jove (Christo) Petrus habet, that is, our Savior is Monarch over
that part of the Church, which triumphs in heaven; and St. Peter, and his
successors are Monarchs over the other part of the Church, which is militant on
the earth: and if both have (...) or (...) in their divisions, as all Monarchs
have; neither should our Savior exercise any power on the earth, Mat. 28.
as he is God and man; contrary to his promise, Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad
finem mundi, nor St. Peter, nor his successors Popes, or Bishops, should
challenge any power in heaven; contrary to that other promise made to Peter, and
the rest Quaecunque solueris in terris, soluta erunt and in coelis.

35. But our Savior keeps his Monarchy entire, and sitting personally in
that City, quam inquirimus, whether we must all resort in order, when we be
called, and give account of our Stewardships; he commends the government, and
the honors, and dignities erected in his Church, to his Apostles
indifferently: making them all his Messengers, and Ambassadors, enduing them
with the same titles, and prerogatives of ligare, and soluere, and pascere, of
being the rocks and foundations of his Church; of keeping the keys, etc. All
which power and authority he made entire, and indifferent to all his Apostles,
and to all Bishops their successors; as is confessed, at least consequently, by
them all. De visib. Monar. p. 16. and. 108.
I will instance only in Sanders: Episcopi omnes (says he) per totum mundum
non minus sunt Episcopi, quam summus Pontifex, nec aliam Episcopatus naturam,
sed eandem prorsus cum illo tenent; which is to say (seeing they challenge
Episcopal power but from St. Peter) Apostoli omnes non minus sunt Apostoli,
quam sanctus Petrus, nec aliam Apostolatus naturam, sed candem cum illo habent.
If they were all Apostles alike, or Bishops alike; if the nature of their
Apostleship be not different; if they have one and the selfsame Apostleship;
they have one and the selfsame power, which is inherent, and natural to the
Apostleship; which cannot hold true, if St. Peter were their Monarch: for it is
absurd to think, that the Optimates in a Monarchy should be of the same
nature, and power, that the Monarch is.

All these titles, and powers, ligare, soluere, pascere, confirmare, habere
claues, esse fundamentum, to bind, to loose, to feed, to strengthen, to have
the keys, to be a foundation; or a rock, are delegated alike to all the
Apostles, and depended not upon the Primacie, which is a thing natural, not
supernatural in the Church, as those honors and prerogatives are, and
therefore can no way proceed from the Primacie; the Monarchy, and chief
power, remaining in our Savior.

37. For he is the Monarchical head of his Church, the essential head; Ipsum
dedit caput. Omnia subiecit sub pedibus eius. Ephesians. 1.22. Mat. 28.18.
Data est illi omnis potestas, etc. By which Monarchical power, he delegateth
all his Apostles alike, and makes them governors over all his Kingdoms. They
are all Capita, but ministerialia, capita secundaria, capita instrumentalia.
Saint Peter had but the first place, or Primacie among them; with such
pre-eminence, and prerogatives, as they yielded to that place. The Church has
not two Monarchs, for then must they be eiusdem dignitatis, which is
blasphemy. Peter cannot be called Vicarius, or Viceroy, or Prorex, or
Promonarcha, for the delegation is alike, and equal to all: he is but the
first among the Proreges; he gouernes not by his own Laws; but by the Law of
Christ, or a general Council of the Apostles.

38. Secondly, our Savior is the Master-Key, the Monarchical Key, Clauis
David; he alone opens, he alone shuts; he is the Essential Key, Clauis
coeli: all the Apostles are Claues ministeriales, claues ecclesiae: the Keys
were given to St Peter, but in the name of them all, and in the name of the
Apostles; neither is the power of all the Keys given unto them, or unto Saint
Peter, absolutely, and definitiuely: for the absolute and definitive power
belongs only to our Savior; but he has promised to bind, and to loose, that
is, to make good in Heaven, whatsoever they shall bind or loose ministerially
on Earth, as his Substitutes, Clem. Epist. ad Jacob. fratrem Dom.
and Vicars. It is well noted, that Episcopi vocantur claues Ecclesiae; vt
recte dicamus and Christum coeli clauem, and Apostolos Ecclesiae claues; per
quorum ministerium ad claues coeli peruenire possumus.

39. Thirdly, our Savior is the Monarchical Rock, or foundation of the
Church, Petra, or Lapis in fundamentis Sion, Lapis probatus, Lapis Angularis,
Lapis pretiosus, Lapis in fundamento fundatus, Lapis essentialis, Fundamentum
primum and maximum, Aug. super Psalm. 86.
as Saint Augustine says; Fundamentum fundamentorum: the Apostles are
ministerialia, and secundaria fundamenta. Saint Peter is not the only
ministerial rock, or foundation: St. Paul says of them all, Ministri estis
and vnusquisque secundum quod Dominus dedit: Ego plantaui, Apollo rigauit,
Dominus dat incrementum. It is absurd therefore to think, that the whole
Church is supported, or underpropped by any of these Rocks, or foundations,
which are all ministerial. Although the name of Peter be used, and termed the
Rock, and the Keys given him, yet it was done figurative, significatiue,
quatenus repraesentauit Ecclesiam; they be Saint Augustines terms, Petrus
quando claues accepit, Aug. super Psalm. 108.
Ecclesiam sanctam significauit; therefore when he was called Petra, ecclesia^
sancta^ significauit. Again, Ecclesiae, Aug trac. vlt. super Ioh.
Petrus Apostolus propter Apostolatus sui Primatum gerebat figurata
generalitate personam: he says, that S. Peter in a figurative generality
represented the person of all the Apostles, as being a Primate, not as a
Monarch. And Saint Hierome says; Hieron. l. 1. aduers. Iouin.
Super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia, licet id alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat;
and cuncti claues regni coelorum accipiunt, and ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae
fortitudo solidatur: Where then is Saint Peter's Monarchy, in this equality of
power and authority? You will say then, where is his Primacie, that Saint
Augustine tells us of? Jbid.
Why Saint Hierome mentions it there; Though there be this equality (says
he) yet proptere a inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto
Schismatis tollatur occasio; that one being constituted the Head, or Primate,
there might be unity, and order in the Church, and all occasion of contention
for the first place removed: seeing in every Aristocracie, or equality, or
fellowship, one must be chief, or else there will be contentions, and
emulations among them, and no order established.

the Monarchical Shepherd; the Apostles all indifferently Pastores
secundarij, and ministeriales; and there is no doubt, but that our Savior
meant, when he said to Peter, 1 Pet. 5.4.
Pasce oues meas, that Peter himself was one of those sheep, as well as the
other Apostles: (for, omnes fecit oues suas, Aug super Jo. trac. 123.
pro quibus est omnibus passus;) and no more a Monarch-Shepheard, then the rest
were: They were all sheep in respect of the Monarch-Shepheard Christ, and all
Shepherds in respect of the rest of the Flock. For though those words were
spoke to Saint Peter, yet the scope and power of them reached to all the
Apostles. Hoc ab ipso Christo docemur, (says Saint Basil) Basil. de vita
sclit. c. 23.
qui Petrum Ecclesiae suae pastorem constituit, etc. Et consequenter omnibus
Apostolis eandem potestatem tribuit: cuius signum est, quod omnes ex aequo and
ligant, et absoluunt.

41. But let our Savior, and Saint Basil, and all the company of holy Fathers
conclude, what they list, Suarez de Leg. l. 4. c. 3. n. 1.
yet Suarez he tells you, Christum, dum indefinite dixit, Pasce oues meas,
ostendisse Petri potestatem fuisse supremam, et Monarchicam, etiam super alios
Apostolos: But Saint Basil said, that the indefinite speech, Pasce oues meas,
was consequently universal, and included all the Apostles, not as Sheep, but
as Shepherds, vtri creditis?

42. But Suarez will prove, that he intends Saint Peter only, and him a
Monarch. And first he would enforce it by authorities from the Canon Law ( Quae
iura valde bona sunt ad hoc, says Aluarez,) as namely, Did. 2. c. In nouo
Test. and Did. 19. c. Ita Dominus. and 24. q. 1. c. Cum beatissimus; and c.
Loquitur. and Did. 96. But the latter usurping Popes are no competent Judges
in their own cause. Secondly, he would prove it by reason, and the proper
reason indeed; and that is, voluntas Christi; Christ's will is, that Peter
should be a Monarch: which if they can prove, we will put it into our prayers,
and say, Fiat voluntas tua, and will join with them effectually for the
performance of it. Thirdly, he will make it good in congruitie, that he
should be a Monarch: Quia oportuit, et decuit in Christi Ecclesia esse vnitatem
mysticam, et perfectissimum regimen: But that, we say, is not a Monarchy
simply, but mixed with an Aristocracie, which resembles the mystical unity,
and regiment in Heaven: where there is one Deity Monarchical, and yet three
Persons Aristocraticall, equal in power, nature, dignity, etc. and yet the
Father has Primatum ordinis, et originis, in respect of the Son, and the
holy Ghost: and yet is no Monarch in respect of them, but all three are one
Monarch, over all creatures. As in the Church there is vnus Episcopatus, Vide
plura.
one only Bishopric, and yet many Apostles, and many Bishops of equal power
and authority; and among them one has Primatum ordinis, because Exordium, and
ordo must be ab vnitate: but that one is no Monarch, in respect of his
fellow-Bishops, but all jointly make one Monarch, in respect of their
inferiors, the Priests, and people. And therefore Suarez conclusion is false,
Instituit Ecclesiam per modum Monarchiae, and suprema^ potestatem vni contulit,
ad quam Petrum elegi^: for we say with Saint Cyprian, and reverent antiquity,
Non vni dedit, sed vnitati, not to Peter, but to them all as to one person,
among whom Peter was first or Primate.

43. I could add, that our Savior is the Archbuilder, or Monarch-builder,
Aedificator primarius, essentialis: the Apostles were aedificatores primarij
ministeriales, operarij, materiarij; adiutores Dei, as his Ministers and
Servants: all the Apostles plant and water, Christ himself gives the increase;
not Peter, who is fellow laborer with the rest. For the power which our
Savior has given him, or them, they have not formaliter, but ministerialiter,
vt Christus per ipsos operetur. And for that reason also Christ is called the
Great Gate, the essential Gate, the Apostles ostia ministerialia; and Saint
Peter is not the sole Porter of heaven. And why are they called Gates, says
Saint Augustine? viz. Quia per ipsos intramus in regnum Dei: praedicant enim
nobis, and cum per ipsos intramus, per Christum intramus. Aug. super Psalm. 86.
Ipse est enim ianua; and cum dicuntur duodecim portae Jerusalem, and vna porta
Christus, and duodecim portae Christus; quia in duodecim portis Christus.

44. Thus we see, that omnia axiomata Christi, as St. Basil calls them; omnia
nomina, vocabula, all those supernatural powers, which are given for the
building of the Church, are given indifferently to all the Apostles: St. Peter
has not so much as his Primacie by them; the Apostles have them omnes ex
aequo; much less do they infer, or confirm a Monarchy to him, or his
successors.

Monarchies are not got by consequents, for this is a rule in the civil Law,
Argumenta a maiori vel minori, in his quae sunt meri Imperij, non valent: such
arguments are not in force, where merum Imperium is delegated, which kind of
government is without Jurisdiction: for merum Imperium, and Iurisdictio are
two several branches of a Monarchy, and each may be delegated without the
other. The reason of the rule is this; Quia ea, quae ex mero Imperto
proficiscuntur, L. 1.. Qui mandata D. Offic. eius cui mand.
non per consequentiam, sed per legem nominatim dantur, they are given by
express words of a Law, and are not to be challenged by any consequent.

46. Now power, or government, Imperium, as they call it, was given nominatim,
by express words, and by Law; and the Prince or Monarch prescribed, quatenus
exerceri debuit; he prescribed certam speciem, modum, formam: and therefore all
things which were Imperij, did not concur in one Magistrate; but part was
given to one, and part to another. L. inter poenas. D. Iurisdict, and relegat^
As for example; the Consul had Ius gladij, not Ius relegandi: Praesides or the
Presidents had Ius gladij, and Ius damnandiin metallum, but they had neither
Ius deportandi, nor confiscandi: so that it is no good consequent, Habet ius
gladij, ergo Ius damnandi in metallum, though it be a less punishment: or,
Habet ius gladij, ergo Ius proscribendi, or, multam dicendi; He has power of
the sword, therefore he has power to banish, or proscribe, or to fine a man.

47. Now let us consider, what this Monarch-Shepheard, this great and
Monarch-Bishop our Savior Christ Jesus delegated, or imparted to his Apostles;
and we shall find, that he delegated not, or commended any temporal things to
them by word, or by writing: not Ius gladij, or any such power as is forenamed.
Ioh. 18.36.
Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo: No, it was a supernatural Kingdom and the
power he gave, and those gifts he imparted, were supernatural.

48. For the Church is not a politic but a mystical body, distinguished (as
I may say) Formally from a politic body; ordained and instituted to a diverse
end, viz. to supernatural felicity: united with a diverse bond, namely the
unity and bond of faith; exercising diverse and distinct actions; as those that
pertain to the honor of God, and sanctifying of our souls, which cannot be
done without certain power supernatural imparted to it, and the chief
magistrates, by the chief Monarch supernatural.

Cont. SVAREZ. de leg l. 4. c. 2. n. 7.
49. Which power is given by consecration of that person which is consecrated;
and ever requires, and presupposes orders; and consists in the very
ordination, and is given by it, not by any election, or deputation made by the
will of man, but immediately from Christ himself, by virtue of his first
institution. For our Savior setting down the honor of a Bishop, and
disposing or ordering the government of his Church (as St. Cyprian tells us)
in the Gospel, says to Peter, Mat. 16.18. and 19.
Ego tibi dico, quia tu es Petrus; I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven:
Inde, from hence (says St. Cyprian) from this time forward, per temporum,
Cypri. Epist. 27. ad Lapsos.
and successionum vices, Episcoporum ordinatio and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit;
the ordination of Bishops, and the government of the Church comes down along
to us by course of times and successions, Vt Ecclesia super Episcopos
constituatur; and omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem Praepositos gubernetur; That
the Church should be settled upon the Bishops, and all the actions of the Church
should be ordered by the same governors. And the Apostles were called to
higher orders then the seauentie two Disciples: and that appears, because
Matthias (who, according to Epiphanius, Epiphan. haere^, 20.
was one of the seauentie two Disciples) was called from the lower order into
Judas his place, which was an higher order: Episcopatum eius accipiat alter;
Accipiat is an argument that he had it not before; and that ordination was a
collation of a new power, by which he became superior over those that were
before of his own order, being only Priests. And this supernatural power
seems to be a certain character impressed in every Bishop; and has not
joined to it any temporal Jurisdiction, pertaining to the external
Ecclesiastical Court, which is now used, land elsewhere derived, (as shall be
showed in due place;) nor consisting of any political quality of punishment
pecuniary, or corporal, to restrain men by fear: but in a Discipline
Ecclesiastical, wherein men were contained either by external abstension (as
it was called) that is, Cyprian ep. 11. ad Pompon.
abstaining from their society who refused the Discipline, by separation, or
excommunication, as now we call it: or by internal moral shamefastness,
which made them conformable: for what Metus does now after Jurisdiction granted
to the Church, that Pudor did in the beginning, before the Church was
strengthened by the civil power: but of this by the way; more shall be said in
the proper place, when we speak of the Primacie.

50. Now the power, which was given by our Savior to his Apostles, and their
successors the Bishops, etc. consisted in these, and the like things. Ligare,
and soluere, with a reference to sins, which is supernatural, Mat. 28.
not political: habere claues, which signifies the same; to baptize in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; to teach those things, which
our Savior commanded them; Hoc facere in eius commemorationem, to administer
the Sacrament of his body and blood; or if you will, Sacrificare in eius
commemorationem, to offer a Sacrifice commemoratiue of his death, and passion:
Pascere, to feed his sheep: Mat. 28.19.
(...), to make Disciples of others of all nations, as Christ made them his
Disciples; a word never used in the New Testament but in this great commission:
and (as I take it, saluo meliore iudicio) implies Ordination, and succession of
Bishops: for I do not think, that (...) and (...) are synonimaes signifying
both of them Docere: but that this new word not elsewhere found in Scripture,
but only in this commission, seems to implye (as the words following
signify, their duties of ministering the Sacraments, and preaching the Gospel)
a new thing, or new succession of Officers, or Disciples, such as themselves
were; and the rest of the duties pertaining to that office. This last, and the
other above specified, are spiritual and supernatural powers, and are veritas
certa de fide, Suarez de. ^eg. l. 4. c. 2. n. 7.
a truth to be believed.

51. Wherefore seeing supernatural power only was delegated to the Apostles
by their Monarch our Savior: though supernatural power be more excellent in
respect of the end, and the means, then the political; yet it is no
consequent to say; They have the greater power, therefore they have the less;
because in power and magistracy nothing is delegated but by express words,
and commissions; as I said, it is no good argument, Habet ius gladij, ergo ius
mulctam dicendi, which is less.

52. But all the arguments, which the Jesuits make, and allege for this
Monarchy, are of this nature, and challenge power not by express Law, or
Commissions, but by consequents, and a maiore, or a minore, as thus: Potest
Petrus pascere, Suarez. de Leg. l. 4. c. 2.
ergo dirigere; ergo leges far; ergo per leges coercere; ergo est Monarcha:
Again, Potest ligare; ergo vinculum inijcere; ergo leges far; ergo est
Monarcha; and many the like, as we may read in Suarez, and others: but seeing
all the power Saint Peter had, was delegated by our Savior, and no Monarchy
commended to him by express words, we deny their consequents, and conclude
that Saint Peter was no Monarch; for Autoritas negatiua in materia
supernaturali et fidei est sufficiens. Jbid. c. 3. a. 16.
This supernatural power is not found in the Scriptures to be conferd on
Peter; therefore Peter had no such power, no such Monarchy.

53. In maintaining this argument, we make not the Church an Anarchie, nor the
government in it without power both directive, and coerciue: for it should not
seem to have been well instituted by our Savior, if he had not prescribed a
proportionate power, whereby to govern it: but our Saviors power, and that
which he delegated to his Apostles, was to a spiritual and supernatural end;
and the Media, which are (as it were) the objects and effects of that power,
are proportionate unto that end supernatural and spiritual. The directive
power is spiritual; the coerciue power is spiritual; that is, it uses only
the spiritual sword, Sit tibi velut ethnicus; that is, has negative or
privative power, or jurisdiction (if I may so call it) that is, of withholding
the Church prayers, and Sacraments, etc. from obstinate offenders; but no
positive temporal jurisdiction, or temporal external court judicial; which
they hold by the favor of Kings, and the first Christian Emperors; not by any
natural consequents drawn from the supernatural power, as shall be showed in
due place.

we all acknowledge a Primacie and deny this Monarchy in Saint Peter; yet
neither by Tibi dabo claues, Matthew. 16. where Bellarmine says the Primacie was
promised: nor by Pasce oues me as, Ioh. 21. where he says it was given: nor by
any prerogative, which he calls confirmatiue, can a Primacie be directly
proved, much less a Monarchy; for nothing is promised in the one place, or
performed in the other, or confirmed by the rest, which is not common to Peter
with the rest of the Apostles.

55. For as when God made man first of the dust of the earth, Inspirauit in
eius faciem, and factus est homo in animam viuentem: though he be said
Inspirasse in faciem, yet he gave life to the whole body, and the soul was
breathed into the whole body: so that Inspiratio illa was not made for the face
only, but for the whole body; as God said, Et factus est homo in animam
viuentem: So where our Savior said, Mat. 16.18.
Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. and Tibi dabo claues; and Quodcunque
ligaueris super terram; though these words were spoken in person to Saint
Peter, yet they did not only Inspirare in faciem, give power to the first or
chief part, which is Peter, but reached indifferently to all the Apostles, to
the whole body. For not only Peter was Petra, but all the Apostles were
Petrae, (Apostoli, says Saint Hierome, Hieron. ^edibiae q. 8.
Petrae vocabulum acceperunt:) or fundamenta, as I showed before: the Keys
were given to them all ex aequo; and they did all ligare, and soluere ex aequo,
and so did the Bishops their successors: for inde, from hence (says Saint
Cyprian,) from these promises, and from this bestowing of the Keys upon Saint
Peter, Cypr. l. 5. epis. 6. ad Lapsos:
per temporum and successionum vices, Episcoporum ordinatio, and Ecclesiae
ratio decurrit, vt Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur: and omnis actus
Ecclesiae per eosdem Praepositos gubernetur: Thus you see, that by this promise
or power nothing is given or gotten, that may enforce so much as a Primacie.

56. How then comes it to pass, that the Fathers generally out of Tu es
Petra; and Tibi dabo claues, and Pasce oues meas, do argue the Primacie, or
Principality to be in Saint Peter? I answer; not because the Primacie was
here promised, or given unto him, but because the gifts were bestowed on the
Church in his name, rather then in the name of any other Apostle: as we may
argue, that the face is the prime place of a man's body, (as the Proverb is,
(The face is the Marketplace) because when God would inspire the whole body,
it is said only, Inspirauit in faciem, when neither the face was first
inspired, nor the rest of the body took life from it, but at once all the
whole Man was made anima viuens, a living soul.

57. It is a good rule, which Saint Augustine sets down, Aug. Confess. l. 10.
c. 16.
Omnes qui legimus, nitimur hoc indagare, atque comprehendere, quod voluit
ille, quem legimus. Now while every man endeauours to find out, and to
comprehend in the holy Scriptures, that sense and meaning, which he intended,
who wrote the book; Quid mali est, Jbid.
(says Saint Augustine) si hoc sentiat, quod tu Lux omnium veridicarum mentium
ostendis verum esse, etiamsi hoc non sentit ille, quem legit; cum and ille
verum, non tamen hoc senserit? What ill is it, if the Fathers out of this
place, Matthew. 16. and that other, Ioh. 21. should affirm Saint Peter's
Primacie, which is true, though our Savior in those places intended it not?
For although the Apostles themselves suspected no Primacie to be granted to S.
Peter, in those words (as I have noted before) yet the Fathers (when they
perceived it afterward to have been conferred upon him; whether by our
Savior, or by the Apostles, or by both, shall be showed in due place) might
very well and probably imagine, that it was in these places insinuated.

58. So that, whereas two kind of controversies may arise, cum aliquid a
nuncijs veracibus per signa enuntiatur, by occasion of some passage of
Holy-writ; one, Si de veritate rerum dissensio est, whether the matter in
question be true or no: another, Si de ipsius, qui annuntiat, voluntate
dissensio est, whether it may be proved by this Text, or no: For the matter in
question, that is, Saint Peter's Primacie, we say with Saint Augustine, Quod ad
Petrum proprie pertinet, natura vnus homo erat, gratia vnus Christianus,
abundantiore gratia vnus idemque primus Apostolus: But for the sense of those
Scriptures, we say also, Quando ei dictum est, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum;
and, Quodcunque ligaueris super terram, erit ligatum and in coelis etc.
vniuersam significabat Ecclesiam, which is shaken in this World with diverse
temptations, etc. and yet falls not, because it is built upon the Rock, Aug.
super Joh. tract. 1^4.
Vnde and Petrus nomen accepit; non enim a Petro petra, sed Petrus a petra;
sicut non Christus a Christiano, sed Christianus a Christo vocatur.

59. And to omit the various interpretations of the ancient Fathers, which may
all stand true (for one truth does not prejudicate another) we say, that these
were not times for the Apostles to expect Monarchies, or meaner Primacies, and
Principalities: but Saint Peter was rather informed in those words of his
passions, and afflictions, and the gates of Hell, which should strive against
him; then of his commands, or his power, and authority: and our Savior rather
published his own Deity, by occasion of Saint Peter's confession, Tu es
Christus filius Dei viui, Matthew. 1 (...).
then Saint Peter's principality, and superiority.

60. For by those two promises, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. and
Tibi dabo claues (though Saint Chrysostom says more for Saint Peter,
Chrysostom. super Mat. Hom. 55.
then Bellarmine does admit, viz. that Hic pastorem futurae Ecclesiae
constituit) yet, says he, his duabus pollicitationibus, Christus ad al^torem
de se (of himself, not of Peter) opinionem Petrum adducit, and seipsum
reuelando Filium Dei ostendit; He rayseth Peter to an higher opinion of his
Deity, and revealing himself more, proves evidently, that he is the Son of
God. For those things which God only can give, namely, Remission of sins, and
that The future Church should stand firm, and immovable against the violence
of so many floods, as should break in upon it (as Saint Peter should do
against all persecutions, and Martyrdom, being Pastor, Chrysostom. Ibid.
and Caput Ecclesiae) haec, inquam, omnia, quae solius Dei sunt, se pollicetur
daturum.

61. And in that he said thrice, Simon Iohannis diligis me? and upon his
answer replied thrice, Pasce oues meas; as the title of Petra was not proper
to him, but to all the Apostles; nor he alone had the keys, but all his
fellows with him: so he alone had not the Pastors office, for Saint Ambrose
says, Post trinam interrogationem Christi, Amb. Pastor.
Amas me? traditas Petro oues, and omnibus Apostolis contraditas; the Sheep
were committed jointly to all the Apostles.

62. Again, where Caietan says, that by these three questions, Petre amas me?
and Amas me plus, quam hi? our Savior committed to Saint Peter Pontificatum,
that is, the Monarchy; Saint Augustine says better, that he prepared him to
Martyrdom, as appears plainly in these words following, where he says,
Passurum te ipse praedixit, August. super Ioh. tract. 123.
qui te praedixerat negaturum. And if we stand upon a Monarchy in these
words, Si diligis me, pasce oues meas; redditur negationi trinae trina
confessio, ne minus amori lingua seruiat, quam timori. Here is no Monarchy;
here is no Primacie: for says he, Quid aliud est, si diligis me, pasce oues
meas; quam si diceretur, si me deligis, non te pascere cogita, sed oues meas;
sicut meas pasce, non sicut tuas: gloriam meam in eis quaere, non tuam:
Dominium meum, non tuum* lucra mea, non tua. So that he rather forbids
glory, and profit, and dominion to Saint Peter, which are Monarchical
properties; then instituteth any Monarchy, or Primacie in this place.

63. To conclude; it is a weak consequent, which is thus inferred: Peter loved
our Savior best, therefore he gave him the Monarchy, or Primacie. For if we
should grant (which seems true to Saint Augustine,) that Saint Peter loved
our Savior more then the rest did; yet Saint John was beloved of our Savior
more then Saint Peter, and the rest of the Apostles. Now in wordly preferments
this is a rule, Solemus praeponere dilectos diligentibus. But I think, here
should be an hard choice; for if we should demand with Saint Augustine: Quis
duorum sit melior, vtrum qui plus, August super Ioh. tract. vlt
an qui minus diligit Christum? no doubt, we would answer; He is the better,
that loves most. Again, if we demand, Quis duorum sit melior, vtrum quem
minus, an quem plus diligit Christus? we would answer again; He, no doubt is
the better, whom Christ loves best. Now if a third question were proposed; who
is more likely to be preferred to the Primacie, or Monarchy, Peter who loved
his Lord more then John, and the rest did, and was less beloved of his Lord;
or Saint John, who loved his Lord less then Saint Peter did, and yet was more
beloved of his Lord and Master? I might answer with Saint Augustine in the
like case; Hic plane cunctatur responsio, and augetur quaestio: a man may
sooner divise more questions, then make a good answer. But if it be
questionable (as I think it is) whether Saint Peter loved our Savior more,
then St. John did; and it be granted, that our Savior loved St. John more,
then he did St. Peter: quantum ipse sapio (says St. Augustine) as they are
both alike good, who love our Savior alike; so he is more happy that is best
beloved, and more likely to be preferred to the highest dignity. But this is
said only to show, how weak their arguments are, who would prove St. Peter's
Monarchy, or Primacie, by these consequents of phrases; not to disanull the
Primacie, which the Fathers allow him.

64. The rest of the Prerogatives are of so small moment, to prove this
Monarchy, or Primacie, that you may imagine, he means to carry it numero,
non pondere authoritatum; and he professes so much, as I have noted before.
For the first prerogative, whereby Bellarmine would challenge it, is Mutatio
nominis, the changing of his name, from Simon to Peter; but we say, that his
name was not changed as Abrams was, but another super-imposed, or super-added
to it: as appears, Pet. Epist. 1. c. 1. v. 1.
because he still retained the name of Simon, and was so called by our Savior
after his resurrection; and he so styles himself in his second Epistle. And
when we answer, that this was no greater privilege, then James and John had,
who were called by our Savior Boanerges; he replies, that there was a
difference between the one, and the other: for Mutauit nomen Petro (says he)
sed imposuit cognomen Iacobo, and Iohanni: but Simons name was not changed
otherwise, then were the names of James and John, but they were all three
retained, and Saint Mark uses the same word at the imposition of them all,
(...), Marc. 3.17
and adds in the same place, naming James and John, (...); he imposed upon
them the names of Boanerges, that is, the sons of thunder: so that this is a
corruption of the Text, to say, that our Savior changed Simons name, and not
the names of James and John; for (...), he super-imposed, or super-added names
to them all. If this were a Prerogative to Peter, it was common to others; and
no Primacie, much less any Monarchy can be challenged by it.

65. If he only conclude, out of these impositions of names, as Saint
Chrysostom does, Chrysostom. super Joan. c. 1.
Deum nunquam imponere noua nomina nisi maximis de causis; we yield to that,
and he gains nothing but that, which we confess with Saint Augustine:
Petrus, Iacobus, Aug. super Ep. ad Galat. c. 2
and Johannes honorabiliores in Apostolis erant; But Saint Chrysostom seems
to give a good and particular reason, why our Savior Christ changed some
names: Vt ostendat (says he) se eundem esse, Chrysostom. super Ioh. hom. 18.
qui vetus dedit testamentum: ipse est, qui nomina apt imponit; qui Abram,
Abraham, Sarai Sara; and Jacob Israel vocauit. And if any should challenge a
principality for changing his name, it should be Saint Paul, for Saint
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom super Act. Apost.
Paulo nomen mutatur cum ordinatione, Saulus, qui and Paulus: or else, Saint
Matthew; for Abulensis says, Abul. super Mat. c. 9. q. 34. and 35.
nomen Matthaei, antequam a Christo vocaretur, non erat Matthaeus, sed solum
Leui etc. Matthaeus autem fuit vocatus post assumptionem in Discipulum, etc. Et
ita videtur esse veritas: so that our Savior calling but six Apostles at most
(for the rest followed him voluntarily of themselves) and changing or adding to
four of their names, Peter can carry no Monarchy by it, nor any privilege.

66. Another Prerogative, whereby Bellarmine chalengeth principality to Peter,
is this. That Saint Peter's feet were first washed by our Savior, and then the
feet of the other Apostles, which although Saint Augustine seem to affirm;
August. super Lu^. c. 13.
yet Saint Chrysostom and Theophilact say, that he washed Judas feet first,
and then Peter's. Origin, who is the most ancient of them says, that Lotis
omnibus Discipulis, vltimo venit ad Petrum: and so does Cyprian in the tract De
ablutione pedum (if the work be his) if not, yet is the bokoe antiqui and
eruditi scriptoris, Bellar. de Scriptor. Eccles.
as Bellarmine confesses, and so of force against him: and the same Author
gives a reason, why Saint Peter refused to be washed, and not the rest. If by
this Prerogative a Monarchy, or Primacie may be proved, the question is
between Judas and Peter for the precedencie, and the greater part give the
prime place of being washed to the traitor Judas.

67. All the other Prerogatives serve rather for number, then wait, in this
question, and do aim but at a Primacie, which we deny not; though the
adversaries do not prove it by all those Prerogatives taken together: and
having been once proposed, and showed to the world, each one may say to the
Cardinal, Discedam, expleui numerum, Virgil.
redaarque tenebris: I have made up a number, and so I have done: and here I
will make an end with them; C. quando Prouo.
because Allegans frustratoria, non auditur; such trifles, and not to the
question, deserve not an answer. Yet I thought it fit to observe somewhat,
that may satisfy the vulgar, which are fed with vain fancies; for unto them,
C. l. 1. de Divine.
Obijciuntur saepe formae, quae reapse nullae sunt, speciem autem offerunt.

Monarchio, they intend not to find out the truth, but only endeavor to
maintain the government in that state, wherein they find it, though it
consist only in tyranny and usurpation: and therefore they fit it not to the
Gospel, or the Primative times; but strain the Scriptures and Antiquity to
make it good: and so they maintain this Monarchy, Non quia diuini sunt, sed
quia superbi sunt, not because it stands with divinity, but because it makes
for their pride: August. Con. l. 12. c. 25.
Nec nouerunt (curant) Christi sententiam, sed amant suam, non quia vera est,
sed quia sua est; they care not what our Savior instituted, or the Church
practiced, but they love their own Monarchy, not because it is lawful, but
because they possess it; and like usurpers forbear no color, or pretext to
uphold their possession.

69. Not a Priest, or Jesuit, that deals in this cause, but he does plausum
petere praestigiae, seek commendations by a new jugling-tricke, by a
counterfeit distinction, or falsified authority, to deceive his Readers. They
say, that Saint Peter's Monarchy is concluded in those words; Tibi dabo claues,
etc. We answer; Those words were not spoke to Peter only, but to all the
Apostles, and the whole Church, and so enforce not this Monarchical
prerogative: We prove this out of Saint Augustine, Aug. super Ioh. 12. Hom 50.
and they have it themselves in the Canon Law, 24. q. 1. c. Quodcunque where
Saint Augustine says, that Quodcunque ligaueris, etc. was not spoken to Peter
only, but to the Church; for Peter, when he received the Keys, Ecclesiam
sanctam significauit. Du-Vall the Sorbon confesses, that Saint Augustine
says, Datas esse claues toti Ecclesiae, but corrupts it thus; id est, Petro
propter Ecclesiam: as if Saint Augustine lacked language to express his
meaning. And by these absurd glosses they corrupt their own Canons.

70. When we prove, that they were not given to Saint Peter propter Ecclesiam,
for the Church, but to the Church immediately; because all the powers, which
are given to Saint Peter, were bestowed upon all the Apostles, immediate a
Christo, to be held immediately of Christ, and not of Saint Peter: they
confess, that they were given to all the Apostles immediately from Christ,
Suarez de Leg. l. 4. c. 3. n. 4.
sed Petro diuerso modo, and magis perfecto; but there being found no one word
of proof, either in the Scriptures, or Antiquity, Videte si responsio illa,
Aug. Ps. 140.
non dementia nominanda est: when it is evident, that Potestas clauium, ligare,
soluere, pascere, hoc facere in mei commemorationem; Ire in vniuersum mundum,
(...), baptizare in nomine Patris, and Filij, et Spiritus sancti, etc. were
given to all the Apostles in an Arithmeticall proportion, and not Geometrical.

71. If this will not serve, they will tell you, Petro datas esse claues vt
capiti, caeteris vt membris. If we answer, that Saint Peter was not then the
Head, when the Keys were given, but was chosen afterward by the consent of
the Apostles, when our Savior was ascended, as their Anacletus testifies; who
says, Apostolos alioqui pares in honor et potestate, Did. 21. c. in nouo.
Petrum Principem suum esse volnisse. Suarez will gloss it, and tell you,
Suar. de Leg. l. 4. c. 3.
that Illud verbum (Voluere) non de voluntate antecedente, sieve eligente; sed
de voluntate consequente, et acceptante, intelligendum esse: that phrase (would
have him their chief, or Prince,) was to be understood not of the electing
him, but of the consenting to his election made by our Savior. Cic.
Nolite existimare, iudices, non vnam et eandem omnibus in locis esse
fraudatorum, et inficiatorum impudentiam: they hope, that any mist of an
obscure distinction will bleare the eyes of their partial Readers. The
Apostles (says Anacletus) being alioqui pares in honor et potestate,
voluerunt Petrum esse Principem suum. If when the Apostles were equal in
honor and power, they would have Peter their Head, or Primate, that will of
theirs was antecedens, et eligens: for had he been chosen before by our
Savior, and so the will consequent, and consentient, as he supposes; then it
could not have been said, Apostoli pares in honor et potestate voluerunt,
etc. but Apostoli impares in honor et potestate, voluerunt; for after Saint
Peter's preferment to this honor by our Saviors appointment (if any such were)
there was no imparitie in honor and power between him and his
fellow-Apostles: so that Apostoli, etc. voluerunt Petrum esse Principem suum;
implies their election of Saint Peter to the Primacie, and not our Saviors
appointment of him.

72. Secondly, if we answer, that all the Apostles were capita, as well as
Peter; and Peter a member as much as they; and though he had the Primacie, and
so might be caput in respect of them, yet partakes equally those gifts, which
were equally given to them all, though somewhat particular belong to the
Primacie: as the head in the body partakes indifferently that power or sense of
feeling, which is given to the whole body, though it have other senses proper
to it self: They will reply; though they were given in the same measure and
proportion to the Head, and the members, to Peter, and the other Apostles, yet
both Potestas ordinis, et iurisdictionis, and the consequents of them, were
given to Peter, as to the Head, tanquam ordinaria, et perpetuo duratura; that
is, to him, and to his successors; but to the other Apostles, Suarez Ibid. n. 8.
per modum legationis, et personalis muneris, finiendi cum vita ipsorum.

73. If we prove this to be false, and show, that the power of the rest of the
Apostles was not legantine to last for their lives only without delegation;
but ordinary to them, and their successors, as Saint Peter's was: (for Saint
John, and Saint Paul, and the other Apostles, ordained many Bishops, who
received from them both potestatem ordinis, and iurisdictionis, and
legislationis, as they term them falsely, as will appear in fit place:) They
answer; that for orders, or ordination, all the Bishops in the World then had
the power, and authority, and succession, media autoritate Petri, mediate, or
immediate: Suarez Ibid. n. 25.
for either Saint Peter made them Bishops, or else the Apostles, who were
consecrated by Saint Peter, and made Bishops by him.

74. If you reply, that our Savior made both Saint Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, Bishops immediately himself, either as he, made them all Apostles,
or when he made them all Apostles: Bellarmine will tell you, that the other
Apostles were not made Bishops by our Savior, but by Saint Peter: and among
many vanities (not fit for this brevity) he does instance in Saint James the
younger, who was made Bishop of Jerusalem by Saint Peter and the other Apostles;
not immediately by Christ: and proves it by three authorities, viz. of
Anacletus, Anacl. Epist. 2. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 2. c 1. Hieron. de viris
illus. in Iacobum.
of Clem. Alexand, and of Saint Hierome. But this is first a fallacy; for our
question is of the Apostles, as they were Bishops, and had the whole World for
each man's Territory; Euntes docete omnes gentes, which was our Saviors
institution; not as they or other were limited to peculiar Cities, or Diocese,
as Saint James was here to the Church of Jerusalem; which is an
Ecclesiastical, or Apostolical constitution. And the better to conceal this
fraud from his Reader, he alleges the testimony of Clement out of Eusebius,
but falsifieth it, as if Clement should say, Iacobum a Petro, Iacobo, and
Iohanne ordinatum Episcopum; that James was ordained a Bishop by them, and not
by our Savior: whereas Eusebius has it, Iacobum a Petro, Iacobo, et Iohanne
ordinatum Episcopum Hierosolymarum, he was made by them the Bishop of
Jerusalem, of that Province, or Diocese; whereas before he was made a Bishop
at large, as the other were; not tied to one place. And so all this
disputation, Definit in falsum mulier formosa superne; ends in a fallacy and
falsification, though it pretend to the World a fair, but meretricious
for-head of truth.

75. Secondly, if you urge, that the other Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint John,
etc. had potestatem iurisdictionis, wheresoever they went, et potestatem ad
ferendas leges, obligantes vniuersam Ecclesiam, as much as Saint Peter, as
appears by antiquity: they will tell you without any ground, or reason for
it; Reliquos Apostolos ordinary illas non tulisse, Suar. ibid. n. 9.
nisi ex consensu, and acceptatione Petri: vel certe eas tulisse in eis
prouincijs, in quibus praedicabant, et postea non nisi sciente and consentiente
Petro, ad totam Ecclesiam diminasse. If a proof be demanded of this assertion,
or some example, or authority for it: there is nothing to be said for it, but
that otherwise, if this were not so, Peter was no Monarch, but the Apostles had
equal power with him, and that ordinary: but Peter (says he) was a Monarch;
which we deny; and it is petitio principij, and a foul blemish to a fair
Disputant.

76. Thirdly, if you affirm, that the other Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint
John, etc. gave unto others, as they past along, potestatem ordinis, to
baptize, to administer the Eucharist, etc. They will tell you out of their
Anacletus, Epist. 1. Bellar. de Pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 23.
that In nouo Testamento post Christum, a Petro cepit sacerdotalis ordo; and
quod Christus suis manibus solum Petrum baptizauit: also that Peter pabtized
Andrew, James and John; and they the other Apostles: and that this is a
special Prerogative to prove Peter's Primacie: and is affirmed by Euodius,
(Bishop of Antioch, next after Saint Peter) in an Epistle of his entitled
(...), or Lumen, Niceph. l. 2. c. 3. Baron. Tom. 1. ano 71. n. 13.
and is cited by Nicephorus. But this is some counterfeit stuff, and Baronius
says of it, Hanc Epistolam ab antiquioribus nec citatam, neque aliter cognitam
esse reperimus: We find not this Epistle alleged by any of the ancients;
neither do we know, that any such is extant, but by the report of Nicephorus,
who lived almost 1300. years after him. Now if we answer directly out of the
Scriptures; Jesus non baptizabat ipse, John 4. Gretz. Defen. Bellar. te. 1. p.
616
sed Discipuli eius; Gretzer will replye confidently, Baptizabat, sed non
ordinary baptizabat: admit that he baptized but once, why might he not baptize
all the Apostles at that time with Saint Peter, as at one and the same time he
washed the feet of all his Apostles.

77. But Saint Augustine distinguishes better, acknowledging, that Saint John
says, John 3.
Iesum venisse in Iudeam, and ibi baptizasse: and in another place, John 4.
Iesum non baptizasse, sed Discipulos eius: which seeming contradiction he
salueth not with ordinary, and non ordinary, as Gretzer does; Aug. super Ioh.
tract. 15. Aug. Epist. 108.
but says Christus baptizauit, and non baptizauit: baptizauit, quia ipse
mundauit; non baptizauit, quia non ipse tingebat: or else thus: Baptizabat
Christus praesentia maiestatis, non autem baptizauit manibus suis. And of this
opinion, that our Savior baptized none with his own hands, is Saint
Chrysostom Homil. 28. sup. Johan: and Hom. 3. sup. Act Apost: whom Theophilact
follows, and Iansen. sup. 4. Johan: and Melchior Canus, l. 8. c. 5. and
Rupertus.

78. For my own part, I am ready to follow a middle course, between these
extremes, and neither believe, that our Savior baptized the rest of the
Apostles, and not Saint Peter, which was the opinion of a certain Nouatian,
August. Epist. 108.
as you may read in Saint Augustine; nor yet that he baptized Peter only, and
not the other Apostles, which is Bellarmines assertion out of a counterfeit
Euodius; both alike absurd: neither yet that he baptized not any at all, which
has reverend Authors; but that all the Apostles were baptized by him.

79. For in Saint Augustines time it was not a question, whether the Apostles
were baptized or no, (as Baronius falsely affirms) neither ought it to be a
question (says he) quando quisque fuit baptizatus, Tom. 1. ^^o. 31. n. 40.
sed quoscunque legimus in corpore Christi, quod est Ecclesia, pertinere ad
regnum coelorum, non nisi baptizatos intelligere debemus: but the question then
was, whether the Apostles were baptized with the baptism of John, or with the
baptism of Christ. S. Augustine says, many were of opinion that the Apostles
were baptized with the baptism of John: but he thought it magis credibile,
that they were baptized with the baptism of Christ; and he gives his reason
for it. Aug. Epist. 108.
Neque enim (says he) ministerio baptizandi defuit, vt haberet baptizatos
seruos, per quos caeteros baptizaret, (he says not, Baptizatum Petrum, per
quem caeteros baptizaret) quia non defuit memorabilis illius humilitatis
ministerio, quando eis lauit pedes, etc. So that we cannot reconcile these
Scriptures by distinguishing Baptizabat, sed non ordinary, ergo Petrum solum;
but Distingue tempora, and reconciliabis: he baptized his Apostles first, Ioh.
3. and after that it is said Ioh. 4. as Saint Augustine notes, Jesus non
baptizabat, sed Discipuli eius.

80. There is a notable place in Saint Cyprians Book De vnitate Ecclesiae, to
prove the equality of the other Apostles with Saint Peter, though the Primacie
were in him: if you allege this to them, and say, Hoc erant vtique and caeteri
Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praedtti and honoris, and
dignitatis: Suarez answers, Suarez de leg. l. 4. c. 9.
that this equality is to be understood formaliter, ceu quantum ad dignitatem
Apostolicam, et eam Iurisdictionem in vniuersum orbem, quae praecise ex vi
illius dignitatis data est: yet, says he, excelluit Petrus in Pontificia
dignitate. But if by the excellency of his Pontificalitie he understand a
Monarchy, as their use is; it is an absurd begging of the question: if he
mean a Primacie only, the distinction is idle; for not prioritie, but
superiority takes away paritie.

81. It is scarce credible, how they have corrupted this discourse of Saint
Cyprian, not only by these vain glosses, but by adding to it, and detracting
from it, to erect this Monarchy, which is there demolished. To these words
alleged by Saint Cyprian, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam; they have falsely added, super vnum aedificat Ecclesiam suam; and
omit two or three lines, that those words might fit the better. This I think,
was begun by the late corrupters of the Canon Law, and so it is found in all,
or most editions, since the year 1540. for the Copies printed then, and before
1525. acknowledge no such words: this you find in the Decrees 24. q. 1. c.
Loquitur, if you compare these editions.

82. From hence it seems to have crept into the original Author himself;
and because these words favor their Monarchy, they choose rather to corrupt
the Author by the false Canon, then correct the Canon by the true Author: for
the Cyprian, which I use, was printed at Paris 1564. and has no such words.
But if you consult some later editions, as also that of Iustus Caluinus, alias,
Iustus Baronius (that is, of him, who of a Caluinist for better maintenance
became a Papist, and so changed his name with his religion) you shall find in
his second book of Prescriptions against heresies (which is this book of
Saint Cyprian De vnitate Ecclesiae) at the third Chapter, not only those words
added out of the corrupted Canon Law, Super illum vnum aedificat Ecclesiam
suam; but in another place not far off, vnam constituit cathedram, and some
other additions; which corruptions are not found in the Canon Law: whereby you
may perceive, they are so far from amending that which is amiss, that they
do proficere in petus, and daily add more corruptions to the writings of the
ancient Fathers to extol, and magnify Saint Peter's Monarchy.

83. Thus, where Arnobius says upon Psalm. 106. Praedicauit Petrus baptismum
Christi, in quo in which baptism, or in which Jesus Christi, vniuersa flumina
in deserto huius mundi benedicuntur vsque hodie a Petro; all the Rivers in the
world are blessed and hallowed, from the time of Saint Peter to this present
day: Stapleton reads most corruptly thus, and definitiuely of Saint Peter;
Vniuersa flumina in deserto huius soeculi benedicuntur vsque hodie a Petro, all
the Rivers in the world are blessed, and hallowed by Saint Peter, even unto
this day; ascribing that which is due to our Savior and his baptism, to Saint
Peter and his baptism; belike, because he holds with Bellarmine that all
Christian baptism proceeds from Saint Peter to the other Apostles, and so to
the whole Church for ever.

84. Again, where Arnobius says in the same place, Ipse posuit exitus aquarum
in sitim, ita vt qui exierit for as ab Ecclesia Petri, siti pereat: which is,
either, Christus posuit exitus aquarum in sitim; Christ by his preaching, gave
many floods of heavenly waters, to quench the desire of thirsty souls: or if
you will; Peter by his preaching, as he passed along, sent out many floods of
heavenly water into the world, etc (which is true also of the rest of the
Apostles:) Stapleton makes him to say for Peter's greater honor above them;
Ipsum esse exi^us aquarum in suim, Stapl. relect. controu. 3. q. 1. art. 1.
conclus. 3.
equalizing him to his Master, who was indeed the water of life, which
whosoever drinks of, should thirst no more. Surely though our Savior,
Tertul. l. 4. cont. Marci. c. 3.
(as Tertullian says) affectauit charissimo Discipulorum, de figuris suis,
nomen peculiariter communicare, and termed him a rock, as our Savior was
called figuratively; yet he never imparted to him his Essentialls, to be the
water of life, that exitus aquarum, which should run along to everlasting
salvation.

85. But of these vain glosses and impious corruptions of the Fathers and
Scriptures, to maintain this Monarchy facto finem, vbi non est finis. That,
Ber.
which has been said at diverse times (I hope) will suffice to show, that
Saint Peter had no Monarchical power over the rest of the Apostles, who in
honor, power, and authority were equal to him; and that all the reasons they
allege for it, are false and fallacious, and but crafty shifts, and by-ways,
to deceive their Readers, and lead them to error.

86. It will perchance scarce seem credible unto their followers, that so many
men of learning, and professors of Religion as are to be found in so many
Colleges of Jesuits, (to say nothing of other orders, and Religions) should
consent to betray so evident a cause with falsifying, forgerie, and fallacious
sophistry, Cic. l. 3. de Natu. Deorum.
seeing, Vitiorum sine vlla ratione grave ipsius conscientiae pondus est. If
they esteemed not their Christianity, yet the very conscience of these sins
should be an heavy burden to them. No question, their number, their learning,
their profession, their outward show of holiness, and Religion, their
unanimous consent in this gross error, carry captive many well-meaning
people, who cannot judge of these their writings.

87. And to say the truth, Quod tam desperatum collegium, Cic. de Leg. l. 3.
in quo nemo a december sana mente sit? Who would think the society to be so
desperately wicked, that (I say) not one Jesuit among ten, but not in ten
Colleges of Jesuits, one should have a sound heart to acknowledge that truth,
which with so manifold glosses they labor to conceal? for those multi
tramites, those by-pathes, which they use, show, that it is via mendax, Lactan.
a deceitful lying way, which they walk in; and that they tread it of
purpose to lead men to error, nay ad occasum, to their utter destruction. But
they have their reward; the same which Lactantius allotted the Philosophers
which opposed Christianity; Lactan. l. 5. c. 2.
when he says, Quisquis veritatis, contra quam perorat, infirmare voluerit
rationem, ineptus, vanus, ridiculus apparebit.

88. I hope, I shall not need in this place to use his exhortation to our
younger Students: Jbid.
Ne patimini vos, quasi homines imperitos istorum fraudibus illici, nec
simplicitas vestra praedae, ac pabulo sit hominibus astutis. And yet why should
I not use it? Many of us have been carried headlong with as slender reasons,
and as gross fallacies and corruptions, to vilify and confound the ancient
Hierarchy of the Church, as those are, with which the Papists are moved to
maintain and dignifie their usurped Monarchy: and it is to be thought, that
had their education been there-after, they would have showed themselves as
prompt and ready to uphold the Monarchy, as they be forward and resolute to
oppugn the Hierarchy.

89. For the Devil, who is praecursor viae stultitiae, the chief guide in the
by-pathes of error and folly, cuius vis and potestas omnis in fallendo est,
whose chief power consists in falsehoods, and fallacies (as appears both by
his discourse with our innocent parent, and our innocent maker, and redeemer,)
Homines in fraudem non posset inducere, Lactan. l. 6. c. 7.
nisi verisimilia illis ostendando; and there is as much probability at least
in the defense of the Popes Monarchy, as in maintaining the Puritans
Democracie, or oppugning our Hierarchy.

90. Wherefore good counsel is not amiss in this place, to take heed of
these frauds, not rashly to give credit to the Polemicall writings, but to
stand to the truth of our own profession, and to use our best wit and
industry to discover their fallacies; for Inter ingenium and diligentiam
perpaulum loci reliquum est arti; or fraudi: Use your wits, and diligence; Cic.
de orat. l 2
and their frauds will easily appear.

91. Neither are you to wonder, or much to be moved, that so slight and weak
glosses should captiuate so many with a false conceit, and settled imagination
of this Monarchy, so that they should refuse the oath of Supremacy to their
true Monarch; nay, even the natural oath of Allegiance to their Liege-Lords
and Sovereigns, even in their temporalties, with hazard of liberty, life, and
living: for you know, that there is not only (...), ignorantia purae
negationis, cum quis simpliciter alicuius rei cognitione destitutus est, such
as Children, and mere rustickes are subject to, and such as follow and
maintain a custom in error; who are incapable of all conclusions of arts,
and other faculties: but there is also (...), Arist.
ignorantia prauae dispositionis, cum quis falso argumento deceptus, falsam
sententiam animo complectitur, and so persuades himself to know that, which
he knows not, or not altogether as he ought to know it.

92. Now this ignorance prauae dispositionis, which is common to many Students,
is the mother of the first of those three kinds of error, which Saint
Augustine mentions, Aug. de vtil. Creden. c. 4.
and is this. Cum id quod falsum est, verum putatur, etiamsi aliud, qui
scripsit, putauerit; as if a man should believe, that Radamanthus heard, and
determined causes in Hell, which concerned the dead, because Virgil says,
Gnossius haec Radamantus habet durissima regna,
Aeneid. 6.
Castigatque auditque dolos;
which is most false, and Virgil himself never believed it: but used poetical
fictions to teach, and delight his Readers. For I assure my self by most
evident proofs of so many sleights, and shifts, and falsifycations, and
contradictions, and all manner of fallacious dealings used by heretics, and
false teachers of the Primitive times, and imitated by Bellarmine, that he
believes no more, that the Pope is the Monarch of the Church, then Virgil
thought, that Radamanthus was the Lord chiefe-Iustice in Hell.

93. I take not upon me herein to censure his learning, which I admire; for vbi
been, nemo doctius; as also vbi male, nemo fallacius; the former excellency is
to be found in his writings against the Anabaptists, Sectaries, and
Schismatickes of these times, but especially against the Arians, and
Antitrinitarians, in his books De Christo; but this that I speak, is to note
his dishonestie, and symbolizing with those false Apostles in all those
sleights, which St. Paul notes to be used in his time to seduce the simple: and
they, that through weakness believe such teachers, fall into two errors, Aug.
Ibid.
as Saint Augustine notes, Quod and rem non credendam credunt: neque id
putandus est credidisse ille, quem legunt: first they believe that which is
false; and secondly, they falsely imagine, that their teachers believe it.

94. I speak all this to confirm you in that truth which you profess; not
that I think any here present tainted, or infected with this error: for as
Saint Augustine sometimes said, beholding his Auditorie, Aug. in Joh. tract. 39.
as I do you: Quidam fortasse sunt in ista multitudine Arriani, non audeo
suspicari esse Sabellianos: So there may peradventure be present in this
Auditorie certain Puritans, or Precisians; I do not believe there is any
Papist: Hoeresis, ista (as Saint Augustine said of the Sabellians) nimis
antiqua est, and paulatim euiscerata; Popery in this place (blessed be God) is
antiquated, and by little and little in process of time euiscerated,
vnbowelled, and the heart of it broken: Arrianorum autem (as he says) videtur
habere aliquam motionem, quasi cadaueris putrescentis, aut certe vt multum,
quasi hominis animam agentis, The Puritan error seems to have but little
motion in the elder sort, so much as may be in a putrefying carcass; or at the
most, Cic.
as in a man giving up the Ghost: but Qui norunt os adolescentioris Academiae,
they who know the conditions of many of the younger sort, qui non delectu
aliquo, aut sapientia ducitur ad iudicandum, sed ^^petu nonnunquam, and quadam
temeritate; think that this error has taken hold fast on many of them: Aug.
Ibid
Oportet inde reliquos liberari, sicut inde multi liberati s^m; It were well
for the peace of the Church, that the rest were delivered from that error, as
others have been; and were informed, that they also hold this first kind of
error, that Saint Augustine mentions, and I have observed in the Papists: Id
quod fatsum est, ver^m putant; cum aliud, qui scripserunt, putauerint: they
hold those positions, which are absurdly false, and destructive, of that form
of government which our Savior left to his Church, by one extremity of the
Democracie; as the Papists do in the other extremity of a Monarchy: and yet
their leaders and guides, and corrupters, aliud, quam scripserunt, putant,
believe not, as they write, and instruct others: but the very opposite part,
which they seem to oppose, as appears both by this their ambitious
encroachment upon the Churches honor; which none affect more preposterously,
or abuse more corruptly: as also by their fraudulent manner of writing; for in
some of their books are found mill testimonia, Vincent. Lirin c. 37.
mill exempla, mill autoritates, de lege, de Psalmis, de Apostolis, de
Prophetis, but yet interpreted tam nouo, tam malo more, that you may be
assured, that they were racked, and strayned to this purpose, even to
contradict that truth, that Hierarchy, which their consciences acknowledged;
as you may observe (to omit others) in Parkers schismatic books of the
Cross, and the Church government; where you may observe more Scriptures, and
authorities of Fathers, and Counsels voluntarily abused to overthrow that
ancient Christian cer^monie of the Cross in Baptism, and the Churches
Hierarchy; then can be found in Bellarmine to maintain his false usurped
Monarchy.

95. Both these extremities know the truth, which they oppose; and though they
be daily convinced, yet pro animositate suae peruersitatis (as Saint Augustine
said of the Rogatians) contra veritatem sibi notissimam dimicant. Aug. Epist.
48.
An impiety (says he) quae fortasse Idololatraim superat, and wherein the
Devils triumph above measure, dum errores suos humanis erroribus (frauds suas
humanis fraudibus) pascunt. Aug. de Catechiz. rudibus. c. 19.


96. But let us speak nothing but the truth in these, and the like questions;
let us hear nothing but that truth which our Savior delivered, who himself
prescribed the true form of government in his Church. Out of his mouth we
have learned him, who is the truth; out of his mouth we have known his Church,
which is partaker of his truth; from his word interpreted by his Church we have
learned the true Church government, which he instituted, and which we
entertain, and in which we live: and if we make our selves not unworthy of
the continuance of so great a blessing, shall by Gods good favor remain in
the same to the worlds end. Grant this Lord Jesus, the great MASTER and sole
Monarch, the Author and establisher of it: To whom with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be ascribed all honor, praise, and
glory, for ever and ever, AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 25. for Monarchium read Monarchicum.

P. 13. l. 14. corruption, r. corruption.

P. 25. l. 25. Dominm, r. Dominum.

P. 32. l. 9. to makes law, r. to make laws.

P. 39. l. 22. not r. non.

P. 53. l. 19. seruus r. seruum.

P. 56. l. 31. (...), r. (...).

P. 120. l. 28. (...), r. (...).

P. 144. l. 22. imagine, r. imagine.


