AN ORATION GRATVLATORY TO the High and Mighty JAMES of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, Defendor of the faith, etc. On the twelft day of
February last presented, when his Majesty entered the Tower of London to
perform the residue of the solemnities of his Coronation thorough the city of
London differred by reason of the plague: and published by his Highness
special allowance.

Wherein both the description of the Tower of London and the union of the
kingdoms is compendiously touched: By WILLIAM HVBBOCKE.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Crown, by Simon VVaterson. 1604.

POTENTISSIMO IACOBO ANgliae, Scotiae, Galliae, and Hiberniae Regi, fidei
Defensori, etc. Oration duodecimo Februarij, cum Arcem Londinensem ingrederetur,
vt inaugurationis suae reliquas solennitates per vrbem perageret, dilatas ob
grassantem pestem, gratulatoria; eiusque auspicijs praelo mandata.

In qua and totius Turris succincta descriptio, regnorumque vnio perstringitur:

Authore Gulielmo Hubbocke.

DABO ait Dominus per Hoseam Prophetam vallem Achor pro foribus spei. Osea.
2.15.
Erat autem vallis Achor primus aditus Israeli in promissam terram. Et hoc
quidem vallum (potentissime Rex) est vestibulum ta^qua^ terrae promissae tibi:
et primum inaugurationis tuae vestigium, ad regnu^ tibi coelesti decreto ante
te natum destinatu^. Cuius ad has valvas salutant te meis verbis, no^ solum
locum hic tenens tuus fidissimus, belli pacisque orname^tis illustris miles,
totaque armata cohors circumstipantium regium latus tuum, servientes hoc loco
tui: sed consalutant vno nutu, Anglia tota, Gallia, Hibernia, quaru^ omnium
supremumius, huius vnius loci complexu prensas, and quasi manu tenes. Haec enim
arx, hoc castrum regale, arra est omnium: and porta non modo bonae spei, sed
portus totius rei. Hic magnificae and regales bestiae, leones Anglicani,
adora^t leone^ Scotiae; o vere de leone Iudae oriu^de, o vere atavis edite
regibus: Hic numisma cuditur, nervi and artus belli, quod Caesareum tuum nome^
and vultum iampride^ gestavit: Hic chartophylacium regni, scrinium actorum and
diplomatum principum nostrorum, illustrissimoru^ maiorum tuorum, e quibus
emendatior historia, ausim dicere, quam quae vlla extat, perpoliri possit.
Existunt hic etiam circumquaque, per anfractus huius loci, sparsae rotundatae
turres ad sontium laesae maiestatis custodia^: vna^ hanc citimam maiores nostri
sanguinolentam dixere, ob cruorem, vt aiunt, infa^tu^ Edouardi quarti, quos
Richardus tertius execra^dae memoriae, horresco referens, immaniter
co^trucidavit. Prostat inde officiose in te desuper spectans, sed aheneis
tormentis propositis flammarum vomitus and tonitrua hostibus minitans,
grandiusculum and quadratum Martis propugnaculum, robur loci, vigil vrbis,
custos pacis, moderator circumiacentis regionis, cuius caniciem facies ipse
attestatur, in quo prisca fama Romani Caesaris praecipue aulam concelebravit.
Hic gemmarum domus and gaza regni, innumera complectens maximi pretij
vtensilia, totamque auream and argenteam supellectilem vna cum opulentissima re
vestiaria regia, quae omnia sese in sinum tuum vt iustissi ni domini and
haeredis ex ass iamdudum effuderunt. Hic, ne singula co^memorem, globorum
monticuli: armorum supra, infra, amplissima domicilia, bombardis, spiculis,
hastis, arcubus sagittis, loricis, galeis, pulvere tormentario, toto denique
apparatu militari, equestri, pedestri, terrestri, navali, refertissima: ad
hosts tuos subiugandos, ad amicos, cives, subditos, socios and foederatos tuos
defendendos: ad pericula, iniurias, vim, metum a capite tuo (fortissime Rex) a
cord tuo, charissima clarissimaque Regina, a liberis, a fortunis, a toto
comitatu propulsanda. Quamobrem gratias, quantas animus noster capere possit,
ei inprimis habemus, Prove. 9.15.
per quem Reges regnant, per quem amplitudo tua, Iacobe apud alios sexte in hac
sexta aetate mundi, apud nos prime, in co^stanti aetate tua, nuta^te aetate
Regni nostri regnum init, and regnat: and quidem quod in tam dissitis studijs,
dissectis sectis, distractis animi^, incredibili omnium ordinum assensu,
vnoquoque acclamante, nullo reclama^te, sine omni castrensi strepitu ita
pacifice regnet. Nulla regio, municipium, praefectura, vrbs, pagus, ex quo non
public venerunt, omniu^ generum, aetatum, ordinum, omnis fortunae and loci,
etiam ex remotissimis gentibus legati, gratulatu^. Quantae effusiones hominum
ex oppidis, concursus ex agris patrum-familias cum co^iugibus and liberis,
quasi dei immortalis dies festi and solennes agerentur. Vt non mayor fuerit
Israelis and Judah olim officiosa concertario ad reducendum Davidem Regem suum,
quam est nostrum totius Regni, 2. Sam. 19.
tanquam vnius viri, praesto obsequium ad inducendum Davidem nostrum secundum
cor Dei regem.

Nam quae duo in Davide eximia fuerunt, artis and martis ornamenta, domi piae
doctrinae laus prophetica, in bello fori arma victricia; hae virtutes duae iam
coepere esse tuae, qui and sine bello superbos debellans, amplissima regna,
ipso audito nomine, assequeris, and in (...) piaru^ artiu^ and politioris
literaturae, eos vere aureos libellos co^scripseris, vt bonae literae; quae
antea veluti plebeiae, spretae apud multos iacebant, iam nobilitari and te
regnante regnare videa^tur. Est autem vt in coeli medio Sol pulchrior quam vlla
alia in part: ita in regali persona eruditionis splendour illustrior, fructus
copiosior, quam in reliquo hominu^ ordine: Cum inde et iustitiae praeses, et
scholae princeps (vt nuper ad nostru^ omnium decus) ipse esse possit, tum ad
ius suis oculis pervidendum, tum ad literas fove^dum, et literatis favendum
multo amplius. Et quanquam non possumus non affici summo desiderio Divae
Elizabethae; tamen cum, illa maturo die suo, Viam lacteam in caelo, var j
commentatores Iacobi viam dixere.
vt sole nostro occidente et abeunte a nobis, ita brevis and serena nox sit
interposita, tot regniluminibus vnam viam Regiam, tanquam coelestem galaxiam et
plane Iabobaeam designantibus illustrata: aliusque ita mane nobis exortus sit
Sol, cuius beneficio, adeo pulcher iam hic integer ferme annus, tanquam vnus
dies illuxit, nobis sine vlla nubecula tempestatis obfuturae, nisi quae in ipsa
coitione Dei presidio evanuit: vt nihil nisi Elizabethicum in hac rerum
co^versione sentiatur, nec in posteru^ nisi bona omnia Elizabethica de
maiestate tua expectemus, pre^erquam quod mascula tua virtus and viriles dotes,
maiora quaedam and augustiora polliceantur: Deo, cuius in faemore scriptum est,
Rex Regum and Dominus dominantium, Apoc. 19.16.
principi Electorum tuoru^ imperialiu^ (nam non hominis hoc factum sed numinis)
gratissimis animis acquiescimus; in te vncto Dei (sacrosancte Rex)
conquiescimus. Haec est enim omnium congratula^tium lo et triumphalis ovatio
nostra. Martial.
Vox diversa sonat, populorum est vox tamen vna:
Tu Rex, tu patriae diceris esse pater.
Quare arcesse tibi pacis triumphos; capesse claues regni, clavum imperij
teneto: possideto principatus tui cameram and metropolim Londinum: conscende
hanc terrae acropolim and armamentarium praecipuum, turrim Londinensem.
Hibernia praesaga tui partim subacta, partim dedititia tua facta est. Rosae
duae Anglicanae, and Lancastrensis vere rubens, quia vulneribus suis cruentata,
exhausta prope erat: and Eboracensis recte albicans dicta, quae amisso bellis
intestinis sanguine, ad mortem fere expalluit, and quae ambae coniunctis
aculcis, saepiu^ quam par est, compungentes, cum Leone Scotiae conflictatae
sunt, iam vt corollae and serta capitis tui se offerunt. Tanquam Deus iam
complesset, quod vaticinatus est olim per Ezechielem in hanc sententiam: Tu
fili hominis, cape tibi duo ligna, Ezech. 37.16.
in vno inscribe Iehudae; in altero inscribe Iosepho cum tota domo Israelis:
tum compinge ea in vnum, vt sint vnum in manu tua. Nam sic ait Iehova:
accepturus sum domum Iosephi cum tribubus Israelis, and domum Iehudae, cum
tribubus eius, and componam eas coniunctas in manu mea, and efficiameas gentem
vnam: and Rex vnus nempe David servus meus pastor erit illis, neque erunt
amplius duae ge^tes, nec dividentur amplius in duo regna. Quis non videt hic
amatque similem dei nutum? Improbi, myrmillones, bustuarij putabant in
interregno turbam in turbas conijcere: Pontificij sperabant totam insulam
arsura^ bello civili: and e tumultu aureum suu^ diem vtrique insole^ter
praedicabant. Sed frustratae adhuc divina virgula and prudentissimis Senatorum
Regni consilijs sunt spes omnium.

Adhuc iustitia and pax occurru^t inter se; Psalm. 85.10.
veritas and fides osculantur se. Regnu^ Angliae etiamnum est regnu^ Eva^gelij,
Regnu^ Regis mei est regnu^ Dei mei, adhuc vivit Defensor fidei a fide
defensitatus: Iustitiae assertor, and in iustif sima Regni causa acceptissimus:
pacis cultor, and a pace excultus pater Ecclesiae Iacobus, filius eiusde^:
Elizabethae haeres regnoru^ and virtutu^. Deus tibi regnu^, regno pietatem,
pietati pacem, and quidem cuncta haereditario tradidit: vicina^ hanc patriae
nostrae gentem, Sororem non paene sed plene nostra^, tanqua^ vnius parentis
geminam, Religione, sanguine, solo, solio, lingua, communibus officijs,
co^munibus periculis, mari vt vno muro coniunctissimam, Angliam inquam and
Scotiam, seu vt vere dixerim, Anglia^ and Sociam vno aureo and amabilissimo
rectionis tuae nexu in aeternu^, nisi peccata nostra interverta^t, colligavit.
Cicero. offic. 2.
Socrates execrari solebat eos qui vtile et honestu^ natura cohaerentia, animis
segregabant. Christus mayor Socrate co^minatur: Ma^th 19 6. Ephesians. 2.14.
Ne homo separet quod Deus coniunxit. Paries intergerinus inter haec duo regna,
te regnante, Dei digito recessit. Israelem and Iudam in te fecit vnum: non duo
regna amplius, nec duos reges: non duos pastores, nec duos greges: non duas
gentes, nec duas mentes: no^ duas regiones, nec duas religiones. Vnus Rex, vnus
grex, vna lex, and vt erat ab initio, Psalm. 82.
vna Albio^. Omnia in vno deo caelesti vnu^. om nia in vno deo terrestri, (
dixi vos deos, ait scriptura) vnu^: Homer.
(...).

Quocirca vtere, augustissime monarcha, hac magnificentia tua, potire, fruere:
Sparta^ qua^ nactus es, parte^ naturae iure tuam optima^ adorna: macte ista
virtute regia: perge porro initiorum laud egregia: Deum tanto beneficiorum
cumulo admirabiliter Deum tuum, eiusque Regnu^ in his ipsis Regni primordijs,
se data iam peste et patefactis coniuratoru^ co^silijs, perfecto cord,
totisque viribus impensius, si fieri potest, quaerito: Religionem non illibata^
solum tuere, sed adauge: Eva^gelium per omnes oras propagato: Arts and
Academias honestato: Christi patrimonium amplificato: vt Deo e postliminio
reddatur, quod Dei est, vbicu^que tuu^ est avita iura in Ecclesia, in
Republica, nisi quid ex Adamo, aut Romulo faecis co^traximus, rata and grata
esse iube: iustitia^ omnibus imperato: tenuiu^ vero accisas res in prosequenda
lite sublevato: non concordia^ du^taxat, sed arctissimam amicitiam inter
sororias has gentes and earum consobrinos omnes, firmiter modis omnibus
constabilito: Recipe nos denique and nostros in clientelam tuam: vt Deo semper
co^cinamus sacru^ paeana and alleluiah: inter nos autem de te circumsonemus:
vivat, vincat, vigeat, valeat, floreat diutissime Iacobus Rex Anglia, Scotia,
Galliae and Hiberniae cum serenissima Domina Anna Regina vxore cu^ He^rico
filio VValliae Principe, cu^ tota reliqua regali sobole: viuat inquam Iacobus
Anglia Rex and Scotiae, seu vt vno verbo dicam, Britanniae. dixi.

I will give says the Lord by nosea the prophet, Ose 2.15.
the vale of Achor for the gate of hope. Now the vale of Achor was the first
entrance for the people of Israel into the land of promise. Semblably this
fort of the Tower (O mighty King) is the threshold, as it were, of the land of
your behest: and the first step of your investiture unto a kingdom, determined
unto you by divine decree, before you were borne. At the port gates whereof
there saluteth you by my words, not only your faithful Lieuetenant a Knight
graced with ornaments of war and peace, The Warders.
and the whole troop of armed men, that surrou^d your princely person, your
servants the Guard in this place: but together also there welcomes you, as it
were with one obeisance, whole England, France and Ireland, the sovereign
authority of all which by the possession of this one place, you do claspe and
as it were gripe in your hand. For this Tower and royal Castle is the pledge
for them all, and not only the gate of good hope, but the haven of the whole
scope. The Lions
Here the stately and princely beasts the Lions (couchant) of England do bow
down to the Lion (Rampant) of Scotland: even to you a true offspring of the
Lion of Judah, and rightly descended of Kings your great-great grandfathers.
Here is money coined, The mynt.
the ioints and sinews of war, which now a good while since has borne the
image and superscription of you our Caesar. Here are the Records of Estate,
Records.
the closet of the acts and patents of our princes, your renowned progenitors,
out of which, I may boldly avouch it, a truer story of our nation by far may be
compiled, then any is yet extant. Here are dispersed in the several quarters
of this place, Prisons.
certain round turrets for the custody of offenders against the king. This
which is next, Bloody Tower.
our elders termed the bloody Tower, for the bloodshed, as they say, of those
Infant Princes of Edward the fourth, who^ Richard the third of cursed memory (I
shudder to men^ion it,) savagely killed two together at one time. Then there
present h^^ self looking dutifully from a great height upon you, Square Tower.
but holding out brazen pieces of shot, threatening slashings of fire and
thunderbolts to your enemies, a great and square Tower for martial service,
the strength of this place, a watchman for the City, a keeper of the peace, a
commander of the country round about, Caesar's hall
wherein antiquity has especially made memorable the hall of the Roman
Caesar. Here is the Iewell-house and the wealth of the kingdom, The Jewel
house.
containing implements of great value above number, and all the gold and silver
plate, The Wardrop.
with a most rich princely wardrop; all which have now long since powered
themselves into your bosom, as the just owner and full heir to the^ al. Here
are, that I may not name every thing, mountains of bullets, and most large
places above and below for receipt of armor, Armory.
with ordinance, darts, pikes, bows arrows, privy coats, helmets,
gunpowder, finally with the whole furniture of chivalry, for service on horse,
on foot, by land by sea, exceedingly stoared: (and all these) to subdue your
enemies* to defend your friends, citizens, subjects, associats and confederats:
and to propulse danger, annoyance, violence, fear from your own person (most
puissant King) from your dearest spouse, our Sovereign Queen, your progeny,
estate, and whole train. Wherefore we give thanks as many as our heart can
conceive, to him first, by whom Kings reign, Pro. 8.15.
by whom your Majesty, O James a sixth among others, to us a first, in this sixth
age of the world, in your own constant age, in the declyning age of our
kingdom, does enter your reign and now fully reigns: and the rather, that
in so great ods of dispositions, so many sects cutting from one another, such
distractions of men's minds, you do with such wonderful agreement of all
degrees, every one acclaming to it, no man reclaiming at it, and without any
stirring of weapon so peaceably reign. There is no country, borough,
precinct, city, hamlet, out of which there have not come openly of al sorts,
ages, degrees, of al estates and conditions even from the most utmost foreine
parts, ambassadors to congratulate. What wonderful resort out of good towns:
what concourse out of the field country of farmers with their wives and
children, as though some great and festival day of the everliving God were now
celebrated. So that there was not a more dutiful striving between Israel and
Judah to bring home David there king: 2. Sam. ^9.
then there is ready obsequiousnes of the whole kingdom of England as of one
man for the bringing in of our David a King after Gods own heart. For these two
ornaments of arts and arms, which in David were eminent, namely the praise of
holy learning to the height of a prophet, the honor of victorious exploits
abroad in war: these two do begin to show themselves to be with you: who
without war vanquishing the proud, have upon the hearing of your name
attained unto most mighty kingdoms: and have written such worthy golden books
out of the circle of sacred sciences, and the finer learning, that good
literature which, as vulgar, lay despised, seems now to be ennobled, and by
your reign to reign it self. And verily as the son is brighter then, when
it is in the midst of heaven, then when it is in any other part: so the shine
of learning is both more orient, and the fruit more abundant in a king, the^
in any other estate of men: seeing thereby he may be president in the courts
of Justice, and chief moderator in schools; (as of late you were to al our
glory:) both to discern the right with your own eyes, and also to foster
learning, and to favor learned men much more. And although we cannot but be
affected with the miss of (now) St. Elizabeth (our late Queen) yet seeing,
when as she, as our sun setting and departing from us in the ripe time of her
days, there followed so short and so clear a night enlightened with so many
stars of the kingdom, The milke^ way in heaven diverse philosophers have
called S. James way. The last conspiracy.
chalking out one kings way, as the milken way in heaven, plainly (as the old
saw has bin) St. James way: and seeing another sun rose so carely unto us,
by comfort whereof this whole now a year almost has continued as one fair
day, without any stormy cloud toward, but such an one, as vanished in the
very gathering of it through the protection of God: so that in this change we
feel no alteration from the raygne of Queen Elizabeth, neither may we expect
any other things at your Majesty's hands, but even all the good things of
Queen Elizabethes time, saving that your ma^ly prowess, and the induments of
nature in the superior degree of your sex above her, does promise both greater
and more notable attempts: Apoc. 19.16.
Unto God (first) in whose thigh is written King of Kings and Lord of Lords
(the chief Prince among al your imperial electors (for it was the doing of
divine power and not humane) with most thankful minds we yield our selves, and
next in you, O sacred King the anointed of the Lord, we set our hearts at
rest. For this is the shouting and triumphant applause of al your subjects,
that jointly welcome you unto the crown.

The cry of people sounds alike, yet is their voice all one: Martial.

Thou James our King, of country art, the father termed alone.
Wherefore take unto you, the triumphs of peace: receive (here) the keys of
the kingdom: take into your hand the helm of this Empire: Enter into the
possession of the chamber of your kingdom, the chief city London: go up
into the chief fort of your land, the Principal armor house of the Realm;
this Tower of London. Ireland wisely foreseeing your approach, partly subdued,
partly yielding, is become totally yours. The two Roses of England, both the
red Rose of Lancaster, rightly called ruddie, as being embrued in blood by
wounds from her self, til she was almost spent: and that other white Rose of
the house of York, rightly named white, as which having lost much blood by
civil war waxed pale well nigh unto death: which both with their prickles
stinging together encountered oftener then was fit with the Lion of Scotland;
do now offer themselves as coronets and garla^ds about your head. As though God
had now fulfilled that, which he forespake by Ezechiel to this purpose: Ezech.
37.16.
Son of man take unto thee two pieces of wood; write in one to Iohuda: in the
other write To Joseph with all the house of Israel: Then frame them together in
one, that they may be one in thy hand. For thus says the Lord. I will take the
house of Joseph with the tribes of Israel, and the house of Judah with his
tribes, and will join them by one fabric in my hand, and will make them one
nation, and one king, namely David my servant shall be Pastor over them neither
shall they be any more two nations, nor henceforth divided into two kingdoms
etc. who does not see and love the like proceeding of God with us? The wicked,
the desperate ruffins thought in the change to cast all in a hurly-burly: the
Popish crew hoped that the whole Island would have bin on fire with civil war
and both of them out of the midst of the stir, did gloriously brag of their
golden day. But through the rod of Gods providence over us, and by the prudent
advice of the counselors of estate, al their hopes hitherto have been made
frustrate: Psalm. 85.10.
Yet justice and peace do greet together truth and faithfulness do kiss each
other: the kingdom of England is still the kingdom of the Gospel: the
kingdom of my king is the kingdom of my God: yet there lives the Defender of
the faith, defended by the faith: the mainteiner of Justice, and most
acceptably entertained in his most just title to the kingdom: a promoter of
peace and promoted by peace, eve^ James the father of the church, and son of
the same: the heir of Queen Elizabeth in her kingdoms and virtues. God has
given unto you a kingdom: unto the kingdom a holy Religion: to a holy
Religion peace: and all these to you even by inheritance. This neighbor nation
to our native country, not out half but full sister, eve^ as it were a twinne
of the same mother, most near of al other to one another in Religion, in
blood, in soil, in right of crown, in language, in common services, and
common hazardes, surrounded with one sea as one wall, I mean England and
Scotland, or to speak more truly, One land, has God plotted into one by the
golden and most loving knotte of your government: and that if our sins do
not overturne it, even for ever. Socrates was wont to curse them, Cicero.
offic. 2.
who severed honesty and profit a sunder in their purposes, which by nature
cleave together. Christ greater then Socrates does command; Let no man
separate, Matthew. 19.6.
that which God has joined together. The partition wall between these two
kingdoms by the finger of God at your coming to the crown is gone: he has
made Israel and Judah one in you: Ephesians. 2.14.
no more two kingdoms, nor two kings: nor two pastors, nor two flocks: nor
two kinds nor two minds: nor two Regions, nor two Religions. One King, one
people, one law, and as it was in the beginning, one land of Albion. Al things
in one heavenly God one: al things in one earthly God, ( for I have styled you
Gods, Psalm. 82.
as the scripture speaks) One. It is not good that in any heads bear rule in
any land: Homer.

Let one be sovereign King and Lord, and so decrees may stand.
Wherefore most mighty monarch, make use of this your magnificent estate;
possess it, enjoy it; bewtifie this your portion, even your best inheritance,
which you are come unto by right of nature: proceed on in your princely virtue:
go forward in the worthy praise of these beginnings: Seek that God, which is
become your God wonderfully by such a heap of benefits, and his kingdom also
in this beginning of your kingdom, the plague being much abated, and the
counsels of conspirators detected, even with a perfect heart and with all your
power, even yet more earnestly, if it may be. Not only preserve religion, but
increase it: Plant the Gospel throughout all your Dominions: Give reputation to
Arts and University, Enlarge the patrimony of Christ; that now at length after
long detinue, restitutio^ may be made unto God of all that is due unto God,
whersoever you have to do. Confirm and ratify the ancient laws both in
Church and Commonwealth, except where we have gathered any corruption, either
from Adam or Rome: Command justice to all me^: but ease the low estate of the
poor in following their suites Establish strongly by all means not only
concord, but indissoluble friendship between these sister nations, and all the
sisters children: Finally receive us and ours into your protection; that we may
always sing unto God a holy himne, and alleluiah, and of you may still ring this
peale among our selves: Let live, O God, let vanquish, let grow, let prosper,
let flourish, as long, as mortality may endure, eve^ James of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland King, together with our sovereign Lady Anne,
his spouse; with Henry Prince of Wales, and the rest of the royal Progeny: Let
live I say James of England and Scotland, or to speak at one word, King of
whole Britain.

FINIS.

