A Second Sermon, preached at Paul's Cross, the 21. of May, 1598. upon the 21.
of Math. the 12. and 13. verses: Concluding a former Sermon Preached the 4. of
December 1597. upon the same Text.

By JOHN HOVVSON, Student of Christes-Church in Oxford.

Imprinted at London by Arn. Hatfield for Thomas Adams, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the white Lion. 1598.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the 21. of May 1598. upon the 21. of
Matthew, the 12. and 13. verses, by John Howson, Student of Christs-Church in
Oxford.
The Text.
And said unto them, it is written, Mine house shall be called the house of
prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.

MATH. 21. verse 13.
OUR blessed Savior in the 12. Luc. 12.42.
of S. Luke 42. notes it to be the office and duty of a faithful and wise
Steward, of a Steward or dispensour of the mysteries of God, 1. Cor. 4.
as S. Paul calls him, to give unto the household in due season their portion
of meat, (...), the measure of wheat, which is due unto them.

By the measure of wheat says S. Greg. exprimitur modus verbi; Greg. past.
li. 3. cap. 5.
the measure and proportion of the word of God is meant and expressed, which
ought to be given to those of the household: which measure and proportion
consists in these points, says Erasmus, Erasm. epist. ad Iod. Ionam.
Promere cum res postulat, cuique promere quod est accommodum, and promere quod
satis est: In delivering the meat or the word in due season, at a fit hour;
in delivering that which is good and wholesome; in delivering that which is
sufficient, not too little, nor too much: for in our corporal food or diet we
observe these three things, a fit time to eat in, the good quality, and
convenient quantity of our food.

Job. 32. Cant. 7. Iere. 4.
I cannot say with Job that I am full of matter, nor with the Spouse in the
Cant. my belly is as an heap of wheat; so that I should be feign to cry with
Jeremy, ventrem meum doleo, ventrem meum doleo: oh my belly, my belly, or with
Job, my belly is like the wine which has no vent, and like new bottles which
break: 1. Sam. 6.13.
but with the men of Bethshemeth, I have reaped a little wheat in the valley,
where though I have not seen so much as the back parts of God, as Moses did
(for that was on a mountain) yet with them of Bethshemeth I have seen his
Arc, that is his Gospel, which has in it both Manna, a word of comfort, and
Aarons rod, a word of reproof: which how I have dispensed unto you here to
fore, either in regard of the due season, or in respect of the quality of the
wheat or sustenance, vos ipsi iudicate, 1. Cor. 11.
you must be judges. But least I should be offensive in the quantity of it, I
made an end vbi finis non erat, Bernard.
where there was no end, as S. Barn. did, and all other Stewards have bin
forced to do, Ioh. 16.12.
being straightned as our Savior Christ was, when he said, Multa habeo dicere
quae non potestis portare modo, I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bare them now; not by reason of the depth of any mysteries I had to
deliver, or in regard of the weakness of your understanding (as he was
straightned) but because with somewhat long speaking, you were made, (...),
Hebr. 5.11. Greg. past. li. 3. cap. 5.
weak or weary with hearing: for as S. Greg. says, dum auditoris animus plus
qua^ valet tenditur, mentis chorda rumpitur, When the ears of our auditors are
strained beyond their accustomed compass, the strings of their attention will
break asunder. Wherefore seeing they which have power and authority to
command, have said unto me as it is in the 17. of the Acts, Act. 17. Bern. de
constable. lib. 1.
we will hear you again upon this text, recurrat stilus ad suam materiam, as
S. Bern. said, I will return to that part of my text where I left, without
repeating that which is past, saving only thus far, that it may please you to
remember, that I divided this text in factum, and dictum; into a deed of our
Saviors, and into a speech of his; into an action of his, and the reason of
it; the action was contained in the former verse, and was a reformation of
certain abuses in the temple, in which I observed five circumstances, first,
the author who, secondly, the time when, thirdly, the place where, fourthly,
the matter what, fifthly, the manner how this reformation was performed.

It remains now that by your accustomed patience I should speak of his
speech, which contained the reason of this action. The reason why he exercised
this whip, this extraordinary and miraculous violence against them, was because
they had abused the temple and profaned it; which he proves by two texts of
scriptures, the former taken out of the 56. chap. of Esaias, which shows the
lawful use of the temple, and the chief end of erecting it, My house shall be
called the house of prayer: the latter is taken out of the 7. of Jeremy, and
shows the abuse and profanation of it; Ye have made it a den of thieves.

But before I entreat of these particulars somewhat in generality of this
speech of our Saviors; I divided this parcel of scripture into factum, and
dictum, an action, and a speech, Act. 1.
as S. Luke did all our Saviors life into facere and docere; and whether were
more myraculous opera diuina, or celestis doctrina, his divine actions, or his
heavenly speeches, I will not dispute, but greater testimony was not given to
his actions then is recorded of the Evangelists to be given to his doctrine.
For if he discoursed and preached to the people either of the resurrection of
the dead, Math. 22. Luke 20. Ioh. 10. Math. 12.
Math. 22. or of Messiah the Lord and son of David, Luke 20. or of the son
of God by nature Ioh. 10. or the sons of God by grace Math. 12. of the
ceremonies of the law, Math. 15.
or the works of charity and mercy Math. 15. of the precepts of God, Math. 22.
Math. 5.6.7.
or the precepts of men Math. 22. of the first and greatest commandment, Math.
5.6.7. of the destruction of the kingdom of this world, and the institution of
the kingdom of heaven Ioh. 3. Ioh. 3. Math. 12. Ioh. 7.
of the passion Mat. 12. death and resurrection of the Messiah Ioh. 7. of the
coming of the holy Ghost and the abundance of his graces: This was ever the
issue and effect and the witness which his auditors gave unto the speeches;
Nunquam sic locutus est homo sicut hic homo, Ioh. 7. Mark. 6.
Never man spoke as this man speaks, Ioh. 7. and in the 6. of S. Mark,
Audientes admirabantur in sermon eius, They that heard him were in admiration
at his doctrine, that is, thought it miraculous; saying, from whence has he
these things, and what wisdom is this which is given unto him? Luke 4.
and in the 4. of S. Lukes Gospel, All gave testimony unto him, and (...),
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth: Math. 7.
and in the 7. of S. Math. when Jesus had ended his words, (...), the
multitude were astonished upon his doctrine; for he taught them as one having
power, and not as the Scribes.

If he played the respondent in disputation, his answers were admirable, and
put the disputer to a non plus: When the Pharisees and Herodians disputed about
tribute to be given to Caesar, Luc. 20.
they maruailed at his answer, and held their peace; when the Saduces
disputed against the resurrection, the Scribes wondered at his answer, and one
of the Scribes said, Ibid.
Master, (...), thou have said excellently well; and when the Lawyer disputed
with him about the greatest commandment, after he had received his answer, he
confessed and said, Mark. 12.
well master thou have said the truth, and no man after that durst ask him
any question.

If he undertook the opposers part, and disputed with them, he utterly
confounded the wisest of them: When he demanded of the high Priests and the
Scribes, who were the most learned among the Jews, whether the baptism of
John were from heaven or from men; they answered plainly, they knevv not
whence it was: and when he proposed this question to the Pharisees whose
son Christ should be, and they answered him David's, Luc. 20.
he so replied, that none could answer him a word, (...). Math. 22.
So that whether he showed himself a Schooleman as we call them, or a
Preacher; whether he opposed, or answered, or discoursed, his speeches were as
full of admiration, as miraculous, as his actions were.

For whereas he was a carpenters son reputed, Matt. 13. Math. 13.
and had no other education, and therefore was called a carpenter, Mark. 6. nay,
ille faber, a man noted by that trade: Mark. 6.
whereas the Scribes which by the law of Moses were appointed (as we term
them) schoolemaisters to instruct others (S. Aust. calls them grammaton
isagogos, Aug. de ci. Dei lib. 18. ca. 39. Deuteronomy. ca. 29. and 31.
the Septuagint (...) Deuteronomy. cap. 29. and 31. so called, because they taught the
grammatical and historical sense of the scriptures) could testify that he
had not bin instructed by them: whereas the Pharisees, who were the chief
expounders of the mysteries and secrets of the law, and therefore sat in
Moses chair, could truly affirm that he was none of their auditor; and
therefore the Jews could say with admiration quomodo hic literas scit cum non
didicerit? how knovves this man letters when he is not learned? Ioh. 7.
no scholar of the Scribes, no auditor of the Pharisees: yet where the common
people of which he was one did speak the Syriack tongue, Eusebius. de demonstrat.
euang. lib. 3. ca. 7. Luke. 4.
as also his Apostles, and that only: Eusebius. de demonstrat. euang. lib. 3. cap.
7. he could allege a long text out of the 61. of Esaias in the Hebrew tongue,
wherewith only the learned were acquainted (as now adays) and expound it and
the most hidden and secret mysteries of the holy scriptures far beyond the
expectation, nay beyond the capacity and understanding of the Scribes and
Pharisees: and he that is well conversant in the holy scriptures, may perceive
that all the speeches of our Savior Christ, have either the perfect form of a
Cabala (as they call it) containing a most simple, most true, most deep, most
certain exposition of mystical things in the scriptures; or else an auouching
of scriptures themselves; as in this place, where alleging a reason of his
fact or action, he avouches the true use, and condemns their abuse by the
scriptures themselves; not without astonishment to the auditors both Scribes
and Pharisees, who as it should seem, could not reply, or durst not make
answer.

Another note I observe before I come to entreat of his speech in particular
is this, that our Savior Christ performing this action not as a man, but
myraculously as he was God (as I showed you before) would nevertheless give a
reason of his action; whereas commonly with God Tota ratio facti est potentia
facientis, Aug. ep. 3.
and voluntas facientis: The reason of Gods actions are, sometimes his power,
sometimes his will: and as humana consuetudo verbis, ita diuina potentia
factis loquitur, As we use words to express our minds, so God by his actions
shows his power and his will also: and as new words or not ordinary
phrases, Aug. 48. ca. 6.
being with moderation and decency inserted to our speech, splendorem addunt,
do make them more pleasing; so in Gods extraordinary and miraculous actions,
which ever in congruitie are very significant, quodammodo luculentior est
diuina eloquentia: God speaks unto us more eloquently and significantly then
by other means; and the husbandman in the 20. Math. 20.14.
of Math. who there represents the person of God, being asked by his servant
why he gave as much to him that wrought but one hour, as to them that labored
many hours, alleged his will only for a reason, Volo huic nouissimo dare
sicut tibi: I will give unto this last as unto thee, verse. 14. and again
verse. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will? and it is said of God the
holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12.
1. Cor. 12. that one and the same spirit works the variety of operations
which are mentioned in that chapter, dividing to every one (...), even as he
will; whereupon Caietan notes, voluntas spiritus sancti pro ratione redditur:
Caiet. ibid.
The will of the holy Ghost is alleged for a sufficient reason of his action;
and in that his will is alleged for a reason of his action, it is apparent,
says he, and a sufficient argument that he is a true God.

Now what might be the cause why our Savior being God, and equal to the Father
and the holy Ghost in deity, would not have his will only stand for a reason,
and when the great Lords and mighty Potentates of the world say sic volo, sic
facio, stet pro ratione voluntas, would render a reason of this his action? was
it because he had to deal with men who were docile, and reasonable, and of
good capacity, and not with wilful and stubborn men? For Theophilact has
this kind of rule, Solere Deum, Theophil. in epist. ad Romans
cum agit cum hominibus non malignis, and querulis, factorum suorum reddere
rationem, That it is the custom of God when he deals with men that are
reasonable and tractable, to render a reason of his actions why he does them:
Cum autem agit cum malignis, and querulis, suam solum allegare voluntatem: but
when he has to do with obstinate and malicious men, to allege only his will
for a reason, because they are not worthy to have other reason given them, of
which his rule he alleges many examples.

I cannot define this to be the reason, but it is not altogether improbable;
for to grant that both the Scribes and Pharisees and the Priests too were
obstinate and malicious: yet (though they were very many of them) they were a
small number being compared with them who were then present when this action
was done; for it may be collected probably out of the Gospel, that our Savior
had most commonly attending upon him to hear his doctrine and see his
miracles, eight or ten thousand people: for he had in the desert one time 5000.
another time 4000. Orig. cont. Celsum lib. 2. Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 6. de demonst.
euang.
besides women and children: and this number is noted by Origin contra Celsum
lib. 2. Eusebius. lib. 3. ca. 6. de demonst. euang. For if he had so many in the
desert places where they could have no sustenance, what companies may be
imagined did follow, Luc. 8.
when he went (...), through so many cities and villages the most populous of
all the world? Joseph. de bell. Iud. li. 3. ca. 2.
For Josephus notes that in Galile there were 400. towns ((...), as the
Evangelist calls the^, oppida sine muris, as Euthinius notes in the first of
Math) in every of which towns there were at least 15000. inahbitants, as the
same Josephus notes: and their cities were proportionable to their towns, for
in the land of Genezareth, besides many other famous cities, there was one
called Tarichaea, Joseph. de bell. Iud. li. 2. ca. 26.
which when occasion served would send out 40000. fighting men, and another
called Tiberias, in which there were 600. Aldermen or Senators, as the same
Josephus notes: by which proportions we may conceive how populous they were.

But this ordinary number of followers, of 4000. or 5000. or 10000. was nothing
to the multitude of people which were gathered together at this feast of the
Passover, from all the countries of Iudaea, and in likelihood were present at
this miracle. For Cestius Gallus the President of Syria, Joseph. de bell. Iud.
li. 7. ca. 17.
having taken a view of them, and considered how many sacrifices were offered,
and how many men went together to the eating of their part in these sacrifices,
informed Nero the Emperor, that the number of men then present was 2700000. at
the least, which all were counted holy and pure; for lepers and many other
diseased were forbidden by the law, and all those within the precinct of the
temple: which number will not seem strange to them that consider the circuit of
the temple and the courts about it, and that all the Jews from all parts of
the world at that time assembled thither.

Now to admit that the Scribes and Pharisees and Priests, etc. were stubborn
and obstinate, and therefore according to Theophil. rule deserved not, that God
should give them a reason of his action: yet the number of the people assembled
being almost infinite in comparison of them, who loved him so that in respect
of them the Pharisees feared to offer him vvrong, Math. 26. Math. 26.
who hung upon him to hear him, Luke. 19. pendebat velut inhians, Luc. 19.
Caiet. finally reioysed, (...), in all the glorious things that were wrought
by him, Luke 13. Luc. 13.
it is not absurd to imagine that in respect of them our Savior vouchsafed to
allege this reason. Or was it because, having showed himself more then a man
to this great assembly by this miraculous action, so he would confirm this
opinion by a miraculous speech? For as igneum and sidereum quiddam radiabat in
oculis, Jerome.
some fiery and starrie brightness glistered in his eyes when he wrought this
action: so it could not be, but that his divinity should bewray it self in
his speech; first, concerning the matter, because being not bred up in learning
to read the scriptures, nor any accustomed auditor to the Scribes, for the
gra^maticall sense, nor to the Pharisees for the mistical sense of the
scriptures, he could nevertheless properly, and to the present purpose allege
unto them the sayings of the Prophets. Secondly, concerning the manner of his
speech, which was extraordinary, (...), Luc. 4.
his speech was with authority and power, not like the speech of other men,
Math. 7.
of other learned men, the Scribes or the Pharisees, Math. 7. whose kind of
teaching was frigida, Iausen. concord. cap. 17.
and ad commouendum parum efficax: cold, and not effectual to move; where as
our Saviors was full of force and efficacy, moving the hearts of the auditors
to faith and repentance: it is not improbable to be for this cause.

Or was it because, seeing the Scribes and Pharisees did most especially assault
him, and seek to confound him with questions and interrogations upon the
chief feasts, when the people were assembled together, Ioh. 7. Ioh. 10. Ioh. 5.
as in the feast of Tabernacles Ioh. 7. in the feast of the dedication of the
Temple, Ioh. 10. in the feast of Pentecost, Ioh. 5. (for so S. Chrysostom,
Cyrill, and Theophil. interpret it though it be not named) he would also in
this great solemn feast and assembly at Easter, or the Passover, try how they
could defend that abuse of the temple, which he proved out of the prophets to
be against the end and the institution of it? Whereunto when they made no
answer, he replied no farther: Greg. Moral. 23.9.
for Finis esse locutionis sapientium solet, vt eousque dicant quo aduersarijs
silentium imponant: The end of a vvisemans speech is by good reason to put his
adversaries to silence, and then urge them no farther. Non enim se ostendere,
sed praua docentes compescere student: For they speak not to ostentation but
to confute or confound them that teach or do amiss.

Or was it done for our instruction? as every action of his is some instruction
for us, Thom. 12. q. 71. ar. 6.
to teach us to do nothing rashly, heddely, and without consideration, as great
Lords and Tyrants do, the rule of whose actions is their will, their froward and
obstinate will: but to measure all our sayings and doings with humane reason,
which is regula propinqua, and homogenea, as the Scholemen call it, a rule
which is natural, bred within us, near unto us, in our mouths, and in our
hearts, Deuteronomy. 30.14.
or with the word of God which is regula remota and heterogenea, a rule hid
from us, far off from us, in heaven, in the bosom of God, quasi ratio Dei,
but yet made known unto us by the holy Scriptures.

Which rule and instruction the holy Fathers and men of God have ever observed,
Greg. Hom. 34.
confirming their doctrine with reason and authority, Nos affirmare nolumus
quod apertis testimonijs no^ approbamus: we will affirm nothing but what
we can prove by reason and authority; and submitting themselves and their
judgments to reason and authority: Arguant me ratione velauthoritate,
Policra. prolog. lib. 8.
and ego vel ad inimici vocem no^ refugie^ emendari: Let it be grounded on
reason or authority, and I will give ear to the reproof of an enemy.

And this pattern of our Savior not only private men, but the whole Church of
Christ in their laws and constitutions do redily imitate: Sancta ecclesia ex
magisterio humilitatis instituta, The holy Church bred up in the school of
humility, and following the steps of our master Christ, Greg. moral. 8.
Recta quae errant bus dicit, non quasi ex authoritate praecipit, sed ex
ratione persuadet: Force not men to believe that which is true by authority,
but persuade them by reason: because as it is wisely observed, Plus mouere
solet ratio inserta in mandato, Humbert. in regulam Aug.
quam ipsum mandatum, a reason inserted to a law or commandment, moves much
more then a naked law: And therefore the Church says with Job, videte an
mentiar, Examine whether I ly or no: Job. 6.
believe not that which I say because I speak it: sed an vera sint ex ratione
pensate, but weigh with reason the truth of it: and if the Church do teach that
(as oftentimes it does) which cannot be comprehended within the compass of
reason; yet for all that, rationabiliter suadet, Greg. ibid.
it persuades you with reason, Ne de occultis ratio humana quaeri debeat, That
of some mysteries and secrets of Christianity, you may not ask or seek the
reason.

Whereas on the other part it is the custom and order of stubborn men, of
heretics, and schismatics, Non rations afferre, sed placita: not to urge
reason, but their will, their pleasure, Aug. contra Faustum Man. lib. 14. ca. 9.
their fantasy, or opinion: as Faustus the Manichee, when he had charged
Moses that he did diuina lacessere, offer violence to the laws of God; dixit,
and abijt, says S. Austine, nihil probare sategit, nihil curauit ostendere: he
said, as Pilate said, quod scripsi, scripsi, quod dixi, dixi: when he had said
it, he had done, he never made offer to prove it, or give a reason of his
speech: and though our doctrine be never so true, yet it is without the
compass of modesty and discretion for any man be he never so learned, to use
these kinds of assertio^s: Ego in hoc libro non contuli: sed asserui and
assero, and penes nullum volo esse iudicium, sed omnibus suadeo, vt praestent
obsequium, I have not used proofs, or authority in my writing; but I affirm
that that I say, and submit my self to no man's judgment, but require every
man to consent to me: scio me mea dogmata habere de caelo: I know that my
speeches descend from heaven, are authentical and canonical; for it is a
property peculiar to God only, Caiet. super 1. Cor. 12.
facere prout vult, to do what he list, and say what he pleases: for other men
must have regulam voluntatis, a rule to direct their will, and some reason to
direct their speech; otherwise while he takes upon him a property or quality
peculiar to God, he becomes fatuus confidens in stultitia sua, Prou. 17.
a fool that is confident in his own folly. And thus much by way of
probability, why our Savior would allege a reason.

The Preface to this speech of his, is this, Scriptum est, it is written. I
noted before unto you, that we must use some rule whereby to square out and
measure our speeches and actions, and one was from within us, homogenea regula,
man's reason: another from without us, regula heterogenea, Gods word: he uses
this second rule as the surest rule, which cannot err; the word of God; which
rule, though it be heterogenea, supernatural to us, yet it is homogenea,
natural to him, who was God himself, for the word of God may be said to be
ratio Dei, which was homogenea to him, as humane reason is to man. So that his
speech is not a bare reason, which peradventure might admit cauils, and
exceptions, and contradictions, but is joined with authority, as good
authority as any Prophet spoke with when he said, Haec dicit dominus thus
says the Lord: And this S. Austine says, is or do naturae, Aug. de mor.
eccle. catho. ca. 2.
the order of nature, that when we learn any thing, or teach any thing,
especially touching faith and religion, Rationem praecedat authoritas, Reason
should be grounded upon some good authority: for says he, Infirma ratio
videri potest quae cum reddita fuerit, authoritatem postea per quam firmetur
assumat: For it may seem to be a vveake reason, which when it is alleged
requires some other reason and authority to confirm it. Now our Saviors
reason was grounded upon good authority, upon that which was regula prima, the
chief rule with the Jews, especially Scribes and Pharisees and Priests, which
is, the written word of God, which being delivered sincerely according to the
true sense and meaning of it, as he did, admits no denial; and therefore the
Pharisees do make no reply.

Now it is worth the observation to consider our Saviors manner of reasoning
with them; It is most certain that with all sorts of me^ that confess there
is a God, the word, and will of God, is regula prima, the first and the
chiefest rule to direct them in all their actions: and therefore some heathen
have the speeches of oracles for their chief rule, fruiturque deorum
colloquio: Virg. Aenei. 7.
other the word of God, which is scriptum in cordibus, written in our hearts,
natural reason for their chief rule, as the Philosophers had: other the word
of God written by the pen of man, but inspired by the holy Ghost, as the Jews
had the old Testament for their chief rule, and Christians both the old and
the new: and whosoever disputed with any one of these sorts of men, out of
these grounds which they received for their chief rule, disputed
demonstratiuely, and otherwise not so: for a reason or authority from the
scripture will not move a Philosopher, nor a reason from the new Testament is
no rule for a Jew. Wherefore our Savior having to deal with the Scribes and
Pharisees and Priests, etc. who received the word of God written in books of
the law and the Prophets for their chief rule, he disputed with them out of
the law and the Prophets, and in this place draws his reason from the prophet
Esaias and the prophet Jeremy: and in the next chapter disputing with the Saduces
about the resurrection, Math. 22.
which received only the five books of Moses for the written word of God, and
their chief rule, he alleges his reasons from the books of Moses only.
Which example the Apostles and holy Fathers have followed in all their
discourses: for S. Paul speaking to the Athenians before their conversion,
alleges no text of scripture, but reasons drawn from the light of nature,
which was their chief rule, and the saying of their Philosopher, Act. 17.
Act. 17. And preaching to the Corinthians after their conversion, alleges
the scripture as regula prima, or remota with Christians: and the reasons or
sayings of Philosophers, 1. Cor. 15.
as regula propinqua, the rule of natural and reasonable men; which course
also is now observed in our preaching. Aug. de moribus cul. catho. cap. 1.
And S. Austine disputing with the Manichees which denied the old Testament to
be the word of God, brought his proofs and reasons from the new Testament
only, because they allowed that for their only rule: and therefore Lactantius
takes exception against that manner of disputation which S. Cyprian used with
Demetrian, Lact. lib. 5. cap. 4.
who urged him too much with authorities of scripture, seeing Demetrian allowed
not the scripture for his rule: Non enim Scripturae testimonijs, qua^ ille
vanam, fictam, commentitiam putabat, sed argumentis and ratione fuerat
refellendus: For he was to be reproved and convinced with arguments and reason,
not with the scripture, which he esteemed as false, fained, and counterfeite,
says Lactantius.

But our Saviors manner of disputation scriptum est, it is written, in the
law or in the prophets, is demonstratiue with Jews or Christians, who accept
the scripture for their chief rule: But for as much as not the letter of the
scripture is the word of God, but the true sense, and meaning of it, you
(beloved Christians) are especially to regard who it is that delivers or
alleges this scripture to you; for although in veritate humana, in humane
truth, (where reason only is a sufficient rule, and principle, which is true of
necessity, whether a poor man or a rich man, a learned man, or an ignorant
man, a Christian or an Heathen, Baalam or his Ass, deliver it) we must rather
consider quid dicatur, quam quis loquatur, what is said, then who says it; yet
in veritate diuina, in divine truth, which is above man's reason, and is
believed because it is so delivered in the scripture, which we accept for the
word of God, because we cannot ever judge, quid dicatur what is said, we must
especially consider quis loquatur, who says it; whether it be the devil which
says scriptum est, it is written, Math. 4.
as he did to our Savior, Math. 4.
or some Atheist, or some Heretic, or some Schismaticke, etc. or whether it
be our Savior Christ, or his true Church, or some found member of his Church.

Aug. de vtilit. Cred. cap. 11.
For as S. Austin says, Quod aliquid intelligimus rationi, quod credimus
authoritati debemus, Though we owe all things, both knowledge, and belief unto
God primario, yet as to his means and instruments we are indebted to reason,
for that that we know, and to authority, for that we believe. Orig. Hom. 31.
in Luc.
And therefore S. Origin gives this obseruable rule, Si quando testimonia de
scriptura audieris, vide ne statim loquenti acquiescas, sed considera illum
cuius sit, ac cuius sententiae, cuius sit voluntatis. When you hear one say
scriptum est, it is written, believe him not therefore in that which he says,
but consider who it is that speaks it, of what opinion he is, whether an
heretic or no, of what mind or affection he be, whether a schismaticke or
no; for if he dissemble that which he is not, and being infected with the
poison of heresy or schism, a wolf do lurk under a sheep skin; then the
devil in him says scriptum est, the scriptures do nothing belong unto him.

Aug. tract. 18. super Joan.
For as heresies have their beginning by occasion of scripture not well
understood, Quia scripturae bonae intelliguntur non been, as S. Austin says,
so the practice of heretics is per verba legis legem impugnare, by the words
of scripture to overthrow the scripture, Ambros. super 3. ad Tit.
Ambr. super 3. ad Titum, and proprium sensum verbis astruere legis, to build
their own opinions upon the words or text of the law. And this verbal
alleging of the scripture is that sheep skin wherewith wolves be clothed,
says Vincent. Lirin. Quid est vestitus ouium, Vincent. Lirin. cap. 36.
nisi prophetarum and apostolorum proloquia? What is the sheep clothing but
the sayings of the Prophets and Apostles? and, Qui sunt lupi rapaces, nisi
sensus haereticorum feri and rabidi, and what be these ravening wolves, but the
wild and unnatural interpretations of heretics? And when our Savior charged
the Saduces that they erred, not knowing the scriptures, it was not that they
were ignorant of the letter of the scripture, at least of so much as they
acknowledged for scripture, but because they knew not the sense, and meaning of
it: Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 18.
for Josephus says of them, that they read the scriptures, and the scriptures
only, and rejected all manner Pharisaicall traditions.

Wherefore seeing many say, It is written, with our Savior, and yet
nevertheless are deceived themselves, and deceive others, (...), Math. 22.
not knowing the sense of them, as the Saduces were: and others (...), do
maliciously wrest them, 2. Pet. 3.
as S. Peter says some did S. Paul's Epistles, (...), to their own
destruction, and to the destruction of other their auditors and followers:
though there be nothing so certain and authentical as the holy scriptures, if
we be sure quid dicatur, what is the true sense and meaning of them, yet there
is nothing so dangerous, if being not able to judge our selves, we do not
consider quis loquatur, who it is that does allege them. But now let us
consider what that is which our Savior says is written in the scriptures.

My house shall be called the house of prayer, but you have made it a den of
thieves. The words of Esaias implie, whose house this Temple was, Gods house: and
secondly, the end or use, why it was built, to pray in. The words of Jeremy
implie the abuse of it, that of Gods house, it was become an house for thieves:
and where it was ordained to pray in, they had made it a den to lurk in, and
so safely to commit any robbery, or sacrilege.

It is most certain, that God who is the Lord and creator of all things, has
reserved to himself a part or portion in all things, not that he has need of
them, but in recognitionem, that all things that are have proceeded from him:
and that he is the most high and absolute Lord over them all: and therefore
though he be king of kings, and Lord of lords, and so by consequent of all
people and nations in the world, yet he has reserved an especial portion of
men to himself, which he calls his people: though he be infinite, and
comprehended in no place, yet he will have some particular place whither this
his people may resort to serve him, which he calls his house, his place, his
habitation: Dan. 7.10.
though thousands of angels minister unto him, and ten thousand thousand stand
before him, yet he has among men also appointed some to his proper service in
this his house, Numb. 3.11.
and those he calls his Priests, his Ministers: though he be a spirit, and
has no need of these corporal things, yet he challenges a part or portion
in all things for the furnishing of this his house, and maintenance of these
his servants: which he calls his part, his portion, his tithes, his
offerings: though he be eternal, and before all times, yet he has reserved
some times and some days as proper to him, wherein his people should resort to
his house to serve him, which he calls his feasts, his Sabbothes. Here
mention is made of his house only, and therefore of that I will frame my
speech, and some certain circumstances belonging unto it.

It is most manifest that God who is comprehended in no place, has had
notwithstanding some place allotted to him ever since the beginning of the
world, and therefore some very learned men have affirmed, that Adam even in
Paradise had a certain place where to present himself before the Lord, that
place where God walked and called him to him, Genesis 3.8. Genesis 4.3.4.
Genesis 3.8. and certain Hebrew interpreters conclude out of the 4. of Genesis ver.
3.4. that Caine and Abell did bring their sacrifices, adduxerunt sacrificia sua
(for so the word imports) to their father Adam, who was then the Priest, that
he might offer them in the place which the Lord appointed for that purpose. In
that place where God appeared unto Abraham, because that place was holy there
he built an altar, Genesis 12. ver. 7. Genesis 12.7.
And when God commanded Abraham to offer his son Isaak, he appointed him the
place where it should be done, on a mountain; and there Abraham built an altar
also, Genesis 22. Genesis 22.
and this was the place where afterward the temple of Solomon was built, 2.
Chro. 3. And when Rebecka felt the children strive, 2. Chro. 3. Genesis 25.22.
she went to ask the Lord; no doubt to some place where he used to give them
answer; the interlineall gloss says, to the place where Abraham built his
altar. Jacob according to the diverse places he dwelt in, had diverse places to
serve God in, and there erected diverse altars; and the occasion that God took
to deliver the children of Israel out of the Egyptian bondage, was, that they
might go to a certain place to serve him, and offer sacrifice to him: we pray
thee let them go three days journey in the desert there to sacrifice unto God,
said Moses and Aaron unto Pharaoh, Exodus 5. Exodus 5.
and the place which God appointed was mount Sinai, Exo. 19. In the desert
there was a tabernacle, which Lira calls tabernaculum paruum, the little
tabernacle, Exodus 19.
Lira super Exodus 16. Exodus 33.
in comparison of the great tabernacle, Exodus 33. whither Aaron commanded the
people to come into the presence of the Lord, Exodus 16.9.
Exo. 16.9. and whither Moses brought Iethro to hear all the wonders which
God had done for them, and to offer sacrifice unto God, Exodus 18. Exodus 26.
Exodus 18. In the 26. of Exodus charge was given to make that great tabernacle,
a moveable tabernacle, which should continue for the house of God, till they
had some settled habitation: finally when their estate was settled, God chose
Jerusalem for the place, and in Jerusalem mount Moriah, to build this temple
in, this house of God, which here is mentioned.

All these places howsoever otherwise called, were yet domus dei, Gods houses,
because there especially he affoorded his presence: And therefore when Caine
stood (as I may say) excommunicated, for murdering his brother, and might not
come into the place appointed for the service of God, he was said to be fugatus
a praesentia domini, cast out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4. Jonas. 1.3.
Genesis 4. and when Jonas was said to have fled from the presence of the Lord,
Aben Ezra says that he fled from that place, where the Prophets stood, and
offered themselves to be sent of God, when he should command them: and when it
is said that Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord, it is meant that they died
before the altar of the Lord, Numb. 3.4. and when any thing was said to be done
before the Arc, Joshua. 24. 1. Sam. 21.
as Joshua 24. or before the tabernacle 1. Sam. 21. or in the temple, it was
said to be done coram domino, or ad dominum, before the Lord, or in the
presence of the Lord.

Now as before the law and under the law God had ever his peculiar, and proper
places to be worshipped in, which therefore were called by his name, Gods
Temple, Gods tabernacle, Gods house: so after the law and under the Gospel,
as soon as ever Kings and Queens became nurses of Christianity, and
professors of religion, there were peculiar places consecrated to the service
of God, which now also are called Gods houses, domus Dei, both because they are
consecrated to him, and because there we perform holy and divine ministeries
to him, and because that place being accepted of him for the place of his
presence and habitation amongst men, plus perticipat operationis and gratiae
Dei. Damas. Orth. fid. lib. 1. Damas. orth. fid. lib. 1. cap. 16.
cap. 16. and in them does dispense unto us by his holy mysteries his manifold
blessings. And as those houses, and especially that house we here speak of was
renowned above the palaces of the greatest Princes, for a double furniture; a
living furniture, and a dead furniture; that is, with multitudes of people, and
with rich, and sumptuous ornaments, great treasures and large revenues; and
therefore found two sorts of enemies, one that would rob it of the people;
another that would spoil it of the riches and reuennewes: so the house of God
under Christianity, has excelled magnitudine and pulchritudine aedificiorum,
Chrysostom. Hom. 66, ad pop. Ant.
and quod maius est conuenientium studio: that is, has those two kind of
furnitures and those two kinds of enemies, which do rob it of the one and the
other.

That great schismaticke Jeroboam made a schism or rent in the church of God,
3. Reg. 12.
that so he might continue the rent or schism which he made in the kingdom;
and the means which he used to make this rent, was to prohibit ten tribes of
the twelve to go up, and do sacrifice in the house of the Lord, 3. Reg. 12.
which were bound by the law to show themselves certain times in the year at
this house of God which was at Jerusalem: and the speech which he made to
persuade them was this: Viri populares, Joseph. Antiqu lib. 8. cap. 3.
notum vobis existimo, quod nullus locus Deo est vacuus, and quod is nullo
certo loco includitur, sed vbique vota exaudit, vbique cultores suos respicit,
etc. My good people and friends says he, I doubt not but you know, that no
place is without God, and that no place does contain God, but wheresoever we
pray he can hear us, and wheresoever we serve him he can see us, etc. and by
these and like speeches withdrew the people from the service of God in his
house at Jerusalem, and builded altars which served for idolatry, and robbed
the church of this first kind of furniture.

Thus also many schismatics and heretics, and such politicians as Jeroboam
was, since the coming of our Savior Christ has endeavored to rob his
churches, of this special ornament of the multitude of people (for the
multitude of the people is the glory of the King Proverbs 14. Prou. 14.
(that is gloria Christi says the interlineall gloss) either to make rents
and rebellions in kingdoms or schisms and deuisions in the house of God. Of
these politicians this latter age has too much experience: Damas. haeres. 80.

Council. Gangrens. circa annum 328.


and Damascen tells us of Massilians which to other heresies did add
Templorum contemptum, the contempt of Churches: and in Gangrensi Concilio there
is mention made of one Eustathius, who said, Templa Dei nullius est vtilitatis,
that there was no use of Churches, and the Petrobrusiani laughed and scoffed at
Churches: and others there were called Pseudo-apostoli, who affirmed Ecclesiam
non plus valere ad orandum, quam stabulum porcorum, that a church was of no
more use for prayer, then a stable or hogstie: As also many in these days who
account of them but as of temples of Baal, and synagogues of Idolatry: using
the same reasons that Jeroboam did, and some texts of scriptures,
misunderstoode, or not well applied: and thus would rob the Church of God,
of the best kind of furniture, to mainteyne and enlarge their own private
conuenticles.

For that other kind of furniture it is most certain that as no Church or
Temple was renowned more for the living furniture, for the multitudes of people
that resorted thither; so no Church in the world was more renowned for the
ornaments, riches and revenues that belonged to it: for although God be a
spirit, yet he will not be worshipped in spirit only; but in body also,
glorify God in body and in spirit. 1. Cor. 6.
1. Cor. 6. and the reason that he alleges is this only, for they are his:
Now if this be a good reason why we should honor God, who is a spirit, both
with spirit and body because they be his, by the same reason we must honor
God, with our time, with our richesse and substance, for they also are his. And
that reason which Saint Paul uses under the Gospel why we should honor God
with our body; the Prophet David under the law used why he would honor him
with his substance: and therefore uses this reason of his great gift toward
the building and furnishing of the Temple: for all things come of thee, 1.
Chro. 29.14
1. Chro. 29.14.

Now as there was never any nation that acknowledged a God, which did not honor
him in their Temples, with some part of their best riches and substance: so
especially the people of God, as soon as they had a certain place, though
mooueable, as was the tabernacle; or a place certain immovable as was this
Temple, they offered up to him, as a sign that they held of him in capite,
some good part of their best riches, and jewels, to adorn his house withal:
to the making and furnishing of the tabernacle they brought gold, silver,
brass, blew silk, purple, scarlet, fine linen, goats hair, rich skins,
Schittim wood, oil, spices, Onyx stones, and stones for the Ephod. Exodus 25.
and 35
And least you should think it to proceed from a kind of superstition or
superfluity, you shall understand that it was done by the commandment of God;
for Moses says to the congregation that God commanded an offering to be taken
from amongst you unto the Lord, Exodus 35.4. Exodus 35.4.
and yet least you should think it not done of devotion but of necessity, none
might give but he that was vltroneus, Exodus 25. Exodus 25. Exodus 35.
volu^tarius and pro^pti animi, Exo. 35. he that was of a free and willing heart.

To the making and furnishing of the Temple, K. David gave of his own, 3000.
talents of gold, 1. Chro. 29.4.
and 7000. talents silver, besides brass, iron, wood, Onyx stones, and
Carbuncle stones of diverse color, and all precious stones, and marble, in
great abundance: and persuaded them that were of ability to do thereafter; so
that the Princes of the families besides all other necessaries gave 5000.
talents of gold, and 10000. talents of silver, and 18000. talents of brass,
Ibid.
and an hundred thousand talents of iron, etc. besides all that which Solomon
provided. And as the tabernacle was made by the commandment by God, so was
this Temple; for David says, that he had the frame of it, and the pattern
sent to him by writing by the hand of the Lord. 1. 1. Chro. 28.19.
Chro. 28.19. and both David and his people offered their gifts willingly and
with a perfect heart and with rejoicing Ibid. cap. 29. as did they that made the
tabernacle. Ibid. cap. 29.
The like might be said of the second temple if the time would serve.

Now that you may know how acceptable unto God this kind of service is, of
building his houses and furnishing them in most sumptuous manner; you shall
observe, (and it worth the observing) that after David had determined with
himself to build the Temple, and not before, God promised to establish the
kingdom to his seed. 2. Samuel. 7. 2. Sam. 7. Psalm. 132.
which David seems also to note himself in the Psalm. where after he had
mentioned his love to Gods house, he notes the love of God to his house, and
his promise to set the fruit of his body upon his throne: Secondly, although
David had many sons, 2. Reg. 3. 1. Chro. 3.
which are named in the 2. Reg. 3. Amnon, Chileab, Absolon, Adoniah,
Shephatiah, Ithream: yet to none of these was the kingdom promised after him,
but to Solomon who was borne after his good intent of building Gods house.
Thirdly, though God promised many blessings to Solomon when he craved wisdom,
as richesse, glory, long life, etc. yet he never promised that his seed should
reign after him till such time as he had finished the house of God. 1. Reg. 9.
1. Reg. 9. but then he said, thou shall not want a man upon the thrown of
Israel. Fourthly, when the Temple was reedified by Nehemiah and others in most
sumptuous manner, Zach. 6.
God commanded two crowns to be made Zach. 6. with the names of the chief
benefactors engraued in them, and caused them to be placed in the Temple, for a
perpetual memory and most honorable testimony to all posterity of their zeal
and liberality toward the house of God.

And this kind of furniture was not proper to Gods house under the law only,
but likewise under the gospel; for as Esayas prophecy was fulfilled under
christianity, Domus meae, domus orationis vocabitur cunctis gentibus; that Gods
house should be the house of prayer to all nations, Esaias. 56.
and the house of prayer should be likewise Gods house: so it should seem that
David's wish or prayer reached even to us that were after the law, who desired
of God that he would keep for ever this voluntary bounty, and liberality in
furnishing Gods house, in the purpose and the thoughts of the hearts of his
people. And therefore as soon as God gave increase to his Church, oratories
were built; and as soon as God raised up Kings and Princes which favored the
Christian truth and religion, 1. Chro. 29.18.
no cost was spared to furnish the Churches, which also were builded with
royal magnificence: Al which the ancient fathers of the Church the chief
pillars and lights of the gospel after the Apostles, judged as acceptable unto
God, as the making and furnishing of the tabernacle, or Solomon's Temple; and
therefore Eusebius notes the great joy which the Christians conceived when
Constantine builte those magnificent Churches and furnished them to be laetitia
diuino munere infusa, a joy whereof God was the author, Eus. eccle. hist. lib.
9. cap. 10. ex verse. ruff. Cyril. chare. 12.
not proceeding from vanity or superstition. Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem
says that the Kings in his time did adorn the Churches with silver and gold,
etc. pietatis ergo, in holiness and devotion. Tertullian calls those voluntary
donations deposita pietatis, Tertul. apologet.
pledges and testimonies of religion, piety and devotion. Orat. 1. contra
Julian.
Greg. Nazian. says, that the cost which Gallus, Iulianus brother bestowed
upon the Church which he built, was acceptable to God, even as Abels sacrifice.
Saint August. says, August. super Psalm. 113. con. 2.
that the vessels of gold and silver which were used in the celebration of the
sacraments, were Sancta, holy, and consecrated to his honor, cui pro salute
nostra inde seruitur: And thus you see, that this house of God, both by Gods
appointment, and to his great good liking, has ever been adorned with this
rich furniture.

But as there have been many sorts of thieves and robbers, heretics,
schismatics, and politicians, which would rob God of that living furniture of
the multitude of people; so are there and ever have been many Atheistes and
irreligious Iulianists, which have been ready to rifle his house of this
other furniture, to spoil the Church of the ornaments and all other riches,
lands, and revenues which were given unto God to maintain his house, and his
household withal: for it has been as true a rule in Gods house as in the
dwellings of men, Difficilis magni custodia census, where riches are thieves
will resort. Thus the first Temple builded by Solomon was destroyed by
Nabucodonozor, and the riches and furnitue carried to Babylon, and afterward
foully abused, and profaned by Baltazar. The second Temple being also admirable
for the fabric and the riches of it, though inferior to the former, was
assaulted by Antiochus, by Heliodorus, by Pompey, by Crassus, and some Roman
Emperors: and of late years in Christianity what so common as sacrilege and
robbing and spoiling of God in his house, and his household? so that where
heretofore they complained thus, Ecclesias Christi quas construxere parents,
Sternere nituntur nati pietate carentes:
They have now brought their desire to the issue, so that in country Villages
Canescunt turpi templa relicta situ. Ovid.
The Churches are almost become that, which those heretics pseudoa postoli
likened them unto, little better then hog-styes; for the best preparation at
any high feast is a little fresh straw under their feet, the ordinary
allowance for swine in their stye, or at the best Domus opportuna volucrum,
(that which God threatened as a plague to Babylon) a cage of unclean and
hateful birds: Apoc. 18.
and in cities and boroughes they are not like the Palaces of Princes as they
were in the primitive church, regijs aulis clariora, Chry. Hom. 66. ad pop. Ant.
but like a country hall, fair whitelimed, or a citizens parlour, at the best
well wainscotted; as though we were rather Platonists then Christians, who
would neither have gold nor silver in their churches because it was Inuidiosa
res, and gave occasion to sacrilege; nor Iuorie that was taken from the body
of a dead beast, because that was Oblatio minime sancta, a profane offering;
nor iron nor brass, because they were Instrumenta bellorum, instruments for
war: but Lapides and ligna dicato qui velit, publicisque templis offerto: but
if any man would dedicate wood or stones, Theodor. sermon. dedijs and Angelis. ex
Pla.
or such base stuff, it was lawful to do it: Theod. alleges it out of Plato.

For the allowance which we make unto God to maintain his family, is thin and
bare, in quantum sitis, Iuuen. sat. 14.
atque fames, and frigor a poscunt: after the rate of a cup of cold water, and
a piece of bread, which shall be rewarded as our Savior says at the day of
judgment, but to such as are able to give no more: after the rate of a frize
coat, or a flannell wastcote, which Dionysius thought warm enough for winter,
and cold enough for summer: after the rate of a Stoics dinner, or Philosophers
breakfast: after the rate of Elias diet in the desert, or Daniels in the Lions
den. And the allowance which we make God in his house in our Churches, is
that which Constituta diualia permiserunt Iudaeis, that which the constitutions
of the christian Emperors allowed to the Jews in their synagogues: that is,
Tegumen parietibus imponere, Cassiod. lib. 2. epist. 27.
bare walls, and a cover upon it to keep us from rain: Nec aliquid ornatus
fas sit adijcere, neither is it lawful to add any ornament, as was said to
the Jews, except perchance a cushion and a wainescot seat, for ones own ease
and credit. But where the first good christian Emperors said, Esaias. 9.10.
that of Esaias 9. ver. 10. Lateres ceciderunt, lapide caeso extruemus, the
oratories which were built in the poorer times of christianity, are decayed,
but we will make them basilica, goodly and stately Churches, beiond the
palaces of the greatest monarchs: we that are the children, say with Judas
Iscarioth, that the magnificence of churches is but a vain cost; we will take
the hewn stone to build our houses, a house of brick will serve for God; the
Cedars are fit for princes palaces, a roof of wild fig trees will serve for
a church: neither considering with the good father Tertull. that pietas est pro
pietate sumptus facere, Tertull. apol. 39.
Godliness to be at cost with God; nor with Theodoricus, that it should be the
purpose of a good christian, Noua construere, sed amplius vetusta seruare.
Cassiod. lib. 3. Cassiod. lib. 3. epist. 9.
epist. 9. to give somewhat himself, but especially to maintain that which is
given by others.

Let no man think that hears me this day, that this zeal for the house of
God is any spice of superstition, but a very religious affection, inherent to
nature, and true christianity, though now for the most part blotted out by
irreligion and avarice: for you have heard that God has had his proper place
and proper house at all times among his people; you have heard how his
tabernacle was furnished by his special appointment; how the temple was
adorned by the means of David and Solomon his chosen servants, and chosen also
for that purpose; and again reedified and restored again to his former
beawtie, and magnificence as near as could be, by Nehemiah and others: you
have heard that as soon as Emperors and Kings were Christians, they spent
their time, and their substance in building and adorning the houses of God,
without fear or regard that their actions might be accounted superstition or
Iudaisme.

You have heard that it is not a ceremonial observation of the old law, which
were said to be in respect of themselves sine ratione, without reason, and In
quantum vel aliquid figurabatur vel excludebatur. Tho. 12. q. 102. art. 1.
habere ratione^ in ordine ad aliud, and to depend only upon somewhat else; but
as it were a constitution in nature, holding one and the same reason, under the
Law and under the Gospel. And therefore the most learned fathers of those
times reasoned thus, and no doubt substantially, De consecrat. did. 1.
Tabernaculum.
Si Iudaei qui vmbris legis deseruiebant, haec faciebant, multo magis nos,
quibus veritas patefacta est, and gratia per Iesum Christum data est, templa
domino aedificare, and prout melius possumus ornare debemus, etc. If the Jews
who lived under the shadow of the law did these things; much more we, to
whom the truth is discovered, and salvation imparted by Jesus Christ, must
build Churches to God, and richly adorn them to our ability, etc. And if
this were good arguing, our is yet better, and may deliver us from all
suspicion of popery: If the Jews under the law did these things, and the
best Christians in the primitive Church did the like also, the antiquity and
universality in the Church of God will defend us, in restoring these ruins,
from suspicion of innovation or superstition.

Most true it is, that as the devotion of the people of God toward the making
of the Tabernacle and the furnishing of it did abound, nay so far exceed
measure, that the wise men that wrought the work were forced to cry unto
Moses, Exodus 36.
Plus offert populus quam necessarium est: the people bring too much, and more
then enough for the use of the work: whereupon Moses made this proclamation
throughout the host, Nec vir nec mulier quicquam vltra offerat in opere
sanctuarij: Let neither man nor woman give any more to the work of the
Sanctuary. So in the time of Popery, the devotion of the people and the Princes
was such toward the building of Gods house, the furnishing of it, the
maintenance of his servants both in goods and in lands, that it did rise and
ascend vltra necessitatem (it is Lyraes note upon that place) to more then was
necessary, Lira super 36 Exodus
Imo contra vtilitatem, nay to more then was profitable: For many abused the
riches of the Church to worldly pomp and the enriching of their friends and
kindred, to omit other abuses which may not be named; so that there wanted
only a Moses to make a proclamation, Nec vir nec mulier quicquam vltra
offerat, let neither man nor vvoma^ offer any more, and to set a stint to the
peoples devotion, especially in those places which had enough. But the
horseleach had two daughters in the Clergy, inordinate desire of their own
greatness, and inordinate affection to their friends and kindred, which still
cried Affer, Affer, bring, bring, give give: and if that would not serve, would
take it by force or else by guile, which made S. Greg. intend a decree for a
measure or rate, Hugo Card. super 36. Exodus Aug. super 36. Exodus
in those kind of offerings, as Hugo Card. notes upon the 36. of Exodus

S. Austine upon that place of Exodus gives this note, that as those workmen
were wise, that said unto Moses, Plus offert populus quam necessarium est: the
people offer more then enough to the work: so they were also Sancti moribus,
holy and virtuous in their behavior; for they might, says he, have suffered
the people to give more then enough, and themselves have secretly conuaied it
away, sed modestia prohibuit, vel religio terruit, but modesty restrained them,
or religion terrified them.

But where is now this modesty, this religion: where is this good nature; this
religious fear? God required much of us, the people brought more, Adeo vt
oblata sufficerent, Exodus 36.
and superabundarent, so that the gifts were sufficient, and too much for the
work, Exodus 36. the laws of Mortmaine etc. provided it should not be lawful
for a man to do what he would with his own, and sic cessatum est a muneribus
offerendis, and so the people were stayed from offering. Ib. But had it staid
there it had bin well: had the superaboundance bin employed to good holy uses,
the intent of the Donors had not bin made frustrate, nor God had bin robbed of
that which was his: but the horseleach had two other daughters among the
laietie, Auaritia, and luxuria, covetousness, and riotousnes, which have cried
so long Aufer, Aufer take away, take away, that they have not only removed the
superaboundance from the storehouse or treasury of God, but left neither bread
nor meat in his house, Malac. 3.10. Mala. 3.10.
and though our Moses cry never so loud by proclamation and statute, Nec vir
nec mulier vltra auferat; let neither man nor woman purloine any more: yet non
cessatum est a muneribus auferendis: neither man nor woman cease from the
spoil: scarce any abstaineth from that which is Gods.

It is an old complaint, that the houses of Bishops and other servants of God
were given Militibus, Sagittarijs, balistarijs contra ius and fas habitandas,
To be inhabited of soldiers and archers etc. against law and right: Epist. 221.
it was S. Bern. complaint to Lewis the King of France. It is an old complaint
that the house of God domus orationis, efficitur stabulum pecoris aut opilionis
aut lanificij officina: should be a stable, a sheepecote, or a storehouse for
wool, etc. It was the complaint of Johan. Saris. Policrat. lib. 7. Policrat.
lib. 7. cap. 21.
ca. 21. It is an old complaint that churches should be robbed of their riches
and plate; and that they should make to themselves Camisias and faemoralia,
shirts, breeches, cushions, etc. of the richest robes and furniture there.
Vict. Vticen. in hist. Vand. lib. 1.
Vict. Vticen. in hist. Vandalor. li. 1. It is an old complaint that the
children should plow up their fathers sepulchers, and there sow their corn
where their fathers were buried; Suydas.
which Suydas calls, (...), to remove those things which should not be
removed: and Augustus in a meriment said to Vectius, that it was vere patris
memorias colere, jesting upon the ambiguitie of the word Colere. It is an old
complaint that the Church was given In direptionem, alijs clam, alijs palam
occupantibus ea^, etc. to be spoiled of every man by might or by sleight,
Policrat. lib. 7. ca. 17. Policrat. lib. 7. cap. 17.
It is an old complaint that munus been meriti, the reward of good service to
the common wealth, should be dispendium innoce^tis, the Churches dommage, or
utter undoing, Cass. lib. 7. epist. 7.
Cassi. lib. 7. epist. 17. It is an old complaint that Princes treasures were
rather augmented Sacerdotum damnis, quam hostiu^ spolijs: With the harms of
the Priests, then with the spoil of the enemy, Symm. lib. 10. epist. 54.
Symma. lib. 10. epist. 54. And it was Luthers complaint, that in his time the
way to preferment, was to be witty and cunning in finding new sleights to
impouerish the Clergy. Luth. tom. 3. page 133.
Luth tom. 3. page 133. All these are old complaints, to complain of them were
now too late. We complain now, that where in times past the goods of the
Church were Gods goods, and therefore res nullius, no man had right or interest
in them; now they be res nullius, and therefore occupantis, his that can catch
them: or else we complain, that whereas heretofore they were Gods goods, and
therefore res nullius, now they are res nullae, nothing at all, as Rachel
complained of her children, not that they were sick, Math. 2.
but that they were not, and that was a pitiful complaint as the Evangelist
notes: And if we may say with the sober maid in Plautus to her father, Plaut.
in Pers.
res nostrae sunt pater pauperculae, somewhat we have, though very little; yet
we complain of this (...), as Luther calls it, this insatiable hunger of that
generation that the Wise man speaks of Prou. 30. Prou. 30.
that will not be satisfied with the fat of so many Monasteries, Bishoprics,
and impropriations; but have teeth like swords, and jaws like knives, to
devour that little which is left to God.

But beloved Christians, take heed of this sin and this affection, for it is
so odious and displeasing to God, that it is an old rule, voluntas sola quoad
ecclesiam punitur, Did. 19. Anastasius.
a sacrilegious intent shall not escape without punishment: but for the action
what story so ancient, but it yeeldes us an instance? what heathen in puris
naturalibus but took notice of it? Carul. lib. 5. cap. 104.
no man of reading and observation but he may say with Carolus Magnus. in
Capitul. Carul. lib. 7. ca. 104. Nouimus multa regna and reges eorum propterea
cecidisse, quia ecclesias spoliauerunt resque earum vastauerunt, alienarunt,
vel deripuerunt, etc. we have known many Kings and kingdoms utterly
destroyed, because they have spoiled and wasted the houses of God, etc. Shall I
tell you that the heathen observed it? Virgill notes that the Graecians offered
violence to the Temple of Pallas; Corripuere sacram effigiem, Virg. Aeneid. 2.
manibusque cruentis

Virgineas ausidiuae contingere vittas. Whereupon he infers this note in
particular, which Carolus gave more generally; Ex illo fluere and retro
sublapsa referri

Spes Danaum. Aug. de ciu. Dei lib. 1.
More of these matters you may find in Saint Austins book de ciu. Dei. 1.
Shall I tell you of the Temple of God built by Solomon? Jeroboam and the rest
of the Kings of Israel after him, withheld the people from coming up to the
Temple and offering yearly unto God, and thereby withheld a great part of those
tithes and oblations which were due unto God. You shall find if you observe
it, that whereas in the kingdom of Judah the family of David reigned
successively: there were nine changes, and nine sundry families that reigned
in Israel: and that the kingdom of Israel continued in no one family, above
four generations: which term seems to be the time limited by God, for the
extirpation of the issue of wicked men. Nabuchodonozor according to the will of
God for the sins of the people, carried them captive, and together with them
the riches of the Temple and the vessels thereof; and he escaped not
punishment, as you all know; but he kept them so that they might have been
used again, if occasion had served. But when Balthazar abused them to profane
uses, then appeared the writing upon the wall, Dan. 5.
mean, tekel, Phares, and the kingdom was cut off from him, and his posterity
for ever. Shall I tell you of the second Temple? Antiochus died miserably, and
at his death confessed his sin of sacrilege, that he had taken vessels of
gold and silver from the Church of Jerusalem. 1. Mac. 6.
1. Mac. 6. Heliodorus was sent to rob the Temple of the riches thereof; and
there appeared two men from heaven, which whipped him continually, so that he
lay down in the Temple destitute of all help, til at the request of the
soldiers the Priest prayed for him. 2. Mac. 3.
2. Mac. 3. Pompey noted by Tully and Liuy for one of the most fortunate men in
the world, after he had abused the Temple of Jerusalem, Josephus.
had continually unhappy success and died miserably. The like is observed of
Marcus Crassus for the same reason by the same author.

But perchance you imagine that God was the God of the Jews, and not of the
Christians, and was zealous over his house and his household under the law; but
careless of his service and servants under the gospel. First this is a rule
which we learn of him pro mensura delicti, Deuteronomy. 25.
erit plagarum modus, as the trespass is, such is the punishment: and
therefore both in the law of God and man, by the quantity of the punishment,
we judge of the quality of an offense. Now what sin so severely punished
even in the Apostles time as this was. Before any Church was built unto Christ,
before any law commanded to give to the Church, Acts. 4.
when Ananias and Saphira withheld secretly part of that which voluntarily
they had given unto God for the use of his servants, they were punished
severely with sudden death. Acts. 4. Presently after the Church was endowed and
adorned with riches and precious furniture, Julian was wounded to death with an
arrow from heaven when he had robbed the Churches, and scoffingly said, Ecce
quam pretiosis vasis ministratur Mariae filio. Theodor. hist. eccles. lib. 3.
c. 11.
Are these vessels fit for the son of Marie? Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 11.
And when Thimelicus a dauncer, had bought by chance some holy vestement, and
abused it publicly in the open theater; Theodor. hist. eccl. lib. 5. ca. 37.
Theodoret affirms him Subito expirasse: in that very place to have given up
the ghost. I pass over multitudes of examples in the primitive church; as also
Frederick the second of latter times, and Philippe Maria, and leave to your
wise and religious consideration the success of such men, as have been used as
instruments to overthrow the Church in these later times of fresher memory.

If they which carry the like affection, and cease not to practice the like
ill actions to their ability, Job. 21.
ducunt in bonis dies suos, spend their days in wealth, and their seed seems
to be established in their sight. Job. 21. Job. 12.
if as the same Job says, The tabernacles of robbers do prosper, and they are
in safety that provoke God? yet we say as Optatus said to the Donatists in the
same case lib. 1. Opt. lib. 1.
An quia cessat talis modo vindicta, ideo tibi cum tuis, vindicas innocentiam:
because God does not now punish you, because you enjoy peaceably those
spoils, are you therefore innocent? No, no, Gloss. ord. super 12. Job.
the ordinary gloss says excellently, Aliud misericorditer dat Deus, aliud
habere sinit iratus: it is one thing for God in mercy to bless us, and
another thing to suffer us to be rich in his anger, Hesiod. lib. 1. oper.
and heavy displeasure: And Hesiodus could make a difference between riches
(...) and (...): riches which were taken by force and violence, and riches,
which were given by the blessing of God: and (...): it is good to be rich by
gift, but ill to be rich by rapine: even an occasion of death, of some ill
death; death to father by covetous hourding; and death to the son by riotous
spending: And as it is a rule in Simonie 500. years old Spiritualium
venditores maiori semper egestate confundi: that the sellers of spiritual
things are pinched at last with extreme penury: so it is as old a rule in
sacrilege, Quae malign contraxit pater, Pet. Ele. ep. 10.
luxu peiori refundet haeres: that which the father has wickedly scraped
together, the son shall more wickedly scatter abroad.

And it is worth the observing now a days, that of those goods and lands
which are taken from God, Perpetuus nulli datur vsus, and haeres

Horat. lib. 2. ep. 2.
Haeredem alterius, velut vnda superuenit vndam. Horat. lib. 2. ep. 2. No man
possesses them long, but they pass from man to man, from heir to heir, from
family to family, like the Arcke of God which could find no place to rest in
among the Philistines, but was removed from Asdod, 1. Sam. 5.
to Gath, from Gath, to Ekron, and troubled the people wheresoever it came,
till they returned it again to his proper place. 1. Sam. 5.

Wherefore to conclude this point, Honorable, etc. as God in the former times
of Christianity, when the church was persecuted, Aug. ep. 50.
would have that first part of the second Psalm fulfilled Astiterunt reges
terrae; the Kings of the earth stood up, and the Princes took counsel
against the Lord, and against his anointed; and then after would have that
other part performed, Et nunc reges intelligite; be wise now ye Kings, be
learned ye judges of the earth, etc. in the time of good Constantine: So also
seeing in these latter times the former is again fulfilled, Astiterunt reges
terrae; fulfill also this latter part once again, Et nunc reges intelligite,
and once again understand and know you that be magistrates and governors and
gentlemen, etc. that God as the very law of nature teaches, and all states and
ages of the Church have practiced, challenges an interest in all our goods,
our lands and possessions; that this is paid as a kind of tribute, and
acknowledgment of his sovereign dominion over us: That he accepts them not
because he has need of them, but for an endless continuance of religion
amongst us; which by experience we find to decay with them: That he has
disposed them partly for an ornament to his house, partly for the necessary
use of his service, and partly for the maintenance of his servants and
ministers: That we receive the possession of them immediately from you, and but
mediately from him; but receive the right of them, immediately from him, and
but mediately from you: who gave them to God, and he unto us, Number. 18. Number. 18.
That he has blessed those Princes and their posterities, which have thus
honored him with part of their goods: and promised to open the windows of
heaven and power down immeasurable blessings, upon the people that in this
respect dealt truly with him, Mal. 3.
Mal. 3. that he has revenged himself on them that robbed him in themselves
and their posterity: and cursed with a curse whole nations that spoiled him,
Mal. 3. Mal. 3.
That the time has been when there was scarcely one Christian to be found so
wicked, that durst offer violence to the house of God, or the furniture of it,
and therefore the Jews were hired to spoil it, In vita Bern. lib. 2. cap. 1.
in vita Bernard. That in these latter times it was not spoiled by Wolves and
Lions such as proudly bid battle to God: but by Foxes, who by sleight, and by
holy pretenses, and by color of friendship would strip him of all: Bern. Sen.
65. super Cant. Psalm. 77.
but as Saint Bern. says of such Foxes, posteriora eorum foetent. Ser. 65.
consider their own end or their posterity, and you will say with the Psalm. 77.
that our God percussit inimicos in posteriora: has wounded his enemies on the
hinder parts.

Wherefore nunc reges intelligite, you that be magistrates, governors, etc. at
length understand and be wise, and learn to discern between spiritual
things and corporal things, inter (...) and (...), between that you take by
force, and that which God gives in mercy; inter (...) and (...) Pindarus:
Pind.
between purchase and robbery: between holy things and profane things:
between the goods of God which are perpetual, and the substance of men, which
are truly called mooueables, and subject to sale and alienation: And when you
crave, beg not that which is Gods; and when you give, give not that which is
Gods; and when you buie, buie not that which is Gods; and when you sell, sell
not that which is Gods: Let other men's harms be instructions for you, and
other men's punishments be cautious for you: let other men's virtues be your
examples; and religious Princes your patterns and precedents. Holy David, wise
Solomon, religious Constantine, and our holy, wise and religious Princess, of
whom we may give this testimony to all succeeding ages, that Petrus Blesens.
left to her most noble progenitor Hen. 2. Benedictus dominus qui regem Henricum
a talibus hactenus conseruauit innoxium: Pet. Bles. ep. 10
Blessed be that God which hitherto has defended her Majesty from all kind
of sacrilege, that has not furnished her house with the spoil of the Church,
nor increased her reuenew by the loss of Gods house; that has not defiled her
hands with Simonie, nor bestowed her preferments for personal favor, or
respect of reward: wherefore Magnificauit eam Dominus in conspectu regum; God
has magnified her in the sight of the Princes of the earth, and has given her
a treasure which will never be spent; even an honorable name, and blessed
memory to all posterity.

The second thing I observed, was the end and use of this house, and that was
to pray in: My house shall be called the house of prayer. Churches as every
thing else receive their chief perfection from the end whereunto they serve.
Now the end and use of Churches is, the public service and worship of God:
which public service in this place is comprehended under the name of prayer:
because of all religious actions, prayer is reckoned the first and the chief:
Thom. 22. q. 83. art. 3.
for sicut men's humana praeeminet exterioribus and corporalibus membris, vel
exterioribus rebus, quae ad Dei seruitium applicantur: ita etiam oration
praeeminet alijs actibus religionis: as the soul of a man excels his body, and
all the parts thereof, and all other external things, which are used to the
service of God; so prayer excels all other religious actions. And that this was
the chief end of Churches, of those houses which were built to God; both the
name argues which God imposed, and as we say christened it with, domus mea
domus orationis vocabitur; and the very words which Solomon used in the
dedication of it 3. Reg. 8.29. and the practice which Joel notes, 3. Reg. 8.29.
Joel. 2.17.
2.17. that the Priests should weep between the porch and the altar, and say,
Spare thy people, O Lord, etc. And although other things were there practiced,
as offering of sacrifices, and oblations, burning of incense, etc. yet those
also are comprehended under S. Paul's distinction, prayers, 1. Tim. 2.
supplications, intercessions, or thanks-geuings, 1. Tim. 2. for all the
sacrifices and offerings were gratiarum actiones, thanks-geuings unto God.

And that our Churches now in Christianity are both domus dei, and domus
orationis, houses for God, and houses for prayer, the names import which in the
purest times were given to these places: for they were called in the primitive
Church (...), or dominica, Gods houses; and oratoria, places especially devoted
to prayer: Though in later times (...) are become (...) in some places, not for
their statelines, as in the time of Constantine, but for the propriety and
possession of them; and oratoria are turned into auditoria; oratories into
auditories: and where the Apostles, who had in their commission Ite praedicate,
go, preach, put prayer in the first place before preaching Act. 6. Nos
orationi and ministerio verbi instantes erimus: Acts. 6.
We will be instant in prayer and preaching the word: now we say, Confess.
Heluetica.
Cedant potiores parts in coetibus sacris doctrinae euangelicae, caueaturque
ne nimis prolixis precibus fatigetur in coetu populus: let the first and the
chief place be given to preaching; and a prouiso is made, that the people be
not ouerwearyed with too much praying. And though the Church of England has no
such constitution, yet the people entertain the practice of it, many of them
condemning common prayer, but a greater part neglecting them, and holding it
the only exercise of the service of God to hear a Sermon.

But beloved for your instruction, you shall understand that this is an old
error, not now first sprung up, or proper and peculiar to this age only: Chry.
Hom. 3. de incompre. dei naturae.
for S. Chrysostom. complains that the multitude of people that came to his
sermons, and heard him with great attention, was ingens and pene inaudita,
great and almost incredible; that they were earnest to approach near to hear
him, that patiently they would expect the end of his sermon: but at the time of
prayer and of ministration of the sacraments and christian mysteries, then
vacua desertaque ecclesia reddebatur, the church was empty and forsaken of
all. And that you may hear me with the better patience, you shall understand
that it is no new reproof: S. Chrysostom. cried out, proh fidem hominum
christianorum, quo pacto istaec veniam consequentur? he calls the very faith
and profession of christianity to witness against it, and reckoned it a fault
that would hardly be pardoned.

Was this a fault then? and is it a virtue now; was it then reproueable, and
now commendable? if it be, show me some practice in the people of God. Under
the law of nature men were moved to the worship of God, Thom. 3. q. 6. art. 5.
nulla lege exterius data, sed solo interiori instinctu, not by any external
law or external instruction, but only by a natural and inward motion:
wherefore then the house of God could not be the house of hearing, but of
praying, sacrificing, and divine worship. Genesis 22.5.
In the time of Abraham the whole service of God was comprehended under the
name of invocation, or adoration: When by the tra^sgression of man the law of
nature was so obscured, that it was necessary an external law should be
given, yet because it was more corrupted quoad appetitum boni, quam quoad
cognitionem very, the place appointed for the service and worship of God,
whether it were Tabernacle or Temple, was domus orationis, the house of prayer:
hearing the law expounded, was but the way to knowledge, and knowledge the way
to the worship of God, Tho. 1. q. 117. art. 1.
via ad cultum: for scientia non est qualitas actiua, sed principium quo
aliquis dirigitur in operando, Knowledge is no active quality, but a means to
direct us to, and in the service of God. In the times of Christianity the
houses of God were oratoria, not auditoria: and before they were built the
Apostles in their times used this temple as the house of prayer: Act. 2.
Peter and John went up to the temple to pray, Act. 2. and S. Paul presently
after his conversion went up for to pray: And our Savior told the people
parables to this end, that they ought always to pray, Luc. 18.1. 1. These. 5.17.
Luc. 18.1. and S. Paul in plain terms without parable expresses it,
Indesinenter orate, pray continually. No such testimony given to hearing, which
is not perfect in it self, but ordained to a farther end and purpose: and
therefore when the parents were commanded to teach their children the law,
that was not the end of the commandment, but they must teach the law that
they may learn how to fear the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.
or serve the Lord: And when the Priests were commanded to teach the people,
the commandment rested not there, but they must teach the laws that the
people might learn them, and take heed to observe them: And therefore the
protestation of the people unto the Priest was this, Deuteronomy. 5.
Declare thou to us that which God says, and we will hear it and do it. And
therefore the blessing is not promised to hearing, but to doing, Romans 2.
non auditores verbi sed factores etc. God reckons not so much of auditors as
factors, of those that hear his word, Luc. 11.
as of those that keep his word: And blessed is he that hears the word of
God, but with this condition, so that he keep it. Otherwise the hearing of the
law or the Gospel to know only, or to know more then another, S. Paul says
is the mother of pride, scientia inflat: 1. Cor. 8.
The Fathers say it is Diabolica tentatio, the temptation wherewith the Devil
assaulted our first parents in Paradise: The Schoolmen say it is superfluity
at least, if not superstition: for this is a rule in divinity, that every
religious action which consists only in exterioribus, Thom. 22. q. 93. art. 2.
and is not referred ad interiorem dei cultum, to the inward service of God, is
either superfluous, or superstitious.

I hope no man that hears me this day will be so injurious to me, or
prejudicial to his own knowledge and understanding, as to conceive that I
speak against hearing or frequenting of Sermons: for I know, and would have
you all learn it, that principium recte viuendi est recte audire; the
ordinary means to live well, is to hear well; and scire est via, causa and
medium ad amare: to know God is the way, the cause and the means to love God:
and that bonum intellectum goodness and virtue well understood, is the object
of our will, which will is the subject of charity; and therefore the better
you know God, the apter you are to love him actually: And if I should deny it,
yet nature would tell you quibus suffragijs exoptata pietas audiatur, Symm.
lib. 1. epist. 7.
with what applause an holy and devout sermon is entertained. But I complain
that you, who are admitted now long ago to the fellowship of christianity, and
bound and sworn to observe the laws and customs thereof, and are now no
longer probationers catechumeni, hearers chatechists, should now prefer hearing
before praying; knowing before doing, wherein consists the service and worship
of God; seeing the actual service and worship of God is the end, and hearing
but the means to that end: and the rule is Semper finis excellit id quod est
ad finem. I complain not that our Churches are auditories, but that they are
not oratories: not that you come to Sermons, but that you refuse or neglect
common prayer; not that you resort ad porticum Solomonis, to Paul's cross, but
that your parish churches are naked and empty. I complain not that you have
ready and attentive ears, but that you have not pure hands, humble looks,
single eyes, clean hearts, souls and bodies undefiled. I complain that your
hearing is commonly a cloak to cover and conceal your want of devotion, and a
nurse to your slothfulnes, which cannot endure the true labor of praying. I
complain that you hear much and profit little, which the learned hold for a
sign of reprobation, Heb. 6.
and S. Paul says little less, Heb. 6. The earth which has drunk in the
rain which comes often upon it, and yet brings forth thorns and briars, is
reproved, and nigh unto cursing. I complain that the end of your hearing is to
censure the preacher, not gaudere super cohortatione, Act. 15.31.
Act. 15.31. to rejoice or make benefit of that which is heard. In a word, I
complain, and I complain not alone, that all the service of God is reduced
only to hearing of Sermons; and our hearing applied to knowledge only.

But beloved Christians, the service of God was not wont to be referred to
hearing; but hearing referred to the service of God: nor the scope of
Christianity was not to know; but the scope of knowledge was to be good
Christians: Christian religion was not only to know without error; but also to
live without spot: and therefore though S. Paul says Christus factus est
nobis sapientia: 1. Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made wisdom unto us, yet he staieth not there as though
Christianity consisted in knowledge only; but he adds also factus est
iustitia, and sanctificatio, and redemptio: he is made our righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30. Sapientia in intellectu, iustitia
in voluntate, sanctificatio in opere, redemptio in statu: wisdom in our
understanding; righteousness in our will; sanctification in our works; and
redemption to the whole man, Caiet. And therefore in the perfectest time of
Christianity, hearing was not enough to make one reputed a good Christian, no
nor Baptism added to it; for hearing was before Baptism; nor belief joined
to them both: what not hearing of sermons, not baptism, not belief a
sufficient argument of true Christianity? why then what shall be thought of
us? no, that was not then enough. It is said in the 8. of the Acts. that Simon
Magus believed, Act 8.
and was baptized, and did cleave fast to Philip, followed Philip and was a
diligent auditor of his; and yet Simon Magus was never good Christian.

The issue of all that I intend to speak if the time served is this. The house
of God is called the house of prayer, either because all divine service is
comprehended under the name of prayer, or some Species of prayer; or else
because of all divine duties prayer is the chief; or else because in all
actions of Christianity and religion which are performed in the house of God,
prayer is ever one and an especial part: As in baptism, in the sacrament of
the supper, in matrimony, in churching of women, in burying the dead, in
preaching the word; besides the ordinary action of common prayer it self which
is as judge sacrificium, the sacrifice which God requires every day, not only
privately in our chamber, but especially together in the Church of God.
Preaching also is a part diuini cultus of the service of God, and therefore
has a reward: but hearing only; or hearing to know, without an intent to
practice; is but the way to knowledge, and knowledge it self but via ad
cultum, the way and the means to the service of God: and therefore if it stay
there it has no reward: for not the hearers only, but the dooers are blessed
of God. And therefore in the primitive Church some were admitted to hear,
which were not admitted to the public service of God, and were called
Catechumeni hearers or catechists, a name of imperfection.

Thanks be to God for it, you are not as heathen to be taught of us, Quid
oporteat credere: what you must believe to be saved: nor as Catechists lately
converted: Quid oporteat facere, Acts. 9.
what you must do: as S. Paul cried to God, Acts 9. you know what to believe,
you know what to do: the end of our preaching should be especially mouere, to
move and exhort you to practice that which you know must be done: not because
you have plenitudinem cognitionis, fulness of knowlegde (ah less we have it not
our selves) but because you have a sufficiency of knowledge. And if Marcus
Agrippa who was no fool but vir ingentis animi, Senec. ep. 94.
a man both of courage and wit, was wont to say that he owed much to Salust
for this one sentence, Concordia paruaeres crescunt, discordia maximae
dilabuntur, by peace and concord small things grow great; by dissension and
discord great things decay; because by that sentence only he was made optimus
frater, and optimus amicus, a very good brother, and a very good friend: I
doubt not but the most ignorant among you is indebted already to us for so many
sentences, as being well digested and practiced would make you good parents,
good children, good friends, good brethren, good neighbors, good subjects, in
a word, good Christians.

The second reason drawn from the abuse of the Temple, is borrowed of the
prophet Ierem. cap. 7. where the same assertion is used, but by way of
interrogation: Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon my name is
called before your eyes? Behold, even I see it, says the Lord. As if he should
say; yea certainly it is become a den of thieves. The sins which the prophet
there reproues are, theft, murder, adultery; false swearing, Idolatry: which
being usual among the people, they would nevertheless come and stand before
him in this house of his. And for thieves and murderers and adulterers and
false swearers and Idolaters, to come into the house of God, either to pray or
to offer sacrifice, without a constant intent to amend their ill ways, is to
make the house of God or the house of prayer, a den of thieves.

But it may seem to some men, that this Scripture is not well alleged by our
Savior Christ: who applies that to buyers and sellers, that the prophet
Jeremy speaks of thieves, murderers, adulterers, false swears, and
Idolaters. May it please you therefore to understand, that in the new
Testament, the texts and prophesies of the old Testament, are alleged sometimes
properly and according to the litteral Math. that prophecy of the 7. of Esaias:
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son. Sometime not properly and
literally, but to express some truth which was Sam. 7. I will be his father
and he shall be my Son; which being properly spoken of Solomon, is applied by
the Apostle to our Savior Christ, whose life and figure Solomon was: as also
in the 19. of S. John's Gospel that of the 12. of Exodus, Os non co^minuetis ex
eo, Not a bone of him shall be broken: which being spoken literally of the
lamb, the Evangelist applies to our Savior, who was figured by the paschal
Esaias said of the Jews in his time, populus hic labijs me honorat, Esaias 29.
etc. this people honor me with their lips, Christ applies as if it had been
spoken in the same case of the Jews in his time, Hypocrites, Esaias prophesied
well of you, saying, etc. Math. 15. the like example you have Math. 13.14. and
Acts. 28.26.

According to this last rule that which the prophet Jeremy uses against
thieves, murderers, false swearers, etc. our Savior very well applies
against buyers and sellers, and money changers, and merchandizers; as though
theft and forswearing and merchandising were all one; which he seems to
implie, seeing in this place casting out the buyers and sellers, etc. he tells
them that they made the house of God a den of thieves: but in the second of
Saint John performing the like action upon the same kind of men, he tells
them, that they had made the house of God, a house of merchandice: so that with
our Savior a den of thieves, and an house of merchandice, seems to admit
very small difference.

And peradventure the applying of those two phrases, a den of thieves, and an
house of merchandice, to one and the self same fault; moved S. Chrysostom. or
the author operis imperfecti, Hom. 38. super Mattd.
the rather to use this assertion: Nullus Christianus debet esse mercator: aut
si voluerit, proijciatur de ecclesia. No Christian man should be a
merchandizer; but if he will needs be, let him be cast out of the Church:
which rule though he restrain to those that buy their wares and sell them
again, integra and immutata, in the same kind and nature wherein they bought
them; excluding them that change the nature of their wares, and so sell again
non rem ipsam, sed artificium suum; not the self same, but their labor and
skill and mystery: Lib. 5. annot. 187.
and Sixtus Senensis restraines it to Ingrossers and Monopolies, calling this
only merchandising and negotiation, according to Cassiodore super Psalm. 70.
quae vilius possint comparari, carius velle distrahere; by art and cunning to
raise the price of those commodities, which by course would be much cheaper.
And some schoolmen restrain it to those merchants that intend gain and
lucre, Tho. 22. q. 77.
as the only and last end of all their labors; and not the maintaynig of
their family, the relief of the poor, or the public utility of the common
wealth: yet seeing in these latter auaritious days, for the most part, lucre
only, quod terminum nescit, sed in infinitum tendit, is the common and
ordinary end of merchandising, of buying and selling; and he that is
negotiator auidus, a covetous merchant, as S. Aust. notes, pro damno
blasphemat, pro pretijs rerum mentitur, and peierat: In his losses will
blaspheme, and lie, swear, and forswear in the prices of wares: there is now
also for the most part, no great difference between a den of thieves and an
house of Merchandice.

Now as our Savior applied that which Jeremy spoke of thieves and
forswearers, etc. to buyers and sellers and merchandizers; because there uses
to be some likeness and affinity between them; so the ancient fathers to
this imitation, have applied this saying of our Savior Christ, to many other
sorts of men: which buie and sell, rob and steal, in the house of God; or buie
and sell, rob, and steal from the house of God. Saint Chrysostom. says that
they make the house of God a den of thieves which talk and discourse in the
Church, Hom. 36. in 1. ad Cor.
and drive their bargains at divine service: and concludes that the Church is
not tonstrina, forum, caupona, a barbars shop, an exchang, or a tavern, but
locus angelorum, locus archangelorum, regia Dei, coelum ipsum: the place of
angels, yea of archangels, the very palace of God, and heaven itself.

The whole course of fathers and schoolmen apply it to buiers and sellers of
ecclesiastical orders; to buiers and sellers of the cures of souls, which is
a special gift and ordinance of the holy Ghost: of which I have spoken
somewhat largely before. Epist. ad Nepotian.
Saint Hierom applies it, negotiatori clerico, to a clergy man that uses
buying and selling and merchandising, and says that he is tanquam pestis
fugiendus, to be shunned as one infected with the plague, or a leprosy, as a
thief or a robber, lurking and shrowding himself in the house of God. The
ordinary gloss applies it to murder and bloodshed committed in the Church,
which was grieuouslie punished in the Canon law, 24. 1. qui contra: and does
portend some great ill to the Church or common wealth; Eccles. hist. lib. 7.
cap. 33.
as is noted by Socrates, and I have touched it before.

Ioannes Sarisbur, applies it to them, which alienate Churches, and
Ecclesiastical houses with the appurtenances to lay men: The house of prayer,
says he, is made an house of merchandise, De nugis curial. lib. 7. cap. 17.
Domino prohibente, which is forbidden by God himself, and the temple which
has the foundation in lapide adiutorij, 1. Sam. 4.1. on the stone of help, is
turned into a den of thieves: and his reason is this, Siquidem ecclesia data
est in direptionem, etc. for the house of God, and the appurtenances are laid
wast, and made the possessions of mighty or subtle men.

But this last sort of men in my opinion, may be said to make the house of God
worse then a den of thieves, (if worse may be) because whereas the other
sorts rob, and spoil in the houses of God; these rob and spoil the houses of
God, and alienate and alter the propriety of them; and of the possessions and
inheritance of God, make them the possessions and inheritance of thieves: For
whereas all good Christians say with the Prophet David, Vnam petij a domino,
Psalm. 27.
etc. One thing I have desired of the Lord, and that I will require, even that
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life: to what end? to
behold the beawtie of the Lord, and to visit his temple; that is says Lyra,
ad adorandum ibidem frequenter, and offerendum, that he might daily worship
him there, and offer sacrifices to him: these men say Vnum petij a domino (de
praeterito) I have made one suite now a great while, to my Lord or master,
etc. Et hanc requiram (de futuro) I will urge this suite till I have obtained
it: vt inhabitem in domo domini, etc. that I may dwell in some of Gods houses
all the days of my life, and my children after me: to what end? vt
haereditate possideam sanctuarium domini, as the wicked men said Psalm. 83. that
some of Gods lands or some of Gods houses may be my inheritance for ever and
ever. So that where they that abuse the house of God with sundry prophanations,
and rob and steal and merchandise in it, make it speluncam latronum, a den
for a time to lurk in, and not be suspected of such behavior: they that rob
and spoil God of his houses, and alienate them to their profane uses, do make
of them tabernacula praedonum, Job. 12. not only the dens, but the very
habitation and dwellings of thieves and robbers.

Now to conclude; I say with S. Chrysostom upon these words, But you have
made it a den of thieves: Vtinam de praeterito populo esset tantum dictum,
Hom. 13. super Marc.
etc. I would to God it could have been said only of the Jews, and not of the
Christians; I would to God it could have been applied to Christians heretofore,
and not unto us; Ploraremus quidem illos, sed de nobis gauderemus, we would
lament over them, but rejoice for our selves: but now in many places, and in
many respects, nay in all these respects, the house of God is made a house of
merchandise, the house of prayer is made a den of thieves. These things are
so manifest, that they require neither exposition, nor application; I would to
God they were more obscure, and hidden from us, and that we did not maintain
these prophanations, by pretenses, and long customs, as these Jews did.
Wherefore if we lament over them, we have cause to weep and howl for our
selves, who have added as great increase and strength to these sins, as time
has added years and increase to the world: so that these iniquities being now
at the full ripeness and perfect growth (which argue little true faith, and
less true charity, if less may be, upon the face of the earth) we are to
expect a perfect and final reformation from Christ Jesus of these abuses; not
by pestilence, famine, wars, waters, or fires from heaven, etc. his ordinary
instruments, which do move us but little: but from his own hands, not armed
with a whip, or other temporal punishment, as at his first coming, Math. 3.
but with his fan, wherewith he will make clean the floor of his Church,
and gather the wheat into his garner, and burn up the chafe of all these
inquities, with unquenchable fire. To this Jesus, the most jealous patron of
the house of his Father, and the most just judge of the quick and the dead,
together with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one almighty
and everliving God, be ascribed all honor, glory, praise, and dominion, for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

