EGYPTS FAVORITE.
The History of JOSEPH, divided into four parts:

1. Josephus in Puteo: or, The unfortunate Brother. 2. Josephus in Gremio: or,
The chaste Courtier. 3. Josephus in Carcere: or, The innocent Prisoner. 4.
Josephus in Summo: or, The Noble Favorite.
Together with old Isreal's Progress into the Land of Goshen.

By Francis Hubert, Knight, and sometime one of the Six Clerks of his
Majesty's High Court of CHANCERIE.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for L. Chapman, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the upper end of Chancery Lane next Holborne. 1631.

THE STATIONER to the READER.
Courteous Reader, I need not by these few lines invite thee to survey this
ensuing divine Poem; the true worth, that it contains, has saved me that
labor. The Author her^of (being my worthy Friend) ere he had fully perfited
the same, was himself translated to the place of all perfection, and changed
the Egypt of this world, for the full fruition of a celestial Canaan. In his
life my desertlesse self was so endeared unto him, that he pleased to bestow
upon me the Copy thereof, and I have taken the pains to make that public,
which was before smoothered in silence, and perhaps might have been buried in
oblivion. Many years sithence he writ a Work entitled, The History and
Reign of EDWARD the second, with his miserable and cruel death: But the same
being by supreamest Authority forbidden to be printed, was for a long time
charily kept, us a Jewel in his secret Cabinet, or rather (amongst diverse
other Works of his excellently well composed) as a chief ornament of his own
private Library, till at length some Sacrilegious hand, (pardon me if I so
tear me it) stole this Wedge of Gold, and for gain, without allowance of
Authority, or knowledge of the Author, brought it to the Press: but so much
dross was mixed therewith, and such foul faults escaped the (...) ^^, that it
had almost quite lost its first part To remedy this, the Author was induced
(...) use me as an Instrument to print the (...) it was originally composed;
the which with his assistance I effected: but the sale thereof was so hindered
by the former Impression of the false Copy, that the true one found little or
no success. Now once again (gentle Reader) I have ventured to present to thy
view this second Work of the same Author, which if the reading thereof may
both profit and pleasure thee, I shall reap a satisfaction of mine own
desires, and thy self good contentment for time so well expended. Farewell.

L. C.

THE AVTHORS INVOCATION.
NOr high Olympus, nor PerNassus hill,
Nor famed Pierian Sisters I implore,
(The Poets Patrons) to assist my quill,
A higher pitch my Eagle-Muse aoth soar.
Thou that taughtst Ishai's youngest son to sing
The Songs of Sion; with thy heavenly deawes
Inspire my heart, as thou did Sions King,
And sacred drops into my quill infuse.
Thou that did love the voice of that sweet Singer,
And David's golden Harp in tune did keep,
Teach me that heavenly Instrument to finger,
Who Dauid-like now sing to Isreal's Sheep.
Thou Son of David, David's Lord and King,
Assist my Muse, for now she takes her wing.
EGYPTS FAVORITE.
JOSEPH in PVTEO. OR, The Unfortunate Brother.
1
Of all the worldly blessings which from heaven
(Like gracious dew) did fall on Jacobs head,
I do not think there was a greater given,
Then were the sons that from his loins were bred.
2
It is a Cordial to the Fathers heart,
To see himself so often multiplide,
The like was never made by Chimick Art,
There Is no extraction of such strength beside.
3
And in this blessing Jacob had a part,
For Jacobs Zodiaque had twelve seu'rall Signs,
(I mean his sons) whose influence did impart
A powrfull strength to him, and his designs.
4
Of all the rest, I was his pretiest boy,
And to my father from my cradle dear,
Son of his age, therefore perhaps his joy,
As by my partie-livery may appear.
5
Or else perhaps 'twas for my Mothers sake,
To whom his soul with chains of love was tide,
Which caused him cherefully to undertake
Twice seven years service, to make her his Bride.
6
O Love, thou art the perfect Adamant,
Which breaks all Hammers, wearies every arm^
Thou have no sense of danger, or of want,
No apprehension of ensuing harm.
7
But thou art carried in a full carreere,
With highest speed to what thou do desire,
Labors are sweet, and difficulties dear,
To compass that vvhereto thy hopes aspire.
8
Unwearied love or labors not at all,
Or else at least does make all labors light,
Witness my father Jacob, Labans thrall,
Or Rachels rather (for to speak more right)
9
Faint with heavens frost by night, heavens fire by day,
Which (though distasteful) Jacob yet puts over,
Thinking all Months alike for one sweet May,
O such a thing it is to be a Lover.
10
And well it may be that I was affected
For my dead mothers sake, whom he held dear:
But sure it is, that I was much respected,
And Rachels love in Joseph did appear.
11
For he did love me more in truth and show,
Then all the children that he had beside,
Who thereupon did discontented grow,
His love to me made me to be envy'de.
12
Alas, that from a root so sweet should spring
So noisome, and so venomous a flower:
But thus (we see) it holds in cuery thing,
Great fortunes, great affections, place and power
13
Are subject to great envy: men will hate
That eminence, which they cannot attain:
It may be Natures fault, it may be Fate,
It may be Custom, which few can restrain.
14
What Ere the cause be, that is the effect (we see)
Even brothers of one back will make it good,
My fathers love had fatal been to me,
If gracious heaven had not their wills withstood.
15
He loves, they hate: and to fill up the stream,
And swell the humor of their ranckling hate,
(So God would have it) I must have a dream,
Which (foolish lad) to them I did relate.
16
Dreams are the Daughters of the silent Night,
Begot on diverse Mothers, most, most vain;
Some bred by dayes-discourse, or dayes-delight,
Some from the stomach fuming to the brain.
17
Some from Complexion; Sanguine Constitutions
Will dream of Maskes, Plays, Revels, Melody:
Some of dead bones, and ghastly apparitions,
Which are the true effects of Melancholy.
18
And some are merely forged to private ends,
And (without doubt) some are Propheticke to,
Which gracious God out of his goodness sends,
To warn us what to shun, or what to do.
19
Or to discover what in time will come,
Either for private, or for pu^lique weal:
Such was my dream, a true presaging one,
Which to my brothers thus I did re^cale:
20
Me thought we were together in the field
Binding of sheaues, Mine rises, stands upright,
Your sheaues encompasse mine, but stoop an^ yield,
And honors mine: Dreamer, we know your spright
21
The brethren say: shall thou rule over us?
Thou Lord it so? Proud boy, it shall not be.
A second dream I had, and told it thus:
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars I seemed to see;
22
The Stars In saw eleu'n in number were,
And all to me (as honoring) did bow,
I told it so, that Jacob did it hear,
Who frowned upon me with an angry brow.
23
Must I, your Mother, and your Brethren be
Your vassals? at your feet (proud boy) be cast?
It Is more then time (I see) to humble thee,
And lance that windy humor swells so fast.
24
And thus in outward show old Israel chides,
To cool his spleenfull sons, whose wrath did flame:
But inwardly the double dream he hides,
And all his thoughts still work upon the same.
25
The sons of Jacob now in Sechem keep
Their flocks (the story says:) go boy (quoth he)
See how thy brethren fare, and how the sheep,
And bring a true relation unto me.
26
From Hebron sent Joseph now takes his way
To Sechem ward: vvandring, a man he met,
Of vvhow he does enquire, if he can say
Ought of his brethren? Is to Dothan set:
27
For thither they would go, I heard them say:
He gives him thanks, and after them does go:
Joseph take heed, thou vvalk'st a dangerous way,
In thine own blood thou find'st a bosom foe.
28
They spied him soon, before he came much nigher,
So Eagle-ey'd is Envy on her prey,
And straight against his life they do conspire,
And to themselves with hatfull scorn they say:
29
Yon comes the Dreamer: now he is in our power,
Lets cut his throat, then cast him in some pit,
And say some savage beast did him devour,
Teach him to dream: See what will come of it.
30
Vile man, thou art a creature worse then beast,
If powerful heaven do not restrain thy will,
A Wolf, a Deu'll does dwell within thy breast,
Which always stirs thee to extremest ill.
31
And there is no tinder that is so apt to fire,
As is thy wicked Nature to consent;
Wee're casily drawn to what we do desire,
And our desires are most to mischief bent.
32
It Is hateful for one man to kill another,
Though causefull fury does distract the sonce:
But O, what is it then to kill a brother?
And in cold blood, and that without offense?
33
Yea, and to offer at a fathers life,
For out of his dear love they well might gather,
That even that murdrous blow, that bloody knife
That stabbed the son, might chance to kill the father.
34
But when that minds are bent to do amiss,
There Is no respects that can the same control,
His other brethren were resolved of this,
But Reuben only had some touch of soul,
35
And therefore this conspiracy withstands,
Use we no force (quoth he) use rather wit,
He is our br^ther, lay no violent hands
Upon his life, yet cast him in the pit.
36
And thus he said, intending to restore
To Isreal's arms the comfort of his age,
D^r^ct denia^l had inflamed them more,
There Is no opposing to a pretent rage:
37
What ever stops the current of a stream,
Is swept away with furious violence,
(...) is effectless^ against a strong extreme:
But yet a man with labor and expense
38
May turn the channel to another course,
He Is often a gayner that can purchase time:
Therefore give way whilst fury runs in force,
Which being spent, then on with thy design.
39
And Reuben means to make advantage so,
Unto whose motion all the rest content;
Joseph mean while is come, but does not know
(Poor innocent) the drift of their intent.
40
And as men joyful of this happy meeting,
They bid him welcome with a false embrace:
As felons true men handle, such their greeting,
And soon (perforce) they strip him of his case.
41
Joseph did more then wonder what they meant,
He knew the parties were his fathers sons,
By whom he was in visitation sent,
And with a pleasing Ambassie he comes:
42
He looks into himself, and finds all well,
Good Lord (thought he) what do my brothers mean?
I know no cause should make them thus to swell:
But finding that their fury grew extreme,
43
He speaks them fair, with tears he does entreat
They would respect his blood, his love, his youth,
What was his fault (he asked) that was so great?
For he knew none that he had done in truth:
44
He tells them, He was none of Esa^s brood,
Who with their father strove even in the womb,
But he derived was from Jacobs blood,
Whose purer streams in all their veins did run:
45
Yet wrathful Esa^ with their Sire incensed,
Both for the birthright, and the blessing too,
Did not proceed to murder (though pretenc'd)
And would they act what he forbear to do?
46
Indeed good Abram (common great grand-sire
Unto them all) resolved to sacrifice
Unto his God (for he did so require)
His deare-deare Lamb, more dear then his own eyes:
47
But he had special Warrant for the deed,
'Twas not a work of will, his own device,
God did command, why should not Izhak bleed?
Obedience is the truest sacrifice.
48
But they had no Commission for his death,
Where was their Warrant so to spill his blood?
Who signed the same? for the received his breath
From God, to yield again when he thought good.
49
If God required it, he was well content,
But 'twas no work of his, 'twas their own will,
Which executed, they would soon repent,
For fearful justice wayts on fearelesse ill.
50
With that they interrupted his discourse:
Words were but lost (they said) he must not preach,
His part was Patience: So with brutish force,
(First having stripped him) without farther speech
51
They cast him straight into the deadly pit:
And then (as well discerning of the state)
In triumph round about the same they sit,
And eat and drink, and jest at Joseph's fate.
52
Indeed (brave spirits) it is a noble act,
Deserving much, and memorable fame,
Laurel at least: well, look into the fact,
'Twill fill your souls with grief, your brows with shame.
53
You have betrayed a young and hopeful Lad,
Alone without the help of any other:
The chiefest comfort that his father had,
Who is your father to, and he your brother.
54
Add more to this, he was an innocent,
Whom causeless hate so fowly did betray,
In love and kindness by a father sent,
And Messengers are sacred (as men say)
55
Besides, your root grew in the Holy Land,
Never before tainted with such a sin,
Izhak will surely grieve (if understand)
To think his Nephews have so bloody bin.
56
But all this while the Bird that is in the breast,
Is fast asleep, and no disturbance makes,
'T was wont to be a Nightingale at least,
But now 'twil prove a Scritch-owle when it wakes.
57
The Frontispice of sin is fair in show,
A pleasant Porter always keeps the gate,
But being in, it is the house of vvoe,
Of fear, of shame, and of all deadly fate.
58
But I must leave the brothers as they be,
Who now securely triumph in their wrong,
Distressed Joseph, I return to thee,
The subject of my ill-made, well-meant Song.
59
Me thinks I see how this poor youth does lie,
Unmanly thus, unnaturally used,
Thinking the pi^ his grave, fixing his eye
On heaven, that sees, helps innocents abused.
60
Me thinks I hear him say, and saying w^epe,
How unexampled is my wretchedness?
My sea of sorrow is so very deep,
That there is no line to fathom my distress.
61
O by what name shall I express my ill,
It is not banishment that I endure,
I am too truly in my Country still;
But banishment were better, more secure.
62
Earth is my Country, and in earth I am,
And yet I am not in my proper place:
For I was borne to walk upon the same,
And with my feet to trample on her face.
63
Now am I in her arms, or bowels rather,
Into my Mothers womb alive I go:
O Jacob, my beloved and loving Father,
Did thou beget me, to be swallowed so?
64
I know that she embraces all at last,
She is the Center unto which we tend;
But yet with me she makes preposterous have,
Her right begins but when my life does end,
65
And then she may with justice seize on me,
Now she intrudes before her lawful time:
O common Parent, I do wrong to thee,
Thou art not to be charged with this crime.
66
Yet Earth is the sole Agent of my ill,
But it is indeed a more refined Clay,
It Is breathing, vvalking Earth (against thy will)
Makes me close prisner in thy womb this day,
67
Where I am neither living, nor yet dead,
And yet am both: I know not what I am:
But this I know, that never was there bred
Amongst all men a more disastrous man,
68
Which am deprived of that common good,
That all Mankind, nay very beasts possess,
Air, light, heat, motion, and all hope of food,
Who (though I live) yet can I not express
69
The powers and acts of life: and (which is worse)
Have able active Organs for the same,
And even those blessings do increase my curse;
For had I been descrepit, blind, or lame,
70
Benumbed with Palsies, sinew-crackt with crampes,
Without all use of limbs and senses to,
I should not have been choked with Earth's cold dampes,
Nor in my grave have lived as now I do.
71
Nay, even those nobler graces of the mind,
Wit, Understanding, Judgment, Memory,
Serve all as one sad Index, for to find,
And read my woeful History thereby,
72
And the more actiue-able that they are,
The more they set my sufferings on the rack,
A feeling knowledge is more wretched far,
Then a dull stupid nonsense, that does lack
73
True apprehension of its proper ill,
And therefore slightly entertaines distress,
Conceiving sorrows are most pregnant still,
In ignorance is senseless happiness.
74
O how extremely wretched is that man,
Whose greatest blessings turn unto his curse?
All his endeavors (do even what h^e can)
Serve but as mean^s to make his fortunes worse.
75
But Joseph, whither does thy stormy passion
(Which does indeed but swell thy misery)
Transport thee from thy self in such a fashion,
As thou art almost fallen to lunacie?
76
Why do thou vent thy sorrows to the earth?
Sh^e hears thee not: It Is bootlesse to complain,
Besi^es thou have no surplusage of breath,
Why do thou make such waste thereof in vain?
77
Rather improve the same unto the best,
Think not on earth, advance thy self to heaven,
If there be hope of help, there does it rest,
And one'y by that hand it must be given.
78
And thus resolved, this Phoenix, in his nest,
Not built-with Spices and Arabian Gummes,
But of hard flints, with toads and slow-worm ^ dressed,
An humble suppliant to his God becomes.
79
And being in the bowels of the Earth,
The Antiperistesis
cold thereof augments his inward heat,
Which from his heart breaks forth into his breath,
And thus (sweet incense) mounts to Gods high seat.
80
Father of Heaven, let not my brothers hate
(Their causeless hate) prevail against my blood;
Thou can their malice and their spleen abate,
And turn their plots and proiects to my good.
81
They are but like to Pipes which do convey,
The stream of action, that does flow from thee:
The work (as it is a work) is thine: but they
(As it is a sin) they only guilty be.
82
They are thy instruments, though now they jarre,
And thou can sweetly tune them, as thou will,
Extract my peace from forth this civil war,
And thine own glory raise out of their guilt.
83
But if my sins (which be in number great)
Have shut thine ear, and barred up mercies gate,
Forgive my brothers yet, I thee entreat,
And lay not to their charge their murdrous hate.
84
But let this pit (that now must be my tomb)
Bury my body, and wi^hall, their shame,
O never let it to the world be known,
That Jacobs sons were guilty of ^uch blame.
85
Especially show mercy to my Sire,
Let his gray head in peace go to his grave,
And once again I humbly thee desire,
Forgive my brothers, and thy servant save.
86
Joseph, thy body in the pit I find,
(That Is earth in earth) out thy more noble part,
Thy purer soul (from earthly dross refined)
Mounts up to heaven, to which thou send'st thy heart.
87
In faithful prayer: an Agent of such trust,
So graceful, and so powerful to prevail,
That though thy self seems buried in the dust,
Yet that makes way to heaven, and will not fail
88
With such effect to prosecute thy cause,
To treat and mediate for thee with thy Lord,
That though thou seem even in destructions jaws,
His mighty arm will timely help afford.
89
As here a troop of Ishmaelites came by,
Merchants (it seems) they were, to Egypt bound,
Laden with Balm, and Myrrh, and spic^ry,
Such precious things as were in Gilead found.
90
So and more ancien^ is the Intercourse,
By which one Country traffiques with another,
And (as we see) often times an able Nourse
Supples the wants of a defective Mother:
91
So does, one Climate with its native wealth
Furnish another, and by such supplies
We have most sovereign Simples for our health,
Pearl, Gold, and diuers-rich Commodities:
92
For this Worlds deep unsounded Architect,
Has not confined all blessings to one Land,
Ea^h Country labors under some defect,
Which must be helped by another hand.
93
And it is the chiefest cause, and use of Trade,
To bring in others wealth, and vent our own,
And to that end long Voyages are made,
Even to remotest Climates, erst unknown.
94
But what? me thinks my Muse does travail too,
And bends her self unto a foreign cost,
Return again to what thou have to do,
Else will thy fruitless labor all be lost.
95
When Judah did these Merchant strangers see,
Some spar^e of Pity, or Hypocrisy
Did seem to touch his heart: Let us (quoth he)
Sell yonder Lad, that in the pit does lie:
96
For, say we kill him, and the murder keep
Secret as night; Alas, will that avail us?
His blood will cry when we are fast asleep,
And our own Conscience to the Bar will hale us.
97
Beside, there is no profit in his blood,
Where by his sale there may arise some gain,
Let us respect both his and our own good,
Such pleasing motions are not made in vain.
98
Judah prevails: Out of the pit they draw him,
They play the Merchants, and to Merchants sell
The lovely Boy: And when these strangers saw him,
They offered ready Cash, they liked so well.
99
Of silver twenty pieces was the price:
They pay the Money, and they take their ware,
And now the brethren study a devices
To cloak their sin, that is their chiefest care.
100
At length they do this stratageme devise,
They stain with blood of a slain Kid or Goat,
(To cast a must before their fathers eyes)
The Ensign of his love, the party Coat.
101
That they resolve to bring unto their Sire,
And say they found it so with blood defiled:
A murderer will ever prove a liar,
How easily is an honest heart beguiled?
102
Thy I ambe into the field why have thou sent?
Why made such wolves the keepers of thy sheep?
Shall we condemn men's actions by the event,
When all success is buried very deep?
103
Into a fathers heart how could it sink,
So many sheep-hear^s Butchers all should be?
How could old Israel once conceive or think,
That such sour Crabs should grow upon his tree?
104
The stock was good that he had grifted in,
And God had blessed it with much goodly fruit,
And as their birth, so had their breeding bin,
His precepts and their practice did not suit.
105
But say he might mistrust some of his sons,
Simeon and Leui had been soyl'd in blood;
But this within no reach of reason comes,
That such a general guilt should taint his brood:
106
That all his sons should so conspire in one,
To ^pill the blood of a poor Innocent:
Where was his Judah when it should be done?
Without all doubt he never would consent.
107
Besides, no cause, nor color did appear,
Why they should be so cruel to a brother:
A virtuous soul that in its self is clear,
Is hardly drawn to think ill of another.
108
And yet (we see) brother did brother kill
Long before this: Cayne innocent Abel slew:
But sure there was this diffrence twixt their ill,
That was a single Duel: they but two:
109
But this was ten to one: yet I confess,
One of the ten was touched unto the heart,
And showed at least some sparks of tendern^sse,
And saved his life by taking of his part.
110
And yet it seems he saw him in the pit,
Yea in the pit (the Emblem of his grave)
But blame not Reuben, '^ was a work of wit,
Or honest wit, whose purpose was to save:
111
For he did mean the lad home to have led,
Witness the rending of his clothes and hair,
When he returned found not, supposed him dead,
(It seems, that in the s^le he had no share)
112
But when the deed was done, he was content
(^o hide his brothers shame) to tell a lie,
In vice how easily multi^udes assent?
How quickly sin with sin does multiply?
113
Most men have itching fingers to shed blood,
And to Revenge as to a Feast they go,
But unto actions, honest, fair, and good,
We creep like snayles, or men benumbed with snow.
114
But whither strayes my Muse? By this the Boy
Arriues at Egypt, Jacobs heart does burn,
To bear some tidings of his long-mist Joy,
And with strange tidings (lo) his sons return.
115
He reads their message written in their face,
But cannot rea^e the tablets of their hearts,
Sad looks at least, and sighs must seem to grace
That Tragedy, wherein they played their parts.
116
But (O) we know that looks are often liars,
Who can judge truly by the out ward show?
We practice how to pal^iate our desires,
No more of man, but the bare bark we know.
117
And yet it may be they were touched indeed
With sad remembrance of their fact so soul:
There are some wounds that inwardly do bleed,
And ghastly looks come from a troubled soul.
118
Vice well may paint her face, and mask her brow,
And look aloft with a bold strumpets eye:
But Conscience, what a biting worm art thou?
When thine own thoughts do give thy looks (the lie)
119
Where is my son (quoth Jacob) where is he?
Why do I not behold my Joseph's face?
Lo, this is all of him that we did see,
The brethren said, and then they showed his case.
120
And when old Israel saw this killing sight,
A wicked beast (he cries) has slain my son:
Good aged Father, thou art in the right,
It was a beast indeed, a bloodie-one.
121
That monster Envy seyzd upon thy child,
And with his Harpies Tallons gripped him so,
That from thy sight Joseph is exild,
And thou art left to waste thine age in woe.
122
Mean while(me thinks) I see these fratricides
Hanging their heads, as it with sorrow smitten,
False complement, foul actions often hides:
For hearts are seldom in the foreheads written.
123
Well, though you could deceive a poor old man,
(Who would not think, that from his Cristall spring
Should slow such muddy streams) go (if you can)
And blind Heavens eye, that sees, marks every thing,
124
Whose present Justice (though it seem to sleep^)
Will su^ely wake, and call you to the Bar,
The Court of Heaven a Register does keep,
Where all our daily deeds enrolled are:
125
Therefore (dissembling men) go make your peace,
Pr^pare (whilst you have time) or your account,
Let your true tears petition for release:
Tears (against waters nature) up will mount,
126
Even to the highest Heavens, and there will cry
For grace and mercy, against your crying sin:
There is great virtue in a weeping eye,
And tears (dumb Orators) when you begin
127
To plead for pardon, seldom sue in vain,
You are successful advocates of ours:
Marble is pierced with often drops of rain,
How the^ is mercy moved with such sweet showers?
128
But all this while does Jacob dwell in tears,
Why should he longer live now Ioseph's slain?
Love (whilst the loved lives) is full of tears,
And dead, then grief begins his tragique reign.
129
And the more strong and fervent that it was,
So much the more it breaks forth into passion:
A heart half hot breathes forth a cold (alas)
And suits it self in black, perhaps for fashion.
130
But the sad soul that is truly touched indeed,
With loss of that, which it did hold so dear,
A long time after of that wound does bleed,
And even till Death the scarre will still appear.
131
So Jacob will go mourning to his grave, Genesis 37.35.

Though all his sons and daughters do their best
To comfort him, but he will no comfort have,
His heart was killed before in Joseph's breast.
132
Good kind old Father, cheer thy self again,
Hope in the bottom of the basket lies,
It may be that thy Joseph is not slain,
Love is too often full of ielousies:
133
Thou shall survive with these thy teare-drownd eyes
To see thy Joseph next the Kingly throne,
To see him nurse thee and thy families,
And in a foreign Land make Israel known.
134
O the great goodness of All-pow'rfull God,
How vvondrously does he his works dispose?
That he can fetch our comforts from the rod,
And raise our fortunes by the means of foes.
135
'Twas not the brothers malice, nor their wit,
That could the Wisdom of high heaven prevent,
They draw the Plot, but God does build on it,
They serve his ends against their own intent.
136
They feared the Youth should live to be their Lord,
And therefore made him (as they thought) a slave:
But their own tongues those Titles shall afford,
Which they so feared, and yet so freely gave.
137
But stay my Muse, me thinks thou flagg'st the wing,
As if thy plumes were wet with Jacobs rain,
Who e tearefull sorrows will not let thee sing,
Till he has dried his aged eyes again.
Timens Deum, non habet quod time at vlterius.

THE CHASTE COVRTIER.
JOSEPH in GREMIO. OR, The Faithful Servant.
1
Brave gallant Youths, the hope and pride of Courts,
Whose haughty spirits active fire inflames,
Clayming by Birth (as Charter) your disports,
Chiefly the sweet Prerogative of Dames,
2
Take my Survey with a true-iudging eye,
I shall be found a Masterpiece of Nature,
For form, and fortune of great raritie,
Not paralleld by any common Creature.
3
I was borne free, but (lo) I now must serve,
I was a youth borne fair and fit for action,
My dutious service did so well deserve,
As soon I won into my Lords affection.
4
O no, it was not any worth in me,
That made such way into my Masters heart:
This stream (great Sea of goodness)flowed from thee,
Thou Sun of grace and glory did impart
5
One beam of brightness to my clouded state.
It was in^eed thy heavenly influence,
Whose virtue drew me from the pit of late,
And now works strongly on my Masters sense,
6
Whose apprehension made him quickly find,
That God was with me, and did bless my ways,
That was the Loadstone drew his steely mind,
My luster did reflect from Heavens fair rays.
7
All vnder-Planets were in opposition,
I was a stranger borne, and even from thence,
He might de^ue a very just suspicion,
Strangers are entertained with d^fidence.
8
I was but green, and tasted of the tree,
Va^ipe for service, or for secrecy,
And no true judgment could he make of me,
He could not take my height to suddenly.
9
But grant I were completely honest, yet
By vnexperience I was vselesse made
For any great employment, and that Bit
Might hold me hard, till I was better way'd.
10
But all these heavy morsels are digested,
Heaven had so vvhetted on his appetite,
That he did seem even with my service feast^d,
And relisht all my actions with delight.
11
So (like a Mushrumpe) in a night I grew
So great in grace, that I had in my hand
All that was his, so much, he scarcely knew
What he should ^at, or drink; his coin, his land,
12
His whole Revenue, Jewels, Stock and Plate,
Indeed himself was managed by my hand,
He seemed the servant, whilst I swayd the state,
For all his fortunes were at my command.
13
This was a gallant and vnlook'd-for Rise,
Much for a youth and stranger to attain:
But thus it pleased (I say not Destinies)
But Providence, who ^ides Fate with his reign.
14
Still I increased in favor and in grace,
And (which is strange) grew great, yet not envied,
And being of comely presence, fair of face,
Of winning carriage, and well qualified,
15
My Lady-Mistresse cast an amourous eye
Upon my form, which her affections drew,
She was Loves Martyr, and in flames did frye,
But (like a woman) did that love pursue
16
Wisely and cunningly: To my dear Lord
A true and faithful servant she commends me;
And he that durst rely upon her word,
Alas, not ghessing once what she intends me,
17
Adds fuel to the fire, that scorched her heart,
My youth, my form, my haviour he admired,
He read a Lecture on each seu'rall part,
And prays her cherish what she most desired.
18
Which for his sake (the says) she will effect,
And since I was so high in his opinion,
Who was her soul, I should have her respect,
And then^^forth be her Favorite, her Minion:
19
For well she knew, himself was so complete
In Judgment, and in every worthy part,
That 'twas no common virtue that could get
So near, and dear a place within his heart.
20
And she had learned (by his example taught)
To favor virtue, though it seem d^iected,
And thus she masked the foulness of her thought,
And made her way to what she most affected.
21
From that time forward she would cast such looks
To all my actions, give such commendation,
As one but meanly read in Cupids books,
Might know the stories end by th'insinuation.
22
She used me like a son, not like a slave;
Or (if that Title, full of hean'nly fire,
Fits not her hellish heat) then let it have
Some other name, to palliate her desire,
23
Which often wrought in her passionate extremes,
She draws me to discour^^, (...), friendly, c^o^e,
She questions me both o^ my wants and means,
And largely offers full supply of those.
24
Ebrew (she says) me thinks you do not look
With that aspect, that you were w^nt to do,
Your heart is not your own: I doubt, you are took
With some Egyptian beaut e: Is It not so?
25
Come tell me truly, and I here protest
By P^tipher himself, whom thou holdst dear,
Who loves thee too, next to my self the best,
In this thy love, my love too shall appear.
26
I Will be thy spokes-woman, for thee I Will woo.
With that he blushes: which she soon espies,
And (heeding well the beauty of his hew)
Sh^e blush her blush, with him to sympathize.
27
But he that did not, would not, at least, know,
W^ither her speech and soft discourse did tend:
M^daine (reply^s) now by the love I owe
To Putipher, and shall vn^ill my end,
28
And next my duty to you (fairest Dame)
No woman's love yet ever touched my heart,
I thank my God, I never knew that flame:
But were it scortch'd (me thinks) (...) impart
29
It to your goodness. Pray thee (quoth she) do.
And so I will (quoth he) when I am shot:
I owe my self unto my Lord and you.
And may she perish that affects thee not.
30
Thus softly to her self (of him unheard)
The Lady spoke: And glad that he was free,
Within her self she plotted and conferred
How Joseph's love by her might compast be.
31
Woman, thou art a fair and winning Creature,
Did I say coming too, I should not lie:
And yet that word does not express thy nature,
For thou art seeking too, if men would fly.
32
But it is thy Tenure to be sought unto,
Men vvooe by Custom, that is thy Copie-hold,
We sue for that which thou art sick to do,
And art all fire, yet seem yc^e cold.
33
And why should thou not color thy desire?
Since thou have learned to color head and face,
Which are indeed but Beakons set on fire,
To give us wa^ning (if we had the grace
34
To apprehendi^) o^ thy foes arriving,
Old age and time, which are thy greatest foes,
Against whom, thou and thy Boxes will be striving,
But striu'st in vain; thou can not conquer those.
35
For Age will seize thy colors in the field,
Thy youths fair colors, being red and white,
That great Commander, Time, will make thee yield,
And foreign aids will fail thee in the fight.
36
But whither do thou stray, my wandering Muse?
I do not think, that in those ancient times,
Though women could their husbands then abuse,
They were not guilty yet of these new crimes.
37
But then it was (I hope not now) the guise,
To make all means answer unto their ends,
O^r age breeds fools: the women then were wise,
And had, and kept, and used their private friends.
38
But (O) you virtuous and unspotted Dames,
That now are tv'd with Hymen's golden chain,
Whose holy thoughts never dreamed of unchaste flames.
But truly loving, are so loved again.
39
Who (as that worthy Roman Lady said)
Do know no other but your husbands breath:
True Turtles, Virgin vviues, that never strayed
From ways of life, into the paths of death.
40
Frown not upon my Muse, and her free Song,
Nor cast into the Vrne a coale-blacke stone,
Your Virtue is your own: Nor is it a wrong,
To blaze the errors of one faulty one:
41
Let her unchasteness serve but as a foil
To make your constant virtue shine the more:
Some weeds will grow even in the richest soil,
Nor do we prize the same the less therefore.
42
Then on, my Muse, and fear not to relate
Those songs of death, which this fair Siren sung:
Poor Joseph, once betrayed by too much hate,
Now too much love (I fear) will do thee vvron.
43
For on a ^ay, (^he servants all being out,
By acci^ent, or purpose sent away,
But ^^re it was her wit brought it about)
The Lady on her Day-bed slumbring lay,
44
And (as she wished) this Ebrew had access,
The house was void, and all things did conspire
To make her set abroach her filthiness.
Joseph (quoth she) approach, and quench my fire:
45
I must confess I love thee, and no longer
Can this my passion hide from thee, my Love;
De^erre not (gentle youth) thou should be stronger
In thy desires, being Man: for Men must move.
46
Come, lie thee down, and hug me in thine arms:
(With that the clothes that covered the bed
She cast aside) and then displayed such charms,
As would have raised a man, even almost dead.
47
Fear not (soft youth) for here are none but we:
Lust-blinded woman, thou art much awry,
An eye (standing upon a staff) does see,
(The Embl^m of his knowledge is the eye,
48
And of his power the staff) He sees thee well,
And he will strike thee too wi^h his strong arm,
The shapelesse unseen Deu'll (the Prince of hell)
Stands by thee too, and prompts thee to thy harm.
49
And thine own Conscience is a witness now,
And will, in time, ^e a tormentor too:
But (all respects removed) she labors how
To compass that which she resolved to do.
50
And therefore thus continues her black spell,
Joseph (fair Joseph) thou have stolen my heart,
Heartlesse I cannot live: Sweet v^e me well;
It Is she that begs, that might command in part.
51
This ycie youth (when thus he heard her speak)
Looks pale for sorrow, like a man half dead,
And with a sigh (as if his heart would brea^e)
Bashfully modest, thus to her he said:
52
Madam, you are a wise and virtuous woman,
And know what it is to break a sacred trust;
This vnment Parley (which you now do^ summon)
Must try, if to my Lord I will prove just.
53
Your self except (dear Lady) what is his,
But ^ may freely v^e it as mine own?
And sh^^ is thine too, seal it with a kiss:
It Is strange, a youth of flesh should be a stone.
54
Milk-sop, what 'dost thou fear? Here Is none can see:
Or say they should, there is none that dare r^late:
Great Lords have sought what is freely offered thee,
And w^^h some hazard would be glad to haue't.
55
The pride of Egypts Court I have withstood,
And am est^em'd a chaste and modest D^me,
To thee (...) prost^tute my blood,
And shall I be denied? Fie boy, for shame
56
Collect thy spirits, wrong not thy Country so;
Does Palestine ^aire Eunches only breed?
Are Canaans childrens bodies made of snow?
Or upon Agnus castus do they feed?
57
Without all doubt thy father was not such,
When he made love unto his lovely Pheere:
Thou wrongst both ours, and thine own sex too much,
But most of all thou wrongst thy self (my dear.)
58
By Heaven I do not speak to sift thy faith,
There is more fire, more passion in my speech,
Grant me thy love, and presently (she says)
(Yet once again I humbly thee beseech)
59
Or by The Egyptian Gods, (and then she swore)
As forcing her she would an outcry make:
She loved him much, but she should hate him more,
If now her profer'd favors he forsake.
60
Still mute he stands: nor does one sign express,
That might give comfort to her foul desire:
Still grew she hotter from his backwardness,
Denial like a bellows blows the fire.
61
Yet finding Man and Youth speak in his blood
Rebellious thoughts, to which he was not used,
And that her words grew not to be withstood,
They were with so much love, and sting ^ffused.
62
First, he betakes himself unto his God:
Shall I (quoth he) offend that dreadful Power,
That whips all sinners with a steely rod?
Whose wrath (like flaming fire) does all devour.
63
O could I act this ill without his sight,
I might be drawn to hazard this sweet sin:
Or (say he saw it) were he not of might,
To plague me for it, I might offend therein.
64
Or (both to grant his knowledge and his might)
Were I not sure it were against his will,
The pleasing taste of such a dear delight
Might easily work me to commit this ill.
65
But (O fair Dame) I know my God too well,
Too well, so to provoke him to my death,
My death of soul and body both in hell,
In hell, where there is no ease, nor end of breath.
66
And with this point he breaks the dangerous thrust;
And could we all be drawn unto this ward,
Without all doubt we should have little lust,
To rush so into sin without regard.
67
But (O) the present pleasure of the sense
Is such a Pulley, to draw on consent,
That we are hurryed headlong to the offense,
And never think on following punishment.
68
And that same soul unto the left hand leanes,
Or rather with full pace does thither bend,
That in the quest of good neglects the means,
And in the acts of ill forgets the End.
69
Besides this first safe lock, Joseph recourses
Next to his Masters favors and his trust,
And those good thoughts his Mistres love divorces,
And were strong repercussiues to her lust:
70
Can I (quoth he) abuse so dear a Love,
So great a trust, as is reposed in me?
By such an act I very well might prove
My self a slave, and worthy so to be.
71
For all the gracious favors he has done me,
Shall I requite him with so great a wrong?
Your self would hate me, if you so had won me:
For Lust is hot at hand, but lasts not long.
72
Kind thankfulness does dwell with noble minds,
But never comes in kenning of a slave,
A present profit only works on hynds,
All former favors have one birth, one grave.
73
And had not Heaven directed Joseph's heart,
He might have thought it, (in a reach of wit)
This Ladies Glue, and mine may well impart
A hopeful means of future benefit.
74
But Joseph knew, that fortunes raisd by sin,
Are like to Summer fruit, that soon will rot;
And therefore no such motives work on him,
Greanesse is good, but not by lewdness got.
75
Who thinks by means unlawful to prevail,
Does build his fortunes upon brittle sand,
Whose weak foundations cannot choose but fail,
When glorious virtue does securely stand.
76
Though Earthquakes come, yea though the Heavens do fall,
A spotless Conscience stands without control,
It needs no props to stay it self withal,
But has its strength from motions of the soul.
77
This is a steadfast Rock, and every wave
Turns but to froth that beats against the same,
The care to keep this calm, was that which gave
Joseph support against his lustful Dame.
78
For from the Lady, ma^ger smiles and tears,
And all her bayts that unto lewdness tend,
He loose perforce does break, (the cloak he wears,
Left in her hand) himself away does wend:
79
Which seen, deluded Lust becomes a rage,
Her flow of love turns to a flood of hate,
Foul secrecies each other may engage,
But never truly will incorporate.
80
Murder and Rape she cries: (his Mantle left)
The Ravisher (as one afraid) is fled:
She looks like one of sense and wits bereft,
Ravished in truth, and not imagined.
81
Her out-crie's heard, and Putipher returns,
He knew the voice, and wonders at the cause,
Which when he heard, excuse him, though he burns
To be revenged of Joseph by the Laws.
82
My Lord (quoth she) the slave so dear to you,
Whom you made Ruler of your house and State,
Imboldned by your love, so saucy grew,
As needs he would mine honor violate:
83
Nay, and by force too: But your Love armed fear,
And (though alone) enabled me to cry,
Which heard (base slave) he fled: See Putipher,
The Ensign of your Hebrews modesty.
84
With that she shows his robe, and then she weeps,
For joy, to think what danger she had past,
Into her Lords arms flies, and there she keeps
Her hold, as drowning folks (they say) do fast.
85
Did the slave think I could be false (quoth she)
Or that I would vn^auorie pleasures prove?
Can courser cates be welcome unto me,
That have bin feasted with thy sweets of Love?
86
Often have I drunk, (and yet I still am dry)
Of purest Nectar, from thy lips distilling,
Commanding Cupid dwells in thine eye,
And binds me to be thine, were I unwilling.
87
O Putifer, I have no Heaven but thee,
I cannot move but only in thy sphere:
Dear is my life, mine honor dear to me,
Then Life and Honor too, thou art more dear.
88
And therewithal (as languishing in love)
With a soft sigh she strains him in her arms,
Joseph's desire might stirring passions move:
Lust up in arms soon stirs with small alarmes.
89
Let go (dear Wife) he cries: it is now high time
To punish goatish and ungrateful youth:
Weep not, his blood shall expiate his crime,
Unto the world proclaim his fault, thy truth.
90
With much ado to part she is content;
But by all Love, all powrfull spells adjures,
Her Lord should not remit the punishment,
Which ielious angry Putipher assures.
91
O woman, thou art ever in extremes,
Either an Aetna, or a Caucasus,
Or burning, like the Dog-starr's fiery gleames,
Or like the bleake North Wind benumbing us.
92
Joseph (who went not far) was quickly found,
And brought before his angry Lord, whose face
Speaking his fury: he in yrons bound,
Was straight committed to th'offenders place.
93
'Twas then no time to plead: upon thy Jury
Had I been summoned, heard the Evidence
The Lady gave, poor Joseph, I assure thee,
I should have found thee guilty of the offense,
94
All things did so concur, the time, the place,
The circumstances, her report, her tears,
The Amazed looks of her sad-seeming face,
The servants absence, joined to Potiphers,
95
The beauty of his form, his fire of age,
His parts of Nature against himself reflect,
His greatness in the house, the Ladies rage,
His robe, her cry, his flight, all urge suspect.
96
Man could have judged no less, and but a woman,
No creature could her malice so express:
This was a new way then, perhaps, since common,
Sweet youth, I can but pray for thy release.
97
But he that is the God of Innocence,
And will not not see the Just (though scourged) fall:
How he in prison kept, how freed from thence,
If winds blow well, the Muse discover shall.
98
For now she is grieved so much with Joseph's wrong,
That she but heavily and harshly sings;
A troubled mind does make an untuned Song,
As muddy water flows from trampled springs.
Timens Deum, non habet quod time at vlterim.

JOSEPH IN CARCERE.
OR, The Innocent Prisoner.
1
FRom hopes of Court, to horrors of a Iayle,
From great respect, from friends, from wealth, from place,
Unto a loathsome dungeon without Bail;
A woeful fall: yet this was Joseph's case.
2
They which of late did crouch with cap and knee,
And would have done worse offices perhaps,
In his reproach are open now and free,
With bitter tongues discoursing his mishaps.
3
Now is he censured by the vulgar breath,
For a most base, and most unthankful slave,
For a perfidious villain, worthy death,
And after death, unworthy of a grave.
4
It Is wretchedness too much to be cast down;
What is it then to fall with infamy?
But he that is to any greatness grown,
Upon a change must look for obloquie.
5
Unhappy Virtue cannot be secure,
Scarce from the hands, not from the tongues assault,
Fair actions foul constructions must endure,
When our misfortunes shall be thought our fault.
6
Nay Putipher himself is construed too,
And pierced, perhaps, by the Plebeian wind,
In that he would so indiscreetly do,
As lay such trust upon an unknown Hind.
7
Thou many-headed Monster that art bred
Out of the vulgar m^d, without all brain,
How easily is thy erring judgment led?
To pass a sudden sentence, idle, vain,
8
Without all certain ground, without all weight,
Nay, without any scanning of the matter:
But thou art swayed with a received conceit,
And thy light air soon turns into water:
9
For rashly-heady, thou art easily borne
Now unto one, straight to another mind:
So have I seen a field of eared Corn
Bending all South, blown with a South^rne wind,
10
And let the same but shift into the North,
Then stalks and heads, and all do bend that way:
And can that man be wise, of real vvorth,
That does on such light puffes his fortunes lay?
11
But stay: Me thinks my self forgets my course,
And I begin to sail without my Card,
Though empty Caskes without all true discourse,
Are in their censures sudden, sour and hard,
12
Yet he that looks with other eyes then men,
And finds the heart untainted with offense,
Binds whom we free, and frees whom we condemn,
It Is he alone that safe-gards innocence.
13
And often he works beyond the reach of man,
We cannot fathom him with our short line,
We may as well graspe Heaven within our span,
As sound the depth of what he does design.
14
How could it be conceived by man's discourse,
That gives and fetters were the means to rise?
Yet all-commanding God does take that course,
And Joseph must be raised by enemies.
15
Me thinks I see him looking on his hands
Fast ^ound with chains, which unto heaven he reares,
And are (says he) these heavy iron bands
The golden bracelets that poor virtue wears?
16
Had my too cruel brothers bin so chained,
I had not then bin thus in prison pent,
Such manacles their furies had restrained,
And I had bin as free, as innocent.
17
Or had I with my Lady changed embraces
When in her arms she would have clasped me fast,
I had not tasted then of these disgraces,
Which will (I fear) prove fatal at the last.
18
Virtue, I thought, had bin a real thing,
But now I find, that it is an ayrie name:
Hate did my brothers, lust my Lady sting,
Yet neither they nor she feel smart or b^ame.
19
But I that only a mere Patient was,
And not an ^gent with them in their sin;
It Is I alone that undergo the lash,
And I must smart for what they faulted in.
20
Me thinks my crop should have been like my seed,
I planted Virtue, that sweet smelling Rose,
And can that root such stinging Nettles breed?
But there is use of Nettles, so of foes.
21
Why was I called Joseph? that is Increasing,
And does not I increase in misery?
My name was rightly given, for without ceasing
My strange disasters daily multiply.
22
Yet Job had been a fitter name for me:
Job, Sorrowful, or hated, which you will:
For that sad name does both ways well agree
With those sad fortunes that pursue me still.
23
For am I not a man made up of sorrow,
Whose matter, and whose form is vvretchednesse;
Unhappy now, but shall be more to morrow,
My days are but additions to distress.
24
That Sun, that sees me breathing out my ill,
Will shortly see me without any breath:
Malice and means, a woman and her will,
Lust and neglect; the very sounds of death.
25
And that will be the period of my pain,
The short and sweet compendium of all vvoe:
Weake-hearted Joseph, raise thy spirits again,
Collect thy self, be not dejected so.
26
Often have thou heard thy father Jacob say,
There was a Libra amongst the Signs of Heaven,
Who always did in equal Balance weigh
The acts of men, and kept the Scales most even.
27
And without doubt, when thou art truly weighed,
Thou shall go current, though thou suffer now:
Heaven must not be contested, but obeyed,
To whose just ends all Mortals needs must bow.
28
And Joseph, he that raised thee from the pit,
When thy enraged brothers played their part,
Can find both time and means, when he thinks fit,
To free thee from this dungeon where thou art.
29
But say he do not, why should wretched dust
Be so much daring, as to question God?
Whose Councels often are secret, ever just:
If therefore still he please to use the rod,
30
Be it for me, I have for my defense
Armor of Proof, to bear all blows withal,
A spotless and a peaceful Conscience,
And that is safer then a-brazen wall.
31
And, Joseph, though thy sufferings be most great,
Yet think upon the letters of thy name,
Which being inverted bring some comfort yet:
For (Hope Is) is Joseph his Anagramme:
32
And there is Hope; nay, there is assurance rather,
Where God is pleased to interpose his hand,
Who out of Poisons Antidotes does gather,
As by the Story here we understand:
33
For in close prison where poor Joseph lies,
Mewed up in bolts and chains to death and shame,
Pursude by many dangerous enemies,
The Abused agents of a lustful Dame:
34
There, (even unlooked for there) upon a day,
(And sure 'twas God that put it in his mind)
The Iaylor thought his Prison to survay,
Where many souls, and foul ones he does find.
35
Some theft, some bloody murder did commit:
Joseph, thy name is callenderd for lust,
Which they t^arm'd Rape; and (which did add to it)
Thy Ladies Rape, against thy Lords dear trust.
36
Whom when the Iaylor viewes, through his fair face,
A fayrer soul and heart he sees within,
(Inspired no doubt) he finds the Iaylors grace,
Who did not only quit him of the sin,
37
But of the pain: From chains he sets him free,
And (which was strange) he gives to him the charge
Of all his fellow-prisners: so that he
Was both a prisner, and was yet at large.
38
Joseph the prison kept, God Joseph keeps,
And he finds favor even amongst the bad:
The Iaylor was secure, eats, drinks, and sleeps,
And trusted this fair youth with all he had.
39
And all that Joseph did, (and he did all)
Did prosper far beyond all expectation:
Thus God can raise, whom men would have to fall,
And this was strange and worthy admiration.
40
But see more wonders yet: some few days past,
Pharoes chief Butler fell into di^grace,
An^ from the Court, was into Prison cast,
And that (we see) is often a Courtiers case.
41
What was his fault, I list not to define,
Great Kings are men, and subject unto Ire,
Perhaps he did not please his taste with wine,
Small faults do often add fuel to their fire.
42
Perhaps some other itch'd to have his place,
Which could not be, till he was first removed:
The fall of one is often another grace:
Such tricks are played at Cards, and well approved
43
And this (for ought I know) might be his case,
But the true Cause I find not in the Text,
But this I find: The Butler's in disgrace,
And in the Prison too, and much perplexed.
44
But yet this somewhat qualifyde his grief,
My Lord the Baker is committed too,
And some good Natures hold it some relief,
To have their friends partakers of their woe.
45
Some fatal star in Egypt ruled this year,
So many stars of Court from their Orbs fell,
And yet no blazing Comet did appear:
Which to great states do dire events foretell.
46
But now these Lords to Joseph's care committed,
Are entertayn'd by him with much respect:
Nothing that might content them was omitted,
Yet misery meets often with neglect.
47
Sweet Natures do behold calamity,
With Eyes of pity, not of churlish scorn,
It Is base to triumph over misery,
To tread upon a poor dejected worm.
48
Would thou behold the Picture of a slave?
This very Caracter shall speak him right,
Be sure to find him insolentlie brave,
Against that man, whom fortune does despite.
49
He is a fearful Tyrant to affliction,
A Phalaris unto a sinking state:
Nor does he weigh the causes of deiection,
It Is fault enough to be unfortunate.
50
Joseph is better molded: He does well
And gently use his charge (though in distress)
Affliction's wayward, apt to s^et and swell,
It need not to be galled with bitterness.
51
I know not how these Lords did spend the day,
But in one night they both fell on a Dream:
Dreams a^e the daughters of the wine (some say)
But this was no such vapor, no such steame.
52
Joseph (as was his use) does early wake,
Sad Care, and quiet sleep were ever foes,
A thinking soul does heavy Eyelids make,
For want of timely rest, and sweet repose.
53
His Charge, his Care was great, and soon he rises,
And rising, finds his prisners much perplexed;
To tell the cause, he gently them advises,
And fairly asked, what so their temper vexed?
54
They answer freely: They had seen that night
A Vision, or a Dream, they knew not whether,
And this the rather did them so affright,
Because what it should mean, they cannot gather.
55
But Joseph then replies: Dreams are from God,
(That God whom Joseph serves) please you unfold
The same, by me they may be understood,
Which cannot be expounded, if not told.
56
Gladly they tell the Youth what they had seen,
And first the Butler does his Vision show:
Me thought (quoth he) I saw a Vine all green,
Put forth three stocks, and from those stocks did grow
57
Leaves, branches, grapes, that were both ripe and fair;
unto my hand (me thought) I took the cup,
And pressed the grapes: The King was debonaire,
Received the liquour fairly, drunk it up.
58
Joseph replies: The Dream is very good,
and (noble Lord) this is th'interpretation:
^y the three stocks three days are understood,
That will restore thee to thy former station.
59
And when my Lord before the King shall stand,
And give him wine, as he was wont to do,
And he shall take the Goblet from thy hand,
Remember Joseph, Partner of thy woe.
60
And by thy noble self, I thee adjure,
Who now can tell what is a Prisoners case,
Remember me to Pharaoh, and procure
My liberty, from this delightlesse place.
61
Who am a stranger, and by force was brought,
Out of my native Country to this land,
Sold by my brethren, and by Merchants bought,
And why kept here, I scarsely understand.
62
Thus Joseph thought it fit, to use his friends,
To compass his deliverance, if he can:
He must use means, that will attain his Ends:
Good fortune has forlworne a careless man.
63
We must not think, that wished felicity
Will drop down from the clouds, like showers o^ rain,
Our selves must watch all opportunity,
Use all Endeavor, if we will attain
64
What we desire: Some say, that Jupiter
Does tell his blessings: and the price we pay,
Is our own labor: and they much do err,
Who think by standing still, to end their way.
65
But I go on: when Joseph had foretold,
The Butler thus, It seems the Divination,
Did likewise Please the Baker: who grevv bold,
To tell his Dream, hoping like Explanation.
66
Me thought (he says) I bo^re upon my head,
Three Baskets, full of baked meats, and of bread,
And round about the uppermost there fled,
Birds of the Air, that from that basket fed.
67
The Augure says: Three baskets three days be,
In fine whereof, prepare to loose thy head,
And thou shall hanged be upon the Tree,
And with thy flesh, The Birds and Ravens be fedd.
68
The hours spend quickly: and that very day,
The third (I mean the Critic of the dream)
Was Pharaoh's birth day: (As the Text does say)
Wherein he feasts the Nobles of his Realm,
69
And to make good what was divined before,
The King the Baker hangs by command,
But did the Butler to his place restore,
Who gave again his Cup into his hand.
70
And this great Lord (so must I call him now)
Regaining Honor, promises forgot,
And (as some Courtiers do) neglects his vow,
Per Dures made: such vows we know bind not.
71
Why should he take to heart another harm?
He had no feeling how poor Joseph fared,
Himself (he thanks his starr^s) was well and warm,
What others suffered, he nor felt, nor cared.
72
Indeed we doat upon our selves too much,
And that divides us from all due respect:
Nature (we see) does often loose her touch;
Then it is not strange, that strangers should neglect
73
The loving service, and kind entertain
Of honest Joseph, are forgotten quite;
Look what he did, was b^t for hope of gain,
And all he did, no more then was his right.
74
Unthankfulness is ever apt to find,
At least some colors wherewithal to paint:
Good turns received we give unto the wind,
And in requital we are dull and faint.
75
Because it is no pleasing Meditation
For mounting men, that are to greatness grown,
Always to think upon their Obligation,
And what an answering kindness must be shown.
76
Two years of days run on, and all this while
The Butler (drunk with honor) soundly sleeps,
No care of Joseph, and of his exile,
He dreams not, and his vow therefore not keeps.
77
And here my musing thoughts are at a stand,
And I do more then marvel, that so long
Poor Joseph escaped the knife; the bloody hand
Of his enraged Lord, whose thought of vvrong,
78
Of most unworthy wrong (as he might deem)
Might whet him to the worst of punishment:
But grant, that Time did cool his boiling spleen,
And that the malice of his madness spent
79
On it is own matter, did extinguish so,
As fiery meteors in the fee^ing Air,
The vapors being consumed whence they did grow,
Cease of themselves: but that his Dames despair
80
Of ever now attayning her black ends,
Armed with the fury of neglected love,
Impatient with revenge, which never lends
One thought of peace, but does with madness move,
81
To bring his plotted Tragedy to act,
And so to free her self from all her fears,
How she (I say) should so long time protract,
As not to work his end within these years,
82
Is more then my conceit can diue into.
But (O) thou deep unsounded Providence,
We must admire what thou art pleased to do,
And not survey thy works by our vveake sense.
83
Thick clouds and darkness do encompasse thee,
And are about thy great Pauilion;
Wonder we may, and must adorers be
Of all thy works: but we must let alone
84
All curious Queres, and all busy prying
Into those secrets which thou do conceal:
We melt our wings, and fall, by too high flying;
Prometheus, that the fire from Heaven did steal,
85
Was sharply punished for his enterprise:
That outward bark contains this pith within,
W^ must not labor to be ouer-wise;
To pry into God's Ark, it is a sin.
86
We know 'twas he that calmed these billowing seas,
And brought wrackt Joseph to his hau'n at la^t,
Else had he sunk under such storms as these,
But that Gods hand (his Anchor) held him fast.
87
And now the eternal and still waking Eye,
(That is all Eye to see, to help all Hand)
Looks down at last on Joseph's misery,
And finds him by affliction fully fanned,
88
And straight he stirs: and now all other means,
(All hopeful means) ^oe seem to fail him quite,
Now he (in mercy pitying his extremes)
Does rouse himself, to do wronged Joseph right.
89
O happy men that are in Gods protection,
No earthly Monarch has a guard so sure:
Legions of Angels seru^ at his direction,
To fortress those, whom he will have secure.
90
All the whole Creature is at his command,
The Sun stands still to wayt on Joshua,
The Stars of Heaven (enrolled in his band)
Do in their courses fight against Sisera.
91
Nay, fire and water too are ioy'nd in one,
Both stars and streams do their best help afford,
The river Kis^on unto arms does run, Judge. 20.21

To fight the glorious battles of the Lord.
92
The Elements are Marshals of his host,
By night the fiery Pillar, and by day
The Cloud conducts his people to their coast,
To which the very Sea it self gives way.
93
The Vict'lere of his Camp he makes the Winds,
Sometimes with bread from Heaven, sometimes with Quails;
The stony rock plenty of water finds,
To give his Soldiers drink when water fails.
94
O ever to be fear'^, and loved withal,
(Feared for thy might, and for thy mercy loved)
I am all wonder, when to mind I call,
With what strange weights thy motions still are moved.
95
Joseph must be releast: that is the Decree,
And from the Prison to the Court be brought,
That Is in the Order too: And now let us see
How God does work, till all his will be wrought:
96
First unto Pharaoh ( Egypts King) he sends
A double Dream, with which he is much perplexed:
He wakes, and longs to know what it portends;
(What the Dreams were, I leave you to the Text)
97
Then does he send, and summon to the Court
All Egypts Magi, to expound his Dreams:
They hear them told, but cannot make report
Unto the King, what this his Vision means,
98
And that was strange: The Egyptians were renownd
Above all Nations, for their skill that way,
In hidden Learning they were held profound,
And so the sacred Text does seem to say.
99
Witness beside the skill they labored so,
In that abstrute and secret Mystery
Of Hieroglyphicke Art, which they did show
In an obscure deepe-shadow'd Charactrie.
100
But yet in this the Magi must be blind,
Because the task for Joseph was reserved;
And now the Butler wakes, and calls to mind
Forgotten Joseph, whom he thus preferred:
101
Great King, I must confess my fau^t this day,
And crave your pardon: I have broke a vow
Which once I made (when I in prison lay)
Unto an Hebrew, and remember now:
102
When as my Lord was with his servants wroth,
And put his Baker, and my self in chains,
A vision in one night appeared to both,
And the^e this Hebrew prisoner it explaines.
103
And as he did divine, it did succeed,
You hanged your Baker, took me to your grace,
The inspired Prophet can your Dream aread.
Make haste (quoth Pharaoh) let me see his face.
104
And now is Joseph sent for to the Court,
And (new adorned) does look as fresh as May,
And well he might do so, there is reason for it:
Good fortunes breed good blood, good spirits (men say.)
105
Being come, the King does take him by the hand,
(Even Kings know to be kind, to gain their ends)
Although no phrase did fit him but command,
Yet he unto a milder form descends,
106
And (welcome) says: I had a Dream this night,
And what is meant thereby I feign would learn;
And thou in Visions have (I hear) insight,
Thy piercing eye heavens secrets does discern.
107
And then he tells him, what before he told
To Egypts Magi. Joseph straight replies:
Your double dream one meaning does infold,
And that God will not hide from Pharaohs eyes.
108
In me it is not; Genesis 41.16
but the God of Heaven
Shall answer Pharaoh to his hearts desire.
Poor puffe-past Man, here is example given
Unto thy swelling thoughts, not to aspire.
109
Not to assume the glory and the praise
Unto thy self, of what is given to thee:
Thy parts are but reflections from those Rays,
By whose fair beams thy clouds dispersed be.
110
Cymerian darkness does possess thy spirit;
If gracious God be pleased to lend thee light,
Will thou ascribe it to thy proper merit?
And steal from him that which is his in right?
111
Will thou unto thy Netts do sacrifice? Hab. 1.16

And hug the self in the arms of thine own love?
If thou be (...), le^rned rich, and wis^,
Know, it is the (...) ^phere that makes thee move.
112
Thy graces are but Donatiues from Heaven,
The good is thine, return the glory thither,
For fear God take away what he has given,
And he that made thee grow does make thee wither
113
What, is not this great Babel I have built Dan. 4.30

To show my power, perpetuate my name?
Alas (poor Prince) thy outside is but guilt,
A sudden storm will wash away the same.
114
For whilst the word was yet even in thy mouth,
A voice from Heaven did tell thee heavy news,
Promotion comes not from the North or South,
Heavens influence only does all good infuse.
115
I could not choose when I had yoked my Teame,
But make this furrow to enrich my field,
And now I do return to Pharaohs Dream,
Whose Exposition Joseph thus does yield:
116
The seven fat Oxen that you saw ascend,
That were so fair to sight in your first dream,
Seven years of joyful plenty do portend,
Seven years of famine the seven lean ones mean.
117
The Ears of Corn divine the self same thing:
But God is good, and what he means to do,
He now is pleased to show unto the King,
And give him warning ere it shall ensue.
118
After seven years of store, seven years of want,
Of bitter famine shall the land oppress,
Wherein both bread and food shall be ^o scant,
As all the land shall mourn for barrenness.
119
Twice did my God present it to your view,
Because he would have Pharaoh mark it well:
When God speaks one thing twice, believe it is true;
Make use (great King) of what I do foretell.
120
Cull out some man that is provident and wise,
And let him be Surveyor of your Land,
Let him collect the fruits that shall arise
From forth the first seven years of plenty, and
121
Let every Town and City Garners build,
Where they may safely lay up corn and grain;
And when those Garners are so stored and filled,
Take care (O King) it be not spent in vain.
122
The King was glad to hear the Divination,
And his great servants were as glad as he:
What man so fit as thou in all the Nation,
(The King replies) in whom heavens graces be?
123
Be it as thou have said: Thy self alone
Shall be the Regent of my Land and State.
Only my self will sit upon the Throne,
And next my self I thee subordinate.
124
With that he takes the Signet from his hand,
And therewith Joseph's finger does invest;
A golden chain (the Ensign of command)
Puts on his Neck: clads him in linen vest.
125
And on his second Charret makes him ride,
Whilst through the Court the Trumpets sound his name,
By officers, who were therein imployd,
Who seemed most forward to perform the same.
126
Because that Joseph now is in his spring,
But if a Winter should but chance to come,
Those Nightingales that now so sweetly sing,
I doubt, would change their notes, or else be dumb.
127
Nay (which is worse) they would like Adders be,
And hiss and bite: Greatness trust not too much,
Unto a smiling brow, a Cringing knee,
A soothing tongue: they will scarce abide the touch,
128
When they are truly brought unto the Test:
Momus did find an error in Jove's Art,
Because he made no windows in man's breast,
By which he might both see and know his heart.
129
Well Joseph now is mounted very high,
And God has raised him to a loft^e Pitch,
Whose Agent Pharaoh still does multiply:
His favors to him: He grows great and rich.
130
The eyes of Kings are more then common eyes,
They are the stars that do predominate,
Th'affayres of men, and in their influence lies,
The good or badd of every ones estate.
131
They are the Primum Mobile of all,
They whirle about our fortunes, as they list:
Their motions make Inferiors rise or fall:
And as they favor, we are cursed or blessed.
132
Though Poets fictions seem to savor much
Of Idle Errors, yet they have their sense:
King Midas turned to gold all he did touch,
The moral is: the favor of the Prince.
133
This gracious hand can work the like effect,
Not India's richest mines breed purer gold,
Then those fair Rays of comfort that reflect,
From the eyes of Kings: there grows that precious mold.
134
Whose smooth and smiling brow is the true place,
Of honor, wealth, respect, dependencie,
And in his frowning Forehead dwells disgrace,
Common contempt, hate, wrong, and poverty.
135
And it is fitting, that it should be so,
All Light must be derived from the Sun,
And as all Rivers from the Sea first flow,
So they again into the Sea must run.
136
Pharaoh still studies to do Joseph good,
And (^o complete the pleasures of his life)
Fair Asenath, of grace and Princely blood,
A beauteous Virgin, must be Joseph's wife.
137
Asenath, Daughter of the Prince of On:
Thus for his servants gracious God prouides,
Who after troubles and affliction,
Fills up their joys: as rivers the Spring-tides.
138
Now you have seen a true particular
Of Joseph's fortunes, weigh them at a Beam,
His sour, his sweet, his loss, his gain confer,
'Twill be a useful and delightful Theme.
139
Joseph removed from Canaans fruitful Soil,
Planted in Egypt, with great growth is blessed;
In vulgar Phrase this may be called Exile,
But that is a man's best country where he is best.
140
In Canaan Joseph in a Pit I find,
Here I do see him next the Regal Throne,
There he has many brothers, but unkind:
Here many favors are by strangers shown.
141
But he is divided from a Fathers sight,
To whom he was as dear, as his own Eyes:
In liew whereof a monarch of great might,
Even Pharoahs love old Jacobs loss supplies.
142
And yet he is not lost: He shall be met,
With a more tender touch of true delight:
So broken bones prove stronger, being well set,
And darkest grounds make white to seem more white.
143
The Ishmalites did sell him for a slave,
But (lo) he is raised to be a power-full Lord:
The Prison, (that at least was meant his grave)
The means of his advancement does afford.
144
His first disaster did arise from dreams,
And dreams must cure the wounds that dreams did make
Friends often do fail their friends in their extremes,
But God his servants never does forsake.
145
It Was he that made this Metamorphosis,
And mark how all his works are sitted right:
The Prison to a Pal^ace changed is,
The iron grates to Prospects of delight.
146
His Alchymy did turn the gyues he wore,
(The iron gyues) Into a golden chain,
With course and common cates he fed before,
Now Sea and Land both give him entertayne.
147
Without all doubt Joseph did often bear,
The bitter burden of offensive scorn:
Now ( A word of honor amongst them.
Abrech, Abrech) sounds in every ear,
Whilst in ^ is Charet he is in Triumph borne.
148
The loa^hsome Savors change to sweet-perfumes,
The Prison garment to a Robe of Price,
The groans of wretched Souls to cheerful tunes,
All hell indeed is ^urn'd to Paradise.
149
And for th'imbraces of an unchaste Dame,
(Whose softest touch is but an Aspicks sting,
Whose fairest looks do breed a hellish flame,
Whose sweetest breath a deadly dampe does bring)
150
Joseph enioyes the pure and heavenly heat
Of both a lawful and delightful bed,
Whose virtuous pleasures only are complete,
From whence there is nor shame, nor sorrow bred.
151
Well, then I see the Proverb holds true,
Bees make not honey one^y for the bad,
Triumphant Virtue shall attain his due,
Whose acts endswel, though the first scenes be sad.
152
Where sin seems Sugar to us at first taste,
Which often we swallow down with deep delight,
But still it ends in bitterness at last,
And proves to be a deadly Aconite.
153
Well, Joseph is at rest with his fair Phere,
And that (my weary Muse) is fit for thee.
For this time (lo) I pitch my Pillars here,
And ( Ne plus vltra) shall my Posie be.
Timens Deum, non habet quod time at vlterius.

JOSEPH IN SVMMO. OR, The Noble Favorite.
1
NOw after thunder and tempestuous storms,
The purged air grows to be calm and clear,
And all the stars put on their fairest forms,
To smile on Joseph each one from its Sphere.
2
Old froward Saturn (erst malevolent)
Is now appeased by his more gentle Son,
Whose sweet aspect has made him eminent,
And he is seated next the Kingly throne.
3
Stern Mars, that but of late was bent to blood.
Being now with Venus in conjunction.
Has changed his fury to a milder mood,
And now from Arms he^^ ^s to Amors won,
4
Sol shines upon him with his cherefull rays,
Who gives him wealth; and Hermes eloquence,
And Cynthia she her brightest beams displayes,
And he grows fruitful by her influence.
5
But these are not the giuers of our good,
It Is only God that does command them all,
And his commands can never be withstood:
He smiles, and men do rise; He frowns, they fall.
6
The Planets are but agents of his will,
They rule in us sometimes, he rules them ever:
The Alluding to the blessed Trinity.
Trine aspect is the most blessed still,
Who Is under that can be unhappy never.
7
Joseph was so, who but of late was seen,
Even in his depth of Winter almost dead;
And (lo) a sudden Spring has made him green,
Much grown in height, and very greatly spread.
8
Observe the flows and ebbes of Man's estate;
See how that part of the still turning wheel,
Which was but low, and touched the ground of late,
Is now the highest, and will straight ways reele
9
Down to the Center: No man is so fixed,
But that he may be soon remoou'd again,
The world has nothing simple: all is mixed,
An hour of pleasure, and a day of pain.
10
Therefore what ere thou be, do not despair,
Loose not thy fortunes, and thy hopes together:
Thy Morning's foul, thine Evening may be fair,
For Man's estate does alter like the weather.
11
Often have I heard some aged men foretell
Or following Rain, by th'aking of their bones;
I do not like that Almanacke so well,
I Would rather fetch my skill from sweating stones:
12
For stones (some say) will sweat against a rain:
That may be so: but this is certain true,
Our states have sometimes cramps, then sound again,
Then sick again, and then comes health anew.
13
Joseph you saw late in a deadly swoune,
Now he recouers, and to strength does grow,
Who (notwithstanding all his great renown)
Does not forget why he was raised so.
14
He knows although he were a Magistrate,
It Was not for his own ends, or for his ease,
But to provide for, and preserve the state,
Which seven years bitter famine else would seyze.
15
He thinks upon his work he has to do:
He mouldes his business in his careful mind:
Great King, brave Court, dear wife to all adue,
Joseph must sail now with another wind.
16
He Is Country-bound: and now he does provide,
For following famine, In the years of store:
It Is good (men say) to take both Wind and Tide,
And whilst they both serve well, to ply the Oar.
17
Me thinks, I do behold this laboring Be,
How he flies up and down to store his hiue,
And (sweetest time) he gathers most from thee,
And so must all Bees do that mean to thrive.
18
There are some happy hours which if we take,
We crown our labors with desired success,
And if th^se fitting seasons we forsake,
We well may wish them more, but find them less.
19
He builds, he gathers, and he lays up grain,
The best of his abilityes he spends,
In ceass-lesse labor, and unwearied pain:
That he may be successful in his ends.
20
It was no May Game that he had in hand,
His charge was weighty, and required him all;
Men that are great in Place, and in command,
Are not their own, must not be several.
21
They must be like the Sun, whose common flame,
Affords heat and light to euery-one,
There Is more in greatness then the very name,
It has much matter for to work upon.
22
The prudent statesman oftentimes does wake,
Whilst sweet Repose seals up the vulgar Eye:
His country care often makes his head to ache,
With forging thousand forms of policy.
23
And without doubt, they which sit near the healme
And have the greatest steerage of the state,
Are the most painful servants of the Realm,
To whom the Prince his power does delegate.
24
Both for his own, and for his Countries good,
Which must be the chief end of their endeavors:
So Joseph is imployd to gather food,
And in that service seven years he perseuers.
25
And the Almighty pleased to bless him so,
That he did store up grain in such a measure,
As that the number numberless did grow,
And yet he was not barred from lawful pleasure:
26
For in those years God gave him two fair Boy^s,
To be the staff of his declining Eld,
And in those blessings Joseph's soul more joys,
Then in the greatest honors that he held:
27
Manasseh, Ephraim, (comforts of his life)
You are his glory, and his strength beside,
Himself divided was, his loving wife,
His children were himself, but multiplide:
28
So many selves will make one self long lived,
In whom he still shall live, when he is dead:
Egypt saw Joseph's end, yet he surviu'd
In those fair boughs, that from his root were spread.
29
But I must to my task, for Time goes on,
And (as men say) flies with a Swallows vving:
The years of plenty soon are past and gone,
And famine n^w thrusts forth her deadly sting:
30
And then how Joseph did himself deport,
How well he governed his long-gather'd grain,
And how all Egypt did to him resort
For needful food, whose sale brought in great gain
31
To his Lords coffers: how he bought their Land,
Their goods, their cattle, and themselves vvithall,
The sacred Writ will make you understand.
Egypt farewell: for Canaan now does call.
32
Yet this before I go, (observe it well)
And it is but touched, to shame our wretched Time:
Al^hough wise Joseph (as the Text does te^l)
Did make a purchase of The Egyptian Clime
33
To his Kings use: yet did he hold his hand
From buying of the Priests that which was theirs,
He would not meddle with the Holy land,
'T was consecrated: therefore he forbeares
34
Such a irreligious purchase: yet the King,
Supplies them, with all necessary food:
Though the their fields no fruitful crops did bring;
Yet they that served for the common good,
35
It Was just the common-good should serve for them,
Even Heathen people held it piety,
To furnish with fit means religious men:
Although they worshipped a false Dietie.
36
How then should we respect and honor too,
The faith^ull servants of the living Lord?
And so (we see) our sacred Sovereign do:
And (O) me thinks his Copy should afford
37
A fair example, for to guide our hand;
In other things Authority swayes much:
And we are willing Apes to great command:
But yet in this we have too little touch.
38
And so (indeed) we have in all devotion,
Our heaven is on the Earth: we sweat for that:
Our Ayme's at wealth, at honor, and promotion,
And in pursuit of them, we are very hot.
39
But stay, ^y Muse, why do thou change thy course?
For thou were shipped and bound for Canaan,
Where famine likewise raged with great force;
Even Jacob wants, that was a vvealthy man,
40
That had both Coin, and Cattle at command,
Strong in his issue, and beloved of God:
Yet now he is under his afflicting hand,
Whose dearest children cannot escape the rod.
41
And he does often rule them with black Lead,
That he may keep them straighter in the line.
And (left by rest there should a rust be bred)
By filing them he does them often refine.
42
Therefore thou happy soul, that seeks for Heaven,
Expect not here a Deluge of delight:
If God does make thy cares and comforts even,
It is a work of Mercy, not of right.
43
When Jacob heard, that Egypts store did yield
Sufficient grain, even for a foreign good,
He calls to him his sons, and then he wild
They should for Egypt make, to buy some food.
44
He needs not bid them spur (the Proverb says)
Whom bitter famine on their way does drive,
They take their fathers blessing, go their ways:
And speed for Egypt, where they soon arrive.
45
To Joseph brought, their business they declare,
And to the ground their humble knees they bow,
Without his warrant they can have no ware:
And by the name of Lord salute him now.
46
Joseph his brethren sees, and wonders much,
And now his former dreams he calls to mind:
He bears him self, as if he had no touch,
Of nature in him: strives to be unkind.
47
He knew them well: but would not know them now
O, they were spies, and came to search the land,
Come was their Color, but they practiced how
To bring all Egypt under their command.
48
How soon may greatness draw the innocent,
At least within the seeming gripe of laws?
And if it be to rigorous courses bent,
How readily it finds, or makes a cause?
49
The brethren tell him, that they came to buy,
Food for their father, and their familyes,
That they his servants meant no trachery,
That they were neither borne, nor bred for spies.
50
That they were one man's sons, who had two more,
And that the youngest with their Sire was left,
And that the other was (long time before)
By fatal accident from him bereft.
51
I, thence it is, that I suspect you spies,
You go not hence, except that youth come hither,
By this you shall be ^ry'd ( Joseph replies)
As by a third they parley'd thus together.
52
There Is no contesting with great Joseph now:
They must to Prison, whither they were sent,
Till farther time more l^^sure did allow,
And better means, to sound their whole intent.
53
Imprisonment, thou art the living grave,
Wherein to bury men, whilst they are quick,
And yet the soul may freest motions have:
Although the body be immured with brick,
54
For nothing can confine the working soul,
That may recourse unto Heavens glorious frame,
And compass all the world without control,
And fee, and sound the actions of the same.
55
An able active Sir Ib. Palmer died with John D. of Northumban ^.^. Mary. Ioh.
St^^
Gentleman of worth,
That lost his head when Mary swayd the State,
Upon the Scaffold freely gave it forth,
That he had learned more in the Tower of late,
56
Then in the course of all his life beside,
Being vvell-traveil'd, vvell-imployd at home;
And yet (quoth he) whilst I did there abide,
I got more knowledge in yon little room,
57
(Poynting unto a corner of the Tower)
Then before that I ever could attain:
For there I learned to know Gods supreme power,
My self a sinful worm, the world most vain.
58
O happy man, that studiest well this art;
And happy place that made him study so:
And blessed Books (dear bolts) that did impart
Such sacred, secret Science, which few know,
59
And fewer care to learn: and that is the cause
Why our desires so do^^ on vanity,
That we are carried hood-winked without pause,
Into unseen, but certain m^^erie.
60
I may even of my self an instance make:
When did I entertain such thoughts as these?
Oh when did I this theme for subject take?
Whilst sin (begot with wealth, and nursed with ease,
61
Confirmed with use) did only sway my will,
Without all care of God, my self, or other.
But this is not the story of my ill,
The brothers call me, shut up by a brother,
62
And so restrained, and all remoou'd from them:
Me thinks, I seem to see them how they stare
Each upon other, like amazed men,
Wondering both why, and how, and where they are.
63
A three days durance they endured there:
Joseph, thou keep'st not just proportion,
One day the Pit contained thee, and was clear
Of thee again before the setting Sun.
64
The punishment in this transcendes the offense,
Even like for like, had bin equality:
Yet Joseph, this I Will say in thy defense,
And truly, without partiality.
65
Their act was diu'llish, and unnatural,
Which ^ast upon thee many-yeares-restraynt,
In daily fear of death (the gall of gall)
Whilst their vnsuffring souls no care did taynt.
66
No thought of thee, no pity of thy wrong,
And therefore now they very justly bear
This short, and easy durance: thine was long,
And vndes^ru'd: thou free, they faulty were.
67
And yet it seems, that Joseph's soul did grieve;
For sending for them, thus to them he said:
I likewise fear your God: do this, and live
Let one of you a Prisoner here be stayed,
68
The rest return unto your aged Sire,
Both his, and your own wants shall be supplide,
But bring your brother with you I require,
For that is the Test whereby you shall be tryde.
69
Joseph had spoke the word, they must obey;
And yet they took it to the very heart,
And to themselves in their own language say,
That these their sufferings came by due desert.
70
Although that they were spotless of this crime,
Wherewith unjustly they were charged vvithall,
Yet when they cast the account of their whole time,
And summed up all their acts in general,
71
They found a Brother missing, whom they sold,
(Stirred up by spleenefull hatred) to his grave,
And now there are by sad Remembrance told,
That they must Legem talionis have.
72
Now Conscience gives better Evidence,
Who is both Witness and Tormentor too,
And Reub^^ now vpbraids them with the offense,
Now see, what your blind malice made you do.
73
I wished you not to sin against the youth,
But you were deaf as Adders, would not hear,
Now is his blood required: And now in truth,
Your seed of sin this crop of shame does bear.
74
They do confesseth' Indictment, 'twas too true,
Their brothers blood did for just vengeane cry,
And now the hand of Heaven pays them their due,
And they are caught in their impiety.
75
O sin, the fretting corr'siue of the heart,
The biting worm that breeds within the breast,
A sure, but sad remembrancer thou art,
No rest till done, and then indeed no rest.
76
Well, now there is no resisting Joseph's will:
Of all extremes 'twas best to choose the least:
Simeon as Pledge must stay in prison still,
(For so was Joseph's choice) for all the rest,
77
Who were dismissed in peace, and all their sackes
By Joseph's Officers were filled with grain,
Who likewise put their moneys in their packes,
And what they brought, restored to them again.
78
Home they return, and to their father tell
How Egypt used them, what the Ruler said,
Of all things in the voyage them befell,
A short, plain, true narration to him made.
79
You may conceive, that aged Israel,
Heard the relation with a great distaste:
And inwardly his grieved heart did swell,
Till thus it leap't into his tongue at last.
80
Ios^ph is not: Simeon is not to me,
And shall I likewise Benjamin forgo?
Why have you done these things: since these things be
Against your father, and all work his woe.
81
What, do you find your own affections such,
As that you hold the less of Children light?
In my sad soul I feel another touch,
And nature works in me with powerful might.
82
The motions of a tender father's love:
An vn^ouch'd heart can hardly comprehend:
But you are fathers too: and well may prove,
Even by your selves: that nature does descend,
83
I cannot yield, that Benjamin should go,
His brother's dead, and he is left alone:
If he should die, I should but live in woe,
And dying, go into my grave with moan.
84
When he was borne, his mother was bereft me,
My dearest Rachell (see, you make me weep)
And nothing now of her, but him is left me,
And (as her dying Pledge) I him will keep.
85
Thus he resolved: but famine still grows hot,
The food was almost spent, that late was brought:
In Canaan there was little to be got:
A new supply from Egypt must be sought.
86
The stately Steed that champes the steely bit,
And proudly seems to menace friend and foe,
Does fling and foame, and boundeth often, and yet,
(Poor beast) perforce he is enforced to go.
87
And good-old Israel, so it fares with thee,
Thy Benjamin must go: there is no boot,
For all thy other sons in this agree:
That without him, they will not stir a foot.
88
Better at home to end their weary race,
And with their dearest friends together dye:
Then go and seek for death in a strange place,
And that with public scorn, and infamy.
89
Besides his Judah earnest (...) did make,
That to his care he would commit his sone:
His deare-lou'd Darling, he would undertake,
For his return: which should be safe, and soon.
90
Jacob replies: it must be so (I see)
Well, take with you the best fruits of the land,
Gifts silent speakers, but preuailers be:
For Hawks come not unto an empty hand.
91
Therefore take somewhat of each seu'rall thing,
To show your thankful minds in worst extremes:
A better fortune greater gifts would bring:
But your poor present answeares to your means.
92
And in your hand the money hither brought,
Doubly return: for fear some oversight
By you my sons should formerly be wrought:
And take your brother too, my chief delight.
93
And when that you have done all that you may,
God make you gracious in the great-mans eyes,
For only he must guy'd you in your way:
And give a blessing to your enterprise.
94
I, holy father, tha's the point indeed,
Now thou have hit the nail upon the head,
The best of our endeavors cannot speed,
If by the hand of heaven not seconded.
95
Vain are their thoughts, that think their watching can
Preserve that City, which God does not keep,
And their's as vain, who quit all use of man,
And think that God will guard them, though they sleep
96
Where to our safety our sedulitie,
Is requisite: God seldom works alone,
Neglect of means is fond credulity,
First for the Lord, Judge. 7.18
, and then for Gideon.
97
And that is the only course that men can take,
Unto Gods blessing join thine own endeavor,
Heaven helps not him, that does himself forsake,
The end and means do always go together.
98
But stay my muse, me thinks thy pace is slow,
Thou make no speed in thy intended way:
Perhaps thou art tyr'de with travel to and fro,
Then take thine Inn until some other day.
99
Or else perhaps the famine makes thee faint,
Which works too strongly in thy feeble brain:
I, there is the ga^l: These are thy years of want,
Some better times will make thee sing again.
Timens Deum, non habet quod time at vlterius.

The Continuation.
1
AFter a blessing from their aged Sire,
To Egypt land the Brethren be^d their course,
A speedy help such sad extremes require,
They needs must haste, whom griping famine force.
2
Some time being spent, and weary travel past,
Once more they gain the wished for Land of food,
And once again before the face at last,
Of their known Lord, but unknown Brother stood;
3
Who had their errand, ever they could it tell,
He knew 'twas Hunger forced them to that place:
'Twas Egypts food that must that Monster quell,
And that could not be had without his grace.
4
He could not likewise choose but call to mind
Their cruel and vnnat'^all insolence,
How once with envy more then famine pynd,
To thraldom they betrayed his innocence.
5
Without regard of duty to their Sire,
Or pity to the moanes of him their brother:
Now time served fit for to repay their hyre;
Yet all these faults his tender love does smother,
6
And his mild Heart relents to see their want
They were his Brothers though before unkind,
Perhapps (says he) their error they recant
And if they do, shall they not pardon find?
7
So fed, his Benjamin he does behold,
Th^n calls his Steward, wills him to prepare
P^enty of Meat. Those Hebrew-strangers should
Dyne at his hoame, and of his bounty fare.
8
To Joseph's house the Steward leads these Men,
They went unwilling being ^ore afraid,
Their hearts misgaue them some state-plot even then
To work their Bondage cunningly was laid.
9
And therefore to the Steward they confess
That food of him they once had bought before
Fear was so powrefull, they could do no less
Their full confess' on pardon does implore.
10
They told him that the price, last paid for Grain,
Was unexpected found in each Man's sack,
But they that silver, and as much again
For new supplies had honestly brought back.
11
The Steward says, all is peace, be not dismayed
Your God, your fathers God that silver gave,
I had your money; for the Corn ye paid:
And you, your Symion left for pledge shall have.
12
Them all, into his Lords fair house he guides
Prepares them water for to wash their Feet,
And for their Beasts he provender provides,
With other things for their refreshment meet.
13
Mean while the great Lord they prepare to greet,
With those rich presents they from Canaan brought
He Is now retur'd from Court, lo at his Feet
They prostrate fall, and him of grace besought.
14
To buy some food his favor they desire,
He kindly greets them, rayseth them from ground
And quest'ond them how fared their aged Sire
The good old Man, they spoke off; safe and sound?
15
They lowly bowed again, then make replye
Our aged Sire thy servant yet does live
Where with on Benjamin he cast his Eye,
And loving looks unto the Lad does give,
16
Is this the youth of whom ye erst did tell,
To thee my son (he said) God gracious be:
With that kind Nature in his breast does swell,
H s bowels y^rnd his Mothers son to see.
17
Moved by affection, he from them vvithdrawes,
And in his private chamber weeps amain:
Then dries his eyes after a little pause,
With cheerful looks he visits them again.
18
Mean while good Joseph rows against the tide,
Nature, kind Nature would it self display,
But (willing) yet a while himself to hide,
He forced his Love, Discretion to obey.
19
He calls for meat, which was served up in state,
And at the table he does sit alone:
The Hebrews were in order served, vvhereat
Within himself, they marveiled each one.
20
The Hebrews and Egyptians severd set:
For by the Law of the Egyptian Nation,
They might not at one board together eat,
Because by them 'twas held abomination.
21
To count the several dishes of this Feast
In these dear times, would make my Muse too sad,
Messes they had, the Text says, who had least,
But Benjamin five times their portion had.
22
They are full-fed now with delicious cates,
Whose hungry souls did whilome pine for food,
Such is the change of our uncertain states,
After a dead low water, comes a flood.
23
The fickle world is never at one stay,
Humane affairs roll in uncertainty,
Vain men, we ring the Changes: every day
Brings forth, to light, some new variety.
24
Then let this ceaselesse, restless agitation
Inflame our souls; all our affections move
To seek for rest, and a sure habitation
In Heaven the new Jerusalem above.
25
The Dinner ended, Joseph does provide
To have each Hebrews sack filled full with grain,
And each man's Coin in his sackes mouth was tide:
Thus they have food for naught yet once again.
26
Into the Sack of his dear Benjamin,
He caused his silver Cup to be conveyed,
And by this means he does occasion win,
To have the youth from his departure stayed.
27
As soon as morn displayed her blushing red,
And c^eare light showed to Travelers their way,
Each Hebrew with his chardg from Joseph sped:
Little suspecting of a new delay.
28
They had not from the City traueld far,
But Joseph's Steward them in have pursues:
He ouer-takes them, they arrested are,
And speechless stand amazed at this sad news.
29
He questioned them, why ill for good they paid,
His Lords divining Silver Cup was gone,
They strangers were, and false perhaps he said:
For but themselves, himself suspected none.
30
This said, at length they thus to him replyde:
Why should our Lord to us these speeches say,
In our sackes mouths when we the silver spyde,
Brought back from Canaan we did it repay.
31
^ is unlikely therefore we should steal,
And use such falsehood where such love we found:
Yet search us all, and he that thus shall deal,
Let him to death, the rest to Prison bound.
32
^ee't so, the Steward says; with that each one,
Takes from his Laden beast his sack of corn,
From eldest Reuben now the search is gone,
And by degrees come to the youngest borne.
33
The silver Cup is found in the youths sack,
The brethren rend their clothes to find it so,
Now once again each man assumes his pack,
And with sad looks back to the City go.
34
And he that whilom served these men in state,
With dainty dishes at a Princelike board,
Safe-guards them now as fellows of stolne-plate,
So great a change so small time does afford.
35
To Joseph's house they now again are brought:
Where he did stay expecting their surprise,
For he was witting of what would be wrought,
And thieves now made them that supposd them spies
36
When they be held his face, (with shame dejected)
To bended knees they do themselves be^a^e:
A as (quot^ he) what is this ye have effected;
Did you not know that I could trial make?
37
Then Judah (thus) What shall we plead or say
Unto my Lord, our selves we cannot free,
It Is Isreal's God that does ou^ sins repay,
And for our the^t we must thy bondmen be.
38
Nay God forbid that I should use you so,
Joseph to those afflicted men replied,
Who stole my Cup, himself to me does owe,
He is my servant, no man else beside.
39
The rest depart in peace unto your Sire.
Then Judah on his knees says, O my Lord,
Whom as a second Pharaoh we admire,
Vouchsafe to hear thy servant speak a word:
40
When first before my Lord we did appear,
It pleased him ask, if we had Sire or Brother:
We truly told, we had a father dear,
All we his sons, and that he had one other,
41
A little one, begot in his old age,
Therefore the more beloved, the more respected,
His brother dead, and he the only gage,
Left by that Mother, whom our Sire affected.
42
Then you enioyn'd us, never see your face,
Or bring the youth, you might his face behold:
When to our father we first told our case,
The sad relation made his old heart cold.
43
One of my sons (quoth he) sent to the field,
Was torn in pieces, never more seen since,
Should I depart with this, and he should yield
To death, by sickness, or by violence,
44
'Twould break my aged heart, my old gray head
With grief and sorrow throw into the grave:
(O my good Lord) detain me in his stead,
I am his Pledge, and to my father gave
45
My faith for his return, with execration,
Let Judah bear the blame for evermore,
Unless I bring to Isreal's habitation,
Young Benjamin: even thus thy servant swore.
46
Then since the old man's being does depend
On the Youths life, let me thy servant be
And with my Brethren back the stripling send
And Judah will be bound, to pray for thee.
47
When Joseph heard his Brothers sad relation,
He could no longer his affection hide
Though great ones present, of the Egyptian Nation
Yet Joseph wept, the text says, loud he cried.
48
Avoid the Room, quoth he, let no man stay
Except these Hebrews, all the rest depart,
Then Joseph to his brethren does display
The inward feelings of his tender heart.
49
See Joseph, lives our father? make report,
But they were stricken dumb with that surprise
Be not dismayed, God sent me to the Court
For to relieve your wants, by my supplies.
50
And this was done to work your preservations,
Our fathers God made me his instrument,
Two years has famine seized upon most nations,
And five such year of want must yet be sent.
51
Therefore return unto our aged Sire
And from my self, sa^ute him in this sort;
Egypts Protector Joseph does desire
To see old Israel at King Pharaohs Court.
52
Himself, his Childrens Children, herds and sheep,
In fruitful Goshen land, shall have a Rome
Near to my self, I them, and theirs will keep
From five years Famine that is yet to come.
53
Remember what I give in charge ye tell,
And Joseph's Honors seen by you relate,
With that on Beniamins fair neck he fell,
And wept so fast, his tears, their tears begat.
54
This was a wondrous and strange salutation,
And unto Egypts King was quickly brought
Who was affected so with the relation
That till he Joseph saw, full long he thought.
55
And seen, he says, unto thy Brethren say
Do this, depart, load beasts, to Canaan go
And bring your father hither that he may
Here with his household live, and let him know.
56
It Is Pharaohs will, the best of Egypts land
Ye shall possess, and ye shall eat the fat,
Even Egypts fat. This more I do command,
You give them Chariots, to conveigh them, that
57
Their father, children, wives may come at ease,
They shall be welcome, unto Egypts King,
Care not for stuff, nor vtensils, for these
Pharaoh shall give them, and what other thing
58
Egypt is master of, my land is yours
The best of all my land, it is Pharoahs gift;
We well may call that ours which God assures,
It Is he from ashes unto Thrones can lift.
59
I am so ouerioy'd I cannot write,
What were the Joys the brethren did conceive?
But sure I am each heart must needs be light;
For Royal Gifts joyful impressions leave.
60
They came to Egypt Merchant-like at best:
But home are carried like great Lords in state,
Their journey was for bread, now they may feast,
Both Horse and Servants, many on them wait.
61
These (once unkind) their Brother stripped, but he
Does give them change of raim^nts of the best:
To his loved Benjamin he was more free,
And five times more did give him, then the rest.
62
For Isreal's journey Joseph does provide,
And by the way, what dainties he should eat,
And ten shee-Asses sent to him beside,
All heavy laden with the purest wheat.
63
And thus set forth, Joseph each one salutes,
And wills them in their travail to agree:
Unfeigned concord best with Brethren suits,
Small j^rres, amongst you so linked, great discords be.
64
Who best instructs, does best example give,
This good do I, is better, then this Do,
Most by the Eye, few by the Ear do live,
Fair actions do compel, good words but woo.
65
He that had showed himself so kind a Brother,
Beyond their hope, beyond all expectation,
Had by his pattern taught them love each other,
They go; and bring Jacob this gratulation.
66
Joseph is yet alive, and, which is more,
It Is he that rules all Egypt: Israel heard,
And his Heart failed, he was so moov'd therefore,
But when he saw the gifts that were conferred,
67
And did behold the Chariots Joseph sent,
His Heart reviu'd (whom would not such a sight
Recall from Death?) and then incontinent,
Like one new molded, full of active spright.
68
Joseph, says he, does live, my child is found
And like a Man distract with joy does cry,
I have enough, may, now my joys abound,
I will go down, and see him ere I die:
69
It Is time, these happy travelers oppressed
With their long voyage make a little stay,
Israel (good night) my weary Muse must rest,
To Egypt will be work for a new day.
O gr^ious God, thou searcher of each heart,
Thou three in Person, but in Essence ^e:
Some Heavenly power to my weak Muse impart:
To end the sacred task she works upon.
JACOBS PROGRESS.
1
Me thinks I see in what religious wise,
Old Jacob unto Beersheba went,
I hear him pray, I see him sacrifice,
And on his knee his heart to God present.
2
From Isreal's God I hear him crave protection,
In this his long, and last peregrination,
For though to Joseph Egypt bore affection:
She had strange Gods, was full of fornication.
3
Ibis, and Apis, Crocodiles, and Leekes,
Such beastly stinking Gods she did adore,
Against these and the like old Israel seeks,
And from the true God does true grace implore.
4
And mark the issue of his good intention,
God, Izaacs God does meet him the midway,
And of his mercies infinite propension,
That night in vision thus to him did say.
5
Jacob, go down to Egypt, do not fear,
I am thy God along with thee will go:
And I will make thee a great nation there;
Who could despair, that was encouraged do.
6
And I will surely bring thee up again,
Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes,
Me thinks I see new blood in each old Vain,
Me thinks I see him cheerfully arise.
7
How like a Giant to his course he runs,
His Heart with joy, with heavenly joy enspir'd
And how he ranckt, and marshalled his sons,
And from his native soil how he retired.
8
Canaan adue, thy father (...)
The top, the hope, the glory of thy Nation,
Takes his last leave, for ever birds farewell,
Goshen henceforth must be his habitation.
9
M^ thinks I see him like an aged tree,
Digg^d up by the Roots, and in a new soil planted,
That grows no more, at least, no more to thee,
Leaves now, for fruit bears, those but thin and skanted.
10
Me thinks I see him now in triumph ride,
I here his Chariot-wheeles: his Horses neigh,
I see his Sons, and Daughters by his side,
And how they march in order on the way.
11
His Sons his Childrens children, Sheep, and Ox,
Their goods, and all that carriage worth they thought
Horse, Catt^ll, Ass, and in one word their stocks,
They drive from Canaan, and to Egypt brought.
12
I could, but that your memories twould cumber,
Tell you the names of all their families,
All his sons names, threescore and six in number,
Which Scripture says descended from his thighs,
13
Besides his Sons wives; thus old Israel takes
His progress into Egypt, like a Prince,
Judah his son, his Harbinger he makes,
Who went before to give intelligence
14
Of Jacobs coming: which when Joseph knew
His father was at hand, and did draw near,
He mounts his Chariots, and with all his crew,
Rides forth to meet him, moov'd by love and fear.
15
You sons of Belial, that advanced to state
Forget your Parents, nay your Parents scorn,
See how well duty in a Magistrate
Shows to a Sire, though but a Shepherd borne.
16
My Lord Protector from his Chariot lights,
And craves his fathers blessing on his knee,
Before great Lords, his Peers; in all their sights
To teach them Duty, and Humility.
17
Rise blessed son, hereafter ever be
The worthy favorite, through the world styled
Thine arms the Storke emblem of piety,
Thine honored name, on fames record be filed.
18
At Gos^en was this interview (we find)
(Is that an interview we may it call)
When Egypts Ruler on his knee enclind,
And on his neck his reverent Sire does fall.
19
There weeps a good while too, the tears he shed
Were tears of kindness and of inward joy;
And when for weeping, he could speak (he sed)
Now let me dye; since I thy sight enjoy.
20
Do but imagine, he that was so tender,
When to his brethren first made himself known,
How he his kindness to his Sire does render?
And to his fathers house what love was showen.
21
Egypts great-Patron was not now to learn
His complements and courtly entertainements,
But by his deeds his kindred might discern,
His welcomes were not shows, nor verbal feynments.
22
They found a real hearty bien venu:
Egypts best soil elected for their seat,
No sooner come, but had to Pharoahs view,
Who like a royal King does them entreat.
23
Joseph himself in person made their way,
And does to Pharaoh reu're^t Israel bring:
He tells his brethren too, what they should say,
And how behave themselves before the King.
24
Five of his brethren with the good old man,
Were to the Court and to the presence brought:
Long stayed not there, but the Egyptian,
Pharaoh appears. Old Jacob kneeles: besought
25
The God of Israel; the true God to bless
The life of royal Pharaoh, keep his Crown,
And give him his desires and good success,
And fill his Cup with honor and renown.
26
The King beheld old Jacob with delight:
His grave aspect, his age he does admire,
And being greatly pleased with his sight,
His studies and his age he does enquire.
27
Jacob replies, the number of my days,
A hundred thirty years do speak me old;
Evil and few, compared, ^hort every ways,
To those good days, my ancestors have told.
28
Thy servant and his sons in arts and books
Have little skill, our only education,
Have been to keep our flocks: our sheepheards hooks
Those are thy servants ways and recreation.
29
Thus Joseph had before hand them advised,
Happy t'auoyd The Egyptians emulation:
(For they were scholars) happily 'twas devised,
They might together her follow their vocation.
30
And so not mingling with the unknown nation,
Not suck their eu^ls: Joseph knew the trade
Of keeping sheep, was an abomination
To Egypt, Joseph's brethren Pharaoh made
31
Rulers of all his Cattle, all his Flocks.
They are in office now, who late like spies,
Were in disgrace: thus fortune plays and mockes,
Changes, throws down, erects unto the skies.
32
Fortune said I? mine error I recant:
It is a Pagans voice, an Atheists phrase,
'Twas Abraham's God, that Israel new does plant:
The Author and the cause of all good days.
33
Youth to your trust, good father to thy rest,
Repose thy weary limbs, thy progress done:
Goshen, fat Goshen entered and possessed,
Sleep in the bosom of thy watchful son.
34
The remnant of thy days in comfort spend,
Grow, plant new nations, do thou find a grave,
My muse that brought thee to thy iourneyes end,
Does here shake hands, and leave to part does crave.
FINIS.

