

SONGS AND SONETTES, written by the right honorable Lord Henry Haward late
Earl of Surrey, and other.

Apud Ricardum Tottel. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum..1557.

To the reder.
THat to have well written in verse, yea and in small parcelles, deserves great
praise, the woorkers of diverse Latins, Italians, and other, do prove
sufficiently. That our tongue is able in that kind to do as praise worthelye as
the rest, the honorable style of the noble earl of Surrey, and the
weightinesse of the deep witted sir Thomas Wiat the elders verse, with several
graces in sundry good English writers, do show abu^dantly. It rests now
(gentle reder) yt thou think it not evil don, to publishe, to ye honor of the
english tongue, and for prosit of the studious of English eloquence, those
works which the vnge^tle horders up of such tresure have heretofore envied
the. And for this point (good reder) thine own profit and pleasure, in these
presentlye, and in more hereafter, shall answer for my defense. If parhappes some
mislike the stateliness of style removed from the rude skill of common earee: I
ask help of the learned to defend their learned friends, the authors of this
woork. And I exhort the unlearned, by reding to learn to ^ee more skillful,
and to purge that swinelike grossness, that makes the sweet maierome not to
smell to their delight.

Descripcion of the restless state of a lover, with suit to his lady, to rue
on his diyng heart.
THe su^ne has twice brought forth his tender grene,
Twice clad the earth in lively lustiness:
Ones have the winds the trees despoiled ciene,
And ones again begins their cruelnesse,
Sins I have hid under my breast the harm,
That never shall recover healthfulnesse.
The winters hurt recouers with the warm:
The parched grene restored is with shade.
What warmth (alas) may serve for to disarm
The frosen heart, that mine in flame has made?
What cold again is able to restore
My fresh grene years, that wither thus and fade?
Alas, I see nothing has hurt so sore,
But time in time reduces a return:
In time my harm increases more and more,
And semes to have my cure always in scorn.
Strange kinds of death, in life that I do try:
At hand to melt, far of in flame to burn.
And like as time list to my cure apply,
So does each place my comfort clean refuse.
Al thing alive, that sees the heavens with eye,
With cloak of night may cover, and excuse
It self from trauail of the days unrest,
Save I, alas, against all others use,
That then stir up the torments of my breast,
And curse each sterre as causer of my fate:
And when the sun has eke the dark oppressed,
And brought the day, it does nothing abate
The travails of mine endless smart and pain.
For then as one that has the light in hate,
I wish for night, more covertly to plain,
And me withdraw from every haunted place,
Lest by my chere my chance appear to plain:
And in my mind I measure pace by pace,
To seek the place where I my self had lost,
That day that I was tangled in the lace,
In semyng slack that knitteth ever most:
But never yet the travail of my thought
Of better state could catch a cause to bost.
For if I found sometime, that I have sought,
Those sterres by whom I trusted of the port:
My sails do fall, and I advance right naught,
As ankerd fast: my sprites do all resort
To stand agazed, and sink in more and more
The deadly harm which she does take in sport.
Lo, if I seek, how I do find my sore:
And if I flee, I carry with me still
The venomd shaft, which does his force restore
By haste of flight and I may plain my fill
Unto my self, unless this careful song
Print in your heart some parcel of my tene.
For I, alas, in silence all to long,
Of mine old hurt yet feel the wound but grene*
Rue on my life: or else your cruel wrong
Shall well appear, and by my death be seen.
Description of Spring, wherein each thing renewes, save only the lover.
THe foot season, that bud and blome forth brings,
With grene has clad the hill, and eke the vale:
The nightingale, with feathers new she sings:
The turtle to her make has told her tale:
Somer is come, for every spray now springs,
The heart has hong his old head on the pale:
The buck in brake his winter coat he flings:
The fishes flete with new repaired scale:
The adder all her slough away she slings:
The swift swallow pursues the flies small:
The busy be her honey now she minges:
Winter is worn that was the flowers bale:
And thus I see among these pleasant things,
Each care decays, and yet my sorrow springs.
Description of the restless state of a lover.
When youth had led me half the race,
That Cupides scourge had made me run:
I looked back, to mete the place,
From whence my weary course begone.
And then I saw how my desire,
Misguidyng me, had led the way:
Mine eyes, to gredy of their hyre,
Had made me lose a better pray.
For when in sighs I spent the day
And could not cloak my grief with game:
The boylyng smoke did still bewray
The persant heat of secret flame.
And when salt tears do bain my breast,
where love his pleasant trains has sown:
Her beauty has the fruits oppressed,
Ere that the buds were sprung and blown.
And when mine eyes did still pursue
The fliyng chase of their request
Their gredy lokes did often renew
The hidden wound within my breast.
When every look these chekes might stain,
From deadly pale to glowyng red:
By outward signs appeared plain,
To her for help my heart was fled.
But all to late love learneth me,
To paint all kind of colors new:
To blind their eyes that else should see
My specled chekes with Cupides hew.
And now the covert breast I claim,
That worshipped Cupide secretly,
And nourished his sacred flame:
From whence no blasyng sparks do fly.
Desciption of the fickle affections, panges, and sleightes of love.
SUch waiward ways has love, that most part in discord
Our wills do stand: whereby our hearts but seldom do accord.
Deceit in his delight, and to begile, and mock
The simple hearts, whom he does strike with froward diverse stroke.
He causes the one to rage with golden burning dart,
And does alay with leaden cold again the other heart.
Whote glemes of burning fire, and easy sparks of flame
In balaunce of vnegal weight he pondereth by aim.
From easy ford, where I might wade and pass full well,
He me withdrawes, and does me drive into a deep dark hell,
And me withholdes, where I am called, and offered place:
And wills me that my mortal foe I do beseke of grace.
He lettes me to pursue a conquest welnere won,
To follow where my pains were lost, ere that my suit begone.
So by this means I know how soon a heart may turn,
From war to peace, from truce to strife, and so again return.
I know how to content my self in others lust:
Of little stuff unto my self to weaue a web of trust:
And how to hide my harms with soft dissembling chere,
When in my face the painted thoughts would outwardly apere.
I know how that the blood forsakes the face for dred:
And how by shame it stains again the chekes with flaming red.
I know under the grene the serpent how he lurkes.
The hammer of the restles forge I wot eke how it works.
I know and can by roate the tale that I would tell:
But often the words come forth awrie of him that loves well.
I know in heat and cold the lover how he shakes:
In singing how he does complain, in sleping how he wakes:
To languish without ache, sicklesse for to consume:
A thousand things for to devise, resolving all in fume.
And though he list to see his ladies grace full sore.
Such pleasures, as delight his eye, do not his health restore.
I know to seek the track of my desired foe:
And fear to find that I do seek. But chiefly this I know,
That lovers must transform into the thing beloved,
And live (alas who would believe?) with sprite from life removed.
I know in hearty sighs, and laughters of the spleen,
At ones to change my state, my will, and eke my color clean.
I know how to deceive my self with others help:
And how the Lion chastised is by beating of the whelp.
In standing nere my fire, I know how that I freze:
Far of I burn: in both I wast: and so my life I leze.
I know how love does rage upon a yelding mind:
How small a net may take and meash a heart of gentle kind:
Or else with seldom sweet to season heaps of gall:
Revived with a glimse of grace old sorrows to let fall,
The hidden trains I know and secret snares of love:
How soon a look will print a thought, that never may remove.
The slipper state I know, the sodein turns from wealth,
The doubtful hope, the certain woe, and sure despe^^ of health.
Complaint of a lover, that defied love, and was by love after the more
tormented.
When so^mer took in hand the winter to assail,
With force of might, and virtue great, his stormy blasts to quail,
And when he clothed fair the earth about with grene,
And every tree new garmented, that pleasure was to seen:
Mine heart began new revive, and changed blood did stur
Me to withdraw my winter woes, that kept within the door.
A broad, quod my desire: assay to set thy foot,
Where thou shall find the savor sweet: for sprung is every rote.
And to thy health, if thou were sick in any case,
Nothing more good, than in the spring the air to feel a space.
There shall thou hear and se all kinds of hirdes ywrought,
Well tune their voice with warble small, as nature has them tought.
Thus pricked me my lust the sluggish house to leave:
And for my health I thought it best such counsel to receive.
So on a morrow forth, vnwist of any wight.
I went to prove how weil it would my heavy burden light.
And when I felt the air so pleasant round about,
Lord, to my self how glad I was that I had gotten out.
There might I se how Ver had every blossom hent:
And eke the new betrothed birds yccupled how they went.
And in their songs me thought they thanked nature much,
That by her license all that ^ere to love their hap was such,
Right as they could devise to chose them feres throughout:
With much rejoicing to their Lord thus flew they al about.
Which when I began to folue, and in my head c^nceaue,
What pleasant life, what heaps of joy these little birds receive.
And saw in what estate I weary man was brought,
By want of that they had at will, and I reject at naught:
Lord how I began in wrath unwisely me demean.
I cursed love and him defied: I thought to turn the stream,
But when I well beheld he had me under awe,
I as^ed mercy for my fault, that so transgrest his law.
Thou blinded God (quod I) forgive me this offense,
Unwittingly I went about, to malice thy pretense.
Wherewith he gave a beck, and thus me thought he swore,
Thy sorrow ought suffice to purge thy fault, if it were more.
The virtue of which sound mine heart did so revive,
That I, me thought, was made as whole as any man alive,
But here I may perceive mine error all and some,
For that I thought that so it was: yet was it still undone.
And all that was no more but mine expressed mind,
That feign would have some good relief, of Cupide well assind^^
I turned home forthwith, and might perceue it well,
That he agreued was right sore with me for my rebel.
My harms have ever since, increased more and more,
And I remain without his help, undone for evermore,
A mirror let me be unto ye lovers all:
Strive not with love, for if ye do, it will ye thus befall.
Complaint of a lover rebuked.
Love, that lives, and reigns in my thought,
That built his seat within my captive breast,
Clad in the arms, wherein with me he fought,
Often in my face he does his banner rest.
She. that me taught to love, and suffer pain,
My doutfull hope, and eke my hot desire,
with shamefast cloak to shadow and restrain,
Her smiling grace conuerteth straight to ire.
And coward love then to the heart apace
Takes his flight, whereas he lurkes and plains
His purpose lost, and dare not show his face.
For my lords gilt thus faultlesse bide I pains,
Yet from my lord shall not my foot remove.
Sweet is his death, that takes his end by love.
Complaint of the lover disdained.
IN Ciprus, springes (where as dame Uenus dwelt)
I Well so hot is, that who tastes the same.
Were he of stone, as thawed yse should melt,
And kindeled find his breast with fired flame.
Whose moist poison dissolved has my heart.
With crepyng fire my cold lymsar suppressed,
Feels the heart that har^orde freedom smart,
Endless despair long thraldom has impressed.
An other well of frosen yse is found,
Whose chilling venom of repugnant kind
The fervent heat does quench of Cupides wound:
And with the spot of change infectes the mind:
Whereof my dear has tasted, to my pain.
Whereby my service grows into disdain.
Description and praise of his love Geraldine.
FRom Tuskane came my Ladies worthy race:
Fair Florence was sometime her ancient seat:
The Western isle, whose pleasant shore does face
Wild Cambers clifs, furst gave her lively heat:
Fostred she was with milk of Irishe breast:
Her sire, an Earl: her dame, of princes blood.
From tender years, in Britain did she rest,
With a kings child, who tastes ghostly food.
Honsdon did first present her to mine iyen:
Bright is her hew, and Geraldine she hight.
Hampton me taught to wish her first for mine:
And Windsor, alas, does chase me from her sight.
Her beauty of kind, her virtues from aboue^
Happy is he, that can obtain her love.
The frailty and hurtfulnes of beauty.
BRittle beauty, that nature made so frail,
Whereof the gift is small, and short the season,
Flowring to day, to morrow apt to fail,
Tickell treasure abhorred of reason,
Daugerous to dele with, vain, of none avail,
Costly in keeping, past not worth two peason,
Slipper in sliding as is an eles tail,
Hard to attain, once gotten not geason,
Jewel of ieopardie that peril does assail,
False and untrue, enticed often to treason,
Enmy to youth: that most may I bewail.
Ah bitter sweet infecting as the poison:
Thou farest as fruit that with the frost is taken,
To day ready ripe, to morrow all to shaken.
A complaint by night of the lover not beloved.
ALas so all things now do hold their peace.
Heaven and earth disturbed in nothing:
The beasts, the air, the birds their song do cease:
The nights chare the stars about does bring:
Calm is the Sea, the waves work less and less:
So am not I, whom love alas does wring,
Bringing before my face the great increase
Of my desires, whereat I weep and sing,
In joy and woe, as in a doutfull ease.
For my sweet thoughts sometime do pleasure bring:
But by and by the cause of my disease
Geues me a pang, that inwardly does sting.
When that I think what grief it is again,
To live and lack the thing should rid my pain.
How each thing save the lover in spring reuiueth to pleasure.
WHen Windsor walls sustained my wearied arm,
My hand my chin, to ease my restles head:
Set pleasant plots reuested green with warm,
The blossomd bows with ^^sty Ueryspred,
The flowred meades, the wedded birds so late
Mine eyes discover: and to my mind resort
The ioly woes, the hatelesse short debate,
The r^kchell life that longes to loves disporte.
Wherewith;alas^ the heavy charge of care
Heapt in my breast breaks forth against my will,
In smoky sighs, that ouercast the air.
My vapord eyes such drery tears distill,
The tender spring which quicken where they fall,
And I halfbent to throw me down withal.
Vow to love faithfully howsoever he be rewarded.
SEt me whereas the Sun do parche the grene,
Or where his beams do not dissolve the yse:
In temperate heat where he is felt and seen:
In presence pressed of people mad or wise.
Set me in hye, or yet in low degree:
In longest night, or in the shortest day:
In clearest sky, or where clouds thickest be:
In lusty youth, or when my hears are gray.
Set me in heaven, in earth, or else in hell,
In hill, or dale, or in the foming flood:
Thrall, or at large, alive where so I dwell:
Sick, or in health^ in ^uyll feign, or good,
Hers will I be, and only with this thought
Content my self, although my chance be naught.
Complaint that his lady after she knew of his love kept her face always hidden
from him.
I Never saw my Lady lay apart
Her cornet black, in cold nor yet in heat,
Since first she knew my grief was grown so great,
Which other fancies drives from my heart.
That to my self I do the thought reserve,
The which unawares did wound my woeful breast,
For on her face mine eyes might never rest,
Sins that she knew I did her love and serve,
Her golden tresse is clad always with black,
Her smiling lokes to hide thus evermore,
And that restraines which I desire so sore.
So does this corner govern my alack:
In somer, sun: in winters breath, of frost:
Whereby the light of her fair lokes I lost.
Request to his love to join bounty with beauty.
THe golden gift that nature did thee give
To fasten friends, and feed them at thy will,
With form and favor, taught me to believe.
How thou art made to show her greatest skill.
Whose hidden virtues are not so unknown,
But lively domes might gather at the furst
Where beauty so her perfect seed has sown,
Of other graces follow needs there must.
Now certesse Garret, sins all this is true,
That from above thy gifts are thus elect:
Do not deface them than with fancies new,
Nor change of minds let not thy mind infect:
But mercy him thy friend, that does thee serve,
Who seeks always thine honor to preserve.
Prisoned in windsor, he recounteth his pleasure there passed.
SO cruel prison how could betide, alas,
As proud Windsor: where I in lust and joy.
With a kings son, my childishe years did pass,
In greater feasts than Priams sons of Troy:
Where each sweet place returns a taste full sower,
The large grene courts, where we were wont to hone,
With eyes cast up into the maidens tower.
And easy sighs, such as folk draw in love:
The stately seats, the ladies bright of hew
The daunces short, long tales of great delight:
with words and lokes, that tigers could but rewe,
Where each of us did plead the others right:
The palm play, where, dispoiled for the game,
with dazed eyes often we by gleames of love,
Have mist the ball, and got sight of our dame,
To bait her eyes, which kept the leads above:
The gravel ground, with sleues tied on the helm:
On foming horse, with swords and friendly hearts:
With cheer, as though one should another whelme:
Where we have fought, and chased often with darts,
with silver drops the meade yet spread for ruth,
In active games of nimblenes, and strength,
Where we did strain, trained with swarms of youth.
Our tender limbs, that yet shot up in length:
The secret groves, which often we made resound
Of pleasant plaint, and of our ladies praise,
Recording often what grace each one had found,
what hope of speed, what dread of long delays:
The wild forest, the clothed holtes with grene:
With rains auailed, and swift ybreathed horse,
With cry of hounds and merry blastes between,
Where we did chase the fearful heart of force,
The wide vales eke that harborde us each night,
Wherewith (alas) reuiueth in m^ breast
The sweet accord, such slepes as yet delight:
The pleasant dreams, the quiet bed of rest:
The secret thoughts imparted with such trust:
The wanton talk, the diverse change of play:
The frenship sworn, each promise kept so just:
wherewith we past the winter nights away.
And, with this thought, the blood forsakes the face,
The tears be^aine my chekes of deadly hew:
The which as soon as sobbing sighs ^alas)
Upsupped have, thus I my plaint renew:
O place of bliss, renuer of my woes,
Give me account, where is my noble fere:
Whom in thy walls thou do each night enclose,
To other leefe, but unto me most dear.
Echo (alas) that does my sorrow rewe,
Returns thereto a hollow sound of plaint.
Thus I alone, where all my freedom grew,
In prison pyne, with bondage and restraint,
And with remembrance of the greater grief
To banish the less, I find my chief relief.
The lover comfort himself with the worthiness of his love.
When raging love with extreme pain
Most cruelly distrains my heart:
When that my tears, as floods of rain,
Bear witness of my woeful smart:
When sighs have wasted so my breath,
That I lie at the point of death.
I call to mind the navy great,
That the Greeks brought to Troy town:
And how the boysteous winds did beat
Their ships, and rent their sails adown,
Till Agamemnons daughters blood
Appea^de the Gods, that them withstood.
And how that in those ten years war,
Full many a bloody deed was done,
And many a lord, that came full far,
There caught his bane (alas) to soon:
And many a good knight ouerron,
Before the Greeks had Helene won.
Then thinck I thus: sith such repair,
So long time war of valiant men,
Was all to win a lady fair:
Shall I not learn to suffer then,
And thinck my life well spent to be,
Serving a worthier wight than she?
Therefore I never will repent,
But pains contented still endure.
For like as when, rough winter spent,
The pleasant spring straight draws in ure:
So after raging storms of care
Joyful at length may be my fare.
Complaint of the absence of her lover being upon the sea.
O Happy dam^s, that may embrace
The fruit of your belight,
Help to bewail the woeful case,
And eke the heavy plight
Of me, that wonted to rejoice
The fortune of my pleasant choice:
Good ladies, help to fill my moorning voyc^.
In ship, freight with remembrance
Of thoughts, and pleasures past,
He sails that has in governance
My life, while it will last:
With scalding sighs, for lack of gale,
Furdering his hope, that is his sail
Toward me, the sweet port of his auail^
Alas, how often in dreams I see
Those eyes that were my food,
Which sometime so delited me,
That yet they do me good.
Wherewith I wake with his return,
Whose absent flame did make me burn.
But when I find the lack, Lord how I mourn?
When other lovers in arms acrosse,
Rejoice their chief delight:
Drowned in tears to mourn my loss,
I stand the bitter night,
In my window, where I may see,
Before the winds how the clouds ^lee.
Lo, what a Mariner love has made me.
And in grene waves when the salt flood
Does rise by rage of wind:
A thousand fancies in that mood
Assail my restless mind.
Alas, now drencheth my sweet fo,
That with the spoil of my heart did go,
And left me but (alas) why did he so?
And when the seas ware calm again,
To chase fro me annoye.
My doutful hope does cause me plain:
So dread cuts of my joy.
Thus is my wealth mingled with woe,
And of each thought a dout does grow,
Now he comes, will he come? alas, no no.
Complaint of a diyng lover refused upon his ladies iniust mista, king of his
writing.
IN winters just return, when Bor^as began his reign,
And every tree unclothed fast, as nature taught them plain:
In misty morning dark, as sheep are then in hold,
I hyed me fast, it sat me on, my sheep for to unfold.
And as it is a thing, that lovers have by fittes,
Under a palm I heard one cry, as he had lost his wits.
Whose voice did ring so shrill, in uttering of his plaint,
That I amazed was to hear, how love could him attaint.
Ah wretched man (quod he) come death, and rid this woe:
A just reward, a happy end, if it may chauuce thee so.
Thy pleasures past have wrought thy woe, without redress.
If thou had never felt no joy, thy smart had been the less,
And retchlesse of his life, he began both sighe and groan,
A rufull thing me thought, it was, to hear him make such moan,
Thou cursed pen (said he) woe worth the bird thee bare,
The man, the knife, and all that made thee, woe be to their share.
Woe worth the time, and place, where I so could endit^.
And woe be it yet once again, the pen that so can write.
Unhappy hand, it had been happy time for me,
If, when to write thou learned first, unjointed had thou be.
Thus cursed he himself, and every other wight,
Save her alone whom love him bound, to serve both day and night.
Which when I heard, and saw, how he himself fordid,
Against the ground with bloody strokes, himself even there to rid:
Had been my heart of flint, it must have melted tho:
For in my life I never saw a man so full of w^.
With tears, for his redress, I rashly to him ran.
And in my arms I caught him fast, and thus I spoke him than.
What woeful wight art thou, that in such heavy case
Torments thy self with such despite, here in this desert place?
Wherewith, as al aghast, fulf^ld with ir^, and dred,
He cast on me ^^^ring look, with color pale, and ded.
Nay, wh(...)ou (quod he) that in this heau^ plight,
Do find (...), most woeful wretch, that life has in despighte
I am quot^ (...) out poor, and simple in degree:
A shepardes charge I have in hand, unworthy though I be.
With that he gave a sighe, as though the sky should fall:
And loud (alas) he shriked often, and Shepard began he call,
Come, hie the fast at ones, and print it in thy heart:
So thou shall know, and I shall tell the, giltlesse how I smart.
His back against the tree, sore febled al with faint,
With weary sprite he stretched him up: and thus he told his plaint.
Ones in my heart (quoth he) it chanced me to love
Such one, in whom has nature wrought, her cunning for to prove.
And sure I can not say, but many years were spent,
with such good will so recompenst, as both we were content
Whereto then I me bound, and she likewise also,
The sun should run his course awry, ere we this faith forgo.
who ioied then, but I: who had this worlds bliss?
Who might compare a life to mine, that never thought on this?
But dwelling in this truth, amid my greatest joy,
Is me befallen a greater loss, then Priam had of Troy.
She is reuersed clean, and bears me in hand,
That my deserts have given her cause to break this faithful band.
And for my just excuse avails no defense,
Now know thou all: I can no more, but shepherd hie the hence
And give him leave to dye, that may no l^nger live:
Whose record lo I claim to have, my death, I do forgive.
And eke when I am gone, be bold to speak it plain:
Thou have seen dye the truest man, that ever love did pain.
Wherewith he turned him round, and gaspyng often for breath,
Into his arms a tree he raught^ and said welcome my death:
welcome a thousand fold, now dearer unto me,
Than should without her love to live, an emperor to be.
Thus, in this woeful state, he yielded up the ghost:
And little knows his lady, what a lover she has lost.
Whose death when I beheld, no maruail was it, right
For pitye though my heart did blede, to se so piteous sight,
My blood from heat to cold often changed wonders sore:
A thousand troubles there I found I never knew before.
Twene dread and dolor, so my sprites were brought in fear,
That long it was ere I could call to mind, what I did there.
But, as each thing has end, so had these payns of mine:
The furies past, and I my wits restord by length of time.
Then as I could devise, to seek I thought it bes^,
Where I might find some worthy place, for su^^ ^ corse to rest.
And in my mind it came: from thence not far away,
Where Creseids love, king Priams son, ye worthy Troilus la^
By him I made his tomb, in token he was true:
And as to him belongs well, I covered it with blew.
Whose soul by angels power, departed not so sone,
But to the heavens, lo it fled, for to receive his dome.
Complaint of the absence of her lover being upon the sea.
GOod Ladies: ye that have your pleasures in exile;
Step in your foot, come take a place, and moorne with me a while
And such as by their lords do set but little price,
Let them sit still: it skilles them not what chance come on ye dice.
But ye whom love has bound by order of desire,
To love your lords, whose good deserts none other would require:
Come ye yet once again, and set your foot by mine,
Whose woeful plight and sorrows great no tongue may well de^^ne,
My love and lord alas, in whom consistes my wealth,
Has fortune sent to pass the seas in hazard of his health.
Whom I was wont tembrace with well contented minde^
Is now amid the fomyng floods at pleasure of the wind.
Where God well him preserve, and sone him home me send,
Without which hope, my life (alas) were shortly at an end.
Whose absence yet, although my hope does tell me plain,
With short return he comes anon, yet cease not my pain,
The fearful dreams I have, of^ times do grieve me so:
That when I wake, I lie in dout, where they be true, or no.
Sometime the roaring seas (me semes) do grow so hye:
That my dear Lord (ay me alas) me thinks I see him dye.
An other time the same does tell me: he is come:
And plaing, where I shall him find with his fair little son
So, forth I go apace to se that leefsome sight,
And with a kiss, me think, I say, welcome my lord, my knight.
Welcome my sweet, alas, the stay of my welfare.
Thy presence brings forth a tru^^ a^w^xt me, and my care,
Then lively does he look, and salu^th me again,
And says, my dear how is it now, that you have all this rain?
wherewith the heavy cares, that heapt are in my breast,
Break forth and me dischargen clean of all my huge unrest.
But when I me awake, and find it but a dreme,
The anguish of my former woe begins more extreme,
And me tormenteth so that uneath may I find
Some hidden place, wherein to slake the gnawing of my mind,
Thus every way you se, with absence how I burn,
And for my wound no cure I find, but hope of good return
Save when I think, by sour how sweet is felt the more,
It does abate some of my pains, that I abode before,
And then unto my self I say, when we shall mete.
But little while shall seem this pain, the joy shall be so sweet,
Ye winds I you conjure in chiefest of your rage,
That ye my Lord safely send, my sorrows to assuage,
And that I may not long abide in this excess,
Do your good will, to cure a wight, that lives in distress.
A praise of his love wherein he reproves them that compare their Ladies with
his.
Give place ye lovers, here before
That spent your bostes and bragges in vain,
My Ladies beauty passes more
The best of yours, I dare well sayen,
Then does the son, the candle light,
Or brightest day, the darkest night,
And thereto has a troth as just,
As had Penelope the fair,
For what she says, ye may it trust.
As it by writing sealed were,
And virtues has she many more,
Than I with pen have skill to show.
I could rehearse, if that I would
The whole effect of natures plaint,
when she had lost the perfect mould,
The like to whom she could not paint:
with wringing hands how she did cry,
And what she said, I know it, I.
I know, she swore with raging mind.
Her kingdom only set apart,
There was no loss, by law of kind,
That could have gone so nere her heart.
And this was chiefly all her pain:
She could not make the like again.
Since nature thus gave her the praise
To be che chefest work she wrought:
In faith me think some better ways
On your behalf might well be sought,
Then to compare (as ye have done)
To match the candle with the sun.
To the lady that scorned her lover
ALthough I had chek,
To give the mate is hard,
For I have found a neck,
To keep mi men in guard.
And you that hardy are
To give so great assay,
Unto a man of war.
To drive his men away:
I read you take good head,
And mark this folish verse,
For I will so provide.
That I will have your ferse,
And when your ferse is had,
And all your war is done,
Then shall yonr self be glad
To end that you begone,
For if by chance I win
Your person in the field:
To late then come you in
Your self to me to yield.
For I will use ^y power,
As captain full of might,
And such I will devour,
As vs^ to show me spite.
And for because you gave
Me chek in your degree,
This van^age lo I have,
Now check, and guard: to the,
Defend it, if thou may,
Stand stiff, in thine estate,
For sure I will assay,
If I can give the mate.
A warning to the lover how he is abused by his love.
TO derely had I bought my grene and youthful years,
If in mine age I could not find when craft for love apperes.
And seldom though I come in court among the ^est.
Yet can I judge in colors dim as deep as can the best.
Where grief torments the man that suffers secret smart,
To break it forth unto some friend it eases well the heart,
So stands i^ now with me for my be^ened frinde.
Thie case is thine for whom I feel such torment of my mind.
And for thy sake I burn so in my secret breast
That till thou know my whole disease my heart can have no rest,
I se how thine abuse ^ath wrest^d so thy wits,
That all it yeldes to thy desire, and folowes the by fittes.
Where thou have loved so long with heart and all thy power,
I se thee fed with fained words, thy fredome to deuower.
I know^ (though she say nay, and would i^ well w^thstand)
When in her grace thou heldest the most, she bare the but in hand,
I se her pleasant chere in chiefest of the s^^e,
When thou art gone, I se him come that gathers up the fruit.
And eke in thy respect I se ^he base deg^e
Of him to whom she gave the har^ that promised was to the,
I se what would you more^ stood never m^n so sure
On woman's word but wisdom would mi^^^ust i^ to endure.
The forsakeu lover describes and fo^saketh love.
O Loathsome place where I
Have seen and hard my dear
when in my heart her eye
Has made her thought appear
By glimsing with such grace
As fortune it ne would,
That lasten any space
Between us l^nger should.
As fortune did auance,
To further my desire:
Even so has fortunes chance
Thrown all amiddes the mire.
And that I have deserved
with true and faithful heart,
Is to his hands reserved
That never felt the smart.
But happy is that man,
That escaped has the grief
That love well teach him can
By wanting his relief.
A scourge to quiet minds
It is, who takes head.
A common plage that binds,
A travel without mede.
This gift it has also,
who so enioies it most,
A thousand troubles grow
To vex his weried ghost.
And last it may not long
The truest thing of all
And sure the greatest wrong
That is within this thrall.
But sins thou desert place
Can give me no account
Of my desired grace
That I so have was wont
Farewell thou have me taught
To think me not the furst,
That love has set aloft,
And casten in the dust.
The lover describes his restless state.
AS often as I behold and see
The sovereign beauty that me bound^;
The nyer my comfort is to m^,
Alas the fressher is my wound.
As flame does quench by rage of fire,
And runnyng stremes consume by rain:
So does the sight, that I desire,
Appease my grief and deadly pain.
First when I saw those cristall streams,
Whose beauty made my mortal wound:
I little thought within her beams
So sweet a venom to have found.
But wilful will did prick me forth,
And blind Cupide did whippe and guide^
Force made me take my grief in worth:
My fruteles hope my harm did hide.
As cruel waves full often be found,
Against the rocks to rore and cry:
So does my heart full often rebound
Against my breast full bitterly.
I fall, and see mine own decay,
As one that bears flame in his breast,
Forgets in pain to put away,
The thing that bredeth mine vnrest^
The lover excuses himself of suspected change.
THough I regarded not
The promise made by me,
Or passed not to spot
My faith and honestee:
Yet were my fancy strange,
And witfull will to wite,
If I sought now to change
A falkon for a kite.
All men might well disprayse
My wit and enterprise,
If I esteemed a pese
Above a perle in prise:
Or judged the owl in sight
The sparehauke to excel,
which stieth but in the night,
As all men know right well.
Or if I sought to sail
Into the brittle port,
Where ankerhold does fail,
To such as do resort.
And leave the haven sure,
Where blows no blusteryng wind,
Nor fickelnesse in ure
So farforth as I find.
No, think me not so light,
Nor of so churlish kind,
Though it lay in my might
My bondage to unbind.
That I would leave the hind
To hunt the ganders so.
No no I have no mind
To make exchanges so:
Nor yet to change at all,
For think it may not be
That I should seek to fall
From my felicity,
Desirous for to win,
And loath for to forgo,
Or new change to begin:
How may all this be so?
The fire it can not frese:
For it is not his kind,
Nor true love can not lose
The constance of the mind.
Yet as sone shall the fire,
Want heat to blase and b^rn,
As I in such desire,
Have once a thought to turn.
A careless man, scorning and describing, the subtle usage of women toward
their lovers.
VVRapt in my careless cloak, as I walked to and fro:
I se, how love ca^ show, what force there reigns in his bow
And how he shoteth eke, a hardy heart to wound:
And where he glanceth by again, that little hurt is found.
For seldom is it seen, he wounds hearts alike.
The tone may rage, when tothers love is often far to seek.
All this I see, with more: and wonder thinks me:
How he can strike the one so sore, and leave the other free.
I see, that wounded wight, that suffers all this wrong:
How he is fed with yeas, and nayes, and lives all to long.
In silence though I keep such secrets to my self:
Yet do I see, how she sometime does yield a look by stelth:
As though it seemd, ywys I will not lose thee so,
When in her heart so sweet a thought did never truly grow.
Then say I thus: alas, that man is far from bliss:
That does receive for his relief, none other gain but this.
And she, that fedes him so, I feel, and find it plain:
Is but to glory in her power, that over such can reign.
Nor are such graces spent, but when she thinks, that he,
A weried man is fully bent, such fancies to let fly:
Then to retain him still, she wrasteth new her grace,
And smileth lo, as though she would forthwith the man embrace;
But when the proof is made, to try such looks withal:
He finds then the place all void, and freighted full of gall.
Lord what abuse is this: who can such women praise?
That for their glory do devise, to use such crafty ways,
I, that among the rest do sit, and mark the row,
Find, that in her is greater craft, then is in twenty mo.
Whose tender years, alas, with wyles so well are sped:
What will she do, when hory hears are powdered in her head?
An answer in the behalf of a woman of an uncertain aucthor.
GIrt in my giltles gown as I sit here and sow,
I see that things are not in deed as to the outward show.
And who so list to look and note things somewhat nere:
Shall find where plainness semes to hau^t nothing but craft appear
For with indifferent eyes my self can well discern,
How some to guide a ship in storms seek for to take the stern.
Whose practice if were proved in calm to stere a barge,
Assuredly believe it well it were to great a charge.
And some I see again sit still and say but small,
That could do ten times more than they that say they can do all.
Whose goodly gifts are such the more they understand,
The more they seek to learn and know and take less charge in hand.
And to declare more plain the time fleetes not so fast:
But I can bear full well in mind the song now soung and past.
The author whereof came wrapped in a crafty cloak:
With will to force a flaming fire where he could raise no smoke,
If power and will had ioynde as it appears plain,
The truth nor right had taken no place their virtues had been vain.
So that you may perceive, and I may safely se,
The innocent that giltlesse is, condemned should have be.
The constant lover lamenteth
SIns fortunes wrath enuieth the wealth.
wherein I reigned by the sight:
Of that that fed rain eyes by stelth,
With sower sweet, dread and delight.
Let not my grief move you to moan,
For I will weep and wail alone.
Spite drove me into Borias reign,
Where hory frostes the fruits do bite,
When hills were spread and every plain:
With stormy winters mantle white.
And yet my dear such was my heat,
When others freze then did I sweat.
And now though on the sun I drive,
Whose fervent flame all things decaies,
His beams in brightness may not strive,
With light of your sweet golden rays,
Nor from my breast this heat remove,
The frosen thoughts graven by love.
Ne may the waves of the salt flood,
Quench that your beauty set on fire,
For though mine eyes forbear the food,
That did releue the hot desire.
Such as I was such will I be,
Your own, what would ye more of me?
A song written by the earl of Surrey by a lady that refused to dance with
him.
Each beast can chose his fere according to his mind,
And eke can show a friendly chere like to their beastly kind.
A Lion saw I late as white as any snow,
Which seemed well to lead the race his port the same did show.
Upon the gentle beast to gaze it pleased me,
For still me thought he seemed well of noble blood to be,
And as he praunced before, still seking for a make,
As who would say there is none here I trow will me forsake.
I might perceive a Wolf as white as whales bone,
A fairer beast of fresher hue beheld I never none.
Save that her looks were coy, and froward eke her grace,
Unto the which this gentle beast began him advance apace.
And with a beck full low he bowed at her feet,
In humble wise as who would say I am to far unmeet.
But such a scornful chere wherewith she him rew^rded,
Was never seen I trow the like to such as well deserved.
With that she start aside welnere a foot or twain,
And unto him thus began she say with spite and great disdain.
Lion she said if thou had known my mind before,
Thou had not spent thy trauail thus nor all thy pain forlore.
^oway I let thee wete thou shall not play with me,
Go range about where thou may find some meter fere for thee.
with that he bet his tail, his eyes began to flame,
I might perceive his noble heart much moved by the same.
Yet saw I him refrain and eke his wrath aswage,
And unto her thus began he say when he was past his rage.
Cruel, you do me wrong to set me thus so light,
Without desert for my good will to show me such despite.
How can ye thus entreat a Lion of the race,
That with his paws a crowned king devoured in the place:
Whose nature is to pray upon no simple food,
As long as he may suck the flesh, and drink of noble blood.
If you be fair and fresh, am I not of your hue?
And for my vaunt I dare well say my blood is not untrue.
For you your self have heard it is not long ago,
Since that for love one of the race did end his life in woe
In tower strong and hie for his assured truth,
Whereas in tears he spent his breath, alas the more the ruth.
This gentle beast so dyed whom nothing could remove,
But willingly to lose his life for loss of his true love.
Other there be whose lives do lingre still in pain,
Against their wills preserved at that would have died feign,
But now I do perceive that naught it moves you,
My good intent, my gentle heart, nor yet my kind so true.
But that your will is such to lure me to the trade,
As other some full many years to trace by craft ye made.
And thus behold our kinds how that we differ far.
I seek my foes: and you your friends do threaten still with war
I fawn where I am fled: you slay that sekes to you,
I can devour no yelding pray: you kill where you subdue.
My kind is to desire the honor of the field:
And you with blood to slake your thirst on such as to you yield.
Wherefore I would you wist that for your coyed looks,
I am no man that will be trapt nor tangled with such hooks.
And though some lust to love where blame full well they might,
And to such beasts of current sort that would have trauail bright.
I will observe the law that Nature gave to me,
To conquer such as will resist and let the rest go fre.
And as a Faucon free that soreth in the air,
Which never fed on hand nor lure, nor for no stale does care,
While that I live and breath such shall my custom be,
In wildnes of the woods to seek my pray where pleases me.
where many one shall rue, that never made offense.
Thus your refuse against my power shall bote them no defense.
And for revenge thereof I vow and swear thereto,
A thousand spoils I shall commit I never thought to do.
And if to light on you my luck so good shall be,
I shall be glad to feed on that that would have fed on me.
And thus farewell unkind to whom I bent and bow,
I would ye wist the ship is safe that bare his sails so low.
Since that a Lions heart is for a Wolf no pray,
With bloody mouth go slake your thirst on simple sheep I say,
With more dispite and ire than I can now express,
Which to my pain though I refrain, the cause you may well guess.
As for because my self was aucthor of the game.
It boots me not that for my wrath I should disturb the same.
The faithful lover declares his pains and his uncertain joys, and with
only hope recomforteth somewhat his woeful heart.
If care do cause men cry, why do not I complain?
If each man do bewail his woe, why show not I my pain?
Since that amongst them all I ^are well say is none,
So far from weal, so full of woe, or has more cause to moan.
For all things having life sometime have quiet rest.
The bearing ^sse, the drawing Ox, and every other beast.
The peasant and the post, that serves at all assayes,
The shipboy and the galley slave have time to take their ^ase,
Save I alas whom care of force does so constrain
To wail the day and wake the night continually in pain,
From pensluenes to plaint, from plaint to bitter tears,
From tears to painful plaint again: and thus my life it wears.
No thing under the sun that I can hear or se,
But moves me for to bewail my cruel destenie.
For where men do rejoice since that I can not so,
I take no pleasure in that place, it doubleth but my woe.
And when I hear the sound of song or instrument,
Me think ech^ tune there doleful is and helps me to lam^^t.
And if I see some have their most desired sight,
Alas think I each man has weal save I most woeful wight.
Then as the stricken Dear withdrawes him self alone,
So do I seek some secret place where I may make my mo^e.
There do my flowing eyes show forth my melting heart,
So yt the stremes of those two wells right well declare my s^^rt.
And in those ^ares so cold I force my self a heat,
As sick men in their shaking ^ittes procure them self to sweat,
With thoughts that for the time do much appease my pain,
But yet they cause a farther fear and bread my woe again.
Me think within my thought I se right plain appear,
My hearts delight my sorrows leche mine earthly goddess here,
With every sundry grace that I have seen her have.
Thus I within my woeful breast her picture paint and grave.
And in my thought I roll her bewties to and fro,
Her laughing chere her lovely look my heart that perced so.
Her strangenes when I sued her servant for to be,
And what she said and how she smiled when that she pitied me.
Then comes a sudden fear that riueth all my rest
Lest absence cause forgetfulness to sink with in her breast.
For when I think how far this earth does us divide.
Alas me se^es love throws me down I feel how that I slide,
But then I think again why should I thus mistrust,
So sweet a wighte so sad and wise that is so true and just,
For loath she was to love, and wavering is she not.
The farther of the more desirde thus lovers tie their knot.
So in despair and hope plonged am I both up an down,
As is the ship with wind and wave when Neptune list to froune,
But as the watery showers delay the raging wind,
So does good hope clean put away despair out of my mind.
And biddes me for to serve and suffer patiently,
For what wot I the after weal that fortune wills to me.
For those that care do know and tasted have of trouble,
When passed is their woeful pain each joy shall seem them double.
And bitter sendes she now to make me taste the better,
The pleasant sweet when that it comes to make it seem the sweter,
And so determine I to serve until my breath.
Ye rather die a thousand times then once to false my faith.
And if my feeble corpse through weight of woeful smart,
Do fail or faint my will it is that still she keep my heart.
And when this carcas here to earth shall be refarde.
I do bequeth my weried ghost to serve her afterward.
The means to attain happy life.
MArtial, the things that do attain
The happy life, be these, I find.
The richesse left, not got with pain:
The fruitful ground: the quiet mind:
The egall friend, no grudge, no strife:
No charge of rule, nor governance:
Without disease the healthful life:
The household of continuance:
The mean diet, no delicate fare:
True wisdom joined with simpleness:
The night discharged of all care,
where wine the wit may not oppress:
The faithful wife, without debate:
Such slepes, as may begile the night:
Contented with thine own estate,
Ne wish for death, ne fear his might.
Praise of mean and constant estate.
OF thy life, Thomas, this compass well mark:
Not aye with full sails the hye seas to beat:
Ne by coward dred, in shonning storms dark,
On shalow shores thy keel in peril freat.
Who so gladly halseth the golden mean,
Uoide of dangers aduisdly has his home
Not with loathsome muck, as a den unclean:
Nor palacelike, whereat disdain may glome.
The lofty pyne the great wind often riues:
With violenter swey fal^e turrets stepe:
Lightnings assault the hie mountains, and cliues,
A heart well stayed, in ouerthwartes deep.
Hops amends: in sweet, does fear the sour.
God, that sends, withdraws winter sharp.
Now il, not aye thus: once Phoebus to lowre
With bow unbent shall cesse, and frame to harp
His voice. In strait estate appear thou stout:
And so wisely, when lucky gale of wind
All thy puffed sails shall fill, look w^ll about:
Take in a ryft: have is wast, proof does find.
Praise of certain psalms of David, translated by sir T. w. the elder
THe great Macedon, that out of Persle chased
Darius, of whose huge power all Asie rong,
In the rich ark dan Homers rimes he placed,
who feigned gestes of heathen princes song.
What holy grave? what worthy sepulture
To Wiattes Psalms should Christians then purchase?
where he does paint the lively faith, and pure,
The steadfast hope, the sweet return to grace
Of just David, by perfect penitence.
Where rulers may see in a mirror clear
The bitter fruit of false concupiscence:
How Iewry bought Urias death full dear.
In princes hearts Gods scourge imprinted deep,
Ought them awake, out of their sinful sleep.
Of the death of the same sir T. w.
Diverse thy death do diversely bemone.
Some, that in presence of thy liuelyhed
Lurked, whose breasts envy with hate had swollen,
Yield Ceasars tears upon Pompeius head,
Some, that watched with the murdrers knife,
With eger thirst to drink thy giltlesse blood,
Whose practice brake by happy end of life,
With envious tears to hear thy fame so good.
But I, that knew what harbred in that head:
What virtues rare were temperd in that breast:
Honor the place, that such a jewel bred,
And kiss the ground, whereas thy corse does rest,
With vapord eyes: from whence such streams aua^l,
As Pyramus did on Thisbes breast bewail.
Of the same.
VVResteth here, that quick could never rest:
Whose heavenly gifts increased by disdain,
And virtue sank the deper in his breast.
Such profit he by envy could obtain.
A head, where wisdom mysteries did frame:
Whose hammers bet still in that lively brain,
As on a stithe: where that some work of fame
Was daily wrought, to turn to Britains gain.
A visage, st^rn, and mylde: where both did grow,
Uice to contemn, in virtue to rejoice:
Amid great storms, whom grace assured so,
To live upright, and smile at fortunes choice.
A hand, that taught, what might be said in rhyme:
That reft Chaucer the glory of his wit:
A mark, the which (vnparfited, for time)
Some may approach, but never none shall hit.
A tongue, that served in foreign realms his king:
whose courteous talk to virtue did inflame.
Each noble heart: a worthy guide to bring
Our English youth, by trauail, unto fame.
An eye, who^e judgment none affect could blind,
Friends to allure, and foes to reconcile:
Whose persing look did represent a mind
With virtue fraught, reposed, void of gile.
A heart, where dread was never so impressed,
To hide the thought, that might the troth auance:
In neither fortune loft, nor yet represt,
To swel in wealth, or yield unto mischance,
A valiant corpse, where force, and beawty met:
Happy, alas, to happy, but for foes:
Lived, and ran the race, that nature set:
Of manhodes shape, where she the mold did lose.
But to the heavens that simple soul is fled:
Which left with such, as covet Christ to know,
Witness of faith, that never shall be ded:
Sent for our health, but not received so.
Thus, for our gilte, this jewel have we lost:
The earth his bones, the heavens possess his ghost.
Of the same.
IN the rude age when knowledge was not rife,
If Jove in Create and other were that taught.
^rtes to convert to profit of one life,
wend after death to have their temples sought,
If virtue yet no void unthankful time,
Failed of some to blast her endless fame,
A goodly mean both to deter from crime:
And to her steps our sequel to inflame,
In days of truth if Wiates friends then wail,
The only det that dead of quick may claim:
That rare wit spent employed to our avail.
where Christ is taught we led to virtues train.
His lively face their breasts how did it freat,
Whose cindres yet with envy they do eat.
Of Sardanapalus dishonorable life, and miserable death.
THassirian king in peace, with foul desire^
And filthy lusts, that staind his regal heart
In war that should set princely hearts on fire:
Did yield, vanquished for want of marciall art.
The dint of swords from kisses seemed strange:
And harder, than his ladies side, his targe:
From glutton feasts, to so^ldiars fare a change:
His helmet, far above a garlands charge.
Who scace the name of manhood did retain,
Drenched in sloth, and womanish delight,
Feeble of sprite, impacient of pain:
When he had lost his honor, and his right:
Proud, time of wealth^ in storms appalled with dred,
Murdered himself, to show some manful deed.
How no age is content with his own e^tate, and how the age of children is the
happiest, if they had skill to understand it.
L^yd in my quiet bed, in study as I were,
I saw within my troubled head, a heap of thoughts appear:
And every thought did sheweso lively in mine eyes,
That now I sighed, and the^ I smilde, as cause of thought did rise.
I saw the little boy in thought, how often that he
Did wish of god, to escape the ^^d, a tall yongman to be.
The yongman eke that feles, his bones with pains oppressed
How he would be a rich old man, to live, and lie at rest.
The rych oldman that sees his end draw on so sore,
How he would be a boy again, to live so much the more.
Whereat full often I smilde, to se, how all these three,
From boy to man, from man to boy, would chop and change degree.
And musing thus I think, the case is very strange,
That man from wealth, to live in woe, does ever seek to change.
Thus thoughtfull as I lay, I saw my witherd skyn,
How it does show my dented chewes, the flesh was worn so thyn^
And eke my tothelesse chaps, the gates of my rightway,
That opes and shuts, as I do speak, do thus unto me say:
Thy white and horish hears, the messengers of age,
That show, like lines of true belife, that this life does assuage,
Byds thee lay hand, and feel them hanging on thy chin:
The which do write two ages past, the third now coming in.
Hang up therefore the bit of thy young wanton time:
And thou that therein beaten art, the happiest life define,
Whereat I sighed, and said, farewell, my wonted^ioy:
Trusse up thy pack, and trudge from me to every little boy:
And tell them thus from me, their time most happy is:
If, to their time, they reason had to know the truth of this.
Bonum est mihi quod humiliasti me.
THe storms are past these clouds are ouerblowne,
And humble chere great rigor has represt:
For the defaute is set a pain fore known,
And patience graft in a determed breast.
And in the heart where heaps of griefs were grown,
The sweet revenge has planted mirth and rest,
No company so pleasant as mine own.
Thraldom at large^hath made this prison fre,
Danger well past remembre^ works delight:
Of lingering doubts such hope is sprung pardie,
That naught I find displeasaunt in my sight:
But when my glass presented unto me:
The curelesse wound that bledeth day and night,
To think (alas) such hap shoud granted be
Unto a wretch that has no heart to fight,
To spill that blood that has so often been shed,
For Britannes sake (alas) and now is ded.
Exhortacion to learn by others trouble.
MY Ratcl^f, when thy retchlesse youth offendes:
Receue thy scourge by others chastisement.
For such calling, when it works none amends:
Then plages are sent without advertisement.
Yet Solomon said, the wronged shall recure:
But Wia^ said true, the skarre does aye endure.
The fancy of a weried lover.
THe fansy, which that I have served long,
That has always been enmy to mine ease,
Seemed of late to rue upon my wrong,
And bad me fly the cause of my misease.
And I forthwith did prease out of the throng,
That thought by flight my painful heart to please
Some other way: till I saw faith more strong:
And to my self I said: alas, those days
In vayn were spent, to run the race so long.
And with that thought, I met my guide, that plain
Out of the way wherein I wandered wrong,
Brought me amiddes the hills, in base Bullayn:
Where I am now, as restless to remayn,
Against my will, full plea^ed with my pain.
SVRREY.
The lover for shamefastness hides his desire within his faithful heart.
THe long love, that in my thought I harber,
And in my heart does keep his residence,
Into my face preaseth with bold pretense,
And there campeth, displaying his banner.
She that me learns to love, and to suffer,
And wills that my trust, and lusts negligenc^
Be reined by reason, shame, and reverence,
With his hardiness takes displeasure.
Wherewith love to the hearts forest he flees,
Leaving his enterprise with pain and cry,
And there him hides and not appears.
What may I do? when my master fears,
But in the field with him to live and dye,
For good is the life, ending faithfully.
The lover waxes wiser, and will not die for affeccion.
YEt was I never of your love agreued,
Nor never shall, while that my life does last:
But of hating my self, that date is past,
And tears continual sore has me weried.
I will not yet in my grave be buried,
Nor on my tomb your name have fixed fast,
As cruel cause, that did my sprite sone have.
From thunhappy boones by great sighs stirred,
Then if an heart ^f amorous faith and will
Content your mind withouten doing grief:
Please it you so to this to do relief,
If other wise you seek for to fulfill
^our wrath: you err, and shall not as you wene.
(...) you your self the cause thereof have been.
The abused lover sees his folly, and entendeth to trust no more.
Was never file yet half so well yfiled,
To file a file for any smith^s intent,
As I was made a filing instrument,
To frame other, while that I was beg^led.
But reason loc, has at my folly smiled,
And pardoned me, sins that I me repent
Of my last years, and of my time misspent.
For youth led me, and falshod me misguided.
Yet, this trust I have of great appearance:
Sins that di^ceit is ay returnable,
Of very force it is agreeable,
That therwithall be done the recompense.
Then gile begiled playnd should be never,
And the reward is little trust for ever.
The lover describes his being stricken with sight of his love.
THe lively sparks, that issue from those eyes,
Against the which there va^^eth no defense,
Have perst my heart, and done it none offense,
With quaking pleasure, more then once or twice.
Was never man could any thing devise,
Sun beams to turn with so great vehemence
To dase man's sight, as by their bright presence
Dased am I, much like unto the gise
Of one stricken with dint of lightening,
Blind with the stroke, and crying here and there,
So call I for help, I not when, nor where,
The pain of my fall patiently bearing.
For straight after the blase (as is no wonder)
Of deadly noise h^are I the fearful thunder.
The wavering lover wills, and dreadeth, to move his desire.
SUch vain thought, as wonted to mislead me
In desert hope by well assured moan,
Makes me from company to live alone,
In following her whom reason bids me flee.
And after her my heart would feign begone:
But armed sighs my way do stop anon.
Twixt hope and dread locking my liberty.
So flees she by gentle cruelty.
Yet as I guess under disdainful brow
One beam of ruth is in her cloudy look:
which comfortes the mind, that erst for fear shook.
That bolded straight the way then seek I how
To utter forth the smart I bide within:
But such it is, I not how to begin.
The lover having dreamed enjoying of his love, complains that the dream is
not either longer or truer.
Unstable dream according to the place,
Be steadfast ones, or else at least be true.
By tasted sweetness, make me not to rue
The soden loss of thy false fained grace.
By good respect in such a dangerous case
Thou broughtest not her into these tossing seas,
But made my sprite to live my care tencrease,
My body in tempest her delight timbrace,
The body dead, the sprite had his desire.
Painlesse was the one, the other in delight.
Why then alas did it not keep it right,
But thus return to leap into the fire:
And where it was at wish, could not remain?
Such mockes of dreams do turn to deadly pain^.
The lover unhappy bids happy lovers rejoice in May, while he waileth that
month to him most unlucky.
YE that in love find luck and sweet abundance,
And live in lust of joyful iolitie,
Arise for shame, do way your sluggardy:
Arise I say, do May some obseruaunce.
Let me in bed lie, dreaming of mischance.
Let me remember my mishappes unhappy.
That me betide in May most commonly:
As one whom love list little to advance.
Stephan said true, that my nativity
Mischanced was with the ruler of May.
He gest (I prove) of that the verity.
In May my wealth, and eke my wits, I say,
Have stand so often in such perplexity.
Joy: let me dream of your felicity.
The lover confesses him in love with Phillis.
IF waker care: if sodayn pale color:
If many sighs, with little speech to plain:
Now joy, now woe: if they my there distaine:
For hope of small, if much to fear therefore,
To haste, or slack: my pace to less, or more:
Be sign of love: then do I love again.
If thou ask whom: sure sins I did refrain
Brunet, that set my wealth in such a rore,
Thunfayned chere of Phillis has the place,
That Brunet had: she has, and ever shall:
She from my self now has me in her grace:
She has in hand my wit, my will, and al^
My heart alone well worthy she does stay,
Without whose help skant do I live a day.
Of others fained sorrow, and the lovers fained mi^th.
Caesar, when that the traitor of Egypt
with thonorable head did him present,
Covering his hearts gladness, did represent
Plaint with his tears outward, as it is writ.
Eke Hannibal, when fortune him out shit
Clean from his reign, and from all his intent,
Laughed to his folk, whom sorrow did torment,
His cruel despite for to disgorge and quit.
So chances me, that every passion
The mind hides by color c^ntrary,
With fained visage, now sad, now merry.
Whereby, if that I laugh at any season:
It is because I have none other way
To cloak my care, but under sport and play.
Of change in mind.
Each man me telth, I change most my devise:
And, on my ^aith, me think it good reason
To change purpose, like after the season.
For in each case to keep still one gui^e
Is mete for them, that would be taken wise.
And I am not of such manner condition:
But treated after a diverse fashion:
And thereupon my diuersnesse does rise.
But you, this diuersnesse that blamen most,
Change you no more, but still after one rate
Treat you me well: and keep you in that state.
And while with me does dwell this weried ghost,
My word nor I shall not be va^iable.
But always one, your own both firm and stable.
How the lover perishes in his delight, as the fly in the fire.
SOme fowls there be that have so perfect sight,
Against the sun their eyes for to defend:
And some, because the light does them offend,
Never appear, but in the dark, or night.
Other rejoice, to se the fire so bright,
And wene to play in it, as they pretend:
But find contrary of it, that they intend.
Alas, of that sort may I be, by right.
For to withstand her look I am not able:
Yet can I not hide me in no dark place:
So follows me remembrance of that face:
That with my teary eyes, swollen, and unstable,
My desteny to behold her does me lead:
And yet I know, I run into the glead.
Against his tongue that failed to utter his suits.
BEcause I still kept thee fro lies, and blame^
And to my power always thee honored,
Unkind tongue, to ill have thou me rendered,
For such desert to do me wreke and shame.
In need of succor most when that I am,
To ask reward: thou standst like one afraied,
Always most cold: and if one word be said,
As in a dream, imperfect is the same.
And ye salt tears, against my will each night,
That are with me, when I would be alone:
Then are ye gone, when I should make my moan.
And ye so ready sighs, to make me shright,
Then are ye slack, when that ye should outstart^
And only does my look declare my heart.
Description of the contrarious passions in a lover.
I Find no peace, and all my war is done:
I feare^ and hope: I burn, and frese like yse:
I fly aloft, yet can I not arise:
And naught I have, and all the world I season.
That locks not loses, holds me in prison,
And holds me not, yet can I escape no wise:
Nor lettes me live, nor dye, at my devise,
And yet of death it gives me occasion.
Without eye I se, without tongue I plain:
I wish to perish, yet I ask for health:
I love another, and I hate my self.
I feed me in sorrow, and laugh in all my pain.
Lo, thus displeases me both death and life.
And my delight is causer of this strife.
The lover compares his state to a ship in perilous storm tossed on the sea.
MY galley charged with forgetfulness,
Through sharp seas, in winter nights does pass,
Twene rock, and rock: and eke my fo (alas)
That is my lord, stereth with cruelnesse:
And every hour, a thought in readiness,
As though that death were light, in such a case.
An endless wind does tear the sail apace
Of forced sighs, and trusty fearfulness.
A rain of tears, a cloud of dark disdain
Have done the weried coardes great hinderance,
Wrethed with error, and with ignorance.
The stars be hid, that lead me to this pain.
Drownde is reason that should be my comfort:
And I remain, dispearing of the port.
Of doutful love.
AUisyng the bright beams of those fair eyes,
Where he abides that mine often moi^tes and washes:
The weried mind straight from the heart departs,
To rest within his worldly Paradise,
And bitter finds the sweet, under his gise.
What webbes there he has wrought, well he perceaueth
Whereby then with him self on love he plaineth,
That spurs with fire, and bridleth eke with yse.
In such extremity thus is he brought:
Frosen now cold, and now he stands in flame:
Twixt woe and wealth: betwixt earnest and game:
With seldom glad, and many a diverse thought:
In sore repentance of his hardiness,
Of such a root lo comes fruit frutelesse.
The lover shows how he is forsaken of such as he sometime enjoyed.
THey flee from me, that sometime did me seek
With naked foot stalking within my chamber.
Once have I seen them gentle, tame, and meke,
That now are wild, and do not once remember
That sometime they have put them selves in danger,
To take bread at my hand, and now they range,
Bus^ly seking in continual change.
Thanked be fortune, it has been otherwise
Twenty times better: but once especial,
In thynne array, after a pleasant gise,
When her loose gown did from her shoulders fall,
And she me caught in her arms long and small,
And therwithall, so swetely did me kiss,
And softly said: dear heart how like you this?
It was no dream: for I lay broad awaking.
But all is turnde now through my gentleness,
Into a bitter fashion of forsaking.
And I have leave to go of her goodness,
And she also to use newfanglenesse.
But, sins that I unkindly so am served:
How like you this, what has she now deserved?
To a lady to answer directly with yea or naie.
MAdame, withouten many words:
Once I am sure, you will, or no.
And if you will: then leave your boordes,
And use your wit, and show it so:
For with a beck you shall me call.
And if of one, that burns always,
Ye have pity or ruth at all:
Answer him faier with yea, or nay.
If it be yea: I shall be feign.
If it be nay: friends, as before.
You shall another man obtain:
And I mine own, and yours no more.
To his love whom he had kissed against her will.
ALas, Madame, for stealing of a kiss,
Have I so much your mind therein offended?
Or have I done so grievously amiss:
That by no means it may not be amended?
Revenge you then, the rediest way is this:
Another kiss my life it shall have ended.
For, to my mouth the first my heart did suck:
The next shall clean out of my breast it pluck.
Of the Ielous man that loved the same woman and espied this other sitting with
her.
THe wandering gadling, in the summer tide,
That finds the Adder with his rechlesse foot^
Startes not dismayed so sodeinly aside,
As jealous despite did, though there were no boot,
When that he saw me sitting by her side,
That of my health is very crop, and root,
It plesed me then to have so fair a grace,
To stynge the heart, that would have had my place,
To his love from whom he had her gloves.
What needs these threatening words, and wasted wynd?
All this can not make me restore my pray.
To rob your good ywis is not my mind:
Nor causeless your fair hand did I display,
Let love be judge: or else whom next we find:
That may both hear, what you and I can say.
She rest my heart: and I a glove from her:
Let us se then if one be worth the other.
Of the fained friend.
RIght true it is, and said full yore ago:
Take heed of him, that by the back thee claweth.
For, none is worse, then is a friendly fo.
Though thee seem good, all thing that thee deliteth:
Yet know it well, that in thy bosom crepeth.
For, many a man such ^ixe often times he kindles:
That with the blase his berd him self he sings.
The lover taught, mistrusteth allurementes.
IT may be good like it who list:
But I do dout, who can me blame?
For often assured, yet have I mist:
And now again I fear the same.
The words, that from your mouth last came,
Of sudden change make me aghast.
For dread to fall, I stand not fast.
Alas I tre^d an endless mase:
That seek taccord two contraries:
And hope thus still, and nothing hase:
Imprisoned in liberties,
As one unheard, and still that cries:
Always thirsty, and naught does taste,
For dread to fall, I stand not fast.
Assured I dout I be not sure,
Should I then trust unto such surety?
That often have put the proof in ure,
And never yet have found it trusty?
Nay sir in faith, it were great folly.
And yet my life thus do I wast,
For dread to fall I stand not fast.
The lover complains that his love does not pity him.
REsownde my voice ye woods, that hear me plain:
Both hills and vales causing reflection,
And rivers eke, record ye of my pain:
Which have often for^ed ye by compassion,
As judges lo to hear my exclamacion.
Among whom, ruth (I finde^ yet does remain.
Where I it seek, alas, there is disdain.
Often ye rivers, to hear my wo^ull sound,
Have stopped your course, and plainly to express,
Many a tear by moisture of the ground
The earth has wept to hear my heaviness:
Which causeless I endure without redress.
The hugy oaks have rored in the wind,
Each thing me thought complaining in their kind.
Why then alas does not she on me rue,
Or is her heart so hard that no pity
May in it sink, my joy for to renew^
O stony heart who has thus framed thee
So cruell^ that art cloked with beauty,
That from thee may no grace to m^ proceed.
But as reward death for to be my m^de.
The lover reioyseth against fortune that by hindering his suit had happily
made him forsake his folly^
IN faith I wot not what to say,
Thy chances ben so wondrous,
Thou fortune with thy diverse play
That makst the joyful dolourous,
And eke the same right joyous.
Yet though thy chain has me enwrapt
Spite of thy hap, hap has well hapt.
Though thou have set me for a wonder,
And sekest by change to do me pain:
Men's minds yet may thou not so order.
For honesty if it remain,
Shall shine for all thy cloudy rain.
In vain thou sekest to have me trapt,
Spite of thy hap, hap has well hapt.
In hindering me, me did thou further,
And made a gap where was a style.
Cruel wills ben often put under.
Wening to lower, then did thou smile,
Lord, how thy self thou did begile,
That in thy cares would me have wrapped?
But spite of hap, hap has well hapt.
A renouncing of hardly escaped love
FArewell the heart of cruelty.
Though that with pain my liberty
Dear have I bought, and woefully
Finished my fearful tragedy,
Of force I must forsake such pleasure:
A good cause just, sins I endure
Thereby my woe, which be ye sure,
Shall therewith go me to recure.
I fare as one escapt that flees,
Glad he is gone, and yet still fears
Spied to be caught, and so dredeth
That he for naught his pain leseth.
In joyful pain rejoice my heart,
Thus to sustain of each a part.
Let not this song from thee astart,
Welcome among my pleasant smart.
The lover to his bed, with describing of his unquiet state.
THe restfull place, renewer of my smart:
The labors salve, increasing my sorrow:
The bodies case, and troubler of my heart:
Quieter of mind, mine unquiet so:
Forgetter of pain, remembrer of my woe:
The place of sleep, wherein I do but wake:
Besprent with tears, my bed, I thee forsake.
The frosty snowes may not redress my heat:
Nor heat of sun abate my fervent cold.
I know nothing to ease my pains so great.
Each cure causes increase by twenty fold.
Renewing cares upon my sorrows old.
Such overthwart effects in me they make.
Besprent with tears my bed for to forsake.
But all for naught: I find no better ease
In bed, or out. This most causes my pain:
Where I do seek how best that I may please,
My lost labor (alas) is all in vain.
My heart once set, I can not it refrain.
No place from me my grief away can take.
Wherefore with tears, my bed I thee forsake.
Comparison of love to a stream falling from the Alps.
FRom these hie hills as when a spring does fall,
It trilleth down with still and subtle course,
Of this and that it gathers ay and shall,
Till it have just down flowed to stream and force:
Then at the foot it rages over all.
So fares love, when he has ^ane a sourse.
Rage is his rain. Resistance vaileth none.
The first eschew is remedy alone.
wiates complaint upon Love, to Reason: with Loves answer.
MIne old dear enmy, my froward master,
A fore that Queen, I causde to be acited,
Which holds the divine part of our nature,
That, like as gold, in fire he might be tried.
Charged with dolor, there I me presented
With horrible fear, as one that greatly dredeth
A wrongful death, and justice always seeks
And thus I said: Once my left foot, Madame,
When I was young, I set within his reign:
Whereby other then firely durning flame
I never felt, but many a grievous pain.
Torment I suffered, anger, and disdain:
That mine oppressed patience was past,
And I mine own life hated, at the last.
Thus hitherto have I my time passed
In pain and smart. What ways profitable:
How many pleasant days have me escaped,
In serving this false liar so deceauable?
what wit have words so pressed and forceable,
That may contain my great mishappynesse,
And just complaints of his ungentleness?
So small honey, much aloes, and gall,
In bitterness, my blind life has ytasted.
His false semblance, that turns as a ball:
With fair and amorous dance, made me be traced,
And, where I had my thought, and mind araced,
From earthly frailnesse, and from vain pleasure,
Me from my rest he took, and set in error:
God made he me regardlesse, than I ought,
And to my self to take right ^itle head:
And for a woman have I set at naught
All other thoughts: in this only to speed.
And he was only counseler of this deed:
whetting always my youthly frail desire
On cruel whetston, tempered with fire.
But (Oh alas) where, had I ever wit^
Or other gift, given to me of nature?
That sooner shall be changed my weried sprite:
Then the obstinate will, that is my ruler.
So robs he my freedom with displeasure,
This wicked traitor, whom I thus accuse:
That bitter life has turned in pleasant use.
He has me hasted, through diverse regions:
Through desert woods, and sharp hye mountains:
Through froward people, and through bitter passion^^
Through rocky seas, and over hills and plains:
With weary travel, and with laborous pains:
Always in trouble and in tediousness:
All in error, and dangerous distress.
But another he, nor she, my the other so,
For all my flight, did ever me forsake:
That though my timely death has been to slow
That me as yet, it has not overtake:
The heavenly Gods of pity do it slake.
And, note they this his cruel tyranny,
That feeds him, with my care, and misery.
Sins I was his, hour rested I never,
Nor look to do: and eke the waky nights
The baneshed sleep may in no wise recover.
By guile, and force, over my thralled sprites,
He is ruler: sins which bell never strikes,
That I hear not as sounding to renew
My plaintes. Himself, be knows, that I say true.
For never worms old rotten stock have eaten:
As he my heart, where he is resident
And does the same with death daily threaten.
Thenc^ ^ome the tears, and thence the bitter torment^
The sighs: the words, and eke the languishment:
That noy both me, and parauenture other.
Judge thou: that know the one, and eke the the other,
Mine aduersair, with such grievous reproof,
Thus he began^ Hear Lady, the other part:
That the plain troth, from which he draws aloose,
This unkind man may show, ere that I part.
In his young age, I took him from that art,
That sells words, and makes a clattering knight:
And of my wealth I gave him the delight.
Now shames he not on me for to complain,
That held him evermore in pleasant gain,
From his desire^ that might have been his pain.
Yet thereby alone I brought him to some frame:
Which now as wretchedness, he does so blame:
And toward honor quickened I his wit:
Whereas a daskard else he might have sit
He knows, how great Atride that made Troy freat,
And Hanniball, to Rome so troubelous:
Whom Homer honored, A chilles that great,
And Thaffricane Scipion the famous:
And many other, by much honor glorious:
Whose fame, and acts did lift them up above:
I did let fall in base dishonest love.
And unto him, though he unworthy were:
I chose the best of many a Milion:
That, under sun yet never was her pere,
Of wisdom, womanhod, and of discrecion:
And of my grace I gave her such a facion,
And eke such way I taught her for to teach,
That never base thought his heart so hye might reach.
Evermore thus to content his maistresse,
That was his only frame of honesty,
I stirred him still toward gentleness:
And causde him to regard fidelity.
Patience I taught him in adversity.
Such virtues learned he in my great school:
Whereof repents now the ignorant fool.
These were the same diceites, and bitter gall,
That I have used, the torment and the anger:
Sweter, then ever did to other fall,
Of right good sede ill fruit lo thus I gather.
And so shall he, that the unkind does further.
A Serpent nourish I under my wing:
And now of nature, ginneth he to sting.
And for to tell, at last, my great seruise.
From thousand dishonesties have I him drawn:
That, by my means, him in no manner wise.
Ne^e^ vile pleasure once has overthrown.
whe^^, in his deed, shame has him always gnawen:
D^^ting r^port, that should come to her ear:
Whom now he blames, her wonted he to fear.
What ever he has of any honest custom:
Of her, and me: that holds he every whit,
But, lo, yet never was there nightly fantome
So far in error, as he is from his wit.
To plain on us, he strives with the bit,
Which may rule him, and do him ease, and pain:
And in one hour, make al his grief his gain,
But, one thing ^^t there is, above all other:
I gave him win^es, wherewith he might vpflie
To honor and fame: and if he would to higher
Then mortal things, above the starry s^ie:
Considering the pleasure, that an eye
Might give in earth, by reason of the love:
what should that be that lasts still above?
And he the same himself has said ere this.
But now, forgotten is both that and I,
That gave her him, his only wealth and bliss.
And, at this word, with dedly shreke and cry.
Thou gave her once: quod I, but by and by
Thou took her again from me: that woe worth the.
Not I but price: more worth than thou (quod he.)
At last: each other for himself, concluded:
I, trembling still: but he, with small reverence.
Lo, thus, as we each other have accused:
Dear Lad^: now we wait thine only sentence.
She smiling, at the whi^ted audience:
It likes me (quod she) to have heard your question:
But, longer time does as^ a resolucion.
The lovers sorrowful state makes him write sorrowful songs, but (Souche) his
love may change the same.
Marvel no more although
The songs, I sing do moan:
For other life then woe,
I never proved none.
And in my heart also,
Is graven with letters d^^e
A thousand sighs and mo:
A flood of tears to weep.
How may a man in smart
Find matter to rejoice?
How may a moorning heart
Set forth a pleasant voice.
Play who so can^ that part:
Needs must in me appear:
How fortune ou^rthwart
Does cause my moorning chere.
Perdy there is no man,
If he saw never sight:
That perfitly tell can
The nature of the ^ight.
Alas: how should I than,
That never taste but sour:
But do, as I began,
Continually to lowre.
But yet perchance some chance
May chance to change my tune:
And when (Souch) chance does chance:
Then shall I thank fortune.
And if I have (Souch) chance:
Perchance ere it be ^ong:
For (Souch) a pleasant chance.
To sing some pleasant song.
The lover complains himself forsaken.
Where shall I have, at mine own will.
Tears to complain? Where shall I set
Such sighs? that I may sigh my fill:
And then again my plaintes repete.
For, though my plaint shall have none end:
My tears cannot suffice my woe.
To moan my harm, have I no friend,
For fortunes friend is mishaps fo.
Comfort (God wot) else have I none:
But in the wind to wast my words,
Naught moves you my deadly moan:
But still you turn it into bordes.
I speak not, now, to move your heart,
That you should rue upon my pain:
The sentence given may not reuert:
I know, such labor were but vain.
But sins that I for you (my dear)
Have lost that thing, that was my best:
A right small loss it must appear,
To lose these words, and all the rest.
But, though they sparkle in the wind:
Yet, shall they show your falsed faith:
Which is returned to his kind:
For like to like: the proverb says,
Fortune^ and you did me auance.
Me thought, I swam, and could not drown:
Happiest of all, but my mischance
Did lift me up, to throw me down.
And you, with her, of cruelnesse,
Did set your foot upon my neck,
Me, and my welfare to oppress:
without offense your heart to wreck.
Where are your pleasant words? alas:
where is your faith? your steadfastness?
There is no more: but all does pass:
And I am left all comfortless.
But sins so much it does you grieve,
And also me my wretched life:
Have here my troth: Naught shall releue,
But death alone my wretched strife.
Therefore, farewell my life my death,
My gain, my loss: my salve my sore:
Farewell also, with you my breath:
For, I am gone for evermore.
Of his love that pricked her finger with a nedle.
SHe sat, and sowed: that has done me the wrong:
Whereof I plain, and have done in my ^ day.
And, whilst she heard my pl^in^, in p^^eous song:
She wished my heart the samplar, that it lay^
The blind master, whom I have served so long:
Grudging to hear, that he did hear her say:
Made her own weapon do her finger blede:
To feel, if pricking were so good in deed.
Of the same.
What man has heard such cruelty before?
That, when my plaint remembered her my woe,
That caused it: she cruel more and more,
Wished each stitche, as she did sit and sow,
Had pricked my heart, for to increase my sore,
And, as I think, she thought it had been so.
For as she thought, this is his heart in deed:
She pricked hard: and made her self to blede.
Request to Cupide for revenge of his unkind love.
BEhold, Love, thy power how she despises:
My grievous pain how little she regards,
The solemn oath, whereof she takes no cure,
Broken she has: and yet, she bydeth sure,
Right at her ease, and little thee she dr^d^^h.
Weaponed thou art, and she unarmed sitte^^
To thee disdainful, all her l^fe she leade^^^
To me spiteful, without just cause, or m^^sure.
Behold Love, how proudly she triumphs,
I am in hold, but if thee pity meueth:
Go, bend thy bow, that stony hearts breaks:
And with some stroke revenge the great displeasure
Of thee, and him that sorrow does endure,
And as his Lord thee lowly here entreats.
Complaint for true love unrequited.
What vaileth troth? or by it, to take pain
To strive by steadfastness, for to attain
How to be just: and flee from doubleness?
Since all alyke, where rules carftinesse,
Rewarded is both crafty false, and plain.
Soonest he spedes, that most can lie and fayn.
True meaning heart is had in hi^ disdain.
Against deceit, and cloked doubleness,
What vaileth troth, or parfit steadfastness.
Deceived is he, by false and crafty trayn,
That means no gile, and faithful does remain
Within the trapt, without help or redress.
But for to love (lo) such a stern maistresse,
Where cruelty dwelles, alas it were in vain.
The lover that fled love, now folowes it with his harm.
Sometime I fled the fire, that me so brent,
By sea, by land, by water, and by wind:
And now, the coals I follow, that be quent,
From Dover to Calas, with willing mind,
Lo, how desire is both forth sprung, and spent:
And he may see, that whilom was so blind:
And all his labor, laughes he now to scorn,
Meashed in the breers, that erst was only torn.
The lover hops of better chance.
HE is not dead, that sometime had a fall.
The Sun returnes^ that hid was under clowd.
And when Fortune has spit out all her gall,
I trust, good luck to me shall be alowd.
For, I have seen a ship in haven fall,
After that storm has broke both maste, and shroud,
The willow eke, that stoupeth with the wind,
Does rise again, and greater wood does bind.
The lover compares his heart to the ouercharged gonne.
THe furious goonne, in his most raging ire.
When that the boule is rammed into sore:
And that the flame cannot part from the fire^
Crackes in sunder: and in the air do rore
The sheuered pieces. So does my desire,
Whose flame increases ay from more to more.
Which to let out, I dare not look, nor speak:
So inward force my heart does all to break.
The lover suspected of change prays that it be not believed against him.
ACcused though I be, without desert:
Since none can prove, believe it not for true^
For never yet, since that you had my heart,
Intended I to false, or be untrue.
Sooner I would of death sustayn the smart,
Than break one word of that I promised you^
Accept therefore my service in good part.
None is alive, that can ill tongues eschew.
Hold them as false: and let not us depart
Our friendship old, in hope of any new.
Put not thy trust in such as use to fayn,
Except thou mind to put thy friend to pain.
The lover abused renownseth love.
MY love to skorne, my service to retain,
Therein (me thought) you used cruelty.
Since with good will I lost my liberty,
Might never woe yet cause me to refrain,
But only this, which is extremity,
To give me naught (alas) nor to agree,
That as I was, your man I might remain.
But since that thus ye list to order me,
That would have been your servant true and fast:
Displease you not: my doting time is past.
And with my loss to leave I must agree.
For as there is a certain time to rage:
So is there time such madness to aswage.
The lover professes himself constant.
Within my breast I never thought it gain^
Of gentle minds the fredom for to lose
Nor in my heart sanck never such disdain,
To be a forger, faults for to disclose.
Nor I can not endure the truth to gloss,
To set a gloss upon an earnest pain.
Nor I am not in number one of those,
That list to blow retrete to every train,
The lover sends his complaints and tears to sue for grace.
Pass forth my wonted cries,
Those cruel cares to pearce,
which in most hateful wise
Do still my plaintes reuerse.
Do you, my tears, also
So wet her barrein heart:
That pity there may grow,
And cruelty depart.
For though hard rocks among
She semes to have been bred:
And of the Tigre long
Been nourished, and fed.
Yet shall that nature change,
If pity once win place.
Whom as unknown, and strange,
She now away does chase.
And as the water soft,
Without forcing or strength,
where that it falls often,
Hard stones does perse at length:
So in her stony heart
My plaintes at last shall grave,
And, rygour set apart,
Win grant of that I crave.
Wherefore my plaintes, present
Still so to her my suit,
As ye, through her assent,
May bring to me some ^rute.
And as she shall me prove,
So bid her me regard,
And render love for love:
Which is a just reward.
The lovers case can not be hidden how ever he dissemble.
YOur lokes so often cast,
Your eyes so friendly rolde,
Your sight fixed so fast,
Always one to behold.
Though hyde i^ fayn ye would:
It plainly does declare,
Who has your heart in hold,
And where good will ye bare,
Fayn would ye find a cloak
Your brennyng fire to hyde:
Yet both the flame, and smoke
Breaks out on every side.
Ye can not love so guide,
That it no issue winnne.
Abroad needs must it glide,
That brens so hot within.
For cause your self do wink,
Ye judge all other blind:
And secret it you think,
Which every man does find.
In wast often spend ye wind
Your self in love to quit,
For agues of that kind
Will show, who has the fit.
Your sighs you set from far,
And all to wry your woe:
Yet are ye near the narre,
Men are not blinded so.
Depely often swear ye no:
But all those oaths ar vain.
So well your eye does show,
Who puttes your heart to pain.
Think not therefore to hide,
That still it self betraies:
Nor seek means to provide
To dark the sunny days.
Forget those wonted ways:
Leave of such frowning chere:
There will be found no sta^es
To stop a thing so clear.
The lover p^aieth not be disdained, refused, mistrusted, nor forsaken.
Disdain me not without desert:
Nor leave me not so suddenly:
Since well ye wot, that in my heart
I mean ye not but honestly.
Refuse me not without cause why:
For think me not to be unjust:
Since that by lot of fantasy,
This careful knot needs knit I must.
Mistrust me not, though some there be,
That feign would spot my steadfastness:
Believe them not, sins that ye se,
The proof is not, as they express.
Forsake me not, till I deserve:
Nor hate me not, till I offend.
Destroy me not, till that I swerue.
But sins ye know what I intend:
Disdain me not that am your own:
Refuse me not that am so true:
Mistrust me not till all be known:
Forsake me not, now for no new.
The lover lamenteth his estate with suit for grace.
FOr want of will, in woe I plain:
Under color of soberness.
Renewing with my suit my pain,
My wanhope with your steadfastness.
Awake therefore of gentleness.
Regard at length, I you require,
My swelting pains of my desire.
Betimes who gives willingly,
Redoubled thanks aye does deserve.
And I that sue unfeignedly,
In frutelesse hope (alas) do sterue.
How great my cause is for to swerue:
And yet how steadfast is my suit:
Lo, here ye see, where is the fruit?
As hound that has his keeper lost,
Seek I your presence to obtain:
In which my heart deliteth most,
And shall delight though I be slain.
You may release my band of pain.
Lose then the care that makes me cry^
For want of help or else I dye.
I dye, though not incontinent,
By process yet consumingly
As waste of fire, which does relent.
If you as wilful will deny.
wherefore cease of such cruelty:
And take me wholly in your grace:
Which lacks will to change his place.
The lover waileth his changed joys.
IF every man might him auaunt
Of fortunes friendly chere:
It was my self I must it grant,
For I have bought it dear.
And derely have I held also
The glory of her name:
In yelding her such tribute, lo.
As did set forth her fame.
Sometime I stood so in her grace:
That as I would require,
Each joy I thought did me embrace.
That furdered my desire.
And all those pleasures (lo) had I,
That fansy might support:
And nothing, she did me deny,
That was unto my comfort.
I had (what would you more perde?)
Each grace that I did crave.
Thus fortunes will was unto me
All thing that I would have.
But all to rathe alas the while,
She built on such a ground:
In little space, to great a guile
In her now have I found.
For she has turned so her whele:
That I unhappy man
May wail the time that I deed feel
Wherewith she fed me than.
For broken now are her behestes:
And pleasant looks she gave:
And therefore now all my requests,
From peril can not save.
Yet would I well it might appear
To her my chief regard:
Though my deserts have been to dear
To m^^^te such reward.
Since fortunes will is now so bent
To plage me thus poor man:
I must my self therewith content:
And bear it as I can.
To his love that had given him answer of refusell.
THe answer that ye made to me my dear,
When I did sue for my poor hearts redress:
Has so appalde my countenance and my chere:
That in this case, I am all comfortless:
Sins I of blame no cause can well express.
I have no wrong, where I can claim no right.
Naught taken me fro, where I have nothing had,
Yet of my woe, I can not so be quite.
Namely, sins that another may be glad
With that, that thus in sorrow makes me sad.
Yet none can claim (I say) by former grant,
That knows not of any grant at all.
And by desert, I dare well make auaunt,
Of faithful will, there is no where that shall
Bear you more truth, more ready at your call.
Now good then, call again that bitter word:
That touched your friend so nere with panges of pain:
And say my dear that it was said in board.
Late, or to sone, let it not rule the gain,
Wherewith free will does true desert retain.
To his lady cruel over her yelden lover
SUch is the course, that natures kind has wrought,
That snakes have time to cast away their stinges.
Ainst chainde prisoners what need defense be sought:
The fierce lion will hurt no yelden things:
Why should such spite be nursed then thy thought?
Since all these powers are pressed under thy wings:
And eke thou see, and reason thee has taught:
What mischief malice many ways it bringes:
Consider eke, that spite avails naught,
Therefore this song thy fault to thee it singes:
Displease the not, for saying thus (me thought.)
Nor hate thou him from whom no hate forth springes,
For furies, that in hell be execrable.
For that they hate, are made most miserable.
The lover complains that deadly sickness can not help his affeccion.
THe enmy of life, decayer of all kind,
That with his cold withers away the grene:
This other night, me in my bed did find:
And offered me to ryd my fever clean.
And I did grant: so did despair me blind.
He drew his bow^, with arrows sharp and kene:
And struck the place, where love had hit before:
And drove the first dart deper more and more.
The lover reioiceth the enjoying of his love.
ONce as me thought, fortune me kissed:
And bade me ask, what I thought best:
And I should have it as me list,
Therewith to set my heart in rest.
I asked but my ladies heart
To have for evermore mine own:
Then at an end were al my smart:
Then should I need no more to moan,
Yet for all that a stormy blast
Had ouerturnde this goodly nay:
And fortune seemed at the last,
That to her promise she said day.
But like as one out of despair
To sudden hope reuiued^ I.
Now fortune shows her self so fair,
That I content me wondersly.
My most desire my hand may reach:
My will is al way at my hand.
Me need not long for to beseech
Her, that has power me to command.
What earthly thing more can I crave?
What would I wish more at my will?
Nothing on earth more would I have,
Save that I have, to have it still.
For fortune now has kept her promise,
In granting me my most desire.
Of my sovereign I have redress,
And I content me with my hire.
The lover complains the unkindness of his love.
MY lute awake perform the last
Labor that thou and I shall wast:
And end that I have now begone:
And when this song is song and past:
My lute be still for I have done.
As to be heard where ear is no^e:
As lead to grave in marble stone:
My song may pearse her heart as sone.
Should we then sigh? or singe, or moan?
No, no, my lute for I have done^
The rocks do not so c^u^lly^
Repulse the waves continually,
As she my suit and affection:
So that I am past remedy,
Whereby my lute and I have done.
Proud of the spoil that thou have got
Of simple hearts through loves shot:
By whom unkind thou have them won,
Think not he has his bow forgot,
Although my lute and I have done.
Uengeaunce shall fall on thy disdain
That make but game on earnest pain.
Think not alone under the sun
Unquit to cause thy lovers plain:
Although my lute and I have done.
May chance thee lie withered and old.
In winter nights that are so cold,
Plaining in vain unto the moon:
Thy wishes then dare not be told.
Care then who list, for I have done.
And then may chance thee to repent
The time that thou have lost and spent
To cause thy lovers ^igh and swowne.
Then shall thou know beauty but lent,
And wish and want as I have done.
Now cease my lute this is the last,
Labor that thou and I shall wast
And ended is that we begone.
Now is this song both^ song and past,
My lute be still for I have done.
How by a kiss he found both his life and death.
NAture that gave the Be so feate a grace,
To find honey of so wondrous fashion:
Has taught the spider out of the same place
To fetch poison by strange alteracion.
Though this be strange, it is a stranger case,
With one kiss by secret operacion,
Both these at once in those your lips to find,
In change whereof, I leave my heart behind.
The lover describes his being taken with sight of his love.
Unawarely so was never no man caught,
With steadfast look upon a goodly face:
As I of late: for suddenly me thought,
My heart was torn out of his place.
Through mine eye the stroke from hers did slide^
And down directly to my heart it ran:
In help whereof the blood thereto did glide,
And left my face both pale and wanne.
Then was I like a man for woe amassed:
Or like the foul that flees into the fire.
For while that I upon her beauty gased:
The more I burnd in my desire.
Anon the blood start in my face again,
Inflamde with heat, that it had at my heart.
And brought therewith through out in every vain,
A quaking heat with pleasant smart.
Then was I like the straw, when that the flame
Is driven therein, by force, and rage of wind,
I can not tell, alas, what I shall blame:
Nor what to seek, nor what to find.
But well I wot: the grief does hold me sore
In heat and cold, betwixt both hope and dread:
That, but her help to health do me restore:
This restless life I may not lead.
To his lover to look upon him.
AL in thy look my life does whole depend.
Thou hydest thy self, and I must dye therefore,
But sins thou may so easily help thy friend:
Why do thou stick to salve that thou made sore?
why do I dye? sins thou may me defend:
And if I dye, thy life may last no more.
For each by other does live and have relief,
I in thy look, and thou most in my grief.
The lover excuses him of words wherewith he was unjustly charged.
PErdy I said it not:
Nor never thought to do.
As well as I ye wot:
I have no power thereto,
And if I did, the lot,
That first did me enchayne:
May never slake the knot,
But straight it to my pain.
And if I did each thing,
That may do harm or woe;
Continually may wring
My heart where so I go.
Report may always ring
Of shame on me for aye:
If in my heart did spring
The words that you do say
And if I did each star,
That is in heaven above,
May frown on me to mar
The hope I have in love.
And if I did such war,
As they brought unto Troy,
Bring all my life as far
From all his lust and joy.
And if I did so say:
The beauty that me bound,
Increase from day to day
More cruel to my wound:
With all the moon that may,
To plaint may turn my song:
My life may sone decay,
Without redress by wrong.
If I be clear from thought,
Why do you then complain?
Then is this thing but sought.
To turn my heart to pain,
Then this that you have wrought,
You must it now redress,
Of right therefore you ought
Such rigor to repress.
And as I have deserved:
So grant me now my hire:
You know I never swarued.
You never found me lier.
For Rachel have I served,
For Lea cared I never:
And her I have reserved
Within my heart for ever.
Of such as had forsaken him.
LUx, my fair fawlcon, and thy fellows all:
How well pleasant it were your liberty:
Ye not forsake me, that fair might you fall.
But they that sometime liked my company:
Like lice a way from dead bodies they crall.
Lo, what a proof in light adversity?
But ye my birds, I swear by all your belles,
Ye be my friends, and very few else.
A description of such a one as he would love.
A Face that should content me wondrous wel^
Should not be fair, but lovely to behold:
Of lively look, all grief for to repel:
With right good grace, so would I that it should
Speak without word, such words as none ca^ tell.
Her tresse also should be of crisped gold.
With wit, and these perchance I might be tried,
And knit again with knot, that should not slide.
How impossible it is to find quiet in love.
Ever my hap is slack and slow in coming
Desire encreasyng ay my hope uncertain:
With doubtful love that but increases pain
For Tigre like so swift it is in parting.
Alas the snow black shall it be and scalding,
The sea waterles, and fish upon the mountain:
The Temis shall back return into his fountain:
And where he rose the sun shall take his lodging.
Ere I in this find peace or quietness.
Or that love or my lady rightwisely
Leave to conspire against me wrongfully.
And if I have after such bitterness,
One drop of sweet, my mouth is out of taste:
That al my trust and travel is but waste.
Of love, fortune, and the lovers mind.
Love, Fortune, and my mind which do remember
Eke that is now, and that that once has been:
Torment my heart so sore that very often
I hate and envy them beyond al measure.
Love sleeth my heart while Fortune his depriuee
Of all my comfort: the folishe mind than:
Burns and plainth: as one that very sildam.
Lives in rest. So still in displeasure
My pleasant days they flete away and pass.
And daily does mine ill change to the worse.
while more then half is run now of my course.
Alas not of stele, but of brittle glass,
I se that from my hand falls my trust:
And all my thoughts are dasshed into dust.
The lover prai^th his offered heart to be received.
HOw often have I, my dear and cruel fo:
With my great pain to get some peace or truce,
Given you my heart; but you do not use,
In so hie things, to cast your mind so low,
If any other look for it, as you trow,
Their vain weak hope does greatly them abuse.
And that thus I disdain, that you refuse.
It was once mine, it can no^ more be so.
If you it chase, that it in you can find,
In this exile, no manner of comfort:
Nor live alone, nor where he is calde, resort,
He may wander from his natural kind.
So shall it be great hurt unto us twain,
And yours the loss, and mine the deadly pain.
The lovers life compared to the Alps.
Like unto these unmeasurable mountains,
So is my painful life, the burden of ire.
For hye be they, and hye is my desire.
And I of tears, and they be full of fountains.
Under craggy rocks they have barren plains,
Hard thoughts in me my woeful mind does tire,
Small fruit and many leaves their tops do attire,
With small effect great trust in me remains.
The boystous winds often their hie boughs do blast:
Hot sighs in me continually be shed.
wild beasts in them, fierce love in me is fed.
Unmoueable am I: and they steadfast.
Of singing birds they have the tune and note:
And I always plaintes passing through my throat.
Charging of his love as vnpetious and loving other.
IF amorous faith, or if an heart unfeigned
A sweet languor, a great lovely desire:
If honest will, kindled in gentle fire:
If long error in a blind mase chained,
If in my visage each thought distained:
Or if my sparkelyng voice, lower, or hier,
Which fear and shame, so woefully does tire:
If pale color, which love alas has stained:
If to have another then my self more dear,
If wailing or sighing continually,
With sorrowful anger feding busily
If burning far of, and if frysing nere,
Are cause that I by love my self destroy:
Yours is the fault, and mine the great annoy.
A renouncing of love.
FArewell, Love, and all thy laws for ever,
Thy bayted hooks shall tangle me no more.
Senec, and Plato call me from thy lore:
To parfit wealth my wit for to endeuer.
In blind error when I did parseuer:
Thy sharp repulse, that pricketh aye so sore:
Taught me in trifles that I set no store:
But escape forth thence: since liberty is lever.
Therefore, farewell: go trouble younger hearts:
And in me claim no more authority.
With idle youth go use thy propartie:
And thereon spend thy many brittle darts.
For, hitherto though I have lost my time:
Me list no longer rotten bows to clime,
The lover forsakes his vukinde love.
MY heart I gave thee, not to do it pain:
But to preserve, lo it to thee was taken.
I served thee not that I should be forsaken:
But, that I should receive reward again,
I was content thy servant to remain:
And not to be repayed on this fashion.
Now, since in thee there is none other reason:
Displease thee not, if that I do refrain.
Unsaciat of my woe, and thy desire.
Assured by craft for to excuse thy fault.
But, sins it pleases thee to fain default:
Farewell, I say, departing from the fire.
For, he, that does believe bearing in hand:
Ploweth in the water: and sows in the sand.
The lover describes his restless state.
THe flaming sighs that boil within my breast
Sometime break forth and they can well declare
The hearts unrest and how that it does fare,
The pain thereof the grief and all the rest.
The watered eyes from whence the tears do fall,
Do feel some force or else they would be dry:
The wasted flesh of color ded can try,
And sometime tell what swetenes is in gall.
And he that lust to see and to disarne,
How care can force within a weried mind:
Come he to me I am that place assinde,
But for all this no force it does no harm.
The wound alas hap in some other place:
From whence no tool away the skar can race.
But you that of such like have had your part,
Can best be judge. Wherefore my friend so dear:
I thought it good my state should now appear.
To you and that there is no great desert.
And whereas you in weighty matters great:
Of fortune saw the shadow that you know,
For trifling things I now am stricken so
That though I feel my heart does wound and beat^
I sit alone save on the second day:
My fever comes with whom I spend my time,
In burning heat while that she list assign.
And who has health and liberty always:
Let him thank God and let him not provoke,
To have the like of this my painful stroke.
The lover lamentes the death of his love.
THe pillar perished is whereto I lent,
The strongest stay of mine unquiet mind:
The like of it no man again can find:
From East to West still seking though he went.
To mine unhappy for hap away has rent,
Of all my joy the very bark and rind:
And I (alas) by chance am thus assinde,
Daily to moorne till death do it relent.
But sins that thus it is by desteny,
What can I more but have a woeful heart,
My pen, in plaint, my voice in careful cry:
My mind in woe, my body full of smart,
And I my self, my self always to hate,
Till dreadful death do ease my doleful state.
The lover sends sighs to moan his suit.
GO burning sighs unto the frosen heart,
Go break the yse with pities painful dart.
Might never perce and if that mortal prayer,
In heaven be heard, at lest yet I desire.
That death or mercy end my woeful smart.
Take with thee pain, whereof I have my part,
And eke the flame from which I cannot start.
And leave me then in rest, I you require:
Go burning sighs fulfill that I desire.
I must go work I see by craft and art,
For truth and faith in her is laid apart:
Alas, I can not therefore now assail her,
With pitefull complaint and scalding fire,
That from my breast disceiuably does start.
Complaint of the absence of his love.
SO feeble is the threde, that does the burden stay,
Of my poor life: in heavy plight, that falls in decay:
That, but it have elsewhere some aid or some succors:
The running spindle of my fate anon shall end his course.
For sins thunhappy hour, that did me to depart,
From my sweet weal: one only hope has stated my life, apart:
Which does persuade such words unto my ^ored mind:
Maintain thy self, O woeful wight, some better luck to find:
For though thou be deprived from thy desired sight:
Who can thee tell, if thy ^eturne be for thy more delight?
Or, who can tell, thy loss if thou may once recover?
Some pleasant hour thy woe may wrap: and thee defend, and cover
Thus in this trust as yet it has my life sustained:
But now (alas) I see it faint: and I, by trust, am trained.
The time does flete, and I see how the hours, do bend
So fast: that I have scant the space to mark my coming end,
Westward the sun from out the East scant shows his light:
When in the West he hies him strayt, within the dark of night.
And comes as fast, where he began, his path awry.
From East to West, from West to East so does his journey lie.
The life so short, so frail, that mortal men live here:
So great a weight, so heavy charge the bodies, that we bear:
That, when I think upon the distaunce, and the space:
That does so far divide me from my dear desired face:
I know not, how tattain the wings, that I require,
To lift me up: that I might fly, to follow my desire.
Thus of that hope, that does my life some thing sustain,
Alas: I fear, and partly feel: full little does remain.
Each place does bring me grief: where I do not behold
Those lively eyes: which of my thoughts were wo^t ye keys to hold,
Those thoughts were pleasant sweet: whilst I enjoyed that grace:
My pleasure past, my present pain, when I might well embrace.
And, forbecause my want should more my woe increase:
In watch, and sleep, both day and night, my will does never cease
That thing to wish: whereof sins I did lose the sight:
Was never thing that might in ought my woeful heart delight,
Thuneasy life, I lead, does teach me for to mete
The floodes, the seas, the land, the hills: that does the^ entermete
Twene me, and those shene lights: that wonted for to clear.
My darked pangs of cloudy thoughts, as bright as Phoebus spear
It teaches me also, what was my pleasant state:
The more to feel, by such record, how that my wealth does bate.
If such record (alas) provoke then^ lamed mind:
Which sprung that day, that I did leave the best of me behind:
If love ^orget himself, by length of absence let:
Who does me guide (O woeful wretch) unto this bayted net?
Where does increase my care: much better were for me,
As dumme, as stone, all thing forgot, still absent for to be.
Alas: the clear crystal, the bright transplendant glass
Does not bewray the colors hid, which underneath it hase:
As does thaccumbred sprite the thoughtfull throws discover,
Of fears delight, of fervent love: that in our hearts we cover.
Out by these eyes, it shows that evermore delight.
In ^laint, and tears to seek redress: and eke both day and night.
Those kinds of pleasures most wherein men so rejoice,
To me they do redouble still of stormy sighs the voice.
For, I am one of them, whom plaint does well content:
It s^ts me well mine absent wealth me semes for to lament:
And with my tears, tassay to charge mine eyes twain:
Like as my heart above the brink is fraughted full of pain.
And forbecause, thereto, that those fair eyes to treat
Do me provoke: I will return, my plaint thus to repeat.
For, there is nothing else, so touches me within:
Where they rule all: and I alone naught but the case, or skin.
Wherefore, I shall return to them, as well, or spring:
From whom descendes my mortal woe, above all other thing,
So shall mine eyes in pain accompany my heart,
That were the guides, that did it lead of love to feel the smart.
The crisped gold, that does surmount Apollos pride:
The lively streams of pleasant stars that under it does glide:
Wherein the beams of love do still increase their heat:
Which yet so far touch me so nere, in cold to make me sweat.
The wise and pleasant talk, so rare, or else alone:
That gave to me the curteis gift, that erst had never none:
Be far from me, alas: and every other thing
I might forbear with better will: then this that did me bring
With pleasant word and chere, redress of lingered pain:
And wonted often in kindled will to virtue me to train.
Thus, am I forced to hear, and harken after news.
My comfort scant, my large desire in doutfull trust renewes.
And yet with more delight to moan my woeful case:
I must complain those hands, those arms: that firmly do embrace
Me from my self: and rule the stern of my poor life:
The sweet disdaines, the pleasant wrathes, and eke the lovely strife
That wonted well to tune in temper just, and mete,
The rage: that often did make me err, by furour indiscreet.
All this is hid fro me, with sharp, and ragged hills:
At others will, my long abode my deep despair fulfils.
And if my hope sometime rise up, by some redress:
It stumbleth strait, for feable faint: my fear has such excess.
Such is the sort of hope: the less for more desire:
And yet I trust ere that I dye to see that I require
The resting place of love: where virtue dwelles and grows
There I desire, my weary life, sometime, may take repose.
My song: thou shall attain to find that pleasant place:
Where she does live, by who^ I live: may chance to have this grace
when she has red, and seen the grief, wherein I serve:
Between her breasts she shall thee put: there, shall she the reserve.
Then, tell her, that I come: she shall me shortly see:
And if for waighte the body fail, the soul shall to her flee^
The lover blames his love for renting of the letter he sent her.
SUffised not (madame) that you did tear,
My woeful heart, but thus also to rent:
The weping paper that to you I sent.
Whereof each letter was written with a tear.
Could not my present paines^ alas suffice.
Your gredy heart? and that my heart does feel,
Torments that prick more sharper the^ the stele,
But new and new must to my lot arise.
Use then my death. So shall your cruelty:
Spite of your spite rid me from all my smart,
And I no more such torments of the heart:
Feel as I do. This shall you gain thereby.
The lover cu^seth the time when first he fell in love.
When first mine eyes did view, and mark,
Thy fair beawtie to behold:
And when mine ears listened to hark:
The pleasant wordes^ that thou me told:
I would as then, I had been free,
From ears to h^are, and eyes to see.
And when my lips began first to move,
Whereby my heart to thee was known:
And when my tongue did talk of love,
To thee that have true love down thrown:
I would, my lips, and tongue also:
Had then been dum, no deal to go.
And when my hands have handled ought,
That thee has kept in memory:
And when my feet have gone, and sought^
To find and get thee company:
I would, each hand a foot had been,
And I each foot a hand had seen.
And when in mind I did consent
To follow this my fancies will:
And when my heart did first relent,
To taste such bayt, my life to spill:
I would, my heart had been as thine:
Or else thy heart had been, as mine.
The lover determines to serve faithfully.
Since love will needs, that I shall love:
Of very force I must agree.
And since no chance may it remove:
In wealth, and in ^duersitie,
I shall always my self apply
To serve and suffer patiently.
Though for good will I find but hate:
And cruelty my life to wast:
And though that still ^ wretched state
Should pine my dales unto the last:
Yet I profess it w^llingly,
To serve, and suffer patiently.
For since my heart is bound to serve:
And I not ruler of mine own:
what so befall, till that I sterue,
By proof full well it shall be known:
That I shall still my self apply
To serve, and suffer patiently.
^ea though my grief find no redresse^
But still increase before mine eyes:
Though my reward be cruelnesse,
With all the harm, hap can deuise^
Yet I profess it willingly
To serve and suffer patiently.
Yea though fortune her pleasant ^ace
Should show, to set me up a loft:
And straight, my wealth for to deface,
Should writhe away, as she does often:
Yet would I still my self apply
To serve and suffer patiently.
There is no grief, no smart, no woe:
That yet I feel, or after shall:
That from this mind may make me go,
And what so ever me befall:
I do profess it willingly
To serve and suffer patiently.
The lover suspected blames ill tongues.
MYstrustfull minds be moved
To have me in suspect.
The troth it shall be proved:
Which time shall once detect.
Though falshed go about
Of crime me to accuse:
At length I do not dout,
But truth shall me excuse.
Such sauce, as they have served
To me without desert:
Even as they have deserved:
Thereof God send them part.
The lover complains and his lady comfort.
Lover. IT burns yet, alas my hearts desire.
Lady. What is the thing, that has inflamde thy h^rt?
Lover. A certain point, as fervent, as the fire.
Lady. The heat shall cease, if that thou will convert.
Lover. I cannot stop the fervent raging ire.
La. What may I do, if thy self cause thy smart?
Lo. Hear my request, and rue weying chere.
La. With right good will, say on: lo, I thee here.
Lo. That thing would I, that makes two content.
La. Thou sekest, perchance, of me, that I may not.
Lo. Would god, thou would, as thou may, well assent.
La. That I may not, the grief is mine: God wot.
Lo. But I it feel, what so thy words have meant.
La. Suspect me not: my words be not forgot.
Lo. Then say, alas: shall I have help? or no.
La. I see no time to answer, y^a, but no.
Lo. Say ye, dear heart: and stand no more in dout^
La. I may not grant a thing, that is so dear
Lo. Lo, with delays thou drieues me still about.
La. Thou would my death: it plainly does apper^.
Lo. First, may my heart his blood, and life blede out
La. Then for my sake, alas, thy will forbere.
Lo. From day to day, thus wastes my life away.
La. Yet, for the best, suffer some small delay.
Lo. Now, good, say yea: do once so good a deed.
La. If I said yea: what should thereof ensue?
Lo. An heart in pain of succor so should speed.
Twixt yea, and nay, my doubt shall still renew^
My sweet, say yea: and do away this dread.
La. Thou will needs so: be it so: but then be true.
Lo. Naught would I else, nor other treasure none,
Thus, hearts be won, by love, request, and moan.
why love is blind.
OF purpose, love chose first for to be blind:
For, he with sight of that, that I behold,
Uanquisht had been, against all godly kind.
His bow your hand, and trusse should have unfold.
And he with me to serve had been assinde.
But, for he blind, and recklesse would him hold:
And still, by chance, his dedly strokes bestow:
With such, as see, I serve, and suffer woe.
To his unkind love.
WHat rage is this? what furor? of what kind?
What power, what plage does weary thus my minde^
Within my bones to rankle is assinde
What poison pleasant sweet?
Lo, see, mine eyes flow with continual tears:
The body still away slepelesse it wears:
My food nothing my fainting strength repaires,
Nor does my limbs sustain.
In deep wide wound, the d^dly stroke does turn:
To cureles skarr^ that never shall return.
Go to: triumph: rejoice thy goodly turn:
Thy friend thou do oppress.
Oppress thou do: and have of him no cure:
Nor yet my plaint no pity can procure.
Fierce Tigre, fell, hard rock without recure:
Cruel rebel to Love,
Once may thou love, never beloved again:
So love thou still, and not thy love obtain:
So wrathful love, with spites of just disdain^
May thret thy cruel heart.
The lover blames his instant desire.
DEsire (alas) my master, and my fo:
So ^ore altered thy self how may thou see?
Sometime thou sekest, that drives me to and fro.
Sometime, thou leadst, that leads the and me.
what reason is to rule thy subjects so?
By forced law, and mutabilitie.
For where by thee I douted to have blame:
Even now by hate again I dout the same.
The lover complains his estate.
I See, that chance has chosen me
Thus secertly to live in pain:
And to ^n other given the fee
Of al my loss to hane the gayn.
By chance assinde thus do I se rue:
And other have, that I deserve.
Unto my self sometime alone
I do lament my woeful case.
But what avails me to moan?
Since troth, and p^t^e has no place
In them: to whom I sue and serve:
And other have, that I deserve.
To seek by mean to change this minde^
Alas, I prove, it will not be.
For in my heart I cannot find
Once to refrain, but still agree,
As bound by force, always to serve:
And other have that I deserve.
Such is the fortune, that I have
To love them most, that love me les^:
And to my pain to seek, and crave
The thing, that other have possessed.
So thus in vain always I serve.
And other have, that I deserve.
And till I may apease the heat:
If that my hap will hap so well:
To wail my woe my heart shall freate:
Whose pen^if pain my tongue can tell.
Yet thus unhappy must I serve:
And other have, that I deserue^
Of his love called Anna.
What word is that, that changes not,
Though it be turned and made in tw^in^^
It is mine Anna god it wot.
The only causer of my pain:
My love that medeth with disdain.
Yet is it loved what will you more.
It is my salve, and eke my sore.
That pleasure is mixed with every pain.
Venomous thrones that are so sharp and kene,
Bear flowers we se full fresh and fair of hue.
Poison is also put in medicine.
And unto man his health does often renew.
The fire that all things eke consumes clean
May hurt and heal: then if that this be true.
I trust sometime my harm may be my health,
Sins every woe is joined with some wealth.
A riddle of a gift given by a Lady:
A Lady gave me a gift she had not,
And I received her gift which I took not,
She gave it me willingly, and yet she would not^
And I received it, albeit, I could not,
If she give it me, I force not,
And if she take it again she cares not.
Conster what this is and tell not,
For I am fast sworn I may not.
That speaking or profering bringes always speding.
Speak thou and speed where will or power ought help^^^
Where power does want will must be won by wealth.
For need will speed, where will works no^ his kind,
And gain, thy foes thy friends shall cause thee find,
For suit and gold, what do not they obtain,
Of good and bad the triers are these twain.
He rules not though he reign over realms that is subject to his own lusts.
IF thou will mighty be, flee from the rage
Of cruel will, and see thou keep thee free
From the foul yoke of sensual bondage,
For though thine empire stretche to Indian sea,
And for thy fear trembles the fardest Thylec,
If thy desire have over thee the power,
Subject then art thou and no governor.
If to be noble and high thy mind be meued,
Consider well thy ground and thy beginning:
For he that has each star in heaven fixed,
And geues the Moon her horns and her ecsipsing:
Alike has made the noble in his working,
So that wretched no way may thou be.
Except foul lust and vice do conquer thee.
All were it so thou had a flood of gold,
Unto thy thirst yet should it not suffice.
And though with Indian stones a thousand fold,
More precious then can thy self devise,
Y^harged were thy back: thy coui^ise
And busy biting yet should never let,
Thy wretched life, ne do thy death profet.
whether liberty by loss of life, or life in prison and thraldom be to be
preferred.
Like as the bird within the cage enclosed,
The door vnsparred, her foe the Hawke without,
Twixt death and prison piteously oppressed.
whether for to those stands in dout,
Lo, so do I, which seek to bring about,
Which should be best by determinacion,
By loss of life liberty, or life by prison.
O mischief by mischief to be redressed.
^here pain is best there lies but little pl^^sur^.
By short death better to be delivered,
Than bide in painful life, thraldom, and doler,
Small is the pleasure where much pain we suffer.
Rather therefore to choose me thinks wisdom,
By loss of lif^ liberty, then life by prison.
And yet me thinks although I live and suffer^
I do but wait a time and fortunes chance:
Often many things do happen in one hou^r.
That which oppressed me now may me ad^ance.
In time is trust which by deaths greuance
Is wholly lost. Then were it not reason,
By death to choose liberty, and not life by prison.
But death were deliverance where life le^gths pain^
Of these two ylles let see now choose the best:
This bird to deliver that here does plain,
what say ye lovers? which shall be the best?
In cage ^hraldome, or by the Hawke oppressed.
And which to choose make plain conclusion,
By loss of life liberty, or life by prison.
Against hourders of money.
FOr shamfast harm of great, and hateful need:
In deep despair, as did a wretch go,
With ready cord, out of his life to speed:
His stumbling foot did find an hoorde, lo,
Of gold, I say: where he ^reparde this deed:
And in eschange, he lef^ the cord, tho.
He, that had hid the gold, and found it not:
Of that, he found, he shapte his neck a knot.
Description of a gonne.
VUlcane begat me: Minerua me taught:
Nature, my mother: Craft nourisht me year by yere^
Three bodies are my food: my strength is in naught:
Anger, wrath, wast, and noyce are my children der^,
Guess friend, what I am: and how I am wraught:
Monster of sea, or of land, or of else where.
Know me, and use me: and I may thee defend:
And if I be thine enmy, I may thy life end,
wiate being in prison, to Brian.
SYghes are my food: my drink are my tears.
Clinking of fetters would such music crave.
^tink, and close air away my life it wears.
Poor innocence is all the hope I have.
Rain, wind, or wether judge I by mine ears.
Malice assaults, that righteousness should have.
Sure am I, Brian, this wound shall heal again:
But yet alas, the skarre shall still remain.
Of dissembling words.
THroughout the world if it were sought,
Fair words enough a man shall find:
They be good chepe they cost right naught.
Their substance is but only wind:
But well to say and so to mean,
That sweet acord is seldom seen.
Of the mean and sure estate.
SLond who so list upon the slipper wheel,
Of hye astate and let me here rejoice.
And use my life in quietness each dele,
Unknowen in court that has the wanton toys,
In hidden place my time shall slowly pass
And when my years be past withouten noyce
Let me dye old after the common trace
For gripes of death does he to hardly pass
That known is to all: but to him self alas,
He dies unknown, dased with dreadful face.
The courtiers life
IN court to serve decked with fresh array,
Of sugared meats feling the sweet repast:
The life in bankets, and sundry kinds of pla^,
Amid the press of worldly looks to waste,
Has with it ioynde often times such bitter taste.
That who so joys such kind of life to hold,
In prison joys fettred with cheines of gold.
Of disapointed purpose by negligence.
OF Carthage he that worthy warrior
Could overcome, but could not use his chance
And I likewise of all my long endeavor
The sharp conquest though fortune did advance,
Ne could I use. The hold that is given over,
I vnposest, so hangs now in balance
Of war, my peace, reward of all my pain,
At Mountzon thus I restless rest in Spain.
Of his return from Spain.
TAgus farewell that Westward with thy stremes
Turns up the grains of gold already tried,
For I with spur and sail go seek the temmes.
Gaineward the sun that shows her welthy pride,
And to the town that Brutus sought by dreams,
Like bended moan that leanes her lusty side.
My king, my country, I seek for whom I live,
O mighty Jove the winds for this me give.
Of sudden trusting.
Driven by desire I did this deed
To danger my self without cause why:
To trust thuntrue not like to speed,
To speak and promise faithfully:
But now the proof does verify,
That who so trusts ere he know,
Does hurt himself and please his foe,
Of the mother that eat her child at the seige of Jerusalem.
IN doubtful breast whiles motherly pity
With furious famine stands at debate,
The mother says: O child unhappy
Return thy blood where thou had milk of late
Yield me those limbs that I made unto thee,
And enter there where thou were generate.
For one of body against all nature,
To an other must I make sepulture.
Of the mean and sure estate written to John Poins.
MY mothers maids when they do sow and spinne:
They sing a song made of the feldishe mouse:
That for because her liuelod was but thin,
Would needs go se her townish sisters house,
She thought, her self endured to grievous pain,
The stormy blastes her cave so sore did sowse:
That when the furrows swimmed with the rain:
She must lie cold, and wet in sorry plight.
And worse then that, bare meat there did remain
To comfort her, when she her house had dight:
Sometime a barley corn: sometime a bean:
For which she labored hard both day and night,
In harvest time, while she might go and gleane.
And when her store was stroyed with the floode:
Then weleaway for she undone was clean.
Then was she feign to take instead of fode,
Sleep if she might, her honger to begile.
My sister (quod she) has a living good:
And hence from me she dwells not a mile.
In cold and storm, she lies warm and dry,
In bed of down: the dirt does not defile
Her tender foot, she labors not as I,
Richely she fedes, and at the richemans cost:
And for her meat she needs not crane nor cry.
By sea, by land, of delicates the most
Her cater sekes, and spares for no perell:
She fedes on boil meat, bake meat, and on roast:
And has therefore no whit of charge nor travel.
And when she list the licour of the grape
Does glad her heart, till that her belly swell.
And at this journey makes she but a iape:
So forth she goes, trusting of all this wealth,
With her sister her part so for to shape:
That if she might there keep her self in health:
To live a Lady while her life does last.
And to the door now is she come by stealth:
And with her foot anon she scarpes full fast.
The Other for fear, durst not well scarce appear:
Of every noise so was the wretch aghast.
At last, she asked softly who was there.
And in her language as well as she could,
Pepe (quod the other) sister I am here.
Peace (quod the town mouse) why speak thou so loud?
And by the hand she took her fair and well.
Welcome (quod she) my sister by the rode.
She feasted her that joy it was to tell
The fare they had, they drank the wine so clear:
And as to purpose now and then i^ fell:
She chered her, with how sister what chere?
Amid this joy be fell a sorry chance:
That (weleaway) the stranger bought full dear
The fare she had. For as she looked a scance:
Under a stole she spied two stemyng eyes
In a round head, with sharp ears: in France
Was never mouse so ferde, for the unwise
Had not ysene such a beast before.
Yet had nature taught her after her gise,
To know her fo: and dread him evermore.
The townemouse f^ed: she knew whither to go:
The other had no shift, but wonders sore
Ferde of her life, at home she wished her tho:
And to the door (alas) as she did skippe:
The heaven it would, lo: and eke her chance was so:
At the threshold hersely foot did trippe:
And ere she might recover it again:
The traitor cat had caught her by the hippe:
And made her there against her will remain:
That had forgot her power, suerty and rest,
For seking wealth, wherein she thought to reign.
Alas (my Poyns) how men do seek the best,
And find the worse, by error as they stray,
And no marvel, when sight is so oppressed,
And blindes the guide, anon out of the way
Goes guide and all in seking quiet life.
O wretched minds, there is no gold that may
Grant that you seek, no war, no peace, no strife.
No, no, although thy head were hoopt with gold,
Sergeant with mace, with hawbart, sword, nor knife,
Can not repulse the care that follow should.
Each kind of life has with him his disease.
Live in delits, even as thy lust would:
And thou shall find, when lust does most thee please:
It irketh straight, and by it self does fade.
A small thing is it, that may thy mind appease.
None of you al there is, that is so mad,
To seek for grapes on brambles, or on briars:
Nor none I trow that has a wit so badde,
To set his hay for coneies over rivers:
Nor ye set not a dragge net for an hare.
And yet the thing, that most is your desire,
You do misseke, with more travel and care.
Make plain thine ha^t, that it be not knotted
With hope or dread, and se thy will be bare
From all affectes, whom vice has never spotted.
Thy self content with that is thee assinde:
And use it well that is to thee allotted,
Then seek no more out of thy self to find
The thing that thou have sought so long before.
For thou shall feel it stickyng in thy mind.
Made, if ye list to continue your sore:
Let present pass, and gape on time to come,
And deep thy self in travel more and more.
Henceforth (my Poins) this shall be all and sum
These wretched foles shall have naught else of me:
But, to the great God and to his dome,
None other pain pray ^ for them to be:
But when the rage does lead them from the right:
That loking backward, Virtue they may se,
Even as she is, so goodly fair and bright.
And whilst they claspe their lusts in arms a cross:
Grant them good Lord, as thou may of thy might,
To freat inward, ^or losyng such a loss.
Of the Courtiers life written to Ihon Poins.
Mine own Ihon Poins: sins ye delight to know
The causes why that homeward I me draw,
And fle the prease of courts, where so they go:
Rather then to live thrall under the awe,
Of lordly lokes, wrapped within my cloak,
To will and lust learning to set a law:
It is not that because I scorn or mock
The power of them: whom fortune here has lent
Charge over us, of right to strike the stroke.
But true it is that I have always meant
Less to esteem them, then the common sort
Of outward things: that judge in their intent,
without regard, what inward does resort.
I grant, sometime of glory that the fire
Does touch my heart. Me list not to report
Blame by honor, and honor to desire.
But how may I this honor now attain?
That can not dye the color black a lier.
My Poyns, I can not frame my time to fayn:
To cloak the truth, for praise without desert,
Of them that list all vice for to retain.
I can not honor them, that set their part
With Uenus, and Bacchus, all their life long:
Nor hold my peace of them, although I smart.
I can not crouch nor knele to such a wrong:
To worship them like God on earth alone:
That areas wolves these sely lambs among.
I can not with my words complain and moan,
And suffer naught: nor smart without complaynt:
No^ turn the word that from my mouth is gone,
I can not speak and look ^^ke as a saint:
Use wiles for wit, and make disceyt a pleasure:
Call craft counsel, for lucre still to paint.
I can not wrest the law to fill the coffer:
with innocent blood to feed my self fat:
And do most hurt: where that most help I offer.
I am not he, that can allow the state
Of hye Ceasar, and damn Cato to dye:
That with his death did escape out of the gate,
From Ceasars hands, if Liuye does not lie:
And would not live, where liberty was lost,
So did his heart the common wealth apply.
I am not he, such eloquence to bost:
To make the crow in singyng, as the swanne:
Nor call the lion of coward beasts the most.
That can not take a mouse, as the cat can.
And he that dies for honger of the gold,
Call him Alexander, and say that Pan
Passes Appollo in music manifold:
Praise sir Copas for a noble tale,
And scorn the story that the knight told:
Praise him for counsel, that is drunk of ale:
Grinne when he laughes, that ^eareth all the sway:
Frown, when he frowns: and groan when he is pale:
On others lust to hang both night and day.
None of these points would ever frame in me.
My wit is naught, I can not learn the way.
And much the less of things that greater be,
That asken help of colors to devise
To join the mean with each extremity:
With nearest virtue ay to cloak the vice.
And as to purpose likewise it shall fall:
To press the virtue that it may not rise.
As drunkenness good fellowship to call:
The friendly foe, with his fair double face,
Say he is gentle and curties therewithal.
Affirm that fauel has a goodly grace,
In eloquence: And cruelty to name
Zeal of Justice: And change in time and place.
And he that suffers offense without blame:
Call him pitiful, and him true and plain,
That rayleth rechlesse unto each man's shame.
Say he is rude, that can not lie and feign:
The letcher a lover, and tyranny
To be the right of a Princes raygne.
I can not I, no, no, it will not be.
This is the cause that I could never yet
Hang on their sleues, that weygh (as thou may se)
A chippe of chance more then a pound of wit.
This makes me at home to hunt and hawk:
And in foul wether at my book to sit:
In frost and snow, then with my bow to stalk.
No man does mark where so I ride or go.
In lusty leas at liberty I walk:
And of these news I feel nor weal nor woe:
Save that a clogge does hang yet at my heel.
No force for that, for it is ordered so:
That I may leap both hedge and dike full well,
I am not now in France, to judge the wine:
with sauery sauce those delicates to feel.
Nor yet in Spain where one must him incline,
Rather then to be, outwardly to seem.
I meddle not with wits that be so fine,
Nor Flaunders chere lettes not my sight to deem
Of black, and white, nor takes my wits away
with beastliness: such do those beasts esteem.
Nor I am not, where truth is given in pray,
For money, poison, and treason: of some
A common practice, used night and day.
But I am here in kent and christendom:
Among the Muses, where I read and ryme,
Where if thou list mine own Ihon Poyns to come:
Thou shall be judge, how I do spend my time.
How to use the court and him self therein, written to sir Fraunces Brian.
A Spendyng hand that always powers out,
Had need to have a bringer in as fast.
And on the stone that still does turn about,
There grows no moss. These proverbs yet do last:
Reason has set them in so sure a place:
That length of years their force can never was^e.
When I remember this, and eke the case,
wherein thou standst: I thought forthwith to write
(Brian) to thee: who knows how great a grace
In writing is to counsel man the right.
To thee therefore that trottes still up and down:
And never restes, but runnyng day and night,
From realm to realm, from city street, and town.
Why do thou wear thy body to the bones?
And might at home sleep in thy bed of down:
And drink good ale so nappy for the nones:
Feed thy self fat, and heap up pound by pound.
Likest thou not this? No. Why? For swine so groines
In stye, and chaw dung molded on the ground.
And driuell on pearls with head still in the maunger,
So of the harp the ass does hear the sound.
So sackes of dirt be filde. The neat courtier
So serves for less, then do these fatted swine.
Though I seem lean and dry, withouten moyster:
Yet will I serve my prince, my lord and thine.
And let them live to feed the paunch that list:
So I may live to feed both me and mine.
By God well said. But what and if thou wist
How to bring in, as fast as thou do spend.
That would I learn. And it shall not be mist,
To tell thee how. Now hark what I intend.
Thou know well first, who so can seek to please,
Shall purchase friends: where troth shall but offend.
Flee therefore truth, it is both wealth and ease.
For though that troth of every man has praise:
Full near that wind goes troth in great misease.
Use virtue, as it goes now a days:
In word alone to make thy language sweet:
And of thy deed, yet do not as thou says.
Else be thou sure: thou shall be far unmeet
To get thy bread, each thing is now so skant.
Seek still thy profit upon thy bare fete.
Lend in no wise: for fear that thou do want:
Unless it be, as to a calfe a chese:
But if thou can be sure to win a can^
Of half at least. It is not good to leese.
Learn at the ladde, that in a long white cote,
From under the stall, withouten lands or feese,
Has lept into the shop: who knows by rote
This rule that I have told thee here before.
Sometime also rich age begins to dote,
Se thou when there thy gain may be the more,
Stay him by the arm, where so he walk or go:
Be nere always, and if he coughe to sore:
What he has spit tread out, and please him so.
A diligent knave that pikes his masters purse,
May please him so, that he withouten mo
Executour is. And what is he the wurse?
But if so chance, thou get naught of the man:
The wydow may for all thy pain disburse.
A riueld skin, a stinkyng breath, what than?
A tothelesse mouth shall do thy lips no harm.
The gold is good, and though she curse or banne:
Yet where thee list, thou may lie good and warm.
Let the old mule bite upon the bridle:
Whilst there do lie a sweter in thy arm.
In this also se that thon be not idle:
Thy nece, thy cosyn, sister, or thy daughter,
If she be fair: if handsome be her middle:
If thy better has her love besought her:
Auaunce his cause, and he shall help thy need.
It is but love, turn thou it to a laughter.
But ware I say, so gold thee help and speed:
That in this case thou be not so unwise,
As Pandar was in such a like deed.
For he the sole of conscience was so nice:
That he no gain would have for all his pain.
Be next thy self for frendshyp bears no price.
Laughest thou at me, why? do I speak in vain?
No not at thee, but at thy thrifty jest.
Would thou, I should for any loss or gain,
Change that for gold, that I have taken for best.
Next godly things: to have an honest name?
Should I leave that? then take me for a beast.
Nay then farewell, and if thou care for shame:
Content thee then with honest poverty:
with free tongue, what thee mislikes, to blame,
And for thy troth sometime adversity.
And therwithall this gift I shall thee give,
In this world now little prosperity:
And coin to keep: as water in a sieve.
The song of Iopas unfinished.
When Dido feasted first the wandering Trojan knight:
who^ Iunos wrath with storms did force in Libik sa^ds to light
That mighty Atlas taught, the supper lasting long,
With crisped locks on golden harp, Iopas sang in song.
That same (quod he) that we the world do call and name:
Of heaven and earth with all contents, it is the very frame.
Or thus, of heavenly powers by more power kept in one
Repugnant kinds, in mids of whom the earth has place alone:
Firm, round, of living things, the mother, place and nourse:
Without the which in egal weight, this heaven does hold his course
And it is called by name, the first and moving heaven,
The firmament is placed next, containing other seven,
Of heavenly powers that same is planted full and thick:
As shining lights which we call stars, that therein cleue and stick.
With great swift sway, the first, and with his restless sours,
Carries it self, and all those eight, in even contin^all course.
And of this world so round within that rolling case,
Two points there be that never move, but firmly keep their place^
The tone we see always, the the other stands object
Against the same, dividing just the ground by line direct.
Which by imaginacion, drawn from the one to the other
Touches the center of the earth, for way there is none other.
And these be calde the Poles, descryde by stars not bright.
Artike the one northward we see: Antartike the other hight,
The line, that we devise from the one to the other so:
As axel is, upon the which the heavens about do go
Which of water nor earth, of air nor fire have kind,
Therefore the substance of those same were hard for man to finde^
But they been vncorrupt, simple and pure unmixed:
And so we say been all those stars, that in those same be sixth.
And eke those erring seven, in circle as they stray:
So calde, because against that first they have repugnant way:
And smaller by ways to, skant sensible to man:
To busy work for my poor harp: let sing them he that can.
The wydest save the first, of all these nine above
One hundred year does ask of space, for one degree to mo^e.
Of which degrees we make, in the first moving heaven,
Three hundred and threscore in parts justly divided even.
And yet there is another between those heavens two:
Whose moving is so sly so slack: I name it not for now.
The seventh heaven or the shell next to the s^arry sky,
All those degrees that gatherth up, with aged pase so sly:
And does perform the same, as elders count has been.
In nine and twenty years complete, and days almost sixtene:
Does carry in his bowt the star of Saturn old:
A threatner of all living things, with drought and with his cold.
The sixth whom this cont^ins does stalk with younger pase:
And in twelve year does somewhat more then thothers v^age was.
And this in it does bear the star of Jove benign,
T'wene Saturns malice and us men, friendly defending sign.
The fifth bears bloody Mars, that in three hundred days,
And twice eleven with one ^ull year, has finished all those ways.
A year does ask the fourth, and hours thereto six,
And in the same the days eye the sun, therein he sticks.
The third that gouernd is by that, that gouerns me:
And love for love, and for no love prouokes: as often we see:
In like space does perform that course, that did the the other.
So does the next unto the same, that second is in order.
But it does bear the star, that called is Mercury:
That many a crafty secret step does tread, as Calcars try.
That sky is last, and fixed next vs^ those ways has gone,
In seven and twenty common days, and eke the third of one:
And ^eareth with his sway, the diverse Moon about:
Now bright, now brown, now bent, now full, and now her light is out.
Thus have they of their own two mouinges all these seven
One, wherein they be carried still, each in his several heaven,
An other of them selves, where their bodies be laid
In by ways, and in lesser rowndes, as I before have said.
Save of them all the Sun does stray lest from the straight,
The starry sky has but one course, that we have called the eight.
And all these moouinges eight are meant from West to East:
Although they seem to clime aloft, I say from East to west.
But that is but by force of the first moving sky:
In twice twelve hours from east to east that carries them by and by
But mark we well also, these mouinges of these seven,
Be not about the axell tree of the first moving heaven.
For they have their two poles directly tone to the the other. etc.
T. VVYATE the elder.
Songs and Sonettes of uncertain auctours.
The complaint of a lover with suit to his love for pity.
IF ever woeful man might move your hearts to ruthe,
Good ladies here his woeful plaint, whose death shall try his truth
And rightful judges be on this his true report:
If he deserve a lovers name among the faithful sort.
Five hundred times the Sun has lodged him in the west:
Since in my heart I harbred first of all the goodlyest gest.
Whose worthynesse to shew^ my wits are all to faint.
And I lack cunning of the scooles, in colors her to paynt.
But this I briefly say in words of egall weight.
So void of vice was never none, nor with such virtues freight.
And for her beauties praise, no wight, that with her wars.
For, where she comes, she shows her self as sun among the stars
But Lord, thou wast to blame, to frame such parfitenesse:
And puttes no pity in her heart, my sorrows to redress.
For if ye knew the pains, and panges, that I have past:
A wonder would it be to you, how that my life has last.
When all the Gods agreed, that Cupide with his bow
Should shote his arrows from her eyes, on me his might to show
I knew it was in vain my force to trust upon:
And well I wist, it was no shame, to yield to ^uch a one.
Then did I me submit with humble heart and mind,
To be her man for evermore: as by the Gods assinde.
And since that day, no woe, wherewith love might torment,
Could move me from this faithful band: or make me once repent.
Yet have I felt full often the hottest of his fire:
The bitter tears, the scalding sighs, the burning hot desire^
And with a sudden sight the trembling of the heart:
And how the blood does come, and go, to succor every part.
When that a pleasant look has lift me in the air:
A frown has made me fall as fast into a deep despayer.
And when that I ere this, my tale could well by heart:
And that my tongue had learned it, so that no word might start:
The sight of her has set my wits in such a stay:
That to be lord of all the world, one word I could not say.
And many a sodayn cramp my heart has pinched so:
That for the time, my senses all felt neither weal, nor woe.
Yet saw I never thing, that might my mind content:
But wished it hers, and at her will, if she could so consent.
Nor never heard of woe: that did her will displease:
But wished the same unto my self, so it might do her ease.
Nor never thought that fair, nor never liked face:
Unless it did resemble her, or some part of her grace.
No distance yet of place could us so far divide,
But that my heart, and my good will did still with her abide.
Nor yet it never lay in any fortunes power,
To put that sweet out of my thought, one minute of an hour.
No rage of drenching sea, nor woodnesse of the wind,
Nor canno^s with their thundering cracks could put her from my mind
For when both sea and land asunder had us set:
My hole delight was only then, my self alone to get.
And thitherward to look, as nere as I could guess:
Where as I thought, that she was the^, that might my woe redress.
Full often it did me good, that ways to take my wind:
So pleasant air in no place else, me thought I could not find.
I saying to my self, my life is yonder way:
And by the wind I have her sent, a thousand sighs a day.
And said unto the sun, great gifts are given thee:
For thou may see mine earthly bliss, where ever that she be.
Thou see in every place, would God I had thy might:
And I the ruler of my self, then should she know no night.
And thus from wish to wish, my wits have been at strife:
And wanting all that I have wished, thus have I led my life.
But long it can not last, that in such woe remains.
No force for that: for death is sweet to him, that feles such paines^
Yet most of all me greues: when I am in my grave,
That she shall purchase by my death a cruel name to have.
Wherefore all you that hear this plaint, or shall it see:
Wish, that it may so perce her heart, that she may pity me.
For and it were her will: for both it were the best,
To save my life, to keep her name, and set my heart at rest.
Of the death of master Deuorox the lord Ferres son.
Who justly may rejoice in ought under the sky?
As life, or lands: as friends, or fruits: which only live to dye.
Or who does not well know all worldly works are vain?
And gives naught but to the lendes, to take the same again.
For though it lift some up: as we long upward all:
Such is the sort of slipper wealth: all things do rise to fall.
Thuncerteintie is such: experience teaches so:
That what things men do cover most them sonest they forgo.
Lo Deuorox where he lies: whose l^fe men held so dear
That now his death is sorowed so, that pity it is to hear.
His birth of ancient blood: his parents of great fame:
And yet in virtue far before the foremost of the same,
His king, and country both he served to so great gain:
That with the Brutes record does rest, and ever shall remain.
No man in war so mete, an enterprise to take:
No man in peace that pleasurde more of enmies friends to make.
A Cato for his counsel: his head was surely such.
Ne Theseus friendship was so great, but Deuorox was as much.
A graffe of so small grothe, so much good fruit to bring:
Is seldom heard, or never seen: it is so rare a thing.
A man sent us from God, his life did well declare,
And now sent for by God again, to teach us what we are.
Death, and the grave, that shall accompany all that live,
Has brought him heaven, though so^what sone, which life could never give
God grant well all, that shall profess as he professed:
To live so well, to dye no worse: and send his soul good rest.
They of the mean estate are happiest.
IF right be rackt, and ouerronne:
And power take part with open wrong:
If fear my force do yield to soon,
The lack is like to last to long.
If God for goods shall be vnplaced:
If right for riches lose his shape:
If world for wisdom be embraced:
The guess is great, much hurt may hap.
Among good things, I prove and find,
The quiet life does most abound:
And sure to the contented mind
There is no riches may be found.
For riches hates to be content:
Rule is enmy to quietness.
Power is most part impacient:
And seldom likes to live in pease.
I heard a herdman once compare:
That quiet nights he had mo slept:
And had mo m^ry days to spare:
Then he, which ought the beasts, he kept.
I would not have it thought hereby
The Dolphin swim I mean to teach:
Nor yet to learn the Fawcon fly:
I row not so far past my reach.
But as my part above the rest,
Is well to wish and well to will:
So till my breath shall fail my breast,
I will not cease to wish you still.
Comparison of life and death.
THe life is long, that lothsomly does last:
The doleful days draw slowly to their date:
The present panges, and painful plages forepast
Yield grief aye grene to stablish this estate.
So that I feel, in this great storm, and strife,
The death is sweet that ends such a life.
Yet by the stroke of this strange overthrow,
At which conflict in thraldom I was thrust:
The Lord be praised: I am well taught to know
From whence man came, and eke whereto he must:
And by the way upon how feeble force
His term does stand, till death does end his course.
The pleasant years that seem, so swift that run
The merry days to end, so fast that flete:
The joyful nights, of which day daweth so soon.
The happy hours, which mo domisse then mete,
Do all consume: as snow against the sun:
And death makes end of all, that life begunne^
Since death shall dure, till all the world be wast.
what means man to dread death then so sore?
As man might make, that life should always last.
Without regard, the lord has led before
The dance of death, which all must run on row:
Though how^ or when: the Lord alone does know.
If man would mind, what burdens life does bring:
What grievous crimes to Go^ he does c^mmi^t:
what plages, what panges, what per^iles thereby spring:
With no sure hour in all his days to ^it:
He would sure think, as with great cause I do:
The day of death were better of the two.
Death is a port, whereby we pass to joy.
Life is a lake, that drowneth all in pain.
Death is so dear, it cease all annoy.
Life is so leude, that all it yeldes is vayn.
And as by life to bondage man is braught:
Even so likewise by death was fredome wraught.
Wherefore with Paul, let all men wish and pray
To be dissolude of this foul fleshly mass:
Or at the least be armde against the day:
That they be found good soldiers, pressed to pass
From life to death: from death to life again
To such a life, as ever shall remain.
The tale of Pigmalion with conclusion upon the beauty of his love.
IN Greece sometime there dwelt a man of worthy fame:
To grave in stone his cunning was: Pygmalio^ was his name,
To make his fame endure, when death had him bereft:
He thought it good, of his own hand some filed work were left.
In secret study then such work he began devise,
^s might his cunning best commend, and please the lookers eyes^
A courser fair he thought to grave, barbd for the field:
And on his back a semely knight, well armd with spear and shield:
Or else some foul, or fish to grave he did devise:
And still, within his wandering thoughts, new fancies did arise.
Thus varied he in mind, what enterprise to take:
Till fansy moved his learned hand a woman fair to make.
Whe^eon he stayde, and thought such parfite form to frame:
Whereby he might amaze all Greece, and win immortal name.
Of yuorie white he made so fair a woman than:
That nature scornd her perfitnesse so taught by craft of man.
Well shaped were her lims, full comely was her face:
Each little vain most lively coucht, each part had semely grace.
Twixt nature and Pigmalion, there might appear great strife,
So semely was this image wrought, it lackt nothing but life.
His curious eye beheld his own devised work:
And, gasing often thereon, he found much venom there to lurk.
For all the featurde shape so did his fancy move:
That, with his idol, whom he made, Pygmalion fell in love.
To whom he honor gave, and decked with garlandes sweet.
And did adourn with jewels rich, as is for lovers mete.
Sometimes on it he fawnd: sometime in rage would cry:
It was a wonder to behold, how fansy bleard his eye.
Since that this image dum enflamde so wise a man:
My dear alas, since I you love, what wonder is it than?
In whom has nature set the glory of her name:
And brake her moulde, in great despair, your like she could not frame.
The lover shows his woeful state, and prays pity.
Like as the Lark within the Marlians foot
With piteous tunes does chirp her yelden lay:
So sing I now, seeing none other boot,
My rendering song, and to your well obey.
Your virtue mountes above my force so hye.
And with your beauty seized I am so sure:
That there auails resistance none in me,
But patiently your pleasure to endure.
For on your will my fansy shall attend:
My life, my death, I put both in your choice:
And rather had this life by you to end,
Than live, by other always to rejoice.
And if your cruelty do thirst my blood:
Then let it forth if it may do you good.
Upon consideration of the state of this life he wishes death.
THe longer life, the more offense:
The more offense the greater pain,
The greater pain, the less defense:
The less defense, the lesser gain
The loss of gain long ill does try^:
Wherefore come death, and let me dye.
The shorter life, less count I find,
The less account, the sooner made:
The count soon made, the merier mind:
The merier mind does thought euade,
Short life in truth this thing does try.
Wherefore come death, and let me dye.
Come gentle death, the ebb of care,
The ebb of care the flood of life.
The flood of life, the ioifull fare,
The joyful fa^e, the end of strife,
The end of strife, that thing wish I:
wherefore come death, and let me dye.
The lover that once disdained love is now become subject being canght in his
snare.
TO this my song give ear who list
And mine ^ntent judge as ye will,
The time is come, that I have myste,
The thing whereon I hoped still,
And from the top of all my trust,
Mishap has thrown me in the dust.
The time has been and that of late:
My heart and I might leap at large,
And was not shut within the gate
Of looues desire: nor took no charge
Of any thing, that did pertain
As touching love in any pain
My thought was free, my heart was light,
I marked not, who lost, who saught,
I played by day, I slept by night
I forced not, who wept, who laughed.
My thought from al such things was free.
And I my self at liberty.
I took no head to tauntes nor toys,
As leef to see them frown as smyle:
where fortune laughed I scornde their joys
I found their frauds and every wyle.
And to my self often times I smiled.
To see how love had them begiled
Thus in the net of my conceyt
I masked still among the sort
Of such as fed upon the bayte,
That Cupide laid for his disport,
And ever as I saw them caught:
I them beheld, and there at laughed.
Till at the length when Cupide spied
My scornful will and spiteful use
And how I past not who was tied,
So that my self might still live lose:
He set him self to lie in wait,
And in my way he threw a bait
Such one as nature never made,
I dare well say save she alone,
Such one she was as would invade
A heart, more hard then marble stone,
Such ^ne she is, I know it right.
Her nature made to show her might
Then as a man in a mase,
when use of reason is away:
So I began to stare and gase,
And suddenly, without delay,
Or ever I had the wit to look:
I swalowed up both bai^ and hoke.
Which daily greues me more and more,
By sundry sorts of ca^efull woe:
And none alive may salve the sore.
But only she that hurt me so.
In whom my life does now consist
To save or slay me as she list.
But seeing now that I am caught,
And bound so fast, I cannot flee:
Be ye by mine ensample taught,
That in your fancies feel you free,
Despise not them, that lovers are:
Lest you be caught within his snare,
Of Fortune, and fame.
THe plage is great, where fortune frounes:
One mischief bringes a thousand woes
Where trumpets g^ue their warlike sown^s:
The weke sustain, sharp overthrows,
No better life they take and feel,
That subject are to fortunes whele.
Her happy chance may last no time:
Her pleasure threatens pains to come,
She is the fall of those that clime:
And yet her where auanceth ^ome
No force where that she hates, or loves:
Her fickle mind so often remoues
She geues uo gift, but craves as fast.
She sone repentes a thankful deed,
She turns after every blast.
She helps them often, that have no need.
Where power dwelles, and riches rest:
False Fortune is a common gest.
Yet some affirm and prove by sayll:
Fortune is not a sleing fame,
She neither can do good, nor ill,
She has no form, yet bears a name,
Then we but strive against the stremes,
To frame such joys on fancies dreams.
If she have shape, or name alone:
I^ she do rule or bear no sway:
If she have body, life or none:
Be she a sprite I can not say.
But well I wot, some cause there is:
That causes woe, and sends bliss.
The causes of things I will not blame:
Lest I offend the prince of peace,
But I may chide, and braule with ^ame:
To make her cry, and never cease
To blow the trumpe within her ears:
That may appease my woeful tears.
Against wicked tongues.
O Evil tongues, which clap at every wind:
Ye slay the quick, and eke the dead defame:
Those that live well, some fault in them ye find,
Ye take no thought in sclaundring their good name,
Ye put just men often times to open shame,
Ye ryng so loud, ye sound unto the skies:
And yet in proof, ye sow nothing but ly^s.
Ye make great war, where peace has been of long
Ye bring rich realms to ruin and decay,
Ye pluck down right: ye enhaunce the wrong.
Ye turn sweet mirth to woe, and well away
Of mischiefs all ye are the ground I say,
Happy is he, that lives on such a sort:
That needs not fear such tongues of false report.
Hell tormenteth not the damned gostes so sore, as unkindness the lover.
THe restless ^age of deep devouring hell,
The blasing brandes, that never do consume:
The roaring route, in Plutoes den that dwell,
The fiery breath, that from those ympes does fume:
The dropsy dries, that Tantale in the flood
Endures ay, all hopeless of relief:
He honger steruen, where fruit is ready food
So wretchedly his soul does suffer grief:
The liver gnawne of gylefull Promethus.
Which Uultures fell with strained talant tire:
The labor lost of weried Sisiphus:
These hellish hounds, with pains of quenchlesse fire,
Can not so sore the silly souls torment,
As her untruth my heart has all to rent.
Of the mutabilitie ^f the world.
BY fortune as I lay in bed, my fortune was to find
Such fa^sies, as my careful thought had brought into my mind
And when each one was gone to rest full soft in bed to lie:
I would have slept, but than the watch did follow still mine eye,
And suddenly I saw a sea of woeful sorrows pressed:
whose wicked ways of sharp repulse bred mine unquiet rest,
I saw this world and how it went, each state in his degree,
And that from wealth I granted is, both life and liberty.
I saw how envy it did rain, and bear the greatest price,
Yet greater poison is not found within the Cockatrice.
I saw also, how that disdain often times to forge my woe,
Gave me the cup of bitter swette to pledge my mortal foo,
I saw also, how that desire, to rest no place could find
But still constrainde in endless pain to follow natures kind
I saw, also most strange of all, how nature did forsake
The blood, yt in her womb, was wrought, as does ye lothed snake.
I saw, how fancy would retain no longer then her lust,
And as the wind how she does change, and is not for to trust.
I saw, how, stedfastnes did fly with wings of often change,
A flying bird, but seldom seen, her nature is so strange,
I saw, how pleasant times did pass, as flowers do in the mede
To day that rises red as rose, to morrow falls ded.
I saw, my time how it did run, as sand out of the glass.
Even as each hour appointed is, from time and tide to pass,
I saw, the years that I had spent, and loss of all my game
And how the sport of youthful plays my folly did retain,
I saw, how that the little Ant in somer still does run
To seek her food, whereby to live in wiuter for to come,
I saw, eke virtue, how she sat the threde of life to spinne,
which shows the end of every work, before it does begin,
And when all these I thus beheld with many in^ pardy,
In me, me thought, each one had wrought a perfie property.
And then I said unto my self, a lesson this shall be
For other, that shall afteh come, for to beware by me
Thus all the night I did devise, which way I might constaine
To form a plot, that wit might work these branches in my brain
Harpalus complaint of Phillidaies love bestowed on Corin, who loved her not:
and denied him that loved her.
PHyllida was a fair maid,
As fr^sh as any flower,
Whom Harpalus the herdman prayde
To be his paramour.
Harpalus and eke Corin
were herdmen both yfere:
and Phyllida could twist and spinne
And thereto s^ng full clear
But Phyllida was all to coy,
For harpalus to win
For Corin was her only joy,
who forced her not a pin,
How often would she flowers twine
How often garlandes make:
Of Cousips and of Columbine.
And all for Corins sake.
But Corin he had Hawks to lure
And forced more the field:
Of lovers law he took no cure
For once he was begilde.
Harpalus prevailed naught
His labor all was lost:
For he was fardest from her thought
And yet he loved her most.
Therefore waxt he both pale and lean
And dry as clod of clay:
His flesh it was consumed cleene
His colowr gone a way,
His beard it had not long be shave,
His here hong all unkempt:
A ^^n most fit even for the grave
Whom spiteful love had spent.
His eyes were red and all forewatched
His face besprent with tears:
It seemed unhap had him long hatched,
In mids of his despaires.
His clothes were black and also bare
As one forlorn was he,
Upon his head always he ware,
A wreath of willow tree
His beasts he kept upon the hill,
And he sa^e in the dale:
And thus with sighs and sorrows shrill,
^egan to tell his tale.
O Harpalus (thus would he say)
Unhappiest vndersunne
The cause of thine unhappy day
By love was first begun.
For thou wentst first by suit to seek
A Tigre to make tame:
That settes not by thy love a leeke
But makes thy grief her game.
As easy it were for to couuert
The frost into the flame:
As for to turn a froward heart
Whom thou so feign would frame^
Corin he lives careless
He leapes among the leaves
He eats the fruits of thy redress
Thou reapes: he takes the sheaues.
My beasts a while your food refrain
And hark your heardmans sound,
Whom spiteful love alas has slain
Through girt with many a wound,
O happy be ye beasts wild
That here your pastures takes,
I see that ye be not begilde
Of these your faithful makes.
The heart he feeds by the ^inde
The Buck hard by the Do
The turtle Dove is not unkind
To him that loves her so,
The Ewe she has by her the Ram
The young Cow has the Bull,
The Cal^e with many a lusty Lamb
Do feed their hungerfull.
But we^away that nature wrought
Thee ^hi^t day so fair,
For I may say that I have bough^
Thy beauty all to dear.
What reason is it that cruelty
With beauty should have part.
Or else that such great tirany
Should dwell in woman's heart.
I see therefore to shappe my death
She cruelly is pressed,
To the end that I may want my breath
My days been at the best.
O Cup^de grant this my request
And do not stop thine ears,
That she may feel within her breast,
The pains of my dispayres.
Of Corin that is careless,
That she may crave her fee,
As I have done in great distress
That loved her faithfully.
But sins that I shall die her slave
Her slave and eke her thr^ll,
Write you my friends, upon my grave
This chance that is befall.
He^e lies unhappy Harpelus
By cruel love now slain,
Whom Philida unjustly thus
Has murdered with disdain.
Upon sir James wilfordes death.
LO here the end of man the cruel sisters three
The web of wilfordes life uneath had hal^e esponne,
When rash upon mildede they all accorded be
To break of virtues course ere half the race were run
And trip him on his way that else had won the game
And holden highest place within the house of feign,
But yet though he be gone, though sense with him be past,
Which trod the even steps that leaden to renown,
We that remayn alive, ne suffer shall to waste
The fame of his deserts, so shall he lose but sown,
The thing shall aye remain, aye kept as fresh in store
As if his ears should ring of that he wrought before.
Wayle not therefore his want, since he so left the stage
Of care and wretched life, with joy and clappe of hands
Who plays longer parts, may well have greater age,
But few so well may pass the gulf of fortunes sands
So tryedly did he tread ay pressed at virtues beck
That fortune found no place to give him once a check.
The fates have ryd him hence, who shall not after go,
Though earshed be his corpse yet flourish shall his fame,
A gladsome thing it is, that ere he stepped us fro,
Such mirrours he us left our life thereby to frame,
Wherefore his praise shall last aye fresh in britons sight,
Till sun shall cease to shine, and lend the earth his light.
Of the wretchedness in this world.
Who list to live upright, and hold himself content,
Shall see such wonders in this world, as never erst was sent,
Such groping for the sweet, such tasting of the sower,
Such wandering here for worldly wealth that lost is in one how^^.
And as the good or badde, get up in hye degree,
So wades the world in right or wrong, it may none other be.
And look what laws they make, each man must them obey,
And yoke himself with pacient heart, to drive and draw that w^^^
Yet such as long ago, great rulers were assynde,
Both lives and laws are now forgot and worn clean out of mynd^
So that by this I see, no state on earth may last
But as their times appointed be, to rise and fall as fast,
The goods that gotten be, by good and just desert,
Yet use them that so neady hands may help to spend the part,
For look what heap thou, hordst of rusty gold in store,
Thine enemies shall waste the same, that never swat therefore.
The repentant sinner in durance and adversity.
Unto the living Lord for pardon do I pray,
From whom I grant, even from the well, and have run (...) astray.
And other lives there none (my death shall well declare)
On whom I ought to grate for grace, as faulty folks do fare.
But thee, O Lord alone, I have offended so,
That this small scourge is much to scant for mine offense I know
I ran without return, the way the world likte best,
And what I ought most to regard, that I respected lest,
The through wherein I thrust has thrown me in such case
That lord my soul is sore beset without thy greater grace.
My gyltes are grown so great, my power does so appayre,
That with great force they argue often, and mercy much despair.
But then with faith I flee to thy prepared store,
Where there lies help for every hurt, and sa^^e for every sore,
My lost time to lament, my vain ways to bewail,
No day, no night, no place no hour, no moment I shall fail.
My soul shall never cease with an assured faith
To knock, to crave, to call, to cry, to thee for help, which says:
Knock and it shall be heard, but ask, and given it is,
And all that like to keep this course: of mercy shall not miss.
For when I call to mind how the one wandering sheep,
Did bring more joy with his return, then all the flock did (...)
It yeldes full hope and trust, my strayed and wandering gho^^^
Sa^he received and h^ld more dear, then those were never lost.
O Lord my hope behold, and for my help make haste,
To pardon the forepassed race that careless I have past.
And but the day draw near that death must pay the det^
For love, of life which thou have lent and time of payment set.
From this sharp shower me shield which threatened is at hand,
Whereby thou shall great power declare, and I the storm withstand
Not my will Lord, but thine, fulfilde be in each case,
To whose great will and mighty power, al powers shall once give place
My faith, my hope, trust, my God and eke my guide,
Stretch forth thy hand to save the soul, what so the body hide,
Refuse not to receive that thou so dear have bought,
For but by thee alone I know, all safety in vain is sought.
I know and knowledge eke, albeit very late,
That thou it is I ought to love and dread in each estate.
And with repentant heart, d^elaude the Lord on hye,
That have so gently set me straight, that erst walkte so awry,
Now grant me grace my God to stand thine strong in sprite,
And le^ ye world the^ work such ways, a^ ^o the world semes met^.
The lover here tells of his diverse joys and adversities in love and lastly
of his ladies death.
Sith singyng gladdeth often the hearts
Of them that feel the panges of love:
And for the while does ease their smarts:
My self I shall the same way prove.
And though that love has smit the stroke.
whereby is lost my liberty:
Which by no means I may revoke:
Yet shall I sing, how pleasantly.
Ny twenty years of youth I past:
Which al in liberty I spent:
And so from first unto the last,
Ere aught I knew, what loving meant,
And after shall I sing the woe,
The pain, the grief, the deadly smart:
When love this life did overthrow,
That hydden lies within my heart.
And then, the joys, that I did feel.
When fortune lifted after this,
And set me hye upon her whele:
And changde my woe to pleasant bliss,
And so the sodeyn fall again
From all the joys, that I was in.
All you, that list to hear of pain,
Give care, for now I do begin.
Lo, first of all, when love began
With hot desires my heart to burn:
Me thought, his might auailde not than
From liberty my heart to turn.
For I was free: and did not know,
How much his might man's heart may gre^^,
I had professed to be his fo:
His law, I thought not to believe,
I went untied in lusty leas,
I had my wish always at will:
There was no woe, might me displease:
Of pleasant joys I had my fill.
No paynfull thought did pass my heart:
I spilt no tear to wet my breast:
I knew no sorrow, sigh, nor smart,
My greatest grief was quiet rest.
I brake no sleep, I tossed not:
Nor did delight to sit alone.
I felt no change of cold and hot:
Nor naught a nights could make me moan.
For all was joy that I did feel:
And of void wandering I was free.
I had no clogge tied at my hele:
This was my life at liberty.
That yet me thinks it is a bliss,
To think upon that pleasure past.
But forthwithall I find the miss,
For that it might no longer last.
Those days I spent at my desire,
Without woe or adversity:
Till that my heart was set a fire,
With love, with wrath, and jealousy.
For on a day (alas the while)
Lo, hear my harm how it began:
The blinded Lord, the God of guile
Had list to end my fredome than.
And through mine eye into my heart
All suddenly I felt it glide.
He shot his sharped fiery dart,
So hard, that yet under my side
The head (alas) does still remain,
And yet since could I never know,
The way to wring it out again:
Yet was it nigh three year ago.
This soden stroke made me aghast:
And it began to vex me sore.
But yet I thought, it would have past,
As other such had done before.
But it did not that (woe is me)
So deep imprinted in my thought,
The stroke abode: that yet I see,
Me thinks my harm how it was wrought.
Kind taught me straight that this was love
And I perceived it perfectly.
Yet thought I thus: Naught shall me move:
I will not thrall my liberty.
And diverse ways I did assay,
By flight, by force, by friend, by fo,
This fiery thought to put away.
I was so loathe for to forgo
My liberty: that me was lever,
Then bondage was, where I hard say:
Who once was bound, was sure never
Without great pain to escape away.
But what for that, there is no choice,
For my mishap was shapen so:
That those my days that did rejoice,
Should turn my bliss to bitter woe.
For with that stroke my bliss took end.
Instead whereof forth with I caught,
Hot burning sighs, that sins have brend,
My wretched heart almost to naught.
And sins that day, O Lord my life,
The misery that it has felt.
That naught has had, but woe and strife,
And hot desires my heart to melt.
O Lord how sudden was the change
From such a pleasant liberty?
The very thraldom seemed strange
But yet there was no remedy.
But I must yield, and give up all,
And make my guide my chefist fo.
And in this wise became I thrall,
Lo, love and hap would have it ^o.
I suffered wrong and held my peace,
I gave my tears good leave to run:
And never would seek for redress,
^ut hept to live as I begone.
For what it was that might me ease,
He lived not that might it know,
Thus drank I all mine own disease:
And all alone bewailde my woe.
I here was no sight that might me please^
I fled from them that did rejoice,
And often alone my (...) to ^ase,
I would bewail with woeful voice
My life, my state, my misery,
And curse my self and al my days.
Thus wrought I with my fantasy,
And sought my help none other ways.
Save sometime to my self alone,
When far of was my help God wot:
Loud would I cry: My life is gone,
My dear, if that ye help me not.
Then wished I straight, that death might end
These bitter panges, and all this grief
For naught, methought, might it amend.
Thus in despair to have relief,
I lingered forth: till I was brought
with pining in so piteous case:
That al, that saw me, said, methought:
Lo, death is painted in his face.
I went no where: but by the way
I saw some sight before mine eyes:
That made me sigh, and often times say^
My life, alas I thee despise.
This lasted well a year, and more:
Which no wight knew, but only I:
So that my life was nere for lore:
And I dispaired utterly.
Til on a day, as fortune would:
(For that, that shall be, needs must fall)
I sat me down, as though I should
Have ended then my life, and al.
And as I sat to write my playn^,
Meaning to show my great unrest:
With quaking hand, and heart full faint,
Amid my plaintes, among the rest,
I wrote with ynk, and bitter tears:
I am not mine, I am not mine:
Behold my life, away that wears:
And if I dye the loss is thine.
Herewith a little hope I caught:
That for a while my life did stay.
But in effect, all was for ^^ught.
Thus lived I still: till on a day
As I sat staring on those eyes:
Those shining eyes, that first me bound:
My inward thought tho cried: Arise:
Lo, mercy where it may be found.
And therewithal I drew me nere:
With feeble heart, and at a braide,
(But it was softly in her care)
Mercy, Madame, was all, I said.
But woe was me, when it was told,
For therwithall fainted my breath:
And I sat still for to behold,
And hear the judgment of my death.
But Love nor Hap would not consent,
To end me then, but welaway:
There gave me bliss: that I repent
To think I live to se this day.
For after this I plained still
So long, and in so piteous wise:
That I my wish had at my will
Granted, as I would it devise.
But Lord who ever hard, or knew
Of half the joy that I felt than?
Or who can think it may be true,
That so much bliss had ever man?
Lo, fortune thus set me aloft:
And more my sorrows to releue,
Of pleasant joys I tasted often:
As much as love or hap might give.
The sorrows old, I felt before
About my heart, were driven thence^
And for each grief, I felt before
I had a bliss in recompense.
Then thought I all the time well spent^
That I in plaint had spent so long.
So was I with my life content:
That to my self I said amoug.
Sins thou art rid of al thine ill:
To show thy joys set forth thy voice,
And sins thou haste thy wish at will^
My happy heart, rejoice, rejoice.
Thus felt I joys a great deal (...),
Then by my song may well be told:
And thinking on my passed woe,
My bliss did double many fold.
And thus I thought with man's blood,
Such bliss might not be bought to dear.
In such estate my joys then stode^
That of a change I had no fear.
But why sing ^ so long of bliss?
It lasts not, that will away,
Let me therefore bewail the miss:
And sing the cause of my decay.
Yet all this while there lived none,
That led his life more pleasantly:
Nor under hap there was not one,
Me thought, so well at ease, as I.
But O blind joy, who may thee trust?
For no estate thou can assure?
Thy faithful vows prove al unjust:
Thy fair behestes be full unsure.
Good proof by me: that but of late
Not fully twenty days ago:
Which thought my life was in such state:
That naught might work my heart this woe.
Yet has the enemy of mine case,
Cruel mishappe, that wretched wight:
Now when my life did most me please:
Devised me such cruel spite.
That from the hiest place of all,
As to the pleasing of my thought,
Down to the deepest am I fall,
And to my help avails nough^,
Lo, thus are all my joys quite gone.
And I am brought from happiness,
Continually to wayle, and moan.
Lo, such is fortunes stablenesse.
In wealth I thought such suertie,
That pleasure should have ended never.
But now (alas) adversity,
Does make my singyng cease ^or ever.
O brittle joy, O wealth unstable:
O frail pleasure, O slidyng bliss,
Who feles thee most, he shall not miss,
At length to be made miserable.
For all must end as does my bliss:
There is none other certeintie.
And at the end the worst is his,
That most has known prosperity.
For he that never bliss assaied,
May well away with wretchedness:
But he shall find that has it said,
A pain to part from pleasantness:
As I do now, for ere I knew
What pleasure was, I felt no grief,
Like unto this, and it is true,
That bliss has brought me all this mischief.
But yet I have not songen, how
This mischief came: but I intend
With woeful voice to sing it now:
And therwithall I make an end.
But Lord, now that it is begoon,
I feel, my sprites are vexed sore.
Oh, give me breath till this be done:
And after let me live no more.
Alas, the enmy of this life,
The ender of all pleasantness:
Alas, he brings all this strife,
And causes all this wretchedness.
For in the mids of all the wealth,
That brought my heart to happiness:
This wicked death he came by stelth,
And robde me of my ioyfulnesse.
He came, when that I little thought
Of ought, that might me vex so sore:
And suddenly he brought to naught
My pleasantness for evermore.
He slew my joy (alas, the wretch)
He slew my joy, or I was ware:
And now (alas) no might may stretch
To set an end to my great care.
For by this cursed deadly stroke,
My bliss is lost, and I forlore:
And no help may the loss revoke:
For lost it is for evermore.
And closed up are those fair eyes,
That gave me first the sign of grace:
My fair sweet foes, mine enemies,
And earth does hide her pleasant face.
The look which did my life uphold:
And all my sorrows did confound:
With which more bliss then may be told:
Alas, now lies it under ground
But cease^ for I will sing no more:
Since that my harm has no redress:
But as a wretch for evermore,
My life will waste with wretchedness.
And ending this my woeful song,
Now that it ended is and past:
I would my life were but as long:
And that this word might be my last.
For loathsome is that life (men say)
That likes not the livers mind:
Lo, thus I seek mine own decay,
And will, till that I may it find.
Of his love name^ white.
FUll fair and white she is, and White by name:
Whose white does strive, the lilli^s white to stain:
Who may contemn the blast of black defame:
who in dark night, can bring day bright again.
The ruddy rose inpreaseth with clear heew,
In lips and chekes, right orient to behold:
That the nerer gaser may that bewty reew,
And feel dispar^t in limbs the chilling cold:
For White, all white his bloodlesse face will be:
The asshy pale so alter will his cheer.
But I that do possess in full degree
The hearty love of this my heart so dear:
So often to me as she presents her face,
For joy do feel my heart spring from his place.
Of the lovers unquiet stare.
What thing is that which I both have and lack,
with good will granted, yet it is denied
How may I be received and put abacke
Always doing and yet unoccupied,
Most slow in that which I have most applied,
Still thus to seek, and lose all that I win,
And that was done is newest to begin,
In riches find I wilful poverty,
In great pleasure, live I in heaviness.
In much freedom I lack my liberty,
Thus am I both in joy and in distress.
And in few words if that I shall be plain,
In Paradise I suffer all this pain.
where good will is, some proof will appear.
IT is no fire that geues no heat,
Though it appear never so hot:
And they that run and can not sweat,
Are very lean and dry God wot,
A perfect leche applies his wits,
To gather herbs of all degrees:
And fevers with their fervent fittes,
Be cured with their contraries.
New wine will search to find a vent,
Although the caske be set so strong:
And wit will walk when will is bent,
Although the way be never so long.
The Rabbets run under the rocks:
The Snailes do clime the highest towers:
Gunpowder cleaues the sturdy blocks.
A fervent will all thing deuowers.
When wit with will and diligent
Apply them selves, and match as mates,
There can no want of resident,
From force defend the castle gates.
Forgetfulness make little haste,
And sloth delites to lie full soft:
That tells the deaf, his tale does waste,
And is full dry that craves full often.
Verses written on the picture of sir James wilford knight.
ALas that ever death such virtues should forlet,
As compast was within his corpse, whose picture is here set.
Or that it ever lay in any fortunes might,
Through deep disdain to end his life that was so worthy a wight.
For sith he first began in armor to be clad,
A worthier champion then he was, yet England never had.
And though recure be past, his life to have again,
Yet would I wish his worthiness in writing to remain.
That men to mind might call how far he did excel,
At all assayes to win the fame, which were to long to tell.
And eke the restless race that he full often has run,
In painful plight from place to place, where service was to don.
Then should men well perceive, my tale to be of troth,
And he to be the worthiest w^ght that ever nature wrought,
The lady prays the return of her lover abiding on the seas.
SHall I thus ever long, and be no whit the near,
And shall I still complain to thee, the which me will not hear?
Alas say nay, say nay, and be no more so dome,
But open thou thy manly mouth, and say that thou will come.
Whereby my heart may think, although I see not thee,
That thou will come thy word so swear, if thou a lives man be.
The roaring hugy waves, they threaten my poor ghost,
And toss thee up and down the seas, in danger to be lost.
Shall they not make me fear that they have swalowed thee,
But as thou art most sure alive, so will thou come to me.
Whereby I shall go see thy ship ride on the strand,
And think and say ^o where he comes, and sure here will he land
And then ^ shall lift up to thee my little hand,
And thou shall think thine heart in ease, in health to see me stand.
And if thou come in deed (as Christ thee send to do,)
These arms which miss thee yet, shall then embrace thee to.
Each vain to every joint, the lively blood shall spread,
Which now for want of thy glad sight, does show full pale and dead.
But if thou slip thy troth and do not come at all,
As minutes in the clock do strike so call for death I shall.
To please both thy false heart, and rid my self from woe,
That rather had to dye in troth then live forsaken so.
The mean estate is best.
THe doutfull man has fevers strange
And constant hope is often diseas^e,
Despair cannot but bread a change,
Nor fleting hearts cannot be pleased.
Of all these bad, the best I thinck,
Is well to hope, though fortune shrinck.
Desired things are not ay pressed,
Nor things denide left all unsought,
Nor new things to be loved best,
Nor all offers to be set at naught,
Where faithful heart has been refusde,
The chosers wit was there abusde.
The woeful ship of careful sprite,
Fleting on seas of w^lling tears,
With sails of wishes broken quite,
Hanging on waves of doleful fears,
By surge of sighs at wrecke nere hand,
May fast no anchor hold on land.
What helps the dyall to the blind,
Or else the clock without it sound.
Or who by dreams does hope to find,
The hidden gold within the ground:
Shall Be as free from cares and fears,
As he that holds a Wolf by the cares.
And how much mad is he that thinks
To clime to heaven by the beams,
What joy alas, has he that winks,
At Titan or his golden streams,
His joys not subject to reasons laws,
That ioyeth more then he has cause.
For as the Phoenix that climeth hye,
The sun lightly in ashes burns,
Again, the Faulcon so quick of eye,
Sone on the ground the net masheth.
Experience therefore the mean assurance,
Prefers before the doutfull pleasance.
The lover thinks no pain to great, whereby he may obtain his lady.
Since that the way to wealth is woe,
And after pain is pleasure pressed,
Why should I than despair so,
Ay bewailing mine unrest:
Or let to lead my life in pain,
So worthy a lady to obtain.
The fisher man does count no care,
To cast his nets to wrack or wast,
And in reward of each man's share.
A gogen gift is much imbrast,
Should I than grudge it grief or gall,
That look at length to whelm a Whall.
The poor man ploweth his ground for grain,
And sows his seed increase to crave,
And for thexpence of all his pain,
Often holds it hap his seed to save,
These pacient pains my part does show,
To long for love ere that I know.
And take no scorn to escape from skill,
To spend my sprites to spare my speech,
To win for wealth the want of will.
And thus for rest to rage I reche,
Running my race as rect upright:
Till tears of truth appease my plight.
And plant my plaint within her breast,
Who doutles may restore again,
My harms to health, my ruthe to rest.
That laced is within her chain,
For erst ne are the griefs so great:
As is the joy when love is met.
For who couets so high to clim,
As does the bird that pitfoll took,
Or who delights so swift to swim,
As does the fish that scapes the hoke,
If these had never entered woe:
How might they have reioysed so.
But yet alas ye lovers all,
That here me joy thus less rejoice,
Judge not amiss what so befall.
In me there lies no power of choice,
It is but hope that does me move:
Who standerd bearer is to love.
On whose ensign when I behold,
I see the shadow of her shape,
Within my faith so fast I fold:
Through dread I die, through hope I escape,
Thus ease and woe full often I find,
What will you more she knows my mind.
Of a new married studient that played fast or lose.
A Studient at his book so plast:
That wealth he might have won,
From book to wife did flete in have,
From wealth to woe to run.
Now, who has played a feater cast,
Since iugling first begone?
In knitting of him self so fast,
Him self he has undone.
The mean estate is to be accounted the best.
Who craftly castes to stere his boat
and safely s^oures the flattering flood:
He cutteth not the greatest waves,
for why that way were nothing good.
Ne fleteth on the crocked shore
lest harm him hap awayting lest.
But wines away between them both,
as who would say the mean is best.
Who waits on the golden mean,
he put in point of sickernes:
Hides not his head in sluttish coats,
ne shroudes himself in filthiness.
Ne sittes aloft in hye estate,
Where hateful hearts envy his chance:
But wisely walks betwixt them twain,
ne proudly does himself auance
The highest tree in all the wood
is rifest rent with blustering winds:
The higher hall the greater fall
such chance have proud and lofty minds.
When Jupiter from hye does threat
with mortal mace and dint of thunder
The highest hills been batrid eft
when they stand still that stoden under.
The man whose head with wit is fraught
in wealth will fear a worser tide
When fortune fails dispaireth naught
but constantly does still abide.
For he that sends grisely storms
with whisking winds and bitter blastes
And fowlth with hayle the winters face,
and frotes the soil with hory frostes:
Even he adawth the force of cold
the spring in sendes with somer hot:
The same full often to stormy hearts
is cause of bale: of joy the root.
Not always ill though so be now
when clouds ben driven, then rides the rack.
Phoebus the fresh ne shoots still,
sometime he harpes his muse to wake.
Stand stif therefore, pluck up thy heart,
lose not thy port though fortune fail.
Again when wind does serve at will,
take heed to hye to hoyse thy sail.
The lover refused, lamenteth his estate.
I Lent my love to loss and gaged my life in vain,
If hate for love and death for life of lovers be the gain.
And curse I may by course the place eke time and hour
That nature first in me did form to be a lives creature,
Sith that I must absent my self so secretly
In place desert where never man my secrets shall discry:
In doling of my days among the beasts so brute,
Who with their tongues may not bewray the secrets of my suit.
Nor I in like to them may once to move my mind
But gase on them and they on me, as beasts are wont of kind.
Thus ranging as refusde, to reach some place of rest,
Ill ruff of heare^ my nails vnnocht, as to such seems best.
That wander by their wits, deformed so to be,
That men may say, such one may curse the time he first began see
The beauty of her face, her shape in such degree,
As God himself may not discern, one place mended to be.
Nor place it in like place, my fansy for to please,
Who would become a heardmans hyre, one hour to have of ease.
Whereby I might restore, to me some stedfastnes.
That have mo thoughts heapt in my head the^ life may long disges
As often to throw me down upon the earth so cold,
Whereas with tears most rufully, my sorrows do unfold.
And in beholding them. I chiefly call to mind,
What woman could find in her heart, such bondnge for to bind.
Then rashly forth I yede, to cast me from that care,
Like as the bird for food does fly, and lights in the snare.
From whence I may not meue, until my race be roon,
So trained is my truth through her, yt thinks my life well won.
Thus toss I to and fro, in hope to have relief,
But in the fine I find not so, it doubleth but my grief.
Wherefore I will my want, a warning for to be,
Unto all men, wishing that they, a myrrour make of me.
The felicity of a mind embracing virtue, that beholds the wretched desires
of the world.
When dredful swelling seas, through boisterous windy blastes,
So toss the ships, that all for naught, serves ancor, sail and mas^es.
Who takes not pleasure then, safely on shore to rest,
And see with dread and deep despair, how shipmen are distressed.
Not that we pleasure take, when others felen smart,
Our gladness grows to see their harms, and yet to feel no part.
Delight we take also, well ranged in array,
When armies meet to see the fight, yet free be from the fray.
But yet among the rest, no joy may match with this,
Taspyre unto the temple hye, where wisdom troned is.
Defended with the saws of hory heads expert,
Which clear it keep from errors mist, that might the truth pervert
From whence thou may look down, and see as under foot,
Man's wa^dring will and doutful life, from whence they take their root.
How some by wit contend, by prowes some to rise,
Riches and rule to gain and hold, is all that men devise.
O miserable minds, O hearts in folly drent,
why see you not what blindness in this wretched life is spent?
Body deuoyde of grief, mind free from care and dread,
Is all and some that nature craves, wherewith our life to feed.
So that for natures turn few things may well suffice,
Dolor and grief clean to expel, and some delight surprice.
Yea and i^ ^alleth often, that nature more content
Is with the less, then when the more to cause delight is spent.
All worldly pleasures vade.
THe winter with his griesly storms ne longer dare abide,
The pleasant grass, with lusty grene, the earth has newly did
The trees have leaves, the bows do^ ^pred, new changed is the year
The water brokes are clean sonk down, the pleasant banks apere.
The spring to come, the goodly nymphs now dasice in every place
Thus has the year most pleasantly of late ychangde his face.
Hope for no immortality, for wealth will wear away,
As we may learn by every year, yea hours of every day.
For Zepharus does molifie the cold and blustering winds:
The summers drought does take away the spring out of our minds
And yet the somer cannot last, but once must step aside,
Then ^utumn thinks so keep his place, but Autumn cannot bide,
For when he has brought forth his fruits and stuffed the barns with corn
Then winter eats and empties all, and thus is Autumn worn.
Then hory ^rosts possess the place, then te^pests work much harm,
Then rage of storms done make all cold, which somer had made so warm
Wherefore let no man put his trust in that, that will decay,
For slipper wealth will not continue, pleasure will wear away.
For when that we have lost our life, and lie under a stone,
What are we then: we are but earth, then is our pleasure gone.
No man can tell what God almight of every wight does cast,
No man can say to day I live, till morn my life shall last.
For when thou shall before thy judge stand to receive thy dome,
What sentence Minos does pronounce that must of thee become.
Then shall not noble stock and blood redeem the from his hands
Nor sugared talk with eloquence shall lose thee from his bands.
Nor yet thy life uprightly lead, can help thee out of hell,
For who descends down so deep, must there abide and dwell.
Diana could not thence deliver chaste Hypolitus,
Nor Theseus could not call to life his friend Perithous.
A complaint of the loss of liberty by love.
IN seking rest, unrest I find,
I find that wealth is cause of woe:
Woe worth the time that I inclinde,
To fix in mind her beauty so.
That day be darkened as the night,
Let furious rage it clean devour:
Ne Sun nor Moon therein give light,
But it consume with stream and shower.
Let no small birds strain forth their voyc^,
with pleasant tunes, ne yet no beast:
Find cause whereat he may rejoice,
That day when chanced mine unrest.
Wherein alas from me was raught,
Mine own free choice and quiet mind,
My life me death in balance braught
And reason rasde through bark and rind,
And I as yet in flower of age,
Both wit and will did still advance:
Ay to resist that burning rage:
But when I darte then did I glaunce.
Nothing to me did seem so hye,
In mind I could it straight attain:
Fansy persuaded me thereby,
Love to esteem a thing most vain.
But as the bird upon the brier,
Does prick and proyne her without care:
Not knowing alas (poor fool) how nere
She is unto the fowlers snare.
So I amid disceitfull trust,
Did not mistrust such woeful hap:
Till cruel love ere that I wist
Had caught me in his careful trappe.
Then did I feel, and partly know,
How little force in me did reign:
So soon to yield to overthrow,
Do frail to flit from joy to pain.
For when in wealth will did me lead
Of liberty to hoyse my sail:
To hale at shete and cast my lead,
I thought free choice would still prevail.
In whose calm streams I sayld so far,
No raging storm had in respect:
Until I raysde a goodly star,
whereto my course I did direct.
In whose prospect in doolfull wise,
My tackle failde, my compass brake?
Through hot desires such storms did rise^
That stern and top went all to wrake.
Oh cruel hap, oh fatal chance,
O Fortune why were thou unkind:
Without regard thus in a trance,
To reave from me my joyful mind.
Where I was free now must I serve,
Where I was lose now am I bound:
In death my life I do preserve,
As one through girt with many a wound.
A praise of his Lady.
Give place you Ladies and be gone,
Boast not your selves at all:
For here at hand approaches one:
Who^e face will stain you all.
The virtue of her lively lokes,
Excels the precious stone:
I wish to have none other books
To read or look upon.
In each of her two cristall eyes,
Smileth a naked boy:
It would you all in heart suffice
To see that lamp of joy.
I think nature has lost the moulde,
Where she her shape did take:
Or else I doubt if nature could,
So fair a creature make.
She may be well comparde
Unto the Phoenix kind:
Whose like was never seen nor heard,
That any man can find.
In life she is Diana cha^t,
In troth Penelopey:
In word and eke in deed steadfast,
What will you more we sey.
If all the world were sought so far,
Who could find such a wight:
Her beuty twinkleth like a star,
Within the frosty night.
Her rosiall color comes and goes,
With such a comely grace:
More redier to then does the rose,
Within her lively face.
At Bacchus feast none shall her mete,
Ne at no wanton play:
Nor gasyng in an open street,
Nor gadding as a stray.
The modest mirth that she does use,
Is mixed with shamefastness:
All vice she does wholly refuse,
And hates idleness.
O lord it is a world to see,
How virtue can repair:
And deck in her such honesty,
Whom nature made so fair.
Truly she does as far excede,
Our women now adays:
As does the Ielifloure, a wede,
And more a thousand ways.
How might I do to get a graffe:
Of this unspotted tree.
For all the rest are plain but chafe,
Which seem good corn to be.
This gift alone I shall her give.
When death does what he can:
Her honest fame shall ever live,
Within the mouth of man.
The pore estate to be holden for best.
Experience now does show what God us taught before,
Desired pomp is vain, and seldom does it last:
Who climbes to reign with kings, may rue his fate full sore^
Alas the woeful end that ^omes with care full fast,
Reject him does renown his pomp^ full low is cast^.
Deceived is the bird by sweetness of the call
Expel that pleasant taste, wherein is bitter gall.
Such as with oten cakes in poor estate abides,
Of care have they no cure, the crab with mirth they roast,
More ease feel they then those, that from their height down slides
Excess does bread their woe, they fail in Scillas cost,
Remainyng in the storms till ship and al be lost.
Serve God therefore thou pore, for lo, thou lives in rest,
Eschew the golden hall, thy thatched house is besT.
The complaint of Thestilis amid the desert wodde.
THestilis a sely man, when love did him forsake,
In mourning wise, amid the wods thus began his plaint to mak^
Ah woeful man (quod he) fallen is thy lot to moan
And pyne away with careful thoughts, unto thy love vnknow^^
Thy lady thee forsakes whom thou did honor so
That ay to her thou were a friend, and to thy self a foe.
Ye lovers that have lost your hearts desired choice,
Lament with me my cruel hap, and help my trembling voice.
Was never man that stood so great in fortunes grace:
Nor with his sweet alas to dear possessed so high a place.
As I whose simple heart aye thought him self full sure,
But now I se hie springing tides they may not aye endure.
She knows my giltelesse heart, and yet she lets it pine,
Of her untrue professed love so feeble is the twine.
What wonder is it than, if I berent my hears,
And caruing death continually do bathe my self in tears,
When Cresus king of Lide was cast in cruel bands,
And yielded goods and life also into his enemies hands.
What tongue could tell his woe, yet was his grief much less
Then mine: for I have lost my love which might my woe redresse^
Ye woods that shroud my limes give now your holow sound,
That ye may help me to bewail the cares that me confound.
Ye rivers rest a while and stay the streams that run,
Rue Thestilis most woeful man that lives under the sun.
Transport my sighs ye winds unto my pleasant foe,
My tricklyng tears shall witness bear of this my cruel woe^
O happy man were I if all the gods agreed:
That now the susters three should cut in twain my fatal threde.
Till life with love shall end I here resign al joy:
Thy pleasant sw^te I now lament whose lack bredes mine anoy
Farewell my dear therefore farewell to me well known:
If that I die it shall be said that thou have slain thine own.
An answer of comfort.
THestilis thou sely man, why do thou so complain,
If needs thy love will thee forsake, thy mourning is in vain.
For none can force the streams against their course to run,
Nor yet unwilling love with tears or w^^lyng can be wonne^
C^ase thou therefore thy plaintes, let hope thy sorrows ease,
The shipmen though their sails be rent yet hope to escape the seas
Though strange she serve a while, yet think she will not change
Good causes drive a ladies love, sometime to seem full strange,
No lover that has wit, but can forsee such hap,
That no wight can at wish or will sleep in his ladies lap.
Achilles for a time fair Brises did forgo,
Yet did they mete with joy again, then think thou may do so.
Though he and lovers al in love sharp storms do find,
Despair not thou pore Thestilis though thy love seem unkind,
Ah think her graffed love cannot so sone decay,
Hie springes may cease from swelling still, but never dry away
Often storms of lovers ire, do more their love increase:
As shinyng sun refreshe the fruits when raining gins to cease.
When springes are waxen low, then must they flow again,
So shall thy heart advanced be, to pleasure out of pain.
When lack of thy delight most bitter grief apperes,
Think on Etrascus worthy love that lasted thirty years,
Which could not long atcheue his hearts desired choice,
Yet at the end he found reward that made him to rejoice.
Since he so long in hope with patience did remain,
Can not thy fervent love forbear thy love a month or twain?
Admit she mind to change and needs will thee forgo,
Is there no mo may thee delyght but she that pains thee so?
Thestilis draw to the town and love as thou have done,
In time thou know by faithful love as good as she is won.
And leave the desert woods and waylyng thus alone,
And seek to salve thy sore else were, if all her love be gone.
The lover prays pity showing that nature has taught his dog as it were to
sue for the same by kissing his ladies hands.
NAture that taught my silly dog god wat:
Even for my sake to like where I do love,
Enforced him whereas my lady sat
With humble suit before her falling flat.
As in his sort he might her pray and move
To rue upon his lord and not forgete
The steadfast faith he bears her and love,
Kissing her hand whom she could not remove.
A way that would for frowning nor for threte
As though he would have said in my behoue.
Pity my lord your slave that does remain,
Lest by his death, you giltles slay us twain.
Of his ring sent to his lady.
SInce thou my ring may go where I ne may.
Since thou may speak, where I must hold my peace.
Say unto her that is my lives stay,
Graven within which I do here express:
That sooner shall the sun not shine by day,
And with the rain the floods shall waxen less.
Sooner the tree the hunter shall bewray^
Then I for change, or choice of other love,
Do ever seek my fansy to remove.
The changeable state of lovers.
FOr that a restles head must somewhat have in ure
Wherewith it may acquainted be, as falcon is with lure.
^ansy does me awake out of my drowsy sleep,
In seeing how the little Mouse, at night begins to crepe.
So the desirous man, that longes to catch his pray,
In spying how to watch his time, lies lurking still by day,
In hoping for to have, and fearing for to find
The salve that should recure his sore, and soroweth but the mind.
Such is the guise of love, and the uncertain state,
That some should have their hoped hap, and other hard estate.
That some should seem to joy in that they never had,
And some again shall frown as fast, where causeles they be sad.
Such trades do lovers use when they be most at large,
That gide the stere when they themselves lie fettred in the barge.
The grenesse of my youth cannot thereof express
The process, for by proof unknown, all this is but by ges^^.
Wherefore I hold it best, in time to hold my peace,
But wanton will it cannot hold, or make my pen to cease.
A pen of no avail, a fruitles labor eke,
My troubled head with fan^ies fraught, does pain it self to seek.
And if perhaps my words of none avail do prick,
Such as do feel the hidden harms, I would not they should kick.
As causeles me to blame which thinks them no harm,
Although I seem by others fire, sometime my self to warm.
Which clearly I deny, as giltles of that crime,
And though wrong denide I be therein, truth it will try in time.
A praise of Audley.
When Audley had run out his race, and ended were his days
His fame stepped forth and ^ad me write of him some wortht praise
What life he ^ad, what acts he did: his virtues and good name,
Whereto I calde for true report as witness of the same.
Well born he was, well bent by kind, whose mind did never sweru^
A skillful head, a valiant heart, a ready hand to serve.
Brought up and trained in feats of war long time beyond the seas
Called home again to serve his prince, who^ still he sought to please
What tornay was there he refu^de, what service did he shoon,
Where he was not nor his advice, what great exploit was done?
In town a Lamb, in field full fierce, a Lion at the need,
In sober wit a Solomon, yet one of Hectors seed.
Then shame it were that any tongue should now defame his dedes^
That in his life a mirror was to all that him succedes.
No poor estate nor hie renown his nature could peruart,
No hard mischance that him befell could move h^s constant hart^
Thus long he lived, loved of all, as one misliekt of none.
And where he went who called him not the gentle Paragon.
But course of kind does cause each fruit to fall when it is ripe,
And spiteful death will suffer none to escape his grievous gripe.
Yet though the ground received have his corpse into her womb,
This Epitaphe ygraue in brass, shall stand upon his tomb.
Lo here he lies that hates vice, and virtues life unbrast,
His name in earth, his sprite above, deserves to be well plast.
Time tries truth.
Each thing I see has time, which time must try my truth,
Which truth deserves a special trust, on trust great friendship grows.
And friendship may not fail where faithfulness is sound,
And faithfulness is full of fruit, and fruitful things be ^ound.
And sound is good at proof, and proof is prince of praise,
And precious praise is such a pearl, as seldom ner decaies.
All these things time tries forth, which time I must abide,
How should I boldly credit crave till time my truth have tried.
For as I found a time to fall in fancies frame,
So I do wish a lucky time for to declare the same.
If hap may answer hope, and hope may have his ^ire,
Then shall my heart possess in peace the time that I desir^.
The lover refused of his love imbraceth death.
MY youthful years are past,
My joyful days are gone;
My life it may not last,
My grave and I am one.
My mirth and joys are fled,
And I a man in woe:
Desirous to be ded,
My mischief to forgo.
I burn and am a cold,
I freze amids the fire:
I see she does withold
That is my most desire.
I see my help at hand,
I see my life also:
I see where she does stand
That is my deadly fo.
I see how she does see,
And yet she will be blind:
I see in helping me,
She sekes and will not find.
I see how she does wry,
When I begin to moan:
I see when I come nigh,
How feign she would begone.
I see what will ye more
She will me gladly kill:
And you shall see therefore
That she shall have her will.
I can not live with stones
It is to hard a food:
I will be dead at ones
To do my lady good.
The picture of a lover.
BEhold my picture here well portrayed for the nones.
With heart consumed and falling flesh, behold the very bones.
Whose cruel chance alas and desteny is such,
Only because I put my trust in some folk all to much.
For sins the time that I did enter in this pine,
I never saw the rising sun but with my weping eyes.
Nor yet I never heard so sweet a voice or ^ound,
But that to me it did increase the dolor of my wound.
Nor in so soft a bed, alas I never lay,
But that it seemed hard to me or ever it was day,
Yet in this body bare^ that naught but life retains,
The strength whereof clean past away the care yet still remain.
Like as the cole in flame does spend it self you se,
To vain and wretched cinder dust till it consumed be.
So does this hope of mine enforce my fervent suit,
To make me for to gape in vain, whilst other eat the fruit.
And shall do till the death does give me such a grace,
To rid this silly woeful sprite out of this doleful case.
And then would God were writ in stone or else in lead,
This Epitaphe upon my grave, to show why I am dead.
Here lies the lover lo, who for the love he aught,
Alive unto his lady dear, his death thereby he caught.
And in a shield of black, lo here his arms appears,
With weping eyes as you may see, well poudred all with tears.
Lo here you may behold, aloft upon his breast,
A woman's hand straining the heart of him that loved her best.
Wherefore all you that see this corpse for love that staru^s,
Example make unto you all, that thanklesse lovers sarues.
Of the death of Phillips.
Bewail with me all ye that have professed,
Of music tharte by touch of coarde or wind:
Lay down your lutes and let your gitterns rest.
Phillips is dead whose like you can not find.
Of music much exceeding all the rest,
Muses therefore of force now must you wrest,
Your pleasant notes into an other sound,
The string is broke, the lute is dispossessed.
The hand is cold, the body in the ground.
The lowering lute lamenteth now therefore.
Phillips her friend that can her touch no more.
That all thing sometime find ease of their pain, save only the lover.
I See there is no sort,
Of things that live in grief:
Which at sometime may not resort,
Whereas they have relief.
The stricken Dear by kind,
Of death that stands in awe:
For his recure an herb can find,
The arrow to withdraw.
The chased Dear has soil,
To cool him in his heat:
The Ass after his weary toil,
In stable is up set.
The Cony has his cave,
The little bird his nest:
From heat and cold them selves to save,
At all times as they list.
The Owl with feeble sight.
Lies lurking in the leaves:
The Sparrow in the frosty night,
May shroude her in the caves.
But woe to me alas,
In sun nor yet in shade,
I cannot find a resting place,
My burden to unlade.
But day by day still bears,
The burden on my back:
With weping eyes and watery tears.
To hold my hope abacke.
All things I see have place,
Wherein they bow or bend:
Save this alas my woeful case,
Which no where finds end.
Thassault of Cupide upon the fort where the lovers heart lay wounded and how he
was taken.
When Cupide scaled first the fort,
wherein my heart lay wounded sore:
The battry was of such a sort
That I must yield or dye therefore.
There saw I love upon the wall,
How he his banner did display:
Alarm alarm he began to call,
And bad his souldiou^s keep array,
The arms the which that Cupide bare,
were pierced hearts with tears besprent:
In silver and sable to declare
The steadfast love he always meant.
There might you see his band all dressed,
In colors like to white and black:
With powder and with pellets pressed,
To bring the sort to spoil and sack.
Good will the master of the shot,
Stood in the rampyre brave and proud:
For spence of powder he sparde not,
Assault assault to cry aloud.
There might you hear the cannons rore,
Each piece discharged a lovers look:
Which had the power to rent, and tore
In any place whereas they took.
And even with the trumpets sown,
The scaling ladders were up set:
And beauty walked up and down
with bow in hand and arrows whet,
Then first desire began to scale,
And shrouded him under his targe,
As on the worthiest of them all,
And aptest for to give the charge.
Then pushed soldiers with their pikes
And holbarders with handy strokes:
The hargabushe in flesh it lights,
And dims the air with misty smokes.
And as it is the soldiers use,
When shot and powder gins to want:
I hanged up my flagge of truce
And pleaded for my lives grant.
When fansy thus had made her breach,
And beauty entered with her band:
with bag and baggage se^y wretch,
I yielded into beauties hand.
Then beauty bad to blow retrete,
And every soldiour to retire.
And mercy wild with speed to fet:
Me captive bound as prisoner.
Madame (quoth I) since that this day,
Has served you at all assaies:
I yield to you without delay,
Here of the fortress all the kaies.
And since that I have been the mark,
At whom you shot at with your eye:
Needs must you with your handy warke^
Or salve my sore or let me dye,
The aged lover renounceth love.
I Loathe that I did love,
In youth that I thought sweet:
As time requires for my b^houe,
Me thinks they are not mete.
My lusts they do me leave,
My fancies a^l be fled:
And tract of time begins to weaue,
Gray hears upon my head.
For age with ^teling steps,
Has clawed me with his crowch:
And lusty life away she leapes,
As there had been none such.
My muse does not delight
Me as she did before:
My hand and pen are not in plight,
As they have been of yore.
For reason me denies,
This youthly idle tim^:
And day by day to me she cries,
Leave of these toys in time.
The wrinkles in my brow,
The furrows in my face:
Say limping age will hedge him now,
Where youth must give him place.
The harbinger of death,
To me I see him ride:
The cough, the cold, the gasping breath,
Does bid me to provide.
A pikeax and a spade,
And eke a shrowding shete,
A house of clay for to be made,
For such a gest most mete.
Me thinks I hear the clarke,
That knoles the careful knell:
And bids me leave my woeful warke,
Ere nature me compel.
My kepers knit the knot,
That youth did laugh to scorn:
Of me that clean shall be forgot,
As I had not been borne.
Thus must I youth give up,
Whose badge I long did wear:
To them I yield the wanton cup
That better may it bear.
Lo here the bared scull,
By whose balde sign I know:
That stouping age away shall pull,
which youthful years did sow.
For beauty with her ^and
These crooked cares has wrought:
And shipped me into the land,
From whence I first was brought.
And ye that bide behind,
Have ye none other trust:
As ye of claye were cast by kind,
So shall ye waste to dust.
Of the lady went worthes death.
TO live to dye and dye to live again,
With good renown of fame well led before
Here lies she that learned had the lore,
Whom if the parfect virtues wolden daine.
To be set forth with foil of worldly grace,
was noble borne and match in noble race,
Lord Wentworthes wife, nor wa^ted to attain,
In natures gifts her praise among the rest,
But that that gave her praise above the best
Not fame, her wedlocks chastnes durst distain,
Wherein with child deliueryng of her womb,
Thuntimely birth has brought the^ both in tomb
So left she life by death to live again.
The lover accusing his love for her unfaithfulness, purposes to live in
liberty.
THe smoky sighs the bitter tears,
That I in vain have wasted:
The broken slepes, the woe and fears,
That long in me have lasted:
The love and all I owe to thee,
Here I renounce and make me free.
Which fredome I have by thy guilt,
And not by my deserving,
Since so inconstantly thou will
Not love, but still be swering.
To leave me of which was thine own,
without cause why as shall be known.
The fruits were fair the which did grow,
Within thy garden planted,
The leaves were grene of every bough,
And moys^ure nothing wanted,
Yet or the blossoms began fall,
The caterpiller wasted all.
Thy body was the garden place,
And ^ugred words it bears,
The blossoms all thy faith it was,
which as the canker wereth.
The caterpiller is the same,
That has won thee and lost thy name.
I mean thy lover loved now,
By thy pretented folly,
which will prove like, thou shall find how,
Unto a tree of holly:
That bark and bery bears always,
The one, birds feeds, the other slayes.
And right well might thou have thy wish
Of thy love new acquaynted:
For thou art like unto the dishe
That Adrianus painted:
Wherein were grapes portraid so fair
That fowls for food did there repaire^
But I am like the beaten foul
That from the net escaped,
And thou art like the ravening owl
That all the night has waked.
For none intent but to betray
The slepyng foul before the day.
Thus has thy love been unto me
As pleasant and commodious,
As was the fire made on the sea
By Naulus hate so odious.
Therewith to train the grekish host
From Troyes return where they were lost.
The lover for want of his desire, shows his death at hand.
AS Cypres tree that rent is by the root,
As branch or slip bereft from whence it grows
As well sown seed for drought that can not sprout
As gaping ground that raineles can not close
As moules that want the earth to do them bote
As fish on land to whom no water flows,
As Thameleon that lackes the aier so sote,
As flowers do fade when Phoebus rarest shows.
As Salamandra repulsed from the fire:
So wanting my wish I dye for my desire
A happy end excedeth all pleasures and riches of the world.
THe shining season here to some,
The glory in the worlds sight,
Renowned fame through fortune won
The glitteryng gold the eyes delight,
The sensual life that semes so sweet,
The heart with joyful days replete,
The thing whereto each wight is thrall,
The happy end exceadeth all.
Against an unsteadfast woman.
O Temerous tauntres that delights in toys
Tumbling cockboat totring to and fro,
Ianglyng iestres deprauers of sweet joys,
Ground of the graffe whence al my grief does grow,
Sullen serpent enuironned with dispite,
That ill for good at all times do requite.
A praise of Petrarke and of Laura his lady.
O Petrarke head and prince of poets al,
Whose lively gift of flowing eloquence,
Well may we seek, but find not how or whence
So rare a gift with thee did rise and fall,
Peace to thy bones, and glory immortal
Be to thy name, and to her excellence.
whose beauty lighted in thy time and sense:
So to be set forth as none other shall.
Why has not our pens, rimes so parfit wrought
Ne why our time forth brings beauty such
To try our wits as gold is by the touch,
If to the style the matter aided ought.
But there was never Laure more then one,
And her had Petrarke for his Paragone.
That petrark cannot be passed but notwithstanding that Lawra is far surpassed
With Petrarke to compare there may no wight,
Nor yet attain unto so high a style,
But yet I wot full well where is a file.
To frame a learned man to praise aright:
Of stature mean of semely form and shap,
Each line of just proporsion to her height:
Her color fresh and mingled with such slight:
As though the rose sat in the lilies lap.
In wit and tongue to show what may be sed,
To every deed she ioynes a parfit grace,
If L^wra liude she would her clean deface.
For I dare say and lay my life to wed
That Momus could not if he down descended,
Once justly say, Lo this may be amended.
Against a cruel woman.
CRuel unkind whom mercy cannot move,
Herbour of unhappy where rigours rage does reign,
Ground of my grief where pity cannot prove:
Trikle to trust of all untruth the train,
Thou rigorous rock that ruth cannot remove.
Dangerous delph deep dungeon of disdain:
Sack of self will the chest of craft and change,
What causes the thus causels for to change?
Ah piteles plant whom plaint cannot provoke.
Den of disceite that right does still refuse,
Causles unkind that cariest under cloak
Cruelty and craft me only to abuse,
Stately and stubberne withstanding Cupides stroke,
Thou merueilouse mase that make men to muse,
Solleyn by self will, most stony stiff and strange,
what causes thee thus causeless for to change?
Slipper and secret where surety cannot sow
Net of newelty, neast of newfanglenesse,
Spring of al spite, from whence whole fluddes do flow,
Thou cave and cage of care and craftiness
Wavering willow that every blast does blow
Graffe without groth and cause of carfulness,
Heap of mishap of all my grief the graunge,
What causes thee thus causeless for to change.
Have thou forgote that I was thine infeft,
By force of love had thou not heart at all,
Saw thou not other for thy love were left
Know thou unkind, that nothing might befall
From out of my heart that could have the bereft.
What meanest thou then at riot thus to raunge,
And leauest thine own that never thought to change.
The lover shows what he would have, if it were granted him to have what he
would wish.
IF it were so that God would grant me my request,
And that I might of earthly things have that I liked best,
I would not wish to clime to princely hye astate,
Which slipper is and slides so often, and has so fickle fate.
Nor yet to conquer realms with cruel sword in hand,
And so to shed the giltlesse blonde of such as would withstand.
Nor I would not desire in worldly rule to reign.
Whose fruit is all unquietness, and breaking of the brain.
Nor richesse in excess of virtue so abhorde,
I would not crave which bredeth care and causes all discord.
But my request should be more worth a thousand fold:
That I might have and her enjoy that has my heart in hold.
Oh God what lusty life should we live then for ever,
In pleasant joy and perfect bliss, to length our lives together.
With words of friendly chere, and lokes of lively love,
To utter all our hot desires, which never should remove.
But gross and gredie wits which grope but on the ground.
To gather muck of worldly goods which often do them confound,
Can not attain to know the mysteries divine
Of perfect love whereto hie wits of knowledge do incline.
A nigard of his gold such joy can never have
which gettes with toil and kepes with care and is his money slave,
As they enjoy always that taste lone in his kind,
For they do hold continually a heaven in their mind.
No^ worldly goods could bring my heart so great an ease^
As for to find or do the thing that might my lady please.
For by her only love my heart should have al joy,
And with the same put care away, and all that could annoy.
As if that any thing should chance to make me sad,
The touching of her coral lips would straightewaies make m^ glad,
And when that in my heart I feel that did me grieve
With one embracing of her arms she might me sone releue:
And as the Angels al which sit in heaven hye
With presence and the sight of god have their felicity,
So likewise I in earth, should have all earthly blis,
With presence of that Paragon, my god in earth that is.
The lady forsaken of her lover, prays his return, or the end of her own
life.
TO love, alas, who would not fear
That sees my woeful state,
For he to whom my heart I bear
Does me extremely hate,
And why therefore I cannot tell,
He will no longer with me dwell.
Did you not sewe and long me seru^
Ere I you granted grace?
And will you this now from me swerve
That never did trespace?
Alas poor woman then alas,
A weary life here must I pass.
And shall my faith have such refuse
In deed and shall it so,
Is there no choice for me to chus^
But must I leave you so?
Alas pore woman then alas,
A werye life hence must I pas.
And is there now no remedy
But that you will forget her?
There was a time when that perdy
You would have heard her better.
But now that time is gone and past,
And all your love is but a blast.
And can you thus break your behest
In deed and can you so?
Did you not swear you loved me best,
And can you now say no?
Remember me poor wight in pain,
And for my sake turn once again.
Alas poor Dido now I feel
Thy present painful state,
When false Eneas did him stele
From thee at Carthage gate.
And left thee slepyng in thy bed,
Regarding not what he had sed,
Was never woman thus betrayed,
Nor man so false forsworn,
His faith and troth so strongly tied,
Untruth has all totorne:
And I have leave for my good will
To wail and weep alone my fill.
But since it will not better be,
My tears shall never blin:
To moist the earth in such degree,
That I may drown therein:
That by my death al men may say.
Lo women are as true as they.
By me al women may beware,
That s^e my woeful smart,
To seek true love let them not spare,
Before they set their heart.
Or else they may become as I,
Which for my truth am like to dye.
The lover yelden into his ladies hands, prays mercy.
IN fredome was my fantasy
Abhorryng bondage of the mind,
But now I yield my liberty,
And willingly my self I bind.
Truly to serve with all my heart,
whiles life does last not to reuart.
Her beauty bound me first of all
And forced my will for to consent:
And I agree to be her thrall,
For as she list I am content.
My will is hers in that ^ may,
And where she biddes I will obey.
It lies in her my woe or wealth,
She may do that she likes best,
If that she list I have my health,
If she list not in woe I rest.
Sins I am fast within her bands.
My woe and wealth lies in her hands.
She can no less then pity me,
Since that my faith to her is known,
It were to much extremity,
With cruelty to use her own.
Alas a sinful enterprise,
To slay that yeldes at her device.
But I think not her heart so hard,
Nor that she has such cruel lust:
I doubt nothing of her reward,
For my desert but well I trust,
As she has beauty to allure,
So has she a heart that will recure.
That nature which works all things for our behoof, has made women also
for our comfort and delight.
AMong dame natures works such perfect law is wrought,
That things be ruled by course of kind in order as the^ ought.
And serves in their state, in such just frame and sort,
That slender wits may judge the same, and make thereof report.
Behold what secret force the wind does easily show,
Which guides the ships amid the seas if he his bellows blow.
The waters waxen wild where blustering blastes do rise,
Yet seldom do they pass their bonds for nature that devise.
The fire which boiles the lead, and tries out the gold:
Has in his power both help and hurt, if he his force unfold.
The frost which kills the fruit, does knit the bruised bones:
And is a medecin of kind, prepared for the nones.
The earth in whose entrails the food of man does live,
At every spring and fall of leaf, what pleasure does she give?
The air which life desires, and is to health so sweet,
Of nature yeldes such lively smelles, that comforts every sprete.
The Sun through natures might, does draw away the dew,
And spredes the flowers where he is wo^t his princely face to show.
The Moon which may be called, the lantern of the night,
Is half a guide to traueling men, such virtue has her light.
The sters not vertuelesse are beauty to the eyes,
A lodes man to the Mariner; a sign of calmed skies.
The flowers and fruitful trees to man do tribute pay,
And when they have their duty done by course they fade away.
Each beast both fish and foul, does offer life and all,
To nourish man and do him ease, yea serve him at his call.
The serpents venomous, whose vglye shapes we hate,
Are sovereign salues for sundry sores, and needful in their state.
Since nature shows her power, in each thing thus at large,
Why should not man submit himself to be in natures charge?
Who thinks to flee her force, at length becomes her thrall,
The wisest cannot slip her snare, for nature gouerns all.
Lo, nature gave us shape, lo nature fedes our lives:
The^ they are worse the^ mad I think, against her force that striue^
Though some do use to say, which can do naught but feign,
Women were made for this intent, to put us men to pain.
Yet sure I think they are a pleasure to the mind,
A joy which man can never want, as nature has assinde.
when adversity is once fallen, it is to late to beware^
TO my mishap alas I find
That happy hap is dangerous:
And fortune works but her kind,
To make the joyful dolorous.
But all to late it comes to mind,
To wail the want that makes me blind.
Amid my mirth and pleasantness,
Such chance is chanced suddenly,
That in despair without redress,
I find my chiefest remedy.
No new kind of unhappiness,
Should thus have left me comfortless.
Who would have thought that my request,
Should bring me forth such bitter fruit:
But now is hapt that I feared lest:
And all this harm comes by my suit,
For when I thought me happiest
Even then hapt all my chief unrest.
In better case was never none
And yet unawares thus am I trapt,
My chief desire does cause me moan,
And to my harm my wealth is hapt,
There is no man but I alone,
T^^t has such cause to sigh and moan.
Thus am I taught for to beware
And trust no more such pleasant chance,
My happy hap bred me this care,
And brought my mirth to great mischanc^^
There is no man whom hap will spare,
But when she list his wealth i^ bare.
Of a lover that made his only god of his love.
ALl you that friendship do profess,
And of a friend present the place:
Give ear to me that did possess,
As friendly fruits as ye embrace.
And to declare the circumstance,
There were them selves that did auaunce:
To teach me truly how to take,
A faithful friend for virtues sake.
But I as one of little skill,
To know what good might grow thereby,
Unto my wealth I had no will,
Nor to my need I had none e^e,
But as the child does learn to go,
So I in time did learn to know,
Of all good fruits the world brought forth.
A faithful friend is thing most worth.
Then with all care I sought to find,
One worthy to receive such trust:
One only that was rich in mind,
One secret, sober, wi^^, and iust^
Whom riches could not ^aise at all^
Nor poverty procure t^ fall:
And to be short in few words plain,
One such a friend I did attain.
And when I did enjoy this wealth,
Who lived Lord in such a case,
For to my friends it was great health,
And to my foes a foul deface,
And to my self a thing ^o rich
As seek the world and find none such.
Thus by this frende^ I set such store.
As by my self I fet no more.
This friend so much was my delight,
When care had clean overcome my hart^
One thought of her rid care as quite,
As never care had causde my smart.
Thus ioyed I in my friend so dear,
Was never ^^^de sat man so nere,
I card for her so much alone,
That other God I card for none.
But as it does to them befall,
That to them selves respect have none:
So my sweet graffe is grown to gall,
Where I sowed mirth I reaped moan.
This ydoll that I honorde so,
Is now transformed to my for
That me most pleased, me most pains,
And in despair my heart remains.
And for just scourge of such desert,
Three plages I may my self assure,
First of my friend to lose my part,
And next my life may not endure,
And last of all the more to blame,
My soul shall suffer for the same.
Wherefore ye friends I warn you all,
Sit fast for fear of ^uch a fall.
Upon the death of sir Antony Denny.
DEath and the king, did as it were contend,
Which of them two bare Denny greatest love.
The king to show his love began far extend,
Did him advance his betters farr^ above.
Nere place, much wealth, great honor eke him gave,
To make it known what power great princes have.
But when death came with his triumphant gift,
From worldly cark he quite his weried ghost,
Free from the corpse, and straight to heaven it li^t,
Now deem that can who did for Denny most.
The king gave wealth but fading and unsure,
Death brought him bliss that ever shall endure.
A comparison of the lovers pains.
Like as the brake within the riders hand,
Does strain the horse nigh wood with grief of p^in^,
Not used before to come in such a band,
Strives for grief, although god wot in vain
To be as erst he was at liberty.
But force of force does strain the contrary.
Eue^ so since band does cause my deadly grief,
That made me so my woeful chance lament,
Like thing has brought me into pain and mischief,
Save willingly to it I did assent.
To bind the thing in fredome which was free,
That now full sore alas repents me.
Of a Ros^mary branche sent.
SUch grene to me as you have sent,
Such grene to you I send again:
^ flowring heart that will not feint,
For dread of hope or loss of gain:
A steadfast thought all wholly bent,
So that he may your grace obtain:
As you by proof have always seen,
To live your own and always grene.
To his love of his constant ha^t.
AS I have been so will I ever be,
Unto my death and longer if I myght^
Have I of love the friendly lokyng eye?
Have, I of fortune favor or despit^?
I am of rock by proof as you may see:
Not ^^ade of wax nor of no metal light,
As leefe to dye, by change as to deceive,
Or break the promise ^ade. And so I leau^.
Of the token which his love sent him.
THe golden apple that the Troyan boy,
Gave to Uenus the fairest of the three,
Which was the cause of all the wrack of Troy,
Was not received with a greater joy,
Then was the same (my love) thou sent to me,
It healed my sore it made my sorrows free,
It gave me hope it banished mine annoy:
Thy happy hand full often of me was blist,
That can give such a salve when that thou list.
Manhood avails not without good Fortune.
THe Cowerd often whom deinty viandes fed,
That bosted much his ladies ears to please,
By help of them whom under him he led
Has reapt the palm ye valiance could not cease.
The inexpert yt shores unknown near sought,
whom Neptune yet apaled not with fear:
In wandering ship on trustles seas has tought
The skill to feel that time to long does leare.
The s^orti^g knight that sco^neth Cupides kind,
With fained chere the pained cause to bread:
In game vnhides the leden sparks of mind,
And gains the gole, where glowing flames should speed,
Thus I see proof yt troth and ma^ly heart
May not avail, if fortune chance to start.
That constancy of all virtues is most worthy
THough in the wax a perfect picture made,
Does show as fair as in the marble stone,
Yet do we see it is esteemed of none.
Because that fire or force the form does fade.
Whereas the marble holden is full dear,
Since that endures the date of longer days.
Of Diamondes it is the greatest praise^
So long to last and always one tappere.
Then if we do esteem that thing for best,
Which in perfection leng^st time does last:
And that most vain yt turns with every blast
What ^ewel then with t^ng can be expressed?
Like to that heart where love has framed such feth,
That ca^ not fade but by ye force of death.
The uncertain state of of a lover.
Like as the rage of rain.
Filles rivers with excess,
And as the drought again,
Does draw t^em less and less.
So I both fall and clyme,
With no and yea sometime.
As they swell hye and hye,
So does increase my state,
As they fall dry and dry
So does my wealth abate,
As yea is mixed with no.
So mirth is mixed with woe.
As nothing can endure,
That lives and lackes relief,
So nothing can stand sure,
Where change does raign^ as chief,
Wherefore I must intend,
To bow when others bend.
And when they laugh to smile,
And when they weep to waile^
And when they craft, begile,
And when they fight, as^aile,
And think there is no change,
Can make them seem to strange^
Oh most unhappy sla^e,
What man may lead this course,
To lack he would faynest have,
Or else to do much worse.
These be rewards for such,
^s live and love to much.
The lover in liberty smileth at them in thraldom, that sometime scorned his
bondage.
AT liberty I sit and see,
Them that have erst laughed me to scorn:
Whypt with the whip that scourged me
And now they banne that they were borne.
I se^ them sit full soberlye^
And think their earnest lokes to hide:
Now in them selves they can not spy,
That they or this in me have spide.
I s^e them sitting all alone,
Markyng the steps each word and look:
And now they tread where I have gone
The painful pathe that I forsook.
Now I see well I saw no whit.
When they saw well that now are blind
But happy hap has made me quit,
And just judgment has them assinde.
I see them wander all alone,
And tread full fast in dreadful dout:
The self same pathe that I have gone,
Blessed be hap that brought me out.
At liberty all this I see,
And say no word but erst among;
Smiling at them that laughed at me.
Lo such is hap, mark well my song.
A comparison of his love with the faithful and painful love of Troylus to
Creside.
I Read how Troylus served in Troy,
A lady long and many a day,
And how he bode so great anoy,
For her as all the stories say.
That half the pain had never man,
Which had this woeful Troyan than.
His youth, his sport, his pleasant chere^
His courtly state and company,
In him so straungely altered were,
With such a face of contrary.
That every joy became a woe,
This poison new had turnde him so.
And what men thought might most him ease,
And most that for his comfort stood,
The fame did most his mind displease,
And set him most in furious mode.
For all his pleasure ever lay,
To think on her that was away.
His chamber was his common walk,
Wherein he kept him secretly,
He made his bed the place of talk,
To hear his great extremity.
In nothing else had he delight.
But even to be a martyr right.
And now to call her by her name
And straight therewith to sigh and throbbe:
And when his fancies might not frame,
Then into tears and so to sobbe,
All in extremes and thus he lies,
Making two fountains of his eyes.
As agues have sharp shifts of fits
Of cold and heat successively:
So had his head like change of wits:
His patience wrought so diversely.
Now up, now down, now here, now there,
Like one that was he wist not where.
And thus though he were Pr^ams son
And comen of the kings hye blood,
This care he had ere he her won.
Till she that was his mantresse good,
And loathe to see her servant so,
Became Physician to his wo^
And took him to her hands and grace,
And said she would her mind apply,
To help him in his woeful case,
If she might be his remedy.
And thus they say to ease his smart,
She made him owner of her heart.
And truth it is except they lie,
From that day forth her study went,
To show to love him faithfully,
And his whole mind full to content.
So happy a man at last was he,
And eke so worthy a woman she.
Lo lady then judge you by this,
Mine case and how my case does fall,
For sure between my life and his,
No difference there is at all.
His care was great^ so was his pain,
And mine is not the lest of twain.
For what he felt in service true
For her whom that he loved so,
The same ^ feel as large for you,
To whom I do my service owe.
There was that time in him no pain,
But now the same in me does reign.
Which if you can compare and way,
And how I stand in every plight,
Then this for you I dare well say,
Your heart must needs remorce of right
To grant me grace and so to do,
As Creside then did Troylus to.
For well I wot you are as good,
And even as fair as ever was she,
And commen of as worthy blood,
And have in you as large pity
To tender me your own true man,
As she did him her servant than.
Which gift I pray God for my sake,
Full sone and shortly you me send,
So shall you make my sorrows slake,
So shall you bring my woe to end.
And set me in as happy case,
As Troylus with his lady was.
To lead a virtuous and honest life.
FLee from the prease and dwell with sothfastnes,
Suffice to thee thy good though it be small,
For horde has hate, and climing ticklenes,
Praise has envy, and weall is blind in all,
Favor no more, then thee behoue shall.
Read well thy self that others well can read,
And troth shall thee deliver, it is no dread.
Pain thee not each crooked to redress,
In hope of her that turns as a ball,
Great rest stands in little business,
Beware also to spurn against a nall,
Strive not as does a crocke against a wall,
Deem first thy self, that demest others deed,
And truth shall thee deliver, it is no dread.
That thee is sent, receine in buxomnesse,
The wrestling of this world asks a fall:
Here is no home, here is but wilderness.
Forth pilgryme forth, forth beast out of thy stall,
Look up on hye, give thanks to God of all:
weane well thy lust, and honest life ay lead,
So troth shall thee deliver, it is no dread.
The wounded lover determines to make suit to his lady for his recure.
SIns Mars first moved war or stirred men to strife,
Was never seen so fearce a fight, I scarce could escape with life.
Resist so long I did, till death approached so nigh,
To save my self, I thought it best, with speed away to fly.
In danger still I fled, by flight I thought to escape
From my dear foe, it veiled not, alas it was to late.
For Uenus from her camp brought Cupide with his bronde,
Who said now yield, or else desire shall chase thee in every land.
Yet would I not straight yield, till fansy fiercely stroke,
Who from my will did cut the raines and charged me with this yoke.
Then all the days and nights mine ear might hear the sound,
What careful sighs my heart would steal, to feel it self so bound.
For though within my breast, thy care I work (he said)
Why for good will did thou behold her persing eye displayed,
Alas the fish is caught, through bait that hides the hook,
Even so her eye me trained has, and tangled with her look.
But or that it be long, my heart thou shall be feign,
To stay my life pray her forththrow sweet lokes when I complain.
When that she shall deny, to do me that good turn,
Then shall she see to ashes gray, by flames my body burn.
Deserte of blame to her no wight may yet impute,
For fear of nay I never sought, the way to frame my suit.
Yet hap that what hap shall, delay I may to long,
Assay I shall for I hear say, the still man often has wrong.
The lover showing of the continual pains that abide within his breast,
determines to die because he cannot have redress.
THe doleful bell that still does ring,
The woeful knell of all my joys:
The wretched heart does perce and wring,
And fills mine ear with deadly noyes.
The hongry Uiper in my breast,
That on my heart does lie and gnaw:
Does daily bread my new unrest,
And deper sighs does cause me draw.
And though I force both hand and eye,
On pleasant matter to attend:
My sorrows to deceive thereby,
And wretched life for to amend.
Yet goes the mill within my heart,
Which grindeth naught but pain and woe:
And turns all my joy to smart,
The evil corn it yeldeth so.
Though Uenus smile with yelding eyes,
And sweet music does play and sing:
Yet does my sprites feel none of these,
The clarke does at mine ear so ring.
As smallest sparckes vncared for,
To greatest flames do sonest grow,
Even so did this mine inward sore,
Begin in game and end in woe.
And now by use so swift it goes,
That nothing can mine ears so fill:
But that the clacke it ouergoeth,
And plucketh me back into the mill.
But since the mill will needs about,
The pin whereon the whele does go:
I will assay to strike it out,
And so the mill to overthrow.
The power of love over gods them selves.
FOr love Apollo (his Godhed set aside)
Was servant to the king of Thessaley,
Whose daughter was so pleasant in his eye,
That both his harp and sawtrey he defide:
And bagpipe solace of the rural bride,
Did puff and blow^ and on the holtes hy,
His cattle kept with that rude melody,
And often eke him that does the heau^ns gide,
Has love transsormed to shapes for him to base
Transmuted thus sometime a swan is he,
Leda taccoy, and eft Europe to please,
A mild white bull, vnwrinckled front and face,
Suffers her play till on his back lepeth she,
Who^ in great care he ferieth through the seas.
The promise of a constant lover.
AS Laurel leaves that cease not to be grene,
From parching sun, nor yet from winters threte
As hardened oak that fears no sword so kene,
As flint for tool in twain that will not frete.
As fast as rock, or pillar surely set:
So fast am I to you, and ay have been,
Assuredly whom I cannot forget,
For joy, for pain, for torment nor for tene.
For loss, for gain, for frowning, nor for thret,
But ever one, yea both in calm and blast,
Your faithful friend, and will be to my last.
Against him that had slaundered a gentle woman with him self.
FAlse may be, and by the powers above,
Never have he good speed or luck in love,
That so can lie or spot the worthy fame,
Of her for whom thou R. art to blame.
For chaste Diane that hunteth still the chase,
And all her maids that sue her in the race.
With fair bows bent and arrows by their side,
Can say that thou in this have falsely lide.
For never hong the bow upon the wall,
Of Dianes temple, no nor never shall.
Of broken chaste the sacred vow to spot,
Of her whom thou doste charge so large I wot,
But if ought be whereof her blame may rise,
It is in that she did not well advise
To mark thee right, as now she does thee know
False of thy deed, false of thy talk also.
Lurker of kind like serpent laid to bite,
As poison hid under the sugar white.
What danger such? So was the house defilde,
Of Collatiue: so was the wife begilde.
So smarted she, and by a traiterous force,
The Cartage queen so she fordid her corse.
So strangled was the Rodopeian maid,
Fie traitor fie, to thy shame be it said,
Thou dunghill Crow that crokest against the rain,
Home to thy hole, brag not with Phebe again.
Carrion for thee, and loathsome be thy voice,
Thy song is foul, ^ w^ary of thy noyce.
Thy black feathers, which are thy wearing wede,
Wet them with tears, and sorrow for thy deed.
And in dark caves, where yrkesome worms do crepe,
Lurk thou all day, and fly when thou should sleep.
And never light where living thing has life,
But eat and drink where stinche and filth is ri^e.
For she that is a foul of feathers bright,
Admit she took some pleasure in thy light.
As foul of state sometimes delight to take,
Foul of mean sort their flight with the^ to make.
For play of wing^ or solace of their kind:
But not in sort as thou do break thy mind.
Not for to tread with such foul foul as thou,
No no I swear, and dare it here ^uow.
Thou never set thy foot within her nest,
Boast not so broad then to thine own unrest.
But blushe for shame, for in thy face it stands,
And thou can not vnspot it with thy hands.
For all the heavens against thee record bear,
And all in earth against thee eke will swear,
That thou in this art even none other man,
But as the judges were to Susan than.
Forgers of that whereto their lust them pricked,
Bashe, blaser then the truth has thee convict.
And she a woman of her worthy fame,
Unspotted stands, and thou have caught the shame.
And there I pray to God that it may rest,
False as thou art, as false as is the best,
That so can wrong the noble kind of man,
In whom all troth first floorisht and began.
And so has stand, till now thy wretched part,
Has spotted us, of whose kind one thou art.
That all the shame that ever rose or may,
Of shameful deed on thee may light I say^
And on thy kind, and thus I wish thee rather,
That all thy seed may like be to their father.
Untrue as thou, and forgers as thou art,
So as all we be blameless of thy part.
And of thy deed. And thus I do thee leave,
Still to be false, and falsely to deceive.
A praise of maistresse R.
I Heard when feign with thundering voice did sommon to appear,
The chief of natures children all that kind has placed here.
To view what brute by virtue got their lives could justly crane,
And bad the^ show what praise by truth they worthy were to have.
Wherewith I saw how Uenus came and put her self in place,
And gave her ladies leave at large to stand and plead their case.
Each one was calde by name a row, in that assemble there,
That hence are gone or here remains, in court or other where.
A solemn s^^ence was proclaimde, the judges sa^e and herd,
What truth could tell, or craft could fain, and who should be preferred.
Then beauty stepped before the bar, whose breast and neck was bare
With hear trust up, and on her head a caul of gold she ware.
Thus Cupides thralles began to flock whose hongry eyes did say
That she had stained all the dames, that present were that day.
For er she spoke, with whispring words, the prease was filled throughout
And fansy forced common voice, thereat to give a shoute.
Which cried to fame take forth thy trump, and sound her praise on hy
That glads the heart of every wight that her beholdes with eye.
What stir and rule (quo^ order than) do these rude people make,
We hold her best that shall deserve a praise for virtues sake.
This sentence was no sooner said, but beauty therewith blushed,
The noise did cease, the hall was still and every thing was whusht.
Then finenesse thought by training talk to win that beauty lost,
And whet her tongue with ioly words, and spared for no cost:
Yet wantonness could not abide, but brake her tale in have,
And peuish pride ^or Pecockes plumes would needs behiest plast.
And therwi^hall came curiousness and carped out of frame.
The audience laughed to hear the strife as they beheld the same.
Yet reason sone apesde the brute her reverence made and done,
She purchased favor ^or to speak, and thus her tale begoon.
Sins bounty shall the garland wear, and crowned be by fame,
O happy judges call for her, for she deserves the same.
Where te^perance gouerns beauties flowers and glory is not sought,
And shamefast mekenes mastreth pride, and virtue dwells in thought.
Bid her come forth and show her face, or else assent each one,
That true report shall grave her name in gold or marble stone.
For all the world to read at will, what worthiness does rest,
In perfect pure unspotted life, which she has here possessed.
Then skill rose up and sought the prease to find if that he might,
A person of such honest name, that men should praise of right.
This one I saw full sadly sit, and shrink her self aside,
Whose sober lokes did show what gifts her wifely grace did hide.
Lo here (quod skill, good people all^ is Lucrece left alive,
And she shall most excepted be, that least for praise did strive.
No longer fame could hold her peace, but blew a blast so hye,
That made an eckow in the aier and sowning through the s^ye.
The voice was loud and thus it said come. R. wit^ happy days,
Thy honest life has won the fame and crowned thee with prays.
And when I heard my maistres name I thrust amids the throng,
And clapped my hands and wished of god yt she might prosper long.
Of one unjustly defamed.
I^Ne can close in short and cunning verse,
Thy worthy praise of bounty by desert:
The hateful spite and slander to rehearse.
Of them that see but know not what thou art,
For kind by craft has wrought thee so to eye,
That no wight may thy wit and virtue spy.
But he have other feel then outward sight,
The lack whereof does hate and spite to try
Thus kind thy craft is let of virtues light:
See how the outward show the wits may dull:
Not of the wise but as the most entend,
Minerua yet might never perce their scull,
That Circes cup and Cupides brand has blend.
Whose fond affects now sturred have their brain,
So does thy hap thy hue with color stain.
Beauty thy so thy shape doubleth thy sore,
To hide thy wit and show thy virtue vain,
Fell were thy fate, if wisdom were not more^
I mean by thee even G. by name,
Whom stormy winds of envy and disdain,
Do toss with boisteous blastes of wicked fame.
Where steadfastness as chief in thee does reign.
Pa^ience thy settled mind does guide and stere^
Silence and shame with many rests there.
Till time thy mother list them forth to call,
Happy is he that may enjoy them all.
Of the death of the late countisse of Penbroke.
YEt once again my muse I pardon pray,
Thine intermitted song if I repeat:
Not in such wise as when love was my pay,
My ioly woe with joyful verse to treat.
But now (vnthanke to our desert be given,
Which merit not a heavens gift to keep)
Thou must with me bewail yt fate has reuen,
From earth a jewel laid in earth to sleep,
A jewel yea a gemme of womanhed,
Whose perfect virtues linked as in chain:
So did adorn that humble wiuelyhed,
As is not rife to find the like again.
For wit and learning framed to obey,
Her husbands will that willed her to use
The love he bare her chiefly as a stay,
For all her friends yt would her furtherance choose
Well sa^d therf^re a heavens gift she was,
Because the best are sonest hence bereft:
And though her self to heaven henc^ did pass,
Her spoil to earth from whence it came she left.
And to us tears her absence to lament,
And eke his chance that was her make by law:
Whose loss to love so great an ornament,
Let the^ esteem which true loves knot can draw^
That each thing is hurt of it self.
Why fear thou thy outward fo,
When thou thy self thy harm do feed,
Of grief, or hurt, of pain or woe.
With^n each thing is sown the sede^
So fine was never yet the clo^h,
No smith so hard his iron did beat:
But the one consumed was with moth,
The Other with canker all to freate.
The knotty oak and wainscot old,
Within does eat the silly worm:
Even so a mind in envy ro^d,
Always within it self does burn.
Thus euer^ thing that nature w^ought
Within it self his hurt does bea^e:
No outward harm need to be sought,
Where enemies be within so near,
Of the choice of a wife.
THe flickering flame that flies from ear to ear,
And ay her ^trength increases with her flight,
Geues first the cause why men to hear delight
Of those whom she does note for beauty bright,
And with this fame that flees on so fast,
Fansy does hye when reason mak^s no have.
And yet not so content they wish to see
And thereby know if fame have said aright,
More trusting to the trial of their eye,
Then to the brute that goes of any weight,
Wise in that point that lightly will not leave,
Unwrie to se that may them after grieve.
Who knows not how sight may love allur^,
And kindle in the heart a hot desire:
The eye to work that same could not procure,
Of greater cause there comes hotter fire,
For ere he we^e himself he feleth warm
The fame and eye the causers of his harm.
Let fame no^ make her known who^ I shall know^
For yet mine eye therein to be my guyde^
Suffiseth me that virtue in her grow,
Whose simple life her fathers walls do hide,
Content with this I leave the rest to go,
And in such choice shall stand my wealth and woe.
Description of an ungodly word.
Who loves to live in peace, and marketh every change,
shall here such news from time to time, as seem right wo^drou^ strange
^uch fraud in friendly lokes, such friendship all for game:
Such cloked wrath in hateful har^s, which worldly men retain.
Such feigned flattring faith, amongs both hye and low^
Such great deceit, such subtle wits, the poor to overthrow.
Such spite in sugared tongues, such malice f^ll of pride,
Such open wrong such great vnt^uth, which cannot go vnspide,
Such res^lesse suit for rowmes^ which brings men to care:
Such sliding down from s^ippery seats, yet can we not beware,
Such barking at ^he good, such bolstering of the ill:
Such threatening of the wrath of god, such vice embraced still.
^uch striving for the best, such climing to estate:
Such great dissembling every ^here, such love al mixed with hate^
Such trains to trap the just, such prolling fautes to pike,
Such cruel words for speaking troth, who ever heard the like?
Such strife for sturri^g strawes, such discord daily wrought:
Such forged ^ales dull wits to blind, such matters made of naught
Such trifles told for troth, such crediting of lies,
Such sil^nce kept when fools do speak, such laughing at the wise,
Such plenty made ^o scarce, such crying for redress:
Such fea^ed signs of our decay, which ^ong dares not express,
Such changes ligh^ly marked, such troubles still apperes,
which never were before this time, no not this thousand years.
Such bribing ^or the purse, which ever gapes for more.
Such hording up of worldly wealth, such keeping mucke in store
Such folly ^ounde in age, such will in tender youth,
Such so^dry ^or^es among great clerks, and few that speak ye truth
Such falshed under craft, and such unsteadfast ways,
was never seen within men's hearts, as is found now a days,
The cause and ground of this, is our unquiet mind,
which ^hinks to take those goods away, which we must leave behind
why do men seek to get which they can not possesse^
Or break their slepes with careful thoughts and al for wretchedness
Though one among a skore, has wealth and case a while,
A thousan^ want which toileth sore and travail many a mile.
And some although they sleep yet wealth falls in their lap,
Thus some be rich, and some be poor, as fortune geues the hap,
wherefore I hold him wis^, which thinks himself at ease,
And is content in simple state both god and man to please.
For those that live like god^ and honored are to ^ay:
within short time their glory fails as flowers do fade away,
Uncertain is their lives on whom this world will frown:
For though they sit ^b^ue y^ sta^res, a storm may ^trike the^ down
In wealth who fear^^ no f^ll^ may slide from joy full soon:
There is nothing so su^e on earth, but changes as the moon.
what pleasure has the rich, or case more th^n the poor?
Although he have a pleasant house, his trouble is the more
They bow and speak him feire, which seek to suck his blood:
And some do wish his soul in hell, and al to have his good
The coveting of the goods, does naught but dull the sprite
And some men chance to taste the sower, that gropeth for ^ the sweet
The rich is still envied by those which eat his bread:
With fawning speech and flattering tales his ears are bailey ^ed
In fine I see and prove the rich have many foes.
He slepeth best, and cares least, that little has to lose,
As time requires now, who would avoid much strife,
Were better live in poor estate, then lead a princis life.
To pass those troublesome times I see but littil choice,
But help to wayle with those that weep, and laugh when they rejoice
For as we se to day, our brother brought in care:
To morrow may we have such chance to fall with him in snare
Of this we may be sure, who thinks to sit most fast,
Shall sonest fall like withered leaves that can not bide a blast,
Though that the flood be great, the ebb as low does run
When every man has played his part our pagent wylbe done.
Who trustes this wretched world, I, hold him worse then mad
Here is not one that ^eareth God, the b^st is all to badde.
For those that seem as saints, are devils in their deeds
Though that the earth bringes forth some flowers it bears many wedes,
I see no pres^ut help from mischief to prevail,
But flee the seas of worldly care or bear a quiet sail,
For who that medleth least, shall save him self from smart
Who stirs an oar in every boat shall play a foolish part
The dispairing lover lamenteth.
VVAlking the path of pensive thought,
I asked my heart how came this woe:
Thine eye (quod he) this care me brought,
Thy mind, thy wit, thy will also
Enforces me to love her ever
This is the cause joy shall I never
And as I walk as one dismaide,
Thinking that wroug this woe me lent:
Right, sent me word by wrath, which said
This just judgment to thee is sent:
^eu^r to (...) d^^^g ever,
^^ll ^r^^th the f^^le, joy shall thou neu^^
^^^h right ^oth iu^ge this w^ tendur^
Of health of wealth of remedy.
As I have done so be she sure,
Of faith and truth until I dye.
And as this pain cloak shall I ever
^o inwardly joy shall I never,
Griping of gripes greu^ not so sor^
Nor serpents styng causes such smart
Nothing on earth may pain me more,
Then sight that perst my woeful heart
Drowned with ^a^es still to perseue^
Come death betimes joy shall I never,
O liberty why do thou swai^e:
And steal away thus all at ones
And I in prison like to starve,
For lack of food do gnaw on bones
My hope and trust in thee was ever,
Now thou art gone joy shall I never,
But still as one al desperate,
To lead my l^fe in misery:
Since fear^ from hope has lock the gate
Where pity should grant remedy,
Despair this lot assigns me ever,
To live in pain, joy shall I never,
The lover prays his service to be accepted, and his defaultes pardoned.
PRo^^yn that sometime served Cephalus
With heart as true as any lover might.
Yet her betide in loving this unright
That as in heart with love surprised thus
She on a day to see this Cephalus
Where he was wont to shroude him in the shade
When of his hunting he an end had made.
Within ye woods with dredful lote forth stalketh
So bussly love in her head it walks.
That she to seen him may her not restrain.
This Cephalus that heard one shake ye leaves
Uprist all egre thrusting after pray,
With darte in hand him list no further daine,
To see his love but slew her in the greaues,
That meant to him but perfect love always.
So curious been alas the rites all,
Of mighty love that uneaths may I think,
In his high service how to look or wink.
Thus I complain that wretchedst am of all,
To you my love, and sovereign lady dear,
That may my heart with death or life stere
As ye best list. That ye vouchsafe in all
Mine humble service. And if me misfall,
By negligence, or else for lack of wit.
That of your mercy yo^ do pardon it,
And t^^nk y^ love made Procrin shake ye leaves
When with unright she slain was in y^ greues.
Descripcion and praise of his love.
Like the Phoenix a bird most rare in sight,
That nature has with gold and purple dressed:
Such she me semes in whom I most delight,
If I might speak for envy at the least.
Nature I think first wrought her in despite,
^^rose and lilly that summer brings first,
In beauty sure, exceeding all the rest,
under the bent of her brows justly pight:
^s Diamondes, or Saphires at the least:
Her glistring lights the darkness of the night.
Whose little mouth and chinne like all the rest.
(...) ruddy lips excede the coral quite.
^^ yuery teeth where none excedes the rest.
^autlesse she is from foot unto the waste:
Her body small and straight as mast upright,
Her arms long in just proporcion cast,
Her hands depaint with veins all blew and white.
What shall I say for that is not in sight?
The hidden parts I judge them by the rest.
And if I were the forman of the quest,
To give a verdite of her beauty bright,
For give me Phoebus, thou should be dispossessed,
Which do usurp my ladies place of right.
Here will I cease lest envy cause dispite.
But nature when she wrought so fair a wight,
In this her work she surely did entende,
To frame a thing that God could not amend.
The lover declares his pains to excede far the pains of hell.
THe souls that lacked grace,
Which lie in bitter pain:
Are not in such a place,
As foolish folk do feign.
Tormented all with fire,
And boil in lead again,
With serpents full of ire,
Stong often with deadly pain.
Then cast in frosen pittes:
To freze there certain hours:
And for their painful fittes,
Appointed tormentours.
No no it is not so,
Their sorrow is not such:
And yet they have of woe,
I dare say twice as much.
Which comes because they lack
The sight of the godhed,
And be from that kept back
Where with are angels fed
This thing know I by love
Through absence cruelty,
Which makes me for to prove
Hell pain before I dye.
There is no tongue can tell
My thousand part of care
There may no fire in hell,
With my desire compare.
No boiling lead can pas
My scalding sighs in hete:
Nor snake that ever was,
With s^inging can so frete
A true and tender heart,
As my thoughts da^ly do,
^o that I know but smart,
And that which longes thereto.
O Cupid Uenns son,
As thou have showed thy might.
And have this conquest won,
Now end the same aright.
And as I am thy slave,
Contented with all this:
So help me soon to have
My parfect earthly bliss.
Of the death of sir Thomas w^ate the elder.
LO dead he lives, that whilome lived here,
Among the dead that quick go on the groun^.
Though he be dead, yet does he quick apere,
By lively name that death cannot confound
His life for ay of fame the trump shall sound.
Though he be dead, yet lives he here alive.
Thus can no death from Wiate; life deprive.
That length of time consumes all things.
What harder is then stone^ what more then water soft?
Yet with soft water drops^ hard stones be pers^d soft.
What geues so strong impulse,
That stone ne may withstand^
What geues more weak repulse.
Then water p^est with hand:
Yet weke though water be,
It holowith hardest flint:
By proof whereof we see,
Time geues the greatest dint.
The beginning of the epistle of Penelope to Vlisles, made into verse.
O Lingering make Ulisses dear, thy wife lo sendes to thee,
He^ driry plaint write not again, but come thy self to me.
Our hateful scourge that woman's foe proud Troy now is fordon
We bye it derer, though Priam slain, and all his kingdom won.
O that the raging surges great that lechers bane had wrought,
When first with sh^p he forowed seas, and Lacedemon sought,
In desert bed my shiuering coarse then should not have sought rest,
Nor take in grief the cherefull sun so slowly fall to west.
And whiles I ca^t long running nights, how best I might begile,
No dista^^ should my widowish hand have weary made the while.
When dread I not more dangers great then are befall in deed:
Love is a careful thing God wot, and passing full of dread.
The lover asks pardon of his passed folly in love.
YOu that in play peruse my plaint, and read in rhyme the smart,
Which in my youth with sighs full cold I harbourd in my heart
Know ye that love in that frail age drove me to that distress,
when I was ha^fe an other man, then I am now to guess.
Then for this work of waue^ing words where I now rage now rue
Tossed in the toys of troublous love, as care or co^^ort grew.
I trust with ^ou that loves affair^^ b^ proof have put in ure:
Not only pardon in my plaint, but pity to procure.
For now I wot that in the world a wonder have I be,
And where to long love made me blind, to late shame makes mese.
Thus of my fault shame is the fruit, and for my youth thus past,
R^pentance is my recompense, and this I learn at last.
Look what the world has most in price, as sure it is to keep.
As is the dream which fancy drives, while sense and reason sleep.
The lover shows that he was stricken by love on good friday.
IT was the day on which the sun deprived of his light,
To rue Christ's death amid his course gave place unto y^ night
When I amid mine ease did fall to such distemperate fits,
That for the face that has my heart I was bereft my wits.
I had the bayte, the hook and all, and wist not loves pretense,
But farde as one that fearde none ill, nor forced for no defense.
Thus dwelling in most quiet state, I fell into this plight,
And that day began my secret sighs, when all folk wept in sight.
For love that vewed me void of care, approcht to take his pray,
And stepped by stelth from eye to heart, so open lay the way.
And straight at eyes brake out in tears, so salt that did declare,
By token of their bitter taste that they were forgde of care.
Now vaunt thee love which fleest a maid defenst with virtues rare,
And wounded have a wight unwise, unweaponed and unware.
The lover describes his whole state unto his love, and promising her his
faithful good will: assures himself of hers again.
THe Sun when he has spread his rays,
And shewde his face ten thousand ways.
Ten thousand things do then begin,
To show the life that they are in.
The heaven shows lively art and hue,
Of sundry shapes and colors new,
And laughes upon the earth anon.
The earth as cold as any stone,
Wet in the tears of her own kind:
Gins then to take a joyful mind.
For well she feels that out and out,
The sun does warm her round about.
And dries her children tenderly,
And shows them forth full orderly.
The mountains hye and how they stand,
The valies and the great maine land.
The trees, the herbs, the towers strong,
The castles and the rivers long.
And even for ^oy thus of this heat,
She shows forth her pleasures great.
And s^eepes no more but sends sorth
Her c^ergions her own dear worth.
To mount and fly up to the air,
Where then they ^ing in order fair.
And tell in sung ^^il merely,
How they have slept full quietly,
That night about their mothers sides.
And when they have song more besides,
Then fall they to their mothers breasts,
Where else they feed or take their restes.
The hunter then soundes out his horn,
And rangeth strait through wood and corn.
On hills then show the Ewe and Lamb,
And every young one with his dambe.
Then lovers walk and tell their tale,
Both of their bliss and of their bale.
And how they serve, and how they do,
And how their lady loves them to.
Then tune the ^irdes their armonie.
Then flock the foul in company.
Then every thing does pleasure f^^de,
In that that comfor^es all their kind.
No dreams do drench them of the night,
Of foes that would them s^ea or bite.
As Hounds to hunt them at the tail,
Or men force them through hill and dale.
The sheep then dreams not o^ the Woulf,
The shipman forces not the goulf.
The Lamb thinks not the butchers knife.
Should then bereue him of his life.
For when the Sun does once run in,
Then all their glad^es does begin.
And then their ski^s, and then their play
So falls their sadness the^ away.
And thus all things have comforting,
In that that does them comfort bring,
Save I alas, whom neither ^unne,
Nor ought that God has wrought and don,
May comfort ought, as though I were
A thing not made for comfort here.
For being absent from your sight,
Which are my joy and whole delight
My comfort and my pleasure to,
How can I joy how should I do?
May sick men laugh that rore for pain?
Joy they in song that do complain?
Are martirs in their torments glad?
Do pleasures please them that are mad?
Then how may I in comfort be,
That lack the thing should comfort me.
The blind man often that lackes his sight,
Complains not most the lack of light.
But those that knew their perfectnes,
And then do miss there blisfulnes.
In martirs tunes they sing and wail,
The want of that which does them fail.
And hereof comes that in my brains,
So many fancies work my pains
For when I wayghe your worthynes,
Your wisdom and your gentlnes,
Your virtues and your sundry grace,
And mind the countenance of your face,
And how that you are she alone,
To whom I must both plain and moan.
whom I do love and must do still.
whom I embrace and ay so will,
To serve and please you as I can,
As may a woeful faithful man.
And find my self so far you fro.
God knows what torment, and what woe,
My rufull heart does then embrace.
The blood then changes in my face.
My synnewes dull, in ^ompes I stand.
No life I feel in fo^e nor hand.
As pale as any clout and ded,
Lo suddenly the blood orespred,
And gone again it uill so bide.
And thus from life to death I slide
As cold sometimes as any stone,
And then again as hot anon.
Thus comes and goes my sundry fits,
To give me sundri sorts of wits.
Till that a sigh becomes my friend,
And then to all this woe does end.
And sure I think that sigh does roon,
From me to you where ay you won.
For well I find it eases me,
And cettes much it pleases me,
To think that it does come to you,
As would to God it could so do.
For then I know you would soon find,
By sent and savor of the wind.
That even a martirs sigh it is,
Whose joy you are and all his blis.
His comfort and his pleasure eke,
And even the same that he does seek.
The same that he does wish and crave,
The same that he does trust to have.
To tender you in all he may,
And all your likinges to obey,
As far as in his power shall lie:
Till death shall darte him for to dye.
But wealeaway mine own most best,
My joy, my comfort, and my rest.
The causer of my woe and smart,
And yet the pleaser of my heart.
And she that on the earth above:
Is even the worthiest for to love.
Hear now my plaint, hear now my woe.
Hear now his pain that loves you so.
And if your heart do pity bear,
Pity the cause that you shall hear.
A doleful foe in all this doubt,
Who leaves me not but sekes me out,
Of wretched form and loathsome face,
While I stand in this woeful case:
Comes forth and takes me by the hand,
And says friend hark and understand.
I see well by thy port and chere,
And by thy lokes and thy manner,
And by thy sadness as thou go,
And by the sighs that thou outthrowes^^
That thou art stuffed full of woe,
The cause I think I do well know.
A fantaser thou art of some,
By whom thy wits are overcome.
But have thou red old pamphlets ought?
Or have thou known how books have taught
That love does use to such as thou,
When they do think them safe ^now.
And certain of their ladies grace:
Have thou not seen often tunes the case,
That suddenly there hap has turnde,
As things in flame consumde and burnde?
Some by disceite forsaken right.
Some likewise changed of fansy light.
And some by absence sone forgot.
The lottes in love, why know thou not?
And tho that she be now thine own:
And knows the well as may be known.
And thinks the to be such a one,
As she likes best to be her own.
Thinks thou that others have not grace,
To show and plain their woeful case.
And chose her for their lady now,
And swear her troth as well as thou.
And what if she do alter mind?
Where is the love that thou would find?
Absence my friend works wonders often.
Now bringes full low that lay full loft.
Now turns the mind now to and fro,
And where art thou if it were so?
If basence (quod I) be marvelous,
I find her not so dangerous.
For she may not remove me fro,
The ^^ore good will that I do owe
To her, whom uneath I love and shall.
And chosen have above them all,
To serve and be her own as far,
As any man may offer her.
And will her serve, and will her love,
As lowly as it shall behoue.
And dye her own if fate be so.
Thus shall my heart nay part her fr^.
And wilnes shall my good will be,
That absence takes her not from me.
But that my love does still increase,
To mind her still and never cease.
And what I feel to be in me,
The same good will I think has she,
As firm and fast to biden ay,
Till death depart us both away.
And as I have my tale thus told,
S^^ps unto me with countenance bold:
A steadfast friend a counselor,
And namde is Hope my comfortour.
And stoutly then he speaks and says:
Thou have said troth withouten nayes.
For I assure thee even by oath,
And thereon take my hand and trothe.
That she is one the worthiest,
The truest and the faithfullest.
The gentlest and the meekest of mind:
That here on earth a man may find,
And if that love and troth were gone,
In her it might be found alone.
For in her mind no thought there is,
But how she may be true ^wis.
And tenders thee and all thy heal,
And wishes both thy health and weal.
And loves thee even as farforth than,
As any woman may a man,
And is thine own and so she says,
And cares for thee ten thousand ways.
On thee she speaks, on thee she thinks,
With thee she eats, with thee she drinks.
With thee she talks, with thee she mones,
With thee she sighs, with thee she groans.
With thee she says farewell mine own.
When thou God knows full far art gone.
And even to tell thee all aright,
To thee she says full often good night.
And names thee often, her own most dear,
Her comfort weal and al her chere.
And tells her pelow all the tale,
How thou have done her woe and bale,
And how she longes and plains for the,
And says why art thou so from me?
Am I not she that loves the best?
Do I not wish thine ease and test?
Seek I not how I may the please?
Why art thou then so from thine ease?
If I be she for whom thou carest,
For whom in torments so thou farest:
Alas thou know to find me here,
Where I remain thine own most dear,
Thine own most true thine own most just,
Thine own that loves the still and must.
Thine own that cares alone for the,
As thou I think do care for me.
And even the woman she alone,
That is full bent to be thine own.
What will thou more? what can thou crave?
Since she is as thou would her have.
Then set this driuell out of door,
That in thy brains such tales does poor.
Of absence and of chaunges strange,
Send him to those that use to change.
For she is none I the auowe,
And well thou may believe me now.
When hope has thus his reason said,
Lord how I feel me well apaide.
A new blood then orespredes my bones,
That al in joy I stand at ones.
My hands I throw to heaven above,
And humbly thank the god of love.
That of his grace I should bestow,
My love so well as I it owe.
And all the planets as they stand,
I thank them to with heart and hand.
That their aspectes so friendly were,
That I should so my good will bear.
To you that are the worthiest,
The fairest and the gentillest.
And best can say, and best can do,
That longes me thinks a woman to.
And therefore are most worthy far,
To be beloved as you ar.
And so says hope in all his tale,
Whereby he eases all my bale.
For I believe and think it true,
That he does speak or say of you.
And thus contented lo I stand,
With that that hope bears me in hand:
That I am yours and shall so be,
Which hope I keep full sure in me.
As he that all my comfort is,
On you alone which are my blis.
My pleasure chief which most I find,
And even the whole joy of my mind.
And shall so be until the death,
Shall make me yield up life and breath.
Thus good mine own, lo here my trust.
Lo here my truth and service just.
Lo in what case for you I stand.
Lo how you have me in your hand.
And if you can requite a man,
Requite me as you find me than.
Of the troubled common wealth restored to quiet by the mighty power of god.
THe secret flame that made all Troy so hot,
Long did it lurk within the wooden horse.
The machine huge Troyans suspected not,
The guiles of Greeks, nor of their hidden force:
Till in their beds their armed foes them met,
And slew them there, and Troy on fire set.
Then rose the rore of treason round about,
And children could of treason call and cry.
Wives wrou^g their hands, ye hole fired town through out,
when yt they saw their husbands slam them by.
And to the Gods and to the skies they shright,
Uengeance to take for treason of that night.
Then was the name of Simon spread and blown,
And whereunto his filed tale did tend.
The secret startes and metinges then were knowne^
Of Troyan traitors tending to this end.
And every man could say as in that case:
Treason in Anthenor and Eneas,
But all to long such wisdom was in store,
To late came out the name of traitor than,
When that their king the altar lay before
Slain there alas, that worthy noble man.
Ilium on flame, the matrons crying out,
And all the streets in streams of blood about.
But such was fate, or such was simple trust,
That king and all should thus to ruin roon,
For if our stories certain be and just:
There were that saw such mischief should be done
And warning gave which compted were in sort,
As sad deuines in matter but of sport.
Such was the time and so in state it stood,
Troy trembled not so careless were the men.
They brake ye walls, they took this horse for good,
They demed Greeks gone, they thought al surety then.
When treason start and set the town on fire,
And stroied Trojans and gave Greeks their desire.
Like to our time, wherein has broken out,
The hidden harm that we suspected least.
Wombed within our walls and realm about,
As Greeks in Troy were in the Grekish beast.
Whose tempest great of harms and of arms,
We thought not on, till it did noise our harms.
Then felt we well the pillar of our wealth,
How sore it shoke, then saw we even at hand,
Ruin how she rusht to confound our health,
Our realm and us with force of mighty band.
And then we heard how treason loud did rore:
Mine is the rule, and reign I will therefore.
Of treason mark the nature and the kind,
A face it bears of all humility.
Truth is the cloak, and friendship of the mind,
And deep it goes, and works secretly,
Like to a mine that creepes so nigh the wall,
Till out breaks sulphur, and oreturneth all.
But he on hye that secretly beholdes
The state of things: and times has in his hand,
And pluckes in plages, and them again vnsoldes.
And has appointed realms to fall and stand:
He in the ^^ost of all this stir and rout,
Began bend his brows, and move him self about.
As who should say, and are ye minded so?
And thus to those, and whom you know I love.
Am I such one as none of you do know?
Or know ye not that I sit here above,
And in my hands do hold your wealth and woe,
To raise you now, and now to overthrow?
Then think that I, as I have set you all,
In places where your honors lay and fame:
So now my self shall give you each your fall,
Where each of you shall have your worthy shame.
And in their hands I will your fall shall be,
Whose fall in yours you sought so sore to see.
Whose wisdom hye as h^ the same foresaw,
So is it wrought, such lo his justice is.
He is the Lord of man and of his law,
Praise therefore now his mighty name in this,
And make account that this our case does stand:
As Israel free, from wicked Pharaos hand.
The lover to his loue^ having forsaken him, and betaken her self to an other.
THe bird that sometime built within my breast,
And there as then chief succor did receive:
Has now else where built her another nest,
And of the old has taken quite her leave.
To you mine oste that harbor mine old guest,
Of such a one, as I can now conceive,
Since that in change her choice dorh chief consist,
The hawk may c^eck, that now comes fair to first.
The lover shows that in dissembling his love openly he keeps secret his
secret good will.
NOt like a God came Jupiter to woo,
When he the fair Europa sought unto.
An other form his godly wisdom took,
Such in effect as writes Ouides book.
As on the earth no living wight can tell.
That mighty Jove did love the queen so well.
For had he come in golden garments bright,
Or so as men might have starde on the sight:
Spread had it been both through earth and air,
That Jove had loved the lady Europa fair.
And then had some been angry at the heart,
And some again as ielous for their part.
Both which to stop, this gentle god took mind,
To shape him self into a brutish kind.
To such a kind as hid what state he was,
And yet did bring him what he sought to pass.
To both their joys, to both their comfort soon,
Though known to none, til all the thing was don
In which attempt if I the like assay,
To you to whom I do my self bewray:
Let it suffice that I do seek to be,
Not counted yours, and yet for to be he.
The lover disceiued by his love repents him of the true love he bare her.
I That Ulysses years have spent,
To find Penelope:
Find well that folly I have meant,
To seek that was not so.
Since Troylous case has caused me,
From Cressed for to go.
And to bewa^l^ Ulysses truth,
In seas and stormy skies,
Of wanton will and raging youth,
Which me have tossed sore:
From Scilla to Caribdis cliues,
Upon the drowning shore.
Where I sought (...), there found I hap,
From danger unto death:
Much like the Mouse that treades the trap,
In hope to find her food,
And bites the bread that stops her breath,
So in like case I stood.
Till now repentance hastes him
To further me so fast:
That where I sanke, there now I swim,
And have both stream and wind:
And luck as good if it may last,
As any man may find.
That where I perished, safe I pass,
And find no peril there:
But stedy stone, no ground of glass,
Now am I sure to save,
And not to flete from fear to fear,
Such anchor hold I have.
The lover having enjoyed his love, humbly thanketh the god of love: and
auowing his heart only to her faithfully promises, utterly to forsake all
other.
THou Cupide God of love, whom Uenus thralles do serve,
I yield thee thanks upon my knees, as thou do well deserve.
By thee my wished joys have shaken of despair,
And all my storming days be past, and weather waxes fair.
By thee I have received a thousand ttmes more joy,
Then ever Paris did possess, when Helen was in Troy.
By thee have I that hope, for which I longde so sore,
And when I th^^ke upon the same, my heart does leap therefore.
By thee my h^^^y doubts and trembling fears are fled,
And now my wits yt troubled were, with pleasant thoughts are fed.
For dread is banished clean, wherein I stood full often,
And doubt to speak that lay full low, is lifted now aloft.
With arms bespred abroad, with opende hands and heart.
I have enjoyed the fruit of hope, reward for all my smart.
The seal and sign of love, the key of troth and trust,
The pledge of pure good will have I, which makes the lovers just
Such grace sins I have found, to one I me betake,
The rest of Uenus deelinges all, I utterly forsake.
And to perform this vow, I bid mine eyes beware,
That they no strangers do salute, nor on their beauties stare.
My wits I warn ye all from this time forth take heed,
That ye no wanton toys devise my fancies new to feed.
Mine cares by ye shit up, and hear no woman's voice,
That may procure me once to smile, or make my heart rejoice.
My fete full slow be ye and lame when ye should move,
To bring my body any where to seek an other love,
Let all the Gods above, and wicked sprites below,
And every wight in earth acuse and curse me where I go:
If I do false my faith in any point or case,
A sodein vengeance fall on me, I ask no better grace.
Away then sily rhyme, present mine earnest faith,
Unto my lady where she is, and mark ^hou what she says.
And if she welcome thee, and lay thee in her lap,
Spring thou for joy, thy master has his most desired hap.
Totus mundus in maligno positus.
Complain we may: much is amiss:
Hope is nigh gone to have redress:
These days ben ill, nothing sure is:
Kind heart is wrapped in heaviness.
The stern is broke: the sail is rent:
The ship is given to wind and wave:
All help is gone: the rock present.
That will be lost, what man can save?
Things hard, therefore are now refused.
Labor in youth is thought but vain:
Duty by (will not) is excused.
Remove the stop the way is plain.
Learning is lewd, and held a fool:
Wisdom is sh^nt counted to rail:
Reason is banished out of school:
The blind is bold, and words prevail,
Power, without care, stepeth at ease:
Will, without law, runth where he list:
Might without mercy can not please.
A wise man says not, had I wist.
When power lackes care and forces not:
When care is feable and may not:
When might is slothful and will not:
Wedes may grow where good herbs cannot.
Take wrong away, law needs not:
For law to wrong is bridle and pain.
Take fear away, law booteth not.
To strive against stream, it is but vain.
Wyly is witty: brainsicke is wise:
Troth is folly: and might is right:
Words are reason: and reason is lies:
The bad is good: darkness is light.
Wrong to redress, wisdom dare not.
Hardy is happy, and rules most.
wilful is witless, and cares not,
Which end go first, till all be lost.
Few right do love, and wrong refuse.
Pleasure is sought in every state.
Liking is lust: there is no choose.
The low give to the hye check mate.
Order is broke in things of weight.
Measure and mean who does not flee?
Two things prevail: money, and slight.
To seem is better then to be.
The bowl is round, and does down slide,
Each one thrusts: none does uphold.
A fall fails not, where blind is guide.
The stay is gone: who can him hold?
Folly and falshed prays apace.
Troth under bushel is feign to crepe.
Flattry is treble, pride singes the bace.
The mean the best part scant does pepe.
This fiery plage the world infectes.
To virtue and troth it geues no rest:
Men's hearts are burnde with sundry sects,
And to each man his way is best.
With floods and storms thus be we tossed,
Awake good Lord, to thee we cry.
Our ship is almost sonk and lost.
Thy mercy help our miserye.
Man's strength is weak: man's wit is dull:
Man's reason is blind. These things tamend,
Thy hand (O Lord) of might is full,
Awake betime, and help us send.
In thee we trust, and in no wight:
Save us as chickens under the hen.
Our crokednesse thou can make right,
Glory to thee for aye. Amen.
The wise trade of life.
DO all your deeds by good advise,
Cast in your mind always the end.
Wit bought is of to dear a price.
The tried, trust, and take as friend,
For friends I find there be but two:
Of countenance, and of effect.
Of the one sort there are inow:
But few ben of the the other sect.
Beware also the venym sweet
Of crafty words and flattery.
For to deceive they be most mete,
That best can play hypocrisy.
Let wisdom rule your deed and thought:
So shall your works be wisely wrought.
That few words show wisdom, and work much quiet.
WHo list to lead a quiet life,
Who list to rid him self from strife:
Give ear to me, mark what I say,
Remember well, bear it away.
Hold back thy tongue at meat and meal,
Speak but few words, bestrow them well.
By words the wise thou shall espy,
By words a fool sone shall thou try.
A wise man can his tongue make cease,
A fool can never hold his peace,
Who loves rest of words beware.
Who loves words, is sure of care.
For words often many have been shent:
For silence kept none has repent.
Two ears, one tongue only thou have,
Mo things to hear then words to wast.
A fool in no wise can forbear:
He has two tongues and but one ear.
Be sure thou keep a steadfast brain,
Lest that thy words put thee to pain.
Words wisely set are worth much gold:
The price of rashness is sone told.
If time require words to be had,
To hold thy peace I count thee mad.
Talk only of needful verities:
Strive not for trifling fantasies.
With soberness the truth poult out,
Affirm nothing wherein is dout.
Who to this lore will take good head,
And spend no mo words then he need,
Though he be a fool and have no brain,
Yet shall h^ a name of wisdom gain
Speak while time is or hold thee still.
Words out of time do often things spyll.
Say well and do well are things twain,
Twice blessed is he in whom both reign.
The complaint of a hot woer, delayed with doutfull cold answers.
A Kind of coal is as men say,
Which have assaied the same:
That in the fire will wast away,
And outward cast no flame.
Unto my self may I compare,
These coals that so consume:
Where naught is seen though men (...) ^^are^
Instead of flame but fume.
They say also to make them burn;
Cold water must be cast:
Or else to ashes will they turn,
And half to sinder, wast.
As this is wonder for to se,
Cold water warm the fire.
So has your coldness caused me,
To burn in my desire.
And as this water cold of kind,
Can cause both heat and cold,
And can these coals both break and bind,
To burn as I have told.
So can your tongue of frosen yse,
From whence cold answers come:
Both cool the fire and fire entice,
To burn me all and some.
Like to the corn that stands on stake,
Which mowen in winter sun:
Full fair without, within is black:
Such heat therein does run.
By force of fire this water cold,
Has bred to burn within,
Even so am I, that heat does hold,
which cold did first begin.
which heat is stint when I do strive,
To have some ease sometime:
But flame a fresh I do revive,
Whereby I cause to clime.
Instead of smoke a sighing breath:
with sparks of sprinkled tears.
That I should live this living death,
Which wastes and never wears.
The answer.
YOur borrowd mean to move your moan, of fume ^outen flame
Being set from smithy smokyng coal: ye seem so by the same.
To show, what such coals use is taught by such as have assayd,
As I, that most do wish you well, am so right well apayd.
That you have such a lesson learnd, how either to maintain,
Your fredome of vnkindled coal, vpheaped all in vain:
Or how most frutefully to frame, with worthy workmans art,
That cunnyng piece may pass there fro, by help of heated heart.
Out of the forge wherein the fume of sighs does mount aloft^
That argues present force of fire to make the metal soft,
To yield unto the hammer head, as best the workman likes.
That thiron glowy^g after blast in time and temper strikes.
Wherein the use of water is, as you do seem to say,
To quench no flame, ne hind. heat, ne yet to wast away:
But, that which better is for you^ and more deliteth me,
To save you from the sudden waste, vain cinderlike to be.
Which lastyng better li^es in love, as you your semble ply.
Then does the bauen blase, that flames and fleteth by and by.
Since then you know each use, wherein your coal may be applide:
Either to lie and last on hoord, in open air to bide,
wi^houten use to gather fat by falling of the raines,
That makes the pitchy iucye to grow, by sokyng in his veins,
Or lie on furnace in the forge, as is his use of right,
Wherein the water trough may serve, and enteryeld her might
By work of smithes both hand and head a cu^nyng key to make,
Or other piece as cause shall crave and bid him undertake:
Do as you deem most fit to do, and whereupon may grow,
Such joy to you, as I may joy your joyful case to know.
An epitaph made by. w. G. lying on his death bed, to be set upon his own
tomb.
LO here lies G. under the ground
Among the gredy worms,
Which in his life time never found
But strife and sturdy storms.
And namely through a wicked wife,
As to the world apperes:
She was the shortnyng of his life
By many days and years.
He might have lived long, god wot:
His yer^s, they were but young:
Of wicked w^ues this is the lot,
To kill with spiteful tongue.
Who^ memory shall still remain
In writi^g here with me,
That men may know whom she has slain,
And say this ^ame is she.
An answer.
IF that thy wicked wife had spon the thread,
And were the weauer of thy woe:
Then art thou double happy to be dead,
As happily dispatched so.
If rage did causeless cause thee to complain,
And mad mood mouer of thy moan:
If frensy forced on thy testy brain:
Then blist is she to live alone.
So, whether were the ground of others grefe,
Because so doutfull was the dome:
Now death has brought your pain a right relefe,
And blessed be ye both become:
She, that she lives no longer bound to beat
The rule of such a froward head:
Thou, that thou live no longer feign to fear
The restless ramp that thou had wed,
Be thou as glad therefore that thou art gone,
As she is glad she does avide:
For so ye be a sonder, all is one:
A badder match can not betide.
An epitaph of master Henry williams.
FRom worldly woe the mede of misbelefe,
From ^^use of care that leads to lament,
From vain delight the ground of greater grefe,
From fear for friends, from matter to repent,
From painful pangs la^t sorrow that is sent,
From dred of death ^ith death does set us free:
With it the better pleased should we be.
This loathsome life where likyng we do find,
Thencreaser of our crimes, does us bereue
Our bliss that always ought to be in mind.
This wily world whiles here we breath alive,
And flesh our feigned fo, do stiffly strive
To flatter us assuryng here the joy,
Where we, alas, do find but great annoy.
Untolde heaps though we have of worldly wealth,
Though we possess the sea and fruitful ground,
Strength, beauty, knowledge, and unharmed health,
Though at a wish all pleasure do abound.
It were but vain, no friendship can be found,
when death assalteth with his dreadful dart.
No ransom can stay the home hastyng heart.
And since thou cut the lives line in twain,
Of Henry, son to sir John Williams knight,
whose manly heart and prowes none could stain.
Whose godly life to virtue was our light,
Whose worthy fame shall flourish long by right.
Though in this life so cruel might thou be,
His spirit in heaven shall triumph over thee.
An other of the same.
STay gentle friend that passest by,
And learn the lore that leads all:
From whence we come with have to hye,
To live, to dye, and stand to fall.
And learn that strength and lusty age,
That wealth and want of worldly woe,
Can not withstand the mighty rage,
Of death our best unwelcome foe.
For hopeful youth had hight me health.
My lust to last till time to dye,
And fortune found my virtue wealth:
But yet for all that here I lie.
Learn also this, to ease thy mind:
when death on corpse has wrought his spite,
A time of triumph shall thou find,
with me to scorn him in delight.
For one day shall we mete again,
Maugre deaths dart in life to dwell.
Then will I thank thee for thy pain,
Now mark my words and fare thou well.
Against women, either good or bad.
A Man may live thrice Nestors life,
Thrice wander out Ulisses race:
Yet never find Ulisses wife.
Such change has chanced in this case.
Less age will serve than Paris had,
Small pein (if none be small enough)
To find good store of Helenes trade.
Such sap the rote does yield the bough.
For one good wife Ulisses slew
A worthy knot of gentle blood:
For one^yll wife Greece overthrew
The town of Troy: Since bad and good
Bring mischief: Lord let be thy will,
To keep me free from either ill.
An answer.
THe virtue of Ulisses wife
Does live, though she has ceast her race,
And far surmountes old Nestors life:
But now in more than then it was.
Such change is chanced in this case.
Ladies now live in other trade:
Far other Helenes now we see,
Than she whom Troyan Paris had.
As virtue fedes the root, so be
The sap and rote of bough and tie.
Ulisses rage, not his good wife,
Spilt gentle blood. Not Helenes face,
But Paris eye did raise the strife,
That did the Troyan buildyng race.
Thus since ne good, ne bad do yll^
Them all, O Lord maintain my wyll^
To serve with all my force and skill.
Against a gentil woman by whom he was refused.
TO false report and flying fame,
whilist my mind gave credit light,
Beleuyng that her bolstred name
Had stuff to show that praise did hight.
I find well now I did mistake,
Upon report my ground to make.
I heard it said such one was she,
As rare to find as parragon,
Of lowly chere, of heart so free,
As her for bounty could pass none.
Such one were fair though form and face,
Were mean to pass in second place,
I sought it near, and thinkyng to find
Report and deed both to agree:
But change had tried her subtle mind:
Of force I was enforced to see,
That she in deed was nothing so:
Which made my will my heart forgo.
For she is such, as geason none.
And what she most may boast to be:
I find her matches mo then one.
What need she so to deal with me?
Masteryng face, with scornful heart,
So ill reward for good desert^
I will repent that I have done,
To end so well the loss is small:
I lost her love, that less has won.
To vaunt she had me as her thrall.
What though a gillot sent that not^,
By cock and pie I meant it not.
The answer.
WHom fansy forced first to love.
Now frensy forces for^o hate:
whose mind erst madness began to moue^
Inconstance causes to abate.
No mind of mean, dut heat of brain
Bred light love: like heat, ^ate again
What hurld your heart in so great heat^
Fansy forced by feigned same.
Belike that she was light to get^
For if that virtue and good name
Moved your mind, why changed your will,
Sith virtue the cause abides still.
Such, Fame reported her to be
As rare it were to find her peer,
For virtue and for honesty,
For her free heart and lowly cheer.
This laud had lied if you had sped,
And fame been false that has been spread.
Since she has so kept her good name.
Such praise of life and gifts of grace,
As brute self blusheth for to blame,
Such fame as fame fears to deface:
You sclaunder not but make it plain,
That you blame brute of brutish train.
If you have found it looking near,
Not as you took the brute to be.
Bylike you meant by lowly cheer,
Bounty and heart that you call free,
But lewd lightness easy to frame,
To win your will against her name.
Nay she may deem your deming so,
A mark of madness in his kind,
Such causes not good name to go:
As your fond folly sought to find.
For brute of kind bent ill to blase,
Always says ill, but forced by cause.
The mo there be, such as is she,
More should be gods thank for his grace.
The more is her joy it to see.
Good should by geason, earne no place,
Nor number make naught, that is good.
Your strange lusting head wants a hoode.
Her dealing greueth you (say ye)
Byside your labor lost in vain.
Her dealing was not as we see,
Sclaunder the end of your great pain,
Ha lewd lieng lips, and hateful heart,
What can thou desire in such desert.
Ye will repent, and right for done.
Ye have a deed deserving shame.
From reasons race far have ye run.
Hold your railing, keep your tongue tame.
Her love, ye lie, ye lost it not.
Ye never lost that ye never got.
She rest ye not your liberty,
She vaunteth not she had your thrall.
If ought have done it, let it lie,
On rage that rest you wit and all.
What though a varlets tale you tell:
By cock and pie you do it well.
The lover dredding to move his suit for dout of denial, accuses all women of
disdain and fickleness.
TO walk on doutfull ground, where danger is unseen,
Does double men that careless be in deep despair I wene.
For as the blind does fear, what footing he shall find:
So does the wise before he speak, mistrust the strangers mind.
For he that blontly runs, may light among the breers,
And so be put unto his plunge where danger least apperes:
The bird that selly fool, does warn us to beware,
Who lights not on every bush, he dreadeth so the snare.
The Mouse that shons the trap, does show what harm does lie:
Within the sweet betraying bait, that often disceiues the eye.
The fish auoydes the hook, though hunger bids him bite,
And houereth still about the worm, whereon is his delight.
If birds and beasts can see, where their undoing lies:
How should a mischief escape our heads, yt have both wit and eyes?
What madness may be more, then plow the barreyn fielde^
Or any fruitful words to sow, to ears that are vnwild.
They hear and than mislike, they like and then they loathe,
They hate, they love, they scorn, they praise, yea sure they ca^ do both
We see what falls they have, that clime on trees unknown:
As they that trust to rotten bows, must needs be overthrown.
A smart in silence kept, does ease the heart much more,
Than for to plain where is no salve, for to recure the sore.
Wherefore my grief I hide, within a holow heart:
Until the smoke thereof be spread, by flaming of the smart.
An answer
TO trust the feigned face, to rue on forced tears,
To credit finely forged tales, wherein there often appears
And breathes as from the breast a smoke of kindled smart,
Where only lurkes a deep deceit within the hollow heart,
Betrays the simple soul, whom plain deceitlesse mind
Taught not to fear that in it self, it self did never find.
Not every trickling tear does argue inward pain:
Not every sigh does surely show the sigher not to feign:
Not every smoke does prove a presence of the fire:
Not every glistring geues the gold, that gredy folk desire:
Not every wayling word is drawn out of the deep:
Not grief for want of granted grace enforces all to weep.
Often malice makes the mind to shed the boiled brine:
And enuies humor often vnlades by conduites of the eyes.
Often craft can cause the man to make a seming show,
Of heart with dolor all distreined, where grief did never grow.
As cursed Crocodile most cruelly can tole,
With truthlesse tears, unto his death, the silly pitying soul.
Blame never those therefore, that wisely can beware
The guilefull man, that sutly says himself to dread the snare.
Blame not the stopped ears against the Syrenes song:
Blame not the mind not moved with moan of falsheds flowing to^g.
If guile do guide your wit by silence so to speak,
By craft to crave and feign by fraud the cause yt you would break.
Great harm your subtle soul shall suffer for the same:
And mighty love will wreke the wrong, so cloked with his name.
But we, whom you have warnde, this lesson learn by you:
To know the tree before we clime, to trust no rotten bow,
To view the limed bushe, to look before we light,
To shun the perilous bayted hook, and use a further sight.
As do the mouse, the bird, the fish, by samply fitly show.
That wily wits and ginnes of men do work the simples woe:
So, simple sith we are, and you so subtle be,
God help the Mouse, the bird, the fish, and us your sleightes to ^^e.
The lover complains his fault, that with ungentle writing had displeased his
lady.
AH love how waiward is his wit what pa^ges do perce his breast
Whom thou to wait upon thy will have reued of his rest.
The light, the dark, the sun, the moon, the day and eke the night,
His daily dieng life, him self, he hates in despite,
Since furst he light to look on her that holds him in thrall,
His moving eyes his moved wit he curses heart and all,
From hungry hope to pining fear each hap does hurl his heart,
From panges of plaint to fits of fume from aching into smart.
Each moment so does change his ch^re not with recourse of ease,
But with sere sorts of sorrows still he works as the seas.
That turning winds not calm returnde rule in unruly wise,
As if their holds of hills vphurld they brasten out to rise.
And puff away the power that is unto their king assignde
To pay that sith their prisonment they deem to be behind.
So does the passions long represt within the woeful wight,
Break down the banks of all his wits and out they gushen quite.
To rere up rores now they be free from reasons rule and stay,
And h^dlong hales thunruled race his quiet quite away.
No measure has he of his ruth, no reason in his rage,
No bottom ground where stays his grief, thus wears away his age
In wishing wants, in wayling woes. Death does he daily call,
To bring release when of relief he sees no hope at all.
Thence comes that often in deep despeire to rise to better state.
On heaven and heavenly lamps he lays the fault of al his fate.
On God and Gods decreed dome cries out with cursing breath,
Each thing that gave and saues him life he damneth of his death.
The womb him bare, ye breasts he sucked, each star yt with their might.
Their secret succor brought to bring the wretch to worldly light
Yea that to his souls perile is most heinous harm of all,
And craves the cruellest revenge that may to man befall:
Her he blasphemes in whom it lies in present as she please,
To dampne him down to depth of hell, or plant in heavens case.
Such rage constrainde my strained heart to guide thunhappy hand
That sent unsitting blots to her on whom my life does stand.
But grant O God that he for them may bear the worthy blame
Whom I do in my deep distress find guilty of the same,
Even that blind boy that blindly guides the fautles to their fall,
That laughes when they lament that he has thrown into thral.
Or Lord, save louring looks of her, what penance else thou please
So her contented will be won I count it all mine ease.
And thou on who^ does hang my will, with heart, with soul and care,
With life and all that life may have of well or evil fare:
Grant grace to him that grates therefore with sea of saltish brine
By extreme heat of boylyng breast distilled through his eyes.
And with thy fancy render thou my self to me again,
That daily then we duly may employ a painelesse pain.
To yield and take the joyful fruits that ^erty love does lend^
To them that mean by honest means to come to happy end.
The lover wounded of Cupide, wishes he had rather ben st^^ken by death.
THe blinded boy that bendes the bow.
To make with dint of double wound:
The stowtest state to stoop and know:
The cruel craft that I have found.
With death I would had chopped a change,
To ^orow as by bargain made:
Each others shaft when he did range,
With restless rouyng to invade.
Thunthralled minds of simple wightes,
Whose giltlesse ghostes deserved not:
To feel such fall of their delights,
Such panges as I have past God wot.
Then both in new unwonted wise,
Should death deserve a better name,
Not (as tofore has been his guise)
Of cruelty to bear the blame.
But contrary be counted kind,
In lendyng life and sparyng space:
For sick to rise and seek to find,
A way to wish their weary race
To draw to some desired end,
Their long and lothed life to rid.
And so to feel how like a friend,
Before the bargain made he did.
And love should either bring again,
To wounded wightes their own desire:
A welcome end of pinyng pain,
As does their cause of ruthe require:
Or when he means the quiet man,
A harm to hasten him to grefe:
A better deed he should do then,
With borrowd dart to give relefe.
That both the sick well demen may,
He brought me rightly my request:
And eke the other sort may say,
He wrought me truly for the best.
So had not fancy forced me,
To bear a brun^ of greater woe:
Then leaving such a life may be,
The ground where only grefes do grow.
Unlucky likyng linkt my heart,
In forged hope and forced fear:
That often I wished the other dart,
Had rather perced me as near.
A feigned trust, constrained care,
Most loath to lack, most hard to find:
In sunder so my judgment tare,
That quite was quiet out of mind.
Absent in absence of mine ease,
Present in presence of my pain:
The woes of want did much displease,
The sighs I sought did grieve again.
Often grefe that boiled in my breast,
Has fraught my face with saltish teares^
Pronouncyng proves of mine unrest,
Whereby my passed pain appears.
My sighs full often have supplied,
That feign with words I would have said:
My voice was stopped my tongue was tied,
My wits with woe were ouerwayd.
With tremblyng soul and humble chere^
Often grated I for grant of grace:
On hope that bounty might be there,
Where beauty had so pight her place.
At length I found, that I did fere,
How I had labourde all to loss,
My self had been the carpenter,
That framed me the cruel cross.
Of this to come if dout alone,
Though bl^nt with trust of better speed:
So often has moved my mind to moan,
So often has made my heart to blede.
What shall I say of it in deed,
Now hope is gone mine old relefe:
And I enforced all to feed,
Upon the fruits of bitter grefe?
Of women's changeable will.
I Would I found not as I feel,
Such changyng chere of women's will,
By fickle flight of fortunes whele,
By kind or custom, never still.
So should I find no fault to lay,
On fortune for their mouyng mind,
So should I know no cause to say
This change to chance by course of kind.
So should not love so work my woe,
To make death surgeant for my sore,
So should their wits not wander so,
So should I reck the less therefore.
The lover complayneth the loss of his lady.
NO joy have I, but live in heaviness,
My dame of price bereft by fortunes cruelnesse,
My hap is turned to unhappiness,
Unhappy I am unless I find relesse.
My pastime past, my youthlike years are gone,
My mouths of mirth, my glistring days of gladsomnesse:
My times of triumph turned into moan.
Unhappy I am unless I find relesse.
My wonted wind to chaunt my cherefull chance,
Does sigh that song sometime the balades of my less:
My sobbes, my sore and sorrow do advance.
Unhappy I am unless I find relesse.
I mourn my mirth for grefe that it is gone,
I mourn my mirth whereof my musing mindefulnesse:
Is ground of greater grefe that grows thereon,
Unhappy I am unless I find relesse.
No joy have I: for fortune frowardly:
Has bent her brows has put her hand to cruelnesse:
Has rest my dame, constrained me to cry,
Unhappy I am unless I find relesse.
Of the golden mean.
THe wisest way, thy bote, in wave and wind to guie,
Is neither still the trade of middle stream to try:
Ne (warely shunnyng wrecke by wether) aye to me,
To press upon the perilous shore,
Both clenely flees he silthe: ne wonnes a wretched wight.
In carlish coat: and careful court a^e thrall to spite,
With port of proud astate he leaves: who does delight,
Of golden mean to hold the lore.
Storms rifest rende the sturdy stout pineapple the.
Of lofty ruing towers the false the feller be.
Most fers does lightenyng light, where furthest we do se.
The hills the valey to forsake.
well furnished breast to bide each chanses changing cheer,
In woe has cheerful hope, in weal has warefull fear,
One self Jove winter makes with lothfull lokes appear,
That can by course the same as^ake.
What if into mishap thy case now casten be?
It forces not such form of luck to last to thee.
Not always bent is Phoebus bow: his harp and he,
Ceast silver sound sometime does raise.
In hardest hap use help of hardy hopeful heart.
Seem bold to bear the brunt of fortune overthwart.
Eke wisely when forewinde to full breathes on thy part,
Swage swellyng sail, and doubt decays.
The praise of a true friend.
WHo so that wisely weyes the profit and the price,
Of things wherein delight by worth is wont to rise.
Shall find no jewel is so rich ne yet so rare,
That with the friendly heart in value may compare.
What other wealth to man by fortune may befall,
But fortunes changed chere may reave a man of all.
A friend no wrack of wealth, no cruel cause of woe,
Can force his friendly faith unfriendly to forgo.
If fortune friendly fawn, and lend thee welthy store,
Thy friends conjoined joy does make thy joy the more.
If frowardly she frown and drive thee to distress,
His aid releues thy ruthe, and makes thy sorrow less.
Thus fortunes pleasant fruits by friends increased be,
The bitter sharp and sour by friends alayde to thee.
That when thou do rejoice, then doubled is thy joy,
And eke in cause of care, the less is thy anoy.
Aloft if thou do live, as one appointed here,
A stately part on stage of worldly state to bear:
Thy friend as only free from fraud will thee advise,
To rest within the rule of mean as do the wise.
He seeks to foresee the peril of thy fall.
He finds out thy faults and warnes thee of them all.
Thee, not thy luck he loves, what ever be thy case,
He is thy faithful friend and thee he does embrace.
If churlish cheer of chance have thrown thee into thrall,
And that thy need ask aid for to releue thy fall:
In him thou secret trust assured art to have,
And succor not to seek, before that thou can crave.
Thus is thy friend to thee the comfort of thy pain,
The stayer of thy state, the doubler of thy gain.
In wealth and woe thy friend, an other self to thee,
Such man to man a God, the proverb says to be.
As wealth will bring thee friends in louring woe to prove,
So woe shall yield thee friends in laughing wealth to love.
With wisdom choose thy friend, with virtue him retain:
Let virtue be the ground, so shall it not be vain.
The lover lamenteth other to have the fruits of his service.
SOme men would think of right to have,
For their true meaning some reward,
But while that I do cry and crave:
I see that other be preferred,
I gape for that I am debard.
I fare as does the hound at hatch:
The worse I speed; the longer I watch.
My wastefull will is tried by trust:
My fond fancy is mine abuse.
For that I would refrain my lust:
For mine avail I cannot choose,
A will, and yet no power to use.
A will, no will by reason just,
Sins my will is at others lust.
They eat the honey, I hold the hyue.
I sow the sede, they reap the corn.
I waste, they win, I draw they drive.
Theirs is the thank, mine is the scorn.
I seek, they speed, in waste my wind is worn,
I gape, they get, and gredely I snatch:
Till wurse I speed, the longer I watch.
I fast, they feed: they drink, I thurst.
They laugh, I wayle: they joy, I mourn.
They gain, I lose: I have the wurst.
They whole, I sick: they cold, I burn.
They leap, I lie: they sleep, I toss and turn.
I would, they may: I crave, they have at will.
That helps them, lo, cruelty does me kill.
Of the sutteltie of crafty lovers.
SUch waiward ways have some when folly stirs their brains
To fain and plain full often of love, when lest they feel his pains.
And for to show a grief such craft have they in store,
That they can halt and lay a salve whereas they feel no sore.
As hound unto the foot, or dog unto the bow,
So are they made to vent her out, whom bent to love they know.
That if I should discribe one hundred of their driftes,
Two hundred wits beside mine own I should put to their shifts
No woodman better knows how for to lodge his dear,
Nor shipman on the sea that more has skill to guide the stere.
Nor beaten dog to herd can warer chose his game.
Nor scholeman to his fancy can a scholar better frame.
Then one of these which have old Ouids art in ure,
Can seek the ways unto their mind a woman to allure.
As round about a hyue the Bees do swarm always,
So round about the house they prease wherein they seek their pray.
And whom they so besege, it is a wondrous thing,
What crafty engines to assault these wily warriers bring.
The eye as scout and watch to stir both to and fro,
Does serve to stale her he^e and there where she does come and go.
The tongue does plead for right as herald of the heart:
And both the hands as orators do serve to point their part.
So shows the countenance then with these four to agree,
As though in witness with the rest, it would hers sworn be.
But if she then mistrust it would turn black to white,
For that the woorrier lokes most smoth when he would fainest bite.
Then wit as counselor a help for this to find:
Straight makes the hand as secretair forthwt to write his mind.
And so the letters straight ambassadors are made,
To treat in haste for to procure her to a better trade.
Wherein if she do think all this is but a show,
Or but a subtle masking cloak to hide a crafty shrewe:
Then come they to the larme, then show they in the field,
Then muster they in colors strange, that ways to make her yield
Then shoot they batry of, then compass they her in,
At tilt and turney often they strive this selly soul to win.
Then sound they on their lutes, then strain they forth their song.
Then romble they with instruments to lay her quite a long.
Then board they her with gifts, then do they woo and watch.
Then night and day they labor hard this simple hold to catch,
As paths within a wood, or turns with in a mase:
So then they show of wiles and crafts they can a thousand wayes^
Of the vanity of man's life.
Vain is the fleting wealth,
Whereon the world stays:
Sith stalking time by privy stelth,
Encrocheth on our days.
And elde which creeps fast,
To taynt^ us with her wound:
Will turn each bliss unto a blast,
Which lasts but a stounde.
Of youth the lusty flower,
Which whylome stood in price:
Shall vanish quite within an hour,
As fire consumes the ice.
Where is become that wight,
For whose sake Troy town:
Withstode the greeks till ten years fight,
Had rasde their walls adowne.
Did not the worms consume,
Her caryon to the dust?
Did dreadful death forbear his fume
For beauty, pride, or lust?
The lover not regarded in earnest suit, being become wiser, refuses her
profred love.
DO way your phisske I faint no more,
The salve you sent it comes to late:
You wist well all my grief before,
And what I suffered for your sake.
Hole is my heart I plain no more,
A new the cure did undertake:
Wherefore do way you come to late.
For whiles you knew I was your own,
So long in vain you made me gape,
And though my faith it were well known,
Yet small regard thou took thereat,
But now the blast is ouerblowne.
Of vain physic a salve you shape,
Wherefore do way you come to late.
How long or this have I been feign,
To gape for mercy at your gate,
Until the time I sp^de it plain,
That pity and you fell at debate.
For my redress then was I feign:
Your service clean for to forsake.
Wherefore do way you come to late.
For when I brent in endless fire,
Who ruled then but cruel hate?
So that uneath I durst desire
One look, my fervent heat to slake.
Therefore another does me hyre,
And all the profer that you make,
Is made in vain and comes to late.
For when I asked recompense,
With cost you naught to grant God wat:
Then said disdain to great expense,
It were for you to grant me that.
Therefore do way your rere pretense,
That you would bind that derst you brake,
For lo your salve comes all to late.
The complaint of a woman ravished, and also mortally wounded.
A Cruel Tiger all with teeth bebled,
A bloody tirantes hand in each degree,
A lecher that by wretched lust was led,
(Alas) deflowred my virginitee.
And not contented with this villainy,
Nor with thoutragious terror of the deed,
With bloody thirst of greater cruelty:
Fearing his heinous gilt should be bewrayed,
By crying death and vengeance openly,
His violent hand forthwith alas he laid
Upon my guilt^es sely child and me,
And like the wretch whom no horror dismayde,
Drownde in the sink of deep iniquity:
Misusing me the mother for a time,
Has slain us both for cloking of his crime.
The lover being made thrall by love, perceives how great a loss is liberty.
AH liberty now have I learnd to know,
By lacking thee what Jewel I possessed,
When I received first from Cupids bow
The deadly wound that festreth in my breast.
So far (alas) forth strayed were mine eyes,
That I ne might refrain them back, for lo:
They in a moment all earthly things despise,
In heavenly sight now are they fixed so.
What then for me but still with mazed sight,
To wonder at that excellence divine:
Where love (my freedom having in despite)
Has made me thrall through error of mine eyes.
For other guerdon hope I not to have,
My foltring toonge so basheth ought to crave.
The diverse and contrary passions of the lover.
HOlding my peace alas how loud I cry,
Pressed with hope and dread even both at ones,
Strayned with death, and yet I cannot dye.
Burning in flame, quaking for cold that groans,
Unto my hope withouten wings I fly.
Pressed with despair, that breaks all my bones.
Walking as if I were, and yet am not.
Fayning with mirth, most inwardly with mones.
Hard by my help, unto my health not nigh.
Mids of the calm my ship on rock it rones.
I serve unbound, fast fettred yet I lie.
Instead of milk that feed on marble stones,
My most will is that I do espy:
That works my joys and sorrows both at ones.
In contrairs stands all my loss and gain:
And lo the giltlesse causes all my pain.
The testament of the hawthorne.
I Sely Haw whose hope is past,
In faithful true and fixed mind:
To her whom that I served last,
Have all my joyfulness resignde,
Because I know assuredly,
My dying day aprocheth nigh.
Dispaired heart the careful nest,
Of all the sighs I kept in store:
Convey my careful corpse to rest,
That leaves his joy for evermore.
And when the day of hope is past,
Give up thy sprite and sigh the last.
But or that we depart in twain,
Tell her I loved with all my might:
That though the corpse in clay remain,
Consumed to ashes pale and white.
And though the vital powers do cease,
The sprite shall love her natrelesse.
And pray my lives lady dear,
During this little time and space,
That I have to abiden here,
Not to withdraw her wonted grace,
In recompensing of the pain,
That I shall have to part in twain.
And that at least she will withsaue,
To grant my just and last request:
When that she shall behold his grave,
That lies of life here dispossessed,
In record that I once was hers,
To bathe the frosen stone with teares^
The service tree here do I make,
For mine executour and my friend:
That living did not me forsake,
Nor will I trust unto my end,
To see my body well conueyde,
In ground where that it shall be layde^
Tombed underneath a goodly Oak,
With Iuy grene that fast is bound:
There this my grave I have besp^ke,
For there my ladies name do sound:
Beset even as my te^tament tells:
With oken leaves and nothing else,
Graven whereon sha^be expressed,
Here lies the body in this place,
Of him that living never cest
To serve the fairest that ever was,
The corpse is here, the heart he gave
To her for whom he lies in grave.
And also set about my hersse,
Two lamps to burn and not to queint,
Which shall be token, and rehersse
That my good will was never spent.
When that my corpse was laid allow,
My spirit did swear to serve no mo.
And if you want of ringing bells,
When that my corpse goth into grave:
Repete her name and nothing else,
To whom that I was bonden slave.
When that my life it shall vnframe,
My sprite shall joy to hear her name.
With doleful note and piteous sound,
Wherewith my heart did cleave in twain:
With such a song lay me in ground,
My sprite let it with her remain,
That had the body to commend:
Till death thereof did make an end.
And even with my last bequest,
When I shall from this life depart:
I give to her I loved best,
My just my true and faithful heart,
Signed with the hand as cold as stone:
Of him that living was her own.
And if he here might live again,
As Phoenix made by death anew:
Of this she may assure her plain,
That he will still be just and true.
Thus farewell she on live my own.
And send her joy when I am gone.
The lover in dispeire lamenteth his case.
A Dieu desert, how art thou spent?
Ah dropping tears how do ye wash?
Ah scalding ^ighes, how be ye spent?
To prick them forth that will not have,
Ah payned heart thou gapst for grace,
Even there where pity has no place.
As easy it is the stony rock,
From place to place for to remove,
As by thy plaint for to provoke:
A f^osen heart from hate to love,
What should I say such is thy lot,
To fawn on them that force the not.
Thus may thou safely say and swear,
That rigor raighneth and ruth does fail,
In thanklesse thoughts thy thoughts do we^^
Thy truth, thy faith, may naught avail,
For thy good will why should thou so,
Still graft where grace it will not grow.
Alas pore heart thus have thou spent,
Thy flowryng time, thy pleasant years.
With sighing voice weep and lament:
For of thy hope no fruit apperes,
Thy true meaning is paid with scorn,
That ever sows and repeth no corn.
And where thou sekes a quiet port,
Thou do but weigh against the wind,
For where thou gladdest woldst resort,
There is no place for thee assinde.
Thy desteny has set it so
That thy true heart should cause thy woe.
Of his maistresse. m. B^
IN Bays I boast whose branch I bear,
Such joy therein I find:
That to the death I shall it wear,
To ease my careful mind.
In heat, in cold, both night and day,
Her virtue may be seen:
When other fruits and flowers decay^
The bay yet grows full grene.
Her berries feed the birds full often,
Her leaves sweet water make:
Her bows be set in every loft,
For their sweet savors sake.
The birds do shroud them from the cold,
In her we daily see:
And men make arbers as they would,
Under the pleasant tree.
It does me good when I repair,
There as these bays do grow:
Where often I walk to take the air,
It does delight me so^
But lo I stand as I were dome,
Her beauty fo: to blase:
Wherw^th my spr^tes be overcome,
So long thereon I gase.
At last I turn unto my walk,
In passing to and fro:
And to my self I smile and talk,
And then away I go.
Why smilest thou say lokers on,
what pleasure have thou found?
With that I am as cold as stone,
And ready for to swound.
Fie fie for shame says fansy than,
Pluck up thy faynted heart:
And speak thou boldly like a man,
Shrink not for little smart.
Whereat I blushe and change my chere,
My senses ware so w^ake:
O god think I what make I here,
That never a word may speak.
I dare not sigh lest I be heard,
My lokes I slyly cast:
And still I stand as one were scarde,
Until my storms be past.
Then happy hap does me revive,
The blood comes to my face:
A merier man is not alive,
Then I am in that case.
Thus after sorrow seek I rest,
When fled is fancies fit.
And though I be a homely gest,
Before the bays I sit^
Where I do watch till leaves do fall,
When wind the tree does shake:
Then though my branch be very small,
My leaf away I take.
And then I go and clap my hands,
My heart does leap for joy.
These bays do ease me from my bands,
That long did me annoy:
For when I do behold the same,
Which makes so fair a show:
I find therein my maistresse name,
And se her virtues grow.
The lover complains his hearty love not requited.
WHen Phoebus had the serpent slain,
He claymed Cupides boe:
which strife did turn him to great pain,
The story well does prove.
For Cupide made him feel much woe,
In sekyng Dephnes love.
This Cupide has a shaft of kind,
Which wounded many a wight:
Whose golden head had power to bind,
Each heart in Uenus bands.
This arrow did on Phoebus light,
Which came from Cupides hands.
An other shast was wrought in spite^
Which headed was with lead:
Whose nature quenched sweet delight,
That lovers most embrace.
In Dephnes breast this cruel head,
Had found a dwelling place.
But Phoebus fond of his desire,
Sought after Dephnes so:
He bu^nt with heat, she felt no fire,
Full fast she fled him fro.
He gate but hate for his good will,
The gods assigned so.
My case with Phoebus may compare,
His hap and mine are one,
I cry to her that knows no ear,
Yet seek I to her most:
When I approach then is she gone,
Thus is my labor lost.
Now blame not me but blame the shaft,
That has the golden head,
And blame those gods that with their craft
Such arrows forge by kind.
And blame the cold and heavy lead,
That does my ladies mind.
A praise of m. M.
IN court as I beheld, the beauty of each dame,
Of right my thought from all the rest should.M. steal the same^
But, er I meant to judge: I vewed with such advise.
As retchlesse dome should not invade: the bounds of my devise,
And, whiles I gased long: such heat did bread within,
As Priamus town felt not more flame, when did the bale begin.
By reasons rule ne yet by wit perceue I could,
That.M, face of earth yfound: enjoy such beauty should.
And fansy doubted that from heaven had Uenus come,
To norish rage in Britaynes hearts, while courage yet does blome,
Her native hue so strove, with color of the rose,
That Paris would have Helene left, and.M. beauty chose.
A wight far passing all, and is more fair to seem,
Then lusty May the lodge of love: that clothes the earth in grene^
So angel like she shines: she seems no mortal wight,
But one whom nature in her forge, did frame her self to spite.
Of beauty princess chief: so makelesse does she rest,
Whose eye would glad an heavy wight: and prison pain in breast,
I wax astonished to see: the seator of her shape,
And wo^dred that a mortal heart: such heavenly beams could escape
Her limbs so answeryng were: the mould of her fair face,
Of Uenus stock she semde to spring, the rote of beauties grace.
Her presens does pretend: such honor and estate,
That simple men might guess her birthe: if folly bred debate.
Her lokes in hearts of flint: would such affectes imprese,
As rage of flame not Nilus stremes: in Nestors years increase.
Within the subtle seat, of her bright eyes does dwell,
Blind Cupide with the prick of pain: that princes fredom sell.
A Paradise it is: her beauty to behold,
where natures stuff so full is found, that natures ware is sold^
An old lover to a young gentilwoman.
YE are to young to bring me in,
And I to old to gape for flies:
I have to long a lover been,
If such young babes should bleare mine eyes,
But trill the ball before my face,
I am content to make you play:
I will not se, I hide my face,
And turn my back and run away.
But if you follow on so fast,
And cross the ways where I should go,
Ye may wax weary at the last,
And then at length your self orethrow.
I mean where you and all your flock,
Devise to pen men in the pound:
I know a key can pick your lock,
And make you run your selves on ground,
Some birds can eat the strawie corn,
And flee the lime that fowlers set,
And some are ferde of every thorn,
And so thereby they escape the net.
But some do light and never look,
And sees not who does stand in wait,
As fish that swalow up the hoke,
And is begiled through the bait.
But men can look before they leap,
And be at price for every ware,
And penyworthes cast to bye good cheap,
And in each thing has eye and ^are.
But he that bluntly runs on head,
And sees not what the race shall be:
Is like to bring a fool to bed,
And thus ye get no more of me.
The lover forsakes his unkind love.
FArewell thou frosen heart and ears of hardened stele,
Thou lackest years to understand the grefe that I did feel,
The gods revenge my wrong, with equal plage on thee,
When pleasure shall prick forth thy youth, to learn what love shalbe^
Perchance thou prouest now, to scale blind Cupides hold,
And matchest where thou may repent, when al thy cards are told
But blush not thou therefore, thy betters have done so,
Who thought they had retaind a dove, when they but caught a cro
And some do longer time, with lof^y lokes we see,
That lights at length as low or wors the^ does the betell be.
Yet let thy hope be good, such hap may fall from hye:
That thou may be if fortune serve, a princess er thou dye.
Is chance prefer thee so, alas poor sely man,
where shall I escape thy cruel hands, or seek for succor than?
God should such greedy wolves, should lap in giltlesse blood,
And send short horns to hurtful heads, y^ rage like lions wood.
I seldom se the day, but malice wants might,
And hateful hearts have never hap, to wreke their wrath aright.
The madman is unmeet, a naked sword to gide,
And more unfit are they to clime, that are overcome with pride.
I touch not thee herein, thou art a fawcon sure,
That can both soer and stoop sometime, as men cast up the lure.
The pecock has no place, in thee when thou shall list,
For some no sooner make a sign, but thou perceuest the fist.
They have that I do want, and that does thee begilde,
The lac^ that thou do se in me, does make thee look so wild.
My lur^ng is not good^ it likes not thine ear,
My call it is not half so sweet, as would to god it were.
well wanton yet beware, thou do no^t^ryng take,
At every hand that would thee feed, or to thee friendship make,
This council take of him that ought thee once his love,
Who hopes to mete thee after this among the saints above,
But here within this world, if he may shonne the place,
He rather asks present death, then to behold thy face.
The lover prefers his lady above all other.
Resign you dames whom tikelyng brute delight,
The golden praise that flatteries tromp does sown^
And vassels be to her that claims by right,
The title just that first dame beauty found.
Whose dainty eyes such sugared baits do hide,
As poison hearts where glims of love do glide.
Come eke and see how heaven and nature wrought,
Within her face where framed is such joy:
As Priams sons in vain the seas had sought.
If half such light had had abode in Troy.
For as the golden sun does dark each star,
So does her hue the fairest dames as far.
Each heavenly gift, each grace that nature could,
By art or wit my lady lo retaynes:
A sacred head, so heapt with h^^res of gold,
As Phoebus beams for beauty far it stayns,
A sucred tongue, where eke such sweetness snowes,
That well it semes a fountain where it flows.
Two laughyng eyes so linked with pleasyng lokes,
As would entice a tigers heart to serve:
The bayt is sweet but eager be the hooks,
For Dyane sekes her honor to preserve.
Thus Arundell sits, throned still with fame,
Whom enmies trompe can not attaynt with shame.
My dased head so daunted is with heaps,
Of gifts divine that harber in her bre^t:
Her heavenly shap^, that lo my verses leap^.
And touch but that wherein she clouds the rest.
For if I should her graces all recite.
Both time should want, and I should wonders write.
Her chere so sweet, so crystal is her eyes,
Her mouth so small, her lips to lively red:
Her hand so fine, her words so sweet and wise,
That Pallas sem^s to soiou^^e in her head.
Her virtues great her form as far^e excedes,
As sun the shade that mortal creatures leads.
Would God that wretched age would spare to race,
Her lively hew that as her graces ra^e:
Be goddess like, even so her goddess face,
Might never change but still continue fair
That eke in after time each wight may see,
How virtue can with beauty bear degree.
The lover lamenteth that he would forget love, and can not.
ALas when shall I joy,
When shall my woeful heart,
Cast forth the folish toy
That breadeth all my smart.
A thousand times and mo,
I have attempted sore:
To rid this restless woe,
Which reigns more and more.
But when remembrance past,
Has laid dead coals together:
Did love renewes his blast,
That cause my joys to wither.
Then sodaynely a spark,
Startes out of my desire:
And lepes into my heart,
Setting the coals a fire.
Then reason runs about,
To seek forgetful water:
To quench and clean put out,
The cause of all this matter.
And says dead flesh must needs,
Be cut out of the core,
For rotten withered wedes,
Can heal no grievous sore.
But then even sodaynely,
The fervent heat does slake:
And cold then straineth me,
That makes my bodies shake.
Alas who can endure,
To suffer all this pain,
Sins her that should me cure,
Most cruel death has slain.
Well well, I say no more,
Let dead care for the dead,
Yet woe is me therefore,
I must attempt to lead.
One other kind of life,
Then hitherto I have:
Or else this pain and strife,
Will bring me to my grave.
Songs written by N. G. Of the ix. Muses.
I M^s of king Jove, and queen Remembrance lo,
The sisters nine, the poets pleasant feres.
Calliope does stately style bestow,
And worthy praises paintes of princely peers.
Clio in solemn songs renews all day,
With present years conioyning age bypast.
Delitefull talk loves Comicall Thalsy:
In fresh grene youth, who does like laurel last.
With voices Tragical sowndes Melpomen,
And, as with cheins, thall^red ear she binds.
Her stringes when Terpsichor does touch, even then
She touches hearts, and reigns in men's minds,
Fine Erato, whose look a lively chere
Presents, in dancing keeps a comely grace.
With semely gesture does Polymnie stere:
Whose words holle routes of ranks do rule in place,
Uranie, her globes to view all bent,
The ninefold heaven observes with fixed face.
The blastes Eutrepe tunes of instrument,
With solace sweet hence heavy dumps to chase.
Lord Phoebus in the mids (whose heavenly sprite
These ladies does enspire) embraces all.
The graces in the Muses weed, delight
To lead them forth, that men in maze they fall.
Musonius the Philosophers saying.
IN working well, if travel you sustain:
Into the wind shall lightly pass the pain:
But of the deed the glory shall remain,
And cause your name with worthy wights to reign.
In working wrong, if pleasure you attain:
The pleasure soon shall vade, and void, as vain:
But of the deed, throughout the life, the shame
Endures, defacing you with fowl defame:
And still torments the mind, both night and day^
Scant length of time the spot can wash away.
Flee then ylswading pleasures baits untrue:
And noble virtues fair renown purseew.
Description of Virtue.
What one art thou, thus in torn weed yclad?
Virtue, in price whom ancient sages had.
why, poorly rayd? For fading goods past care.
Why doublefaced? I mark each fortunes fare.
This bridle, what? Minds rages to restrain.
Tools why bear you? I love to take great pain^
Why, wings? I teach above the stars to fly.
Why tread you death? I only cannot dye^
Praise of measure-keping.
THe ancient time commended, not for naught,
The mean: what better thing can there be sought?
In mean, is virtue placed: on either side,
Both right, and left, amiss a man shall slide^
Icar, with sire had thou the mid way flown,
Icarian beck by name had no man known.
If middle path kept had proud Phaeton,
No burning brand this earth had fa^^ne upon.
N^ cruel power, ne none to soft can reign:
That kepes a mean, the same shall still remain.
Thee, Iulie, once did too much mercy spill:
Thee, Nero stern, rigor extreem did kill.
How could August so many years well pass?
Nor ouermeek, nor ouerferse he was.
Worship not Jove with curious fancies vain,
Nor him despise: hold right atween these twain.
No wastefull wight, no greedy goom is prayzd.
Stands largess just, in egall balance payzd.
So Catoes meal, surmountes Antonius chere,
And better fame his sober fare has her^.
To slender building, bad: as bad, to gross:
One, an eyesore, the the other falls to loss.
As medcines help, in measure: so (God wot)
By overmuch, the sick their bane have got.
Unmeet me seems to utter this, mo ways:
Measure forbids unmeasurable praise.
Man's life after Possidonius, or Crates.
What path list you to tread? what trade will you assay?
The courts of plea, by braul, and bate, drive gentle peace away^
In house, for wife, and child, there is but cark and care:
With trauail, and with toil enough, in feelds we use to fare.
Upon the seas lies dreed: the rich in foraine land,
Do fear the loss: and there, the poor, like misers poorly stand^
Strife, with a wife, without, your thrift full hard to see:
Young brats, a trouble: none at all^ a maym it seems to be:
Youth, fond, age has no heart, and pincheth all to nigh.
Choose then the leeser of these two, no life, or soon to dye.
Metrodorus mind to the contrary.
What race of life run you? what trade will you assay^
In courts, is glory got, and wit increased day by day.
At home, we take our ease, and beak our selves in rest:
The feeldes our nature do refresh with pleasures of the best^
On seas, is gayn to get: the stranger, he shall be
Esteemed: having much: if not, none knows his lack, but hee^
A wife will trim thy house: no wife? then art thou free.
Brood is a lovely thing: without, thy life is loose to thee.
^ong bloods be strong: old sires in double honor dwell.
D^way that choice, no life, or soon to dye: for all is well.
Of friendship.
OF all the heavenly gifts, that mortal men commend,
What trusty treasure in the world can counteruail a friend?
Our health is soon decayed: goods, casual, light, and vain:
Broke have we seen the force of power, and honor suffer stain^
In bodies lust, man does resemble but base brute:
True virtue gets, and keeps a friend, good guide of our pursuit:
Whose hearty zeal with ours accords, in every case:
No term of time, no space of place, no storm can it deface.
When fickle fortune fails, this knot endures still:
Thy kin out of their kind may swerve, when friends owe the good will^
What sweter solace shall befall, than one to find,
Upon whose breast thou may repose the secrets of thy mind?
He wayleth at thy woe, his tears with thine be shed:
With thee does he all joys enjoy: so leef a life is led.
Behold thy friend, and of thy self the pattern see:
One soull, a wonder shall it seem, in bodies twain to be.
In absence, present, rich in want, in sickness sound,
Yea after death alive, may thou by thy sure friend be found.
Each house, each town, each realm by steadfast love does stand:
Where fowl debate breeds bitter bale, in each divided land.
O friendship, flowr of flowrs: O lively sprite of life,
O sacred bond of blisfull peace, the stalworth staunch of strife:
Scipio with Lelius did thou conioyn in care,
At home, in wars, for weal and woe, with egall faith to fare.
Gesippus eke with Tite, Damon with Pythias,
And with M^netus son Achill, by thee combined was.
Euryalus, and Nisus gave Uirgil cause to sing:
Of ^ylades do many rimes, and of Orestes ring.
Down Thes^us went to hell, Pirith, his friend to find:
O that the wives, in these our days, were to their mates so kinde^
Cicero^ the friendly man, to Atticus^ his friend,
Of friendship wrote: such couples lo does lot but seldom lend.
Recount thy race, no^ run: how few shall thou there see,
Of whom to say: This same is he, that never failed me.
So rare a jewel then must needs be holden dear:
And as thou will esteem thy self, so take thy chosen fere^
The tirant, in despair, no lack of gold bewayls.
But, Out I am undone (says he() for all my friendship fails.
Wherefore sins nothing is more kindly for our kind:
Next wisdom thus that teaches us, love we the frendful mind.
The death of Zoroas, an Egyptian Astronomer, in the first fight, that
Alexander had with the Persians.
NOw clattering arms, now ragyng broyls of war,
Gan^^^^e the noyes of dreadful trompets clang:
Shrouded with shafts, the heaven: with clowd of darts,
Covered the air: against full fatted bulls,
As forces kindled ire the Lions keen:
whose greedy gutts the gnawyng honger pricks:
So Macedoins against the Persians fare.
Now corpses hide the purpurde soil with blood:
Large slaughter, on each side: but Perses more
Moist feelds be bledd: their hearts, and nombers bate.
Fainted while they give back, and fall to flight:
The lightening Macedon, by swoords, by gleaus,
By bands and trowps, of fotemen with his guard,
Speeds to Darie: but him, his nearest kyn,
Oxate preserues, with horsemen on a plump
Before his carr: that none the charge could give.
Here grunts, here groans, each where strong youth is spent:
Shaking her bloody hands, Bellone, among
The Perses, sows all kind of cruel death.
with thro^e ycutt, he roores: he lies along,
His entrails with a lance through girded quite:
Him smites the club, him wounds farstrikyng bow,
And him the sling, and him the shinyng sword:
He dies, he is all dead, he pants, he rests.
Right ouerstood, in snowwhite armor brave,
The Memphite Zor^as, a cunning clarke:
To whom the heaven lay open, as his book:
And in celestial bodies he could tell
The mouyng, metyng, light, aspect, eclips,
And influence, and constellacions all:
What earthly chances would betide: what year
Of plenty, storde, what sign forwarned derth:
How winter gendreth snow, what temperature
In the primetide does season well the soil:
Why somer burns, why autumn has ripe grapes:
Whether the circle, quadrate may become:
Whether our times heavens harmony can yield:
Of four begins, among them selves how great
Proporcion is: what sway the erryng lights
Does send in course gayn that first mouyng heaven:
What grees, one from another distant be:
what star does let the hurtful sire to rage,
Or him more mild what opposition makes:
What fire doth^ qualify Mauorses fire:
what house each one does seek: what planet reigns
Within this hemisphere, or that, small things
I speak, whole heaven he closes in his breast.
This sage then, in the stars had spied: the fates
Threatened him death, without delay: and sith
He saw, he could not fatal order change:
Forward he preast, in battle that he might
Mete with the ruler of the Macedoins:
Of his right hand des^rous to be slain,
The boldest beurn, and worthiest in the field:
And, as a wight ^ow weary of his life,
And sekyng death: in first front of his rage,
Comes desperately to Alexanders face:
At him, with darts, one after other throws:
With reckles words, and clamor him prouokes:
And says, Nectanabs bastard, shameful stain
Of mothers bed: why losest thou thy strokes,
Cowards among? Turn thee to me, in case
Manhod there be so much left in thy heart:
Come fight with me: that on my helmet wear
Appolloes laurel, both for learnings laud,
And eke for martial praise: that, in my shield,
The seuenfold sophie of Minerue contein:
A match, more meet, sir king, than any here.
The noble prince amoued, takes ruthe upon
The wilful wight: and with soft words, again,
O monstrous man (quod he) what so thou art,
I pray the, live: ne do not, with thy death,
This lodge of lore, the Muses mansion mar.
That treasure house this hand shall never spoil:
My sword shall never bruise that skillful brain,
Long gatherd heaps of science sone to spyll.
O, how fair fruits may you to mortal men
From wisdoms garden give? How many may
By you the wiser and the better prove?
what error, what mad mood, what phrensy thee
Persuades to be down sent to deep Auerne:
Where no arts flourish, nor no knowledge vails?
For all these sawes, when thus the souerain said,
Alighted Zoroas: with sword unsheathed,
The careless king there smot, above the grieve,
At thopenyng of his quishes: wounded him
So that the blood down reyled on the ground.
The Macedon perceiuyng hurt, began gnash:
But yet his mind he bent, in any wise,
Him to forbear: set spurs unto his st^de,
And turnde away: lest anger of his smart
Should cause revenger hand deal balefull blows.
But of the Macedonian chieftains knights
One Meleager, could not bear this sight:
But ran upon the said Egyptian reuk:
And cut him in both knees: he fell to ground:
Wherewith a whole rout came of soldiers stern,
And all in pieces hewed the silly seg.
But happily the soul fled to the starre^:
Where under him, he has full sight of all,
Whereat he gased here, with reaching look.
The Persians wailde such sapience to forgo:
The very fone, the Macedonians wished.
He wo^ld have lived: king Alexander self
Demde him a man, unmeet to dye at all:
Who won like praise, for conquest of his ire,
As for stout men in field that day subdued:
Who princes taught, how to discern a man,
That in his head so rare a jewel bears.
But over all, those same Camenes, those same
Divine Camenes, whose honor he procurde,
As tender parent does his daughters weal:
Lamented: and for thanks all that they can,
Do cherish'him deceast, and set him free,
From dark oblivion of devouring death.
Marcus Tullius Ciceroes death.
Therefore, when restless rage of wind, and wave
He saw: By fates, alas called for (quod he)
Is hapless Cicero: sail on, shape course
To the next shore, and bring me to my death.
Perdy these thanks, reskued from civil sword,
Will thou my country pay? I see mine end:
So powers divine, so bid the gods above,
In city saved that Consul Marcus shend.
Speaking no more, but drawyng from deep heart
Great groans, even at the name of Rome rehearst:
His eyes and chekes, with showrs of tears, he washed,
And (though a rout in daily dangers worn)
With forced face, the shipmen held their tears:
And, striuyng long the seas rough^ floods to pass,
In angry winds, and stormy showers made way:
And at the last, safe ancred in the rode.
Came heavy Cicero a land: with pain,
His fainted lims the aged sire does draw:
And, round about their master stood his band:
Nor greatly with their own hard hap dismayed,
Nor plighted faith, prove in sharp time to break:
Some swords prepare: some their dear lord assist:
In littour laid, they lead him uncouth ways:
If so deceive Antonius cruel gleaues
They might, and threats of following routs escape.
Thus lo, that Tullie, went, that Tullius,
Of royal robe, and sacred senate prince:
When he a far the men approach espieth,
And of his ^one the ensigns does aknow:
And, with drawn sword, Popilius threatening death:
Whose life, and holl estate, in hazard once,
He had preserude: when Room as yet to free
Herd him, and at his thundering voice amazde.
Herennius eek, more eyger than the rest,
Present enflamde with fury, him purseews.
What might he do? Should he use in defense
Disarmed hands ^or pardon ask, for meed?
Should he with words attempt to turn the wrath
Of tharmed knight, whose safeguard he had wrought?
No, age, forbids, and fixed within deep breast
His countries love, and falling Romes image.
The charret turn, says he, let loose the rayns:
Roon to the undeserved death: me, lo,
Has Phoebus fowl, as messenger forwarnd:
And Jove desires a neew heauensman to make.
Brutus, and Cassius soulls, live you in bliss:
In case yet all the fates gaynstriue us not,
Neither shall we perchance dye unrevenged.
Now have I lived, O Room, enough for me:
My passed life naught suffers me to dout
Noysom oblivion of the lothesome death.
Slay me: yet all the offspring to come shall know:
And this deceas shall bring eternal life.
Yea, and (unless I fayl, and all in vain
Room, I soomtime thy Augur chosen was)
Not evermore shall friendly fortune thee
Favor, Antonius: once the day shall coom:
When her dear wights, by cruel spite, thus slain,
Uictorious Room shall at thy hands require.
Me likes, therwhile, go see the hoped heaven.
Speech had he left: and therewith he, good man,
His throat preparde, and held his head vnmoued^
His hasting to those fates the very knights
Be loathe to see: and, rage rebated, when
They his bare neck beheld, and his horeheyres:
Scant could they hold the tears, that forth began burst
And almost fell from bloody hands the swoords.
Only the stern Herennius, with grym look,
Dastards, why stand you still? he says: and straight,
Swaps of the head, with his presumptuous iron.
Ne with that slaughter yet is he not filled:
Fowl shame on shame to heap, is his delight.
Wherefore the hands also does he of smite,
Which durst Antonius life so lively paynt.
Him, yeldyng strayned ghost, from welkin hye.
With lothy chere, lord Phoebus began behold:
And in black clowd, they say, long hid his head.
The latin^ Muses, and the Grayes, they wept:
And, for his fall, eternally shall weep.
And lo, hertpersing Pitho (strange to tell)
Who had to him suffisde both sense, and words,
When so he spoke: and dressed, with nectar soote,
That flowyng tongue: when his windpipe disclosde,
Fled with her fleeyng friend: and (out alas)
Has left the earth, ne will no more return.
Popilius flies, therwhile: and, leaving there
The senseless stock, a grizely sight does bear
Unto Antonius board, with mischief fed.
Of M. T. Gicero.
FOr Tullie, late, a tomb I began prepare:
When Cynthie, thus, bad me my labor spare:
Such manner things becoom the ded, quoth he:
But Tullie lives, and still alive shall be.
N. G.
A
ALas so al things now. 5 Although I had a chek 10 As often as I behold 12
Auising the bright 22 Alas madam for steling. 23 Accused though I be. 29 All in
thy look my life 34 A face that should content. 35 A lady gave me a gift 42 A
spending hand 47 Alas that ever death. 62 A s^udent at his book 64 As cypress
tree. 74 Among dame natures. 77 All ye that friendship 78 As I have been so will
79 At liberty I sit and see 80 As laurel leaves. 83 A kind of cole is. 97 A
man may live thrice 100 Ah love how waiward 102 A cruel Tiger. 107 Ah liberty
now have I 107 Adieu desert, how art 108 Alas when shall I joy 112
B
BRitle beauty that 5 Because I still kept 21 Behold love thy power. 28 By
fortune as I lay 55 Behold my picture 70 Bewail with me 70
C
Caesar when that the. 21 Cruel unkind. 74 Complain we may. 96
D
Diverse thy death. 16 Disdain me not. 31 Desire alas my master 41 Driven by
desire I did. 44 Death and the king. 78 Do all your deeds by 97 Do way your
physic. 106
E
Each beast can choose 14 Each man me telth 21 Ever my hap is slack. 36
Experience now does 67 Each thing I see has 69
F
FRom Tuscan came. 5 Farewell the heart of 24 From these hye hills 25 For want
of will in woe. 31 Farewell love. 37 For shamefast harm. 43 Full fair and
white she is 61 For that a restless head 69 Flee from the prease. 82 For love
Apollo. 8^ False may he be. 83 From worldly woe 99 Farewell thou frosen heart 111
For Tully late. 117
G
GOod ladies ye that. 9 Give place ye lovers 10 Girt in my giltlesse gown 13 Go
burning sighs. 38 Give place ye ladies 67
H
HE is not dead that. 29 How often have I^ 36 Holding my peace. 107
I
IN Cyprus springes 5 I never saw my L. lay 6 In winters just return. 8 If care
do cause men cry 15 In the rude age. 17 If waker car^. 20 I find no peace. 21
It may be good. 23 In faith I wot not. 24 If ever man might him 32 If amorous
faith. 36 It burns yet alas. 40 I see that chance has 41 If thou will
mighty be. 43 In court to serve. 44 In doutfull breast. 45 If ever woeful man.
50 If right be rackt. 51 In Greece sometime 52 It is no fire. 62 I lent my love
to loss. 64 In seking rest, 66 I see there is no sort. 71 I loathe that I did
love. 72 If it were so that God 75 In fredom was my fantasy 76 I read how
Troilus 81 I heard when fame. 84 I ne can close in short. 85 It was the day on
which 90 I that Ulisses years. 9^ If that thy wicked wife 99 I would I found
not. 104 I s^^ly Haw. 107 In bays I bost. 109 In court as I beheld. 110 Imps
of king Io^^ 113 In working well. 113
L
Love (...) lives 4 Lay^ ^n my quiet bed. 18 Lux, my fair falcon. 35 Love,
^ortune, and my mind. 36 Like unto these vnmesu. 36 Like as the bird with 43
Like as the Lark. 52 Lo here the end of man. 56 Like as the brake. 78 Like as
the rage of rain. 80 Like the Phoenix a bird 88 Lo ded he lives. 89 Lo here
lies G. 98
M
MArtial, the things. 16 My Ratclif, when 18 My galley charged. 22 Madame
withouten 23 Mine old dear enmy. 25 Marvel no'more although. 27 My love to
scorn. 29 My lute awake. 33 My heart I gave thee. 37 Mistrustfull minds 40 My
mothers maids 45 Mine own I. Poins. 46 My youthful years 70
N
NAture that gave the be 34 Nature that taught 68 Not like a God came 95 No
joy have I. 104 Now clattering arms. 115
O
O Happy dames that may 8 O loathsome place where 11 Of thy life, Thomas. 16
Ones, as me thought, 33 Of purpose love chose 41 Of Carthage he 44 O evil
tongs. 54 O temerous tauntresse. 74 O Petrarke head, 74 O lingering make. 89 Of
all the heavenly gifts 114
P
Pass forth my wonted 30 Perdie I said it not. 35 Philida was a fair maid 55
Procrin that sometime ^7
R
RIght true it is. 23 Resound my voice. 24 Resign ye dames. 112
S
SUch wayward ways 3 So cruel prison 6 Set me whereas the sun. 6 Sins^ fortunes
wrath. 13 Such vain thought as 20 Some fowls there be. 21 She sat and sowed.
28 Sometime I fled the fire. 29 Such is the course. 33 So feeble is the thread 38
Sufficed not, madame. 39 Since love will needs 40 Speak thou and speed. 42
Sighs are my speed 44 Stand who so list. 44 Sith singing gladdeth 58 Shall I
thus ever long. 62 Sith that the way to 63 Sins thou my ring. 69 Such grene to
me. 79 Sins Mars first moved 82 Stay gentle ^rend. 99 Some men would think. 105
Such wayward ways. 105
T
THe sun has twice 2 The soote season that 2 The golden gift. 6 To dearly
had I bought. 11 Though I regarded not 12 The great Macedon. 16 Thassyrian
king. 17 The fancy which that I 18 The storms are past. 18 The lively sparks
19 They flee from me. 22 The wandering gadling 23 The restfull place, renewer 25
The furious gonne. 29 The answer that ye made. 32 The enmy of life. 33 The
flaming sighs that 37 The pillar perished is 37 Throughout the world 44 Tagus
farewell. 44 The life is long. 51 The longer life the more 53 To this my song
give ear 53 The plage is great. 54 The restless rage of 54 The doutfull man
has 63 The winter with his 65 Thestilis a sely man 67 Thestilis thou sely man
68 To live to dye. 73 The smoky ^ighes. 73 The shining s^ason. 74 To leave alas,
who would 75 To my mishap alas 77 The golden apple. 79 The coward often. 79 Though
in the wax. 79 The dole^ull bell. 82 The sucking fame. 86 The souls that
lacked 88 The sun when he has 90 The secret flame that 93 The bird that
sometime, 9^ Thou Cupide Go^ 95 ^he ^^^tue of Ulisses 100 To false^ eport 100 To
walk on doutfull 101 ^^ ^^ust the fained face 102 (...) ^^^inded boy. 103
(...) ^isest way, thy bote 104 The ancient time com. 113 Therefore when
restless. 116 The long love that in my
V
Unstable dream. 20 ^nwarely so was 34 ^enemous thorns 42 Uulcan begat me. 43
Unto the living Lord. 57 Uain is the fleting wealth 106
VV
When youth had led me 3 When ^omer took in 4 When Windsor walls. 5 When
raging love. 7 Wrapped in my careless 13 Wiat restes here. 16 Was never ^ile. 19
What needs these threat. 23 Where shall I have. 27 What man has heard 28 What
vaileth troth. 29 Within my breast I never 30 When first mine eyes 39 What rage
is this 41 What word is that 42 When Dido feasted first 49 Who justly may
rejoice 51 Who list to live upright 57 What thing is that 62 Who craftly castes
to stere 64 When dreadful swelling 65 When Audley had ron 69 When Cupide sealed
7^ With Petrark to compare. 74 Why fear thou thy 85 Who loves to live in
peace 86 Walking the path. 87 What harder is then stone 89 Who list to lead a
quiet 97 Whom fancy forced 100 Whosoever that wisely weies 104 when Phoebus had 110
What one art thou 113 What path list you to 114 What race of life ron you 114
Y
YEt was I never of 19 Ye that in love find 20 Your lokes so often 30 Yet ones
again my Muse 85 Ye that in play peruse 89 Your borrowd mean^ 98 You are to
young. 1^^
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in fleet street within Temple bar, at the sign of the
hand and star, by Richard Tottell the.xxxi. day of July. An. 1557.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


