THE AMBASSADOR.

Printed at London by V.S. for James Shawe. 1603.

To the Right Honorable, William Earl of Pembrooke, Lord Herbert, Cardiffe,
Marmion, and Saint Quintin, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
Noble Lord,
I humbly present unto your Lordship, the Ambassador, which the learned Author
Hotman first framed, and a Gentleman of quality, translated, for the use of
their private friends: which coming to my hands, and being a subject meet for
the exercise of Noble spirits, and for these times: I have thought good to
present to public view, and publish under your Honorable name: for that
herein you may behold, the Idea of those virtues, which heaven and nature have
planted in you, fit for the managing of these, and the like high services, for
your prince and country, whose eyes and expectations therein are fixed on you.
And resting in the assurance of your Lordshippes honorable favor, I humbly
remain (*)

Your Honors humbly devoted, I. S.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader,
the learned Author of this Treatise, accounting it a subject fit only for
the view of high spirits, and such as already were, or in time might be called
to the great affairs of the common wealth: suffered no other copies to be
extant then those which he dispersed to his private friends, as himself
affirms. A Gentleman having recovered one of them, did at the request of some
particular friends, turn it into English, supposing that the scribled copy,
which, through haste, and want of leisure, was taken as he read it out of the
original, might satisfy his judicious and learned frinds. By reason whereof,
the Printer following the same, has committed some errors, through want of the
Authors work, and other usual assistance; which he nevertheless hops will
be excused with the great desire he had to please the worthy learned and noble
Readers, to whom as he accounts the Treatise properly to belong: so he hops
that his readiness therein will be unto them most acceptable.

His Behavior, Charge, Privileges, Family.


THE AMBASSADOR.
I Know not any of the old Writers that have purposedlie handled this
Argument. Polibius indeed has left some collections de Legationibus, but not
de Legato. The reason in mine opinion is, that none were called ordinarily to
this charge but men of great honor, virtue and experience, attained, by having
passed through the goodliest and greatest charges of the Common wealth, as I
will after show.

For, as in old time there was no punishment ordained for Parricides,
forasmuch as in those ages of innocence it could not be thought, that a
wickedness so monstrous could enter into the heart of any man: even so the
learned Politicians of times past, believed not that Princes and Estates would
be so indiscreet, as to honor with an Embassage (which commonly imports the
whole estate) a person which were not most capable thereof: or that he which
were not worthy of it, should be so ill advised as to undertake it. To the
former, punishments were afterward ordained: and the other, have need of good
instructions; til when, I will give them in this Treatise, this word of advise.

And, to begin, I will not stay upon searching out, either the name
Ambassador, which is strange and unknown to us, or the antiquity and origin
of this charge, the which it is most likely had his beginning with the
establishment of society amongst men, and the assembling of people and
estates the one with the other. When Princes would not, and Commonwealths could
not meet together for to treat thereof. Neither will I spend time in telling
that the name Ambassador is not so general as the Latin word Legatus: and is
not understood properly, but of those who under the assurance of the public
faith, authorized by the law of nations, are employed to negociate with
foreign Princes or Commonwealths the affairs of their Masters, and with
dignity to represent their persons and greatness during their Embassage.

They are of two sorts: The one which are not but for a little time, and for
one affair only, as, for renewing some aliance, to swear and ratify a
treaty, to congratulate, condole, or to do like office in the behalf of
their Masters. Those that go to present obedience to the Pope, in the behalf
of Christian Princes, are of this number, or which go upon other affairs not
ordinary. For which cause they may be named extraordinary Ambassadors, who
return as soon as that affair is dispatched. The Romans and other nations in
former ages used them in no other manner. The other are ordinary and Ligiers,
without having any time limited, but at the pleasure of the Prince which
sends them. And this is that sort which is now most in use, and which
antiquity knew not, fearing lest the long reside^ce of an Ambassador might
discover the secrets of the Estate. The Pope has retained the name of Legate
and Nuncio, of which it is not my purpose to speak in particular.

As touching Agents, to whom, at times, is given the Title of Ligiers: they are
in like manner public persons and being once received and admitted, they enjoy
the law of nations, but neither have place, nor oftentimes power so ample as
Ambassadors have. Such are most commonly employed about Princes which will not
yield to that dignity which those by whom they are sent pretend to have: as
those that have been about the Emperor of late years for the King, and he
that at this present is with the Archduke and the Infanta, which is Monsieur de
la Boderie, who much deserves the Title of Ambassador, sithence he performs
the charge thereof so worthily. Those also are named Agents which manage the
affairs of Princes, not sovereign, and such as are much inferior to Monarchs
and great Commonwealths, for as for those which are sent by the Prince into
his own Dominions, and toward his subjects, they are called Commissioners:
like as they are named Deputies, whom subjects send unto their Sovereign: who
yet do not enjoy this law of nations and privileges of an Ambassador. Ius
externo non ciui quaesitum est, says Titus Liuius. But indeed Heralds do,
whose persons are unviolable, even in the midst of Armies, as well as those
of Ambassadors, although that properly and most commonly they are but
Messagers, carrying barely some word of mouth or letter, without authority to
treat of any matter: as also Drums, Trumpets, and such like persons in time
of war, who nevertheless deserve not this title and dignity of Ambassador.

The Romans had also an other form of Embassage, contrary to the ancient law,
Ne quis suaerei ergo legatus siet, the which was called Libera legatio, which
was to grace persons of quality going toward foreign countries, or into some
Provinces of the Empire for their own affairs and particular businesses, to
be thereby the more respected, and under the favor of the law of nations: as
likewise those were to whom they would not do the uttermost disgrace of an
Exile: and this was called Honesta legatio, which Tacitus says, that Tiberius
used toward the miserable Agrippa for to rid him far off from the Court.

It seems also that there may be set in the number of Agents and Ambassadors,
the Consuls which ouersee the affairs of Merchants, Towns, and Corporations
in Argier, Tunis, Tripoli, and other places of Barbary and Turkey. Forasmuch
as the Prince allows of their nomination, authoriseth and recommendeth them
by his letters; and for that for want of Ambassadors they give aduises, and
sometimes supply their charges, as some have done with very good success, as
has been seen in our time in some places. The Venetians have their consulls
in Cario, at Aleppo, Rosetta, Alexandria, and other towns and havens of
importance: Which is a great commodity unto them, for besides the intelligence
which they have from time to time of the prices of all sorts of merchandise,
they receive also by the same means news from all parts of the world. Wherein
they exceed all other Estates and Commonwealths.

His Behavior.
TO come then unto our Ambassador, and principally to that whom we have called
Ordinary and Ligier: albeit that the principal most general and ordinary
subject of his Embassage be for entertainment of alliances and amity with the
Prince or the Estate to whom he is sent: yet there are many other occasions of
his sending which is needelesle here to articulate, the same being infinite,
according to the diversity of treaties and affairs which are between Princes
and Commonwealths. In some countries they speak only of money and leuying of
forces: in others, of sea matters, traffic and commerce, in others of
breaches of treaties, of inrodes and riottes on frontiers. Furthermore, in some
Estates there are Monarkes others are governed by Lords, the last by the
people, so that, according to the quality of these gouernementes, and nature
of the affairs, it is requisite to make choice of Ambassadors that may be
fitting to the place and Prince to whom they are appointed. And not only
because of this diversity of Estates and negotiations, but also by reason of
the difference of humors, conditions, and religion of Princes and people,
toward whom they are employed: it being very certain, that one that is a
Protestant should not be so fit to be about the Pope nor the King of Spain:
but contrariewise, one of that profession (if the Kings service so require)
should be more acceptable in England, Scotland, Denmark, and with the
protestant Princes of Germany, whereof the Queen of England willed me to
carry word to the King, during the siege of Paris, by occasion of a Gentleman
of quality which had bin sent to the protestant Princes of Germany, and was
not welcome unto them. Likewise must they shun the like jest that was made
of a Bishop sent to the Grand Signior, and of a Gentleman held for a great good
Christian, who was appointed Ambassador to the Pope, for it was said that the
one would convert the Turk, and the other should be conuertedby the Pope. In
some Estates they consider much the quality of the Ambassador, and make the
less account of him, if he be not a gentleman of nobility, or at least well
qualified, liberal and honorable.

Some other Princes and Estates had rather have one that profesleth the Laws:
as at Venice (none has of long time bin there so acceptable as Monsieur de
Maisse Hurault one of the chief Counselors of this Estate. I doubt not but
that the Pope would be content to have rather a Biship or some other Churchman
near him: Nevertheless I understand that the Spaniardes have perceived that
it was more necessary for the service of their Master, that the Ambassador
were of some other quality, because Ecclesiastical persons make a very strict
oath unto the Pope and the Church, which derogateth from the natural fidelity
which all subjects owe unto their Sovereign.

Howsoever it be, the Romans sent none for Ambassadors that had not passed
through the greatest part of the degrees of honor and magistracy: and
sometimes they were the Consulls themselves: not so much for the honor of the
Prince to whom they were sent, as for the greatness and majesty of the
commonwealth. Philip de Comines complains, that his Master King Jews the
eleventh employed therein ordinarily his Barber. Other Princes make no
difficulty to send the Grooms of the Chambers, Cloake-bearers, and others of
baser sort unto the greatest Princes of Christendom. And God knows how they
handle many times the affairs of their Masters. He therefore that appoynteth
an Ambassador, ought to look well hereunto, and especially to the sex, to
the age, and to the disposition of him to whom he is sent. For he that would
give commission to an old and melancholy man to treat of a marriage with a
young Princess, and make love unto her in the behalf of his Master (a thing
which most commonly amongst the Great is done by an Attorney) it is very
certain, that naturally she would not so willingly see or hear him as one that
were more youthful and gallant. I have sometime seen the experience thereof.
This choice being of greater importance than one would belecue, and wherein
notwithstanding there is oftnest failing. A neighbor Prince sent a while
sithence, a man of an ill grace to a great Lady of France for this purpose: who
eflected nothing of consequence therein. Such a one must be a man acceptable,
for the better managing the disposition of him with whom he has to deal.

But much more in extraordinary Ambassadors, and those which go not but for
one affair, as if it be a matter concerning war, it is fitter to commit it
to a Marshall of France, or some other General of the field, and practiced in
points of arms. To General Counsels it were ridiculous to send others than
Ecclesiastical persons, divines, and men seen in the Laws. And where
question should be of the right of succession, of marches, reprisalls, of other
difficulties of right, there are men meet for the same, and which would better
serve their Master therein then either a Churchman or a martial man. But if it
be for the renewing of an aliance, conducting of some princess, or any other
solemn action consisting most in ceremony and magnificence, it is meetest to
commit the charge and honor thereof to a Prince or Lord of quailitie and means.

Moreover, there are many other things to be considered in the person of an
Ambassador, of which I will note some (not to make a perfect Idea of an
Ambassador, as Tasso, Magio, Gentilis and some others have labored to do.) For
as once one said of Platoes Commonwealth, that the Idea thereof was in heaven:
so the perfect image of an Ambassador, such as they have figured unto us, was
never amongst men, for they would have him to be a Divine, Astrologer,
Logician, an excellent Orator, as learned as Aristotle, and as wise as Solomon.

But for me, I require no more of him than he may attain unto by use and
nature. True it is, that I wish he were seen in all, by reason of the
diversity of affairs which are handled in his charge. The which he cannot
be, if he have not seen and traveled abroad, if he have not some
experience, and especially the knowledge of Histories, which I find to be
more necessary for him than any other study: and that formerly he have been
employed in some other charges or affairs of estate, if it were but only to
have more assuredness when he comes to speak in public: for as it shall
appear by the process of the discourse, an embassage is as it were an
abridgement of the principalest charges and offices that are exercised in the
commonwealth: So also would I have him rich, not only in the goods of the
mind, but also in the goods of fortune, at least, in some indifferent sort.
For, besides that a great poverty is always suspected, he being so, it is
very hard for him to hold that dignity which he ought to represent; their
Masters being not always very careful to make them due provision; and the
Romans many times refused such persons in the exercise of the chiefest charges
of their Commonwealth.

To speak of Sciences more particularly, I know that many have managed the
like and greater charges without any learning, and that unto diverse men it has
sorted well. But I maintain that me^ of lerning are much more capable thereof,
know how to speak better, and answer every man, to judge of the iustnes of a
war, of the equity of all pretenses, and demands, to beware of being
deceued in treaties and negotiations of peace, alliance or marriage, whereabouts
such men are most commonly emplored,) to weigh their reasons best, to resolve
any subtle conclusions sophistications, and to discourse of all things, either
grave or familiar: and to speak in a word, he is more to be blamed that
comes unto it without this quality, than he were to be praised, if he
brought unto it, all these necessary qualities with him. At least I will
counsel him, during the time of his Embassage, to furnish himself with as much
thereof, as his leisure will permit him: although (to say true) it is very late
to dig a well, when one is thirsty, or to make armor, when it is time to fight:
Above all, let him not make show that he despises men of learning, but still
accounting of men of knowledge and experience, which in all well policied
estates are cherished.

I find then that among the parts of Philosophy, he ought to have knowledge of
the Moral and Politic: and if before he have had any taste of the Roman
Civil Law, the same would give him more insight and facility to the
negotiation of treaty and clearing many matters that fall out in diverse
places: as for example, of the right of the succession of Princes, of the
difference of the borders, of taking booties of Prisoners, Reprisals, and of
Sea matters, whereof most commonly question arises in England, Denmark,
Holland, and other parts standing on the Sea, or of some obscurity,
ambiguitie, and difficulty of clauses and articles of a treaty. Above all, he
ought not to be ignorant of the Laws, customs and manners of his own country,
specially in things concerning the Estate, the rights, titles, and pretenses of
his Masters Crown, and the usurpations that other Princes have made upon his
estate. Whereunto the knowledge of histories will greatly help him; which besides
the pleasure of it, will bring him also this commodity, that it will increase
in him, wisdom and judgment in the affairs of his charge. Will enable him
against all chances. Will bring him to the knowledge of the origin,
continuance and ruin of kingdoms, countries, and towns, which have no
remainder of their glory, but the name only. Will make him that he be not
astonished at any thing that he hears read or spoken, considering that
histories will furnish him with many examples of like accidents. It being a
shameful thing to a man of his sort to wonder at all that is spoken. For
wondering is the daughter of ignorance, and they are always children which know
not that which was done before their time.

Lastly, Eloquence is of such force, and so important in such a charge, that if
he be endewed therewith, either by art or nature, he will make himself very
gracious, be it that he speak unto the Prince, to the Counsel, or in public
(as the use is in popular estates) or that he entertain his friends in private.
And in many places Ambassadors are called Orators. But to speak well, in good
frame, and good terms, it shall be expedient that he first write and polish
that which he has to say in public. (Parato quid vnquam defecit?) Yet
without servile tying himself, to learn by heart his own speech, lest it
befall him, as many times it does unto school boys. If he know the language
of the Country where he is, it will be a great furtherance unto him, to the
more perfect understanding of the histories and affairs of that estate. Cicero
says (Sumus surdi omnes in linguis quas non intelligimus.) It is alone to be
deaf, and not to understand what is said.) Nevertheless many without this
quality have not failed to perform their charge well and worthily. And
although he knew the language, I had rather that he should feign, not to
understand it: for so has he the more advantage to speak and negotiate in his
own language: or at least in Latin which is common unto all, as they do in
Germany, Polonia, and other countries. His speech must be grave, brief, and
significant, without employing many alegations, as a Master of Art would do,
or of words borrowed, and out of use, whereby I have seen many falter
through affectation: And he must, as much as may be, accommodate himself to the
fashion of the prince and people to whom he speaks: for he that would
mignionize and painte out his speeches in Suisserland or Holland, should do
that which were ridiculous and superfluous. Princes, and almost all Great men
and military men love not great speakers, nor long discourses; and an old
writer has very well observed in the disposition of the Frenchman, that he
gives himself chiefly to the profession of arms, and to a brief and subtle
form of speaking, Duas res, says he, accurate norunt, rem militarem, and
argute loqui. Even so the King that now is, being tired with the long discourse
of a Lord lately come out of Italy, said unto him, I know very well that you
come out of the Country of fair words. In a word, if an Ambassador have not
this gift of speaking well, and that he stop or stutter in his delivery,
besides that happily he shall do no great good in his Embassage, he shall be
oftentimes the jest of Courtiers. And if his speeches be too long; he may have
such an answer as those of Lacedemon made to the Samnites. That they had
forgotten the beginning, understood not the middle, and disliked the Conclusion.

These are very nearly the sciences which I judge the most requisite, and
which are, in mine opinion, the easiest, and the which, or the greater part of
them, he may learn in the places of his charge, if he be resident there for
some years, all the other will not be unprofitable for him. But he must have
besides these, other virtues and qualities, as well gotten by practice, as borne
with him, for better performing his Embassage: and which are so much the more
necessary for him, in that he represents the greatness of his prince in a
foreign Country, and in the view of the world, and for that the faults
which he commits are many times cause of the contempt of his Master, or of
some worser consequence. For first al men agree in this, that he ought to be
endewed with a good natural understanding, joined with a long experience of
the affairs of the world, which makes that a young man is not so capable of
this charge, as one of old or middle age. For which cause, Philip de Comines
said, it was very hard for a man to be wise that had not bin deceived.
(Nevertheless sometimes a good spirit disgraceth the age and experience of
many others, witness Monsieur de Beaumont Harlay, who does the King so good
service in this charge of Ambassador in England.) Nevertheless an old man is
ordinarily melancholy and diseased, and a young man, too humorous, light, and
indiscreete. As one that was sent to certain Alies of this Crown, who walked
abroad in the evening and part of the night through the streets, with others
of his own age, and in his doublet and hose, playing on a Bandore: although
otherwise he was a man of a good spirit.

Touching the wisdom of our Ambassador, it will be discerned, first of all, if
he bring with him these requisite qualities whereof I have spoken, and such
things as are necessary for the occasions of his charge: unless that the
Prince have made him to undertake it on a so daine, and by express
commandment, without giving him leisure to advise himself, as many times it
falls out. For, if he have not the goods of fortune, or has not otherwise
provided to cause a good allowance to be made him: he will be accounted
indiscreete to have embarked himself in a charge of so great expense. And for
the gifts of nature, if he be bleare-eyed, crookebackt, lame, or otherwise
mishaped, it is certain, that he will not be so acceptable. One of the old
writers says, that in those ill proportioned and vicious bodies, the soul is
ill lodged. And the Romans having on a time sent two Ambassadors to one of
their Provinces, of which one had upon his head the skars of many wounds, and
the other was lame of his feet, it was said in a mockery. Mittit populus R.
legationem quae nec caput nec pedes habet. An Embassage that has neither head
nor feet. Likewise if it be possible let him not be much inferior in means
or quality to him whom he succeeds, lest he find at his door. O antique
domus. Alas poor house that have made a change of masters, as it happened (to
my knowledge) unto one that succeeded in the house and place of an Ambassador
that had been very liberal and bountiful: for there was nothing so cold as
his Kitchen, nor so bare as his stable. Farther, that he knew how to make good
choice of his train and household servants: whereunto he ought especially to
take heed, that he fall not into the inconvenience that some have done, who
having sorted themselves with indiscreete and uncivil servants, have themselves
paid for their folly. An advice which Monsieur de Bellieure (who having bin
often times honored with this charge, in which he made his first practice among
the Grisons, has at length attained by the steps of honor and desert, to
the dignity of Chancellor of France) gives unto Ambassadors going upon their
charges, according to that which Cicero said unto his brother then Governor of
Asia in like case, Horum non modo facta sed dicta etiam omnia tibi praestanda
sunt. Thou must be the warrant both of their actions, yea and of the very words
also. And a little after, Si innocents existimari volumus non sclum nos
abstinentes verumeriam nostris comites praestare debemus. To make our
uprightness appear, it is not enough that we be discreet, but even our
followers must be so also. And to say truth, for that which is in the choice
of a man, he can not impute it to any other, but must lay the blame on
himself, if he have not done it well. It fell out ill in this point with the
Lord of Camcy sent, on the behalf of the King to the Duke of Burgundy, in the
year 1417. through too much confidence in his Secretary, who either of
indiscretion, or corruption, had made many copies of his masters instructions,
to be seen abroad, and discovered the secrets of his commission: for which
cause the master was blamed by the Kings counsel, and sent to take up his
lodging in the Bastile.

Amongst the Officers of his house, the most necessary, and in choice of whom
he ought to be most careful, are, the Secretaries, and the Steward of the
house. The one for to assist and ease him in the businesses of his charge, to
dispatch causes that concern the same, and to hold a good register thereof, to
keep faithfully the scroles, ciphers, and other papers of importance, (which
nevertheless would be better under the masters lock) the other for the
expenses of the house, which ought to be well ordered, and nevertheless
honorable in every part thereof, chiefly at the table and kitchen, whereupon
strangers and especially those of the Northern countries look more then upon
all other expenses besides. In Spain and Italy the table is more frugale: But
there it must appear in horses, coaches, apparel, and train of followers.
And I will say this by the way, sithence that the most proper, and most
essential virtue of a Prince is to be liberal, he that represents his
greatness amongst strangers, does him injury, and gets himself an evil
name, if he be sparing and wretched: it seeming incredible to most men, that a
great King, or other Sovereign would appoint him to that place without
allowing him means sufficient, and are moved to think, that he keeps up,
and turns to his own uses, the moneys of his allowance. There have been
some in our time, who by their sparing and baseness, seemed rather to go to
profit themselves, and make a gain; whereas this charge consists wholly on
honor, and was in times past given, to honor those which had done good service
to the Commonwealth: so that it ought not to be purchased by bribes, nor too
much sought after, whereby to avoid the suspicion of covetousness.
Nevertheless, in this his liberal expense he must use his discretion in not
exceeding too far his ordinary exhibition, and especially that thereby he
belie not falsely the occasion of his Embassage. For I have seen those which
have failed in both, and it has bin told them, that they named themselves the
Ambassadors of misery (for they came to crave succors of men and money) and yet
were in their expenses as if their master had possessed the Indies. And here it
is that an argument from the less to the great may be made: how shall he
perform a charge of importance, that knows not how to guide his house and
order his expense?

Furthermore, he shall manifest his wisdom in this, if when he has received
order to depart, he take instructions sufficiently ratified for whatsoever he
has to say or negotiate, that he may not be disallowed for any thing that he
shall have said, treated, or concluded, as it has befalne unto some that have
after repented it, whereof I will speak a word hereafter. He must also
instruct himself by the mouth of him that was next before him in this charge:
unless that his predecessor do install him himself, and at his induction do
communicate unto him all such treaties, remembrances, and papers as are
necessary, and do sufficiently inform him of all. And because Secretaries of
Estate give not so often intelligences to the Ambassador, nor always send him
advice of that which passes at Court and in the Estate, so often as he gladly
would: and that it should many times be expedient to have aduertizement
thereof, because of the false rumors which are ordinarily spread by the enemies
of an Estate, especially in time of war: and that it is a shame to an
Ambassador, that strangers should know the news of his country before him,
he shall do very well to have some friend in court which may aduertize him
often of that which is done, yea, even to the least particularities, by which
many times, he may judge of matters of importance.

The grief wherein I have seen Monsieur de Sillary Brulart in Swisserland,
and in England, Monsieur de Beaunoir la Nocle, and many others elsewhere:
(Indeed it was in the hottest of the troubles) makes me to give this advice
to those that go on Embassage, and that they ought not to spare two or three
hundred crowns a year this way, if need require.

Furthermore that man is indiscreet, that through rashness throws himself
into the danger of his enemy. Neither will I counsel any to go on embassage
toward that Prince whom he has offended in word or deed: for Princes do
seldom forget an injury, and are patient to awaite a fit time to revenge
themselves. At the least, it is very likely, that he shall never perform his
Masters businesses so well with such a one. Besides, it is not meet to commit
this charge to him that has been spotted with any crime or public reproach:
Nor unto him that is the subject of that Prince to whom he is sent: for in this
behalf it be fell out ill with the Esquire Merueilles as Millan, of whom
Guicciardine and du Bellay make mention: at least Duke Sforza gave his excuse
in payment as I will show anon. It being both more commodious and more
convenient for the greatness of the master, that he which is sent, be his
natural subject, not a stranger, considering that naturally he will use
therein more care and more fidelity: and it is a shame to make our want to be
known in this behalf, of men able and capable of such a charge: Not but that
sometimes it has well sorted when strangers have been employed. Above all, it
is a thing odious and unsavory to send unto a neighbor Prince a subject of his
for Ambassador, to whom he will ever do honor discontentedly, remembering what
power and authority a Prince has over his subjects. True it is, that out of
this rule prisoners of war may be excepted either to negociate the
deliverance of themselves and their companions, or to treat of some good means
for a peace, truce, or other good occasion; as has been seen in the wars
between the Romans and the Carthaginians, and in those of France and England.

An other point of wisdom is, to arrive in season, and to take occasion
commodiously, which I observe, because there are some, who through the
hardness of the season, or for the difficulty and dangers of the ways, or
for some other light hinderance do defer the departure, or stay by the way:
so that at their arrival they find matters altered, and come as a Physician
when one is dead. And to this purpose Suetonius recounteth how those of Troy
sent the Deputies to Tiberius to condole the death of his sons, seven or
eight months after that it happened. And I, said he, am very sorry for the
loss which sometime you had of fstanders by to laugh: for countriman Hector,
and so made all the standers by to laugh: for Hector died many hundred years
before. He must also present himself in due time and place, that there be no
suspicion conceived upon the cause of his coming: as Titus Liuius declares of
the Mirian Ambassadors. Who kept themselves secret a while at Rome, waiting
peradventure, for some new instructions from their Master: which was a cause
to make them to be stayed as spies: Whereof they had somewhat to do to purge
themselves: mentitur legationem qui nomen legationis non praefert suo tempore:
as a Lawyer says, and an Embassage is held suspected which is not done in due
time and place. Seruius says, that in old time amongst the Romans this order
was kept in receiving strange Ambassadors. Legati si quando incogniti venire
nunciarentur; primo quid vellent ab exploratoribus requirebatur, postea ad eos
egrediebantur maiestratus minores and tunc demum Senatus: and si ita visum
fuisset, admittebantur. But concerning this point of departing in time, in
former times the Deputies of the Rhodians were accused for not departing at the
prefixed day toward Athens about a matter of importance, whereof grew some
inconvenience. They defended and excused themselves through the Treasurers
default who had not given them the money appointed unto them for their voyage,
but their reply and reproach was, that for a matter of such importance they
ought themselves to have disbursed the money, rather than to loose an occasion
which might prejudice the Estate; at least, that in due time they ought to have
made their diligence appear, and to have protested against the Treasurer.

It is not enough to ariue time. He must, as before I said, present himself
and deliver his Embassage, if it be of any importance, for the lingering of
some, has given opportunity to Spies to discover their secrets, and the
occasion of well effecting it, is so lost.

Alcibiades used like subtilitie to the Ambassadors of Lacedemon, who were made
a jest of thereby: and many like examples have, to my knowledge, chanced:
unless that there be a lawful cause why audience should not be demanded, as
if he found the Court in mourning, war proclaimed, or some other accident of
importance fallen out in the mean time which was not before thought of.

Tacitus says, Vt initia sunt, spem in extera fore. It is the principal point
to begin well, a thing is half done that is well begun. For which cause our
Ambassador from his first arrival is to give of himself so good an
expectation, as that by his gravity, courtesy affability, requisite expenses,
first audience, and establishment in his charge he make al men hope of good to
come by his Embassage. In like sort is it in war and other affairs of the
world, that men judge of the end by the beginning, and he is held wise that can
discreetely raise a good opinion of himself from the first entrance into his
charge. The which he shall do not only in respect of those of the Country,
but also toward his Master by his first letters of advice of the style
whereof we will speak a word heere-after. And he shall do most wisely in
establishing forthwith his intelligences from all parts following the order
of his predecessor, adding thereunto, the correspondencie which he can have
with his friends, even to the remotest countries: there being no charge
whatsoever in the Estate which has more need to know the occurrents of the
world, as I have heard the most sufficient Ambassadors to hold: Considering
that this is done with little charge, and oftentimes with much fruit.

He will make himself held a fit man, if he can make choice of some one to
assist and second him in his charge if it be such that he have need thereof, as
indeed it is hard to be without one, especially in a Country and a charge,
wherein he had not bin before as great and able a man as Scipio was, yet took
he with him the learned Panaetius (others says Laelius.) True it is, he ought
to take good heed to whom he trusts himself, for some from Companions will
become Masters and Corriualls, and having gotten knowledge in the businesses
and secrets of the charge, do not often handle the same discreetly. And so
bring him more hurt than good, and more coffeehouse than comfort. But it is
much more grievous unto him, whenas for to help his insufficiency, or to have
an eye over his doing, there is an assistant joined with him: for in this case
he loses the whole grace, and often times the fruit of his Embassage. The
which, as I have said, has no other end than Honor.

He ought likewise to take heed that he receive not into his family, and
amongst his household servants, those of the country where he is resident, it
being very certain, that they are so many spies, except those, of whose
fidelity he has had good proof, whereof some such are found (but very
seldom.) Cicero in the same Epistle gives this self same advice, saying that
no man ought to communicate himself much unto them, nor discover the affairs
of his charge unto them, whatsoever appearance of affection they use: for there
has befallen thereby very great inconveniences: the Ambassador being otherwise
sufficiently looked into, and his demenor sifted; likewise is he in a place so
eminent, that his actions cannot be hidden what industy soever he use therein.
Much less ought his house to serve for a retraite unto the offenders of that
estate wherein he is, or to person that are suspected and odious. I have seen
some that have bin maligned and ill entreated for this occasion, and it is a
very ticklish point especially if they be subjects of that estate where he
bears his charge: considering that in making intercession for them, he
puts himself in hazard of receiving a denial, from whence a greater
mischief may arise. I speak not this without cause, and the example thereof
is fresh.

And to return to those of his house, our Ambassador not being always able to
have an eye over them, as well by reason of his dignity, as for the affairs of
his charge. It shall be the best way, if he can, to bring his wife with him,
whose eye will stop infinite abuses amongst his people, and disorders in his
house, unless he can trust therewith some one of his own followers, that may
carry an eye and charge over the rest. But if himself be not temperate and
stayed, he presently opens (by his example) a door unto the disorders of
his family, who will sooner do evil by seeing him to do evil, then they
will do well by immitating of him: besides that, he has his mouth stopped, if
he would reprehend or punish them, Nimium est negotij continere eos quibus
praesis, nisi te ipse contineas. It is a hard labor to make those that are
under thee to be wise, if thou be not so thy self, says the same author in
the same place. And Tacitus in the life of Agricola says, Domum suam coercere
plaerisque hand minus arduum est, quam prouinciam regere. And concerning this
point of temperancie, it is requisite that a man placed in such a charge do
moderate himself in his pleasures, not only in respect of women, but also for
his mouth, and for play, whereby there has grown many times, both scandale
and reproach. There was one such, who being met by night, by the watch of the
City, received the shame to be led away prisoner: and when he alleged his
quality, it was told him very stowtly, by one that fained he knew him not:
The Ambassador of France is too wise to go so by night, without company or
torch-light. A while after, a foreign Ambassador being then at Paris, going by
night to visit a woman, attended only with a lackey, was stayed, and put
under safe-keeping, till the morning that the king (that last died) was
advertised thereof, who sent for him, and turned all the matter into a jest.

Above all, he ought not to touch the honor of women of good name, for
husbands and fathers are impatient of such attempts, for which even kings have
been driven from their estates, or slain by their own subjects.

Concerning Drunkenness, which Seneca caleth a voluntary folly, I maintain,
that in Germany, Swisserland, Polonia, Denmark, and other Countries of the
North, he must, in some sort, accommodate himself to drink with them, it
being very certain, that one is more acceptable unto them thereby: But yet he
must withal remember the Emperor Bonosus, who ordinarily made foreign
Ambassadors drunken for to learn their secrets. Others have been slain
amongst wine and banqueting. Herodotus and Josephus recite the stories
thereof. And in truth, wine and secrecy, are incompatible things, and this
fault is ill befitting the dignity of him that representes such a majesty,
Legatus enim ipsam reipub. faciem suam attulisse videtur: As a certain Author
has learnedly said upon this Argument.

As for play, I have seen an other that was so earnest unto it, that thereby
he forgate the businesses of his charge, making many times his Masters
messengers to give attendaunce, fifteen or twenty days for his pleasure. He
shall therefore so accommodate himself unto the manners of the country, where
he is, that he neither force his natural disposition, neither be perceived to
do it purposedly: for the one is ridiculous, and the other suspected and
odious.

An other effect of his temperance shall be, not to receive any gifts and
presents, neither of the Prince to whom he is sent, nor of any of his, for
any cause whatsoever, unless at such time, as having taken his leave, he is
ready to take horse and depart. The Ambassador of England sir Amias Pawlet,
would not receive the chain of gold, which the king sent unto him, according
to the custom, until he was half a league out of Paris: Gifts do oblige,
and those that receive them, become slaves to those that give them: much more
if they take a pension, or other benefit, in which case there will be either a
stain of avarice, or suspicion of treason, and that is capital in many places.

But there is nothing more hurtful to his reputation then indiscreet
speaking, for there are some seen who at the table and at every word, meddle
not only with particular persons, but with the Princes also to whom they are
sent: find fault with the form of a popular government: laugh openly at the
manners of the nation where they are. This indiscretion cannot be endured from
a private man: but it is altogether intolerable from the mouth of an
Ambassador, who in doing thereof, does not any longer remember wherefore he is
in that charge: since that the principal and most apparent end thereof is to
confirm, as I have said, and to entertain the amity of the Prince or people
to whom he is sent: and I should need a resme of paper, to reckon up the
inconveniences that have befalne through such indiscretion, and the danger that
those have incurred which could not command their tongues. I will only say
with an ancient Writer: He that knows how to speak well, knows also when
he must hold his peace. Whereas besides the tediousness of much speaking, the
same hinders him from hearing of others, and gathering, by that means, the
truth of such matters as hoe ought to know in his charge. The Lord Cecill high
Treasurer of England had this dexterity, that he left not one at his table,
whom he did not reason with, and hear speak at their turns. And concerning
those which speak not the language, the same may and ought to be done by an
interpreter, who is present for that effect: especially in popular Estates,
where the least will be respected as well as the greatest. Neither can I
forbear to speak of those who spare not even their master, and their own
nation: these defaults whereof they discover by their talk, and by the same
means confirm that opinion which strangers have thereof. Our country is our
mother, we ought not to reveal the shame thereof, and we ought to be as
jealous thereof as of our own honor: for it is ill befitting to a servant to
touch the honor of his master, to publish the secrets of his Court, to
control his pleasures, and blame his actions; especially he must take heed,
that he speak not in public what he judges touching the right of his
pretenses toward any Estate: for either he must maintain them to be just, or
must altogether hold his peace, and discreetly turn his talk to other matter.
These are Arcana imperij, whereof Tacitus speaks.

Courage also and resolution are very necessary for him, by reason of the
hazards, intricate affairs, oppositions and vexations, which are evermore
ordinary with those that serve Princes and Commonwealths: And even so the
Romans well considering the peril which accompanies Ambassages, honored the
memory of those that died in that charge with a statue: for which cause an
Ambassador of Athens answered so freely King Philip of Macedon, who threatened
him, that he would cause his head to be cut off: If thou take this head from
me, my Country will give me another that shall be immortal: Statuam pro
capite, pro morte immortalitatem. Nevertheless every one would not like of
such a change, and some would rather keep their own: and if the Ambassadors
escaped the danger, and had well served the Commonwealth, there were
recompenses answerable to the deserts appointed unto them.

The English Ambassador, Sir Edward Stafford, on the day, or the next day after
the Barricadoes of Paris, when a Lord of the faction of the Duke of Guise,
that dead is, would have him take a pas-port or safe-gard from the said duke,
made him answer: I am under the safeguard of the law of nations, and in the
protection of the King, to whom you are but subjects and servants. This
proceeded from a generous resolution, even in the furies of a popular
commotion, when the most mutinous could do all, and good men feared all. The
Lord of Mortfontaine, that dead is, going Ambassador into Swisserland, about
five years past, and being to pass through the County of Burgundy, which, at
that time, was full of Spanish and Italian Soldiers going into Flaunders,
spoke very freely unto those of the parliament of Dole, which would have put
him in fear, to the end, that he might not arrive in due time at the assembly
of Baden, wherein they had some practice against the Kings service. That he was
under the assurance of the Law of nations, and of the Newtrality, and in the
protection of the Lords of the Cantons, and that they should readily determine
to make his passage safe, and this furthered him: albeit that which he aledged
of the Law of nations was very disputable: as I told him as soon as we were
out of danger. I will speak a word again theereof in his due place.

Furthermore, these are too common and childish precepts, to admonish him to be
patient, and stayed, if he see any to break out through impatience (as they
do most commonly) who think they have right and reason on their sides.
Especially, the Swissers and Germans, who are cholerike. The sense being
distempered, choketh reason: and choler is an enemy to counsel, breeding
hatred and contempt, and is ill-befitting to every man much more to a man that
manageth the chief affairs of an Estate, which many times he hurts through
his hastiness, collar and impatience. The Frenchman who has his blood hot,
and his spirit more stirring, has consequently certain quick dispositions,
which other Nations do not allow of; at least, they would be more tolerable
in martial men, yea, in any other man, than in an Ambassador, and Counselor
of Estate. I wish nevertheless that he would moderate his gravity so, as it
be not hautie, as that of the Spaniards oftentimes is, in their speech,
countenance, train and gate: One that has been Ambassador in England since
in France, for the last King of Spain was wont to say: Dios es poderoso en el
ciel, y, el Rey d'Espagna en la tierra. He had his horses and coach garnished
with little bells, and having but three steps from his lodging to the Church,
nevertheless, both he and his train would mount on horseback in their
litter or coach. The letters of occurrents report, that an other, departing
from Rome to follow the Pope went forth with seven litters, six coaches,
drawn every one with six horses, two hundred servants, sixty wagons laden
with baggage, and the first day he passed not the first gate. This fashion is
held for good amongst them.

Let us return into our way again, for to add unto our Ambassador one of the
worthiest qualities which he can purchase unto himself. That is, to be, and
to seem, a most discreet man. The which he cannot better do, then by these
two virtues, to be Charitable and Veritable. For the former, there are some
which repine at that which is given to the poor, and nevertheless, are
otherwise at great expenses, as if the one and the other were incompatible
things. Our forefathers did say, that Wisdom and Honesty make a discreet man.
Then what may a man expect of the honesty of such a one as refuses the gift
of a halfepenny to a beggar, or of his wisdom, if he would be accounted
liberal, and nevertheless spares half a dozen of Crowns in alms every
year? This is matter for Preachers, and Ecclesiastes says, Fili, ne auertas
oculos tuos ab egeno. And if one must not turn away his eyes from seeing the
miserable, much less is it lawful to reproach and revile them, and to add an
injury to a refusal.

The other mark of discretion, is, to be veritable sparing in promising and
religious in observing that once he has promised: for naturally one is less
offended at a refusal then at an unfaithfulness: nothing will so much preserve
his reputation, especially amongst merchants and mony-men: There having been
such an Ambassador seen, as by his credit alone has borrowed so notable a
sum, and by the same done so worthy service to his Master, that at the last,
he has both deserved, and received a great reward: But the reward which is
most pleasing to a good man, is the honor it self which arises unto him by
his virtue. The Germans and other Nations of that Climate make more account of
a promise made, then we do, who most commonly serve our turns therewith to
rid our hands of such as are importunate. I have always seen Monsieur de
Sillary (who has been near about eight years Ambassador in Swisserland, and
has there served the King very profitably, during the desperate estate of our
affairs) be very sparing in making any promise to the Swissers. For those
people, for the most part, do note down, the place, day and hour, that they
were spoken with, yea every word of an Ambassador, still seeking to engage him
in his promise: and do carefully keep the letters which he writes unto them:
and take hold of the very hopes that are given unto them: and would make the
same to stand instead of a bill or obligation: how much more a promise written,
or his word given? Let our Ambassador, therefore remember the saying of an
aundent Writer: Think an hour before you speak, and a day before you promise.

And further, one has time among them to bethink himself and deliberate of
that which is to be answered unto them, and they themselves use the same manner.
But much more sparing ought he to be to oblige his Master: and although he have
full authority to do it, nevertheless he shall do well, if the service of his
Master permit it, to give him advice thereof, before the conclusion and
contract be passed, for besides that the wills of Princes are subject to
changes, that which he shall do, shall be so much the more authorized, and
himself be without reproach. I will add this word by the way upon this point
of contracts and treaties, that they ought to be couched in terms plain, not
ambiguous, nor captious, and to follow as much as may be, the terms and
clauses of presidents. The Ambassador makes the Prince to speak therein, for
whom it is unseemly to use ambiguities and subtilties, for fear lest it be
told him as it was to the Emperor Charles the fist, by Duke Mauritius, upon
the equivocation of these two words: Enig and Enig: Sir, these subtilties are
meet for an Advocate, but not for an Emperor.

True it is, that there is not almost any public charge, wherein there is more
lying, and sometimes by the Masters commandment, and for the good of his
service, as I will show by and by. I have seen some of them, who through an
habitude of lying, have of men of fidelity, become at last very sound liers.
Ecclesiasticus also says, that the use thereof is evil. Noli velle mentiri
omne mendacium: assiduitas enim illius non est bona. Others there are, who that
they may not lie so aparantly, help themselves with ambiguous terms, couched
so artificially, that the subtilest heads know not where to find an Yea or a
Nay. In these there is least harm: and they escape best when they are sommoned
and do less wrong to their Masters, and to his reputation: nevertheless this
shift is soon smelled out and descried: and the lier g^^neth thus much
thereby, that he is not believed, even when he tells truth. Let him be
therefore true in his words, mindful of that which he has promised,
correspondent to himslefe, holding always agreeable conclusions in his
discourses: to the end that the contrary be not imputed to him for folly and
vnstayednesse.

Here arises a question, to wit, If a man, to live ciuillie, ought to be more
inclined to refuse, than to grant: forasmuch as some make all demands and
requests that are made unto them so difficult, that they seem to do it of
purpose to excuse themselves from them. Others never refuse any thing, for not
discontenting any man for the present time Guicciardine seems to lean to
this opinion, that one ought not to refuse any thing absolutely: because, says
he, if the request be for a thing hereafter to come, or for a matter that
depends on the will of another: there happen many occasions by which thou
may be discharged of thy promise, whereas by a flat denial, or in making the
matter difficult, thou offendest thy friend. I believe that there is a mean
between these two extreamities: for the wise Ambassador, by giving other
counsel and direction, or testifying a good will by other gracious effects and
honest speeches, may mollify the denial which many times he is enforced to
use to demands that are made out of time, and without reason. A lesson in
particular, for the Ambassadors of Swisserland, and the Grisons, whose affairs
are full of such importunities, I mean for those that shall come after
Monsieur de Vicque, who having gotten so much reputation in the other charges
which he has managed heretofore, does in this one surmount himself.

And to return to our matter, the same Guicciardine says, that when a Prince
would deceive his companion, he first deceives his Ambassador, to the intent
that his reasons may be the more effectual, and his persuasions may carry
weight: for there is less affection used in that which is dissembled.

But whether must he lie upon his own knowledge for his Masters service, as I
said before? Some excuse it upon the Masters commandment, saying, that he is
sufficiently discharged, in having done or said that which was enjoined him: no
more, nor no less then the subject which bears arms for his Prince, and
asks not whether the war be just or no. But indeed this seems hard unto
a good man, that does not willingly wound his conscience, to get the Title of
a sufficient man: this is also hard unto a man of a generous and open spirit,
who in lying does violence to his natural disposition: for lying and
dissimulation are assured marks of an ignoble heart, and of a man basely borne.
So the Satire would no longer converse with the man, after he had seen him
blow hot and cold out of one mouth. Considering also, that a good man ought
always to set before his eyes, Honor and Conscience, although there were
profit in doing evil.

His charge in General.
LEt us now speak of the matter of his charge, but generally, forasmuch as the
diversity of Estates and affairs require also a diversity of instructions,
for otherwise is he to bear himself in a popular estate then with a
Sovereign Prince. Solemn speeches and declamations are yet in some use
amongst popular Estates and commonwealths: and these they must after deliver
unto them in writing, because they will not be mistooken, and will have time to
make answer. There are more formalities, and complements observed in one place
than in another. In Swisserland there must be more money than art, more good
cheer than fair words. For which cause, some of them prayed me to tell the
King, that they had more need of a Treasurer with money, than of an Ambassador
with words. In some other Estates Honor swayeth most, together with
Complements, and streams of Rhetorike. The very respect of Religion has had
more force with some Princes than money: hereof in our time, we have had
experience. Some instructions are limited, and some at the discretion of him
that is sent, as in affairs of secrecy, and such, as whereof no certainty or
knowledge can be had, but in the place if self being then represented to the
sight.

Some also are for a time, and for one matter: othersome for a long time, and
diverse businesses, and by reason to the difference of affairs, the same is
infinite, as I have before said. Yet a man may give it this one general rule;
That as much as possibly he can, he employ the words, terms, reasons and
conclusions that are comprehended in his instructions to be always aiming the
will of his Master. Demosthenes said: We give them not forces or ships of
war to manage, but words, days, hours, and moments, and they also are to
give an account even to sillables and minutes, if they do any thing to the
prejudice of the Commonwealth. Plato in his Commonwealth, would, that those
that had done or said one thing for another, should be punished with death.
Mandatum i^sdem verbis, quoad eius fieri potuit, perfici debet, as the Law
says: Yea, and an Ambassador ought to desire that his commission be given him
in writing, when the affair whereabout he goieth to treat, is of great
consequence, or that the effect thereof is odious. And in this case he shall
be rightly counseled to give up his speech in writing, as those did whom the
Senate sent to Anthony, for fear of displeasing him: And as of late an
Ambassador of Paris did to a neighbor Princess, to whom he carried a message,
with threatening her, if she did not forbear to give succors unto her
confederates, and he did well: for it was resolved to detain him, if he had
not showed his instructions sufficiently ratified. Yea, and although the
affairs for the which he was sent, has not sorted to good effect, yet shall
he be excused for having followed his instructions. And withal, in a limited
authority, one is not always admitted to say: I have done better than it was
enjoined me, for that is to seem to be wiser than his Master and his
counsel. An example whereof in a case of war in Posthumous, Manlius and
other Romans, which caused their own sons to be put to death, for having
fought with the ennemy without leave, although with prosperous success. An
example also in him who having received commandment to cause a great mast of a
ship, to be brought, Did choose one somewhat lesser, which he said was fitter for
the purpose: and said truth, nevertheless was blamed for it. And in our
fathers time, The Mareschall de Thermes being General in Scotland of the Kings
army, gave a reward to a Soldier that had first mounted upon the bulwark of
a fort which he besieged, whereupon insued the gaining of the fort: and an hour
after caused him to be hanged for having been so hardy, as to go thither
without commandment. But (not to depart from our present argument) Metrodorus
being sent in the behalf of his master Mithridates to King Tigranes, to
request him to join his forces with him in the war which he intended against
the Romans, was punished for having made this double answer to Tigranes, who
asked his advice therein: As being an Ambassador I counsel you unto it: but as
being Metrodorus, I am not of that opinion: and he said well, for his Master
would gladly have been rid of so dangerous an enterprise.

It is therefore better, to fail in obeying, than to incur the hazard of
being disallowed in well doing: especially in these limited authorities. But
Princes sometimes are ill warrants for such things as they have commanded, how
much more for those things that they have not commanded? The Athenians caused
the Ambassadors which they sent into Arcadia to be put to death, for having
tooken an other way than was commanded them. And it is not very long since that
a Secretary of Estate wrote unto an Ambassador, the which had, of his own
head, and yet not without good cause, hazarded, certain moneys of the kings,
through a dangerous way; His Majesty thinks well of it, since that the matter
has fallen out well. And it does not often happen, that the Ambassador has so
little time, that he cannot both give and ask advice of his master concerning
the same. Which is always the meetest and surest way, to make apparent unto
him, both his respectiuenesse, and diligence.

Another point is, de libero mandato, and of instructions not signed nor
limited: or else of those, to which the Athenians added, Legati praeterea
quicquid boni possunt agunto. In this case they had full liberty to threate,
do, and conclude that which they judged to be profitable for the service of
their Sovereign. There are also some affairs so secret, so important, so
urgent, so desperate, that it is expedient to commit all to the wisdom of
the Ambassador, as Tacitus says, speaking of Drusus, who was sent in the
behalf of his father Tiberius toward the mutinous Legions: Nullis certis
mandatis ex re consulturum mittit: and as in former times when the Commonwealth
was in danger, all was committed to the power and will of the Dictator.
Nevertheless men placed in great charge are so exposed unto envy and
slander, that our Ambassador shall do very discreetely, not to conclude any
thing without his Masters commandment, as I have said, out of his due place.
Unless, when the matter cannot admit any delay, to communicate it with two or
three of the most experienced servants that his Master has in the Country
where he is, for the matter happening to fall out ill, he shall avoid the
reproach of having done it alone, and without advice. The which I say also, and
chiefly for him that shall have his remembrances in express words, and signed:
to whom nevertheless some new accident might befall, which was neither
foreseen, nor comprehended within his commission, for oftentimes the Agents
and Ministers of Princes do find at their arrival, matters other-therwise
disposed then was before imagined; especially in time of war, and in a
country far distant. And there needs to a new business a new advice: as
namely, if he had bin commanded to use gentle and gracious terms, it may be
peradventure more needful that he spoke roughly and in threatening manner, or
to change and omit something enjoined by his instructions. He shall likewise
have this advice of me, that through too much diligence and earnestness, he
give not or augment the suspicion which might be had of the cause of his
coming, and that he do not discover it, through too much art and talking.
The great preparation of him that fears to be surprised, makes his fear to
increase: and his fear augmenteth his enemies courage: it being otherwise very
certain, that all things which are affected, disguised, or augmented, are
naturally suspected.

Yet another advice, which is, that there are some, who at their coming make
the affairs of their Master or Commonwealth, to be so feeble, and so
desperate, as nothing more, thinking to stir up compassion, and to be the
sooner succored; but many Princes contemn those that are in necessity, and
do no good but to those whom they fear, or from whom they expect profit. Yea,
there are some that reject the distressed, accompting that they are abandoned
of God and Fortune, all at once: as if God had no other there blessing than that
of the goods of fortune: but a holy Father of the Church has holily said,
Multa deus negat propicius, quae concedit iratus. God is not always angry
when he denies us any thing. God is not always pleased when he grants us
any thing. He must therefore remember, that oftentimes the countenance carries
away the game, and that compassion is not lodged, but in a truly humane, and
christian heart, and seldom indeed in the hearts of the Mighty, and of their
Counselors.

We said then, that many things ought to be left to the discretion of a wise
Ambassador, without binding his tongue and hands. Mitte sapientem and
nihildicito. But when he has carried himself therein like an honest man, it
is wickedly done to reward him with a dissalowance, and such Princes deserve
not to be served of honest men, especially when they have done well. Industry
and Diligence are of our selves but a happy success is from heaven.
Nevertheless there are some things subject to dissallowance, as are the
haughty and insolent words which an Ambassador has used, or else the secret
plottes and practices, which he works in the Estate where he is resident, if
it be without commandment, and even populare estates have made a prouiso for
the same, without expecting a dissallowance.

Amongst others, there is an express law amongst the Grisons, made in the
month of February, MDLXXX by which, all Agentes, Ministers, and Factors of
foreign Princes, are prohibited to make any secret or open complotts, or else
to spread any new thing among the people, without aduertizing the general
assembly of their three Cantons, upon pain of being held prisoners. This law
is closely in all other Estates, if it be not expressed in words: whereof we
will anon speak in his place. As for words, it is certain that how absolute
soever the Prince, or great the Commonwealth is which he represents, the
respect and the civility which he looks for, is reciprocal on his part.
The more or the less is referred to his discretion the which he ought to have
for guide and mistres in all his actions. The kezar or great duke of Muscouie
causd an Ambassadors hat to be naild to his head, for not having done him
honor enough. Such a one would rather have cast his hat under his feet.

The Doctor B. speaking unto the Counsel of the late King, in the behalf of
his Master, used so uncivil words, that he offended every man: and it was
not believed that his commission warranted such language, nevertheless they
would not aggrauate matters then. Anthony caused the Ambassador of Augustus
to be whipped, for having spoken to Cleopatra with too little respect: and the
Greekish Emperor Emanuel caused, for the like occasion, the Venetian
Ambassadors eyes to be plucked out, for sometimes Ambassadors bearing
themselves bold on the greatness of their Masters, do forget themselves, and
especially those that are brought up in popular Estates, and which are
accustomed to a liberty of speaking, as the Romans in former times. It is a
story worthy to be noted of one of the two Ambassadors which those of Thebes
sent unto king Artaxerxes, who seeing the honor which was given unto him, to
be great, and very near unto adoration, that he might not be reprehended
for doing too much or too little therein, fained in saluting him, to take up
his ring, which he had of purpose let fall upon the ground. Contrariwise
Timagoras being sent in the behalf of those of Athens to the same King was
reprehended for having done honor unto him, not as a Citizen of Athens, but as
a subject of Persia. In like manner, there are great submissions to be done to
the grand Signor by all the Ambassadors, to whom, or the greater part of them,
he gives entertainment by mouth, and there is danger in omitting them. For
perhaps it would not happen so well with all men, as it did once to an
Ambassador of France, that was so ielous of the dignity of his Master, that
he handsomely shifted himself out of the hands of two Baschaes, that
conducted him according to the custom, and on a sudden presented himself to
the Grand Signor, without doing him any other honor than that which is given
unto the Princes of Christendom. His freedom and plainness served him for
an excuse: but his successor in that charge, which was his Nephew, would not
use the like: he ought therefore to hold his degree and the dignity of his
Master provided, that it be without contempt of the Prince to whom he is sent,
and so Monsieur de la Noue speaks thereof in this judicious observations upon
Guicciardine.

See yet another advice which is not to be neglected, which is, that he accept
no charge or commission from any other than his Master. An Embassage and a
Comedy are different things; A man cannot therein play diverse parts under
diverse garments, for fear lest it befall him as it did to an Ambassador sent
to the Emperor, who being requested by a Cardinal to do in his name, faith,
homage, and submission, for certain lands held held of the Emperor, was
admitted to do it, but not without the mockery of those which had seen him
the day before in his dignity of an Ambassador, the which he destained by
this submission, doing wrong to his own reputation and to the greatness of
his ma^ster, both at once. Neither at his return from his charge, ought he to
bring credence or message from him to whom he had been sent, besides the
business which he went to treat of: for that is suspicious and ill befitting,
if it be not between Princes that are near of blood and very good friends,
and for a matter common between them, and not odious.

But to return to the matter of his charge, if he have not lessons given him
by writing, it is no danger to tell him in general, that he shall do well to
learn, what is the form of government of the Country wherein he is, the
limits, greatness and largeness thereof, the manners of the people, the
number of places of strength, havens and vessels, the storehouses of munition,
the forces of war for sea and land, what may be drawn out of the Country
without vnfurnishing the frontiers and places of importance; the entrances into
the Country, the ordinary and extraordinary reuenewe; the Treasure and mean
in ready money; the alliances offensive and defensive with other Princes and
Estates near or far off; the traffike, commerse, plenty and fertility
thereof: and if it be a Prince, to know the humor and inclination of him, and
of those that rule most about him to know the coffeehouse the people has of
his behavior, the iealousies and practices of the Great-ones, the factions and
particularities in the estate, and whether it be for the state, or for
religion, or for any other occasion, his yearly expenses, both for his house,
as for his frontiers and garrisons. Above all, let him always have an eye
abroad into the country, to discover, if there be any stirring against the
service of his Master, or against his confederates. The which he shall much
better learn, if he be daily attendant at the Court, unless at such times as
the king withdraws himself for his recreation: (for, in such a case he
should make himself to be held suspected and importunate) in popular Estates
to be always present at their diets, meetings, and assemblies, or to have some
one of his own company there, to the end that there be no evil resolution
taken to the prejudice of his master.

He ought also to visit the princepall Counselors, the Secretaries of Estate,
and amongst others, him that Has the charge of foreign affairs, to
entertain them at times with magnificence and affability; but yet seldom. He
shall also visit the Ambassadors of other Princes and Common wealths, that are
resident in the same Court, but yet sparingly, that he may not gine them a
shadow of himself. A foreign Ambassador that was of late in our Court, saw no
man, nor suffered himself to be seen but once in three months. And God
knows if his aduices were slender and barren. Cyneas being Ambassador for
Pyrrhus unto the Romans did much better. He knew all the Senators and saluted
them every one by his name. Which made him the more acceptable and favored. I
have seen some Ambassadors of Venice to perform this point with much
dexterity: and for the most part they have no need but of this instruction,
for the relations which at their return they are accustomed to present to the
Signeurie makes those which succeed them to be sufficiently instructed in that
which they ought to know in an Estate.

Yet must our Ambassador, in this, as well as in all the other prates of his
charge, use great discretion, for that all Princes are naturally jealous of the
secrecies of their Estates. There is an express law of Honorius and Theodosius
de alieni regni arcanis non scrutandis. I remember that the late Monsieur B.
who followed Monsieur the late Duke of Aniow into England, was there maligned
for his indiscreet curiosity, although that otherwise he was esteemed for
his learning. Being at dinner with an English Lord, he began to speak of the
succession (a matter then amongst them odious and capital) and affirmed, that
a certain Princess was the presumptiue inheritrix thereunto: notwithstanding
a certain law which seemed to exclude those that were borne out of the land:
and yet, said he, I know not where this law is for all the diligence which I
have used to find it out. It was suddenly replied unto him by this Lord: You
shall find it on the back side of the Salicque law, a indicious and biting
rebound, which instantly stopped the curiosity of this man, which indeed was in
all respects out of season: for at that time there was a treaty of marriage
between his Master and the Queen of England. Neither does Plutarch place this
discourse of Bodin amongst talk fit for the table. And in truth it was taken
in ill part, that this man had written and published some matter of England,
upon report of some particular men, without other verification. Therefore in
searching out these matters he ought to be wonderfully discreet and
considerate. In France all things are exposed to the curiosity of strangers,
partly through our natural liberty in speaking of all things, partly by
reason of the fashions in the estate, and the divisions in religion, which for
the space of forty years have shaken France: but principally, through the
greatness and largeness of this Estate, wherein it is more difficult to remedy
this mischief, then in alesser Realm, or small Commonwealth, where it is
easier to stop private men's mouths.

Amongst the means how to be informed of the affairs of a Country, besides
money which makes the closest Cabinets of Princes to fly open, there is one
more open, and less suspected. Which is, entertainment at the table, which
obliges many people, and especially those, who to have a free recourse
thereunto, or to draw from the Ambassador some dosen of crowns, smell out all
the news and report them unto him, at his table, or in private. True it is
that they are not always of a true stample, and it be hooueth a wise man to
weigh them well, and learn the truth thereof, before he make use of it, and
that, if possibly he can, he await the proceeding and issue of the matter, and
the effect of a deliberation that is taken, before he give advise thereof: for
that all things in the world are subject to change. A Gentleman (that was
otherwise excellently qualified) being at the beginning of these last troubles
sent unto the Court, to learn what was in working against his Master, and
those of his party, suffered himself to be led on with the fair words of the
Court, having forgotten the first secret of his charge. To take heed rather to
that which is done, then to that which is spoken. I have seen others to have
failed in the like, who for a desire which they had to give fresh
intellignences, wrote all things indifferently, were it false or true, and
oftentimes at the first answer which they received from the Court, were
rewarded for their diligence with some piece of mockery. Others fall into this
extreamitie of writing, even to the least occurrences of a country, the
quarrels of particular men, the love of Ladies in Court, the executions of
justice, the orders for receiving the treasure, and of the government: or
other frivolous matters which no way concern the Estate, much like those
aduises and occurants of Italy, which are fit for nothing but to make work
for idle heads. It is true, that there are some Princes and Ladies would know
all: for contenting of whose curiosity, I would make a private letter, which
not meddling with the affairs of his charge, should not need to be carried or
read unto the Counsel.

Here arises a question, if an Ambassador ought to give advise unto his
Master, of all that which is spoken amiss of him: because that advise thereof
may come unto him by other means then from himself, who in such cases ought
to take good heed that he be not prevented. I remember me, to this effect, of
the Agent of a neighbor Princess, who seeing the wrong that such reports
would bring unto the service and common cause of the one and the other, did
rather choose to conceal the indiscreet speeches which he had heard. I
commended and admired his discretion, exhorting him, in the like occasions, to
yield unto the public good, the particular offense of some particular drunken
or witless fellow. Even so Philip de Comines complains that by the report
made of a few words, there has many times a good alliance been broken, or a
good and profitable effect hindered. It is an other thing, if in full counsel
of the Prince, or in the Pulpit by the Preachers, or on the Theater by stage
players, or by writing or Lybels, he see the honor of his Master defamed. For
he ought forthwith to advertise him of it, and withal to crave Justice, and
amends for the same, of those that ought to grant it unto him: Yet
nevertheless moderating himself, for not making the mischief to be greater
than it is; for so it befalls them as with Women, who many times through too
much defending of their Honesty, make it more doubtful and suspected,
especially, when they add thereto much affection and feruencie, as Tacitus
says, Co^nicia si irascare, agnita videntur, spreta exolescunt. But what if
himself receive any injury for his own particular or any of his followers? It
must be distinguished, whether the injury be done unto him in public, of t he
Prince or Commonwealth, in which he is resident. As that Ambassador of Rome,
on whom in full assembly Thelitizeus of Tarentum threw dirt and piss. I have
says he, more then I demanded, but one day you shall wash my clothes with
your blood; and his prophecy fell true, and he ought forthwith to advertise
his Master thereof, that he may do therein as he shall judge to be for the
best. Or else, whether that the indignity were offered unto him by some
particular person: In this case the way of complaint is open unto him, to have
right by the ordinary course of Justice, which shall unfeignedly be granted unto
him, if be not intended to break off with his Master. For it is not denied
unto strangers by the same law of Nations, Plato says, that God has a
particular rate of strangers, and the further off that a stranger is from the
succor of his kindred and friends, the more he is in the protection of God.
Omnia in Perigrinos quam in ciues peccata grauiora sunt and magis vltori Deo
curae. And withal, the person of the Prince seems to be violated in the
person of the Ambassador, who having put himself into the protection, and
under the assurance of a public faith, has received a wrong or an indignity,
and is bound to cause true Instice and full amends to be made unto him.

Let us speak a word of his aduises, because most commonly it is not known
what an Ambassador does in his charge, but by that which himself writes. It
was once forgotten that there was an Ambassador in Denmark, if the late Sieur
de Douse a worthy Gentleman, and who has been there above thirty years, had
not at length remembered it himself. For that in so far a Country, and where
the affairs were not very great, an Ambassador has seldom sufficient
occasion to make his virtue known, and for that things are worth no more then
the value that is made of them, he shall do well to make himself known by
his aduises which are looked on and considered by the Secretarries of Estate,
read unto the Counsel, and represented unto the Prince, according unto the
worth of the subject. They must therefore be grave, brief, well compact,
containing much in few words, couched in terms, rather ordinary then
borrowed, interlaced sometimes with sententious clauses, and points, yet very
seldom; and that they may be the better understood, it shall be good to
articulate every affair apart: as commonly those of Monsieur de Vileroy
(chief and most worthy Secretary of the Commandments) are, and as the use is
in the most part of the Chaunceries in Germany. For my part, I cannot allow
the manner of writing of such as tie themselves to a continnuate running on, and
heaping together of their letters, notwithstanding the difference of affairs
which they contain, and it seems, as it were a course covering or other like
work made of diverse pieces joined together. And if his Masters seeruice can
admit it, I would rather give no new advise, until I had answer unto the
former. Order and Methoode in all things eases the mind, and augmenteth the
memory. Likewise if it fall out that he must write many letters of the same
subject, for the same place, as it ordinarily happens, he shall do well to
use as much difference as he can in the terms and style, that they may not be
like to a Notories president.

I must now speak concerning Presidencie, whereof there are a thousand good
points to be spoken, which are for a several discourse. I will only say, that
if an Ambassador will reap honor of his charge, it is meet that he do
honor unto the same, and that he be jealous of the degree and place which is
due unto his Master, without yielding any jot thereof unto an other. Princes
and sovereign estates do hold many times more dear, the conservation of
their degree and dignity than of their lands and possessions. So Arcases, did
put his Ambassador to death: for having surrendered his place unto Sylla, (as
Plutarke says.

It is true, that always such questions do not arise, because almost every
one throughout all places knows the degree and place, that is due unto him.
In the Court of Rome for these 50. or 60. years, the Ambassador of Spain has
made question of precedencie with those of France. There was a great alteration
therein at the Council of Trent. At Venice it has been adjudged to him of
France. The late Advocate Pithou affirms, that in all the prouincials of all
the Cathedral Churches of Christendom that have been imprinted at Rome even
to this present, the King of France is put the first of all other Kings, being
seconded by the King of England, and then by him of Spain. Bodin says, that
in the ceremony, of the Order of England, the place of the King of France, is
at the right hand of the chief of the Order, and so it was decreed at a
Chapter held on the eve of Saint George patron of that Order, in the year
1555 by the knights of the Garter, albeit that the King of Spain had married
Mary the elder sister of the late Queen of England, I believe that there would
be no less honor done unto him in Scotland, Denmark, and of many princes and
potentates of Germany and Italy. But the Emperor being near kins-man, of the
same name and arms, that the King of Spain is, gives the precedencie to his
Ambassador; and the last Emperor was content that it should go by turns, (as
anciently that of the Roman Consulls was, and at present that of the
Burghemaisters, and Auoyers in some Cantons of Swisserland is) to the end not
to displease the one nor the other. Nevertheless the King sent word unto
Monsieur de la Forest his Ambassador, that he should not alter any thing in
this matter, without his express commandment. The Senate of Polonia, to a
like question ordained, tha the first come should be the first heard. At an
other time, at the Council of Constance the Ambassador of England, debated it
with him of France, whose strongest argument was the title which his Master
then took of, King of England and France. And he possessed Aquitania and
pretended unto Normandy. I have heard reported that an Ambassador of the
Kings in Swisserland being in company with the Ambassador of Spain at the
assembly of Baden, and seeing that the spaniard always strove for the way,
made as if he would buy something at a Marchantes shop where both of them
staying together the French stepped out first and took the advantage. The best
is in such occasions, never to meet together, unless that the service of his
master do require it. At least he can excuse himself for public places and
ceremonies as has bin practiced at Rome for these certain years. And if so
be our Ambassador chance to be present at such like altercation of other
Ambassadors, he must take heed, not to inuest himself in the one side or the
other, or any way to interpose himself therein without his masters
commandment. It is not so for all other differences that many fall out in the
country where he is, especially if he perceive his Master to have any
interest therein: as when there happens any discord amongst the Swissers, or
the Grisons, all which have almost as many commonwealths as they have Cities
and Corporations. And it is very hard that in that great body so diversely
compounded with difference of customs, languages, and religion, (in one only
Canton of the Grisons, there are three different languages spoken) there grow
not amongst them (as wise as they all are) some occasion of disputation,
wherein the wise Ambassador may make the dexterity of his spirit to prevail,
by setting them at accord, employing the affection of his Master toward the
one side and the other to oblige them both unto him. The which thing the Sieur
de Liuerdis last Ambassador for the King amongst the Grisons knew how to
handle both wisely and profitably, when he saw they were on terms of
disagreeing and I can speak for a certainty, that his memory is yet held dear
amongst them. The Interest of the King in these two estates is, that during
their divisions he can levy no forces, nor be succored with their people to
any purpose, if he should stand in need of them. About the year 1602. the
Sieur de Dase by his wise Meditation accorded to two Kings of Denmark and
Swethen being ready to enter into war, and both of them made choice of him
for Arbitrator of their differences.

His Privileges.
IT follows now to speak of the privileges and immunities of an Ambassador,
not only for the respect of his own person, but also of those of his family,
and of all that appertains unto him: for concerning his person, every man
knows, that by the laws of God and man, even amongst barbarous nations, and
in the midst of the arms and armies of enemies, the person of an Ambassador
has in all ages been adudged holy, sacred, and inviolable: for if besides the
peril and inconveniences of a long voyage, to which they expose themselves,
they should not be in safety in the place whereunto they go, there would
never be any which would undertake the hazard thereof, and consequently there
would never any longer be made any truce, peace, or establishment of commerce:
finally, we should fall again into that first Chaos, and confusion of all
things. And likewise the punishments of those that have done violence unto
them, have in all times been very rigorous: this law being grown into a
proverb: Legatus neque coeditur neque violatur. And when men have not taken
punishment for the same, it has been observed from age to age, that God has
not suffiered this offense unpunished: witness the subversion of Carthage, of
Sirus, of Thebes, and of so many other Cities, yea Provinces, and whole
Kingdoms. David fought against, discomfited and brought into bondage the
Ammonites for this cause. The histories both sacred and profane do afforde us
enough and too many examples hereof, King Frances the first denounced war
against the Emperor Charles for the murder of Amion and Fregose his
Ambassadors. Yea, even a rough and haughty word, a scorn or contempt done
unto some Ambassadors has been oftentimes cause of the beginning of war, as
that of Dalmatia, whereof Nasica was General, and a long time after that of
Simon King of Bulgarie, against Alexander Emperor of Constantinople. By a much
stronger reason therefore if they have been outraged n their persons.
Contrariwise this very name of Ambassador has been in so great reverence with
all good men, that some have not so much as touched the persons of those that
had been surprised in working some practices at Rome with the rebels: The
great Africanus sent home those of Carthage, although that their Masters had
violated the law of nations in the persons of the Roman Ambassadors, and the
Dictator Posthumous suffered certain spies to depart, who falsely termed
themselves Ambassadors, and did no other harm unto them. It is not long since
that there was great courtesy showed to an Ambassador of a neighbor Prince,
which was discovered to have complotted with the rebels of the Estate, for
without more ado he had fear to depart. Yet I aduouch that other have dealt
herein otherwise. And the three former examples are of mere courtesy and
effects of the Roman generositie. King Frances the first having understood that
the Emperor had put under custody the Bishop of Tarbis his Ambassador, did the
like unto Granuelle, lodging him in the Chastelet without doing him other
hurt. And very seldom indeed has that respect bin violated, which the law of
Nations (I had thought to have said of Nature) has imprinted in the minds of
men, since the beginning of the world, if it were not peradventure by a Clement
the VI. a Julius the II. or some such other enemy of the name of France, or
rather enemy of nature. The one reviled and imprisoned the Ambassadors of
Germany and France, which went in their Masters behalf to offer him some good
means of reconciliation. The other committed to prison and tortured a Bishop
being an Ambassador of Savoy, that offered in the behalf of his Master to
enterpose himself in making peace between him and the King of France. In
ancient times the Romans contented themselves to carry upon them certain
herbs which they called Sagmina, whereof they were called Sancti, and the
Greeks their (...), as the Heraldes their Caducei. This only mark in those
days held them inviolable, and respected even amongst the very Barbarous
nations.

It is true that this respect, freedom and assurance which they have for their
Masters sakes, gives them no liberty to do evil. In hoc datumius gentium,
non vt laedant alios, sed ne ipsi laedantur: as says a Writer of our time. For
he that has falsified the public faith, does not deserve that it should be
kept unto him; and a colorable Embassage is so much the more to be punished,
because oftentimes it concerns the ruin of an Estate. And all laws ordain,
that he which abuses his privilege, makes himself unworthy thereof, and
loses it. For if he works any plottes or practices, either by attempts on
the person of the Prince to whom he is sent, or any enterprise upon his
Estate, as Mendoza did in that of England, some sixteen or eighteen years
past: At other times there was a distinction made, if there were but a counsel
simply given, or a conspiracy made without execution, or else if the effect
followed thereuppon. Afterward they would know if he were abetted in it by
his Master or not. The which the Romans and others did many times put in
practice, and those which were found to be disalowed by them, were delivered
and given over unto him whom they had offended, or unto his Master. Dedebantur
ex iure gentium. In the matter of Mendoza, the Queen of England laid no hand
on him, but gave him a Congee to depart out of her Realm. This was not done
without consultation taken, whether there were law to stay him and have him
punished; saying, that in vain, he puts himself under the sauegard of
nations which violateth the law of nations: and there were many examples
thereof, or at least if he should be held in safe keeping until advise had
been given, and right required of his Master. They having done me the honor
to ask my opinion on herein, I told them that the most requisite and ordinary
means, and safest for the Estate, was to advertise his Master thereof, and to
expect his allowance or disallowance; but the Gentleman whom they sent thither,
was neither seen nor heard by the King of Spain, who made himself to be
excused by his weakness of body, that he might avoid answering thereof:
Forasmuch as his atte^pts of long time plotted ted against England were to
manifest, he would never he nor forsake him whom he had set on work. They were
also advised that the offense was only plotted, no executed, coeptum non
consummatum, as the Lawyers say. But in this last point I would not have bin
his warrant no more then of al others that make the like attempts, who falling
into the hands of Princes or Commonweales that are more patient to bear a
wrong and less stayed, should not escape so good cheap. For if it be granted
by both civil and natural laws to resist force with force, if Lex Talionis
proceed from the law of nature: Yea, if such an enterprise had not been left
unpunished in the very person of his Master, if he had been present as it
has been seen many times: I leave it to be judged of, if there were not good
reason to detain him, that I may say no worse. Considering that rule of the
Common law. Vbi quis deliquit iurisdictionem eius subijsse intelligigitur cuius
in ditione deliquit. He is subject unto the laws of the Estate where the
offense is committed, and there is no quality nor privilege that excuses him.
Which I affirm although he had showed his masters commission for the same.
And indeed every man uses not in such a matter the patience and prudence of a
Roman Senate. For the truth is, that the Ambassador which under the title of
amity comes toward a Prince, that is his Masters alie: to serve him an ill
turn, makes himself culpable and without excuse: Bis peccat qui praetexta
pietatis peccat: There being no privilege of the law of nations that can
warrant him from the ordinary punishment of all such as trouble the quiet of
any Estate. Which I affirm by so much the stronger reason, since that Procopius
in his history of the Goths brings in Theodeadus saying unto the Ambassador
of Justinian, that an attempt against the honor of a woman, or an indignity
done unto a King by an Ambassador, deserves punishment. Eatenus hac
praerogatiua possunt vti, quoad ab officio non recedunt. Nam legatum licet
oceidere si in Regem fuit contumeliosus, aut si pudicitiam alienae vxoris
contrectauit. The easiest punishment is to expel him, and send him home unto
his Master, or to demand Justice to be done after that the crime shall be
sufficiently auerred by letters or witnesses, or that the Ambassador stands
convict, by having entered into the execution and enterprise. Thus many have
dealt as I have said before, to show themselves more religious in the
preservation of a public and privileged person, or charitable to render good
for evil, as the Great Africanus did. Of whom when it was demanded in the open
Senate, what should be done unto the Ambassadors of Carthage; are answered,
Nihil tale quod Carthaginienses. Let us not commit that fault which we blame
in them.

Therefore a wise Ambassador will not thrust himself into these perils,
Nevertheless if he have a Commandment from his Master to do it as we spoke
before, concerning deceit and lies, Shall he be admitted to excuse himself
thereby to judge of the justness of his Masters intentions and of the equity
of his commandments? Is it for him to diue into the secrets or to control the
pleasure of his Prince? Hear a good man does again find himself in great
doubts what to do, for if an Ambassador ought to set before his eyes, the
honor, greatness, profit, and service of his Lord, and that by these
practises', some special service may be effected for him: I seems that it is
not lawful for him to refuse his commandment. This question, me thinks, may
be resolved by the solution of such as are made by Philosophers, Lawyers, and
Divines, concerning the obedience that the child is bound to render to his
father, the servant unto his Master, the Subject unto his Prince, and the
Vassal to his liege Lord. For all are of accord that this obedience extends
not unto that which is against God, Nature, and Reason. But to lie, deceive,
betray, to attempt the life of a Sovereign prince, to make his subjects to
revolt from him, to weaken and trouble his Estate, especially in time of peace,
and under color of amity and alliance is directly against the Commandment
of God, against the Laws of Nature, and of Nations; It is a violating of the
public faith, without which, humane society, and finally the frame of the
world would be dissolved. And the Ambassador which serves his Master in such
an affair, commits a double offense, both for that he serves him in the
enterprise and execution of so ill an action; and for that he does not give
him better counsel which he is bound to do by the duty of his charge, which
charge comprehends the quality of a Counselor of Estate for time of his
Embassage, although he had not the honor to be accounted so before. The
History of France mentions that the Sieur de Flauij Governor of Compisque for
King Charles the seventh, seeing that his Master suffered himself to be
abused by the Duke of Burgundy, caused the Inhabitants to enterpose
themselves, and by humble demonstrations refused to give over the place unto
the Duke, notwithstanding a second Commandment from this King, and inhonestly
refusing that unto his master which was prejudicial unto him, he discharged the
duty of a faithful servant. Surely it is a good service to deny ones Master
when he commands to his hurt: as the one that would ask a sword to hill
himself, Non dare, sed eripere telum irato, pium est.) But let us speak the
truth, the most part of the practices that are made upon adioining estates,
take such beginning as the Ambassadors and Agents themselves do give thereof
unto their Master, they themselves laving open the means thereunto, and
offering themselves voluntarily to put them in execution. I have observed it
ten times in my life, neither are they to complain when they fall into this
laborinth.

Thus much for the public: but, what if the Ambassador himself has offered
violence to any particular person? I know not whether there be any thing
determined or specified by the Laws therein: Yet if extremity be used, he
cannot escape the rigor of the Laws of the Country where he committed the
fault. His master himself, according to the rule aforegoeing, should in like
case be ordered by justice. For there is a difference to be made between the
dignity of a Prince and his Authority. Within the dominions of another
Sovereign, he retains but his dignity: And what honor soever is done unto
his Person, yet there is no authority given him, to make grauntes, to
pronounce decrees, to establish Laws, to stamp money of his own coin, and
such like things which carry the mark of Souerainetie. A neighbor King being
fled for refuge into France, did, or suffered to be done, some violence to a
Sergeant, which went to do an exploite in his lodging. Had it not been in
respect of his dignity, and other reasons of Estate, he had possibly been
otherwise spoken withal then he was. The like, and so much the stronger
reason is, for an Ambassador, who is but the Minister, and subject of his
Prince. But the safest and fittest course is, before you require reason of him,
to demand it of his Master, who in such a case will not deny it so soon as
in a matter of estate.

Here falls out place for a question which some men make, to wit, If by the
Law of Nations an Ambassador has jurisdiction over those of his house and
family. For which I see no likelihood, for the reason which I here give, That
the authority of a Prince, and all marks of souerainetie, do cease in an
others dominions. But punishment by death is the Sovereign mark of
Soueraintie; and to come from the great to the lesser, the Ambassador has not
more right than his Prince or other Sovereign. An Ambassador (I never name any
that I may not wrong his reputation) did run a hazard in a near Country. One
of his household servants had forced his Daughter, being of the age of five or
six years, he himself caused punishment to be done, causing the servant to
be strangled. In France the just cause of giefe might possibly have excused a
man of quality, for not having addressed himself to the ordinary course of
justice, according to the sense of the Law, Iulia de adulterys in the behalf
of fathers and husbands that found the adulterers in this act: at least, a
pardon or a remission had yielded reason for the same. But these people made
much work about it, saying that no man of what quality soever could exercise
justice, but he to whom the Sovereign commits it, and they said true: for no
Prince, Lord, or gentleman, exercises supreme justice in that Country: and
the stood upon it, that process ought to be made against the Ambassador for
having dared to cause a man to be put to death, of his own private authority.
Nevertheless, the foul offense committed by the servant which was a frenchman
and the considerations of estate, but much more the authority of the prince did
stop their mouths. The King of Denmarkes Ambassador used altogether an other
course in England: for he demanded Justice of the Queen, for a Murder
committed in his house, by one of his own servants upon an other of them. She
of favor would not meddle therewith, but permitted him to carry him back into
Denmark to have him there ordered by Justice. Neither can I allow of the doing
of a Spanish Ambassador at Venice, who caused a servant of his, to be hanged at
his Chamber window for some great offense, as it was said, although the
Seigneurie made no show nor pursuit therein: to whom he could and ought to
have addressed himself

That ancient rule therefore ought to take place, Nulla manus ferrum tractat,
nisi quae sceptram, unless that both the Princes had so agreede between
themseluesas the same might and ought to be done in Estates that are far one
from the other. For otherwise the punishment of a crime should oftentimes be
deferred, and consequently be neglected, through such a distance of place. No
otherwise than as Captains upon the Sea, have ordinarily authority from their
Soueraines to punish the crimes that are committed abord their ships, as
other commanders of the field, have authority to punish offenders in their
Armies, although they be in the dominions of other Soueraines. And I have since
observed, that this is the opinion of Monsieur Paschall, a most learned
Counselor of Estate, in his book de Legato.

And if so be an Ambassador has no jurisdiction over those of his own
household, he has less over the other subjects of his Master: The kings
Ambassador in Swisserland at the beginning of the last troubles being
aduertized of the practizes which were intended against the service of the king
would cause one of the debtors therein to be stayed, who was passing to
Soleure, and pretended the law of Nations, and the freedom of the passage. But
who doubts that within his house he had not sufficient authority to seize on
him, and out of his house, to use the authority of the Magistrate unto the
same effect? I say simply, to seize on him, and not to proceed in Justice
against him, but to send him to his Master, or to hold him until he
understand his pleasure.

We have before spoken of Spies that come under the name of Ambassadors, or of
Ambassadors which under color of negotiating some affair, or entertainment
of amity, do spy out the secrets of the estate to an ill intent, but with
those it fares otherwise than with common spies, and of such as come without
allowance. For being once accepted for Ambassadors they are infallibly within
the sanctuary of the Law of Nations, and the consequence would be most
dangerous, if a door were opened unto such near inquirets, and few men, and
medlers in foreign affairs, would be assured in their charges, the most part
of them being in effect employed therein, but to learn that which is done
amongst others. And some call them also honorable Spies alleging that saying
of Chabrias, He is an excellent commander for the war that knows all that
is done amongst his enemies. And in truth he cannot be accounted for a true
friend which is mistrusted, and whose secrets and designs a man is constrained
to epsy. And to this effect the History of England, says that Henry the
seventh, (a wise and discreet Prince, and Grandfather to the late Queen)
was about to have dismissed all resident and ledger Ambassadors, and to have
kept none with any other, but death prevented him. We have also said before,
that Antiquity knew them not, and the History of France notes that Lewis the
eleventh did neur send the same Ambassador twice unto him whom he would
intertaine with words, to the end, that if the former had by chance treated
of any matter, where of the effect did not follow, the latter should not know
what to answer thereunto, and that the ignorance of the matter, might serve
him for an excuse whereby to gain time. But we are gone from our matter, we
must therefore distinguish if they be deputies in the behalf of some Provinces
that are in subjection to a greater Empire, or under the protection of an other
as those quae populi Romani Maiestatem colere dicebantur. Or else, if they be
sent from a sovereign Prince to his equal form of the first case they should
stand more at the mercy of him whom they have offended. Nec a subditis, nec
subditos recte mittuntur legati. Those are not properly Ambassadors whom the
Subjects send unto their prince, or he to them, whereof I spoke before. I will
only add a good note that is in Plutarke of one of Sparta sent to the
General of their enemies army, who being asked in what quality he presented
himself. If, says he, I obtain that which I demand I come as an
Ambassador, If not as one private, and without charge: I could not forget this
wise speech, although it be not to our matter.

Let us now see whether the Ambassador which passes thorough the Country of a
Prince to whom he is not sent, may aledge the law of Nations. I have before
spoken of the Sieur de Mortefontaine Hotman, and of his passage through the
Country of Burgundy, there was then open war between France and Spain,
those of the Country subjects of the Spaniard, therefore there was no
assurance for him by that taking course; Yea, a third man is not bound to
receive and acknowledge him for an Ambassador that passes thorough his
Country, to execute his charge in an other place, and if he does it, it is but
of courtesy and humanity, which is used in the behalf of passengers, to whom
in time of peace all ways are open. One thing helps him, to wit,
Neutralitie, which notwithstanding all the wars of former times has been
entertained and renewed between the King and those of the said Country, in
favor and at the request of the Lords of the Cantons, who term themselves
mediators and protectors of the said Neutralitie, whosoever therefore is to
pass thorough the Country of another, ought to enquire whether the Prince be
his Masters friend or enemy, if the Country be in peace or in war, and
howsoever it be, yet to crave passage, and to procure a good pasporte
sufficiently ratified for the same, or else a good and safe conduct. But if
notwithstanding the prohibition that has been made him to enter into the
Country where he goes to execute his charge, he would pass on further. We
ask if he can shield himself with the law of nations, whereunto we answer,
that seeing by the same law of Nations, and of Nature, every Colliar is
master in his own house, as the saying is, and every Sovereign in his own
estate. Surely he has full power and liberty to forbid the entrance into his
Country to such as he disliketh, and holds for suspected. Nevertheless if
he come toward the same as a suppliant, as the Roman Ladies came unto
Coriolanus: Plato says, Omnium tum in ciues tum in peregrinos maximum est
peccatum cum peccaturus supplices, Deus enim afflicti supplicis custos eximius.
This humanity ought in like manner to take place in the behalf of rebellious
and seditious subjects, at such times as they ordain any amongst them to make
submission and crave pardon for them, or to work some way of reconciliation,
following the clause and condition of the Roman Senate to those of Ascolie:
Sifactorum poentteat, liciturum ipsis mittere legatos, sui mimes, minime. But
if the number be great, as that in France lately was, and that the Estate be
divided into two Factions, and each side fallen into an open war. Seeing that
by martial laws even amongst strange and barbarous nations.

Heralds and Ambassadors are in saftie, surely this law ought to prevail
as well for divided subjects, as for strangers that are enemies unto the Estate.
I dare affirm the like for such as are fugitives, outlawes, or pirates, when
they make a head and join themselves together, as sometimes those under the
conduct of Spartacus, Sertorius Viriatus, Tacfarinas, and such like: for the
assurance that is granted unto such persons as they ordain to treat for them,
is not for their sakes, but in consideration of the Common good, and to reduce
them to their obedience, to the end that the troubles of the Estate may refuse.
Quod est necesse, turpe non est. Necessity has neither law nor shame And here
it is that that notable and ancient Maxim of estate ought to take place. Salus
populi suprema lex. The good of the Estate goes above all laws, and all
respects: true it is that they shall do well, not to present themselves, but
with a sufficient pasport from the General of the Army, with whom they have
to handle. And in this case to go about to attach their persons, or to do
them other displeasure, were to violate the faith that has been given them,
whatsoever Alber. Gent. in his treatise de Legationibus says thereof, contrary
to the opinion of my late father in his book of Notable questions.

There is also a doubt made concerning those, that are sent by Heretics,
Schismatiques, and excommunicated persons. This false principal, that faith
ought not to be kept with heretics, which was hatched in the Counsel of
Constance, and practiced against some particular persons that were caused to
come thither under the public faith, has given occasion to this question.
For which cause it is, that never since none would trust the faith of Popes nor
of Councels: the only or principal reason of schism which continues in the
Church since almost an hundred years. But this doubt may be cleared as the
former, by the consideration of the weal public: for that it is impossible
that we can abide without those things which are in other Countries and Lands,
and much less with that which is amongst our neighbors, of what religion and
belief soever they be. Christian Princes and Estates make no difficulty to
hold their Agents and Factors with the Turks when they have occasion, and the
king keeps an ordinary and resident with him. The grand Signior has his with
the Persian, and so reciprocally: nevertheless the Turk and the Persian, hold
each other for heretics. In former times, and very often, the Latin church
sent unto the Greek, which nevertheless it accounted for schismatike. At an
other time, the Church, being assembled in a Counsel of Africa sent the
Deputies unto the donatists. The Catholics have them with the Protestants, and
the Pope would once have sent some into England, and yet would unto other
Protestant Estates, if he thought they should be receued and be suffered to
manage his affairs among them. And if they were admitted, they should be
without doubt under the safeguard of Nations: as well as these which should be
sent unto him in their behalf.

Concerning these that are subjects of the Prince or Estate to whom they go in
Embassage, it is another matter: for although they have put themselves under
another Master, or have gotten tho freedom of Denisons in other places, yet
are they thereby nothing less the subjects of their natural Lord, nor any
thing less to be ordered by justice by him, if happily they have gone out of his
dominions without his leave, or for some offense or rebellion. King Perceus
sent unto Gentius King of Illyria, one that was natural borne subject of
Illyria. A Lieutenant of the Popes, in some part of the jurisdiction of the
Church, held prisoner the Duke of Vrbins Ambassador; because, said he, the
Ambassador was the Popes subject. And in our Fathers days, Frances Sforza Duke
of Millan caused the Esquier Merueilles, a subject of Millan, who having
retired himself into France, was sent Ambassador to the Duke, by King Frances,
to be beheaded, as before I noted. It was indiscretion in these three Princes,
to employ such men in that charge, and folly in the men to accept the same, for
to all three it fell out ill. Nevertheless the King had reason to complain,
and to require right to be done him therein: for Sforza having once admitted
and received Merucilies for Ambassador of France, as the King sufficiently
verified it by a letter of the said Sforzas, it was no longer lawful for him
to handle him as his subject, and did therein against the law of Nations. In
like manner was it with two others, under Charles the sixth, the Constable
Clisson subject to the duke of Britain, trusting thereunto, went unto him in
an ill season, and thought to have lost both life and liberty together: the
Duke having afterward set him at liberty, purged and rustified himself upon
the quality of the said Clisson, which he affirmed was a Britton by birth, and
his natural subject. And besides he would that the King should owe him a like
requital, for the respect which he had of one of his officers seeing that
otherwise he pretended to have had good reason to put him to death. But Philip
the Fair sent back those whom the Earl Guy of Flanders had sent unto him, to
offer him choice of peace or war: although that their Master and themselves
were his subjects, as the said King did not forget to tell them.

I will speak nothing here of the grand Signior, who not long since offered
himself to put to death the Ambassador of a Christian Prince, for to do that
Prince a pleasure, as he said: because the said Ambassador had done his
Master some ill offices, and had correspondency with his enemies. Neither was
the offer accepted because it might have brought much prejudice by the
consequence thereof.

His Family.
AND because we have comprehended his servants under his privileges, we will
speak a word thereof. In former times the number of those that accompanied him
in his embassage was certain and prefixed, and their names registered upon his
provision, or set on a list for to have recourse thereunto. These ought to
enjoy their masters privilege as those that in time of war are comprehended
within one passeport or safe conduct. But it being now left to the discretion
of the Ambassador, to take as many as he will, it is demanded, if al ought to
participate thereof; I make no doubt of it, forasmuch as concerns the
assurance of their persons, Quod ad legatos comitesue attinet, si quis little,
quem pulsisse, sieve iniuriam fecisse arguitur, lege Iulia, de vi publica
tenetur, as says a Law of the digests, the which extends the punishment unto
those that have outraged the servants of the Ambassador, as if they had done it
to his own person. And in truth the privilege of an Ambassador were very
slender, if it did not comprehend the persons of those of his family. I say of
his family. For there are some that pass many times under the favor and pass
port of the Ambassador, which would not be in any great assurance, if they
were discovered, although they were advouched by him, especially if they be of
another Nation than himself, or the subjects of that Prince unto whom he
goes.

Besides it ought not to be doubted that the house of an Ambassador is a
sanctuary and place of retraite to his servants and followers, against all
injuries and violences: provided that they do nothing against the laws of the
Country where they are, and against public honesty. For that which is not
permitted to the Master, much less is unto his servants. And yet nevertheless
I think not that without the permission of the Ambassador it is lawful for a
Sergeant or other officer of justice, to lay hands on, ceaze upon, or to use
any other course of justice upon any of those of his house, unless that they
be tooken in the very act and out of his house. For which cause the Ambassador
of Spain had reason to complain of the officers of Tunis, which were come to
carry away by force a servant of his being accused of Sodomitry, alleging
that they had no jurisdiction upon him or any of his: and added, that that
crime was not capital in all countries, for if the Tunisians had taken his
servant they would have proceeded against him and caused him to be burned
quick, according to the laws of their Country.

And concerning taxes, impositions, and other charges and contributions: I
doubt not but they are exempted from them as well as their Master in the
Country where he is resident, and as long as they are his servants; I mean, in
respect of their horses, apparel, and baggage, Preuided, they do not abuse
this privilege to make Merchandise, or to make other men's goods to pass under
the color of their privilege, as Guicciardin says, was done by certain
Deputies of Florence, sent to the Emperor Charles the fifth; being the^ at
Bologne with the pope who receued therefore both shame and punishment all at
once. And the law of the Digests wills that for that which they bring out of
their country besides their mouables, they should pay the impost thereof.
Nevertheless in this whole privilege they must order themselves according to
the particular use and custom of the places. For if it were said that none
should be exempted, of what condition or quality soever he were, certainly
neither he nor his servants, should be more privileged than others: it being
besides sufficiently known that Ambassadors and other foreign personages are
more favorably in treated in one place than in an other.

Thus much for the country, wherein their Master is resident, and only during
the time of his Embassage, and which is generally of the Law of Nations, and
common unto all Ambassadors, and their servants. But concerning the
exemptions, immunities, privileges, and prerogatives which an Ambassador
enjoys in his own Country, by the consent of his Prince or of the chief
Magistrate: the same comes from the Law Civil and that of the place it
self: and it is not of one sort in all places, and stretches not so sarre as
unto servants. For I think it not reason to grant unto them, letters of Estate
(as they are termed) and of respite against their Creditors, and to cause any
actions or process that has been commenced against them, since their
departure, and in respect of their absence, to cease, or be adiourned as unto
their Master himself: neither is there like consideration for it. No
otherwise than the servant of an officer, or one of the Kings house, or of the
chief Prince of the blood who has his causes committed unto the masters of
the Requests has no part in the privilege of his Master. The like I affirm
concerning all other exemptions, as taxes and such like charges, which are
privileges granted unto the persion of the Ambassador, and not to his servants
and followers, who are, or ought to be paid and rewarded with their Masters
purse, and whom he may either leave or change at his pleasure.

Nevertheless reason requires that I take out of this number, those that are
adjoined unto him by the Prince, or such other persons of quality whom
himself has chosen for to accompany him, and serve him in the affairs of his
Embassage, and without whom he cannot sufficiently perform the same. Unto
them I also add the Secretary and the Interpreter, which are necessary
Instruments unto him, and which serve rather the Embassage then the Ambassador,
as amongst the Swisers and Grisons, where the said Secretaries and
Interpreters are enrowled in the account of the pensions of that Nation, and
receive the ordinary wages of a crown by the day. But yet to give assurance of
their actual service, they shall do well to take a certificate or attestation
of the Ambassador, signed with his hand, that it may stand them in stead when
time and place shall require.

All this is founded on natural reason, and on the rule of that common equity,
which even children know by heart: That absence ought not to prejudice him which
is employed out of his Country for the service of his Prince or Commonwealth.
Absens reip: causa praesens esse censetur.

And by the same equity, and to the end also, that the Ambassador might not
be withdrawn from his charge, and constrained to return into his Country
about his suites of law, no man can commence any new action, either Real or
Personal against him, and a cessation was granted unless the cause had bin
before declared against him, in which case he appointed an Advocate to plead
for him.

Concerning his Horses, Mooueables, and vtensels: they are, by the same rule,
comprehended under this privilege, and I do not believe that it is lawful,
by reason of any debt or obligation to enter into the Ambassadors house, and to
make an attachment or sale of his Mooueables and Horses, since that I have
before showed that even in criminal causes there ought to be used herein both
respect and discretion. The accident which lately befell in Spain, in the
French Ambassadors house, gives us a proof thereof, which in a more doubtful
time had been the occasion of a greater trouble. And for Civil respects, it
behooves those which bargain with them to take good heed thereunto,
forasmuch as most commonly they are constrained to attend until the Embassage
be expired; and it happens unto them, as unto at others that have bargained
with one that is in his none-age, or with some privileged person, of whose
estate and condition, they ought not to be ignorant. It is true that the Civil
law distinguishes between contracts made before, or during the time of their
Embassage, and that which he had promised to pay in the place of his residence,
and at the time of his continuance there, which they called Constituta pecunia.
I speak of Contracts for money and payments; for it does not often happen that
an Ambassador makes any purchase of house, lands, and possessions, in the
Country where he is, or that he there contracteth himself in Marriage: Even as
it was not permitted unto those whom the Romans sent for governors into their
Provinces, to make purchases there, or to marry themselves. For thereby they
might be suspected of the one and the other. A French Gentleman that would have
married the Queen of Walachia, did put him self into great danger, for he went
about it without acquainting his Master, and without leave of the grand
Signior, who was much offended therewith. And to return to the matter of debts
and obligations, the Creditors must only address themselves by petition unto
the Prince or Soeraine Magistrate, without whose permission, in such causes
nothing can be effected. Manus regia ius facit in omni legatorum negotio. For
if the Ambassadors or his followers might not be ordered by law, no man would
ever lend unto them, neither would any man have any longer to do with them:
the Master himself would find the hurt thereof when his service should be
left undone for this occasion. And farther, it is without reason that they
should make their profit of an other man's harm. Which would so be if they
were not bound to render and to make payment. Therefore in bargaining they
ought to be subject to the jurisdiction of the place where they are, which I
have before said, takes place in the crimes and offenses which an Ambassador
or his servants do commit.

I have observed two other ancient privileges: the one, that the chains of
gold and other gifts and prcesents that had bin given unto them in regard of
their Embassage should remain unto themselves, and I believe that no man would
now make any question thereof, provided that it be without suspicion, and in
such sort as I have before showed. For the inciuilitie and barbarousnesse of
the Duke of Moscouie is not to be approved, who takes away, not only the
habites and ornaments which he gives them at their departure, but also the
gifts and presents which have been bestowed upon them in their Embassage,
which he converteth to his own profit. It is true that the Muscouites are not
simply subjects, (as those which were in England in the behalf of their Prince
about 18. years past did show unto me) but slaves unto their Prince. The
other ancient advantage of Ambassadors is that it was permitted unto them to
repose themselves after their return without being constrained to be charged
with any business or office of the Commonwealth. For as for the charge of
wardship, and such like, A man is discharged of it upon a less occasion.

Finally, he begins to enjoy his privileges, not only from the day of his
ariual, but even from the day of his nomi nation to the charge, as also his
return was not counted at the prefixed instant but after he had made his
report and cum laxamento temporis, as they use to say: because that as odious
matters are restrained, even so favorable matters are favorably extended, and
for that also it is for the good of the Estate to be fully informed of the
negotiation of an Ambassador. And this his return does no longer depend upon
his will, but on the reuocation, a Commandment of his Master, if he would
not be accounted one that forsakes his place, as a soldier that departs
from the sentinel without being relieved or that leaves his colors without
his Captains permission. And such Ambassadors in ancient times, were deprived
of their wages, privileges and allowances: and with all, hazarded their lives.
Nor know I any sufficient excuse for him that leaves his charge without
having had com mandement therefore, if he happen to stand in danger of his life
thereby, as it many times falls out: unless he were driven away by force, or
by the authority of him, about whom he executed his charge: or that there
chanced such and so sudden trouble or alteration in the Estate that he could
no longer remain; or that the Prince, with whom he was resident should on a
sudden denounce open war against his Master, in which case the law forbids
them to receive any gifts or presents. Yet I would have him, if possibly he
could, to make stay on the frontires, whereby to take time to advertise his
Master thereof that he may not so dainly surprise him, or give him an
unexpected alarm of his return, which is a rash attempt, that all Princes
take not in sport. In a popular Estate or under a severe and sharp Prince,
they are in danger of punishment for the same. But as soon as he is revoked,
his authority is at an end. For which cause Monsieur de Granuelle refused to
read the letter of defiance which King Francis the first had underwritten, to
be sent to his Master the Emperor Charles, alleging for excuse that he was
no longer Ambassador, for that he had received commandment to take leave and
to depart.

FINIS.

