A SERMON upon the Parable of the King that takes an account of his servants.

Math. 18.23. Wherein is declared, the justice, mercy, and severity of God:
the cruelty of man, and his reward for the same.

Rising upon St. Peter's question to Christ, Viz. How often shall I forgive my
brother? seven times? 21 verse. Fiat voluntari^m, quod futurum est necessarium,
and offeramus Deo pro munere, quod pro debito reddere tenemur. Chrysostom. hom.
10. in Mat. BY JOHN HOSKIN, Minister of Gods holy word, student in Divinity.

AT LONDON Printed by G. E. for John Wright, 1609.

To the right honorable his very good Lord and patron, Henry Fynes Knight,
Lord Clinton and Say, Earl of Lincoln, Io: Hoskin wishes health, honor, and
happiness in this life, and in the life to come eternal felicity.
Entering of late (right Honorable) into some extraordinary consideration, of
the common cruelty, and horrible oppression daily committed, by many covetous
cormorants, and cankred Catter-pillets, of this most miserable age wherein we
live, who delight (as the Prophet says) in nothing but in joining house to
house, Isa. 5 8.
and field to field, till the poor can get no habitation, except it be in some
prison or other, (where some of these wicked wretches will not stick to say,
they live better then they do abroad. (Indeed, as some of them use them,) and
then waying with my self how vile a monster, nay, how heinous, and hellish an
Hydra, Psalm. 36.5. and 108.4 Genesis 1.26
Barbarous Cruelty is, both in the sight of God, (whose mercy is greater then
the heavens) and in the eyes of good men (made after his own Image) which is
many ways more practiced and put in execution, now in the light or the
Gospel, amongst the professors of the same, which bear the name of
Christians, then ever it was, either in the time of darkness and ignorance,
or amongst the Heathen that never heard of God. Wherefore, being fully
persuaded that your Lordship is both a professed foe, and an open enemy, to
all bloud^e Cains, and covetous Ahabs, that any way seek the subversion of
their poor brothers, or neighbors, spiritual, or temporal, either by might,
or policy. I therefore, being minimus apostolorum, whose arrows are
feathered with foul Misfortune, and whose sunshine of prosperity, and
warm days of welfare, have been Eclipsed with the black clouds of cruelty,
and nipping frosts of nine years most pitiless imprisonment, have not only
enterprised to pen this simple tract, of the evil servant toward his poor
fellow, Mat. 18.23.
but also presumed to present the same unto your honorable view, and Christian
consideration, supposing no man more worthy then your Lordship of a far
fairer piece of work then it is; not doubting but your honor will vouchsafe,
not only to acce^t thereof, as the poor widows mite, with as much
kindness, as I offer it with good will, but also defend it, under the shadow
of your shelter, whereby it shall be safe, from the in^ection of infamous
tongues. And although I have not streined up my strings to any high pitche,
whereby to make any great sound, fine melody, or musical harmony, with
Orpheus Harp to move dumb, yea senseless creatures (as it were) to listen
thereunto, so foming out the frothe of man's wisdom, in making a great show of
learning (for that is not the mark I shoot at) but only the salvation of
men's souls, for whom Christ dyed.) Therefore according to the capacity of the
common sort, I have tuned mine instrument with Hyparchyons Pipe, to play by the
plainest mood, at the lowest Key, and sweetest sound, thereby to move
reasonable men (if it might be) to learn something, toward the salvation of
their poor souls, because we are not sent to Preach with wisdom of words,
1. Cor. 1.17.27. and 14.19.
for five words to edifying is better then ten thousand not understood. Wherein
if I have any ways passed the bound of modesty, whereby to offend your
Lordships patience, or committed any thing distasteful to your honorable
conceit, I most humbly crave pardon for the same, attending to receive the
punishment due to mine imperfections. But if I have pleased the least part of
your Lordships good liking, I shall most happily rest contented at the door of
your devotion, and lowest step of your footestoole. And so leaving the crew of
all cursed Caines, and all covetous Ahabs, with all such canker-wormes of
cruelty and merciless misers, in the midst and maine sea of their monstrous
mallicious minds, and your Lordship as a most worthy pillar, and protector of
all poor oppressed persons, to weed out the wicked, and defend the innocent,
with the sword of Justice, whereby Mercy and Charity may be well planted,
the Kings Majesty the better preserved, the common wealth best governed, and
God most of all glorified, I most humbly take my leave. From the Fleet. 1608.

Your Honors poor distressed, in all Christian duty ever to be commanded:
IO: HOSKIN, Minister of Gods word. ^. years prisoner.

To the Christian Reader.
I Beseech you by the mercies of God, in his son Jesus Christ, and by all the
Christian kindness, which I hope to find at your hands, to persuade your
selves, that what so ever I have set down in this simple Treatise, is rather
to describe the nature of cursed Cruelty, then to tax any man with the
infection of that pestilent disease and hellish humor, The labor is but short,
the Sense plain, whose substance I refer either to the censure of your
courteous discretion, or kindness of your gentle correction, and so with my
unfeigned love to your good desert, I rest as cause shall require.

Yours ever in the Lord, IO: HOSKIN.

The Parable of the king and his evil servant.
Math. 18.23. The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain King, which
would take an accoumpt of his servants.


ACcording to the observation, and writings of the learned and ancient Fathers,
there are seaue^ soeciall Parables of great consolation and comfort, declared
and set down by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, at several times in the
holy Gospel. Amongst the which, this, touching the forgiveness of ten
thousand Talents, is one of the chief, wherein the holy spirit of GOD, does
not only breath this, but with-all does teach us a most necessary duty of
Christian charity, which the Heathen knew not, and many that bear the name of
Christians, say they know, but will neither use, nor practice toward their
poor brethren, which the Apostle calls forbearing and forgiving one
another. Which is so necessary a disposition, Coll. 13.3
as that our Savior Christ the author thereof, does annexe and join it unto
his prayer, in the holy Gospel, saying, Except ye forgive men their
trespasses, Mat. 6.15.
your heavenly father will not forgive you.

The occasion hereof was the question which Saint Peter moved unto our Savior
Christ, verse. 21. How often shall I forgive my brother? unto seven times?
wherein he presumes two things.

1. First that men must forgive.

2. Secondly, that they must forgive more then once. For there is a generation
in the world that come of the seed of curssed Caine, such as Lamech was, who
will put up no wrong, nor (as they say) do no right, but will be revenged like
him seventy times seven times, Genesis 4 24 Romans 2.4
scoffing (as it were) at the long sufferance of God, in not punishing Cain,
for killing his brother Abell. As though God would suffer him to murder his
brother, and not be revenged of such monstrous cruelty. Yes, mihi vindicta and
ego rependam: vengeance is mine, To. 12.19
and I will repay, says the Lord.

2. Secondly, the Apostle presumes, that a man must forgive more then once,
because the Heathen that knew not God, would forgive once, but no more, who
condemn many that bear the name of Christians, and profess the Gospel, yea
such as ought to be examples of love, and charity unto others, who will not
forgive any one injury (be it never so small) but will be revenged one way or
other, Quoque iure, quaque iniura, either by law, or by violence, for every
trifle: nay, as Tully says, Nonnulli agrediuntur ad iniuriam faciendum, vt
adipiscantur ea quae concupierunt. There be some that enterprise to do
injury, that they may obtain those things, which they covet and desire,
clean contrary to the word of God, which commands all men to do as they
would be done unto. Mat. 7.12
But hij petunt inferas vt discant verum esse in morte, Ambro^
quod in vita credere noluerunt, These go to the Devil, that they may learn,
it to be true at their death, which they would not believe all their life time.

Again, there be some that think, that Peter's meaning is, by this question,
to learn of our Savior Christ, whether a man having forgiven seven injuries,
may afterward be revenged, if occasion be offered. Others think his question
is, as if he said, it is too much: shall I forgive till seven times? but our
Lord and master Christ, (the true pattern of Christian charity,) answering
this his question, exceeds Peter's expectation: saying, not seven times: but
seventy times seven times, which is 490. verse. 22.

viz that all such as belong unto Christ, should be as bountiful in mercy,
forgiveness, love and charity, as Lamech professed he would be in revenge,
malice, wrong and cruelty. For by mercy, love and charity, we are known to
be the Disciples of Christ, and children of God. Ioh. 13.35.
But by revenge and cruelty, the very impes of hell, and dat lings of the
Devil, Iam. 2.13
for there shall be condemnation merciless to him that shows no mercy, 2.
Doctr.
From hence also we learn, that it is no wise man's course, to determine, how
far we should extend our mercy: for says our Savior Christ, thy mercy is
the measure of joy: sicut et ego tibi, even as I had pity on thee verse. 33.
so should we.

But such as would have a certain number set down, how often they should
forgive their brother, and a proportion for practicing of their mercy: desire
that GOD should forgive them a certain number of times, and afterward power
down his anger, and heavy wrath upon them.

The Key of the opening and understanding of this Parable, Expositio at diuisio.
is verse. 35. where the King is the heavenly father, we the servants; The debt
sin, and the fallow, servants our poor neighbors, and Christian brethren.

In this Parable (as the ancient Fathers do note) there are two parts, a white
part, and a black, viz. a good example to be followed, and a bad to be
eschewed and avoided; as we are exhorted by the Prophets. Eschew evil, and
do good, Psa. 34.13 Isa. 1.16.17
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, etc. Or if we divide it after the King
himself, there we may behold, To. 11, 22
both the bountifulness and severity of God.

1. First the great mercy and bounty of the King, in forgiving his servant a
debt of ten thousand Talents. 2. Secondly his severity, in turning his debt
upon his bead, who having bin forgiven a great debt, would not forgive his
fellow servant a small debt.
The white part.
In the former part there are two things to be considered.

1. First, the persons; which are two. 2. Secondly, the proceedings, which are
of justice. The proceedings according to justice, are declared in the 25. ver.
where it is said, because he had nothing to pay, his Lord commanded him to be
sold, etc. The proceedings according to mercy, verse. 27. his Lord had
compassion and loosed him, and forgave him, etc. Either of which, I could wish
were executed now adays amongst us, that bear the name of Christians, and
profess the Gospel, for then there should not so many poor men pine and
perish in prison, to the utter undoing of their wives and children for ever.
Whereby we may see evidently, that the proceedings of mercy, which consist in
our imitation, and which we ought to practice, are utterly neglected and
abolished.

1. In the black part, first we are to observe, The black part.
how the evil servant (being forgiven) behaved himself toward his fellow
servant, which is to be seen, verse. 28. and 30. Taking him by the throat and
casting him in prison.

2. Secondly how he was served, for his barbarous and most cruel dealings,
which also consists of two parts.

1 First in respect of his fellow servants. 2. Secondly in respect of his
master.
Generally we are to learn and observe thus much, that this is a plain mirror
of Gods great mercy and goodness, who requires nothing of us, but what he
first performs toward us: as the Apostle says, in hoc comendar charitatem,
Romans 5.8.
in this God seeteth out his love toward us, that when we were sinners Christ
dyed for us. And therefore it is but equal dealing, that we should (after his
example) show mercy unto our brethren: and we must not only do to an other,
as we would have others do to us (which the law of nature teaches us to be
equal) but as we would have God do unto us. For we must forgive our
brethren, not only as we would have them forgive us, but as we look, and
hope to be forgiven at the hands of Almighty God.

Now for the persons: and first for the King, which is Almighty God, who
sets out himself in the Scriptures, by sundry resemblances, as to an
husbandman, a Shepherd, Math. 13 Ioh. 10.
a ^isher, a Merchan^ and here a King.

And in this there is a very deep reach, for our nature is so bewitched, that
many times, we think that the practice of godly and Christian virtues, will
utterly disgrace us, as it is gathered by the ancient Fathers upon the
Canticles, where it is said, Can. 5.3.
I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

If we forgive any little wrong that is offered us (especially by our
inferiors,) nay if they do not patiently endure, and quietly put up, any
cruel, and intolerable injuries, and open wrongs, that we do offer unto them,
Injury offered three ways.
we think our selves both much abused, and foulie abused, whether it be in
their body, goods or name, yea many, but upon a supposed offense, will not
only offer injury, but also seek revenge for the same, yea even unto the
death, which is a most detestable fury, far passing the nature of wild
beasts, which spare the blood of their sex. Therefore says Socrates, Socrat.
Revenge is not in any sort to be used, nor is it just to offend any, although
he had offered us wrong: for the Lord is the auenger of all such things, and
oppresso in refugium, 1. These. 4.6 Psalm. 9.9.
and defense for the oppressed: but we never remember it.

Our heavenly father (when he will teach us this most excellent virtue of
mercy) brings in himself as a King, to teach us that it is a princely thing
to forgive, for so says Christ himself, Mat. 9.13. pro. 21.3.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice. that is, what care I for your sacrifices,
as long as your lives, and conuersations are wicked, and full of pride,
oppression, covetousness, usury, bribery, extortion, adultry, murder,
drunkenness, Idolatry, malice, e^u^e, undoing and deuonring of each other,
etc. Mat. 5.24 and 6.12.
And therefore exhorts us unto reconciliation, before we come to offer any
gift, else it is but in vain to pray, forgive us our trespasses.

Therefore forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done unto thee, ^e^e.
28.2.3.4.
so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also, when thou praiest. For should a
man bear hatred against man? and desire forgiveness of the Lord? he will
show no mercy to a man, which is like himself, and will he ask forgiveness
of his own sins? If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, and ask pardon of
God, who will entreat for his sins? Psalm. 103.8
Therefore remember the end, and let enmity pass; for misericors and clemens
est dominus. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, whose example we ought
to follow. And, Pius quotidie miseretur and dat mutuum, a good man is ever
merciful and lends, says the Prophet, preferring mercy before judgment i^
his song, Psa. 37.26. and 101.1. Iam. 2.13. Luc. 6.13.
and mercy rejoices against judgment. Therefore be merciful, as your
heavenly Father is merciful. For God had rather want the sacrifice due unto
him, Chrysostom.
then mercy and reconciliation should be wanting, betwixt thee and thy brother

To pardon and forgive, Pittacus.
is the part of a man, to revenge is the part of a beast. Then how many beasts
be there now adays amongst us, who void of all mercy, pity, or any spark of
compassion, seek not only revenge, but the utter spoil, subversion, and
destruction of their poor neighbors, Amos 4.1
and needy brethren, who would feign dwell in quiet by them. Pro. 3.29. and
24.15. and 22.23.
Therefore spoil not his resting place: for the Lord will spoil the soul of
them that spoil them.

In Athens there was a Temple dedicated unto Mercy, into the which none might
enter that were not helpe-full and beneficial unto others, which caused the
people, but especially the Magistrates, and men of authority and calling, to
study and exercise works of pity and piety, through a desire, which they had
to enter therein. Now therefore if they which had not any knowledge of God nor
his word, in respect of that which we have now, in the light of the Gospel,
did so much respect the works of mercy, and compassion, pity and piety, for
the desire they had to enter into an earthly temple: what ought we to do for
the entrance into the celestial and everlasting temple of the Lord, and the
endless habitation in the same, 1. Cor. 2.9
where there are such joys as no mortal eyes have seen, ears have heard,
tongue can express, or heart conceine?

The Prophet David asks, Psalm. 15.1.2.3.
quis habitabit in tabernaculo domini? Who shall dwell in the holy temple of
the Lord? and answers: Qui operatur iustitiam; neque fecit malum proximo suo.
He that works righteousness, and has not done evil to his neighbor. None
else? no. Then what shall become of all tyrants, oppressors, bloody builders,
murderers, backbiters, standerers, biting usurers, bribers, extortioners,
covetous persons, that take rewards against the innocent? and such like, as
false swearers, and knights of the post? and those that use false weights and
measures? surely these, and all such (without speedy and unfeigned repentance)
must needs fall and be cast down, with that merciless churl into hell, Luc.
16.
who would show no mercy unto poor Lazarus, as the Prophet affirms, saying:
Conuertentur impy in infernum, et omnes gentes, qui obliuiscuntur dei. The
wicked shall be turned into hell, Psa. 9.17.
and all the people that forget God, who is the fountain of all mercy, pity
and compassion.

Therefore let all bloody Cains, theenish. Achans, bribing Gehezies, covetous
Ahabs and Iezebels, all Labans and Naballs, with all the rabble of rent-rackers,
take heed and remember, that Dominus sibi virum pium segregauit, Psalm. 4.3. and
5.6.
the Lord has chosen to himself the man that is godly. Sed qui loquuntur
mendacium, and virum sanguinum abhominabitur, but abhors both the liar, and
blood-thirsty man.

Man is called homo, from whence this word humanitas is derived, which
signifies courtesy, or gentleness, for which cause Plato calls him a civil
creature, Plato.
by nature sociable and merciful, and therefore says, that Mercy ought no
more to be taken away from the nature of man, then the altar out of the temple.
The sinner despises his neighbor says Solomon, Pro. 14.21
but he that is merciful to the poor is blessed, and he that has pity on
the poor lends unto the Lord, who will ^ecompence him that which he has
given. and 19.17.
I might allege many reasons and diverse arguments, 1.^
to move us unto lous and charity, pity and mercy toward our poor brethren
and needy neighbors: as first the creation of man after the Image of God,
whereunto we owe all honor, Psa 2 Genesis 1.26.
love, and obedience. Secondly the re-establishment into the same Image by his
pure grace and mercy. Thirdly the contemplation and building of this glorious
frame of man, with the excellent composition thereof, in whom the brightness and
grace of God shines, but especially in those whom the world despises.
Further, if we did but consider, that we are of one mould, have one maker, and
one God, who promises to accept as done to himself, Mat. 25.
what good so ever we do to one of his little ones, of whom, some for want of
succor and relief, are ready to starve in the streets, others pine and
perish in prison, Ier 7.5.6. and 22.3. Look into all prisons.
and all for want of the due execution of judgment and justice, as well
toward the rich as the poor, the creditor as the debtor, whereby the widow
and fatherless, the innocent and friendlesse, are still oppressed, some time
by delays, some time by demurres, and some time by ad idem in proximum, (which
things are good in themselves, but being abused are very bad) and many times
bribes blind the eyes of the wise, Exo. 23.15. D^u, 16
and pervert true judgment, but woe unto the bribers and extortioners. Ier.
22.15. Prou. 18.5. Mich. 3. Pro. 17.22.
Did not their fathers live well and prosper, when they executed justice
without respect of persons? But they have perverted all equity, and abhorred
judgment, and judged for rewards: And thus the peoples skins are pulled and
plucked from their backs: thus they are bought and sold for old shoes: Amos.
8.^
and thus they are eaten up and devoured like bread, whereas we ought not only
to do good, Psa 14.8 Galla.
and show mercy unto all men, but even to them that do us wrong and hate us:
according to our Savior Christ's commandment: Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, Mat. 5.44
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you.

Joseph was a great person, yet thought it no disgrace to forgive his brethren.
Gen 25.15. 1. Sam. 24 2. Sam. 16 Acts 7.60 Lu 23.34 ^. pro. 20.28
David a King, did show mercy unto his enemy Saul, and forgave Shemei his
offense in cursing him, Steven them that stoned him, and our Savior Christ
those that put him to death.

Thus we see it is not only a princely, but also a most divine thing to pardon
and forgive our brethren: for the King that here sets forth him as an
example is God himself. Therefore if we will be honorable, or so accounted,
we must learn our terms of honor from our Lord and master Jesus Christ, and
not from the race of cursed Cain, or reuengfull Lamech. And the more honorable
that a man is, so much the more it is his honor, to be most ready to forgive,
and put up wrong, without seeking revenge: but as the Prophet says; Ps. 49.
vlt. Eccl. 3 18
Homo in honor non intelliget, sed comparatur immentis quae intereunt, Man
being in honor, has no understanding, but may be compared unto the beasts that
perish; especially when they vndooe their poor brethren, by oppression, suites
in law, frawde, or imprisonment, for every light occasion. Nay, without any
just cause, A proverb.
but it is an old saying, Where the hedge is lowest, the beast soonest goes
over, and the weakest are soonest put to the worst. Bernard in Can.
Therefore I may say with that old Father; If beasts could speak, they would
call such wicked men beasts, and far worse. August.
For as Saint Augustine says: Brute beasts do raven but when they are hungry,
and being full do spare the prey. But these beasts, the more they have, the
more they raven and spoil, whereby it appears, they neither fear God in
heaven, King on earth, nor devil in hell. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa
pecunia crescit: The love of money increases as the money it self increases:
the more they have the more they desire, like ^^re, the more wodde the more
heat: therefore the covetous man's heart is compared unto a bottomless pursse,
which is never full: or like the Horseleche that Solomon speaks of, Pro.
30.15 16
the grave and the barren womb, which will never be satisfied.

Thus the poor are threshed to death with Flailes, Amos. 1.3
as the Prophet says: this is the malicious sin which David prays against,
Psalm. 59.5
saying, Ne miserearis omnibus qui perverse et inique agunt: be not merciful
to them that offend of malice: for as Job says, fire shall consume their
houses. Job. 15.34


I would that such cruel men, and seekers of revenge, would remember the words
and deeds of Philip King of Macedon, who when it was told him that one Nicanor
(a needy fellow) did speak evil of him, because he never did him good, the
kings servants gave him counsel to punish him. Nay quoth the King, not so. I
suppose be is a good man, therefore it were better to search first if the fault
be not in us. The King understanding that Nicanor was a poor man, sent him a
rich present, whereupon afterward this fellow spoke as much good of the king
openly for his bounty, as ever he did evil of him for his covetousness.
Whereby we see it is in the power of great men themselves, to cause either
evil or good to be spoken of them.

Likewise Antigonus King of Macedon, Antigon.
hearing himself evil spoken of by soldiers hard by his tent, came forth unto
them, and said nothing but thus. Good Lord could you not have gene farther off,
to have spoken evil of me? Thus far off were these two Kings from revenging
their own private quarrels, which might be a good example unto all men of what
estate or degree so ever they be, how they seek revenge against ye poor.

But now tempora mutaneur et nos mutamur in illis, the case is clean altered,
for every man (for the most part) will most cruelly revenge the injuries done
to himself, and pardon those which are done against other, yea many times,
although they be directly against the law and honor of God. Xenoph.
And therefore as Zenophon says in his Cyropaedia, let every one so behave
himself to wards his enemy, as at some time or other he may think to have
him his friend.

Secondly now touching the servants, wherein we have 4. things to observe.

First, that sin has the nature of a debt, for so our Savior Christ
teaches us to pray: forgive us our debts, and so sinners are called debtors,
as Mary Magdalen was, Luc. 16.5 Luc. 7.47
who had her sins forgiven her, which before were accounted debts. For the
case of the law, it is as an obligation, wherein if the condition be not kept,
we do incur the penalty.

Secondly, we are to note a difference betwixt sins and debts. For sins,
which are against God, are compared unto talents: sins against our brethren,
are but as pence.

Thirdly, the debt is not of one, but of t^^ thousand talents: hec no^ summa,
est massa, this is not a sum, but a mas of money. And as before, we saw the
enormitie of sin, so here we may behold the multitude of our sins.

Fourthly, it is said, adductus est, he was brought: which bringing, shows
that he never took care, or any thought, A secure sinner.
how to pay his debt. He eat his meat and took his rest, he lived merrily,
and quietly, in pomp and pleasure, which is the case of many now adays, in
respect of sin, wherein most securely they are lulled and rocked fast a
sleep, yet their case is most dangerous, and most lamentable, and nothing
else, but that which our Savior Christ speaks of in the Gospel Fortis sic
omnia possidet, Luc. 11.21
the strong man possesses all things so in peace; as for example, Simile.
a Captain having quiet possession of a castle or strong hold, what needs he
to make any broiles, or brabbles? even so it is with our aduer sary the Devil,
^c omnia possidet, does so quietly possess the hearts and minds, (which are
as the Castles and holds of many covetous wretched worldlings) and has so
rocked them a sleep in the Cradle of Security, that they never make any
account of many sins which they daily commit, both against God and man:
especially of petty sins, as jesting, scurrulous talk, wantonness,
idleness, and riotous expenses, etc. for the which they scorn to be
controuled or admonished of by any man, which is a token of reprobation: for
let all such know, that as many small drops of rain do make a great flood,
able to drown both horse and man, so many small sins do make a great and
dangerous deluge, able to drown both body and soul.

Therefore says the Psalmist, Psa. 38.18
Cogitabo, et anxius ero pro peccato I will confess my wickedness, and be
sorry for my sin. And, and 32.6.
confessionem faciam de peccatis meis domino, et tu remisis^^, iniquitatem
peccati mei: I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
wickedness of my sin. According to that saving of Augustine. August.
Audiui regem dicentem peccani Domino, et Prophetam respondentem transtulit
dominus peccatum tuum a te. I heard the King say I have sinned against the
Lord, and the Prophet make answer: the Lord has taken thy sins from thee.
Therefore the wise man's advise is, Pro. 6.8
if thou be surety for another, humble thy self, and use all means to
discharge the debt: till then give thine eyes no sleep. But this fellow takes
no such order, but was secure and careless, and so was fit to be brought.

Such is our security in respect of sin, we take no thought for it, we
neither strive by prayer against it, before we commit it, nor yet are we
humbled after it, but many are such as Solomon speaks of, Pro. 2.11
Qui letantur cum male fecerint, et exultent in rebus pessimis, they are glad
when they have done evil, and rejoice in things most wicked: Simile.
until God by some cross or affliction, by some means or other bring us
under an arest. Such may fitly be compared unto thieves in a Iayle, who never
remember the assizes, until the judge come riding in at towns end. Nay rather
like condemned felons, who fall merilye to gaming, sport, and pastime with the
halters about their necks, wherewith their breath must be stopped. Even so,
many secure sinners never think on their end, until vgglye Death arrest and
seize upon them: and what is this? but even, the Ox to the slaughter, Pro.
7.22
and the fool to the stocks, never thinking of death or punishment, which is a
most woeful case, the Lord amend it.

There is also an other kind of sinners, A desperate sinner.
who being but weak in mind and conscience, and not well acquainted with the
sweet promises of ye gospel, being prick^d in conscience with the burden of
their sins and then remembering the curse of the law due for the same, which no
man is, (or ever was) able to bear, but only our Savior Christ: alas, what a
miserable case are these in? let them remember that at what time soever a
sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, Eze. 18.21
the Lord will blot them out of his remembrance, and that the servants Lord had
compassion, and forgave him the debt, as soon as he humbly beseeched him.
La^^an.
27. verse.

Now for the two proceedings: and first of Justice. Justice as says
Lactantius, in respect of God, is called godliness, but in respect of our
selves, and our dealings with men, Cicero.
it is taken for an equal distribution of right, and of laws, and as Cicero
says, it is a perpetual and a constant desire, and good will to give every
one his right, and his own, especially as the party is greater, chiefly the
King must have his right: but in respect of God, and the duties which we are to
perform unto him, if he should take an account of us, Job. 9.3.
we are not able to answer him one of a thousand, and as the Psalmist says,
Si niquitates obseruaris domine quis consistet? Psalm. 103.3
If thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it?

Then if not able to pay (which was the case of this servant) all his goods
must be praised, and sale must be made according to the law; but not as many
under Sheriffs and common Bayliffes do often times in the country with poor
men's goods, Nota, quam iniuriam, in sons ego ipse, bis sustuli. imo omnia
omnin^ perdidi.
playing sweepe-stake for their own advantage and gain, whereby the poor
debtor, his wife and children are utterly undone, because his goods are praised
and sold, not at a quarter the rate which they are worth, and never can have
them again of which hard dealings, I have been Occulatus testis, but as
Elisha said to the poor widow: 1. Reg. 4.7.
sell thy oil and pay thy debts, and live upon the ^est. So does the King
command him, his wife and children, and all that he had, so be sold, and
payment to be made, verse. 25. which were a happy course for many poor men,
which commonly pine and perish in prison, by the cruelty of the creditors,
there spending that little which they have, and at length there leaving their
lives, as Snakes do their Hackles in old hedges, whereby the leanness of
impouerished persons, make fat prisons, and Iaylers Gentlemen: where ten
shillings a week for a bare Chamber and a bed-stead, is nothing; where
seventy pound a year for a drunken Taphouse is but a little, else how should
the rent of a Iayle be at a thousand pound a year.

But ad rem, I know this law of sale which the King commanded to be made, nor
the doctrine thereof, neither tastes well in the mouths, nor is it pleasant
in the stomachs of those, whom we in plain English call Bankrupts: who upon
credit, will take up as much money and goods, as they can get into their
hands, and then break (as they call it) with their Creditors, contrary to
their promise, bonds, faith, and all honesty, taking up their lodging in
Ludgate, or some Sanctuary, and there living in ease and pleasure, letting out
their money to Usury with a bad conscience, paying their Creditors with two
shillings in the pound, or some such matter, thinking this no theft, nor any
deceit at all, clean contrary to Saint Paul's rule, Romans 13.8
concerning debtors: Owe nothing to any man, but this, Exodus 20 17.15
that ye love one another, and the last commandment, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors goods, or thou shall not steal; thoose ye which.

But when the King comes to take account of his servants, verse. 23. they
shall find, that all such subtle shifts, and deceitful devises shall prove
but Fig leaves, Genesis 3.7
not able to cover their cursed covetousness; nor yet to defend them from the
wrath of him, who is scrutator cordis, Ier. 17.10 1. Tim. 4.2
the searcher out of their hollow hearts, and seard consciences.

Now if we should apply this to a spitituall consideration, it would fit us
very well: for as the Apostle says, we are all sold under sin, Romans 7.14 1.
Ioh. 5, 19
and totus mundus in maligno positus est, all the world is set upon
wickedness: and as the Prophet says, Psalm. 14.2. and 53.2.
Corruperunt vias suas, abominabile focerunt studium, non est qui facit bonum,
they are all corrupt and become abominable in their doings, there is none that
does good, no not one.

But here I leave these, and go forward to the proceedings of mercy.

Mercy being the most excellent virtue, and the joy of faith, the author
whereof is God himself, whose mercy is everlasting, Luc. 1.50
will hear the cry of the afflicted, Exe. 22.27 and 4.31.
and will never forsake them, because he is merciful, yea as David says,
Prope adest Dominus omnibus inuocantibus eum in veritate, Psa. 145.18
The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him faithfully: he heard Jacob in all
his troubles, Genesis 35. Exodus 14 1. Sam. 1
and Moses when he sighed and groned, Anna that barren woman was not forgotten,
nor Da^iel in the Lions den, Dan. 3. and 1, 3.
nor Susanna amongst the wicked Judges, nor the three children in the fiery
Furnace, Acts. 11.
nor Peter in prison: and so likewise, as we may see verse. 26. by this
servant, when he besought his master, he heard him, and had compassion upon
him.

Quiarogasti, because thou prayedst me, verse. 32. For so says the Prophet
David, Psa. 32.6
if a man will be delivered from his sins, Pro hoc orabit omnis, for this
shall every one pray. And Saint Peter's advice is, Pray God, Acts. 8.22
that if it be possible the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee: as
that godly Father also teaches, saying: A te petatur, in te queratur, August.
lib. confess. 13. cap. vlt.
ad te pulsetur, sic accipietur, sic inuonietur, sic aporietur. Of thee we must
ask, at thee we must seek, and at thee we must knock, so we receive, so we
find, and so to us it is opened: which doctrine is clean contrary to the
vile blasphemous Papists, which pray either unto stocks or stones, Images,
Saints, Angels, or the Virgin Mary.

Also, here we may see, that by a submissure intercession, we must remove from
the Court of Gods justice, unto the Court of Gods mercy. And upon this second
proceeding, behold the bountifulness of the King, who for a few words
speaking, forgiueth him the debt, when he had nothing to pay, as we read in the
Gospel, he does not only grant him that which he desired, Luc. 24.7
which was but forbearance, but also much more abundantly, according to the
saying of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.20
he is able to do abundantly above all that we can ask or desire. For
whereas he desired but only to be forborne, by his humility and prayer he does
obtain both dylation and remission, be does not only forget, but also
forgive, and remit the debt: lo here the necossitie and effect of himble
prayer. And that which is a third thing to be remembered, turn at that time
when (...) sat upon his judgment seat, to take a reckoning and strict
account: as the Prophet says; He does in wrath remember mercy, which is a
lesson, Hab. 3.2
both for Judges, that sit to hear the causes of poor distressed men, and
also of great consolation and comfort to all those that are oppressed and heavy
laden with the burden of their sins, Mat. 11.2
that the nature of the Deity is thus slow to wrath, and ready to forgive,
which is or might be an example unto all men, but especially unto great men,
and Magistrates, that they should immitate this King in mercy, which is
Almighty GOD, whose mercy indeed, should be the example of ours, and our mercy
the measure of his. For man being a creature made of God, after his own image,
just, holy good, Genesis 1.2
and right by nature, framed of the earth, and inspired with spirit and life,
has his being, and his well being, only to set forth the glory of his
Creator, and to speak and do those things which are agreeable unto him, which
is, to be merciful, Exo. 22.27 Luc. 6.36
as he is merciful. Thus we see the severity and bounty of the King.

Now secondly we are to take a blew how he dealt with his fellow servant.

A body would think, that after his impression of fear, that was condenmed to
be sold, and contrariwise, the great affection of love and compassion in the
King in forgiving the debt, upon his humble entreaty, he would never have
forgotten the goodness of his master. But we may see it to be true, which the
Apostle says, Iam. 4.5 What envy is.
There is an evil spirit which lusts after envy, which is a grief arising
at another man's presperitie, with which vice this evil servant was fowly
enfected, as there be many now adays sick of that disease, who grudge and
grieve, mumble and murmr, if they see any man thrive, come to any preferment,
or have any good success in his affairs, more then themselves, or be
accounted honester then they: we our selves and every one, for his own part,
2. Tim. 3.2
is sick of self-love, for we can be content to be well used, well spoken of,
and praised: yea, to have our faults covered, and our offenses and debts
forgiven us, without any scrupulositie or quaintness, both at Gods hand and
man's, which is a blessed thing, as the Prophet says: Psalm. 32.1
but we cannot find in our hearts to mete the same measure again unto
others, notwithstanding our Savior Christ in his holy Gospel teaches us,
that with what measure we mete, Math. 7.2
it shall be measured to us again; There is in this part three carnal sins.

1. First he was his fellow servant, of the same estate, no stranger unto him,
but one that he knew well enough, yea a brother, which has matter to stir up
compassion, especially in any man that has any spark of Christianity in him.

God cannot offend man, yet he forgineth man: but man may offend man, and yet
will not forgive man, he might after offend his fellow servant, and therefore
ought to forgive him before he did it.

2. Secondly the debt was no great matter, but an hundred pence, and therefore
he might the more easily have forgiven it, for as much as GOD forgave him a
great mas of money.

3. Thirdly, this debt he will not forgive, although it be but small, but
requires it after a most inhumaine and sa^age manner, taking him by the
throat, and saying, pay me that thou owe, verse. 28. To the which we add
three parts more.

1. First going forth but even from the presence of his Master as soon as he
had been forgiven, he begins to be unmerciful, that having received
mercy at Gods hands, he is so cruel to his fellow servant, that adds a great
heynousnesse unto his crime.

2. Secondly, in that his fellow uses the same means to him, which he used
unto God, viz. I pray thee have patience: quiarogasti, because thou prayedst
me; was the reason why the Lord forgave him, yet he will not forgive his
fellow, who used the same words unto him.

3. Thirdly, non moueri saltem consciontia, not to be moved one whit in
conscience, is a heinous fault, but especially not to be moved with the
example of a King, that has dealt so graciously with him, that is a great
wickedness, he is not only cruel, but also wicked and unkind, even in that
wherein he had found kindness, which also adds very much to his fault: for
our Savior Christ says, Cui multum remittitur, to whom much is forgiven, she
loved much. Luc. 7.49
He had a great debt forgiven him, and therefore ought, to have showed his
love in like sort unto his fellow servant, in forgiving him his debt, according
to our Savior Christ's commandment, go thou and do likewise. Lu. 10.37
For his fellows debt was but a small sum, an hundred pence; and ought
therefore the rather to move him to have been pitiful, but he is never the
better.

Even as many now adays, to whom the Lord has showed great mercy in giving
them great abundance, and much enerease, frumenti, vini, atque olei, Psa. 4.8
or corn, wine, and oil, as the Prophet says: Yea, the wicked live and wax
old, and grow in wealth, Job. 21.7 8. etc.
their seed is established in their fight, their houses are peaceable without
fear, the rod of GOD is not upon them, their Bullock gendreth, their Cow
Calueth, and fails not, their Children dance and make merry with Tabret,
Harp, and Organs, Amos. 6.4
and spend their days in wealth, Lying down upon their beds, eating fatt
Calves and Lambs, singing to the Violl, and drinking wine in bowls, but no
man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. Nay as the Apostle says, more then
this, and far beyond the cruelty of this man, toward his fellow servant,
many rich covetous wretches appresse the poor by tyranny, Iam 2.6
drawing them before the Judgment seat, clapping them up in prison, taking all
their living and maintenance from them, which this evil servant did not: and
so void of all compassion and mercy, keep their poor neighbors there, till
gentle death bail them out of their bloody fingers, thus reproching him that
made them, Pro. 14.31 Iam. 2.7.
and blaspheming the worthy name after which they are named. Therefore why
should they be honored, that thus dishonor God, but even weep and howl for
the miseries that shall come upon them, and 5.1.2.3
because their riches are corrupt, and their garments Moth-eaten, their gold
and silver canckred, and the rust thereof shall be a witness against them,
Math. 6.16
and eat their flesh as it were fire, thus they shall have their reward: so
that as the Philosopher says; the soul is lost, Plato.
that delights in covetousness.

Thus we see how he dealt with his fellow servant. Now a word or two, how he
was dealt with all, for his barbarous cruelty toward his fellow servant.

1. First his other fellow servants were greatly moved, at his unmerciful
dealings, insomuch that they accuse him to their master, for indeed man (who
is the principal work of nature, Psa. 8.5
crowned with glory and worship, and for whose sake the very Angels are sent to
minister, Heb. 1.14
especially for such as shall receive the inheritance of salvation,) by nature
loves mercy: knowing there is no man but shall have need of mercy, as the
same Apostle affirms, Omnes sunt peccatores and deficiuntur gratia Dei: Romans
3.2^ psa. 14. and 69.30. and 70.5. Iam. 1.19
All are sinners and stand in need of Gods grace, as the Prophet) plainelye
proves throughout the Psalm. But God (our heavenly Father the Fountain of
all mercy, who is slow to wrath, as the Apostle says,) hates all cruelty,
especially this cruelty, which the very Heathen (which never knew God nor his
laws,) could not endure, viz. poutem frangere quem ipse transisti, to break
and pull up the bridge after himself has escaped, that no man else may escape
but be drowned, this is a great and a most sanadge cruelty.

Now his fellow servants bring in their verdict against him for his
discourtesie and monstrous inhumanity.

2. Then comes in the second point. viz. that the King is altered, and his
mind clean changed, for whereas before there was no sign of anger at all in
him, but extended his great favor toward him, in forgiving him the debt,
verse. 27. now his mercy is turned into mere and seueare Justice, and his
good will into extreme wrath.

3. Thirdly, whereas before he used no hard speeches, nor any unkind words unto
him, lewd and evil servant, verse. 32. wherein we are to take heed how we
incur the Lords displeasure, by any hard and cruel dealings toward our
debtors or poor brethren. 1. Pet. 4.8
For even as mercy covers a multitude of sins, even so cruelty in not
hearing their complaints, and not showing mercy, incurreth the wrath of God: 1.
The. 4.6 Deu. 16.19
For he shall cry himself and not be heard, for the Lord is the auenger of
all such things.

A good Caveat for Magistrates, and all such as to whom the hearing and
deciding of poor oppressed men's causes does appertain, that they be neither
partial on the one side, nor the other, for rewards, pity, fear, or any
favor, but Judge the people with righteous judgment: whereby the integrity
of ancient Justice may be preserved, and not like unto certain Lacedemonian
Ephori, tetchlesse Magistrates, that heard men's causes (as they say) with their
harvest ears, nor yet like Adrianus the Emperor, that cast all the
supplications of his poor petitioners, into the water before their faces, but
even like the LORD himself, the Judge of all Judges, this King, who accepts
the rich and poor all alike, De. 10.17 Job. 34.19
yea the Prince, no more then the peasant, but hearkneth and hears, Mal. 3.16
Exo. 22.23 Eccle. 35.
yea, and reuengeth the wrongs done unto the poor oppressed, be they
widows, fatherless, friendlesse, or comfortless, or any ways distressed,
Ier. 21.12.13.
which is more acceptable to him then sacrifice: and to do justice betimes in
the morning, Pro. 21.3
viz. without any delay, which is the bane of many a poor man's cause, and the
very shipwreck of him and his: Wisd. 6
for a great Judgment shall they have that bear rule over the people.
Therefore deliver the oppressed, Ier. 21.12
out of the hands of the oppressor, least the wrath of the Lord go out like
fire, and burn, that none can quench it, because of sin and wickedness.

4. Fourthly, the just judgment of the King, upon him for his cruelty toward
his fellow servant, for whereas before he condemned him to be sold only,
now he condemns him to be tormented. Now we see that his judgment is more
severe, then it was before, whereby we have to learn, that God stands
otherwise affected to a mallicious and merciless sinner, then to one that is
but a bare sinner, such an one as falls through weakness and imperfection,
for there is great difference betwixt the infirmities of Gods children, and the
unregenerate, for although the godly fall through infirmity, Ecc. 19.16
yet they strive against sin before they commit it, and are sorrowful for it
afterward, but the wicked neither labor by prayer against it, neither are
they grieved nor humbled afterward: Pro. 2.14
but as Solomon says, potius letantur cum male fecerint, et exultent in rebus
pessimis, and 24.16
they are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in things most wicked:
pius labitur in domo, sed non a domo, the godly slip and fall in the house, but
not out of it; they rise again, but the wicked play as one that breaks his
neck, and never rises again: the godly have the relics of sin remaining
in them, but not the kingdom of Satan reigning in them, Romans 6.
but as for malicious sinners; the world was never so pestred with them,
Mallicious sinners.
as it is now a days, against whom the Prophet prays with imprecations, that
the Lord will not be merciful unto them, because they sin of malicious
wickedness: Psalm. 59.5 and 1.1.
such are all that sit in the seat of the scornful, that snuff and puff
when they are told of their sins, which is a token of reprobation, and
contrary wise a sign of the child of God, when we can say with David,
percutiat me iustus, and 141.5
and redarguat, let the godly smite me friendly and reprove me, as Nathan
reproved him for Vrias wife, 1. S^. 12.7
which he, (although a King) took very patiently and cried peccaui: a good
example for all men. Malicious sinners, also are all Ahabs and Iezabels and
Nebuchadnezzars, such couerous cormorant, Caterpillars and Church-robbers, as
will neither suffer ^oore Naboth to enjoy his Wineyard, nor the Minister his
Tithes quietly, whereby Gods people are not only robbed of both temporal and
spiritual food, life and soul, but also God of his honor, and glory. For
take away living and maintenance, take away both life and learning, take away
learning, and take away preaching: and take away preaching and then what
follows, but all disorder and confusion, for where there is no vision, viz.
preaching, Pro. 29.18
there the people perish, by famine the people faint and dye: Amo. 8 11
but no famine so greenous, as that of the word of God, which breeds and
brings the leanness, faintness, and famishment of the soul. Psa. 106.15
Yet such fellow servants this world is full of, who although they have no
Reed, neither of Naboths Wineyard, nor Church-liuings, appointed ad pios vsus,
to godly purposes, yet they will throttle their fellow servants for them: and
such malicious sinners are also all that know a matter to be naught, and yet
will take part with it, and money to defend it, as many of our lewd,
unconscionable Atturness, and pelting pettifoggers do, and so be they that
take money, and never speak a word in a man's cause, and such be those that
justify the wicked and condemn the innocent, either for fear, favor, Pro.
18.5. and 17.15.
bribes or rewards, which as Solomon says is abomination unto the Lord, with
many more, as keepers back of the hyrelings wages, and common blasphemers: and
such a mallicious sinner was this evil servant, in dealing so cruelly with his
fellow; and yet not so cruel as many now adays, which cast their poor
brethren in prison without any just cause, taking all their living from them:
wherefore it may be said unto such kind of fellows, as that Father says, Si
in ignem mittendus est, Aug. Mat. 3.10
quia sua non dedit, vbi put as mittendus, qui aliena rapit, if he shall be
cast into the fire, that has not given of his own unto the poor? whether
shall h^^ be cast that takes theirs from them? if there be an ite malidicti,
a go ye cursed, for them that do not visit and comfort those that are in
prison, without succor and relief: what remains for them that void of all
compassion cast them into prison, there keeping them continually, without
conscience, fear of God, or shame of ye world. Our inferiors (says one
Father) do so look for our mercy, Greg. Naz. de pauper.
as we at time of need do look for Gods mercy. Therefore if a sinner that
has obtained mercy at Gods hands, many and sundry ways, both in temporal and
spiritual blessings, in so much that he wants nothing that his heart can
desire, and then be merciless unto his brother, that humbly entreats him to
forbear him a little, and will not forgive him a light offense, but beyond all
Christianity, will take him by the throat, verse. 28. vex and trouble him,
lay frivolous actions upon him, cast him in prison, and so undo him, his
poor wife and children, as the manner of many merciless men is now adays,
whereby they can neither do their duty to God nor man, with any quiet
conscience in their place and vocation, God will he wrathfully displeased, and
revenge the same, Exodus 22 23.1, These. 4.6
they shall perish with the sword, their wives shall be widows, and their
children fatherless, and as the Prophet says; their sword shall go through
their own throat, Psalm. 37.14 15
and all for casting down the poor and needy. Lo thus will God plague all
cruel and covetous oppressors. This made. Plato say, Plato.
that where there are beggars in a town, there are thieves and Church-robbers.
Now therefore if we, that bear the name of Christians, acknowledging the
poor our debtors and needy brethren, to be the members of Christ, are not
ashamed to banquet and feast, and let them statue in the streets, nay vex and
trouble, whip, punish, and cast them in prison, and there to let them pine and
perish: shall not the very Heathen, that never heard of God, rise up in
judgment at the last day, before that just Judge, to accuse and condemn us as
thieves, Church-robbers, and murderers, but especially such as maintain their
vain delights and filthy pleasures, with the goods of the poor, and
patrimony of Christ; toward whom the distribution of our own wealth ought
to be exionded, both by the law of God and man; shall not our own consciences
also accuse us? and be as mill testes, a thousand witnesses against us? when
it shall be said unto us, Luc. 16.2
read rationem, come give an account? for our selves, Adam? vbi es? where art
thou? Cen 3.9.
and how have thou walked in my commandments? an account for our bodies, if
they have been kept as the temples of the holy Ghost? 1. Cor. 6.19.
an account of our souls, 1. Pet. 2.25 Reu. 22.12 Mat. 12.36 Wisd. 1.9
if they be fit to appear in the sight and presence of the great shepherd,
an account for our works, words, and thoughts? and also an account how we have
used our brethren? Cain, vbi est frater tuus Abel? Genesis 4.9
where is thy brother? if there be a discite ex me, learn of me, by the rich
glutton, that fared diliciouslie every day, Lu. 16.25
neglecting the miserable estate of poor Lazarus: what are all oppressors of
their poor brethren to expect at the dreadful day of judgment, but even with
most sorrowful sobbing sighs, and mournful moanes, fall a wishing that they
had never used such hard dealings, and cruel oppression toward their poor
brethren and fellow servants? but alas now it is too late.

Therefore when a man has had forgiveness at Gods hands for his sins, to
forgive our brother and fellow servant in like sort, is not a matter of gift
but of duty, non opportuit? ought thou not? verse. 33. Yes surely, having
received mercy, thou art bound to show mercy: if thou have ten thousand talents
forgiven thee, ought not thou to forgive an hundred pence? Covetousness and
Cruelty always companions.
yes certainly, but here we may plainly see, that covetousness, and cruelty,
are always companions, for if the King that cannot offend thee, (but thou him)
shall forgive thee? ought not thou to forgive thy fellow servant, whom thou
may offend? and so stand in need of his mercy?

In as much therefore as thou have not done as thou ought to have done, Ex
are tuo te iudico. Lu. 19.22
I judge thee out of thineowne mouth: for as Solomon says, he that finds
friendship ought to show himself friendly again toward others. Pro. 18.24


Now for the conclusion, the last verse 35. as I said is the key for the
opening of this parable, and it lays us all in this duty.

God is our King, and we his subjects, we become his debtors by our sins, and
as we look to have forgiveness at his hands, so we must forgive one an
other. For as Saint Paul says, this was not written for Abraham only: Romans
4.23
that he was justified, but also for all the faithful: so likewise this
parable, we must apply unto our selves.

For the point of forgiving.

1. First we must know it is simile regi, like a King, Pro. 20.21
God our heavenly Father and King commands this duty, as an honorable thing,
that we be ready to forgive, as we would have GOD forgive us, and does accept
it as done unto himself, Mat. 25.40
whatsoever we do unto his poor members, whom he calls his little ones,
and his brethren.

2. Secondly, as I forgave you, is a matter of duty and equity, and not of
equity only, but also of Justice, non oportuit? ought thou not? seeing
thou have received mercy? yes verily, thou art bound to show mercy.

3. Thirdly, in respect of the reward, for he that shows mercy shall be
rewarded with mercy. Yea in the kingdom of heaven, as our Savior says: Mat.
9.41.
For God is not unrighteous, that he will forget your works of mercy,
therefore be merciful after they power. Heb. 6.10 Tob 4.8 Luc. 6.13
for in so doing, thou shall not only obtain forbearance, but also an
acquittance of thy debt.

4 Fourthly, for the punishment of being merciless, for whereas before God
was mild, (...)
he will be wroth, whereas before he was condemned to be sold only, now
he shall be grievously tormented, until he have the whole due, verse. 34. a
most heause and (...)
horrible sentence for merciless men to think upon.

The Prophet, Ps. 118.12
his enemies shall come about him like Bees, not waspes, because hes gathered
honey from them: so there is profit to be reaped from our enemies, but the
profit that we shall reap by this Christian charity, is, we shall (as it
were) make God bound unto us, by forgiving.

It is that which some note upon the words of the Psalmist, where ^e says,
re^^mber me according to thy word, Ps. 119.49
wherein thou have caused me to put my trust, that is; we convent thee O Lord
upon thy promise, to forgive us our trespasses, because we have forgiven our
brethren their offenses.

Now therefore, if the reward will not serve to stir us up unto this duty of
mercy toward our poor brethren? then the punishment must, which never
fails, viz. sic faciat vobis; so he shall do unto you.

And if some, perhaps understand it not, quando adductus erit, when he shall
be brought, he shall understand, that he has not only lost the reward, but
also incurred the punishment, from the which the Lord and Father of all mercy,
vouchsafe to deliver us, for his son Jesus Christ his sake, our only Savior
and redeemer. To whom with the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all
power and glory, praise and dominion, now and for ever, world without end.

Amen.

