THE SVFFICIENCIE OF THE SPIRITS TEACHING, WITHOUT HVMANE-LEARNING: OR A
TREATISE, TENDING TO PROVE HVMANE-LEARNING TO BE NO HELP TO the Spiritual
understanding of the Word of GOD

Written (if it may be) for the Silencing of such false and scandalous reports,
as have been rumored about concerning this Matter; and also for the affording
of true information to all such as desire to know the Truth.

By SAMUEL HOW.

Prove. 14.5. A Faithful witness will not lie, but a false record will speak
lies.

Esaias. 57.14. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling
block out of the way of my people.

Mal. 2.1, 2. And now o ye Priests, this Commandment is for you, if ye will
not hear it, nor consider it in your heart, to give glory to my name, (says
the Lord of hosts) I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your
blessings, yea I have cursed them already, because ye do not consider it in
your heart.

Mat. 11.25.26. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee o Father*
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
men of understanding, and have revealed them unto babes, even so Father because
thy good pleasure was such.

Luke 16.15. Then he said unto them, ye are they that justify your selves
before men, but God knows your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed among
men is abomination in the sight of God.

Mat. 11.6. And Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me.

See also Esaias. 29.14. and Rev. 2.24.25.

Seen, Allowed, and Printed, by us etc. 1640.

TO ALL SVCH AS LOVE THE TRUTH IN SINSERITY, LIGHT AND UNDERSTANDING BE
MULTIPLIED THROUGH JESUS CHRIST.
GODS Gracious Promise it is (Christian Reader) that by the 2 These. 2.8.
breath of his mouth, and the brighnesse of his coming he will reveal the Man
of Sin, and Son of Perdition: Yet thus witnesses the Spirit, that when it
shall so come to pass, that the Vial of Gods wrath shall be Reve. 16.10, 11.
powered upon the Throne of the Beast, to the darkening of his Kingdom, and
discovering of those strong Delusions, whereby he has long deluded the world,
that then the men of that throne shall gnaw their tongues for sorrow, and shall
blaspheme the God of heaven.

All which to me appears to be fulfilled and made good concerning this
following Treatise: 1. that when as the Lord by his Word the breath of his
mouth has blown out some smoke of the bottomless pit, which I conceive to be
Humane-Learning, which is so much magnified, as being a help, whereby to
understand the mind of God.

This matter has so vexed and tormented the men of that Throne, that even He
himself, at whose request I was moved to open this portion of Scripture, 2
Pet. 3.16. has (as I am credibly informed) reported about this City, that I
made a Calfe (meaning a false and unsound exposition) and when I had done
danced about it; herein exposing not only me, but the very Truth it self,
which I in this point delivered, to the derision, and contempt, and
Table-talke, of such, as bad rather be deceived and believe their Learned
Teachers (as men call them) on their bare word (having the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory with respect of Persons) then to receive and
justify the Truth of God, if the Messenger be weak and contemptible, and his
message in power, much plainness, and demonstration of the spirit. And not
beautified with the excellency of speech, and swelling words of man's wisdom,
which is enmity to God. It crosses and opposes the simplicity of his way in
the dispensation of the Glorious Mystery of the Gospel. And therefore God has
said of it, as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, Act. 8, 21 1 Cor. 1.19.
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter.

But yet (me thinks) such men, Ephesians 5.4.
as would carry the show of Godliness, should remember the Council of the
Apostle, that such Carriages are things not seemly; though for my own part, I
bless the Lord for it, being to me a more strong confirmation, that I have the
Truth on my side: For thus was Luke 16.14.
Jesus Christ our Lord served by the Wise and Learned Pharisees, when as he
taught them such a Doctrine as pleased them not: And thus was Paul the Preacher
of Righteousness dealt by of the leareed Act. 17.18.
Athenians, even for preaching Jesus, and the Resurrection. Likewise I read ^n
Heb. 11. that this in former times was part of the trial, that the Lord
exercised his Witnesses withal, even mockings, verse. 36. And therefore as our
Savior teaches me, I have in this case great cause to be glad and rejoice,
for they having so served Jesus Christ my Lord, and his faithful followers;
then what am I, that I should be one of that number, that have so large Mat.
5.12.
encouragement and reward promised: I shall therefore quietly pass by all such
things, and only Job. 21.3
with Job in his distressed condition, crave that he and all you that have done
this thing will suffer me to speak, and when I have spoken mock on; seeing as
the Job. 12.2.
Servant of God said, Indeed, because ye are the people only, Wisdom must dye
with you; so will I make bold to say to you also: Yet for all his understanding
and such others as heard me, they failed of their zeal for God, and his glory,
in that they sought not to suppress and throw down that Calfe of dishonor,
which must needs (being an Idol) be a very high provocation in the eyes of his
Glory; which he that put me upon this Exercise having excepted against it, when
it was finished, and with much passion manifested his great dislike thereof
before many witnesses, ought especially, and was obliged to have done, being
then lovingly requested by a friend that was there present, for the
satisfaction of all that Assembly to Instance (if not in all) yet at least in
some particular Scripture wherein I had perverted it, seeing he had openly cast
an Aspertion on all that I had said; but neither he, nor any of his Profession,
though many were then present, did undertake this task, nor yet to this day,
has He, or any of them endeavored it. So it may appear my Error was not so
great, or none at all, that they could prove; or else their zeal to God and
his Truth, and their Charity to Me and oaths very small. And if there were a
Calfe, It was their Humane-Learning and wisdom which the men of this Throne
set up, and themselves danced about it, whilst I to their great grief and
discontent was laboring with all the power and might that God assisted me
with, utterly to cast down, grind it to powder, and to blow it away with the
word of God, with the breath of his mouth: Whether it be thus, or no, I commend
now to the judgment of all such as love and know the truth; not doubting but
there will be some found, that out of love will reprove what is amiss, and so
turn the sinner out of the error of his way, though some others, as Job. 13.4.
Job says, forge lies (as I could name diverse) who are Physicians of no value.

For God who knows the hearts of all men, knows that it was not my intent at
all at that time to have meddled in this Argument, nor with this Scripture, not
till the night before I spoke of it, and all because I knew if I did, it would
be offensive, as it has proved; and and what I did herein it was by the advice
of Friends. But now I see that Gods hand was in it, and I doubt not but for
good: though it is, and may be my portion deeply to suffer for it: and for men
to be offended at the truth, and such as declare it, is no new thing, even for
the Psa. 118.22. Act. 4.11. Isay. 8.14.15.
builders themselves to stumble at the stumbling stone: But leaving all such to
stand or fall to their own Lord.

Something remains to be spoken concerning the matter following, for the
preventing of such things as may further be objected against it.

1. Though the matter be the same in substance that it was at the first
delivery, yet somewhat may be wanting, and is, which was then said; and more is
added in other respects then at that time was spoken, which I thought fit to
give notice of. 2. Another exception and that of great moment, is, that I have
bl^sphemed against Jesus Christ, in saying, that He was without
Humane-Learning.
Now besides what is answered hereunto in the first Objection belonging to the
first Doctrine; if any yet remain unsatisfied, and will affirm the contrary,
Let them declare, (as the Romans 11.34.35.
Apostle says) who was his Counselor, and who taught him, and he shall be
recompensed: The Scripture tells us, that He grew in Wisdom and Stature, and
so couples them alike together: Now none will affirm that He Learned his
Stature: then from the like will I affirm, that He Learned not His Wisdom, no
more then He did His Stature; and so if none taught him, then must it needs
follow that He was without Humane-Learning, for we in common speech call them
unlearned, which were never taught, as did the Joh. 7.15. Acts 4.13.
Jews; and Learning presupposes one to Teach, so that me thinks) it is but
requisite, if any do so affirm, that they should declare his Teacher, which if
they cannot do, why then should they affirm Him to have Humane-Learning. And
me thinks, the matter being rightly considered, it will be found blasphemy for
any to affirm that He had Humane-Learning, seeing that in so doing, they call
in question the perfection of His Manhood, as if there were others that could
add unto Him, seeing all grant that the Master is above the Scholar: and the
Scripture witnesses for me, that at Luke 2.46, 47.
12 years old, such was His Wisdom observed amonst the Doctors, as that they
were astonished at his understanding and answers; and doubtless this was a
part of their great wonder, seeing that He never Learned, as it was the
Councels wonder also concerning Acts 4.13.
Peter and John. Therefore for any to affirm Him to be by men taught, is to
take that glory from Him which He had of His own, and so they are most like to
be them that blaspheme.

3. It is also very likely that pride and vainglory will be imputed to me, as it
has been already, that I being as I am, should undertake to maintain that
which all godly and learned men are contrary to me in.

God to meet with such hard measure, even for declaring of the truth; for so
was Joseph Genesis 37.8.10, 11.
dealt by even of his Father and Brethren: and so was 1 Samuel 17.28.
David used for speaking for the Lord. And Paul you shall find was Act. 17, 18.
scoffed at by the learned Athenians: And seeing that it has always bin so
with Gods Servants, why should not I affirm with the 1 Cor. 4.3.
Apostle, not to pass to be judged of men, whatsoever they be, though godly,
wise, learned; seeing that as the Apostle says, it makes no matter to me, God
is no Gal. 2.6.
accepter of persons: And therefore I hold it a defense sufficient with David to
say, 1 Samuel 17.29.
Is there not a Cause? seeing that there is none that I know of that will stand
up for the Lord, against those that defy the host of Israel, because that they
be not Goliah-like, Men of stature, having Boots of brass, and such like
furniture, as that the fleshly hearts of men dare not look such in the face;
and all because that they be so strongly furnished with Man's strength: Though
that the Soldiers of the Lord of hosts, may with one blast of a Rams horn,
through the might of God, Josh. 6.20.
blow down the strong Wall of this spiritual Jericho: seeing that the Lord
has said, that by the Mat. 21.16.
mouth of babes and sucklings he will perfect his praise, and this if Babes
should neglect to do, the stones would cry, whence is to be observed our
Savior descends from Babes to Stones, and not from Babes to Learned men, for
he has Chosen such to bring forth His Righteousness as the light; for He
himself does not despise the day of Zach. ^.10.
small things. Now these things considered, why should any with the proud M^^^
1.15.
Pharisees disdain at what the Lord will do; but lay their hands upon their
mouths and say nothing because He Psalm. 39.
does it; And seeing it is the Lords Psalm. 118.23.
doing, why should it not be Merveylous in our eyes: Though I doubt not but the
Lord will in his good time bring forth one learned Moses, and another as
excellent that ways as was Paul, and cause them disclayming that Humane
excellency to magnify the foolishness of God, 1 Cor. 1.25.
to be wiser then the wisdom of men, and so every way convince men of their
folly this way to his praise.

And in the mean while let them that can receive this for Truth, receive it,
and let none be so conceited of Learned-men, as if the word of God came only
to them, and from them, as Paul said to 1 Cor. 14.36, 37.
some that were puffed up. But let such as are spiritual know that the Lord
reveals his Mysteries to whom he pleases, and where he will; and therefore the
eye of none should be evil because he is good, but we should learn, as the
Wiseman says, that Eccles. 9.11
the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong: but it may
so prove* that little David without Saul's Armor only with a Sling and a Stone
through the Name of the Lord, may so wound great Goliath of Gath, the enemy of
God and his people, as that he may receive his deadly wound, and ly grovelling
on the ground, to the dismayment of all the Host of the Phylistims, and great
rejoicing of the Israel of God, and this the Stone that is hewn out of the
Mountain without hands, is only able to do. Therefore let all that fear the
Lord take heed that they lean not to their own Wisdom, but so much the more
that any of us have Wisdom, and Understanding, Memory, and such like natural
parts, above other, so much the more let us be watchful and careful over our
selves, as knowing that the Romans 8.7.
Wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, and is ready to but against the
Spirit: and now to draw to a Conclusion of all in the words of the Prophet,
Isay 44.25.
The Lord frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes the Diviners mad,
turns wisemen backward, and makes their Knowledge foolishness.

If any shall except against the matter, for the rudeness of it, as that it is
without form, or Learning, all such are to know that it is but suitable to the
whole argument, and that if it should be otherwise, I should condemn that in
practice which I justify in words, and so make my self a trespasser. Thus I
commit this my labor, with all those that out of love to the Truth shall seek
information in this matter, to the blessing of the most High, and remain an
unfeigned welwiller of all them that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity. The 25
day of the First Month, 1639.

SAMUEL HOW

THE SVFFICIENCIE OF THE SPIRITS TEACHING, WITHOUT HVMAN-LEARNING.
The text, 2 PETER 3.16. As one that in all his Epistles speaks of these
things, in which are some things hard to be understood: which they that are
Unlearned and Unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures unto their
own destruction.


THESE Words, that I am allotted to speak from at this time, have respect, as
it should seem, to such things as the Apostle had spoken of Before, which
things seem to me to be those that are contained from the beginnning of the
second Chapter to the end of the thirteenth verse of this third Chapter; and
the foureteenth verse contains Peter's exhortation, strengthened in the
fifteenth verse, by his Brother Paul's writings, who in all his Epistles speaks
of these things, as of the coming of the Lord Jesus, and other things, such as
are herein contained; among the which (that is) Paul's writings in his Epistles,
some things were hard to be understood, and so indeed was the coming of Christ
Jesus, which it should seem was hard of them to be understood, and that
appears by his earnest writing to the 2 These. ^2. at the beginning.
Thessalonians; where he exorts them that they should not suddenly be moved,
neither by Word, nor Epistle, as it were from him, as if the day of Christ were
at hand, for there were many things to be fulfilled first, as a departure from
the Faith, the rising up, the perfection and the consumption of the Man of
sin: and this it should seem though he had told them of it before, yet to
them it was hard to be understood, which had the true Learning here meant,
which things they that were Unlearned and Unstable, perverted as they did other
Scriptures to their own destruction. Therefore the great thing here to be
minded, is to find out what this learning is that Peter here intends. And,
Secondly, who they be that are the unlearned ones: and by that we shall easily
find who they be that are the perverters of the Scriptures to their own
destruction. For this end therefore I will consider what this learning is not,
and then what it is.

What Learning it is not.
It is not Humane-Learning. That I may not be misconceived about it, I will
here lay down my understanding in it; and by Humane-Learning I do not mind the
knowledge and understanding of our own language, which every man of what tongue
soever he be, might in some measure be taught of another, as the Parents teach
their Children, and they learn of them: of this there is a natural necessity,
as the Apostle says, How shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard; Romans 10.14.
now the hearing there mentioned must needs be a natural hearing, seeing it is
set before Faith; and this hearing must needs be the understanding of the sound
of words spoken. Now thus Peter and John, and all the rest learned the foolish
things spoken of 1 Cor. 1.21.: and thus I acknowledge that there is none but in
some measure have this learning, and must of necessity have it, to understand
Gods mind in an ordinary way. But by Humane-Learning all along in this matter,
which I oppose, It is the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, diverse Tongues, and
much reading, and a persisting in these things, so as there-by to be made able
to understand the mind of God in his Word; this is it that I condemn from the
word of Truth, for being that by which any is made able spiritually to
understand the mind of God, which the Aposte says, cannot be attained to by
the words which man's wisdom teaches: all which, these excellencies are said
to be. 1 Cor. 2.13.
So that by Humane-Learning I do here understand, that, whereby certain men
do excel, and are far above and beyond other ordinary men; and in this
sense do I understand that the Council Judged Peter and John to be no such
learned men: Act. 4.13.
For we in common speech do oppose a learned man to one that otherwise can
read and write in his own tongue, though he do not understand the grounds of
his own speech, as the other man that is learned does, as may appear by the
Book called the English Schoolmaster. And so such learning do I not conceive
to be here meant, which I conclude for these Reasons.

1. Because that then Peter must of necessity condemn himself, 1 Reason.
for he was a Man that in the Act. 4 13.
Councels knowledge was such an unlearned man, and so must needs himself lie
under that blame that he laves upon others, therefore Humane-Learning is not
here that which he intends. 2. Because Humane-Learning is a Col. 2.8.
rudiment of this world; 2 Reason.
hence is it that our Savior acknowledges that his Mysteries were hid from
the Luke 10.21.
Learned: but they were not hid from his Disciples, for unto them it was Mat.
13. Col. 2.8.
given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom. And the rudiments of this world
are not after Christ, the Apostle tells us: therefore Humane-Learning cannot be
it that Peter here minds. 3. Because the natural man cannot 1 Cor. 2.14.
perceive the things of God, 3 Reason.
but a mere natural man, may be a great worldly Learned man, as were the
Egyptians, and Babylonians, and as are many of the Romish Priests and
Jesuits; therefore for this cause, that is not the learning here meant. 4.
Because such of Gods servants, as have had such kind of learning, when as they
came to know Christ, they forsook it all, 4 Reason.
as Moses when he came to age, though he was Act. 7.22.
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, yet by Faith he forsook all the
treasures of Egypt, and this being one of Aegypts treasures, he forsook this
also, for when he says treasures, there none is excepted: therefore in as much
as learning was one, as well as riches and honors, he forsook that also, as
seeing by Faith a better treasure in the worst condition among the people of
God, then in the best condition in the world, suppose it be learning.
The like is to be seen in Paul, who counted all things loss and dung that he
might win Christ, even the righteousness of the Law it self, which is far
beyond all this, and all this he did that he might know him: Wherein the
Apostle gives me to understand, that all such things were but hindrances to
keep him from the knowledge of Christ to salvation, which is it that here I
mind also: therefore likewise this is not the learning here meant, seeing it was
rejected of them, therefore it was no help nor furtherance to them to know
Christ by; but lets and hindrances, and so much appears by those converts in
Acts 19.18, 19. Who when they believed are said, such of them as used curious
Arts, to burn their Books, declaring that now they had met with learning of
far greater worth, then their curious Arts, and therefore now they burn their
Books, declaring that now they had no more need of them, and so I conclude that
such as this is not the learning here meant.

What Learning it is.
I now come to manifest what Learning it is the Apostle here intended.

Now the learning here intended by the Apostle, it is as I understand, That
sound knowledge, and sure information that every Christian has in Jesus
Christ, Col. 2.7.
whereby he is so deeply rooted, and so surely grafted into him by Faith, as
that he abides unmoveably settled in him, Ephe. 3.17.18.
as thereby he abides stable in the sure knowledge and understanding of the word
of Christ, and so much here me thinks the Apostle gives us to understand, 1
Pet. 2.6.
how that the unlearned, they be unstable: then on the contrary, the learned
they are stable, believing, and being laid on the true Foundation, they shall
never be confounded, or ashamed. Now such as these are, that are learned as the
truth is in Jesus, these may well say to the greatest worldly learned ones, as
Philip said to the Eunuch, Understand thou what thou read: and not only
so, but such may teach them the understanding of the mystery, saying, these are
taught and instructed by the teachings of the Spirit of God, agreeable to these
Scriptures: 1 Cor. 2.10.
That it has not entered into the heart of man to conceive of that which God by
his Spirit (which searches the deep things of God) has reavealed unto us. And
this the Apostle further explaines, that as no man knows the things of a man,
save the spirit of a man which is in him: so the things of God knows no man, no
not a worldly learned man, but by the Spirit of God: and so he goes on to
difference the spirit of the world, from Gods Spirit, and shows, that, that is
it, whereby the things of God are known, and also manifested to others: so that
all the things of God both for matter and manner flow from the wisdom of Gods
Spirit, and not what man's wisdom teaches, which is to compare spiritual
things and carnal things together, as tongues, and ar^s, and such like: but
Gods Spirit teaches us to compare spiritual things with spiritual things,
and so he goes on and declares that only such that are taught by the Spirit,
are capable of true discerning of spiritual things, without being justly
condemned of any, as truly having the mind of Christ, rightly and truly knowing
the things that are of God, and with this agrees the witness of John, 1 Ioh.
2.26.27.
saying, these things have I written unto you concerning them that deceive you,
whereby it appears they had deceivers about them, and those things were written
concerning such; But says the Apostle in opposition to their deceivings, ye
have received the Anointing of him that dwells in you; and this anointing that
they had received does he oppose to their deceiving, as being able thoroughly to
teach them so, as that they needed not that any man teach them, save as that
anointing taught them: then seeing that that anointing never did teach them
such tongues or arts, as were humane, therefore the Saints by the Apostles grant
had not need of any such learning, and yet this anointing taught all truth and
obedience in it also. And yet further our Ioh. 16.7. with 13.
Savior himself concludes this point, showing that when he has sent the
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth to them, that then he shall lead them into all
truth: whence I do conclude, that for the Disciples knowledge of the truth
there, was no more necessary according to the mind of him that was Truth, but
the Spirit of God to lead them into all truth without all error, teaching by
no humane means: the Reason why is rendered, because it is sufficient, and
that is because it speaks from the Father, agreeable to that of our Savior
taken from the Prophet, that Ioh. 6.45.
we shall be all taught of God, and so indeed being taught of the Spirit, we
are taught of the Ftther, and the Son also, which are all one; and so our
learning comes to us, being taught of the Father, Son, and Spirit, for all
our Instructers and Councellers, and this is all the learning that we need, to
know the things that are of God by, agreeable to his will: so from these words
thus interpreted, the Conclusion comes to this,

That such as are taught by the Spirit of God, destitute of Humane-Learning,
are the Learned ones that truly understand the Scriptures according to Peter's
mind.

I say, such as are taught by the Spirit, without Humane-Learning, are such
persons as rightly understand the Word: And this (me thinks) the whole Council
of Jerusalem, as wicked as they were, did in effect conclude, Act. 4.13.14.
considering Peter and John, though unlearned men, yet they knew they had been
with Jesus by their boldness, and so they had nothing to say against it: and
yet though men should oppose it, Christ Jesus our Lord Luke 10.21.24.
Justifies it, with great thankfulness to his Father, that having hid these
s^ings from the wise and prudent, he had revealed them to babes: Now that
revealing must needs be by the Spirit, according to that 1 Cor. 2.10. And on
this manner is it that our Lord comfort, his Disciples telling them that all
things were given him of his Father to reveal, and so in that regard he tells
them that blessed are the eyes that see that, that they saw, which was as the
Apostle says, God manifested in the flesh, which many wise men and Kings
desired to see, but could not see it, and so that was now made manifest to
them, which before was hid from Wisemen and Scribes, and so was at the present
also: for few of the Wise could attain to the knowledge of Him and his
Doctrine, as they did Now with this also agrees what our Mat. 22.23.29.
Savior further affirms to the Sadducse, who by reason of their Wisdom and
Learning thought to have entangled him, he tells them that they erred not
knowing the Scriptures, for all their great Learning being destitute of Gods
Spirit. Now by these Scriptures this point being thus confirmed, good Reason
also may by Gods word be brought for the futher justifying of it, as

First, 1 Reason.
Because it is the good pleasure of God to place our salvation in great
contempt and enmity to man's wisdom: hence is it that the Apostle says, that
he preached Christ crucified to the Jews a 1 Cor. 1.23.24.
stumbling block, and to the Gretians foolishness, for the Jews we read in
great contempt refused him, as Pilate bid them behold their Ioh. 19.19.21.
King; presently they cry away with him, away with him, Crucify him: and so
when Pilate had wrote on the Cross, that he was King of the Jews, they took
it as a great prejudice to them, and therefore wished him to write, that he said
he was the King of the Jews.

And so as Peter tells them in Acts 3. they denied him, and desired a murderer
to be given them, and to this agreed the Gentiles, for they had their hands
also in his death: and we find that whenas Paul preached him at Athens, Act.
17.18.23.
that then this saying of the Apostle here is made good both of Jews and
Gentiles: and indeed they both agree to hang him, betwixt heaven and earth, as
being in their esteem worthy of neither, and yet even in this Crucified Jesus
lies contained the salvation of Act. 4.12.
all (both Jews and Gentiles) that are saved: and in this despised Ie^us are
all to rejoice with the ^ Cor. 2.2. G^^ 6.14.
Apostle, to salvation: for in him thus dishonorable and unmeet in man's
wisdom, lie hid all our heavenly Col. 2.3. 1 Cor. 1.20.
treasures of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: for he is
the wisdom of God, and power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.

Another Reason why such as have Gods Spirit destitute of Humane-Learning come
thus to know Gods mind, is, 2 Reason.
that (as the 1 Cor. 1.29.
Apostle declares) no flesh should rejoice in Gods presence: now this learning
is but fleshly and carnal. Now the Apostles advise is, though we had known 2
Cor. 5.16.
Christ Jesus after the flesh; yet now coming to be after God, we should
henceforth know him so no more: and here is a sufficient Reason, because
knwledge is subject to puff us up, as says the 1 Cor. 2.8.
Apostle: Whenas love, and the Learning of the Spirit, keeps us low in our own
eyes, and causes, as Solomon says, our minds to be good, making us suitable to
the Apostles exhortations, Romans 12.16.
saying, Be not high minded, but make your selves equal to them of the lower
sort; be not wise in your selves, but Phil. 2.3.
let every man esteem others better then himself: and if any glory, let him 1
Cor. 1.31.
glory in the Lord. Now he that has these things, as Humane-Learning and
Wisdom more then another, let him weigh and consider duly with himself,
whether he does not think and conclude that he in regard of these things is not
more to be respected then they that are without them: now then 1 Cor. 5.6.
this rejoicing is not good, for it is a rejoicing in the flesh, and suitable to
Romans 4.2.
works, and so not of God: and yet so is it that for our hearts we cannot but
think better of our selves for these things, then of others without them, and
so we may see the Apostles words fulfild, that the wisdom of the Romans 8.7.
flesh, that is, whatsoever the flesh is excellent in, it is enmity to God, it
is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

Anotder Cause, why the Spirits teaching is sufficient without Humane-Learning,
is, because, as the Apostle says, 3 Reason.
we are complete in him, that is, perfect and full in him: and this he
strengthens yet further from this consideration, that he is the head of all
Principalities and Powers, so that if there were any thing else, to make us
complete, he being the Head of all, we should have it: but he has given
nothing but his 1 Cor. 12.7.
Spirit to profit withal, therefore we are complete by it alone; and therefore
is it that Paul 1 Timothy 6.20.21.
exhorts Timothy to keep that which was committed to him, which was the Faith
taught by the Word and Spirit, and wishes him to avoid and beware of Science,
that is, all knowledge natural, which is comprehended under Col. 2.8
philosophy, learned, profane and vain bablings, and oppositions to the Faith
of Christ, and so much is by the Apostle there declared, saying, which while
some have lusted after, they have erred from the Faith: so that it is most
plain and clear, that these things are so far from perfecting men, or
helping of them in the knowledge of the truth, as that they hinder and cause
such as profess them to err from the Faith: even all the seven Liberal
Sciences, for all be but Science, and all this Science or knowledge is falsely
said to be of use in the Gospel; Profane and vain bablings are far better
names for them, and oppositions, according to Paul's teaching, and he says of
himself, I think I have the Spirit of God, and so indeed he had without
doubt, and so our ground remains good, that we are complete in Christ Jesus.

Another consideration confirming this Conclusion, 4 Reason.
is from the Apostles 1 Cor. 3.18.
advise, let no man deceive himself, and that in the true way of attaining
wisdom; he declares what it is in these words, that such a one is to become a
fool that he may be wise, and how ^s that, but by knowing that indeed there is
nothing in all man's wisdom to be any whit helpful but hurtful to him in
attaining and comprehending the wisdom of God in Christ: Now what is more
foolish to a man then to know that there is nothing that all the wits of man
can reach unto, that can benefit him: and if nothing, then not this thing in
question, but that it must needs be that we must be fools to it, and what is
the true mark of a fool but to be ignorant, and without knowledge, therefore
we call them fools in the world, and so is it here; the best way for a man not
to deceive himself, is to know nothing of this learning, nor any other fleshly
excellency that so he may learn true wisdom: and the Apostle does (me thinks,
sufficiently confirm this advice of his, against all exceptions, the Lord
knows (says he) that the thoughts of men be vain: Men think highly of their
own conceits this way, yet if no man will take this his council for wisdom in
this kind, yet the Lord concludes the truth of it, and he knows the thoughts of
men to be vain, that think Humane-Learning some help: but let them think what
they will, the Lord is against them in it, for he knows that it is sure that
they are deceived, for his thoughts be not as man's thoughts.

Now another Cause that confirms me in this Conclusion, is because that
wheresoever the Apostle honors the Spirits teaching, 5 Reason.
and preferres it, usually he at the same time casts contempt upon this
learning, as is to be seen in many places 1 Cor. 1.17.18.
Christ (says he) sent me to preach the Gospel, not with the wisdom of
words, least I should make the cross of Christ, or the Gospel of Christ of
none effect, where we see, that for good reason he rejects the very wisdom of
words in preaching of the Gospel, and that (...), least if he should have done
otherwise, he should have made it of no effect, because he was to declare the
sincere word, without the least mingling; as if he should say, such manner of
p^eaching is a foolish preaching, but it is so only to them that perish; but
to such as are saved it is the power of God, without what man expects: and
therefore he 2 Cor. 11.2.3
says again, he was jealous over them with a godly jealousy, for he had
prepared them a pure Virgin for Christ: but says he, I fear that as the
Serpent beguiled Eve, but how? through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupt, that is, putrified, and infected from the sincerity that is in Christ:
This we see was Paul's fear, that while he was absent their minds should be
withdrawn from the foolishness of the Gospel, and the simplicity, sincerity,
and truth thereof, and this they should be withdrawn from by the subtilty of
Satan that old Serpent, in his instruments the false teachers; this he fears
because of their fleshlynesse that was in them, which was ready to yield to
their wiles by reason of their subtilty that way, for by fair words and
flatteries they deceived the Romans 16.18.
hearts of the simple, and with this their craftiness they lie in wait to
Ephe. 4.14.
deceive; thus contemptuously does Paul speak of these things, in opposition
to the true learning, as is further to be seen in many places, of which I will
name one more, and that from the Apostle Peter in his second Epistle chap. 1.
verse 16. For we says he followed not deceiveable Fables, when we opened unto
you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus. Now such names as these are, does
the Apostle choose to cast on man's excellencies, as in diverse other 1 Timothy 1.4.
and 4.7. Tit. 3.9.
places which declare what contempt is cast on such learning in opposition to
the Spirit of God.

Now one thing more which I conceive observable for the proof of this point in
hand, 5 Reason,
is drawn from the 2 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit searches the deep things of God, and
14. The spiritual man discernes all things; if then the Spirit searches the
deep things of God, and that discernes all things, what need we more: and with
this agrees the Apostle John, 2 Ioh. 2.27.
saying, And ye need not that any man teach you, save as that Anointing
teaches you. Then I conclude, That we need not that any man teach us, not the
Master, nor any of his followers, for the Disciples of Jesus Christ do learn
(as the truth is) in him, and of him, and they have received the Spirit of God,
that they might know the things of God: therefore we may well be without any
man's learning, and have no need of it; and so the point is clear and plain,
That such as are taught by Gods Spirit without that Learning, do truly
understand the Word.

I judge it necessary also to be understood of the Reader, what I do
understand by human wisdom, as well as Human-Learning: by human wisdom I do
understand whatsoever appears excellent in man's understanding, as he is left
without Gods spirits teaching; this the more excellent it is to him that is
carnal, so much the worse it is: therefore it is said of such by the Apostle,
that whenas they professed themselves to be wise, then they became fools. Romans
1.21.
And says our Savior, If the light which is in thee (which I mind to be meant
of men's understanding and wisdom) be darkness, Mat. 6.23.
how great is that darkness: So that by man's wisdom I understand, whatsoever
seems excellent to him with which he would honor God withal, that he is not
the Author of, as eloquence, and fair speeches, and any thing in that way:
such as the Greeks sought after, as men do now adays. This I do the rather
differ from Haman-Learning, 1 Cor. 1.22.
because it seems to me that the Scripture differenceth them, Acts 22. and the
difference rightly understood may prevent just exception, and give light to the
right understanding of the whole matter: for this wisdom is made by the
Apostle, and that rightly, Romans 6.7.
to be enmity to the Spirit of God, and impossible to submit to it, it is so
contrary.

Now follows to be answered such Objections as are made against it, as first,

Paul, in 1 Timothy 3.6. That a Bishop must be no young Scholar, lest he being
puffed up fall into the condemnation of the Devil.

Paul means here, is the teaching of the Spirit, whereby the man is made sound
in the Faith, for that learning only will make men low in their own eyes, as
is before declared, and he that is unsound in the faith, will ever be found the
most lofty and puffed up in his own conceit, and so be rejected of God as the
Devil was, though he was in heaven with God, yet being puffed up, he was
rejected of God, and so 2 Pet. 2.4.
cast down to hell; to which example Paul here alludes, as I conceive, and that
rightly, for a Bishop in the Church is in respect of his spiritual state and
place, in favor and fellowship with God, and that in Heaven, as the whole Book
of the Revelation describes the Church to be: Now such as by the Church should
be chosen to that state, being young Scholars, that is, not soundly taught in
the truth by the Spirit, he is in great danger, the more other learning that he
has, so much the more to be puffed up. This I believe was the cause of
Diotrephes 3 Ioh. 9.10.
pride, he wanted this Scholership, and that caused him to seek the
pre-eminence: And this, whatsoever our great Scholars think of themselves, is
the cause of the high conceits that they have of themselves, and their
knnowledge and understanding above others, that want their learning, even this,
because they be but young Scholars (if that) in the Schole of Christ: and thene
is it they are so puffed up with the vain glory of their fleshly learning, that
they think that none that are not as themselves are fit to be their fellows,
and so know not now that they be wretched, poor, miserable, blind, and naked:
though they conceive themselves to be rich, and have need of nothing, as did
the Rev. 3.17.
Laodiceans; and so indeed are fallen into the condemnation of the Devil, as
being rejected of God, for he resists the proud, and such as are puffed up, and
gives grace to the 1 Pet. 5.5.
humble, and such as are low in their own eyes: Now whether these men Humanly
learned, be they that are puffed up or low in their own eyes, as mean as he that
is unlearned, I leave to all that have eyes to see to look into it, and so to
judge whether they are not yet to learn Paul's Scholership.

Further I say it is here to be minded, that if it should be Human-Lerning that
is here meant, then Paul should teach Timothy for to teach the Church to choose
such Scholars, as had more learning then had their Master Christ Jesus: Now
this some say is blasphemy, and threaten me sorely for it.

Christ Jesus as God, according to the Divine nature, so he is God over all,
and so gives all things, Acts 17.25. and so he is the Iam. 1.17.
giver of every good gift, and so Human-Learning, and wisdom are Romans 11.37.
of him, and through him: and so much (but that men are maliciously bent) they
might discern, that I in this argument had not to deal with him, as God, but
as the Minister of God, administering for the good of his body, according to
that, Luke 4.18. where he says, the spirit of the Lord has Anointed me, that
I should Minister, etc. and so in this argument he is by the Apostle set forth
as a Man, Act. 2, 22.
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God; and as such a man so administering I
doe-still affirm, and that with great confidence, that He was unlearned in
this consideration, and without the learning that we speak of: Isay. 50.4,
and so the tongue of the " Learned that" was said to be given Him, is Isay.
61.1.
interpreted by the same Prophet to be the Spirit of God, for says He, the
Spirit of the Lord has Anointed me that I should preach; from whence is
plain, that Christ Jesus was learned of the Father to preach by the Spirit,
without Human-Learning, See further of this in the Epistle noted with this
mark.
and so much is plain to them that can believe the Scriptures, from John 7.15.
where the Jews admire, saying, How comes this man to know the Scriptures,
seeing that he was never learned: from whence it is plain that as he was a Man
he was unlearned in the letters of the Scriptures, though as God he knew all
things, and by a divine power, not Human-Learning, so much as his own natural
tongue by letter, Luke 4.7.
as in the Synagogue he could take the Book and read: and this doubtless was
one cause, why the Jews are said to be astonished at the bearing and seeing of
Him, as appears Math. 13.54. etc. Luke 4.22. so that from all this my
affirmation remains true, and good, that if Human-Learning should be it that
is there meant by the Apostle, then he was to teach the Servant to be above his
Myster, whenas Christ Jesus himself Mat. 10.5.
says, It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Lord, and he being destitute
of Human-Learning, his Disciples may well be without it also, without any
offense, and yet preach the Gospel too. Now, if notwithstanding all this there
be them that will take Act 6.11.
Stephens accusers place, and still accuse me of Uasphemy as they did him, etc.
though it may be, they may say true words, as that I said that Jesus Christ was
without Human-Learning, and so apply it to him as God, whenas I spoke of him as
Man, they may there see themselves ranked among the number of them that are
called by the Spirit of God false witnesses, as walking in the steps of those
envious persons, even such as were always the murderers and betrayers of
Christ Jesus and his servants: and they that are such, may be likened to them
that being full of envy, Act. 13.45.
spoke against those things that were spoken of Paul, contrarying them, and
railing on them: Mark it, they denied what he taught, but disproved it not,
but spoke against it, and rayled on the person, and so left not till they had
bin a means to expel them out of their Coasts; so was he, and such like
measure is still to be expected to befall such as tread in his steps, but it is
to be minded that envious ones are the movers of it: and so leaving of it, I
come to another exception, which is,

unlearned, will be able to stop the mouths of gainsayers, seeing the Apostle
requires of a Tit. 1.11.
Bishop that he should be able so to do.

intent that the mouths of gainsayers should be stopped by the knowledge of
tongues and arts, but that way that himself directs, 1 Titus 9. which is by
sound doctrine, or by wholesome doctrine; so then, to go any other way then
thus stop their mouths, is both an unsound, and an unwholesome course: and it
were far better in my judgment and that according to Paul, that their
mouths should be left open, then that they should be stopped after that manner,
and it has not profited them in the spiritual meaning of the word that have
bin exercised therein: so now it is high time that we, honoring the teaching of
the Spirit, should refuse to meddle with such as go another way to work, then
by it, to declare Gods mind to us, because it alone is sufficient to stop the
mouths of all gainsayers. Act. 6.10.
They were not able to resist the Spirit (not the tongues and arts) by which he
spoke, for he used none of them, for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, and so are tongues and arts, and such like, but yet mighty, not by
man, but through God, to 2 Cor. 1.45.
cast down holds: therefore this weapon only is sufficient to stop the mouth
of all gaynsayers; and for such as think it not sufficient, much good let their
Human-Learning do them, and the good Lord give me of his holy Spirit only, to
do this work; and so I come to the next exception, which is,

tongues in the Apostles times in the Churches, Act 2. Acts 8. Acts 10. Acts
19. 1 Cor. 12. and 1 Cor. 14.

true, but there we find that they were the immediate gifts of God, freely
given and bestowed on them as other spiritual gifts were, without their
industry or pains, as appears in diverse Act. 2.2. Act. 8.27. Act. 10.44. Act.
19.6.
Scriptures: now whersoever such gifts are to be found, them I will freely
acknowledge, as being indeed suitable to the Gospel, which brings to us freely
all good gifts, without any labor or pains of ours, and therefore all is said
to be of gift, least any man should boast: but if the tongues that are pleaded
for, are such as are attained to by industry and paines-taking of our own, then
they better suit with works then grace, and so are more meet for Egypt and
Babylon then for the Church of Jesus Christ, which comes by all her precious
Gifts gratis, and therefore such as plead for these things, as suitable to the
Ministers, become in effect suitable with Act. 8.18.
Simon Magus, who would have obtained the gift of the Spirit, by money, which
there was the gift of tongues, and if these tongues pleaded for, be the same,
they are all attained by money, and if this be so good a way now, why does
Peter so evilly entreat him, for desiring that for money, which all afterward
by these pleas were thereby to obtain: But Peter we see perceives him to be in
the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity, that should offer to seek
to obtain the gift of Gods Spirit that way: and if they be Human-excellencies,
then of necessity the course is to be repented of also, that any should offer
to bring any humane thing to Gods word, when as it is so expressly forbidden us,
that we put nothing thereto, nor take any thing therfrom; Deu. 12.32. Pro. 30.6.
Put nothing to his Word, least he reprove thee and thou be found a liar. Now
there is nothing but the word and spirit go together, therefore they are liable
to Gods reproof, which is Psa. 50.21.22.
tearing in pieces. Therefore let all such as stand for such learning to bring
men to the knowledge of Gods word, mind whether Peter's exhortation to Simon
Magus, ought not to take place with them, namely to Act. 8.22.
repent of this their wickedness, etc. and acknowledge the Spirit of God
freely bestowed, to be the alone furnisher of us to that which is right in his
sight, without which none have part or fellowship of this business in
understanding and unfolding of the things of God, and so I come to another
exception.

grace from God, and alike gifted by His Spirit, the one a learned man, and the
other an unlearned man, which of these two should be chosen into the Ministry
of Christ in his Church?

The unlearned man: For these Reasons.

First, Because Gal. 2.6.
God respect no man's person: now if God should take the learned man, then he
must be respected above the other for it, if he be of right and due to be
preferred, which is wickedness once to think of him, for all are alike in
that respect: but the Scripture tells us, and that for good reason, that
without any respect at all, he of his good pleasure, and that no flesh should
glory, has chosen the foolish things and the vile things in man's account; he
has chosen the 1 Cor. 1.27.
foolish things of this world to confound the wise: then if, God have so
chosen, let him have his own choice, it is meet he should, for his choice is
the best; and the end why he has so chosen, is, that he might confound the
wise, and so Isay. 29.13.
fulfill his words as Paul 1 Cor. 1.19.
expresses; and thus he chooses not only for salvation but for ministration,
the Romans 16.18.
foolish in Man's account. Paul it seems was so foolish in theirs and others
account, 2 Col. 11.1.
in his administration of the word, as that they could scarce suffer it, and
this sense must needs be good, though the place be understood of Gods choice to
salvation only, which cannot be the meaning, because as we may see Paul's
argument is about 2 Cor. 11.17.
preaching of the Gospel, going onwards in opposing the Scribe and disputer of
this world, to them that were not such, and so comes to declare among whom it
was, that the Lord made his choice, and that was among the foolish in the
worlds eye: but as I said before, take the other for the sense, and the point
remains true, because, that of such as God chooses to salvation of them, he
chooses Ministers, and for salvation it is granted he chooses the foolish,
then it must needs follow, that out of the foolish also he chooses Ministers.

Secondly, And this indeed is most suitable to the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.3.
which is it self simpicity, and appears to the wisdom of man so to be, and
it is not meet our Savior says to put contraries together, as a new piece
into an old garment, nor new wine into old vessels, but to have all things
suitable. Therefore seeing the Gospel is 1 Cor. 1.25.
foolishness, therefore it is meet he should have foolish Ministers in the wise
worlds account, yea and in his servants too, whenas they see as man sees, and
not as does the Lord, For thus was it of old subject to Samuel the Lords
Prophet, whenas the Lord sent him to the house of Ishay, to anoint him a King,
he seeing as a man does, he said, 1 Samuel 16.6.7.
surely the Lords anointed is before me, but we find that the Lord corrects
that, and tells him, it was not so, the more unlikely man, and the unthought of
one, was he that God had chosen to himself, and so is it here, we are not to
see as man sees, but as the Lord directs us.

Thirdly, God chooses these things in opposition to others, to astonish the
wisdom of man: When the Act. 4.13.
Council perceived Peter and John were unlearned men, and without knowledge,
they marveyled, and were amazed: And so says the Apostle, He 1 Cor. 3.19.
catches the wise in their own craft: they think that all knowledge lies in
their breasts. Now the Lord he comes and makes fools wise, and so catches
them, manifesting that their thoughts be but vain, in thinking that the wise
be them that God has chosen; for it is not so, for he has chosen the foolish
to confound the wise, and therefore such as are godly wise, should choose Gods
wise, but the worlds foolish things for His, serve before the worlds wise ones:
and so I come to another exception, which is,

sanctified, it must needs be a good help to the right understanding of the
Truth.

sanctified, so it is, But how or where does that appear that ever it was
sanctified? Has not the Lord long agone told us by his Isay. 19.15.
Prophet, and wished his to behold it, that he would do a marveylous work,
and then he doubles it again, even a marveylous work and a wonder, and then
all comes to this, that he would cause to perish, and destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and cast away the understanding of the prudent; and here if we could
see, we might all of us stay our wondering at this strange thing, and consider,
the Lord tells us, it is a marveylous work and a wonder, and so our wondering
and marveyling, how these things come so to be, is but a fulfilling of Gods
word; and men might rest in it, and see in the next words, that it is a woe to
them for the former abuse of the same: and so now as Mal. 2.2.
Malachy says, that he would curse their blessings, and that he had done it
already: to both which 1 Cor. 1.19. Romans 8.7.
agrees the Apostle from Isay, and concludes also that God has destroyed it:
and in another place tells us, that it is emnity with God. How shall any dare
say then, it is sanctified, whenas so plain a curse is on it, as that we are
wished to beware of being Col. 2.8.
spoiled by it: Now are we wished any where to beware of being spoiled by that
which is sanctified to us, in a spiritual way. Now these things can be
sanctified no further then they are of use, and that is but in a worldly way:
for a spiritual use they be accursed from it.

exception from these things thus minded is, That by this all Humane-Learning
seems utterly to be condemned.

Genesis 11. from 6. to 10.
which is for the repayring of that decay which came upon man for sin: so, I
say, it is of good use, for the repayring of that loss, and so fit for
Statesmen, Physicians, Lawyers, and Gentlemen, yea, all men so far as they
can attain to it, are as men beyond and above others that are without it, yea,
and beyond all other excellencies that this world can afford: but bring it once
to be a help to understand the mind of God in the holy Scriptures, and there it
is detestable filth, dross and dung in that respect, and so good for nothing,
but 1 Timothy 6.21
destroy and cause men to err, as we have seen before: It fares with it, as I
perceive, as it does with Fire, keep it in the Chymney, and it serves as a good
blessing of God, for good and necessary uses, but let it once come into the
roof of the house, and it destroys all, because it is not in its proper
place: so it is here for this thing, among men, for humane and worldly
employments, it is good; But bring it once to the perfiting of the Gospel, and
it will be found to be the spoiling of it.

And yet further so far do I acknowledge tongues to be of use, as to yield
us the translation, of the Scriptures, out of one language into another,
without which we that are unlearned could not come to have the letter of the
word, and so far there as a necessity of it for that use: but that man which
can foe do, is ever the more able to understand the spiritual meaning iof the
word thereby, that I deny, and withal do affirm that an understanding man
may through the teaching of the Spirit know the mind of God, which the other
may never reach unto, according to that Mat. 13.11.
saying of our Savior; To you it is given to know the Mysteries, the secrets
of the Kingdom of heaven, to you his simple Disciples it is given, but to
others, the learned Scribes and Pharisees it was not given: But in this case it
may fare as it did with those that built Noah's Arc, they made a place of
safeguard for others, but were drowned themselves: so these men may prepare a
good help for others, but themselves be altogether without the benefit of it:
A Lantherne you know is of good use, to contain the Candle, but let one carry
it in a dark night, and it will do him no pleasure without a Candle lighted
in it; of the same use is the letter of the word, it is but as a Lautherne or
Candle without light. Now the Spirit is the light of the letter, and so is the
Apostles 2 Cor. 3^
opposition: such men then in that respect may be a help to others, and yet
when all is done be but castawayes themselves, seeing as we have before seen,
the Egyptians and Babylonians in this kind of learning did excel. And it is
none other blessing then what the Pope, Cardinals, and other professed enemies
of the truth (as all for the general confess them to be) have in as great a
measure, and beyond many others that profess to know the truth, and stand
stiffly for this as a special help to understand the true meaning of the Lord
in the word, which if it be so, then by their own grants they have the
advantage of them, and so are to be reverenced of themselves, to have more
knowledge in it then they: so then, they are to acknowledge their error, in
counting themselves wise above what is meet, or else must be forced to
confess, that that learning is inavayleable for finding out of the mind of
God. Neither for all this would I have any to conclude of me, as some affirm,
that I hold all Learned men to be excluded from the spiritual meaning of the
Word, God forbid, for,

Though the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.26.
say, not many of several ranks, yet he says not, there is none, but yet not
many: There was one Joseph of Mar. 15.43.
Arimathea; One Nicodemus; One Deputy Ioh. 3.1. Act. 13.7.
Surgeus Paulus a prudent man, and diverse of Act 6.7.
the Priests. But this was not ususuall, for it is hard for such men to
entertain the truth. Gods ordinary way is among the foolish 1 Cor. 1.27.28.
Iam. 2.5. with Mat. 11.5.
weak and vile; so that when as the wise, rich, noble and learned come to
receive the Gospel, they then come to make themselves equal with them of the
Romans 12.26.
lower sort, the foolish, vile and unlearned, for those be the true Isay 51.1.
heirs of it; and therefore it was not in vain, that James said, Iam. 2.5.
Hearken, my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor, he well saw that
the rich and carnal were dull of hearing of this matter, but yet he tells them
God has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in Faith, and upon this
consideration it is that he wishes the I am. 1.9.10
Brother of high degree to rejoice in that he was made low, that is, brought in
his mind, and account equal with the poor, accounting himself never the
higher for any such excellencies: and so the Brother of low degree, to rejoice
in that he is exalted, that is, that he was made a Rev. 1.6.
King and Priest unto God, and was set in heavenly places with Jesus Christ; so
as the one is made low in respect of any fleshly considence he has in such
things, the other is exalted, being out wardly poor, by being in Christ Jesus,
and so they both meet in one; but now by reason of the smoke that is risen out
of the bottomless pit, and that the Devil is Ephesians. 2.6.
cast out of heaven, and all his Angels with him to the Earth, which Angels
were the fallen Rev. 12.9.
Stars that he drew after his tail, that now he has by reason of them
hatched since a Religion in the world, as that he would have the wise, the
rich, the noble, the learned the only ones, and the poor must be beholden to
them, whenas this is like himself directly to oppose Jesus Christ; so, as that
we may truly say with the Prophet, Lord who has believed our report, or to
whom is the arm of the Lord revealed.

excellency that is in another, to disparage that in them that so they might
advance themselves.

carnal course that such as are themselves fleshly are subject to take, and it
may as well be my fault as another, But yet I profess in the presence of the
Lord that I do not allow my self in any such course. Neither does such an
exception as this beseem a man that is led by the Spirit of Truth, for to make
against any servant of God, that professes opposition to such things, as
professing to be led thereto by the word and Spirit of Truth, For it savours
strongly of the flesh, and is too suitable to the practice of Reprobates, whose
practice is to take things in the evil part, whereas love by which all the
Saints should judge, judges the best of things, till such time it can epsy any
cause so to do. And for the lifting up of my self, to be sure if I so do,
Gods word it is, that he will pluck the mighty from his seat, and then you may
be sure that according to his word my fall will be far greater then my
exaltation can possibly be, and therefore it were best for all such as so
conceive, to commit the judgment to the Lord, and themselves judge nothing
before the time, not speak no more presumptuously: let not arrogancy come out
of your mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him enterprises are
established. But yet after this manner of reasoning, carnal men may overthrow
the whole Gospel: For whereas the Scripture shows that Jesus Christ was
without form, or beauty, or any such thing, wherefore he should be desired, the
carnal man will soon say no other but such a one would be so foolish, as to
part from honors, riches, credit, and such like, to endure so much sorrow and
need not, and whereas the Apostle Phil. 2.
says, that he took on him the form of a servant, the would soon answer, and
good reason why, because he could not be a Master: and whereas it is said, he
chose the poor, that will they say, he must needs do; and the foolish, for
none of the rich and wise, would be so simple, as to follow him: and whereas he
says, love not the world, nor the things in it, good cause why will they say,
for such fools as you, know not how to get it, or else, to be sure, you would
love it as well as others. And thus have I given you a glympse, how that by
this manner of carnal arguing, we might overthrow our own salvation, and sit
down in the very vale and shadow of death, as full of darkness, as this
argument is destitute of Truth.

And thus having Answered to such exceptions as I know of made against this
truth: I come now to such Uses as it shall afford us. 1 Use.
The first is

To discover to us the depth of the great Woe, that the world lies under, set
forth and Rev. 9. from 1. to 11.
revealed to us, in which the word of the Lord" is fulfilled, and men see it
not: and this you know the Scripture in sundry places makes the depth of a
judgment, as in Hosea, Ephraim is said to have here and there gray hayres, and
yet he saw them not; and in this we know was the strength of that 2 These. 2.11.
great Judgment, that men should confidently take lies for truth, this is
there made the depth of their woe. 1 Timothy 42.
And the like is manifested else where, by the same Apostle, declaring, that
though they speak lies, yet they were so seared in their Consciences, as that
they felt, nor feared no danger that they were in, no more then the man that
lying drunk did, though he lay sleeping on the top of the Mast, Pro. 23.35.35.
and so ready to be drowned, yet he feared it not; and yet such is the case,
the Sun and the Air being darkened, their condition must needs be woeful: and
yet this is the case of the inhabitants of the Earth, that they cannot be
brought to believe, but that they are in a very good case, though that the
light of the glorious Gospel, which is the Image of God, do not shine unto
them, as 2 Cor. 4.4.6.
says the Apostle. Now that by which this Sun is said to be darkened, is the
smoke of the bottomless pit, and that we shall find to be the glory and power
of the false Church, called by the name of the Bottomless pit. And that this
may the better appear, we find many Isay. 6.4.1 King. 8.11.12. with. 15. Rev. 8
place in the Scripture, manifesting the glory of God, and his power to be his
smoke: Now because God has smoke in his Temple, so has Gods adversary in his
Temple also, or rather, his bottomless pit: After his smoke, in Revel. 9.2.3.
there follows power; and if you look in the 7, 8, and 9. verses, there is
their glory; and it does further appear by the 13th Chap. and the 3. verse,
that it was so great power and glory, as that all the world wondered, and
admired it; and yet this Jesus Christ accounts a great woe and plague to them;
Rev. 16.10.11
Now part of this woe, I believe is this learning, which we have here in
question, for as we have before manifested, the Sun light of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ alows not, for the glory of Christ's Doctrine is, that it is of the
Spirits teaching: for when we behold the glory of the Lord in the most
perfectest measure, 2 Cor. 3.12.
so as we are changed thereinto from glory to glory, yet all is from the Spirit
of the Lord, seeing that he is the promised Comforter, that is to teach us all
good things belonging to our perfection. Then it must needs follow that is a
smokey power, and glory, flowing from the Kingdom of Satan, and so a part of
the tail that the Rev. 12.4.
Dragon drew the Stars withal after him: and hence comes it to pass, that
now instead of the Spirits teaching, according to Peter's prophecy, here are a
generation that do arise, 2 Pet. 2.1.
which privily bring in damnable errors, and so for that end forsaking the
Spirit of truth, they speak lies through hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2.
as Paul also witnesses they should do, pretending now that the true and
right way for understanding the Scriptures and mind of God was, that men for
that end must learn a part from others, only for that work, and so to be
taught in Tongues, and diverse Languages, and have their wits exercised in Arts
and Sciences humane: and so such a flourish bears this in man's conceit, as
that it seems the only way that can be for a man to be made fit for this
work: so that before while the Angels kept their station in heaven, the
Spirits simple teaching was judged sufficient without these things for this
work, they now being fallen from thence to the earth, Rev. 9.2.
and having the key of the bottomless pit, thence it being opened, now arises
up See John Bale on Rev. 9.1.
Plato and Aristotle, and a multitude more of Heathen Philosophers. These are
the four Angels that stand on the four corners of the earth, holding the
four winds that they should not blow on the Earth, neither on the Sea, neither
on any Tree, Rev. 7.1.
as being those that have the whole power of Preaching in their hand, not
suffering any to blow but who they please, and so do withold the truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
declalaring thereby they be under the wrath of God: and they seem to yield
these Starrey Principles, very fitting in their own understanding, better to
furnish them with fitness to open the mind of God, then His Spirit can do;
whereas before, whenas the perfect teachings of the holy Spirit was in force,
these men of all others were by reason of their learning and wisdom, the most
untutablest men that were in the world for the receiving of the truth, as
appears by the testimony of Luke, Act. 1.18.
and is not yet for all the great Sun light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
which these men profess, they have these black smokey principles still so
stiffly stood for, as that there is no removing of men from the high conceit
that they have of them. And does not this sufficiently declare as the Apostle
says, that God has blinded the minds of men, so as they cannot see, but are
so much the blinder because they say they see: and hence came it to pass, 2
Cor. 4.4. Ioh. 9.41.
that I for mentioning Plato and Aristotle, and such like, was demanded how I
came by the knowledge of that, Human-Learning? with contempt cast upon it, as
if that which I had from them, being Humane Learned Men, was of it self
sufficient to overthrow the matter which I had there delivered.

Paul mentioned to the Athenians their own Poets, and yet for all that he was
as great an enemy to Human-Learning as I, and greater too. Act. 17
And it is to be minded, as I have before declared, that I do not oppose the
knowledge of Humane things, nor yet deny but that we may be acquainted with
their sayings, as the Apostle himself, and our Savior was, yea and that
sometimes we make use of them too, as occasion requires, as I have done here,
though sparingly, and but seldom, and when it is, that it be of great use, as
it was at those 3 times that Paul did use them, and no more, Act. 17.28.1 Cor.
15.33. Tit. 1.12.
that I remember in all the Scripture. Now this you see the Spirit teaches,
and therefore it cannot properly be called Human-Learning, especially in my
sense that I have to do withal, which is to oppose that which is maintained,
to make men fitting to open the mind of God in his word, which is by the
learning of tongues and arts, as of necessity, whereas this is used but by the
by, and not to find out the Truth with, but it being sufficiently before
proved, by themselves also. It is the Spirits order to gain there
acknowledgement of it, and this is no other learning, but what every man
without any Scholership (as ye call it) may attain unto, whereas that that is
so much gloryed in, is, that a man is able aptly to speak according to art and
knowledge in the Sciences, and this is it by which men yet still are hatched
and bred up, Rev. 12.16.1 Tim. 6. to. 12. Rev. 12.4.
and this I believe was the means of bringing in all those abominable errors
that the Earth has drunk in, both in Doctrine and Practice, and so have
occasined those noisome lusts that drown men in perdition, that the man of God
is to fly, as best beseeming the tail of the Dragon, and suting with this
great woe which is further manifested, by comparing the Ministers of Jesus
Christ and those together. Now what marks they be known by, you may read in 2
Cor. 6. from the the 3. to the 11. verse, where as in a Looking-glass, you may
behold the true picture, both of the one, and of the other: By them we approve
our selves as the Ministers of Christ, and give none occasion, why our Ministry
should be reprooved, says Paul, In much Patience, in Afflictions, in
Necessities in Distresses, in strips, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labor,
in Watchings, in Fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by
kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the
power of God, by the armor of righteousness, on the right hand, and on the
left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as d^ceivers
and yet true; as unknown, and yet known, as dying, and yet behold we live, as
chastened, and not killed, as sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing, as poor,
and yet making many rich, as having nothing and yet possessing all things.
These ye see are the marks by which Paul approves himself with his fellow
laborers, to be the Ministers of Christ. Now the quite contrary may be read in
those that profess themselves so to be: They disprove themselves to be the
Ministers of Christ, in all these things; where is their patient bearing with
the contrary minded, as Paul says the 2 Timothy 2.24.25.
servants of God should do? and where are their afflictions which they suffer,
with their necessities and distresses? are they not for the most part full of
all outward necessaries? What are they in distress for? How many stripes do
they suffer, or shall have need so to do, be they but observant of their
Canonical obedience? How many, nay, where are any imprisonments that they
suffer, or at least need to do, if they live according to their own Laws? And
for tumults, they are so far from abiding any, as that they be far more
ready to make them against others, then to endure them themselves: and for
their labors, which what he means you may perceive by 1 Cor. 4.12. and that to
be sure they are guiltless of: and so for their watchings and fastings, and
all the rest being duly considered of, we may read the quite contrary fulfilled
in them, so that of necessity there will appear as void a difference, as is
betwixt light and darkness, and those persons more fitly futing that
description, belonging to the Rev. 9. from 7. to. 11.
Locusts, then with this description here of the 2 Cor. 6 feom 3. to 11.
Apostle, so far are they from what they pretend themselves to be, as that
the words of the Prophet come truly to be fullfild in them, that their Isay.
47, 10.
wisdom and their knowledge perverts them, or causes them to err, and is the
wickedness they trust unto: and this is it that lifts them up in their own
conceits, so far, as that they think in their hearts and stick not to say
also with their tongues, that they are for the ministration of the word, and
none else: and the Lord says, that their wisdom and knowledge is the cause of
this their error, and they say, it is the means of right understanding: now
whether is to be believed, God or they, let all judge, especially when as we
see, that the Lord himself is against them for it, in denying others he denies
them, saying, therefore shall evil come upon thee, and thou shall not know
where it arises, etc. all which declares the depth of the woe they lie under;
for is not this a woeful thing, that of that which God has made a curse, men
should make a blessing, and that against his will, and say that his mind cannot
be known, what can be more against him.

In the next place, that being so, 2 Use.
that men taught by Gods spirit are through it sufficiently made able to know
his mind in word, then it teaches us not to account any man any whit the
nearer to understand the Scriptures by any humane excellencies, but rather let
us be suspicious of him that has them, for the same: especially if he make use
of them in those things, for as we have seen they be dangerous to be leaned
unto. It is his high time that now we should all awake from sleep, and watch in
the Spirit, Romans 11.19.
and so let the Lord have all the praise and glory of his own grace: Not unto
us, Not unto us, but to his name be all the glory, seeing it is he only that
does great things.

Also it may teach all men to cease pinning of their faith upon the sleeves of
learned men, for there is no good cause why we should so do, but to see with
our own eyes, seeing that the just is to live by his own Faith, and to believe
what the Lord has said, which is, that he has Luke 10.2^.
hid those things, that is, the mysteries of the Gospel (among which, this
which now is declared is one) from the wise and learned, and this I verily
believe, is the wholesome doctrine of the Gospel, and which has against it the
wise and learned opposing and denying of it to be so, and so confirming the
words of our Savior: therefore need we not to wait for their witness to it,
but to be glad, and rejoice to see his saying made true, That he will reveal
them to Babes, that is, simple things in the worlds eye and account, and with
this consideration to overlooke all contempt that can be cast upon us for the
same: For so is it now with men, that they judge that nothing is hid from such
and such, when as we are to expect the fullfilling of the Prophecy of Zach.
13.2.
Zachary, that the Lord will cut off the names of the Idols and the unclean
spirits of the Land, and that while they Prophecy their Father and Mother that
begat them, shall run them through with the sword of the Spirit, and say, that
they shall not live, because they told lies in the name of the Lord, and then
shall they be ashamed of their vision; and it then shall be known, that their
garments, by which they be known and taken knowledge of to be Ministers, are
garments of deceit: and at that day such Prophets, shall be ashamed of
themselves, as that they shall disclaim themselves for very shame, to stand in
any relation to such Prophets, as Zach. 13.4.5
there the Prophet shows, whenas their nearest friends with contempt shall
refuse them, and run them through, saying, thou toldest us lies in the name of
the Lord; such light it seems shall then appear, as that they themselves shall
count him no Prophet, that is so made by man's teaching: Now this teaching in
question, is but man's teaching, and therefore whenas the clear light appears,
they shall be ashamed of it, though now they prefer it.

This Consideration also ministers matter of thankefullnesse to God on our
parts, 3 Use.
for his exceeding kindness toward us in Christ Jesus, for that he is pleased
to reveal these great Mysteries, to such mean and simple things as we are,
whenas he conceales them from the wise and prudent: This use Mat. 11.29.
Christ Jesus himself makes, and gives us to understand the true cause why,
and that he makes not any excellency in them, more then was in others, but
only according to the nature of the Gospel, the grod pleasure of God, which
is indeed the only ground of all our happiness, and blessed must needs all
those be, that can with our Savior truly conclude with the same. And so I come
to the next point; for having found out who be the Learned-men that Peter here
intends, which is, they that are taught by the Spirit of God: then it must
needs follow, that they that are not such, are the perverters of these and all
other Scriptures to their own destruction* and so this is another observation,

That such as are destitute of the Spirits teaching, though furnish with
Human-Learning are the perverters and wresters of these and all other
Scriptures to their own destruction.

The truth of this Conclusion appears plainly confirmed to us in the Math 5.21.
Pharisees, as our Savior declares in many particulars plainly discovering the
Math. 23. from 16. to 19.
blindness of these learned teachers, in esteeming and preferring of things
less in themselves, above such as were far greater, as the proportion is
made betwixt the gold of the Temple, and the Temple, and the Altar and that
which was offered thereon: and so blind were they that they counted that most
holy, which the Temple and the Altar made to be holy; and the same Math 15.
from 3. to 7.
else ^here appears, that for all their learning, they taught directly against
the mind of God in his word. We may see the same farther commended to us in
Bartesus one full of all Acts 13.6.
su^^^^^ in this kind, but a turner from the Faith, and not to it, and a
perverter of the straight ways of God. The like is to be observed in, 1 Timothy
1.7.
those of whom Paul speaks, that would be Doctors of the Law, and yet knew not
what they said, nor whereof they ^ffirmed, so wise their Humane-Learning did
help to make them.

Now from the word of God good Reasons may be observed, further to confi^^e
this, as first,

Spirit of God can bring any to the true knowledge of the word of God, and so
says the 1 Cor 2.12.
Apostle, We have received the Spirit of God, that we may know the things that
are given us of God; and Peter 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
tells us, that no Scripture is of any private interpretation, but in
opposition to that, the Apostle sets the Spirit, and opposes it to the will of
Man, and so declares that the Spirits interpretation, where it is, is a
public interpretation and not private; and that Men, though endued with great
learning, having not the Spirit of God can give but a private interpretation
according to the Apostles intent: let men judge what they will though it be the
Pope, and all his Councels of Cardinals and Bishops, and the rest of that
learned rabble, yet they being destitute of the Spirit, can give but a private
interpretation according to the Apostles mind: whereas if a Man have the Spirit
of God, though he be a Peddler, Tinker, Chimney-sweeper, or COBBLER, he may by
the help of Gods Spirit, give a more public interpretation, then they all,
for as 1 Cor. 15.^^ 2.
Paul says of love, the same is to be said of the Spirit, though men did
speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, and knew all secrets, and had all
knowledge, yet this is but as a sounding brass, or tinckling Cymball without
the Spirit.

Jesus Christ His coming into the world, that they that Ioh. 9.39.
see might be made blind, and this clearly appears in the Pharisees, those
learned wise men that counted the common people as accursed, because not
knowing the Law, and they themselves seeing, blessed ones: and therefore Ioh
7.48.
say they, Do any of the Rulers, or Pharisees believe in him, as touching, that
the Rulers and Pharisees must needs know the Truth, whenas these were blind
guides, as says our Savior, and so much Ioh. 9.4^.
these took notice of that he so accounted hem; and so also those that were
blind in man's sight, as was the blind man there spoken of, He sees the gift of
God, and believes in Jesus Christ for his salvation, and yet they refuse the
knowledge and light of this seeing ver. 29.
man, and upbraid him for being born in sins and for going about to teach them,
scorning that such learned men as they should be taught of such as he was,
though Jesus Christ has made him learned, and given himself for him.

Another Reason is rendered out of the words, 3 Reason.


Because such are unlearned and unstable ones: for as before we have seen such
persons are destitute of the true learning, so also are they in an unsettled and
unstable condition, seeing as the Prophet Psalm 51.
witnesses that the Spirit is the establisher; neither can they be rooted, and
established in the Faith, according to the Apostles Col. 2.7.
saying, seeing they be not founded on the rock Christ Jesus, but on ^he sands
of Human-Learning, arysing from a fleshly mind, destitute of the Spirit of
Truth, for they have not learned, as the Truth is in Jesus:

Again, 4 Reason.
it must needs be so that such must pervert the Scriptures because it is
impossible for them to go beyond their pronciple. Now their principle is
error, as the following words declare, and by it they be guided, and lead,
even the whole heap of them, as big as it is, and these shall satisfy men's
lusts, and turn them from the Faith, unto Fables, as the 2 Timothy 4.4.4.
Apostle long ago has foretold: For such as are themselves of the flesh, turn
all things to fleshlinesse, for that is it which they savor, for to the
unclean all things are unclean, their Consciences being defiled, as Tit. 1.15.
witnesses the Apostle: hence was it that whenas our Savior Ioh 2.29.
bade the Jews to destroy this Temple meaning his ver. 29.
body, they themselves being carnal, understood him to speak of the Temple of
Jerusalem. And so the Capernaites, whenas Jesus Christ tells them, He will give
Ioh. 6.
them of His flesh to eat, they being carnal cannot bear it, and all because
they be destitute of the Sririt, verse 53.60.63. Ioh. ^.1.3.4.
for it was in a spiritual sense that he intended it: And the like is to be
seen in Nicodemus a Pharisee, and so a learned man, being a Teacher, and a
Ruler of the Jews, this man for all this whenas Jesus Christ tells him that he
must be borne again, otherwise he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, he
seeing no further then into the natural birth, demands how that could be, that
a man when he is old should enter into his Mothers womb, and be borne again,
so destitute was ne of the spiritual meaning of the mind of Jesus Christ in
his word.

Another Reason (me thinks) included in the words is,

Because such Persons are usually vessels of wrath, 5 Reason.
prepared to destruction, therefore they drive all to the same end, to which
themselves belong: the Gospel is the savor of life to life in them that are
saved, but it is the savor of death to them that perish: Yet would I not from
hence have any to conclude, that I deny salvotion to learned men, as some in
effect have affirmed (as I hear) of me, for the Scripture is against it, as is
already before declared from the 1 Cor. 1.26.
Apostle, though there be not many. But yet this for certain is the worst
work that a carnal man can undertake, to meddle with the Scriptures, seeing
that he abuses them, and that to his own destruction: for the word is a Sword
with two edges, which whosoever that is carnal meddles with, it will run into
his heart, to Romans 2.5.
harden it against the day of wrath. And so I conceive the point is clear, and
plain, That men without Gods Spirit, though furnished with Human-Learning, do
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.

Spirit of God, or the spirit or Error?

Spirit of God is a sufficient witness to it self, seeing that the Spirit is
Truth. Now this agreeing as it does with the word, needs not any other
testimony of it self, because it is the witness of God, and that is the
greatest, as says John, the 1 Ioh. 5.6.
Spirit bears witness, for the Spirit is Truth: and again, 1 Ioh. 3.24.
hereby we know that he abidoth in us, even by the Spirit that he has given us.

Next, it is to be known by its operations and works: as first it savours
spiritual things, they that are after the flesh, says the Apostle, Romans 8.5.
savor the things of the flesh, and they that are after the Spirit, the things
of the Spirit. And again, the verse. 10.
Spirit is life for righteousness sake, and is said to be of a verse. 11.
quickening and an enlivening nature for righteousness. The fruits of it are
further manifested in Gal. 5.22.23.
other places. Now these things being sound in us, do witness for God against
error, though it set it self up with never so high a hand. And yet here
(methinks) I hear the worldly learned men saying to me as did 1 King. 22.24.
Zedekiah, when went the Spirit of God from them to such as I speak of?
Zedekiah such persons do but beg the question, and take for granted like
him, that which they never had, for that could never depart from him which was
never with him: therefore though he were great, and his companions many, verse. 6.
as is showed and that Micaiah was but one poor Prophet alone, and hate^ of
the King, yet he had the Spirit of God, whenas all the other were led and ruled
by the lying Spirit; and though Jesus Christ, and his learned ones cannot be
believed of the great, and honorable Prophets of the world, but by Zedekiahs
shall be smitten on the Cheek, when by them this question is demanded of the
Lords Prophets, yet this answer may be given them, that whenas they come to
hide themselves in secret, and to be ashamed of their visi^n, and that the Rev.
15.1.
seven last plagues come to be fulfilled, spoken of in the Revelations; then
they shall find the truth of the testimony that is borne against them, though
in the mean time the servants of the Lord be committed to prison, there to
eat the bread of affliction, and the water of affliction for their testimony.

Human Learning is no help to underst and the mind of God, yet is it not
useful to furnish us with words to express our selves in the delivery of the
Gospel?

Paul, that the whole Scripture is given of God, and is profitable to make the
man of God absolute and thoroughly 2 Timothy 3.16.
furnished to every good work, whence I conclude, that if the Scripture be
perfect, and absolute for every good work, then it is so for that, so that
then there is no need of man's wisdom to help the Ministers of God. And so yet
further says the Apostle, that he 1 Cor. 1.17.
preached the Gospel not with wisdom of words, if not with wisdom of words,
then I conclude, they were needless, and so much the next words declare, least
says he, I should make the Cross of none effect And again, I, Brethren,
says he when I came unto you, came not with the 1 Cor. 2.1.
excellency of words, or of wisdom, showing unto you the Council of God, but
frees himself from it, denying that his preaching stood in the verse. 4.
enticing speech of man's wisdom, but on the contrary, in the plain evidence
and demonstration of the Spirit. And afterward he gives the verse. 5.
Reason for it, that their Faith should not be in the wisdom of men, by which
it seems it is subject so to be, if that were used. And so we find that indeed
it is, and not in the power of God, by the plain demonstation of the Spirit:
and though in all this one would think the Apostle had said enough in this
matter for the manner of the delivering of the truth, yet for all this he has
not done with it, but minds it yet 1 Cor. 2.13.
again, saying, Which things as we know them, so we also speak not with words,
which man's wisdom teaches. And so again, he Cor. 4.19.
slightly passes over the words of the false teachers, as not worth the
knowing or regarding: therefore he says, when he comes he will know, not their
words, but their power. And so again, he condiscends to the false teachers, so
far, as to confess that he was Cor. 11.6.
rude in speaking, but not so in knowledge: by all which places it plainly
appears, that man's wisdom is to be rejected, even in speaking the word of
God, and that none are to affect any excellence that way, but to content
themselves even with the use of the natural abilities they have, without any
art or skill in learning further.

Apollas is said to be an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, Acts
18.24.

Paul, and Moses and those mentioned in Acts 19. and yet, as I have before
manifested, that whenas all these came to receive the faith they left,
forsook, and contemned all that: so do I believe was it here with this man,
that whenas he came to be taught further in the knowledge of Christ, that he
then became more and more suitable to the rudeness and simplicity of preaching
the Gospel, as well as Paul, for never afterward do we read that he was
commended by that term, for such manner of excellency was proper to the Law,
and not to the Gospel in any degree But Secondly, take it for granted that he
persisted in his eloquence, yet it appears that it was such as he had obtained
by being mighty in the Scriptures: and this also further justifies a former
Answer, that the Scripture alone is sufficient to furnish us with expression.
So now the point remaining true for all this, That men destitute of the Spirit,
having Human-Learning, do pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction.
This in the first place may teach

Gods Spirit, how wise and learned otherwise they seem to be, to beware of
meddling with the Scriptures, it is the worst work that possibly they can
undertake, for in so doing they meddle with that, in which they have no skill,
and so wound themselves: for it is a sharp two edged sword, and they having no
skill to handle it, to be sure it will dangerously wound them to their own
destruction: but seeing the truth is so, as that they have neither ears to
hear, nor hearts to understand it, therefore I will thus pass it over: and

Gods Spirit, whatever they be else, yet they be both unlearned and unstable
men, according to the mind of God: so the 1 Cor. 14.24
unbeleever is called of Paul, an unlearned man: and so much in effect Iam 1.6,
7.8.
James tells us, of a Faithless man's inconstancy, that he is tossed about like
a wave, and is unstable in all his ways of Religion, for indeed wanting the
Spirit to establish him, he is driven hither and thither of every blast and
breath of man's wisdom, and so much experience, without any more Scriptures
daily proves, upon every change of orders, and ordinances of Religion: how
confident have many wise worldly Learned men bin of their stability for being
brought to yield to this or that, when as the raging wave of the Sea has
roared but a little, how have these men fallen from their supposed stability
and stedfastnes: so that instances I need not name, every ones small experience
can bring forth enough: but from all this there is given us to see the
Scriptures fullfilled before our eyes, for our confirmation, and their just
conviction.

learned men, but according to Peter's intent, unlearned men, do pervert the
Scriptures, making their interpretations as carnal as themselves, for whenas
the Scriptures speak of learning, and so by it do for the most part commend
unto us the learning of the Spirit of Truth, as before we have seen from this
text, and many more places, these persons presently apply them to
Human-Learning, and the texts are all by them wrested and perverted: and in
this kind many Instances might further be aledged. First concerning the Church:
whereas the Scriptures do authorize Christians to gather themselves together
in Christ's name, and so have the Mat. 18.20.
promise of Gods presence in so doing. This they presently deny to be the
intent of the place, and say it is to be meant of two or three come together in
performance of prayer, or such like, contrary to the scope of the place, which
treats only of such as are in Church Order, and have committed to them the
power of binding and loosing, which the promise of Christ Jesus his approving
of the same by them; and besides, where in the Scriptures is Christ Jesus said
to be in the midst of any, but his Lev. 26.11.12. 2 Cor 6.16. Ps 132.14. Rev.
13.1. Rev 2.1.
Churches: And further, whereas the Scriptures speak of the Church, Temple,
and house of God, applying these savings to believers and such as are 2 Cor.
6.16. with Heb. 3.6. with 1 Pet. 2.5.
built upon Christ by faith, these they wrest, and pervert in applying these
titles to their houses of lime and stone, calling them the houses of God, and
Temples for him to dwell in, though the Scriptures be plain to the contrary,
as Stephen declared to the Act. 7.47. to 50.
Council long ago, and that from the testimony of the Isay 66.1.
Prophet long before: and so our Ioh. 4.21.
Savior himself to the Woman of Samaria, denying for the time to come any
such places, as the Jews, and the Samaritans doted on, but tells her, and us,
that spiritual service in Mat. 18.20.
any place, as he says himself, should please him, though it will no^ give
carnal men content. Likewise are not the Scriptures alleged frequently by
these learned men: for the nation and people for being the Church of God, and
for the same end, national observances, as an High Priest consecrated and set
apart for the services of the Church, and so under him the rest of the holy
Priests with their holy garments, and tithes and such like for their
maintenance, and for this purpose the Scriptures, alleged in a most plentiful
manner, both from the Law and the Prophets, for the justifying of their names,
orders, and administrations, whenas if it be sp^ritually discerned, and the
Scriptures not wrested, nor perverted, it will be found true, as Peter Act.
10.14.15.
says, Rev. 13.7. with Rev. 16.19.
that no^ every Nation, nor any more any Nation, but in every Nation them that
fear the Lord and none other, are accepted of him: Whereas Christ Jesus himself
has told us, that the Psalm. 125. Psalm 1.
beast should have power over every kindred, nation and tongue, and that the
national Cities should fall: whereas Mount Sion the City of God shall never be
moved, as says the Heb. 12.
Prophet, and also the Apostle; by this then it appears that all such
Scriptures as are alleged for the maintenance of a National Church are
perverted. Seeing that long since the Lord has rejected it, Now accounting a
Company of Saints in fellowship with himself, to be Mount Rev. 14 1. ^sal.
14.9. from 6 to 9.
, that shall never be moved, and these he has made Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. 1 Pet.
2.9.
Kings and Priests to God. The like we may see in the Ministers of the Church:
seeing that they were of old time in that Church, to be honorable persons, in
outward honor and esteem; for their names, Priests, for their callings, above
the rest of the people, a distinct body of themselves; for their apparel,
different in their administrations from other of the people; and so for their
maintenance, by tithes, and offerings, all which had a respect to Christ, and
were in him to have their end, as the Apostle Gal. 4.12.
declares, as being but worldly rudiments.

Yet these men, though they profess themselves Ministers of Jesus Christ, and
under the Gospel, yet Childlike, as under tutors, and governors do yet
observe these things, after the rudiments of the world; and so sutably to the
Gospel cannot abide to approve themselves to be Ministers of Christ, by such
marks as his word affords, as we have 2 Cor. 6. from ^. to 10.
before considered, but they must be men of honor, and such as be distinct
from others in their apparel, maintenance, and such like: dishonor, and
reproach, and nakedness, and living on mere alms they cannot brook: but they
be so far from working with their own hands for their own necessities, as the
Apostle requires that the Acts 2.33, 34, 35.
Ministers of the Gospel should do, as that they wrest the Scriptures of the
Law and the Prophets, haling in as it were by the hair of the head, the
Scriptures to speak for them and their delicious living, faring like Dives
deliciously every day, whereas the Elders of Jesus Christ should 1 Pet. 5.1.2.
feed the flock of God, not caring for it for filty lu^re, but of a ready mind.

But leaving these things, and such as these are which declare them to be more
suitable for Moses and the Law, which tends unto wrath and bondage, then such as
are Ministers of Christ, and made partakers of the liberty of the servants of
God.

with the Answer.
I will speak of some few things that are in difference among them and us You
know it is usually objected against us because of our departure, out of the
Ioh. 6.68.
words of Peter to our Savior, being these, Whether shall we go, thou have
the words of eternal life? from whence is concluded against us, if the text be
not perverted, that we in leaving them do forsake Jesus Christ, wherein they
take it for granted that He is with them, and not with those that forsake them:
whereas the text is clear to prove, that the words of eternal life are in him,
as Ioh. 6.
himself says also, the words that I speak are spirit and life, and this who
(...) but that he that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has
not life: But let not the text be wrested, yet what proof is here that
Antichrist has the words of eternal life, and that there is no forsaking of
him, and yet all that know wherein the difference lies, know that this is the
contraversie, and how that these persons thus forsaking go to Christ, and to
the word of eternal life, seeing that the Lord Isa. 8.16.
binds the testimony and seal^s up the Law among his Disciples: so that till it
can be proved that these leave Christ, and forsake the words of eternal life,
the text must be taken for none other but to be perverted, and a veil drawn
over it to beguile the simple.

Where we had our Conversion (if we have any) if not among them and so taking
it for granted, that we had it among them, a great outcry is made against us as
if we had stolen their gods, and done them great wrong, and for this purpose
this amongst other things is alleged, that that Church which is able to beget
is able to bring up.

conversion does properly belong to the Psalm. 19.7. Romans 1.16. 1 Pet 1.3.23.
word of the Lord: Now this word by which we are all begotten is the proper
portion of the Church of God, as Psalm. 147.19.20. Mat. 13.11. 1 Cor. 3.22.
diverse Scriptures declare: hence then must it needs follow, that whosoever are
converted to the Lord, those by virtue of their conversion belong to the true
Church, because as is before said, the word is hers, and therefore they are to
cleave to her, and forsake those places, where they were converted, and that
for this Reason, because the Lord himself is Psalm. 78.6.
said to count whenas he writes the people that this man was born there, that
is, in Sion, the Church of God, though that the man were converted in man's
account in Babel, and Palestina; yet the Lord when he counts, shall write the
converted man to be born in Sion his Church: Now all Gods people should count
and write as God does, and give Babel no honor at all of their conversion,
because the Lord does not give her any; and the same thing is abundantly seen
in the converts, that they are Act. 2.40.
exhorted to leave those places where they were converted, and so they did, as
the Act. 2.44. and 17.4.34.
Scripture manifests in many places, which might be noted.

Again it is to be minded that God himself counts all the faithful to belong
to the Rev. 12.4.5.
Woman, the Church of God, as appears in the Revelations, where the Man-child
as is evident by Exodus 4.22.23.
other places contains all the faithful, even the whole Church of God. This
Son of God and his Man-child is called his Exodus 5, 1.
people. The like appears in Isay 66.7, 8. where the Man-child is interpreted
to be a whole Nation of Children, including all the faithful. Now this woman
is said to be in travail crying; and if yours be that Church that is in this
travail crying, and in pain according to the Scriptures, I am content the
Child shall be acknowledged yours, but if it be in jollity, and without sorrow,
putting the others to pain, and ready to cut the living Child in pieces, how
then can I acknowledge it for the true Mother, whenas also the Apostle says,
that Jerusalem that is from above is the Gal. 4.24.
Mother of us all, and she is not one that gendereth to bondage, but to
freedom, as says the Apostle, and therefore me thinks it appears that every
ones conversion strongly binds him to make speed to that Church which consists
of such as are faithful in Jesus Christ, a^ being the proper inheritance to
which they all belong, and to know that all such places as are aledged to
conclude otherwise, be but wrested and perverted, though never so fair a
gloss be set upon them; for God ever since the beginning has put enmity
betwixt the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent, and accursed shall
all they be that shall join those together that God has so far separated;
and therefore let none of Gods servant stand with one foot on Mount-Sion, and
another on Babylon, least that which is halting be turned out of the way. Heb.
12.

Ministry after this manner,

That Ministry that does the work of the ministry of Jesus Christ, spoken of
in Ephesians 4. for the p^rfitting of the Saints, is a true Ministry, but your
Ministry you say, does the same work, etc.

work of the Ministry of the Apostles, etc. to read divine service, Church
Women Marry, and bury the dead, and such like services as there are? Did the
Apostles perfect the Saints after this manner? For who knows not but that this
is the substance of what your Office of Ministry binds you unto? as for
preaching that may be dispensed withal, and a little now and then may serve
the turn.

Jesus Christ from on high gave gifts unto, for you have others, that the
Scripture speaks not any otherwise, then by the Rev. 17.3.
names of blasphemy: But for the power and work of the Ministry, which you say
is answerable to that of the Apostles, by your gathering of the Saints
together, taking it for granted that you say, from what do you convert them? If
from the power of darkness, as you would seem to imply, into the Kingdom of
Christ, as Col. 1.13.
did the Apostle, then by your own grant in the power of darkness you found
them and the truth is, that where you found them there you leave them; when you
found them before their conversion, you professed of them that they were
regenerate and born anew, to what then do you convert them? or have you
conversion after regeneration? you also bade these persons before, to take and
eat in remembrance that Christ dyed for them, and fo^give them the seals of
life and salvation* and yet after all this you being ministers to them, come to
justify the truth of your Ministry by your conversion of these people, that
have by these things no need of amendment, and yet when all is done that you
plead for, they still abide in the same Church, under the same Ministry, in the
same worship that they were conversant in before, whenas I have declared
before, that whenas the Apostles converted any, those converts left their
former places, turning from dumb Idols to serve the living God. Now it has
been long since acknowledged and professed, that the Worship of your Church,
and the Ministry of it came out of the Popes shop, and must needs be reformed,
or else the judgment of God cannot but light upon you, as has bin manifested
in the first and second admonition to the Parliament in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, and all know that yet it continues the same that then it was, and if
it were so bad then, as it is reported that a thousand Ministers said it was,
small cause have any to plead conversion, whenas they shall continue in such
abominations, as that the plagues of God cannot by their own confession be
withheld: seeing that the Scriptures, and Spirit of God teaches us, that the
Psalm. 119.101.
fear of the Lord teaches m^n to refrain their feet from every evil way, and
to cleanse our selves from al^ filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to
grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God, or the worship of God, as our
Savior Mat. 4. 2 Cor. 2.1.
interprets it, and to hate the very Jude 23.
garment spotted by the flesh. Now these things well considered, it will
appear that the several Scriptures that are continually brought for the
maintenanc of your Ministry, are but as so many flourishes by which the word of
truth is wrested and wringed like to a nose of wax, contrary to their proper
intents and scopes to serve your own turns, which who they be of you or others
that are the perverters of them, God knows, and one day will judge betwixt the
righteous and the wicked and give to every one according as his works shall
be: In the mean while to me it appears plain, that men destitute of Gods holy
Spirit, be they as learned as may be in Mans-Learning, yet they do pervert all
Scriptures to their own destruction, whenas the unlearned one, simple men and
women having the Spirit of truth in them, shall rightly know them, and Gods
mind in them for their great comfort. 4 Use.


Again, seeing this is so, that such men do thus pervert the Scriptures, this
should provoke all that are made able Ministers of the Spirit as says the 2
Cor. 3.2.
Apostle, that they take the same Apostles 1 Timothy 4.6.
advise, saying, if thou put the Brethren in remembrance of these things thou
shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ: If thou put the Brethren in
remembrace of these things, What things? those things mentioned from the 1.
verse.
before, how that the Spirit has foretold of Doctrines of Devils, how that men
should speeake lies through hypocrisy, etc. as Zachary also foretold that the
Zach. 13.3.
Father and Mother of the Prophet should say, that he told them lies in the
name of the Lord: If thou put the Brethren in remembrance of these things,
because they are subject to forget them, and thou should be their
remembrancer, which if thou do thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ,
which have bin nourished up in the words of faith, and good doctrine; then
mark, these things are not errors, nor lies, nor he a false-teacher that
speaks of them, but a good Minister that has bin nourisht up in faith, and
good doctrine, which was continually taught of Paul, and heard of Timothy, and
to this is to be added what the Apostle Tim 6.3.4.
says further in this matter, declaring that he that consents not to
wholesome doctrine, that is according to godliness, is puffed up, and knows
nothing, but dotes about words, and is such a one, as is so far corrupted by
the flesh, as that he is to be separated from: Therefore Gods good Ministers, as
we see, should be careful of these things as knowing of whom they shall
receive their reward, and what shall also be their portion from men of the world
in that which is Rev. 11.7.
death in the world, but Rev. 14.13.
life with the Lord: Be Faithful therefore to the death, and you shall have a
Rev. 2.10. 5 Use.
crown of life, declaring the power of the Spirit of the Lord in you.

Now in the last place, I will conclude with the exhortation of the 2 Pet.
3.17.18.
Apostle in the words following, Ye therefore beloved seeing ye know these
things before, what things? among others those, that worldly learned men are
Gods unlearned men, being destitute of his Spirit, beware and take heed least
ye also as well as others (you being subject to it) be plucked away before you
be aware into the error of the wicked, to think that Gods Mysteries cannot be
attained to by man's learning, and so you fall from your own stedfastnes, which
is, Romans 11.
through Faith; for by Faith ye stand, and by the Spirit, for by it ye are also
Psalm. 51.
established: and for a preservative against this error, as opposite to it,
grow and increase in the grace of God, and the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, which is that that will preserve you from error. Now to Him be glory,
not to us, nor to Man, but to Him our Lord Jesus Christ both now and for
evermore. Amen.

I SAY 44.25. The Lord frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners
mad, turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge* foolishness.


FINIS.

