THE VINDICATION OF THE COBBLER, BEING A BRIEF PVBLICATION OF HIS DOCTRINE. OR
Certain Tenants collected out of the Sermon of Samuel How a Cobbler in Long
Ally in Morefields, which Sermon he Preached in the Nags-head Tavern near
Coleman-Street in the presence of above a hundred people, among which was five
Ministers (some of them silenc't ones) This Sermon being lately Printed, and
Entitled, The sufficiency of the Spirits teaching, without Humane Learning;
For the light and information of the Ignorant. These following Doctrines are
published in the very same words he there deliverd them; upon this Text, 2 Peter
3. 16. In which they that are unlearned, and unstable wrest as they do all, so
the other Scriptures to their own destruction.
THat such as are destitute of Human learning, 1 Doct.
are the learned ones that truly understand the Scriptures according to Peter's
mind, else he condemned himself, for Peter was an unlearned man, and Jesus
Christ without Human learning.

That Human learning was never sanctified by GOD, 2 Doct.
but to spiritual uses is accursed, and is only profitable to a Statesman, a
Physician or a Lawyer; for to a Divine it is as bad as fire in the Roof of a
House: Therefore if two men both alike indewed with grace from GOD, the one
learned, the other unlearned, be to be preferred to the Ministry, the unlearned
is to be preferred for these reasons. First, Because GOD respects no persons,
secondly, it is suitable to the Gospels simplicity: thirdly, GOD chooses the
unlearned in opposition to the learned, so must we; for that learning which is
attained to by labor, is not fit for Christ's Church, but for Egypt, and
Babylon it is suitable.

That if knowledge in Tongues, 3 Doct.
be given us from GOD without labor, then we may accept it as coming from his
grace, not else, for we must not labor for it; for Human learning, as it is
noe help to stop the mouths of gainesayers, and opposers, so it may not be
purchased with money, for we read that Simon Magus offering to buy it with
money, was sharply reproved for it by Peter, as springing from an evil root.

That we are to be suspicious that such persons are destitute of the Spirit
that make any use of Human learning to understand the Scripture, 4 Doct.
for that such usually, are vessels of wrath prepared for destruction; for all
which came to CHRIST having any kind of Human learning for sooke it; Moses
forsook the Treasures of Egypt, of which Human learning was the chief: The
Ephesians whom Paul converted Acts the 19. wholly did abondon it, for they
burned their books of curious Arts: Therefore no words of Art, or of Humane
learning, may be used in Preaching the Gospel for doubtless Moses, Paul, and
Apollos, contemned all such.

That seeing Jesus Christ was destitute of Human learning, Use. 1.
so his Servants ought to be also, for it is not fit for them to be above their
Lord.

To discover the great woe the World lies under, Use. 2.
that are so blind as not to see that Humane learning is so far from being a
help to understand the mind of GOD, that quite contrary instead of a Blessing
it is a Curse, instead of a fire profitable, it is as pernicious fire in the
Roof of a House: Therefore all Christians are to beware of it, for it is that
evil seed that causes Error, and occasioneth those noisome Lusts that drown
men in perdition, it is the Dragons tail, and suitable for those Locusts that
ascend out of the Bottomless Pit, whose smoke Human learning is; Scribes,
Pharisees, Papists, Egyptians, Babylonians, they are the men that highly
esteem of Human learning: And thus the unlearned Cobbler his zeal having made
him outrun his Last concluded. Let the man of GOD fly Human learning.

THis Sermon a Minister who was there, and had given him his Text exclaimed
against, Affirming he had delivered Blasphemy: the Cobbler being stiff in his
opinion the Minister replied, How had made a Cal^e, and danced about it, which
speech being reported abroad to his disgrace as if he had made an unsound
exposition, the Cobbler to vindicate himself and (as he says in his Epistle to
the Reader) the truth it self which he delivered, caused his Sermon to be
Printed, and in his Epistle undertakes to prove Human learning the Calfe, and
the men of that Throne (as he calls the Ministers) those that set it up and
themselves danced about it: while he (the Cobbler) to their great grief and
discontent did cast it down and grind it to Powder, and so blew it away with
the Word of GOD. Which whether he did or not, you may partly judge by what is
here collected.

What How, how now has How such learning found,
To throw Arts curious Image to the ground?
Cambridg, and Oxford may their glory now,
Veil to a Cobbler, if they know but How.
Though bigg with Arts they cannot overtop,
The Spirits Teaching in a Cobblers Shop:
Then gnaw your tongues for madness if you will,
The Spirits Teaching flows not from your quill.
Reader if thou an Human Artist be,
Let Human learning be no Judge for thee,
Lay down thy Art, then try this Cobblers end,
And see if it be by the Spirit pend:
Mean time advise you Arts, and Artists all,
The Spirits wisdom may atend the Awl:
For it is no strange thing that we here have got,
This Cobblers Father was (no doubt) a Scot.
FINIS.
London. Printed by R. Oulton, for John Wright the younger, and are to be sold
at his Shop in the Old-Bayly. 1640.


