A discourse touching the pretended match between the Duke of Norfolk and the
Queen of Scotts.
FOr as much as of late it has been given out, that the continuance of the
Gospel here among us, and the safety of our Sovereign, should depend upon
a match to be had between the Duke of Norf. and the Q. of Scots: for that
otherwise she marying a foreine Prince, might grow to that strength, as our
Sovereigns forces should not be able to counteruaile the same (a thing very
dangerous, considering hur asspiring mind) whereby both this present state and
religion should be in hazard. And further, that the uniting of these two
realms by this match might make us equal in strength to our neighbors that
border about us, I thought good by consideration of hur parson and of his
person, of the match to be had between them, and of the present state of this
realm, to see whether there should not be less danger in common reason to
have hur matched rather abroad, then at home, though it seem a very strange
Proposition to be proponed by any subject of this land, whether it be better
to have hur married abroad, then at home, she remaining under our Sovereigns
government, to dispose of hur marriage or not marying, as shall seem to make
most for her safety. What is it else but to call in question whether her
Majesty may govern or not govern in her own Realm?

A consideration of the Q. of Scots person.
IN Religion she is either a Papist, whilke is evil, or else an Atheist, whilke
is werse, and in league joined with the confederate enemies of the Gospel, by
the name of the holy league, to root out all such Princes and Magistrates as
are professors of the same. A thing well known, though not generally.

Of Nation she is a Scot, of whilke nation I forbear to say what may be said,
in a reverent respect of a few godly of that nation.

Of inclination how she is given, let her own horrible acts publicly known
to the whole world witness, though now of late certain seduced by practice,
seek to cloak and hide the same.

Of aliances of the mother side how she is descended of a race that is both
enemy to God, and the common quiet to Europe, every man knows, but alas to
many have felt.

In good will toward our Sovereign, she has showed her self sundry ways
evil affectes whose ambition has drawn her by bearing the Arms of England,
to discipher hur self to be a Competitour of this crown. A thing publicly
known. I leave to touch other particular practices that has discovered her
aspiring mind.

The consideration of the Dukes person.
TOuching his religion how he is affected, I leave to God and his own
conscience, but that he should not be settled in religion, it shall appear by
sundry reasons to the contrary.

First, his education of his son under the government of a Papist does show.
Secondly, the corruption of his house, his chief men of trust being Papists.
Thirdly, the confidence and reposed trust he has in the chiefest Papists in
the realm. Fourthly, his last marriage with a Papist. And lastly, this
pretended match.
Touching his calling, he is in state the second person of this Realm.

Touching his credit with the Nobility and Commons, it is well known to be
great, with the one in respect of his alliance, with the other in respect of a
kind of familiarity is used toward them in public sport, as in shooting
and ^eckefightes, a thing not to be discommended, if this match of his did not
discover it to savor of an ambitious and aspiring intent.

Consideration of the match.
All matches in marriages whilke promise good success and continuance of
concord, are joined in the fear of God, and coupled by sincere love, the true
and only knot of good agreement, whilke love is engendered by the eye and by
the ear, and cannot be perfect, unless both senses be satisfied in either
party: whilke eye liking in them cannot be, for that neither of them has
seen the other. Now let us way, whether sincerity of love be the maker of
this match.

First for degrees sake let us begin with the Queen. Is it likely that the Q.
of Scots, that could not like of Derley, should like well of the Duke, such as
know them both do think very unlikely.

Now to the Duke. Is it likely that any man that professes true religion* or
resp^cteth worldly honor, or regards his own safety, would match with one
detected of so horrible crimes, in respect of love, surely none that is either
honest, or religious can think so. Then must it needs follow, that neither
the eye in hur, if the Painter has discharged his duty, for other eye lyking
has not passed between the^, nor the ear in him is contented, but that some
other respect should be the knitter of the knot: whilke respect carries in it
self manifest presumption of evident danger.

A consideration of the present state.
Touching religion for lack of doctrine, it is thought that the realm divided
into three parts, two of them be inclined so Papistrie and Atheism.

Touching government such has been the lenity of our Sovereign, a thing very
commendable in a prince, if our corruption abused not the same, as men for the
most part are grown so remiss in duty toward her majesty, as they both
contemn laws, and inferior magistrates. I leave to descend into some other
perticularities in this behalf.

A discourse upon the foresaid considerations.
NOw let us see upon the consideration had of either of the persons, and of the
match, and of the present state, what likelyhoode there is of continuance of
Religion, and safety to our Sovereign. And first let us resort to the
consideration had of her person, and begin with religion.

Is it likely that the Gospe^^ shall all have continuance by her, who is enemy
to the Gospel, and joined in league and confederacy with the coniured
repugners of the same?

It may be said, that in Religion by persuasion she may be altered. It may well
be answered that it is only Gods office to incline hearts to true religion,
and that otherwise to think proceeds of vain presumption. Surely, if we way
her inclination by the experience had of the fruits of her behavior, we shall
see small cause to hope that sincere religion can dwell in so corruptible a
vessel: Then in reason consider further how unlikely it is that upon
consideration of the present state, she finding two parts of this Realm
inclining to her religion, where she thinks to have a great party, will
alter the same, to join with the fewer in number.

Now as touching our Sovereigns safety, is it like that our Sovereigns
safety should be grounded and depended upon her, who has disciphred her self
to be our competitor of this Realm? I speak of things publicly known. I
leave other secret prastises tending to the same end.

It may be said, that so that the Q. can be brought to like of the match, and
to restore her to her kingdom, and stablish her in the succession, she will by
oath and subscription confirm any thing that may tend to the Queens safety.
If she falsify her faith, no pleading will serve, the sword must be the
remedy.

But how like is it, that one ambitious, a borne Scot, a defamed person, who
has made shipwreck of all honor and reputation, and lastly a branch of the
house of Guise, whose profession is to keep none Edict never so solemnly
promised, will keep faith? I leave it to the consideration of those that judge
without affection.

Now having showed how unlikely it is that any safety to our Sovereign, or
continuance in religion can grow by her person in this match, let us see
whether the deserts in her are likely to be supplied by the consideration of
his person. And first will we come to the weighing of his religion* which having
showed to be unsettled by sandrye reasons of good moment, let us now see,
whether by this match there is not like to ensue an evident and undoubted
danger of his revolt. And for proof hereof, let the only example of Solomon
teach us so to think. Did not he by matching with an idolatresse Egyptian,
become an idolater, whereby ensued to him Gods high displeasure, to the great
plague of his kin and posterity?

If wisdom might have stayed him, he was likest to have been stayed, for he
was of all that ever was the wisest. But when wisdom passes the bonds of
Gods commandments, it turns to folly. That law which forbad Solomon to
marry with the Egyptian idolatresse, stands in force still, and forbids
the Duke to mary with the Scottish idolatresse, least that punishment which
fell upon Salomons kin, teach the Duke to beware of like punishment. But let
us go further in applying.

Solomon married one meaner witted then him self: but the Duke would marry one
equal in wit, and in subtlety superior. To conclude, if Solomon marying one
in degree his inferior, and in wit meaner, became an idolater: what shall we
then look for of him, that in degree is inferior, and in wit rather meaner
then equal with hur, whom he seeks to mary? But well, suppose he will
continue constant: is all the danger gone? No: For if either she mislike him,
which is likely, for that she can hardly love him, having to delicate an eye:
or if that she ouerrule him, for that he is her inferior, whilke is not
unlikely, considering her courage: or if he die, a thing to be thought of, for
that he is mortal: or if his life be taken from him by indirect means, a
practice wherewith she is right well acquainted, and by a Pope may be dispensed
withal: what shall then become of the continuance in Religion?

Now let us see further what safety may grow to our Sovereign by his matching
with her. Before in the consideration of his person, I showed how that by
calling in birth he was honorable, and of credit great, with both Nobility
and commons, which two qualities as they are good gifts of God, and such as
being well emplode by him whom God has endued withal, yield no small benefit
to the common wealth and Prince where he lives, so on the other side, being
abused through ambition, they bread to the Prince danger* and to the common
wealth disquietnes.

Now let us see what doubt grows by this match of the abuse of the said
qualities.
FIrst, the match it self not grounded in the fear of God, nor upon due
respect, as before was showed, can never yield good fruits, but must needs
taste of ambition, of all other the most dangerous fruit.

Secondly, the party her self whom he is to match withal, having showed her
self once a Competitor of this Crown, is like to draw him from the due
consideration of his allegiances by her cunning persuasions wherein she
excels. To abuse the said qualities in attempting the said crown for the
thirst of a kingdom, can never be quenched, until it has hazarded the
uttermost trial.

It may be objected that by diverse capitulations that mischief may be well
prevented.

It may be well answered, that such as with simple eye weigh her favorers in
respect of religion, his friends in respect of calling, alliance, and popular
familiarity, and therewith the eging of foraine practices, may well see no
bond sufficient to bridle so incorrigible an humor as ambition is.

These things well wayed with the consideration of this present state, how
little awe reigns commonly, through the lenity of our Sovereign, in the
hearts of the subjects, whereby they may the more easilye be seduced by
practices, be drawn from the consideration of their duty, it must needs
appear that the home match carries in it self most euidnt danger.

I leave to Lawyers to define of what quantie this presumption is, for a
subject to seek to match with a Competor of this Crown, without making his
Sovereign first privy thereof.

A comparison between the home match and the foreine.
Having showed the danger of this home match let us now consider with the
foreign match, and see whilke of them yeldeth most danger.

If she marry a foreine Prince, her party here within the Realm will not be
great, for hardlye is an Englishman brought to like of a Stranger or a foraine
governor, then must her means to annoy us, consiste in foreine aid, whilke
though it be dangerous, yet does it not yield like danger to the home enemy.
For one enemy within a City besieged, is more dangerous, then a hundredth
abroad.

If she mary a foreine Prince, as for example with France, then will Spain be
ielous, for it were contrary to the Spanish policy to see France and England
united under one governor. And therefore England might look for any Spanishe
aid, to keep France from this purpose.

But if she mary at home, whereby the ielosie of these two Princes may be taken
away, then they both in respect of that league wherein she is joined with them,
and the desire they have to disquiet this estate, will join together in ayding
of her. And so besides her home help, she should lack no foreine aid. By
this short comparison, euidentlye you may see the home match more dangerous,
then the foreine, as well in respect of the continuance of Religion, as of the
safety of our Sovereign.

God be thanked that has so provided for the continuance of our Religion, as
he has given us a Prince that favors Religion, and that we need not seek
no further stay at her hands, who is enemy to Religion.

God also be thanked, that has so provided for her Majesty's safety, as she
has no need of this new found remedy.

Touching the other respect of this home match, which is the uniting of England
and Scotland, if we look well upon the vniters with a single eye, that leaves
the continuance of Gods glory, and the safety of our Sovereign, and the
quietness of this state, we shall see more profit in division, then in union.

Notwithstanding, it has pleased God in this behalf so fauourablye to deal
with our Queeene, as he has raised up in Scotland a Governor during the
noneage of the young king, so faithfullye inclining to her Majesty, as of no
subject in this Realm she may dispose more of them, then of him: whereby
during his Government she may assure her self of most perfect union God grant
that she may make that account of him, that he deserves.

Thus ye see the Queen in safety, the two Realms united, and this remedy
nedeles.

God grant her Majesty may seek the advancement of Gods glory in simple
sincerity, execute her laws with convenient severity, and then no doubt of
it, he will bless her with long and assured safety.


