King Edward the 2. surnamed Carnaruen was crouned at Westminster at the 22.
year of his age the 24. of febru: 1308. he Reigned 19 year. 6 months was
de^^sed the 25 of Ia^^^^rius 1326. he was slain in the Castle of barkley in
the 43 year of his age.



THE HISTORY OF EDWARD THE SECOND.

Surnamed CARNARVAN, one of our English KINGS.

Together with the Fatal downfall of his two unfortunate Favorites GAVESTON
and SPENCER.

Now Published by the Author thereof, according to the true Original Copy,
and purged from those foul Errors and Corruptions, wherewith that spurious and
surreptitious Piece, which lately came forth under the same Title, was too much
defiled, and deformed.

With the Addition of some other Observations both of use and Ornament.

By F. H. Knight.

LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. F. for L. Chapman, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the upper end of Chancery Lane. 1629.

TO HIS VERY LOVING Brother, Mr. RICHARD HVBERT, the Author of this historical
Poem F. H. Knight, wishes all Health and Happiness.
WORTHY SIR:
I Know that noble Natures desire more to do good, then to hear^ of the good,
they do; and therefore, without all farther Complement, you shall give me
leave, Only to say thus much: That (if GOD and Nature had not) yet your many
kind and Constant favors to me, and all mine have made me truly your own:
which, (as I gladly acknowledge) so I would have the World take notice, That I
am both sensible of them, and thankful for them: And now (Sir) being already
deep in your debt, I must still run farther upon your score, by committing
to your Care and custody this Innocent Child not of my Body, but of my Brain.
It is surely of full Age, for It was conceived and borne in Queen Elizabeth's
time, but grew to more maturitie in King James's; and therefore, (as we use to
say) It should be now able to shift for It self: But I that gave It life,
finding the weakness thereof, was fully resolved to keep It still at home
under mine own wing, and not to let It see the Sun, when lo, (after Twenty
years concealment) when I thought the unfortunate Babe (like to It Is Father)
even dead to the World, I saw the false and uncomely Picture of my poor Child
(taken by a most unskillful hand) offered to the public sight and censure of
every judicious Eye: and (though that could not) yet truly I did blush for It,
to see It, so nakedly, so unworthily, so mangled and so maimed thrust into the
world, that I scarce knew It, and was ashamed to own It: And therefore (good
Brother) to vindicate both It and my Self from those gross and senseless
Errors, wherewith that false Bastard was too foulie deformed; I have now sent
It abroad to seek It Is fortunes, in It Is own true shape, and habit: desiring
your Self, and every understanding Reader (for I know It is not for the use of
every Ordinary Eye) to l^oke upon that former Piece, with scorn and Contempt,
and once again to take a resurvay of It, as now It Appears in It Is own true
feature and posture: It may be you shall find somewhat in It, both to inform
the Understanding and to rectify the Affections, and if in any of the Passages
thereof, It shall seem either too light, and remiss or too bold, and free,
either, too open and tart, or too sparing and reserved; That you must impute,
either to the matter, that I handle, or the parties, that I personate, which
must of necessity be drawn according to the true Life, both in colors and
proportion, or else, the Work will be of very little use, and of less Grace
and Ornament, either to my Self or others: And so humbly desiring the Almighty
to bless You both in Soul, Body and Estate; I rest, not your Servant
according to the new and fine, but false Phrase of the Time, but in honest old
English, your loving Brother, and true Friend for ever:

FRAN: HVBERT.

THE AVTHORS PREFACE. ()
1
REbellious thoughts why do you tumult so?
And stri^e to break from forth my troubled breast?
^t not enough that I my self do know
The moving Causes of mine own unrest?
^^s't not enough to know my self distressed?
O no: Surcharged hearts must needs complain,
"Some ease it is (though small) to tell our pain.
2
Yet weyward thoughts retire unto your home,
unto my heart (your proper home) retire.
There rest in your unrest, till Death ^oth come,
And Death will come, called by concealed desire,
"For Coals raked up glow more then open Fire,
And deepest streams do run with smoothest speed,
And silent griefs are the true griefs Indeed.
3
But if my heart be so In^r'd to groaning,
Or if my tongue must be the voice of Sorrow,
Or that my Pen be still Enjoined to moaning,
Because my night of Care has never morrow,
Yet of my grief thus much at least I Will borrow.
That for a time, I may surcease mine own.
And tune my Muse to tell another moan.
4
Another moan to tell my Muse is tuned,
(If any tune can be in ja^ring Grief)
And I a King for subject have assumed,
An English King: Wh^^ whilst he li^'d, was chi^
In Honors height, yet dyed without relief;
So true is that, which SOLON once did say;
No man is Happy, till his dying day.
F. H.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF EDWARD the Second.
5
IT is thy sad disaster which I sing
Carnarvan EDWARD: Second of that name,
Thy Minions pride, thy States ill-managing,
Thy Peers revolt, the sequel of the same,
Thy Life, thy Death I sing, thy Sin, thy shame;
And how thou were deprived of thy Crown.
In highest fortunes, cast by Fortune down.
6
Did I say Fortune? Nay, by Folly rather,
By vnrespect unto the rules of State.
For let a Prince assure himself to gather
As he has planted: either Love, or Hate.
Contempt, or Duty: not the works of Fate,
Much l^sse of Fortune, but of due respects
To Causes, which must needs produce effects.
7
As if a Prince do draw his plat-forme right,
And then with courage builds upon the same.
His ends proves happy: But by oversight
He that is weak, wholly subuerts the frame
Of his own building, and does Idly blame
Fortune, the servant to deserving merit,
But the Commander of the a^ject spirit.
8
In which discourse, if I shall hap to touch
Those faults, which in our time are frequent grown
Let not the galled offender winch, or grudge.
For I intend a private wrong to none,
Only I would have those same errors known
By which the State did then to ruin run,
That (warned by theirs) Our Age like sins might shun*
9
Nor do I mean, to bound my self so much,
As only for to tie me to those Times,
The causes, courses, consequents I Will touch
Of later Ages, and of their designs,
And if detr^ctions breath does blast my Lines,
Be it for me, I have for my defense
The priuie-Coat of harmless Innocence.
10
And thou * great King that now do weild our State IACOBVS, 1

Building on that, which former times did square
O let it not be thought to derogate
From thy perfections; (admirably rare)
If I some errors of these Times declare.
"Since never State was so precisely good,
"But faults have escaped, which could not be with stood
11
For men are not like God, complete, divine,
"Whom neither passions move, nor errors blind,
"Who is not limited with any time,
"Nor tide to means, nor into place confined;
"But free in all, no counter check does find
"To contradict the least part of his will,
"But works all in all, and nothing Ill.
12
"Whereas our human actions all are mixed,
"Men live in motion, so do their designs;
"Nothing is simply good, or firmly fixed.
"All have defects: Nature it self declines,
"Darkness often clouds the clearest Sun that shines.
"Our purest streams are not without their mud
"And we mistake, what often we take for good?
13
Besides, Kings needs must see with others Eyes,
From whence mistakings cannot choose but spring,
And when the offense from Error does arise,
Why should men cast the Envy on the King?
And not on those, that mis-informe the thing?
"It is the gall most banes the Kingly throne,
"That of his faults the least part is his own.
14
For he himself is blameless often (God knows)
Except it be, because he does not know
The noted Scandals, that arise from those
On whom, he does his favors most bestow
Which they abusing, discontents may grow
Against the Prince, though not deserving them,
"So apt we are even Goodness to condemn.
15
Nor must we with a blacking Coal straight brand
A Prince, or State, because of some defect,
Who can be free from Sulley (if so scanned)?
But that same Prince or State deserves respect,
Whose actions do in general affect.
And aim at good: for in particulers
"None can be so complete, but often erres.
16
And much they are deceived, that think to find
A State, without some blemish, or a stain.
Conceit may cast Ideas in the mind.
And forge strange forms, in th'inuentiue brain.
But States consist of men, and men retain
One native badge, which unto all does cleave,
That is, to be deceived: and to deceive.
17
It is the sole Prerogative of Heaven
Not to be tainted with the smallest error,
But that Immunitie was never given
To Earth; wise Soloman be thou the mirror
Where all may see their frailties even with terror.
Thou moving in perfections higest Sphere
Fell from thy orb: who has not cause to fear?
18
The Warlike Trumpet sounding to the fight
Commands the hearing more then does the Reed.
Each eye is fixed on the Eagles flight,
When little Wrens deserve not any heed.
The greatest men shall have the greatest meed.
Mark who so list, and they shall find it tried
"That all men's ears to Princes tongus are tied.
19
Then let the world attend King Edwards words
(The second Edwards) matter fit for moan,
Whose smiles gave life, whose frowns did wound like swords
Whilst he did sit upon ye Kingly throne.
Nor minded now, nor moan'd by any One.
"So time (we see) cuts down with fatal blow
"As well proud oaks, as humble shrubs below.
20
Imagine with your selves, you see him come
From forth the deep dark Cauernes of the earth,
Starued, and pined, Nothing but skin and bone
In Princely plenty suffering want and dearth,
As naked as an Infant at his birth.
"So pinching need does pluck what Pride did plant.
And wastfull Riot is repaid with want.
21
And thus p^ore Prince (begins his tragic plaint,
Am I the same that was first Edwards Son?
By Nature borne to live without restraint.
Were there for me so many Trophies won?
By Long-shanks, and such great atchiuements done?
I am the same; and he so great did leave me,
As none (I thought) of Greatness could bereave me.
22
But now I find by proof, that One there is
(And well it is, that there is such an One)
Who is not hood winckt unto our amiss,
And he can pull us from our Kingly Throne,
For all our Guards, our Forts, our walls of ^^one.
Know King how great-soeuer that thou be,
The King of Kings still rules over thee.
23
Thou do command on Earth, well, be it so,
That Earth which thou co^mand'st, his footstool is.
Thy power but reaches things that are below,
Heaven, Earth; and Hell are subject unto his.
The Infernal Agents, and the spirits of bliss
His Servants are, to execute his will,
"What wants nor might, nor means to punish Ill.
24
I know, that Nature (apt to ouer-weene)
May easily strain a Prince his thoughts to high.
I know it is, and evermore has been
A common course, to flatter Majesty.
"Greatness is apt to sin in surcudrie,
(Yet though) like Hills we ouer-look low grounds
All virtuous Kings do know they have their bounds*
25
And therefore, though we have Prerogatives,
Yet there are certain limits to the same.
Which keeps not Kings from being Superlatiue^
To sway (as Gods-Lieue-tenants) this fair frame
And those Aspirers merit death and shame,
That do repine against those supreme powers
Whom God has made his underlings, not ours*
26
Yet grant their State free from coerciue force,
That gives not lawless liberty in all,
Kings must observe a just and rightful course,
God is their King, by whom they stand or fall.
Who all their acts to strickt acccount will call,
Besides, their Oath, their virtue, their Renown^
Are Diamantine chains to tie a Crown.
27
And such as are not moved with these respects,
But make their power to serve their will in all,
Leave them to God, who ruin, sand erects,
Sets up a David, and pulls down a Saul.
He prospers: Houses rise: he frowns: they fall,
It Is not discents, nor fortune, force, nor fate,
But God supports, and God supplants a State.
28
Nine Kings had reigned since the Conquest here,
Whom I succeeded in a rightful line,
My Father (all domesticke tumults clear)
Did war, and win in fruitful Palestine.
This Northern Sun even to the East did shine.
The French were fearful hearing but his name,
French, Scots, and Turks aeternized his fame
29
No Realm but did resound first Edwards praise.
No praise was ever won with more deserts,
And no deserts (though great) could counterpoise
Much less out-balance his Heroyicke Parts,
Mars taught him Arms, the Muses taught him Arts,
Whereby so great he grew, that might there be
A Jove on Earth, that earthly Jove was he.
30
A King may leave his name unto his Son,
But to his Son, no King can leave his nature.
In outward form and shape they may seem one.
Hi^ posture, speech, his Countenance and feature.
May make the Son be thought the selfsame creature.
It Is true, in face Sons may be like their Sires
But faces like have often unlike desires.
31
For why, our Bodies made of human seed
Resemble them, whose matter was our making,
Yea so far forth as often times we read
Of many griefs hereditarie, taking
First root from Parents loins: and not forsaking
Their Issues issue, until many Ages,
To woeful masters most unwelcome Pages.
32
But minds not cast in any mortal mould,
Infused from Heaven, not tied unto succession.
Are freely left, (for so the Maker would)
Unto his wise all-gouerning discretion,
Like softened wax, apt to receive impression.
But when the form is once imprinted In
"'It Is hardly lost, what Nature first did win.
33
It Is somewhat to be borne of virtuous seed,
An honest belly bears a hopeful Son.
And yet (we see) goods Parents often breed
A wild and wicked Issue, which do run
Most impious courses, till their lives be done.
As was the Sire, the Son himself will fashion
Is probable: but yet no demonstration.
34
That virtuous Roman great Germanicus
One of the peerless worthies of that State,
Begets Caligula, a Prince most vicious,
Most bloody, furious, and unfortunate.
How much Domitian did degenerate
From his brave Sire, warlike Vespatian.
Is not unknown to every knowing man.
35
The same is truly instanced in me,
For I was far unlike my worthy Sire.
A sower Crab, from sweetest Apple Tree,
A Cloudie smoke from Sun-bright shining fire.
And that small good that Nature did inspire,
By soothing tongues too soon was turned to Ill,
So smallest ^rost untimely fruit does kill.
36
For when men did perceive my youthful Itch.
To vain delight, and saw my mind affected
Unto the flight, where pleasure made the pitch.
How all my noble studies were neglected,
My youth with ease, my ease with Lust infected.
Straight some sowed pillowes underneath my sin,
And praised that most, I most delighted in.
37
Upon the earth where is that happy ground
Wherein such answering Echoes are not heard?
But most of all such pleasing voices sound
About Kings Courts, there find they best reward,
And that is the chiefest end, that they regard,
But that poor Prince which such flies blow upon.
Shall scarcely know his own Complexion.
38
Blessed are those times (says an * Historian) Tacitus.

The grauest, wisest, worthiest of that kind,
Wherein it is lawful for an honest man,
Freely to think, to speak, to write his mind.
And you great earthly Gods shall ever find
More truly loving hearts, in such free tongues.
Then in th'impostum'd breath of flattering lungs.
39
Amongst the rest one Pierce of Gaueston
(Pleasing in speech, and graceful in behavior,
One, that Indeed was second unto none
In winding in himself to great men's favor,
That by their hazards he might be the Sauer)
When he did spy the mark whereat I meant
Straight gave the means to give my bow more bent,
40
We lived together even from prime of years,
Whereby our joint affections were combined.
The mutual consort of our infant Pheeres
Does keep a long possession of the mind*
And many deep Impressions leaves behind.
Would thou have Love to last beyond the tomb.
The^ let it take beginning at the womb.
41
So hunts the Hound, and so the Hawk does fly.
As at the first entrance they are made, and manned,
And so those springing humors seldom dye.
That in our first conceit Ingraued stand,
Though childish love seem to be built on sand,
Yet every one even in himself may prove
He likes it still, what he at first did love.
42
Princes, that do intend your Heirs such good
As shall enable them for to succeed,
And no way to disparage their high blood,
O let it be your most respective heed,
To sow their tender years with virtues seed.
For so the well, or ill-manured field
As it is tilled does Corn or Cocle yield.
43
Inure their youth unto their Peers converse,
From whence, some seeds of liking first will grow,
Which even the Soul it self in time will pierce
And prove a constant zeal: from whence will flow
All dutious offices, that men may show.
And then, Designs of Princes happiest prove
When their great Peers do serve, because they love
44
Besides, there is a secret trust reposed,
In those, whom long assurance has combined,
And when we know, how humors are disposed,
We frame our councels fitter to the mind.
"Unsounded Natures sharpest judgments blind
"And those we entertain with diffidence
Of whom we have but small experience.
45
So that to win a trust, to plant a Love,
To gain a settled Service of the Peers,
It is the safest way, that Kings can prove,
To glue them close even in their Infant years,
And here my Fathers Error much appears,
Who did ingrift me into Gaueston,
By so uniting both our youths in one.
46
He was in face a Cupid, or more fair.
A Mercury in speech, or else as much.
In active vigor he was Mars his heir,
In wit Jove. bred Minerua was not such.
But (O) these gifts will not abide the touch,
Except with Inward virtues of the mind.
Both beauty, speech, strength, wit are all refined.
47
But why should Nature set so fair a Gloss
Upon a mind, which sin did so deforme?
Why should she gild, and polish such base dross?
As if she did the Souls perfection scorn,
And only would Impiety adorn.
Or else seduce those minds from judging right,
Who do conform their censures to their sight.
48
But often we see a sweet and mild aspect,
A comely presence, winning upon all.
A face that seems all virtue to affect
Does hide a heart of stone, a mind of gall,
A crabbed will, a Soul to sin most thrall.
And therefore he in Judgment shootes awry
That takes his level only from his Eye.
49
Because, the glorious inside of the mind
Has no dependence on the outward form,
In which, if erring Nature prove unkind,
And disproportions do the shape deforme
She commonly endeauours to reform
The bodies error, with the minds supply,
So richest Iemmes in Earths base entrails lie.
50
"The face is false, the look is but a liar,
"The habit and the heart do much descent.
"For good pretenses cloak a bad desire.
"Fair complements varnish a foul intent,
"Who does rely on them may chance repent.
Which was my Case, and caused my overthrow;
For I did prize the substance by the show.
51
If one may use that word without control,
If ever any* Metempsicosis was. Sardanapalus.

I think the last* As^yrians A transmigration of the soul from one body to
another. On^ of Pythagoras his dreams.
Monarchs soul
By due descent to Gaueston did pass.
For he a right Sardanapalus was:
Drowned in delights (if one may term them so)
That hatch in lust, and breath their last in woe.
52
This highest Scholar in the School of Sin,
This Centaure, half a man, and half a Best,
This pleasing Siren so my soul did win,
That he was dear to me above the rest
Look what he said, was Gospel at the lest.
Look what he did, I made my President.
So soon we learn, what we too late repent.
53
This Angell-Diu'll thus shrined in my heart,
This Dragon having got the golden fruit,
My very Soul to him I did impart,
Nor was I ever deaf unto his suit.
He acted all, I was a silent mute.
My being seemed to be in him alone
Plantaginet was turned to Gaueston.
54
And having seized me thus into his hands
(For fear belike least he should be diseased)
He thought to tie me still in streighter bands
By praising that, wherewith my sense was pleased;
Affirming, that our lives were to be eased
Of many cumbers, which the curious wise
Had laid on men, the more to tyrannize.
55
For what are Laws, but servile observations
Of this, or that, what pleased the Makers mind?
The selfe-conceited-sowen Imaginations
Of working brains, which did in freedom find
Our human state, which they forsooth would bind
To what they liked, what liked not, was forbidden,
So Horse and Mule, with bitt and spur are ridden.
56
Which well invented scar-Crowes, though they serve
For m^d-borne men, to keep them in some awe.
Yet Princes are not borne, so to observe
The strict preciseness of the incombring Law.
Which their high state to base contempt does draw.
Kings made those laws, and Ks. may break the^ now
That pleased them then, and this now pleases you.
57
No, no (sweet Prince) says he, There is no law
Can bind a King, but only his desire.
And that full well The Assyrians Monarcks saw,
Who had before them borne consuming Fire.
(Emblem of Regal power) which all admire
But none must touch, for fear of following harms
For Fire we know consumes, as well as worms.
58
The Spiders web holds fast the silly Fly.
The Hornet breaks It, like a mighty Lord,
That* King of Kings Alexander magnus.
when he could not untie
The Gordian knot d^uides it with his Sword.
That Act of his fit matter does afford
For President: were I, as thou shall be.
No Law at all, should give a law to me.
59
Except it were the golden law of Nature,
Sweet Nature, (sweetest Mother of us all)
Who has infused thus much into each Creature
To love the Honey, and to loath the Gall*
To serve delight, not to be Sorrow's thrall;
For pleasure does with Nature so agree,
As Bees with hiue, as Honey with the Be.
60
For in the Prologue of our Infant play.
Even in our Cradle, we do cry, and yell
For Nurses breast: why so? For food (you will say)
It Is true: and food (say I) does please us well,
As Hunger seems to be a second Hell.
So that (in truth,) The motive of our Cry,
Is to be fed, and to be pleased thereby.
61
As in our Prologue, so in our next Act
(I mean in Childish years) who does not see
That every thought of ours, and word, and fact
Do aim at Sport, at Pastime, and at glee?
Which daily cares, and nightly studies be.
Witness the checks, the Rods, the blows we take
The many blows, and all for Pleasures sake.
62
But when our Youth does step upon the Stage,
(The sweetest part, that any man can play)
Then pleasing Love, and hope (loves pleasing page)
And Courage (hops Attendant night, and day)
And fortune seldom saying Courage Nay
With full-sayl'd course does carry us amain,
To seek the Coast, where full content does reign.
63
Not staying here, still Nature draws us on
To new delights, but of a diverse kind,
For middle Age to Arms will needs be gone.
With honors sweets to feed his hungry mind,
And what is Honor but a pleasing wind?
Remember what, the famous * Grecian says, Themis^ocles*

The sweetest Music is a Man's own praise.
64
Next elder-Age, and Siluer-seeming hayres
By Nature run full chase still after pleasure.
For (O) the solace of the waning years!
To view their Rudducks, and their heaps of treasur^
To weigh, and tell their gold at every leisure
How great it is; speak they, that rather choo^^
Gold should loose them: then they their gold would loos^
65
The Epilogue of all our former time
More hunts for joy then any of the rest.
Decrepit Age does pray before the prime,
With weeping eyes, and knocks upon his Bre^^
And gives his Alms, to them that are distressed,
And what is his end? that he might Heaven obtai^
"And what is Heaven, but pleasure void of pain*
66
And as the mind has motions to affect,
So have we means to satisfy the mind.
"Our little world is made with much respect,
Our Mother Nature has bin wise and kind;
By whom, we have apt Organons assigned
To execute, what so our thoughts intend,
"And all our thoughts aim at some pleasing (...)
67
Is not the Head the storehouse of conceit
Plotting the means, to compass our delight?
Our Eyes Attendants, that do daily wait
Upon such objects, as may please the sight?
Witness the cherry-cheeke, and brow milk-white.
Witness no other witness, but my wish,
How sight, and Soul, both likes, and longs for this.
68
What mind, what man, what man of any mind
That is not touched, and moved with Musicks sound?
Whose deep Impressions work in brutish kind,
As Dolphynes, Else Arion had bin drowned.
The saluage beasts, that would not Orpheus wound
The senseless stones, who^ Phoebus harp did move
Do witness all, how all do Music love.
69
The bubling murmur of a sliding Spring
That seems to run with sweet, yet ^ullen mind.
By which the winged Quiers in Consort sing
With faire-fac't Eunuchs (the defects of kind)
Whose Notes are answered by a soft still wind.
Some dear loved Dame, bearing her part with kisses
Who would not think that place a heaven of blisses?
70
As head, and ears, and Eyes; So are our hands
^lesh-hookes to draw, and gather all unto us
That with our pleasure, or our profit stands,
Thrusting aside, what ever may vndoe-vs
For which Employments are allotted to us
Two hands, two feet, The Agents of our wills.
To follow rest, and fly from restless Ills.
71
"So likewise, in the structure of this frame
"What is not made with admirable Art?
So likewise in the guidance of the same,
What is denied us, that may please the heart?
Most senseless man (what man so e're thou art)
That in the very fullness of such store,
By wilful wants wilt make thy self most poor.
72
In heat of Summer, when the burning Sun
Does crust the Earth, are there not shadie bowers
Are there not Rivers, that do mildly run?
And now, and then some cooling dewie showers
To keep the beauty of the blooming flowers?
Wherewith our mother Earth (so fairly dressed)
Seems, to Invite her sons to pleasures feast.
73
I will not speak of every days delight
They are so various, full of Ratities.
But are there not sweet pleasures for the night?
Maskes, Revels, Banquets, mirthfull Comedies,
Night-Sunnes, (kind Natures dearest Prodigies)
Which work in men with powerful Influence
As having their first life, best motion thence.
74
O glorious Pieces, (the best gifts of Heaven)
Fairer the^ those fair lights, that make Earth fair^
Why were you unto wretched mortals given
But to be Cordials against heart-eating Care,
B' Imparting unto us your beauties rare?
You are the Stars, which when the Sun is se^
Both heat, and light, and life in us beget.
75
Has then the Mouer of this glorious round
So wisely fitted every thing to pleasure,
And seems he not his Order to confound
That to delight does limit sparing measure?
And makes himself unworthy of such treasure?
Is It ever like, He would have made things thus
But that they should be fully used by us?
76
And that I may not run about the field
But keep my self in Compass of the Ring.
I will omit the rich, and fruitful yield
Of pleasure, pointing only at the Spring,
The taste whereof, such perfect joy does bring.
As I do think, no other Heaven there Is,
Heaven pardon me; If I do think amiss.
77
That is (sweet Ned) the Paradise of Love,
The joy of Life, and life of our conceit,
The heavenly Fire, infused from above,
On which the Muses, and the Graces wayt;
The Bodies health, Hearts hope, and Natures bayt,
The quintissence, of pure essential sweet.
The point, where all the lines of Pleasures meet.
78
Sweet love, that have sweet beauty for thine object
Kind love, that knits in One two several hearts.
Great love, to whom the greatest King is subject;
Pure love, that sublimates our Earthly parts,
And makes them ayerie by Ingenious Arts.
O let my Ned, my Prince, my Jove possess
The joys, I would, but cannot well express.
79
And thou (dear Ned) experience but the pleasure
Try what it is to Love, and be requited,
And I will pawn my life, (my greatest treasure)
With one sweet night, thou will be so delighted,
That thou will wish, ye world were still benighted;
Then say (sweet Prince) when thou the same do prove*
No heaven but joy: Nor any joy but love.
80
O see the fruits of an Ill-gouern'd wit,
When the sharp Edge thereof, is turned awry.
When the best graces make men apt, and fit
To blazon, and to trick Impiety:
To lay fair Colors on foul Sin, whereby
The Abused sense, (deluded with false shows)
On a most loathsome witch Inamo^'d grows.
81
We need no Tutors, to be taught to sin,
We suck that l^sson from our mothers breast.
Nature is easily drawn, to trade therein,
For that is the traffic that does please us best,
Sin is a bold, a most intruding guest;
And will not be kept out, do what we can
There Is such an union betwixt Sin, and Man.
82
What need Inuitement? why should Art be used
To draw that on, which we too much desire?
Why should our ablest Graces be abused
To power more oil upon a flaming Fire?
But mounting Spirits that feign would soar up higher
Regard not what they do, nor what they say,
So they to their own ends may make their way*
83
And then indeed, they are most dangerous
When they are armed with Learning, wit, and skill.
Wholesome Ingredients prove most mischievous
Being applied, only to strengthen Ill;
For then they work too much upon the will.
And that full well such damned Doctors know,
Which makes them use their Art and cunning so.
84
It is a certain truth: The best of all
Being Corrupted, turns unto the worst.
And so, those hellish Spirits, before their fall
Most blessed (changed from what they were at first)
Are now most vile, and wretched, most accursed.
Look, what degree of Goodness, things retain
Whilst they are good, being Ill, they so remain.
85
But to proceed; By these, and like discourses
(Whereat thy maiden muse may blush for shame)
This Gaveston embarked me in such Courses
As caused my Fathers grief, mine own defame.
Whilst I went on, not sensible of shame,
Nor of my Fathers grief, not heavens just doom
Nor any future danger, that might Come.
86
O see, how soon our sweetest buds are blasted,
How soon our fairest colors loose their flourish,
How easily are the Seeds of virtue wasted?
And noisome weeds of vice how much we nourish
Which do ye Soul of her chief wealth impouerish.
Youth (apt to stray) is easily led awry,
We fall by Nature, what need Flattery?
87
And yet, it has too much, to work upon*
The vnexperience of our younger years,
The heat of blood, the fury of affection,
Ungrounded hopes, and vain surmized fears.
The courses entertained by like compeeres.
Our selfe^conceit, our Parents watchful Eye.
Nay, even desert, make all for flattery.
88
And soon it will the least advantage find,
Whereby it may creep into men's conceit.
Observing first, to what they are inclined.
Which once perceived, It fits the humor straight,
Still keeping fashion, but still wanting weight.
In complements most seemingly precise,
And that is the abused mask to blind weak eyes.
89
But like, ^s those diseases faster grow,
Whose moving causes our Complexions ^eed.
So far more dangerous is this private foe
That does attire himself in friendships weed,
Then he that shows his hate by open deed.
For Arms, or Laws, or Friends may fence the one
The other God himself must shield, or none.
90
So Simon did the Trojan State confound,
So gilded Tombs are full of rotten Earth,
So Crocodiles although they weep, they wound,
So Panthers circumuent with their sweet breath,
So Sirens though they sing, their tunes are death.
And yet, as fish bite most at hony-baytes
Even so are men most caught with sweet deceites.
91
Therefore be pleased to hear a plain discourse.
Suspect the tongue, that is still tuned to the ear.
Fair truth is not for nakedness the worse
But falsehood many Ornaments must wear.
Least all her foul deformities appear.
Which Art can flourish over, fit for Court,
Whilst simple truth to deserts does resort.
92
And this is that vast Sea of misery
In which, the greatest Monarks most are drowned,
That they are seldom free from flattery.
Pretenses being colourably found,
To sooth that humor, that does most abound.
And so the Prince runs on from ill, to worse.
But still persuaded best of his bad course.
93
Whereby the danger on himself does fall.
The gain unto the Fauori^e accrewes.
For wronged Subjects, being grieved withal.
Forgetting duty, impiously pursues
Means o^ revenge: whence danger often insues.
Mean while the man, that fed the humor so
Falls off perhaps, and s^apes the coming blow.
94
Therefore let Kings prefer them, that are plain.
And make those great, that do not greatness fear.
Such serve their Lords for love, and not for gain.
The'are Jewels of the heart, not of the ear.
They will discover dangers, that are near.
When oyled tongues will still make all secure,
"And careless greatness ever stands unsure.
95
But why should I give rules, when I kept none?
Why should I teach, and never could obey?
Only for this: where I was overthrown
Others may Look, least they be cast away.
And they that make this use, thrice happy they.
Because, by others wracks themselves may read.
How to prevent their own mishaps with heed.
96
Soothed thus in sin, all goodness was forgotten,
My Fathers words of no esteem were grown.
And I that scarce seemed ripe, was straight found rotten.
Like fruit that is from tree untimely blown.
But that took root, which Gaveston had sown.
And sprouted so, that It did seed at last:
So worthless weeds (we see) do grow too fast.
97
For at the first, I was ashamed of Sin,
But sin did say, my greatest sin was shame.
Then by degrees I did delight therein;
And from Delight, I did desire the same.
And my Desires so prosperously did frame.
That now the chiefest Quere, was this One.
Whether were worse my Self, or Gaveston.
98
It is a certain truth: Men do not touch
The highest point of wickedness at first.
"Habites or good, or bad, prove to be such
"By often use, Sin thriues as It is nursed.
And therefore, kill this Cocatrice (accursed)
Whilst it is an Egg; for if It hatch, and grow,
It will at last prove a commanding Foe.
99
This did my aged Father well perceive,
And with sad tears (the Messengers of moan)
He did b^wayle himself, that he should leave
His Crown to me, and me to ( Gaueston)
I in my son (says he) am overthrown.
My bliss my bane; my peace procures my strife.
First Edward dies, in Second Edwards life.
100
To be a Father was my only Joy
And now my grief it is, to be a Father:
Why should my solace turn to mine annoy?
Why planted I Harts-ease, and Rue must gather?
As I did sow, I should have reaped rather.
My hopeful harvest proves but baleful weeds,
And for the blood I gave, my heart now bleeds.
101
For (Oh) how near a touch does Nature give?
How searching are the sufferings of our blood?
How much the Fathers soul does joy, or grieve,
When he does see his Issues bad, or good,
Is hard of any to be understood
Except by such, whose feeling bowels find,
What deep Impressions do proceed from kind.
102
Wise was the Prince, who playing with his Son,
And teaching him to ride upon a Reed.
To whom a great Ambassador did come,
And seemed to blush at his so childish deed.
Do not (quoth he) to censure it proceed.
I only crave a respite of thy doom.
Till thou thy self art Father of a Son.
103
Inferring, that there is a secret love,
Which untouched hearts can hardly comprehend.
Would God, the same reciprocal might prove*
Oh that kind Nature did sometimes ascend.
Parents too often in Indulgence offend
But Sons more often in duty prove defective.
These weyward times are grown so vnrespectiue.
104
Nature so wrought, that Cressas Son cried out,
Who from his birth before had not spoke word.
When he did see a Soldier go about,
To kill the King his Father, with a sword.
Could Nature then such Presidents afford?
Was she so powerful then, now weakened so.
That Sons themselves, do work their Fathers woe?
105
Or was he not my Son? did brutish lust
So fire the affections of my dearest Queen
That she unto my bed should prove unjust?
And by some other, not my self should teeme?
O far be it from my soul, so to misdeeme.
Sweet flower of Castile, sacred was thy vow,
If ever wife were true, that wi^e were thou.
106
O Elianor, thou were too good a piece,
Once to admit the smallest show touch,
Take all the chastest Dames of Rome, or Greece,
Whereof foregoing Ages speak so much,
They can but say at best, That they were such
As I knew thee to be: and perhaps too.
Time more then Truth permits them so to do.
107
Ill governed Ned, although my soul does hate
Thy vicious Errors, as the Stigian flood,
Which will prove dangerous to thy self, and State,
Yet Nature works so much upon my blood,
As that I cannot choose, but wish thy good.
If ever thou in Himens bands be tied.
Such as thy Mother was, such be thy Bride.
108
And in that only wish Included is
The chiefest, choysest good, that thou can find.
Summa Totalis of all earthly bliss
Is such a wise, as is both wise, and kind.
Chaste, sober, silent, fair in face, and mind.
And such was she: when therefore thou do err,
It Is from thy self alone, and not from her.
109
But foolish man why do I blame my Son?
Whose yet unknowing years by Ill ad^ice
Being led away: A dangerous course does run.
For Youths hot blood forgets old Ages ye*
And while his hand is in, does throw the dice
At all that pleasure sets: and thinks to gain*
If with the Bye he can discharge the maine.
110
Sweet Ned, I blame not thee, but Gaueston.
For he it is that sits at the helm
And steeres thy course, with his wind thou art blown
Nor will he leave, till he does ouerwhelme
In deepest gulf, thy self, and all this Realm,
For stirring spirits do troubled streams desire.
And then thrive best, when all is set on fire.
111
Observe with all those States that do decline,
How apt they always are for Innovation.
How much they do against public good repine,
And hopefully expect an Alteration.
That whilst things are unsettled* out of fashion.
They may close up the wounds they had before,
And by that means their private wants restore.
112
Therefore let those that have a grounded State.
And may live well, join close in any wise
Against all such, as seek to Innouate,
If not in duty, yet in sound advice
To keep such down, as hope perhaps to rise
Upon their ruins, whose revenues may
Cut short their lives, sure prove the spoilers pray.
113
And with these link such Spirits as feign would rise,
But are by former great. Ones still suppressed,
And such do dangerous Stratagems devise,
Nor will their Eager hopes affor'd them rest.
But mount they must, who-euer be deprest.
And little do they force the States confusion.
So thereby they to greatness make Intrusion.
114
And to this End, they are obsequious still,
They sooth, they fawn, they seem officious.
They fit themselves to their great mouers will.
Be It good, or bad, just, or Injurious.
They serve even turns base, and luxurious
But I Will provide a wholesom^ Mithredate
So to prevent the poisons of the State.
115
And firmly settled in this resolution,
By strict command was Gaueston exiled.
(...) begged of him to stop the Execution.
But then my Father shak'd his head, and smiled,
O Ned (says he) how much art thou beguiled
To foster that which will thy downe-fall be,
And warm the Snake, that will inuenom thee.
116
^ wished my self an Echo at that word,
That I might boldly then have answered: Thee
For never was there sharpest-edged sword
That wounded more, the^ that same wounded me.
But go he must, such was the King decree.
And when he went, then died my bloud-lesse heart,
So does the Body from the soul depart.
117
The former times have held it policy
That some offenders should abjure the Land,
But it is indeed an idle vanity.
And with no rules of regiment can stand,
For if the matter be with Judgment scanned
It will appear to men considerate
That Abiuration hurts both Prince and State.
118
I do not mean of men, that are not mist,
(For who respects the hummings of a Gnat)
Such atomy may wander where they list,
Their muddie pa^es can neither frame the plat,
Nor feeble hands work danger to the State,
Let men of Note be marked; and wary heed
Be had of them, that may disturbance breed.
119
And it is not safe, to banish such an-One
As may find means to work his own return.
So * Bolenbroke stepped into * Richards Rich. 2.
throne. Hen*
And he had leisure, afterward to mourn
His foolish fault: Such medicines may adjourne
The present pain a while: But makes the sore
To ache more felly, then It did before.
120
Mild drugs may stir the humors that abound,
But will not quite expel the growing Ill;
The Root and Body both remaining sound
Although the tree be lopt, It thriues It still.
And when thou have the Axe, to use at will
Strike at the Root; and fell it to the ground,
Rather then pare the boughs and branches round
121
For it is lost labor, to begin with them.
They needs must wither, if the other dye.
And do not fear, though vulgar breath condemn
Thy Carriage in such courses, whose weak Eye
"Looks at the present only: And thereby
Values the rest: "Do thou make good thy end
"The common sort will ever be thy friend.
122
Wise Long-shankes, yet in this thou were not wise*
If thou had took the head of Gaveston,
Those subsequent disasters that did rise
From him, had bin prevented euery-one:
Thy Son had not bin shouldred from his throne*
Thy people slain, nor Realm to ruin brought
But so God works, till all his will be wrought.
123
"And the whole List of Nature serves his will,
"Our selves are Instruments unto his ends.
"Our most reserved drifts he uses still.
"To work those purposes, which he Intends;
"Though our devices aim at other ends.
"He is the Master^ wheel, and makes us strike
No otherwise, then he himself does like.
124
My Gaveston thus driu'n into exile,
My self Committed like a Captive thrall;
(For so my Father kept me short a while)
With bitter Curses I did banne them all,
I drank my Tears, and fed upon my Gall.
I chafed, and stormed, yet could I not prevail.
"Needs must: will be, feign would: does often fail.
125
Then were my Colors turned to mournful black
And I put on the Liuerie of Care.
Like to the hopeless Seaman in a wrack
That sees the greedy wa^es devour his share;
No otherwise, did thoughtfull Edward fare.
When sad remembrance in my soul did plant
His lot, my loss; His woe, my pleasures want.
126
The chiefest Cordial of my grieved Soul,
The one, and only Period of my pain.
Was this: That Death (admitting no Control)
Would end my Fathers wrath, his Life, his Reign
And then (thought I) Ned will have Pierce again.
When Englands Crown shall make a Jove of me
Then Gaveston my Ganimed shall be.
127
As I did hope, so had my hopes success.
For shortly after died my noble Sire.
Whilst he prepared the Sco^s for to suppress.
Low now (quoth I) I have my hearts desire.
Long-shankes is dead: His water, Air, and fire
Are turned to Earth: and earthy might he be,
That on the Earth did keep a Crown from me*
128
Yet in that sad dismayfull hour of dying,
No grief did him more feelingly possess,
Then that his vicious Son all virtue flying
Should ruin that, by riot, and excess.
Which he had built with so great carfulness.
And therefore, for to weane me from such Sins.
These well tuned Notes this dying Swan begins.
129
My Son (quoth he) (for in that name of zeal
My words may prove of more effectual power)
Why should thou so with thy sick Father deal?
As to torment him in his parting hour.
Whose life has had his portion full of sower.
And yet to make my measure fuller still,
My Son does daily add unto my ill,
130
I know what it is even sometimes by extremes
To keep the Crown upright upon the head.
I know the troubled sleeps and fearful dreams*
That houer still about a Princely bed.
"The worm of greatness (Jealousy) is bred.
"Out of it self; yet this I know withal,
Our powerful sway does sweeten all our gall.
131
But for thy self, and for my heart-breake grief
That out of thy sin-ship-wrack'd youth does grow
No Circumstance yields color of relief.
The cause excuselesse, Limitlesse the woe
That does from thy full Sea of follies flow.
For foulest faults proceed from powerful Ill.
And Subjects sort themselves to Princes still:
132
Thou do not only by thy vicious living
Bereave thy Soul of bliss, which virtue wins.
But also, by the ill-example giving
Thou do incite weak minds unto like sins.
"For certainly, the Subject ever swims
Just with the stream: so growing like to thee.
A general Deluge of all sin will be.
133
Much better had It bin: Thou had not bin,
Then that thy being should so ruin all.
O wherefore was thy birthday ever seen?
If by thy life, The State It self does fall.
To those foul sins, which wrath from Heaven do call.
By whose just doom such states confounded are
By foreign fury, or domesticke war.
134
For when the seed of sin to ripeness grows
Then Justice with a sithe does mow It down
This, this It is, that Kingdoms overthrows.
Lays wast the fields, vnpeoples every Town.
Or if not so, disorders yet the Crown.
Which, though It prove no general desolation
Yet many mischiefs grow by Innovation.
135
When my heau'n-seeking soul shall leave her Inn,
And this my flesh closed in a house of Clay.
Then will my shame survive me in thy sin.
And babes unborn, will ban my birth, and say;
His wretched life, gave life to our decay.
And had no other ill by him bin done.
He sinned too much, in getting such a Son.
136
Did I for this endure the dust and Sun?
Dislodge at midnight, March in mid-dayes heat?
Were Turkish, French, Welsh, Scottish Trophies wo^
Was all my care employed, to make thee great,
That sin might dispossess thee of thy Seat?
O then, I see that greatness soon is gone,
When God draws not the plot, man builds upon.
137
And my devining Solue does sadl^ see
Thy Ruin in thy riot: Ah my Ned
When I am gone, a King then shall thou be,
But if thou still be with thy passions led,
Thou will not keep the Crown upon thy head.
My Soul now parting from her earthly Cage
Fore-tels thee so in her Propheticke rage.
138
And those predictions seldom use to fail
Which she unfolds in her last ecstasy.
She Is ready now to quit her fleshly jayle
And now she tells thee with free liberty
Thy Reign, thy life will end in misery,
If still thou keep'st the ways, thou now art in.
And do not leave thy mind, and means to sin.
139
Well Son I feel my faultering tongue does fail,
Therefore this short Abridgement I do make.
Fear God, Love goodness, let the right pre^aile.
Shun sudden courses, Parasites forsake.
Disfavor not thy Peers, their Councels take
In thy designs: Revoke not Gaueston,
For he will prove the Canker of thy Throne.
140
Pursue those Scottish wars I have in hand.
And for because my Soul did make a vow
Unto my God: to serve in Holy Land.
From which, This sickness Interdicts me now,
Though death disable me, yet do it thou.
Embowell me, and thither bear my heart,
That in that worthy work I may have part.
141
And you my Lords (speaking unto his Peers)
Whose wealth, and greatness I have much Increased
Be Fathers to my Sons vntored years.
Love him for me, though Long-shanks be deceased.
Let Gauestons exile be not released.
Lest his repeal occasion civil strife
And so first Edward ends both speech, and life.
142
Thus death, that Herald that even Kings does summon,
The Pursiuan^, that does attatch proud Peers.
The Cittie-Sergeant, whose arrest is Common,
The errant-Bayliffe, that one Process bears,
And no place bounds, but serves it in all shires.
The general Surueyor of each-one
Did bring my Father to his longest home.
143
Whose obsequies, and Ceremonies done.
The^ I was crowned: me thought the Sun did dance.
And that fair Thames with silver streams did run.
Me thought, the Stars did all applaud the chance,
That did my State unto a Crown advance.
Smile Stars, dance Sun, and River run with mirth,
Carnaruan Edward is a God on Earth.
144
But all the Stars to blazing Comets turned,
Whose sad vprise presaged my dreatie fate.
The Rivers seemed, as if they wept, and Mourned.
The Sun did never shine upon my state.
Stars, streams, and Sun, saw me unfortunate.
Disastrous man, so borne to suffer wrack,
As is the Aethiop to be always black.
145
Observe the man, whom fates have slau'd to grief
See how the wretch, that is destined Fortunes foe
Will be a rub, to turn away relief
Even from himself, and work his owne-wrought woe.
Harm after him: he after harm shall go.
(Fore-spoken man) he is never but succeslesse,
Himself his hurt, and yet his hurt redreslesse.
146
Nay even those very means which he shall use
In good discretion to prevent the clap
Shall Be returned unto his abuse.
And serve for pullies of his own mishap.
So though he see, he shall not shun the trap.
And if his ruin were not ripe before,
His own designs shall hasten It the more.
147
The King of * ALEXANDER Epiro^
Epire, fearing death at home.
Fore-warned thereof by former Prophecy.
To Italy forthwith must needs be gone.
So to prevent his fate by policy.
But Still he is followed by his destiny.
In Italy he finds an Acharon,
The fatal flood, from which he would be gone.
148
Fourth Henry was by some blind Bard foretold,
That he should never dye, till he had seen
Jerusalem: fourth Henry will be old.
Jerusalem for him shall be unseen.
No, he shall see it, when he least does ween.
He sownes at prayers, and by religious men
Is straight conuey'd unto Jerusalem.
149
(So was the Chamber called, where he was laid)
And shortly after died the noble King.
"In vain man strives: the heavens will be obay'd.
"We may foreknow, but not prevent a thing.
"Our selves will never cease until we bring
"Our Fates to full effect: and what we do
"Shall be but lines, to lead us thereunto.
150
For first, I do those Counselors remove
That in my Fathers time had borne most sway.
Whereby I did disarme me of their Love,
To practices, and discontents made way.
Expose my self to Envy: open lay
To disadvantage, wanting their advice,
Whom long experience had made deeply wise.
151
Besides, I did the public State some wrong.
So to cast off those grounded Politicians.
Who knew to govern, by commanding long.
Had seen, and well observed men's dispositions.
And so could tell, when, where, how Impositions
Were to be raised: how to avoid offense.
How to gain men, and ends with fair pretense.
152
Who likewise knew, how other Kingdoms stood,
The concordances of each neighboring state
How Realms best correspond for eythers good.
How to make Leagues, how to negotiate.
When to break off, when to Incorporate.
How far Remotes, and neere-Confiners too.
Are to be weighed, as they have means to do.
153
It Is not the practice of a day, or twain.
It Is not the School, or Sophisters debate.
It Is not the froth of every working brain.
It Is not the start into a neighboring State.
That works men fit to bear a Kingdoms weight.
When men are fully made, employ them then,
"For it is an Art of Arts to govern men.
154
Therefore I lay It for a certain ground,
Which new-made Princes must not violate
(Except they will the Commonwealth confound^
Not to discard those men, that know the State.
Whose long experience does ingenerate
A true, and ready Method to command.
Both for the Princes good, and for the Land.
155
What got the youthful Son of Soloman
By his neglect of that Sage-sound advice
Which from his Fathers Counselors did come?
Did It not turn unto his prejudice?
Did not ten Tribes fall from him in a trice?
Which never could be glew'd again in one
After that rupture and disunion,
156
Besides this fault, scarce settled in my State:
I straight recalled exiled Gaueston.
Who by my many favors grew so great,
That I did seem for him, to live alone.
I Alexander: He Hephestion.
O no, I wrong them to usurp their names,
Our loves were like, but far unlike our fames.
157
Here I did violate my Fathers will,
And all respect of duty did despise.
"To wrong the dead, is Sacraligious Ill,
A clog which on the Conscience ever lies.
And at the latest gasp for vengeance cries.
What fears, how many doubts lurk close wthin
That restless soul, that is guilty of this Sin?
158
When all his joints are racked with dying pain.
With cold dead sweat all covered over quite.
What thorny thoughts will the^ distract his brain?
How shall he dare to approach his fathers sight?
Whose dying words he living set so light.
He Will fear his friends, suspect his wife, and Son,
And sighing think: They Will do as I have done.
159
It is too Common, to betray the trust
That is in friends by Testators reposed.
But mark Gods Judgments, how severe, how just.
How to the Nature of the Sin disposed,
Even I my self was by my Son deposed.
I that infringed my dying Fathers best,
Was in my life, by my own Son distressed.
160
Me, that did wrong a Sire, a Son did wrong.
I that did show my self degenerate
As I had sown, so did I reap er'e-long,
Such sin It is* our Faith to violate.
O deepest doom, of all foreseeing fate
How wisely are thy fearful Judgments fitted.
To punish sin, as Sin was first Committed.
161
The Giants heap't up hills, to climb the Sky,
I honors heaped, that Gaueston might climb,
They did contend with Jove, and fell thereby.
He with my Peers, and perished in his prime.
They thriu'd at first, but fell in after time.
His Prologue sweet, but sad was his last Act.
So fairest glass (men say) is soonest cracked.
162
These were the honors, that he did attain,
The Earl of Cornwall, and the Lord of Man,
Chief Secretary, Lord great Chamberlain.
And for his wife he Glosters sister wan*
Aspiring men, see how great Monarchs Can.
Advance their states, whom they do daine to favor.
"Who serves y^ King, does seldom lose his labor.
163
Though Poets fictions seem to savor much
Of Idle Error, yet they have their sense.
King Midas turned to Gold all he did touch.
The Moral this: The favor of a Prince
His gracious touch may gild without offense
The greatest wants: and make him for to soar
A lofty Pitch, that flagg'd the wing before.
164
Not all the painful passages one spends
In serious Contemplation of deep Arts,
Nor any-one Employment so commends
The Agent (though a man of rarest parts)
As when the Prince but One sweet smile Imparts
One Look of Love, One Eye-glance of delight
Has power to change dark Clouds, to Suns most bright.
165
The Eyes of Kings, are more then simply Eyes
They are the Stars that do predominate
The affairs of men, and in their Influence lies
The good, or bad of euery-ones estate.
They are the Primum Mobile of Fate.
They whirle about our Fortunes as they list.
And as they favor, men are Cursed, or Blist.
166
A Kings smooth brow, Is the true dwelling place
Of Honor, wealth, dependancie, respect.
And in his frowning forehead Lives disgrace,
Death, Exile, want, a general neglect,
A world of wrongs let that poor wretch expect.
Be it: All Rivers to the Sea must run.
And every Light receive light from the Sun.
167
Let them be great, whom Kings resolve to grace,
It is a Privilege, that is their own.
To raise such as they please to wealth, or place,
Is truly proper to the Kingly throne
And has not bin denied to any-One.
Jews the eleventh did say he spent his Reign,
In making, and in marring men again.
168
Some by the School, some by ye Laws do mount,
Some by the Sword, and some by Navigations.
All streams have heads, though not the selfsame fount;
Shall only Kings admit a Limitation
How high, for what desert, or of what Nation
They shall advance? It were a wretched thing
On that Condition to become a King.
169
To make new Creatures, Is the Princes due,
And without murmur let him have his own.
The danger only Is to him that is new,
For Envy ever waytes on such an-One
Both from those men, that are not so well grown,
And from great houses too, who straight will fear
Lest such new Stars should thrust them from they^ Sphere
170
And those which once have got the highest staire
Will keep them down, that mount with too much have*
It Is best (say some) to rise but soft and fair.
If thou will gain thy journies end at last,
Tire not thy means by posting ouer-fast.
Stir like a Dyall, vnperceiu'd to move:
So shall thou gather strength, and purchase love*
171
And therefore, they that found a Family,
Must gather wealth, live under their estates,
Make great pretenses of Humility.
Ally themselves with graced Confederates,
Serve Great men's turns, so to avoid their hates.
For Cerberus with Hony-sops was pleased,
And Malice must with Mildnes be appeased.
172
Then let It be his work, that next succeeds
To raise himself unto a farther height,
By home-Imployments, or by foreign deeds.
Or by vnlading some of that rich freight
Of wealth, which he had stored: And that will straight
Bring Honor to his house: That golden key
To all designs opens a ready way.
173
Nor shall ^ee find such eager Opposition,
Time having worn out all his Fathers foes.
Or else perhaps altered their dispositions
By Gifts, by Matches, by Obsequious shows,
Or else perchance for fear of future blows.
And so some few discents from heir to heir
The newness of the House will varnish fair.
174
Where sudden Greatness ruined Gaveston,
Whom I too much preferred before my Peers,
Who did possess me more then any One,
From whence; grew many jealousies and fears
Close discontents, which at first appears
Of little moment, worthless of respect,
But proved such skarres, as we did least expect.
175
It is the praise and blessing of the Sun
To make his heat, and light both general;
Princes are Suns, and both must freely run
An open Course, and not be several
Unto some few, but common unto all.
The poorest he that breathes, this Song may sing
We all have Interest in the Air and King.
176
And this too much did speak my heady passion,
Who like pure water should have had no taste,
This Error did my government disfashion
That Gaveston unworthily was graced.
And made too great a monster, huge, and vast;
Who in this growth being vnproportionall,
Became offensive to himself, and all.
177
The Court, which in my Fathers lifetime seemed
A Senate House of siluer-headed Sages.
Might now a pompous Theater be deemed
Pestered with Panders, Players, and with Pages.
Of my ensuing fall, too true presages.
And yet in show, It seemed fairer far,
So Comets glister more then any Star.
178
But (O) the quiet of that happy Land.
Where aged Nestors bear ye chiefest sway.
Where strength of mind, more rules then force of hand*
Where Old men bid, and Young men do obey,
Where Ages winter guides youths sweet May.
But when the foot, or hand Commands the head,
The Body then is many ways misled.
179
Let silver hair, and long-experienc'd Age
Be sole directors of each enterprise.
Let youth be as an Actor on the Stage,
To execute, what stayder-heads devise;
For Youth is Active, Age discreet, and wise.
Youth is more daring, but precipitate.
Age more Judicious, and considerate.
180
Yet should not Statists be too-aged men,
Because, by too much time their spirits decay;
They Earthy grow, and Melancloly then
Heavy, and dull (their Edge being worn away)
Weyward, and teachy, wrangling all the day;
Full of mo^ositie, and which is worse,
Extremely given to gripe, and fill the purse.
181
Besides, we see, some men are ripe betimes,
Like Summer fruit, soon pleasing to the taste.
And if those Spirits in whom such virtue shines
May be with Greatness, and Employments graced
They Come to full maturitie at last,
Men of exceeding worth, when they are grown.
Both for their Countries good, and for their own.
182
But to my Self: Who did neglect my Peers,
And only did divote my self to pleasure.
Loved I? Why Love it self loves youthful years.
Spent I? Why Kings should not be ^laues to treasure.
Heard I not Subjects suits? I had no leisure.
Did I neglect my Peers converse? What then?
Jove is not tied, to sort himself with men.
183
When they did say that Scottish Bruce did burn
My Northern borders, and did wast the same.
Then sighing I to Gaveston would turn,
And say (sweet Pierce) my self feels fancies flame.
I saw, I love, I dye for such a Dame.
Cupid (I fear) to me a Bruce will prove,
My Holds by him, my heart is fired by Love.
184
With these, and many more fantastic toys
I shifted-off my Council, when they came.
I had not time enough to spend in joys,
Why should I spare one minute from the same.
Let them that list, by wars go out for fame
I force it not, give me those pleasing wars;
Where blows are given, but such as cause no scarres.
185
But when the field, is to a field bed turned.
When Eyes like sharpest Lances pierce, yet please.
When amorous Hearts with equal flames are burned.
When Foes lie down, our fury to appease,
And lips on lips redouble blows of ease.
When brave assaults are not by Death controlled,
In such a band who would not be enrolled.
186
The Roman Monster Heliogabilus.
And Persian Xerxes never fortunate;
Might well be thought to live again in us,
We prized our Pleasures at so high a Rate.
Such was our sad, and still-succeslesse Fate.
In Peace, our Faults procured our decays,
In War, our Fortunes made us Run-awayes.
187
The lucke-lesse Battles fought, whilst I did Reign
With Robert Bruce, that noble English-Scot.
Sad Monuments unto the world remain,
"That vicious Life with Monarchs thriueth not;
"For Sin and shame are tied with Gordions knot:
"And those Designs, do prove succeslesse quite,
"That are Contrived by men drowned in delight.
188
Mark but the Maps of all Antiquity.
True Registers, vnfalsify'd Records,
The voice of Time (which we call History)
And 'twill be found, that every Age affords
Plenty of proof to fortify my words.
Each place, each time do pregnant witness bear,
Who Riot most, to Ruin are most near.
189
When Sin did over flow, the Deluge Came.
The Assirians then did loose their Monarchy
When their last * King did live most out of frame SARDANAPALVS.

And was o're-whelm'd with Sensuality.
The Persians then did wrack their Empirie.
When wealth, and Lust, and ease did most abound
Which also did the Roman State confound.
190
The Danes did first set footing in this Land,
Because Lord Buerus wife was ravished here.
The Saxon forces got the vpper-hand,
When Vortiger held Hengists * Daughter dear. ROVVEN.

And still our Realm to ruin has bin near
When ripened Sin has gathered strongest head.
So stalled Steeres are to the shambles led.
191
Thus Edward said: And this our Age has seen
Like Instance, of a neere-confining State,
Never was France more deadly sick of sin.
Never was Goodness grown more out of date.
Never did Princes more preposterate
Their private lives, and public regiment.
And as they Lived so died Impenitent.
192
Never Religion served for more pretenses.
Never were Nobles more ambitious.
Never like Inundation of offenccs.
Never were Churchmen less religious.
Never were Commons more seditious.
Such plotting, Counterplotting policies,
Such massacres, such barbarous Cruelties.
193
Such Impious Courses, such Impunitie
Never was seen, less blushing, and more shame*
Never had Sin so great Immunitie.
Never was ever all so out of frame
As in those wretched times: Till the fierce flame*
Of Civil fury, and the foreign foe
Did make poor France the stage of tragic wo^
194
And without doubt, had not that * Man of men: HENRY, 4. the Great.

The mighty Atlas of that falling State
Bin raised by God, to give new life, even then
That famous Kingdom of so ancient date
By home ambition, and by foreign hate
Had breathed her last, being Sin-sick unto death
And much a do there was, to give her breath.
195
But that great Spirit was a blessed instrument
To give new strength unto much weakened France.
That Heau'n-blest Country never shall repent
That she did Henry Burbon so advance.
For next to God, It was his happy chance
By matchless virtue to revive again
That sinking State which Sin had almost slain.
196
"For still the eye of wrath does ouer-looke
"The wicked actions of obdurate men,
"The Court of heaven does keep a titeling book,
"Wherein are entered all our sins, and when
"The score is full, let us look for payment then.
And O, what Prince what Commonwealth can stand
When God does scourge it with a rigorous hand.
197
And let us make this use of their neere-wracke,
"Forbear to sin, for fear of punishment.
"God is not senseless, though he seem to flacke.
"He gives us day, in hope we will repent;
"But use grows more, the longer debts are lent*
And God forbeares, and winkes at our abuse
"That we might have less color of excuse.
198
I could not choose, when I had yoak't my teame,
But make this furrow to enrich my field.
I now return to my Intended Theme.
And Edward wishes, that his Reign might yield
Fit Presidents for Princes, how to weild.
That weighty Province, which they do sustain.
And thus continues his discourse again.
199
When my chief Peers did see, how things mischance
And those mischances did Impute to Sin.
My Sin to him, whom I had so advanced,
To banish him again, they then begin,
And made my self to have a hand therein*
Their force, my fear compelled me thereunto,
"'It Is hard, when Princes are enforced to do.
200
It is the chiefest good, of Kingly Reign
That it is free, from base compelling fear.
And it is again the Kingdoms chiefest bane
Not to admit wise Counc^ll to the Ear.
Away with Awe: hold admonition dear,
"Fears figure never should meet with Kingly Eyes,
"But on the Backs o^ flying Enemies.
201
But the fair lovely picture of Advice
Should still be placed in the Princes sight.
Thrice happy Kings that are both stout, and wise,
You scorn Control, but set not Council light
Not fear, but virtue makes you to do right.
You Are, Kings indeed: and may securely rest
Whilst fears are lod'gd within a weaker breast
202
Te Solum vercor: Is a Princely word
Speaking to him, that Is Lord Paramount
And supreme Princes so should bear the sword
As but to him, they need give no account.
Which they shall do, If (as they do Surmount
In greatness (so in goodness they excel,
It Is certain: He rules all, that governs well.
203
And none does so, but the selfe-governor
That his own private passions can Command.
Which make a slave, even of an Emperor,
If once they grow, to get the upper hand.
And soon deep searching Spirits will understand
And find a Prince that is weak: and ride him so,
That he must pace, as they will have him go.
204
Whereof my self may be a President
Who was so ouer-aw'd by my great Peers
That Gaveston was doomed to banishment,
And now my Soul (full fraught with griefs, and fears
Was in her motions restless (like the Spheres
But not so fixed) Now go he should: now should not.
So woman like I would: and straight I would not.
205
Yet e're he went, (as go he must, and did)
Dear Prince (says he) wherein have I misdon?
That I am banished thus? Does Edward bid,
His poor (yet but his own poor Pierce) to shun
His gracious sight? must I from England run?
He bids: I must: Farewell: yet think of me.
Though body goes, yet stays my Soul with thee.
206
What were these words, but each to me a wound?
Whereat my very life-bloud gashed out.
I would have spoke: but words with tears drowned
Whilst giddy passion hurled my brains about.
Confusedly I spoke: O do not doubt:
Those cursed Peers: It is not long of me
Though Body stays, yet goes my Soul with thee.
207
Mourn not (sweet Prince) says he: O do not mourn.
Let never tears disgrace those graceful eyes:
Is not enough, that I am thus forlorn?
Must woes from me, (as clouds from Sea) arise?
My dear, dear Liege, let it at least suffice,
That still you have the better part of me
My Body they command, my Soul is free.
208
Cease, cease my Pierce, thy tongue does wound my heart.
I grieve to see: because I see thy grief.
Farewell: and yet me thinks we should not part.
And yet we must: Well: this be thy relief:
Thou bear a fi^ld of gold: A King in chief.
Thou shall be Irelands Governor for me.
Would thou might stay, or I might go with thee.
209
At Parting, thus with wanton grief we played.
He went to Sea, and I to Sorrow went;
And yet, my heat of lust was not allayed.
My treasure that to Ireland was sent.
And there by Gaveston in triumphs spent.
Who now seemed greater, then he was before,
So vines being cut, increase, and thrive the more.
210
And here my Peers did in true Judgment fail.
So to remove, not take him quite away.
Who once returning, needs must seek to quail
The adverse part: that labored his decay,
Dead Dogs can neither bark, nor bite (men say)
But angered Curres more fiercely still return,
And wronged mind^ with greater fury burn.
211
Better It is, still to dissemble hate
Then first to enter into discontent,
And leave him great, whom thou did wrong of late
Who having means, and sharp'ned in Intent
May easily work some dangerous event.
Either strike not, or (else besure) strike so.
That thou thy self need fear no after blow.
212
Besides, they did the more exasperate,
By opposition, my enraged ire;
And as for Gaveston, (whom they did hate)
They did inflame me with a greater fire.
His absence setting edge on my desire.
"For Princes kept from what they do affect,
"Do hurry to their ends without respect.
213
What ever stops the Current of a Stream
Is swept away with furious violence.
"Force is effectlesse against a strong extreme,
But if one will with labor, and expense
Divert the course, and turn the Channel thence.
It Is possible, that he in time peuailes,
For Art does compass, when resistance fails.
214
Philosophers do hold, (and truly too)
That lightning often, (the sheath untouched (y^ blade
Consumes: The reason why it does so do
Is, by the one there is small resistance made,
Being full of Pores: The other hard to Invade
Does set it self against that heavenly shot
Which quite consumes, because it pierces not.
215
I cannot fit the awful wrath of Kings
More properly, then to this wondrous fire
Which once inflamed, consumes resisting things,
Breaks up the bounds, that limit their desire,
And by depressing down, still mounteth higher.
"Whereas strong passion borne with patience,
"Spends on It self, and dies without offense.
216
My Peers soon saw, which way the Hare did run,
And therefore gave consent to his repeal.
Not Caesar (when Pharsalia field he won)
Did triumph more then I, when they did Seal
And did subscribe the ruin of our weal.
Then all was well, whilst all did well agree,
But All proved Ill for all, and worst for me.
217
For Gaveston after he did return
Of all my former favors once possessed,
His full-sayl'd Fortunes held my Peers in scorn,
Nor could he any equal well digest,
Though I was King in show, in him did rest
The Kingly power: all was at his Command,
And nothing done, that did not pass his hand.
218
Such over-swelling greatness was the Cause
That made my Peers report: His cursed Dam
To be a Witch: And (that by force of Laws,
She suffering for it) was burned for the same
And that her Son like practices did frame
Upon my self: and by such hellish Art
Had skrew'd him self so far into my heart.
219
It is too true, my dotage was extreme.
And I did prize him at so high a Rate,
That he, my Crown, my life weighed at a beam,
Above them both, I him did estimate.
Which was indeed my folly, and his fate.
But that the same was wrought by Magic Spell.
Is such a Tale, as old wives use to tell.
220
Witchcraft may work upon the Body much,
But there is no fascination of the mind.
The Soul is free from any M^gicke touch.
Nor can enchanting charms or loose, or bind
The powers and ^aculties thereto assigned,
Spirits may suggest, they may persuade to ill,
But all their power cannot compel the will.
221
It is the sole Prerogative of Heaven,
It Is Gods peculiar, to command the heart.
That damned Imposter had his power given
From the most high, e're he with all his Art
Could work on him, in whom he had most part.
Seduced Ahab falls by his persuasion.
But It is God, that first graunts the Commission.
222
The Prince of Darkness may corrupt the brain,
And so work strongly upon the Imagination,
Which being abused, often becomes most vain
In the conceiting a strange transmutation,
Of It Is own self, into some wolvish fashion.
Which is no other* (As our Doctors say)
Then the disease called Lycantropia.
223
He may, (and does often times) delude the sight,
By offering strange Phantasmaes to our Eyes.
And then the Judgment is perverted quite;
When it is seduced by such erroneous Spies,
As brings us no Intelligence, but lies.
A thousand like devises he has got
To make us think he does, what he does not.
224
Besides, when any Error is committed,
Whereby we may Incur or loss, or shame.
That we our selves thereof may be acquitted,
We are too ready to transfer the blame
Upon some Witch: That made us do the same.
It is the vulgar Plea, that weake-ones use,
I was bewitched: I could nor will: nor choose.
225
But my affection was not caused by Art
The witch that wrought on me, was in my breast.
My Gaveston wholly possessed my heart
And that did make him swell above the rest,
But it is not safe so high to build ones nest:
For bubbles fullest blown do soonest break,
And Trees are ever at the top most weak.
226
Content does seat It self in lowly dales
Out of the dint of winds, and stormy showers.
There sit, and sing melodious Nightingales,
There run fresh cooling streams, there grow sweet flowers
There heat and cold are fenced by shady bowers.
And there is wealth at will: But this we know,
The grass is short, that on the hill does grow.
227
O Gaveston! why do thou then aspire
To be so Great, when greatness stands on ye.
If thou should slip, as now thy place is higher
So will thy fall be greater: In a trice
He Is down that stands on Pinacles: Be wise,
Stand low, stand sure: But (oh) I speak in vain
"For men will mount, though sure to stoop again.
228
How Gaveston (the third time banished)
Did live in Dutch-land, where he found no rest.
How he returned, How I as famished
Did feed on him, as on some dainty feast.
How ill my Peers his presence did digest,
I do but touch at: Now my Muse unfold
How till his fall he bare him proud, and bold.
229
Suppose him spleenfull, melancholy, sad.
And me in my affections passionate.
Think him reuengefull, think me doting-mad;
Think, how I loved, and think, how he did hate;
And think him then, thus to expostulate.
Grieved with precedent, feared with future wrong
Thus did this Siren tune his balefull song.
230
O King (no King) but shadow of a King;
Nay, do not frown, but hear me what I say,
I speak in Zeal, (though harshly I do sing)
Thou op'st a gap unto thine own decay
By suffering thy proud Peers to bear such sway.
For look how much ye shadows length does grow
So much the Sun declines, and goes more low.
231
Thy waxing is their waine: Thy Ebb, their tide.
When they are strongest, thou art weak and faint.
Turn every stone, to quell their growing pride.
It fits not Kings to brook the least restraint.
Disgrace, Exile, close Durance, or Attaint
For seeming Crimes, to bring them into hate
These are the means to reassure thy State.
232
Now thou art King in show, but not Indeed,
Those petty Pawnes do check, and mate thee too.
All is reverst, that is by Thee decreed,
They do injoyne Thee what thou have to do,
And what they will, thou art Compelled unto.
But though thy pleasure bend another way
Yet things must pass, as they are pleased to sway.
233
They have Allies, to strengthen their dissignes.
They back themselves with strong Conferates.
Their seeming Zeal the vulgar undermines,
The wiser sort for fear insinuates;
And so they gain assurance of all States.
Some by the gloss of fair deportment, and
Some by a hard and ouer-awing hand.
234
Besides, they raise men, that are popular,
And by their means the Peoples hearts they steal
Themselves seem just, their courses regular,
They make pretenses (for the Commonweal)
Of Reformation, of religious Zeal.
And by these Colors which they do pretend
They bring their complots to successful end.
235
But more then this: The wealth of all thy Land
Is in their hand, or else at their dispose,
Whereby they have an absolute Command
Of many Lives, which are maintayn'd by those
Great bounties, which from their abundance flows.
For they must needs remain at their devotion,
That have from them their being, and their motion.
236
These are the close Consumptions of thy State,
Which by these Antidotes thou must restore.
Be served by such, as thou have raised of late,
Advance new Creatures, of no note before;
And such will still depend on thee therefore.
For wanting means, except thou grace them still
They must remain obliged to thy will.
237
Let them be stirring Spirits of air and fire,
Apt both to make, and to maintain a Faction.
Ambitious, Active, hungry to aspire.
Not fooled with fear, but bold for any action,
True to their ends, but false in faith and paction;
And such being graced and favored by the time,
Will in despite of spightfull envy Climb.
234
Whose grouth, thy Peers will malice, and detest,
And seek to stop: Which they not brooking well
Will nourish mutual hatred in their breast;
And rankerous Envy in their souls will swell.
From whence revenge, and greedy thrist to quell
The adverse party: Cannot but proceed.
And so Confusion to them all Indeed.
239
Mean while, thou underhand must feed the flame
And secretly, give heart to either side.
And which is weakest, lean thou to the same,
Whereby thou shall Confound the adverse pride.
And if thy doubling, chance to be espied,
Make it an open quarrel, and be sure
To rid them first, that may most harm procure.
240
This lesson was by Tarquine well expressed,
When with his wand he did behead those flowers,
That any way did ouer-grow the rest.
As who should say: Be jealous of great Powers,
And Cut them down, whose growth near equals ours.
For that same Throne is but a slippery Seat,
That suffers any to be ouer-Great.
241
Make penal Laws, to Cut off their retainers.
Wrest from their hands all public great command.
Grace them in show, but not to make them gainers
Keep them aloof, let them not understand
The Passages of State, at any hand.
Do not Commit thy forces to their trust,
Least having minds, th'aue means to be unjust.
242
Where e're they live, (though they be far removed)
Yet, let them be survay'd with careful Eye.
Such as are near to them, and dearly loved,
To whom their Inward thoughts most open lie;
Win them by gifts, and by close policy,
To serve thy turn, with true Intelligence
Of any thing, that may procure offense.
243
Gain to thy self by all means (if thou can)
His bosom friend, the Consort of his life.
So did Sejanus (that deep knowing man)
Obtain the Love of Livia, Drusus wife,
(With whom he lived in jealousy and strife)
And by that course found means to make away
His Opposite, who labored his decay.
244
If they do sue, do not thou favor then,
Let all advancements be derived from thee.
So shall thou weane from them, the hearts of men,
And they will only thy dependants be.
For there men serve, where they preferment see.
Lastly, what Stratagem thou do Intend,
Let shows of virtue color still thy end.
245
These are the baits, to fish for wisest Peers,
The yonglings may be caught with easier means.
Let Siren pleasure love their youthful years,
Let Lust, expense, and riotous extremes,
(To which their youth by course of Nature leanes)
Let followers, change of beauties, pompous pride
Infect their minds, and wrack their states beside.
246
Yet, If thou see a likely growing Plant (great)
Whose spreading branches may in time grow
Lodge him at home, let him Employment want,
And vselesse wither in his Native seat;
For Ease and rest will Chill his active heat,
And lulled in pleasures of a safe delight,
Relinquish mounting thoughts of honor quite.
247
But if his Temper soar so high a Pitch,
As that his working virtue must have vent.
Engage him in some Action, by the which
H^s harvest may be Death, or Discontent.
Yet make a show to grace his hardiment,
With highest honors, and so thrust him on
To such Attempts, as death still waytes upon.
248
Which (if he miss, as Heaven may bless him so)
Yet will the managing of such designs
Afford fit matter for his overthrow:
If prosperous fortune any ways declines.
For Commonly the vulgar sort repines
Against all Actions, that do want success,
And in their humors weigh the Agents less.
249
And so they lie more open to their wrack
When they have once Incurred a Common hate.
And then some fair occasion cannot lack
Either by Death to cancel their lives date,
Or at the least, to weaken so their state;
As that the Prince need fear no future harm,
That may proceed from their vnjoynted arm.
250
And having cleared thy self of such: Yet then
(That thou must keep thy Majesty and State)
Thou needs must entertain some Noble men.
But froathy bubbles full of Idle prate,
Who study fashions, know their place (scarce that)
All whose sweet worth is fetched from dead men's Tombs,
And they themselves less worthy then their Grooms.
251
Let them discourse of Kindred, and Allies,
My Uncle Earl, my Cosi^^ Duke, or so.
Who living did this, or that enterprise.
And tell how his great Grandsires horse did go,
When he in France encountered with his Foe.
Graco these (sweet Pr:) These thy Court-Co^met^ be
And pray for the^: They Will never prey on thee.
252
Thus must thy twigges be lim'd, thy nets displayed
To catch these birds, that soar up to the Sun.
And when these wise foundations once are laid,
It Is almost ended, what is well begun.
Then art thou King Indeed: Then have thou won
Unto thy self, an absolute estate.
Till when, The Lion lives but in the Grate.
253
Thus did this hellish Are cast the ball
Or Discontent, betwixt me, and my Peers.
Whose wicked Councels (flowing from the gall)
Filled them with fury, me with needless fears,
And set us altogether by the Ears;
Whilst either side (neglecting Common good)
Sought only how to spill each others blood.
254
Ill Councels seem most fair at the first show
And promise much, but in their managing,
Many unthought of difficulties grow.
And in their end (which crowns every thing)
They prove unprosperous, and do ruin bring.
They have an ea^^e birth, Dangers attend
Their progress: And in wretchedness they end.
255
It is a wise man's part; soundly to weigh
The Councels given: And to observe with-all
The giuers private ends: because they may
In their advice upon some passage fall,
That may perhaps prove prejudicial
Unto the Advice: They (their own true friends)
Aiming at nothing, but their private ends.
256
Which in this Council given by Gaveston
Was obvious for every Eye to see.
Who in his spleenfull heart still thought upon
His own revenge, and so advised me
To that, which with his ends did best agree.
Which drew my Peers to Arms, who vowed e'^t long
His head should answer for his cursed tongue.
256
I wished the trees were turned to armed troops,
And all the bows were Pikes, their hearts to wound*
All other birds the Princely Eagle stoops,
The Lion Roares: The Beasts shake at the sound,
Why should not I their daring pride Confound?
That saw cily usurp upon my right,
But Lions are no Lions wanting might.
258
My Peers did strike, whilst that the steel was ho^
And Still came on to seize upon their prey.
What should we do, Complain? It booted not.
Go leauie men? Our men did disobey.
Sue for a Truce? They would not grant a day.
Submit our selves, and so some pity crave,
Me hurt they would not, him they would not save
259
That Prince Indeed is to be held most wise
That by his virtues does his State secure.
But he is not so, that means to tyrannize
And does not secke by forces to assure
His own designs: for let him be most sure;
A Prince that is weak, and yet does govern ill,
Is subject to a thousand dangers still.
260
O Sacred Virtue, what a powerful guard
Art thou? What a strong Power of defense?
All hearts are won to reverence and regard
Thy awful worth: Thou neither give offense,
Nor take It: Men are not without sense,
But they both see, and taste, and love, and nourish,
That Real good, by which themselves do flourish.
261
What understanding Soul, that does not know,
And knowing love, and loving will not spend
The dearest blood, that in his veins does flow,
To guard, and give unto that Prince, whose end
To public more then private good does bend?
He shall be ever able to command
At will, his Subjects purse, his heart, his hand.
262
Flight was our best defense, and fly we did.
So silly Doves before proud Falcons fly.
Till Gaveston in Scarborow. Castle hid
My Peers surpised: Whom War wicks Earl Sir Guy
Beuchamp beheaded: The death of GAVESTON.
So my Pierce did dye.
A gloomie night conclude his fair morn
And Fortunes darling ended Fortunes scorn.
263
O what is honor but an exhalation?
A fiery meteor soon extinct and gone,
A breath of People, and the Tongues relation,
That straight is ended when the voice is done,
A morning dew, dried up with miidday Sun.
A ceasing sweet, like Danaes golden shower.
That both began, and ended in an hour.
264
There breeds a little Beast, by Nilus Streams,
Which being borne, when Phoebus first does rise,
Grows Old, when he reflects his hottest beams,
And when at night to Western Seas he hies,
Then life begins to fail, and straight It dies.
Borne, old, and dead, and all but in a day
Such honor Is, so soon it wears away.
264
How much more happy is that sweet estate
That neither creepes too low: nor soars too high?
Which yields no matter to contempt, or hate.
Which others not disdain, nor yet envy,
Which neither do^s, nor takes an injury.
But living to it self in sweet Content,
Is neither abject, nor yet insolent.
266
He lives indeed, and spends his course of time
In truest pleasure, that this life can yield.
He has set hours, to pray at Even, and Prime
He walks abroad into his quiet field
And studies, how his home affairs to wield.
His Soul, and Body make one Commonwealth.
His Councels Care, to keep them both in health.
267
He fears no poisons in his meats and drinks,
He needs no guard, to watch about his bed.
No teacher undermines him, what he thinks,
No dangerous projects hammer in his head,
He sits and sees how things are managed.
And by observing, what has erst been done.
He levels often, how future things will run.
268
If he would live with Kings, and mighty men,
He does converse with them in History.
If he would know the Heavenly motions, Then
He takes his Globe, he reads Astronomy,
His Mapps, and Chartes do teach Cosmography.
And whilst in his safe Cell he studying stands,
In one short hour, he sails both Sea and Lands.
269
And tired (perhaps) with the discovery
Of foreign things, He comes more nearer home,
He looks into himself with careful Eye,
That little world, (that is indeed his own)
He trauailes-In, which being truly known,
Affords enough, for wonder and delight,
When he has learned, to know himself aright.
270
How far removed from this true Happiness
Are those high Climbers, that grow overgreat?
They always eat the Bread of Carfulness,
And sad suspicion vshers in their meat.
They sleep on Thorns: (If any sleep they get)
Being troubled, both to deal, and to discard.
Unguarded they do fear, and fear their Guard.
271
O greatness! though thou seem fair gilded. over
Yet Inwardly, thou art but wretchedness.
So have I known, a Costly habit cover
A Body full of Soars, and filthiness.
Thy very marrow is but rottenness.
An Alpe to Clime, An ye to stand upon,
A very Hell of Hell's, if had, and gone.
272
The Earl of Cornwall (causer of the War)
Thus being dead, they laid their weapons down.
Protesting all, They would not go so far
As to be thought disloyal to the Crown,
But they did seek the Realms, and my Renown.
Which was eclipsed in him, whom they had slain,
But Englands Sphere would now grow fair again.
273
But still dark Clouds did shadow Englands Sphere,
And bitter storms, on gloomie Clouds dependant.
Unfortunate, and fatal every year,
Whilst haples Edward was chief Lord ascendant.
Malignant Stars on me were still attendant,
Though at my birth Jove smiled with sweet aspect
Yet froward Saturn did my life direct.
274
For though distasted Gaveston was dead,
Yet Edward lived, and lived to farther Ill,
For still I was by my affections led,
I willed no Law: yet used no Law but will,
My Peers disgraced, my people grieved still.
The Spencers, hey succeeded Gaveston.
Ill changed to worse: and worst: two Ills for one
275
These Spencers (now the Subject of my Song)
Descended of a Race of great esteem.
The elder Hugh (the Father) lived long
A man of worth, and happy days had seen.
Till his ambitious Son did over-weene.
Whose greatness caused the Father to aspire,
And at the last did wrack both Son, and Sire.
276
O what have thou (Old man) to do with Court?
Thy Books, and Beads had better been for thee.
Live still retired, and do not now resort
To stormy tempest, Age does Ill agree
With great Concourses, and vulgar mutinee.
It rather craves Immunitie, and rest,
And peaceful ease, with tumults not distressed.
277
Whose joints being racked, and tortured with the Gout
Can scarce endure the stirring of a straw
Who being vnweildie, must be borne about.
Whose golden Ewre is cracked with many a flaw,
Who has no grinders left in either jaw.
Whose strong men bow, whose keepers shake and tremble,
Whose meager looks, pale death does most resemble.
278
But this Ambition is a boiling Ill.
Honor does make dead Cinders glow again.
What aged One so great, but by his will
Would feign grow greater? Age does still retain
Two Humors: Hope of Life: Desire of Gain.
And this was that, which made Old Spencer clime.
When he was past the Autumn of his time.
279
The younger Hugh (the Son of this old man)
Was of an active Spirit, and able brain,
Who with the Barrons at the first began
To side himself: They favoring him again
For Gaveston made him Lord Chamberlain.
That he in place so near about the King.
Might give them notice still of every thing.
280
Thinking, (because he was by them preferred)
He still would cleave to them in their designs.
But (vnjudiciall men) herein they er^'d.
A swelling Spirit hates him, by whom he climes;
As Iuie kills the tree whereon It twines.
So rising men, when they are mounted high.
Spurn at the means, that first they mounted by.
281
Because, they think such favors challenge still,
An equal correspondencie of Love.
Which ties them, to be plyant to their will.
And as the lower Spheres by those above
Are whirled about, so they by them must move.
And do what they insultingly obtrude.
Or else be censured for Ingratitude.
282
And such well mettled men cannot digest
To be obsequious to another mind,
Their haughty Spirits will not let them rest,
Till those precedent bands which did them bind.
By open opposition are vntwin'd.
And such a public rupture does restore
Their liberty, which was lngag'd before.
283
And greatness holds it needful policy.
To rid his hands of them, that did it raise.
By entering into open Enmity,
And so to cut them off without delays.
These were, and are the Courses of our days;
Who list observe both old, and modern times
Shall find I write no fables, though some Rimes.
284
I will not touch particulars at all,
I play the ball, let others mark the chase.
The Spencers do my wandering muse recall.
Who being near the King in chiefest place,
Did heap up much, and that in little space.
For all things had from them their passage then,
Who turned to gold all matters, and all men.
285
The chiefest Peers were underhand kept down,
The Minions of the King got every place.
Though Edward had, yet Spencers ruled the Crown.
And being both made Earls in highest grace,
Did heap up much, and that in little space.
They wronged, they cared not who^: such was their lust
"And sudden greatness grows too soon unjust
286
Especially, If (like a mole) it works
Only in Earth, how greedy's such a Man?
How slyly he in close advantage lurkes
To compass a whole Country, if he can.
Still griping all, that Comes within his span.
What wealth, wit, friends, force can do, good, or Ill,
Shall, must be practiced for to please his will.
287
The Princes favors do for Pulleys serve
To draw on men to be at his command.
Even Seats of Judgment shall from Justice swerue,
If they may bring a Title to his hand.
And if some Reverend Fathers shall with-stand.
Then weed them out: They will not serve a turn,
Such men are fit for Marryres: Let them burn.
288
His Agents must be of another mould,
Sharpe-sighted into other men's estate.
Plyant to do what their great Master would,
Close, cunning to dissemble love, or hate,
VVell-spoken, powerful to Insinuate.
Seemingly honest, out wardly precise.
By which they may their close complots disguise.
289
These are the Pipes of lead, that do Convey
Those practices, that from their head do spring.
And so, these seconds come to bear great sway,
Are legged and crouch'd unto, for fear they sting
These buy, and build, and beg: and raise and wring
Farmer, Esquire, Knight, and Baron too,
And Prince, and all with whom they have to do.
290
And this Indeed was the most dangerous Rock
VVhereon I split, and so at last did drown.
This was my Error: This the stumbling block
At which I fell, and cast my Fortunes down,
This lost my peoples hearts, (and that the Crown)
My Minions rapine, and unjust oppression,
And my too much Indulgent Indiscretion.
291
My Peers were malcontent, being unrespected.
My Soldiers mutinous for want of Pay.
My Court with all Licentiousness infected.
My People poor, with Taxes pared away,
And apt for Innovation every day:
All out of joint, dejected, and dismayed.
Only the Spencers, and their Consort swayed.
292
I sold, they bought, I wasted, they did thrive.
They had abundance, I was Indigent.
Their's was the honey, mine the ransacked hiue,
Which made them grow bold, tart, and insolent,
And thereby caused a Common discontent.
Of all whose Crimes, I did Incur the blame,
Because my heat gave life unto the same.
293
Princes attend (for I do speak in Zeal)
It Is not enough, that you your selves be just.
But you must Look into the Commonweal;
And see that those whom you do put in trust,
Do govern by the Law, not by their Lust.
"For he indeed the wrong does perpetrate,
"That may redres^e, yet does It tolerate.
294
And so you make their wickedness your own
By suffering them to sin without Control.
But let not Widows tears bedew your Throne.
Nor poor men's sighs sent from a grieved Soul.
Nor Orphans prayers (which heaven does still enroll)
Nor common curses caused by public grieuance,
Draw Judgments down on you, for their mischieuance.
295
Kings must use some: And may choose of the best,
But let them still remember, what men are,
Let not all Laws be locked up in one breast.
Let not ones only Censure make or mar;
For men have passions, which often strain them far.
"The most sees least: few best: But none sees all,
"Who has not, does: who does not, yet may fall.
296
I do not bark against Authority,
My heart did never lodge irreverent thought.
Heaven knows, how I adore just Sovereignty,
How often my soul with vpheau'd hands have sought
Unto that God, whose precious blood us bought.
For our right virtuous * King, JACOB. I.
This peaceful State
And all those powers, he does subordinate.
297
Long before this, how often have I prayed
Unto the Almighties supreme Majesty.
And in a faithful Zeal devoutly said;
When loved ELIZA (of blessed memory)
Shall pay the debt of all mortality.
And leave her Crown upon this Earth, To be
Translated to a Crown in Heaven with thee.
298
Do not again a Conquering William bring,
Nor an intruding Stephen, to steer our helm.
Let neither power, nor practice make a King
That has not lawful Title to the Realm,
Least Civil broils (so caused) should ouerwhelm
The fortified foundations of our Land
Which thou have laid by thine ELIZAES hand.
299
And if one beam of thy resplendent light
Most fair, all gladding Sun chance to descend
Upon this short Abridgement, which I write.
Let no conceit thy Sacred self offend;
For It was chiefly molded to this end,
To show, how much our selves obliged stand,
For that firm Peer, that now does bless our Land.
300
Which by Collation of those gloomie days
Appear more full of Comfort, and Content.
But I go on: Muse, keep the beaten ways,
Whilst Spencers ruled with Common discontent.
Even God himself inflicted Punishment;
Upon the Prince, the People, and the Land,
Which felt the weight of his afflicting hand.
302
The King himself was full of diffidence,
And sought to strengthen his Partiality.
The Lords (not brooking Spencers Insolence)
Did league themselves with strong formalitie.
The best were guilty of Neutralitie.
The vulgar sort were tyded up, and down.
As fortune pleased to favor, or to frown.
302
The Earth her self (as sorrowing for her Sons,
Or weary of their foul misgouernment)
Grew out of heart, and barren so becomes.
Not yielding men, sufficient to be spent,
But seemed to droope away with languishment.
So may we see, how God vnfructifies,
A fruitful Land, for men's Impieties.
303
The louring heavens do seem to drop down tears
As if they wept, to wash the sinful Earth,
Infectious fogges, and gloomie clouds appears;
Which choke the growth of all things in their birth,
Heaven, Earth, and All conspired to make a dearth.
O see, when God takes Arms against his Land,
He can enroll all Creatures in a band.
304
Great was the want, of that unhappy time,
The Earth not yielding her accustom'd-store,
And that which was, whilst greedy men purloyne
And hoord It up: They make the Famine more,
Grinding thereby the faces of the poor.
As if Gods heavy hand were too too light,
Unless even Man should study man's despite.
305
Such men are Traitors even to Natures law,
And do conspire against the Common good.
They wring the bread out of the poor man's jaw,
By keeping up the Corn, whilst they want food
But without doubt, God will require their blood.
Their guiltless blood, which from the earth shall cry
And beg revenge for such Impiety.
306
If but one spark of Grace in them did dwell.
Did they respect human Society,
Had they a hope of Heaven, or fear of Hell;
Or any little sense of Piety,
Did they in heart conceive a Dietie,
And that most Just, most wise, most powerful too,
They would forbear, what God forbids to do.
307
But neither fear of God, nor Love of men,
Nor just Compassion of a Public ill
Can work upon their steely hearts: And then
"Coe^ciue means best fits a stubborn will,
Else they will be hardened in their malice still.
For often times (we see) where Nature fayles
Law Interposes, and indeed preuailes.
308
The ancient Roman state in It Is chief Pride,
When It was governed with most sound advice:
Had Leges Frument arias, to provide
That Corn should not grow to too high a Price,
And sure It was a course both Just and wise,
When men grow monstrous, even against their kind,
We must like Monsters them enclose and bind.
309
But now I must not be misunder stood,
I do not pass a heavy Censure here,
Upon such men, as for the general good
Store up the plenty of a fruitful Year.
And keep it safe, till more cause does appear,
To vent the same: And when such cause shall be,
As they were frugall, so they must be free.
310
Religious Joseph in the Egyptian Land
Stored up much grain, and at an easy Rate,
He had his warrant signed with Gods own hand.
Both for the public good of the whole State
(To which he did that grain Communicate)
And to relieve his Fathers family,
In those ensuing years of Scarcity.
311
And so we may (and must) after like fashion
When there is great abundance to come-In.
Provide both for the wants of our own Nation,
And to help those that our Confiners bin
"Frugall provision never was a Sin.
It is a just, and honest Policy
So to provide against necessity.
312
But in a time of Dearth, when there is want*
Then for a man to hoord, and hide his grain,
With an Intent, to make the same more scant;
And so to raise the price for his own gain,
Is such a Sin, as were I to ordain
A Law against It, for the Common good,
I should (with Drac^) write that Law in blood.
313
But (O) what times are these wherein we live?
In which, we neither can Endure the Sore
Nor yet the Salve; The Causes why we grieve,
Nor yet the means, which should our states restore.
Once Pharoes Kine (which were but lean and pore)
Devoured the fat: Those times are altered clean
For now we see, The fat deuoures the lean.
314
But whilst, Impatient hunger did constrain
The vulgar sort, to eat unhealthy food,
A great Mortality began to reign,
Spilling too much (but most Ploebeian) blood.
And after Dearth came Death with angry mood.
Lo wretched man, how woes still come in gross
And after One succeeds a second Cross.
315
When God severely scourgerh any Land
He seconds Plagues with plagues, and woes with woes.
He takes his three-stringed whip in hand
Of Dearth, of death, of home, or foreign Foes,
And from these three all desolation grows.
What true Content, what rest to man remains,
When ills by Ounces: Good scarce comes by Grains.
316
And to increase the current of my Care,
A slavish Groom ( John Poydras was his name)
Borne in the West; At Exceter, did dare
To bruit abroad, that he form Long-shankes came,
And I a Changling was supposed the same
That he in truth was, Edwards lawful Son,
And by a Nurse this treachery was done.
317
But afterward, (of his untruth convicted)
He did confess that he was moved to that
By those black Arts, that God has Interdicted,
And by a Spirit, in likeness of a Cat,
Who did assure him, by this damned plat.
He should unto the Sovereignty attain.
But a poor Rope served to prevent his Reign.
318
Here, give me leave a little while to dwell
Upon the Nature of this accident,
First I observe: The Devils cannot foretell
Before things Come, what will be their event;
If that the same be properly Contingent.
That is, That may be, and not be as-well.
And such no Devil, no Spirit can foretell.
319
All future things, that have, or may be told,
Are in themselves, or by their causes known.
Things in themselves God only can unfold,
And yet sometimes he does Impart his own
And proper knowledge, of such things to Come
Unto such Agents, as he please t'inspire
With some small sparkles of his heavenly fire.
320
Such were the holy Prophets in their days
Who Only by the Infusion of his Grace,
Foretold strange things, such likewise did he raise
At several times, even from the Gentill Race,
And in that Rank some do the Sybils place.
Who by the glimmering of his glorious Light,
Of things to come, did often divine aright.
321
Those things that by their causes are conceived
Do either follow of necessity,
(Therefore in them even men are not deceived)
Or grounded else on probability,
Or they do hit by mere contingencie.
The first, the Diu'ls most certainly conceive,
Guess at the second, In the last deceive.
322




A present knowledge, from remotest parts.
I grant they fully comprehend those things,
Which unto us great admiration brings.
323
But when in truth, The things are so Concealed,
As neither causes nor effects appear,
Then those occurrents are by them revealed
In such a sort, as double sense may bear,
Always ambiguous, cloudie, never clear.
And such were those same Oracles of Old,
That were by Phoebus, or by Hamon told.
324
I will be no retayler of such wares,
For they are cheap, and common unto all.
But I observe, what comes to such men's shares.
I note the fearful Judgments, that do fall
Upon such Artists, as do use to call.
Which both the ancient Annals do record,
And modern stories of our times afford.
325
Some burnt with fire, as Zoroastes was,
And some the Earth did swallow up alive.
As Amphiraus, when that he did pass
To Thebes: Some their own Spirits did deprive
Of breath, and so Pope Benedict did thrive,
The ninth of that same name, whose vital line
The Diu'll himself by strangling did untwine.
326
Nicephorus, and so Abdias tells,
How Simon Magus flying in the Air,
By Magic Art, and by enchanting spells,
Fell down, and brake his boanes at Peter's prayer,
And so he died in horror and despair.
O God! how far thy hand is stretched out,
To pour down vengeance on this damned Rout.
327
But to return, from whence I did digress,
Besides this Common confluence of ill,
Those wars I undertook, God did not bless,
But evermore they were successelesse still;
Because I failed both in advice and skill.
Which being managed without due respect,
How could their ends, but sort to such effect.
328
Most true It is: A Power of fearful Hearts,
That by a Princely Lion is but led,
Shall in the field exploit more glorious parts,
Then Armed Lions with ^ Heart, their head;
Besides, Wars thr^ue as they are managed.
And in the stream of Action, sound advice,
Preuailes as much, as does bold enterprise.
329
A Ship well manned, well victual'd, tackled well
Without a skillful Pilote steer the same,
Does in that warry world in danger dwell,
Look what the Pilote is to that huge frame,
To armed Troops the chieferaine is the same.
Who wanting either Courage, or foresight,
Ruins himself, and all his army quite.
330
In managing of Civil home designs,
If any Council, be not wisely fitted,
There yet remains some spark in after times
To execute, what was before omitted,
Or to correct, what was before committed.
But in the field, when Armies join in shocke
One only Error brings all to the block.
331
And hence (as I conceive) It does proceed,
That excellent Commanders are so rare.
Because they must be very wise Indeed,
To take the least advantages that are,
And very valiant to attempt, and dare.
And (O) how seldom meet in one these twain;
A Lions heart, joined with a Foxes brain.
332
Troy only stories forth one Hectors fame.
One Alexander Name of (Great) did merit.
One Hanibal from Carthage only Came.
And but one Pyrrus Epire did Inherit,
So sparing are the Heavens of such a spirit.
That no one Climate has produced many
And many one has searce been blessed with any.
333
The Theban State no greatness did attain
But only in Epaminundas time.
Who being dead: That did grow weak again,
He was the Sun, that lightened all that Clime,
His setting was their fall: His rise their Prime.
Before Inglorious, after of no name,
Such powerful virtue from that Chieftaine came.
334
Therefore in truth, I do not Iumpe with those
Who think the Prince for Conduct in the field,
Should both himself, and common wealth repose
Upon some-Chiestain, whilst himself does wield
The home-affaires: which more assurance yield.
In show I grant: but weigning every thing.
Such seeming safeties certain dangers bring.
335
For if Ambition seize upon the Soul
(As it is a passion apt to entertain.
And once possessed, no just respects Control)
I would advise the Prince that then does reign
To doubt the event: It Is worser to complain,
Then be complayn'd of: and who does not know
How many Kings have been uncrowned so.
336
This was y^ Rock, that wrackt great Mer^uees Line*
And brought the Crown of France to Martells Race;
For Childericke was forced to resign
To Pepin (Martells Son) his Princely place.
And so like-wise Hugh Capit did displace
The Line of Pepin, and advanced his own,
Because in war his worth was greater grown.
337
A Subject may in shape a Prince excel*
A Subject may more then his Sovereign know
Either in Arts, or in discoursing well.
He may be stronger to unhorse his foe,
And yet no danger to the Scepter so,
But if in Arms the Subject grows too great,
The Prince may chance be set besides his Seat.
338
Therefore let Princes labor to attain
The Art of war, by all the means they can;
Because, It does enable him to reign,
And makes him greater, then a private man.
That often has the Supreme Title wanne
Of sole Commander: which who does possess
Is scarce a Prince: and yet but somewhat less.
339
To have such troops of Soldiers at command,
To have such store of wealth, which men affect,
To have such potent means by Sea or Land,
To execute what e're they would effect,
To be observed with duty and respect;
By foreign States, and home dependencie,
Are shadows at the least of Soveraigntie.
340
And he that often has tasted that delight,
Wherewith such powerful greatness does bewitch,
Is hardly brought, to humble so his Spirit,
As not to think himself above the pitch
Of Common men: More eager is the Itch
To mount the top, of One, that is up half way,
Then his, that still at lowest step does stay.
341
Therefore the Prince, whose forces, and whose Arms
By other, then himself Commanded bin,
Must (for prevention of ambitious harms)
Have many Chiefetaines to Employ therein,
So shall no One be able for to win
So strong a party, but another may
Serve for a Help: to be crossed in his way.
342
But is there then, No Cement for to join
The Prince, and powerful Peer so close, so fast,
That the one shall not suspect, nor the other clime?
Or is the state of things so strangely placed
That men cannot be good with greatness graced?
Must Princes fear the noblest virtues still?
Or must a Subject use such virtues Ill?
343
O no, such minds a gloss of virtue bear,
But no essential part of her partake,
"A Kingly Nature cannot nourish fear,
"And virtuous souls Love good for goodness sake,
"And only that their Actions aim do make.
Where such as borrow virtues for a time,
Are dangerous men, and very apt to clime.
344
Especially, If their designements bend
To Compass that, which we dependence call,
If all their actions level at this end,
T'endeare themselves unto the General,
They will be easily drawn to throw at all,
When they have got the dice into their hand,
By having often Conduct, and Command.
345
The Antidote for Princes to preserve
Their States vndanger'd from such poisonous plattes
Is only Justice: which who does observe
In all designs, to men of all estates,
And is not swaid with Fears, Hopes, Loves, or Hates.
Or any passion, but goes eu'nly on
That Prince is wise, and does secure his Throne.
346
Let all the Politickes that breath this day
Rack their conceits, until they break their brain.
They never shall invent a better way
Whereby a Prince may with assurance reign,
Then to be truly just: and to retain
An even proportion Arithmaticall,
Which gives equal Justice unto all.
347
This is the Mother both of Love, and Fear,
This does engender duty, and desire.
This does the Prince from all suspicion clear,
Because it does Cut Off the means to aspire,
This distributes to all deserved Hire,
Whereby the Subject having his just due,
Does rest Contented, and Contented, true.
348
And you great Stars, whose powerful Influence
May work so much, be not Irregular:
Mo^e fairly in your Orbs without offense,
Be Nobles truly, and not Titular;
But stay my Muse, how apt art thou to err.
From thy first path, return, and make it plain;
That Arms are safest for a Sovereign.
349
Not only to prevent aspyring harms
Would I have Kings Commanders of their own.
But chiefly I would have them practice Arms,
That their great spirits might be the better shown,
And have more vent to make their virtues known.
For greatness does much in opinions rest,
And that is maintained by being in action best.
350
Besides, it is certain, all men wish to serve
Rather in the Kings eye, then by his Ear
Nothing inflames the Soul, more to deserve,
More quickens honor, more expels fear,
Then when the Prince in presence does appear.
To check the Coward, and with praise, and merit
To grace the Actions of a gallant Spirit.
351
This of all Causes, that I can Conceive
Made Alexander Monarch of the East.
It is a mighty motive, not to leave
Their Sovereign Prince in danger, or distressed,
Ill thrive they here on Earth (in heaven unblessed)
That think not so: And grant (O dearest Lord)
That men, and Angels to my prayers accord.
352
Wise was that State, and very well advised
Whose forces being often put to flight,
Still finding bad success, at length devised
To bring their Infant Prince into the fight,
Even in his Cradle, that his very sight
Might give them better heart; which proved most true,
For they did fight, and fighting did subdue.
353
Besides, those Under-officers that are
Employed, according to each several place,
Will with more Faith, and more respective Care
Intend their Charge before the Princes face,
So to avoid both danger, and disgrace.
And then the Common Soldier serves best,
When he is respected most, and fleeced least.
354
And (though I know Examples do not prove)
Yet is the state of things not so Confounded.
But that those selfsame motives still may move,
On which their resolutions then were grounded.
Therefore since Nor-man William first was Crowned,
Who list survey our Kings, cannot but yield
Their states thriu'd best, who most did keep y^ field
355
Yet, if the Prince by Age disabled be,
Or otherwise, by any like defect;
Or if the Sex with Arms does not agree,
Then let them make fit choice, with much respect
Of men of greatest virtues, to direct
Their martial forces, and the more they train
In such Designs, The safer is their Reign.
356
Because that Prince with more assurance lives
That does rely on many, then on One.
For nothing sooner apt occasion gives
To swelling Spirits, for to work upon,
Then if they often have Command alone.
Especially, If men do hold them such,
As without them, The State cannot do much.
357
Besides, it causes Envy on all parts,
Many malignant humors will be bred;
If that the Prince all powerfulness Imparts
Solely to One, which eu'nly quartered
Sets many Spirits on work: Who all are fed
At least with hopes, which else perhaps might fall
To practice, If one hand engrossed all.
358
Nor would I have the Prince to nourish fears
Or jealousies, of such as well deserve.
But let them make, and keep great spirits theirs,
And let their favors, and their bounties serve
As chains to bind them, that they may not swerue
From loyal Duty: Stronger is that Tie,
Then Cunning practice, or stern Cruelty.
359
And since, they must have Agents of their will
For Execution of their enterprises,
Or be themselves Engaged in action still.
Let nor ungrounded fears, and false surmises
Unapt their means, and cross their own devises.
"For who suspects, when no cause does appear,
"Does give a cause to that, which he does fear.
360
So Commodus, and Bassia^^^ so
(Two Princes of a most mistrustfull brain)
Did spinne the third of their own overthrow
By diffidence, which they did entertain
Of their own Creatures, by who^ they were slain
Only to save themselves: Whilst causlesse fear
Did make them guilty, which before were clear.
361
Where lives the man, that may in peace possess
The happy blessings of a private state?
Yet prostitutes himself to wretchedness,
To Care of mind, to bodies Toil, to hate
Of Envy, to the violence of Fate,
To teachy times; To dangers imminent,
If virtue finds no grace, but discontent.
362
Therefore let Princes weigh their Servants merits,
And grace them most, that have deserved best,
So shall respected virtue raise new spirits.
And every noble heart, and gentle breast
Will boil with Zeal, which will not let them rest
Till they have robbed of blood each several vein,
To do due service to their Sovereign.
363
But if the Prince too much distrustful be,
Sad, sour, and of a melancholy mind,
Hard of access, close-handed, nothing free,
To best deseruers ever most unkind.
Let such an One assure himself to find
False hearts, and feeble hands, but certain hate
If any danger threatens his estate.
364
Besides, the foul defacing of his glory,
And the remembance of his living shame,
Which will recorded be in every story,
And every Annall will report the same,
And tax with hateful tyranny his Name.
And why should Kings be so Ill-gouerned
That their black deeds should live, when they dead?
365
A Thousand years, and more are gone, and past,
Since that Justinian did the Empire sway
And yet his foul dishonor still does last;
And will do still, whilst there is night, and day.
Because he did unworthily repay
Thy Services (good BELLISARIVS)
To whom he was unjustly Tyrannous.
366
What though he did pluck forth those Eyes of thine?
(The cheerful Lamps y^ lightened those dark days)
Yet thy great Acts (maugre his malice) shine
As bright, Da obulu^^^ Bellisario v^^^ator, que^^ Inuidia, no^^ culpa
cac^^^^^it, form^^ suaepetition^^
and glorious as the Sunnie rays,
And Time both sees, and speaks thy lasting praise.
What though he made thee * beg from door to door?
Thou shall be rich in honor, he but poor.
367
Besides, God does Ingratitude detest*
But loves kind offices from man to man;
For sweetness, goodness, private States are blessed.
And much more Kings: Because, indeed they can
Do much more good: They measure not by the span
But by the Ell: And as their means are more,
With abler wings so must they higher sore.
368
And (O dear God, the fountain of all good)
How much obl^ged are these times to thee?
For our most blessed * Prince, JACOB. I.
of greatest blood;
And yet of greater virtue; Happy we,
Yea ten times happy, that have lived to see
So many rare perfections joined in One.
And that same-One to sit upon our Throne.
369
I do not purpose to per^ume my Rimes
With the false ^ash of servile Flattery,
I rather (...) too bold with these our Times.
But I appeal to Gods All-seeing Eye
(To which our closest drifts do open lie)
How my true Pen writes from my feeling heart,
When I (Great King) out shadow what thou art.
370
And (O) how blessed, how dear the heavens do love
That happy State, where virtuous Princes sway?
O sweet Experience, now by thee we prove,
We taste, we touch that blessing every day,
And grant (All-guiding God) that long we may
Long in himself, and so long in his Race,
Till Time unto Eternity give place.
371
But whither has my Zeal, my Souls desire
With fervent passion led my Pen astray?
To my first subject now I will retire,
And bring my Muse into the beaten way,
And ^ing of thy disaster, and decay;
O fatal Edward, whose Ill-gouern'd Crown
Both ruined others, and thy self cast down.
372
But yet of all the multiplicitie
Of several Ills, that do unhappy life;
There was no greater Infelicitie
Then was the false-hood of his faulty Wife,
"That bosom wound, that deadly-poyson'd knife
"That stabs the Soul, and never finds relief;
"But kills with outward shame, and inward grief.
373
O what a Chaos of Confused ill
Is in the Compass of this Sin Contained?
First, violation of GODS Sacred will.
Next Parents, Brothers, Sisters are defamed,
The Commonwealth by Bastardy is stayn'd.
Inheritances wrongfully possessed.
The Husband scorned, 6 Wife loathed, 7 And babes unblessed.
374
The festrous Sore grows to a dangerous head,
Now Mortimer begins to play his prise.
A brauer spirit Nature never bred,
Of goodly presence, to attract the Eyes,
Of sweet Discourse, wherein great Influence lies
Of high resolve, and of a noble heart,
No want of Nature, and all Aid of Art.
375
This was the Paris, which my Hellen won,
And this Promethius stole my heavenly fire.
This was the Eagle, ayring in the Sun,
"He Is more then man, that can restrain desire,
Especially, being waged by such a hire.
A Queen, and young, and fair, he is half a Jove
"Whom honor, youth, and beauty cannot move.
376
And (though there be no just excuse for sin).
Yet ISABELL, This will I say for thee.
"'It Is hardly kept, what many strive to win,
"The finest Cloth does soonest stain (we see)
Perhaps thou took'st thy President from me.
'Twas like for like: though in thee wrong It were
Yet was It right and just for me to bear.
377
Besides, He did employ all potent means
To undermine the bulwark of her breast,
And (O) that Sex too much by Nature leanes
To Change of loves: What need it be oppressed,
With winning Art? But men will do their best
To scale the Fort: And till the same be won,
"It is undone, desired: Repented done.
378
And after many sweet intising baytes,
When he had something diu'd into her heart,
He then fit opportunity awaytes,
To act the last, and best of all his part,
Wherein he was to show his Master Art.
Which having got: Thus he begins the field,
To conquer her, that of her self did yield.
379
Fair Queen (quoth. He) may I behold thy beauty?
Why not, (quoth she) The Sun is seen of all.
And shall I speak, respecting still my duty?
Why not (quoth. she?) Jove hears the Captive thrall?
Shall not disdain on my endeauours fall?
Fear not (quoth. she) great minds take all in worth,
Not Pearl, but Flint sends sparks of fire forth.
380
Then beauteous Queen, my words shall vent my woe,
I love: how sweet were that same sound from thee?
For once (quoth. she) I am pleased to play the Echo,
I love: It is no perfect point (quoth he)
The sentence wants, except your Grace adds: Me
You said not so, I made but repitition,
To greatest sums (fair Queen) needs no addition.
381
Why then (quoth. she) what is it that I should add?
Add fancy to affection gracious Queen,
Let not desire in tawny weeds be clad,
No suite becomes sweet Love, so well as green,
Add Love to love, Love will more lovely seem.
Believe me (sweet) stolen fruit contenteth most,
Then spare not that, which being spared is lost.
382
Ah Mortimer, Thou know (quoth. she) I may not.
Madame (quoth. he) I know you may, but will not.
What if I will? Why then sweet Queen delay not.
Edward will know: why say he does, It skils not:
Fame will defame: fame well may hurt, but kills not.
Danger may grow: That will indeere delight,
So darkest grounds make white to show more white.
383
Thou will be false: then Sun leese thou thy light,
Why being Eclipsed, thou know it often does so.
Let water burn: I know thou hitt'st It right,
From Englands Bathes such boiling waters flow,
Be Constant Moon, when I unconstant grow,
That fitteth well: She changing: You untrue:
Nay you the Moon, and I the man in you.
384
I Will cry: Do Madam, Shed some tears for joy.
You wrong me much, yet wronged you will not tell*
I pray thee leave: It Is but an Idle Toy:
It Is true: and Toys please Ladies passing well?
I cannot yield: No, women must but spell
Men put together: That Is my part to play:
I Will cry: I Will kiss, and so begin the fray.
385
You will: Nay then I must, because you will,
Women are weak (poor souls) and dare not fight
Who-euer rises, we go downward still,
And yet fond men will say, that we are light,
Well, it is our Fortunes, and the destines spite.
I am Content, because I cannot choose,
It Is best to take, what boots not to refuse.
386
Thus Mortimer did steal this fleece of gold,
That story (so applied) does Ill agree:
She rather was Medea, fierce, and bold,
And gave away that golden fleece: 'Twas she
That let another griffe upon my Tree
The fruit of sin, and shame; whence did proceed,
Matter, that made me both to blush, and bleed.
387
O woman! Thou art ever in extremes,
Either an Aetna or a Caucasus:
Or burning, like the Dog-starres fiery gleames,
Or like North winds too bleake, and boisterous.
Either too mirthfull, or too mischievous.
Yet of the twain (since needs thou will be such)
Thy fire is better, then thy frost by much.
388
Thy ouer-louing may prove Jealousy
And that is an amorous sickness, a kind pain,
But hatred Is the Dame of Cruelty,
And at the very Life-bloud still does Aim.
But leaving this: Go to thy Loomes again
Unwearied Muse: till thou have wou'n at will
The woeful story of poor Edwards Ill.
389
It Is not the Air, whereby we live, and breath,
It Is not the Earth, the Mother of us all,
Nor Stars above, nor is it Hell beneath,
Nor yet those Spirits which we our Demons call,
Nor chance, which seems to sway things casual.
That are the sole-efficients of our Evils
We, to our selves, are either Gods, or Devils*
390
But I was still the latter of the twain,
My selfe-wrought woe bears witness of the same.
And you great Lords, y^ lived, whilst I did reign
And were consumed with the furious flame
Of my enraged wrath, I will not blame
Your wayward Pride, nor yet my wives untruth.
My seed was Sin, my Crop was shame, and ruth.
391
And when did ever that accursed field
Bear other harvest, then such thriflesse weed?
Can poisoned fountains wholesome waters yield?
Or do not worms out of corruption breed?
Mischief the D^m pregnant with sinful seed.
Brings forth her daughter Misery at last,
And they are always glew'd together fast.
392
There can be no divorce between these twain,
They mix, or rather they incorporate.
Like to the Poles of Heaven it does remain
Constant and fixed: Sin is unfortunate,
Still drawing Judgments down, on each estate.
Which sometimes are deferred, not following straight,
But what time loses, is repaid with weight.
393
How many houses have bin raised by Sin,
And flourished fair, for one, or two discents.
But still the third unprosperous has bin,
And God has crossed them, with some strange events
Whereof these times yield many presidents.
But stay my Muse, If thou will shun offense
Thou must not meddle with the present Tence.
394
Speak of the Spencers mighty in their days,
Let Edward be the Subject of thy Pen.
Who did his Minions to such greatness raise
That the whole State was by them managed then,
As men with Counters, So do Kings with men,
Sometimes they stand for halfe-pence, and anon
What was but so, becomes a Million.
395
But when my Peers did see, how I was bent
To make base waxen wings to mount the sky,
Whilst their fair Plumes were plucked which vile contempt.
And they deprest with scorn and Injury.
To late-left Arms they got them by and by.
They moved war, the Spencers to remove,
Hate armed them, and I was armed by Love.
396
They levied men, I likewise men did levy.
Both raised all the Forces we could make:
A Tyrants hand (they say) was too too heavy.
A traitors head (I said) became a stake.
They vowed redress, I vowed revenge to take.
We met, and meeting fought, and fighting found,
No hurt more grieves, then does a selfe-wrought wound.
397
O English Peers! relinquish Impious Arms,
Build not your weightiest actions upon sand.
It Is not the Color of pretended harms,
Nor seeming zeal unto your Native Land.
Nor reformation (though you bear in hand
The people so) of some abuse of Laws
That can make lawful your unlawful Cause.
398
These are* (and ever have bin) those smooth Oils
With which foul treason seeks to paint her face:
That she might seem fair, pleasing, full of smiles,
So to win love, and gain the peoples grace,
Who silly Gudgions ever bite apace.
Until the fatal hook be swallowed down*
Wherewith Ambition Angles for a Crown.
399
Who ever practiced against Prince, or State
But always did pretend the Common good?
Thereby to draw into contempt, or hate.
The course of government, as then it stood.
This has been still the marrow, life, and blood
Of such Attempts: But here the rule stands fast,
"What Is thought-on first, Is executed last.
400
For when that once their private turn is served,
The care of Commonwealth Is laid aside,
That did but wh^t the knife, with which they carved
For their own good: That vizor did but hide
Some Secret ends, not fit to be discry'd
Until accomplished: which once brought to pass
The Common State stands as before it was.
401
And for to angle men, Crimes must be made
Against the Prince: I if he be without touch,
So that no just exceptions can be had.
Then must the Imputation rest on such
Who being near the Prince* are used much.
For this is certain: "They that stand on high,
"Are fairest marks for foulest obloquie.
402
But though the Arrow seems at them aimed,
Yet through their sides it wounds the Princes breast
Whose reputation cannot be but stained
By their reproach, whom they do favor best.
And they that kill the birds, would spoil the nest.
But what is intended, must be closely wrought,
And that pretended, which was never thought.
403
Why should vain man still daube his actions thus
With outward whit-lime, that are pitched within,
"Even wicked Kings must be Endured by us.
"What e're the cause be, Treason is a sin,
"Rebellious Arms cannot true honor win.
"The sword is not the Subjects: His defense
"In all extremes: Is Prayer, and Patience.
404
Therefore dear spirits, dye not your silver Arms
Into a Sanguine, with your Mothers blood.
Let not uncivil hands cause civil harms;
For private grief, confound not public good,
"Not all the water in the Ocean flood
"Can wash the Sin from you, and your Allies,
"For Treason lives, although the Traitor dies.
405
Sweet Trent! How were thy Christall-waters stained
With English-bloud, that was at Burton shed.
Let Burrow-bridge a Golgotha be named,
A field of death, wherein lay buried
So many people, and all Natives bred.
Against foreign foes, had those lives bin Employed;
We had not grieved, though they had nobly died.
406
At last, the doubtful victory proved mine,
The Barons lost the day, and lost their lives.
Their heads went-off, whose hearts did so repine
Against their Prince, "For treason seldom thriues,
"That great all-seeing God, whose knowledge dives
"Into the deepest secrets of the Soul,
"Unjust attempts in Justice does Control.
407
Great * Lancaster, Tho. Plantaginet Earl of Lancaster.
then whom. No greater Earl
This greatest Isle of Europe had before,
Good Lancaster: in goodness such a Pearl,
That him the vulgar sort did long adore,
Had then his head struck off, and many more
Even of the greatest, felt the selfsame stroke,
"So lightning spares the shrub* and rends ye Oak.
408
And here be pleased, to make this observation,
The Popular, and ouer-powerfull Peer.
That does Command too much in any Nation
Breeds in his Prince, both Jealousy and fear,
Is enuy'd even of those of his own Sphere.
Vntunes the vulgar: tumults the whole State,
And to himself proves most unfortunate.
409
That make-king * Warwick Richard (...) Earl of Warwick. (...)
having the English Crown
Pinned on his sleue, to place where he thought best,
Who set up * Princes, and did pull them down.
How did he toil the Land with his unrest?
How did his sword rip up his Mothers breast?
Whose greatness, and his popularitie
Wrought both his own, and others Tragedy.
410
O that we could not Instance in our days,
Then some of match-lesse virtues had not so
By popular dependancie, and praise
Bin drawn to fatal courses, full of woe,
Which caused their own, and others overthrow.
But wishes come too late, when things are done,
And men are borne to that, they cannot shu^.
411
"Yet prudent men a present use may make
"Of errors past: And they are truly wise,
"That do from others their Instructions take
"Not from themselves: It is too dear a price
"So to buy wit: Be ruled by my advice.
"Learn to be wise, yet not at thine own cost,
"But shun those ways where thou see others lost.
412
The sword was sharp, and wounded every where,
Many great men of noble quality,
In several places were beheaded here,
For being Actors in that treachery,
Which always proves a mournful Tragedy.
And though I know, The sword is due to such,
Yet should a Prince forbear to strike too much.
413
For often Executions in a State
Especially of men of fashion
First stir up pity, then dislike, then hate,
Then close complaint, then combination
Then follows practice for some Alteration*
And that Indaungers all, if not withstood:
And though unprosperous yet It spils much blood.
414
And that same Throne, that is often wet with bood
Is very slipp'rie, apt to catch a fall.
Yielding no hours rest, no pleasures good,
Sleeping on Thorns, and feeding upon gall.
Still thinking, and still thinking Ill of all.
Ha^^^ed with restless fears, whilst day does last
And then at night, with fearful dreams aghast,
415
Our Stories do report third Richard so,
And without doubt, He did too much let blood,
Always mistrustfull, both of friend, and foe.
Ready to strike them, that but near him stood,
Fearful to all, such was his furious mood.
And fearing all, as one that knew too well
How many souls did wish his soul in hell.
416
O that a Prince might see a Tyrants mind,
What Monsters, what Chimeraes therein are.
What horrors in his Soul, he still does find,
How much himself is with himself at war,
Ever divided, full of thoughtfull Care.
What Pistols, Ponyards, Poisons he conceits,
And thinks each one for his destruction waits.
417
Besides, It is indeed no Policy
(Except it be in a mere Turkish state)
To make the Crown a Common Butcherie,
To govern all by fear, which breeds hate
In noble minds, and does exasperate
A freeborn People: Where the Turkish race
Fear best Commands, being servile, poor, and base.
418
Princes rewards should fall like gentle Rain,
Which coming softly, does the longer last,
That their sweet relish might still fresh remain.
Their Executions should be done in have,
Like sudden furious storms, that soon are past.
Because, when once the violence Is done,
The offense thereof might be forgot and gone.
420
One limb of that great body, that did band
It self against me, in their factious frayes
Was Mortimer: Who yet upon Command
Came^ In before the fight, and I streight-wayes
Sent to the Tower, to spend his weary days
In wretched bands: restrayn'd from liberty,
But walls of stone keep not out Destiny.
421
Which either finds, or makes it self away.
For Mortimer, thus sent unto the Tower
To free himself does labor night, and day,
And by a sleepie Potion, which had power
To make men slumber, till a certain hour.
He found the means (his Keepers so made fast,
To make escape: and got to France at last.
422
This was not done without my Queens consent,
Whose head, and hand were working in the same.
Little thought I, That, that way the Hare went,
But Sir Stephen Segraue * only I did blame. Constable of the Tower.

Wretched mankind, how bold we are, to frame
Hopes to our selves: How blind to see our ill,
That least we fear, what most does hurt us still.
423
Do but Conceive, how much we strain at Gnats
And swallow Camels down without respect.
How hood-winck'd are we to discern those plats
That hurt us most, how ready to suspect
Our friends for foes, how apt we are to effect
Our own disaster: Mortimer goes free,
And others dye, that less had wronged me.
423
Observe the weakness of Mortality,
It sees but little, and It can do less.
Yet, I allow not of fatalitie,
Except that word be used to express
That all Commanding Power, that does suppress,
Support, set up, pull down, does all in all,
Even in those Actions, that seem casual.
424
Now did I think my self, my State as sure
As if great Atlas did uphold the same.
The dross being purged, my gold must needs be pure,
The smoke once gone, my fire must brightly flame
Their Eyes were out, ye marked, and marred my game.
They had no hearts to dare, nor tongus to preach,
Nor hands to fight, nor busy heads to reach.
425
But heartlesse, hapless, yea and headless too
Are those disturbers of our awful Reign.
Who would prescribe their Prince, what he should do,
And when, and where, and why, and whom refrain
Like (...), whom their Tutors do restrain.
"To play with Edg tools Is a dangerous thing,
"And it is no May ^game to Control a King.
426
Thus in a Calm, I feared no storm at all,
But yet too soon a sudden Cloud did rise.
From whence such store of wintry storms did fall
As for my shroud, no shelter might suffice,
Until pale Death had closed my tearefull Eyes.
O bring with you, who-euer reads my fall,
Sad thoughts, wet Eyes, and wailing words withal.
427
And thus It was: I sent my Queen to France,
And after her, The Prince my Son I sent,
To treat a Peace; but see the fatal chance.
They brought home War, although for Peace they went.
The Ambitious woman, she was fully bent
To have sole rule, and meant to put me down.
So Ninus once did loose both life and Crown.
428
There is more mercy in the Tigers claw,
Less venom in the Scorpions sting does lie,
More pity in the hungry Lions paw,
Less danger in the Basiliske his Eye.
Hiaena, that does call the goers by,
The Panthers breath, and Crocodiles false tears
Have truer hearts, then faithless women bears.
429
Let loosers speak, for they will not be let,
I lost my Crown, my Life I also lost,
My glorious rising had a gloomie set.
My Wife the Sea, wherein my bark was tossed,
The rock, wherein I suffered shipwreck most.
She Clitemnestra: Agamemnon I,
Whom false Aegistus foully caused to dye.
430
His part my Rival Mortimer did play
Whom ISABELL my Queen so well did love,
That still in France she meant with him to stay
As One that would the self same fortunes prove,
And move, no otherwise then he did move.
Mean while, The Cuckoe hatched in Edwards nest
And in my Boat his Oar was liked best.
431
They that enjoy, and joy in their own Loves,
Whose virtuous souls no secret sins do stain.
Who never did unlawful pleasures prove,
But truly loving are so loved again.
Thrice happy they, more true Contentment gain
Then those that have the change and choice of many
And using all, are never loved of any.
432
For streams divided run a shallower Course
Then they, that only in one Channel run.
A mind unchaste, does ever like them worse
That are obtayn'd, then those that are vnwonne.
Because, It thinks some pleasure is to Come
Which yet, it has not found; and never ill
Did seem so sweet, but something wanted still.
433
For how can Sin afford a full delight
When it is indeed a mere privation?
As well may darkness be the Cause of light,
And Heaven to Hell be turned by transformation,
As Wickedness yield perfect Contentation.
"The virtuous Pleasures are Complete and sound,
"And lawful is at last delightful found.
434
But Lust is deaf, and has no Ear to hear
The cunning Charmer, charm he nere so well.
Which did too much in Isabell appear.
Who did resolve with Mortimer to dwell
And both of them did labor to expel,
Me from my Kingdom: and to please the time
They made my Son the color of their Crime.
435
And here observe, the foul effects of Lust,
What Treasons, Murders, outrage from It springs,
How both to God, and man it is unjust.
How it defiles all States, Confounds all things
And at the last, to utter ruin brings.
How much more pure is that most holy fire,
Which God does bless, and men themselves desire.
436
I never heard of any he or she
Although themselves were lewd, and vicious
That ever wished their Offspring for to be
Like to themselves: but good and virtuous.
There Is some thing in the Soul, that works us
TO affect the good we had at our Creation,
Whereof (being lost) we wish a restoration.
437
As Mortimer, and Isabell my Queen
Practiced in France, so here they had their factions
Of Earls and Barons: Men of great esteem,
Both wise, and stout to manage any actions.
And the poor Commons (grinded with Exactions)
To Innovation were not easily led,
And nothing wanted, but an able head.
438
But he that was chief workman of the frame,
Which drew the plot at home for all the rest,
Who afterward did build upon the same
A Bishop was: Yet Churchmen should be best,
But oftentimes Sin lurkes within the breast*
When sacred Titles, and religious names,
Are but the Couers of uncomely shames.
439
'Twas * Tarlton, ADAM DE ORLETON or TARLTON, B^sh^p of Hereford.
whose great spleen, and working brain,
Was the Producter of this Monster first.
Who for some private wrong he did sustain.
An inward hate, and bosom treason nursed
Against his Prince: Which afterward did burst
Into those open flames, from whence did grow
As hateful Ills, as ever Age did show.
440
May then Religion be a Cloak for Sin?
Can holiest Functions serve but for pretenses?
Are Churchmen Saints without, and Diu'ls within*
Dare men make God a color for offenses?
Knowing with what fierce wrath he recompenses*
Even simple Sinners, that scarce know his will,
Then much more those, whose knowledge serves for ill*
441
Most reverend Priesthood, how art thou prophan'^
How comes thy glorious Luster so obscure,
That even thy very Title is defamed?
The Cause is plain: Profes^ors are impure,
Their lives do hurt, more then their tongues do cure*
For Laymen think all lawful that they do,
And with that thought, are easily drawn thereto
442
And so there grows a Confluence of all Sin.
For Sheep will wander, If the Shepherd stray.
Small Boats must drown, If great ships cannot swi^*
If Doctors fail, what shall poor Pupils say?
God help the blind, If clear Eyes miss the way*
Though Sin does ever draw with it, a Curse;
Yet does the Author, make the sin the worse.
443
But to my self: I doubted what to do.
(For weighty Causes challenge heedfull care)
I feared the French, I feared my Subjects too,
I wanted Crowns, the Sinnewes of the war.
Those that I had, I thought not good to sp^r^.
But freely sent them to the King of France,
For fear he should his Sisters part advance.
444
Whereby from thence she had no Aid at all.
O what a pleasing Orator is Gold?
How well he speaks, that tells a golden tale?
And yet, It loves not to be heard but told;
Although It sweetly sounds to young, and old.
Orpheus did make ye stones strange wonders do,
But this can move both stones, and Orpheus too.
445
Philip Macedon did besiege a Hold,
Which some did tell him, was not to be won.
He answers: If an Ass laden with Gold
Can come unto 't; The work is to be done.
Such is the heat, and luster of this Sun
That It does melt the hearts, and blind the Eyes
Both of the brainlesse vulgar, and the wise.
446
Which when my Queen, and Mortimer perceived
They leaving France, to Henault went for Aid.
And there with honor, they were well received,
Forces prepared, and Ensigns were displayed,
And Ships were rigged, and nothing was delayed
That might advance their Enterprise begun,
So deepest Seas with smoothest silence run.
447
They took the Sea, By Narwich in Essex.
and landed at the last
At * Orwell Hau'n, a deadly Gulf to me
And thither their Confederates did have,
Both Lords, and Commons seemed to agree;
As winds, and waves Consent, when wrackes shall be.
All turned their faces to the rising Sun,
Because my date was done, and I undone.
448
But when the voice of Eagle-winged fame
Did spread abroad the cause of their repair.
And seemed still to justify the same
By due succession of my Son and heir,
My hope to fear: My fear turned to despair.
And my despair on these two grounds was laid,
My Peers were false, my Partisans dismayed.
449
Then did I fly from London, where I lay,
Because they seemed partially affected,
And in my flight did often weep, and say,
To what hard haps art thou (poor Prince) subjected?
What gloomie Stars have thus thy State infected?
That they should hate, who ought to love thee rather,
A hapless King, a Husband, and a father.
450
Most mighty Monarkes have bin often distressed,
Who^ yet their wives have loved with tender Care,
And many in their matches cursed, are blessed
Yet in their Issue: But my case is rare,
In all of them my fortunes fatal are.
They hurt me most, that should protect me rather
A hapless King, A husband, and a father.
451
Some say, that Kings are Gods upon the Earth*
And Marriage quasi Merri-age some surmise.
God give us joy (they say) at Childrens birth.
What God am I whom traytrous men despise?
And Marr-age from my Marriage does arise.
There reap I Care, where most Content does gather,
A hapless King, a Husband, and a Father.
452
As thus I fled, My Queen pursues amayne,
So runs the Hare for life, the Hound for Prey.
Few followed me: But thousands were her train,
So Flies swarm thickest in a Sunshine day.
At last at Oxford, did she make some stay
With all her Troops: and did deliberate
What Course to take with me, and with ye State*
453
There did her Tutor Tarlton think it fit
Of their chief drift remonstrance for to make.
Who being of good Discourse and pregnant wit?
To broach the matter, first did undertake.
He Preached: His Text was this, My head does Ache,
Whereon dilating, he did seem to prove
That Subjects might an Aching head remove.
454
And in that Compass he included me.
And so Concluded, I should be Deposed.
A dangerous, and detested Heresy,
By some infernal fury first Composed
In Hell: Where long the monster lay enclosed.
Till Impious Spirits, swollen with insolence
To curb all Christian Princes brought it thence.
455
Why should such Devilish Principles be broached,
By them, that seem to bring Gods Embassy?
Why should the Pulpit be so much reproached
As to be made a place to tell a lie?
To serve a Turn, to sooth Impiety.
But they that only their own Ends affect,
Nor God, nor man, nor Heaven, nor Hell respect.
456
No worthy mind will charge me to disclose
With Cursed Cham my Fathers secret shame.
If my free Muse do somewhat touch at those
Of holy Church, whose Actions full of blame
Have soyl'd themselves (not function) with defame,
Nor is 't a wonder, though those blinded times,
Did hatch both monstrous men, and monstrous Crimes.
457
William whose Sword did seat him in this throne
Brought with him Odo Bishop of Bayon.
Whose Pride, whose lust, whose Irreligion,
Whose Symonie to buy the Sea of Rome
Incenst his Brother to just wrath: By whom
The aspiring Priest in Prison was restrained,
And not released, as long as William reigned.
458
And had that headstrong man bin still held in,
( Rufus) thy reign had bin more easy far.
For having head, he labored still to win
All discontented Spirits, (who ever are
Apt to take fire) unto a Civil war.
And the Corrupted humors drawn to a head,
In Prince and State great Inflammations bred.
459
When second Henry wore the Diadem
How did Ambitious Becket toil the State?
Who made the Pope to Interdict the Realm?
Who with the French King did Confederate?
Who underhand nursed man and wives debate?
Who drew the Son to Arms against the Sire?
'Twas Becket, that most kindled all this fire.
460
What bitter storms had almost wracked the state
By Clergy practice whilst King John did Reign?
Six years the Realm stood Excommunicate,
And under Interdiction did remain.
People and Peers drawn from their Sovereign.
Jews of France brought in to wear y^ Crown,
If by his forces John were shouldred down.
461
Who almost sinking with so rough a blast,
Finding himself unable to withstand.
To save his Crown, was forced at the last,
For to resign unto the Pope this Land,
And by a Rent to farm it at his hand.
Then all was well: The Clergy turn was served,
Jews was Cursed, and John had well deserved.
462
Do Kingdoms then serve but for Tennis-balles
For holy Church to racket up and down?
Must Scepters be disposed by Bishops Palles?
Or shall a Prince make forfeit of his Crown
If a proud Prelate chance to fret and frown?
If they can Carry it so, I like their wit;
But sure I am: It Is not by holy writ.
463
When Straw his base rebellious troops did gather
And drew the Commons to a dangerous head.
One Ball a Priest, or one of Baals Priests rather,
By those seditious Libels, which he spread.
By foolish doting Rimes he much misled
The vulgar sort, and made their madness more,
Which of It self did rage too fast before.
464
When* Lancaster King * Richard HENRY, 4.
did depose
His chief Assistant Thomas Arundell, RICH. 2.

Primate of England did absolve all those
That joined in that soul Action, to expel,
Their lawful King, and did in substance tell
The very Tale, that Tarlton first had told.
So often this Realm by them was bought, and sold
465
Whilst Humphrey Duke of Glouster ruled the Stat^
( Henry the Sixth then being under Age)
What bloody Tumults, what Intestine hate
Were here untimely raised by * Benforts rage Bishop of Winchester.

Which was so fell, that nothing could assuage
His rank'rous spleen, nor would he stint y^ strif^
Till by close practice Glouster lost his life.
466
Richard the 3. that did usurp the Crown,
And swom through blood to get the Kingly plac^
Had he not Shaw a Clearke of great Renown?
(Before that time high in the peoples grace)
Who at Pauls-Cro^^e did Bastard Edwards race.
Defamed the dead, forged, wrested, soothed up (...)
Ventured his Soul, a ^yrants Love to win.
467
But stay, I handle with too hard ^ touch
The Churches wounds, that now are fairly healed.
Then were the hood^winkt times: then were they such
In those dark days, now is ye truth revealed,
And now those former Errors are repealed.
And now the Sun illumines all our Clime
Most Learned Fathers answer you the time.
468
Be (as you should be) Lamps to give us light,
And shining Stars to grace our firmament,
Though you do teach, and we believe aright,
Yet minds unsettled sooner will be bent,
When they shall see your words, and works consent.
And therefore let your lives your faith express,
And prove by practice, what you do profess.
469
Nor speak I this, to tax this present Age
Either of Ignorance, or Indeuotion,
Let envy swell and burst with It Is own rage,
Yet my free Soul shall truly vent her notion
Those Reuered men, that now attain promotion
Are for the most part such, as do excel
As well in Learning, as in living well.
470
Whilst Mortimer, my Queen, and Tarlton played
Their pageant thus: The Current went so swift,
That I thought fit, until the fury stayed,
In some close-priuate place a while to shift,
And (for the land seemed Cross unto my drift)
I did resolve, by Sea to seek some Clime)
Where I might harbor, till some happier time.
471
And so I left the Land, and took the Seas.
But Sea and Land conspired unto my taking,
For neither plaints, nor prayers could appease
the winds, and waves, which fared, as they were making
Sharp war betwixt themselves: whilst I stood quaking
For fear least I the subject of their strife,
Should end their war, by ending of my life.
472
And yet, thrice happy had poor Edward bin,
If Death had ended then his weary days.
For cast on Shore in Wales: I lived unseen
In path-lesse woods, and unfrequented ways
With those few friends, whom whilome I did raise
Balduck, Reading, young Spencer, and no more.
Who in my fall, their ruin did deplore.
473
Of all the swarms, that followed Kingly Reign,
Of all the friends that faw'nd on awful pride,
Lo, only this poor Remnant did remain,
Whose ^ortunes glew'd to mine, made the^ to abide,
A true-loue knot, with sad affliction tied.
For wretched men Comp^ssionate each other,
And kind Compassion is affections mother.
474
O see, what quick-san^s Honor treads upon?
How Icie is the way, that Greatness goes?
A mighty Monarch late Attended-on
With supple hammes, smooth brows, submissiue shows,
For many followers, now has many foes.
For ^aw^ing friends, from falling fortunes run
As Persians used to Curse the setting Sun.
475
When Jove had made the chief of all his Creatures
Which we call Man: (A little world indeed)
The Gods did praise his well proportioned features
Each in their functions serving others need.
But prying Momus taking better heed
Observed at last one Error in his Art;
Because he made no windows in man's heart.
476
O that the glorious Architect of man
Had made transparent Glasses in his breast,
What place should be for Politicians then?
How should dissembling grow in such request?
And machiauillian Athiesme prosper best.
But temporising is the way to Clime,
There is no music without keeping time.
477
I shall not do amiss, If now I sing
Those heavy Anthemes our sad Consort made,
Whilst they did warble to their wretched King,
(As we did Sorrowing sit in silent shade)
The Sudden downfall, Reeling Greatness had*
Balduck(quoth I) ou^ of Philosophy,
Distill some medicine for our Misery.
478
Dear Prince (quoth he) whom late our Eyes beheld
In greatest Glory, that the world could see.
Whilst thou with awful Majesty did weild
The public State, let It no wonder be,
If some few Stars prove opposite to thee.
Since in their favor none so firmly stood,
But they have given them grief, as well as good.
479
Do but observe the Favorite of Chance.
Her chiefest Minion, highest in her Grace,
Philips great * Son, ALEXANDER.
whom she did so advance.
Who did subdue the East in little space.
Unto whose Arms the Amazed world gave place.
Whose Actions are the subject of all Stories,
He poys'ned dies amidst a world of glories.
480
I list not wade in telling tragic Tales
Suffices this: All greatness is unsure.
"Storms rage more fiercely on the hills, the^ dales.
"Shrubs better then high Cedars winds endure.
"Those Colors soonest stain, that are most pure.
"O let him graspe the Clouds and span the sky.
"That can assure himself felicity.
481
In all, that this same massy world does hold
There is a certain mixture to be found
Either of dry, or moist, or hot, or cold.
Of which, If any One too much abound
The body so affected proves unsound.
But being kept in just proportion
They do maintain a healthful union.
482
So fares It in our fortunes, and our State,
Nothing is simply sweet, or simply sower.
Our weal is mixed with woe, our love with hate,
Our hope with fear, and weakness with our power,
"Bright Moons breed mists, y^ Sunshine morn a shower.
And as there is an Autumn, and a Spring.
So change by course is seen in every thing.
483
The wind that is now at South, will change to Nore,
The greenest grass will turn to withered Hay,
The Seas both ^bbe and flow at every shore.
The Moon does wax and waine, yet not decay,
Day draws on night, and night draws on the day.
Our selves once babes, now men, now old, straight none,
Do plainly prove a change in euery-one.
484
Wise Politicians, and deepe-sighted Sages
That have discourst of Commonwealths with Care,
Both of our time, and of precedent Ages,
Observe in them a birth, when first they are,
A growth, which often extends very far.
A s^ate, wherein they stand, and change withal,
And then at last, A final fatal fall.
485
Rome had her being first from Romulus,
Her growth, from Consuls, that were annual*
Her State most flourished in Octa^ius.
Many Conuersions, Three most principal,
From Kings to Consuls, Last Imperial.
And (O) who sees not she is ruined,
And in her ruins now lies buried?
486
The greatest, and best grounded Monarchy
Has had a Period, and an overthrow.
"There is no Constant perpetuity
"The stream of things is carried to and fro,
"And does in euer-running Channels go.
If then great Empires are to changes bending
What weaker States are warranted from ending?
487
Ruins of Kingdoms, and their fatal harms
From one of these same causes do arise.
From Civil fury, or from foreign Arms
Or from some plague doomed from the angry skies,
Or worn by wasting time dissolved dies.
For as the fruit once ripe falls from the Tree.
So Commonwealths by Age subverted be.
488
If these be Rocks that shipwreck Monarchies,
Are private States exempted from the same?
Where lives the man has such Immunities?
It Is hard to escape vnscorch'd in Common flame,
Or parts to stand, when ruined is the frame.
Those public harms that Empires do decay
In private states do bear a greater sway.
489
Five hundred years some that are curious wise,
Would have the Period of a public State.
And they appoint for private families
Some Six, or Seven discents the utmost date,
I dare not so precisely Calculate.
But without doubt there is a fixed Time,
In which all States have both their Even and Prime.
490
Let these be motives (O dejected great^One)
To calm the Tempest of thy stormy Care,
And though I must confess it well may fret-one,
Thy past and present fortunes to compare;
Yet, since in all things changes common are.
Think Ebbed estates may flow, and think withal,
What happ's to One, to every-one may fall.
491
Thus Balducke ceased, and Reading thus begun
(But first his eyes dew'd down a weeping rain)
O thou (once glorious now Eclipsed) Sun
Now thou art clouded, yet may clear again,
With Courage therefore hopeful thoughts retain.
For often those winds y^ draw the Clouds together,
By their disperse occasions fairer weather.
492
But I intend no Comment on this Text,
Nor will I harrow that which he did sow;
What I apply to thy sad Soul perplexed
With those dismayes that from thy Fortunes flow,
Out of the assured grounds of truth does grow*
Then make good use thereof, and learn thereby
This Sovereign Salve for thy sad melody
493
All things, that boundless thought can once conceive,
Sacred, profane, of Elements composed,
Unbodied Spirits, or what else does receive
A being: when, or where, or how disposed,
Within one Triple Circle are enclosed.
Being Eternal, or perpetual,
Or else indeed but merely Temporal.
494
That is Eternal, which did not begin
Nor ever ends: and only God is so,
"Who has for ever, and from ever bin,
"VVho^ no place circumscribes, nor times forego
"Nor limits bound, nor thoughts can fully know.
"Whom we so much the more ought to admire
"How much the less to knowledge we aspire.
495
That is perpetual, which in time began,
But never any time shall end again.
Such are the Angels, such the Soul of man,
Such are those Spirits, that live in restless pain
Rebellions Spirits, against their Sovereign.
All these were formed, as pleased the makers will,
Once to begin, but to continue still.
496
Lastly, those things are counted Temporal,
Which has beginnings, and shall have their ends,
And in that rank, the world it self shall fall.
So honor, riches, strength, Allies and friends,
All which by Nature to corruption bends.
And in this sense, It Is true Philosophy,
"What does begin, shall end most certainly.
497
And therefore make not things so weak and vain
To be thy God, as if they were Eternal,
Nay, do not prize them, as an equal gain
Unto thy Soul, which Is perpetual,
But hold them, as they are but Temporal
And since their Nature is, to cease to be,
Think, they observe but their due course with thee.
498
The spacious world Is Fortunes Tennis-Court,
Men are the Balls, which with her Racket (Time)
Sh^e tos^es too and fro, for his disport,
Some times above, some times beneath the line,
Now bounding, straight struck dead, but yet in fine,
All go into the hazard, that is the grave,
And they once gone, she other balls must have*
499
Now we are those, with whom she plays her set,
And she does ply us with hard strokes amain,
Yet thereby may we this advantage get*
Not to depend on her, that is so vain
Whose fa^our, soon is won, soon lost again.
Then let us not fix our affections here,
But let our hopes move in a higher Sphere.
500
So silenc'st he: and then spoke Spencer so,
To my discourse (dear Prince) vouchsafe thine Ears,
And since we all do share alike in woe,
Let me have leave, to tune my voice like theirs.
"United forces greater virtue bears,
And all of us level our Aims at this,
To make thee think the world, but as It is.
501
Which (O) that our experience proved not true,
Would we did sit upon the quiet strand,
And thence behold the wrack like to ensue,
And pity others, we secure on Land;
But now our states in doubtful hazard stand
Succeeding Ages in our fall may read,
"How all things hang but by a slender thread.
502
Such in the sad-condition of each state
Annexed to It, by Eternal doom,
Which is enrolled in the book of Fate,
From whence, our least occurrents here do come
That happen from the Cradle, to the Tomb.
For though our fortunes seem but Casual,
The finger of the highest is in all.
503
And it is a work of his All-guiding will,
Whose boundles knowledge sees what is the best,
In our whole life to mingle good with Ill,
Contents with crosses, quiet with unrest,
Least we should hold the world in such request.
That for the same, we should abandon Heaven
And sour our selves, with too much earthly Leau'n.
504
For who sees not, how much the world bewitches?
Who feels not, how the flesh is apt to yield?
Especially, made insolent with riches,
How hard It is Prosperity to weild?
How proudly fights Sin with such a shield?
When lustful ease, hot wines, and stirring fare
Are Satan's baits, to draw us to his snare.
505
We may even of our selves an instance make,
When did we entertain such thoughts as these?
Oh, when did we this Theme for Subject take?
When sin begot with greatness, nursed with ease,
Confirmed with use, did seek all means to please.
The present humor, that did most delight,
And framed our minds according to our might.
506
But now afflicting sorrow does assail us,
We tune our Consort to another key;
We change our minds, because our means do fail us.
And those lewd motives being removed away
Which did induce us so to run astray.
We now recall our wandering thoughts again,
And from our troubles take our truest Aim.
507
O sad afliction, though thou seem severe,
Yet oftentimes thou draw'st us unto God,
"Who strikes, for to instruct, and Clouds, to clear.
"So does the tender father use the rod
"So bitterest herbs in medicines o^t are sod.
Of easy Reins who does no reckoning make,
Must needs be ridden with a rougher brake.
508
We were too full of rust, and sinful soil,
Which like a Canker eats into the Soul,
Our gracious God is pleased to use this file
To take that rust off, that did make us foul,
And since his Actions are without Control.
Let Us meet his blessed will without submission,
For he knows best, what is best for our condition.
509
If thus thou do^st account, thou reck'nest even,
And thou shall sum thy Sorrows with delight.
"God strikes on earth, that he may stroke in heaven,
"He gives a Talent, when he takes a mite.
And least thy Soul should live in endless night,
He sends his Herald only to this end,
That thou may be his follower: He thy friend.
510
He ceased: I said: Spencer I find It true,
Even from my self I can the proof derive,
"Calamity does fashion us anew,
"Remorcefull grief, into the Soul does diue
"And sorrow makes repe^tant thoughts to thrive.
"But full-fed men, and fortunes soaring high,
"Care neither how to live, nor how to dye.
511
I must confess the truth: The time has bin
Whilst my sweet-canded Fortune lasted still,
I never thought on things, that were unseen,
I only was obsequious to my will,
My sense my God: whose lusts I did fulfill.
And my deluded Soul did place it is good,
Only in that, that pleased my wanton blood.
512
How often did I plot Impiety?
And fashion It, upon my sinful bed,
Still hunting after ^resh variety.
Longing to act, what was in fancy bred,
How much were all occasions welcomed?
By which, I might add heat unto my fire,
And still new forms, were framed by new desire.
413
And that, I might do Ill without Control,
Without all check, or touch of Conscience,
How often did I say unto my Soul?
Enjoy a present good: Be ruled by sense;
Not by opinion, or conceit, from whence
Some curious brains have forged strange Novelties,
But be thou wise, and follow realties.
514
But Spencer, now I find, I was a fool,
And like Ixion did a cloud Embrace.
Calam^tie has set me to a School
Where (though I feel more grief) I find more grace.
And now I see, how wretched was my case,
Whilst being bewitched with false felicity,
I thought Religion but mere policy.
515
But now my Soul groans with the weight of sin,
And I lie prostrate at my Makers feet.
I do confess, how sottish I have bin,
How my distaste has taken sower for sweet,
I find a God, whose Judgments now I meet.
Damned Atheist, thou that say, There is no God
Thou will confess one, when thou feel'st his rod.
516
Let Pharoh live at rest, and he will wage
War against heaven: and ask who Is the Lord.
Nay more, and more, the Tyrant still will rage,
Till God draw forth his sharp auenging sword,
Till his just plagues no breathing time afford.
Then* I have sinned, Pray for me, Let them go.
And then, who God Is, Pharoh learnes to know.
517
So does the Sharpest bryer hear sweetest Rose,
And bittrest Po^ions purge the body best*
How woundrously does God his works dispose
That even by Crosses he can make us blessed?
And hatch our chiefest joy in sorrows nest,
Then let us not repine against his doom,
But weaue our web, as he has warped our loome.
518
And Reading, of the world thou read'st aright.
It is indeed, but merely temporal,
And those dear pleasures, wherein men delight,
Friends, honors, riches, all are Casual,
And as they have their honny, so their gall.
There Is nothing certain in the world but this,
"That every worldly thing uncertain Is.
519
Whom Rosy Phoebus rising in the East
Has seen aloft in glory and renown,
Before he took his lodging in the West,
Has often seen as low dejected down*
That man, that in the morning wore the Crown*
Had not er'e night, nor Crown nor head to wear,
So full of frailties are our fortunes here.
520
These were our parlies as we sat alone,
These tearefull Tributes duly were defraid,
Now did we walk, and weep, now sit, and groan
Till faithless Welsh me (friendles wretch) betrays
Unto their hands, who straight, ways me conueys
To K^nnelworth, where I imprisoned lay,
And never after saw one happy day.
521
The proof whereof we do not only see,
But by a self experience we do feel,
Others to us have taught, others shall be
Informed by us? how that part of the wheel
That Is now aloft, does straight ways downward reele*
And never rests at any certain stay,
But up and down wears out a weary way.
522
The Spencers both the Father, and the Son
Descended of an ancient worthy race,
By whose directions all designs were done,
And nothing past without their special grace,
They were so great in power, so high in place.
Both died such wretched deaths, as men may say*
A gloomie night shut up a glorious day.
523
To use the French-mans phrase, under an Oak
They both of them at several times did dye,
Their Bodies quartered by the Hangmans stroke*
Their Heads cut off, were placed very high;
As Spectacles, for every envious Eye.
Which done, says form of Law by lawless will,
Though they deserved It, was unjust and Ill.
524
The Son ( Glosters proud Earl) so great before,
Had a white Paper fixed upon his head.
Wherein (both to disgrace and grieve him more)
In * Capital letters were Caractred Quid glori^^vis potens i^^ moliti^ ^ud^

Those words, that in one of the Psalms are read;
For so the two and fiftieth does begin,
Thou Mighty Man, why do thou boast i^ Sin?
525
Unhappy Lord, It was enough to dye,
It was too much, to dye with s^orne and shame.
"Men should not trample upon misery,
"Since every Mothers Son may share the same,
I know he was in many things too blame.
Proud, griping, cruel, Well: Say what you can,
Yet give me leave to say: He was a man.
526
I write not Idly, do not read me so;
I pray observe, upon what slipperie way,
"Greatness, (that is too great) does ever go
"How apt It is to catch a fall, and they
"That so do slip, how readily they may
"Break their own necks: without especial grace,
"They fall not soft, that fall from an high place.
527
Besides, who will observe the Course of things
From Conquering Williams Raig^e, til this our age,
Shall find, how those great Favorites of Kings



Such dangerous humors swelling greatness breeds.
528
Thou shall not need, to travail very far
To fetch in matter, to inform thy mind*
Of which, our Stories true relaters are,
Study but them, Thou shall not fail to find
Particular Examples, in each kind*
I am, but as an Index to a Book
To point thee too 't: Turn thou the leaves and look.
529
Ask Wolsey, Ask Lord Cromwell, Both will say
That Princes Minions do but hold at will.
That, favors never were Free holds, but they
Are soon transferred from one to another still;
That, as the wind does change* So must the Mill.
Be turned about, and euery-one does know,
"Winds do not always in one quarter blow.
530
Empson, and Dudley flourished very fair,
And mighty were, during seventh Henry's reign;
But he being dead, his next succeeding Heir
Did cut them down, and they did fall again.
They had their waxing, and they had their wane.
And for the vulgar rage, who does not know,
How many mighty men have perished so.
531
I was my self deposed by Parliament
From Princely rule, as one not fit to reign
Both Peers, and people, all did give consent,
That I vnking'd in durance should remain,
And sent their Agents to me, to explain
That if I would not to my Son resign,
They Would choose a Prince out of some other Line.
532
O Englands Peers, weigh what you take in hand,
Look but with Judgment, into your design,
That which you now attempt, will wrack the Land
The wounds whereof, will bleed in after-time,
And Babes unborn, will Curse your hateful crime.
For what so does pervert the course of things
Wrath, Envy, death, and desolation brings.
533
There is a lawful, and a certain right,
Which always must be kept Inuiolate.
And being infringed by practice, or by might*
Draws fearful Judgments down upon a State.
Then you, or yours will wish (although too late)
That I had kept my rightful Interest still,
And you had not bin Agents in this Ill.
534
When your own children shall each other wound
And with accursed hands gore eythers breast;
When Civil fury shall your state confound,
Then will you say; His Ghost is not at rest
His, whom unjustly we have dispossessed.
The second E^wards: for whose Sacrifice
Your N^phews then shall pay a bloody price.
535
Never (O never) was the rightful Course
Of this our Crown perverted, or suppressed.
But still the same has bin the fatal source
Of many mischiefs, and of much unrest.
And as the Land has bin therewith oppressed
So the usurpers never kept it long
In any quiet, what they got with wrong.
536
William who with his sword did get the Crown,
Winning by Conquest, what he kept with Care
(The true and lawful heir being shouldred down)
Like a wood-Lyon (His own word) did fare
Against the English, whom he did not spare
Or young, or old, that were of worth, and place.
And for the rest, He yoked with bondage base.
537
And as he toiled the Land, with his unrest,
So tasted he his share of misery.
Robert rebels: a Byrd of his own nest,
The Normans break forth into mutiny,
T^^' opressed English hatch conspiracy.
Always in Foreign broils* or Civil strife,
And so wastes forth a wretched weary life.
538
Nay Death, the Period-maker of all moan
Even against Nature, follows him with spite,
The mighty Prince of thousands waited-on
Being dead, Is left alone forsaken quite,
No Son, no friend, to do him his last right.
None, that vouchsafed to give him burial,
But unregarded lay, despised of all.
539
Nay more, The ground where he should be Interred
Anselme Fitz-Arthur(his dead bones to spite)
Claimed as his own, (A thing not ever heard)
And for the Prince (there dead) by lawless might
Had worm'd him out of that, which was his right.
On Gods behalf, He did forbid them all
Within his Earth, to give him burial.
540
Nor would he cease the challenge he had made,
Nor yet, durst they interre his Corpse therein,
Until a sum of money was defrayed
With which, they paid a ransom for his sin
So much a do had this great Prince to win
That which none does the poorest wretch deny.
A bed of peace, where his dead bones might lie.
541
Nor was the stream of misery thus stayed,
The date of our Affliction lasted still.
There is not yet, sufficient ransom paid,
The Ill-got Scepter, must be swayed as Ill,
Rufus succeeds, and still more blood does ^pill.
Still hauocks more, and still does Tyrannize,
Until by sudden violence, he dies*
542
Nor did the Crown stand well on any head,
Till * Ben. Clarke got the Scepter in his hand, HENRY, 1.

Who to the Saxon Maude being married.
Some beams of comfort cheered the drooping Land,
And then our State in peaceful terms did stand.
Till Henry died: and Steephen unjustly got*
The Crown, and set new troubles here on foot.
543
Then burst there forth, an all consuming flame,
The Empress Ma^de sought to require her right.
Steephen had the Crown, and he would keep the same;
Until She could recover It by fight.
Then followed all the hostile Acts of spite.
Sword, fire, Rapes, murders, leaguers, wast and wrack.
And nothing of extremest Ills did lack.
544
So has unjust Succession scourged this Realm
At length Steephen dies, after a wretched Reign
Then Second Henry wears the Diadem,
In whom, the rightful Title did remain,
And then our state did happy fortunes gain.
Then did our strength increase, our bounds extend;
And many nations to our yoke did bend.
545
And Richard his brave Son did next succeed
In a just Course, and all things prosper'd well.
In S^ria he did many a worthy deed,
The Eastern world of his exploits can tell,
And many thousand miscreants sent to Hell,
By his unconquered Arms: have proved long since
That Cure-De Lion was a peerlesse Prince.
546
He dead, young Arthur should have had ye Crown,
The Son of Ieffrey, who was Henry's Son
Had not King John his Uncle put him down,
Who being hauld on by Ambition
Diuerts the Course of true succession*
Makes himself King usurps the Princes name,
And murders Arthur, to secure the same.
547
And now (O now) begins our Tragedy,
Where Death and horror only Actors are.
John gouernes (as he got) preposterously
And does both with his Peers, and Clergy jarre.
Then Ianus sets wide^ope the gates of war.
And then the Land with blood was overflowed,
And none could safely call his own, his own.
548
Then were the Cities sacked, the fields laid wast,
The Virgins forced, the Marriage bed defiled.
Then were the ancient Monuments defaced.
The Ports vntraffick'd landed up, and spoiled.
Even God himself seemed hence to be exiled.
The land was Cursed, all Sacred rights were bard
And Six years space, no public prayers were heard.
549
Then did the King lease forth the Realm to Rome.
Then did the Peers to France betray the Crown.
O heavens great King, how fearful is thy doom?
How many mighty Plagues can thou power down
Upon a Nation, If thou please to frown.
Arthur, It was the wrong done thee of late,
That made just Heaven so to afflict our State.
550
But yet, might not his death that did the deed,
Be a Peace-offring to redeem the Sin?
Why should the Land of ye one wound still bleed?
Or wherefore died not his offense with him?
Was not the measure heap'd-vp to the brim
Both of the Ills he suffered, and had done,
But that the guilt must prosecute the Son?
551
O no: Although third Henry was the man
In whom, The lawful Title was Invested
(For Arthur dead, the right was then in John
And John decea'sd, the same in Henry rested)
Yet, that the world should see, ^ow God detested
Such wrongful means, Acts so unjustly done,
The Fathers whip is made to lash the Son.
552
For still did Civil fury wound the state
During the time of Henry's pupillage,
And still the Peers swollen with Intesti^e hate
Against their harmless Prince, being under age
Co^bine themselves with France: and when that rage
Was spent, the Barons-warre brake forth again,
So full of troubles was third Henry's reign.
553
He dead, my Father Long-shankes then did reign,
And in due Course succeeded next his Sire;
Then all afflictions did begin to waine,
And England did to peace and wealth aspire.
Nor did the stream of bliss flow ever higher:
Then when first Edward managed the State,
Prudent in Peace, and in wars fortunate.
554
That Noble Prince to me my birth did give,
Whom I succeeded in a rightful line.
You all have sworn Allegiance whilst I live,
And will you now enforce me to resign?
Will you again with wicked hands vnt wine
That Sacred chain, whereon depends our good,
And drown this Island once again in blood?
555
O, If you do disorder thus the Crown,
And turn the lawful course another way.
If you unjustly wring from me mine own,
You spinne a Thread, to work our own decay
And my propheticke Soul does truly say
The time will come, when this unjust design;
Will plague your selves, your sons, and mine own line.
556
For from my Stock two branches shall arise
From whom shall grow such great disunion,
As many thousand lives shall not suffice
To reunite them both again in One,
England shall wast more dear blood of her own,
Against her self, then would suffice to obtain
All France, and conquer Germany, and Spain.
557
Thou were too true a Prophet fatal King,
And thy Presages were too ominous.
From thee, and from thy worthy Son did spring
Those Families, that so afflicted us;
For York and Lancaster litigious
For the Crowne-right, did make the Sword their plea,
And so white Albion grew to be a Red Sea.
558
But when that men are bent to do amiss,
Then all persuasions are but spent in vain.
The Parliament was resolute in this
That I their King no longer should remain.
Whereto If I opposed my self: 'Twas vain.
They were resolved: And my perverseness might
Make them perhaps to do my Son less right.
559
Which when I heard, think how my soul did war
Within It self, which way I should incline.
Dear was my Son, my self was dearer far,
By my Eclipse must I procure his shine?
Cannot he reign, unless I now resign?
My Father died e're I could get the Crown.
I live: And yet my Son must put me down.
560
My Son? (Alas poor Prince) It is not he,
For many Wolves mask in that Lambs attire.
Proud Mortimer,'It Is thou vncrownest me.
Luxurious Queen, This is thy foul desire,
And moodie Tarleton(bellows of this fire)
It Is you that are the marrow of this sin
My Son does serve, but for the outward skin.
561
You are the wheels that make this Clock to strike
My fatal hour; The last of all my good,
For this is not the height of your dislike.
"Death is the fruit, when Treason is the bud,
"Such practices do always end in blood.
"When others stumble, Kings fall headlong down
"There is no mean betwixt a Grave and Crown*
562
"For this is certain: Sin does always find
"Within It self sufficient cause of fear.
"'It Is dangerous, to trust a guilty mind.
"The Creditor removed, the debt's thought clear
"Men hate who^ they have wronged, and hating fear
"And fearing will not cease, till they have proved
"All means, by which the cause may be removed.
563
Therefore, would I might lead a private life
In some sequestered place, which none might see.
Where I may seek, to reconcile the strife
That Sin has made, betwixt my God, and me.
For if the ransom of my Crown might free
My life from slaughter, little would I grieve,
"There Is none so wretched but desires to live.
564
And yet why should I loose or life or Crown?
Are lives, or Crowns so light and easy losses?
It Is vain to ask, why fortune list to frown,
Or to dispute the causes of our Crosses*
When Ships at Sea, storms winds and billows tosses
It boots not ask, why winds and storms should rise,
"All ruling heaven respects not human whyes?
565
Cato would know a reason of the Gods
Why Pompey should by Caesar vanquished be?
Whose cause was better (as he thought) by odds.
Cato, thou see Events, thou can not see
Their causes: They are kept reserved from thee,
In Gods close Cabinet, being safely laid;
And he must not be questioned, but obeyed.
566
The stately Steed that champs the steely bit,
And proudly seems to menace friend and foe,
Does fling, and foame, and boundeth often, and yet
Poor beast perforce he is enforced to go.
Even so fared I: and since It must be so,
As good the same should seem to come from me,
'Twas best to will, what against my will would be.
567
And so I made a solemn resignation
Of all my right and Title to my Son,
And there withal an earnest Protestation
(Which was with sighs, and weeping tears begun)
How much I grieved, that I had so misdone,
As to procure thereby my Peoples hate,
And so be thought unworthy of the State.
568
Which since I was, I willingly would give
Unto my Son my throne of Majesty;
Desiring them, to give me leave to Live,
And not too much tread on my misery:
For I had once their Faith, and fealty.
Which, though I now discharged, and set them free,
Though not obey, yet should they pity me.
569
The Crown had often made my head to Ache,
And I prayed God, my Son felt not the same.
Whom they should not less value for my sake,
Since by his virtue he might salve my shame.
And well I hoped, my President would tame
All youthful humors, which are easily led
Unto those courses which Confusion bred.
570
And here, (though grief my senses did o'rewhelm
And I did swo^ne, e're forms could finished be)
Yet * Thomas Trussell Knight for all the Realm Speaker of the Parliament.

Did then renounce Allegiance unto me
And of all Faith and Service set men free.
My Steward brake his staff: my State before
Was now discharged, and I was King no more.
571
Mark what pretenses wrong can make of right,
How loath men seem against Justice ^o offend.
O Sacred virtue! Thou art full of might,
When even thy foes thy Title will pretend,
As if thy only shadow could amend
All Impious Acts: But now it is grown an use
Thou must be made a Bawd unto abuse.
572
Well, well wise Politickes! With formal shows
Your lawless Actions you have gilded over.
And now the stream in a smooth channel goes.
My resignation now does fairly Cover
Your foul Abuse: But Time will truth discover.
That Is current now, that will not always go,
"Forms serve for men: God Is not served so*
573
Your hands can not wipe off the holy-Oyle
Which he has laid on Kingly Majesty.
Nor your devices wash away the soil
From your own Souls of wilful Perjury
To God: To me of Infidelity.
Use all your Art, you never can get free
From that just Oath* you gave to God, and me.
574
When I had thus departed from my Crown,
I did bewail the wayning of my State.
Poor Prince (said I) how low art thou cast down
From that high Heaven, which thou inioy'dst of late?
Thou have no prospect, but an Iron-grate.
Thy costly Hangings, ragged walls of stone,
And all thy solace, solitary moan.
575
Now of a Cushion thou must make a Crown,
And play the mock-king with it on thy head.
And on the Earth (thy chair of State) sit down,
And why not so? Since thou art Earthly bred.
But for a Scepter how will thou be sped?
Why, take a brand, and shake it in thy hand,
And now, thou art a King of high Command.
576
All guiding Heaven what change do I endure?
Once wealth at will: But wealthy now in want.
Then men my pleasure, now my pain procure.
Then sumptuous houses, now one Chamber scant.
Then thoughts of rest, now restless thought does plant
The sad remembrance of my wretched fate,
What now I am, and what I was of late.
577
Me thinks, the Birds vpbraid me in their songs
And early sing my shame in every place.
Me thinks, the waters murmr forth my wrongs,
And in their course discourse of my disgrace.
Me thinks, the Sun does blush to see my face.
The whistling winds (me thinks) do witness this,
"No grief so great, as to have lived in bliss.
578
When I complain to Echo of head-aking,
She sounds a King: And yet no King am I.
In silent night, when I my rest am taking,
I dream of Kings, yet I vnking'd does lie.
And till sweet sleep seales-vp my weary Eye.
I cannot fix my thought on any thing,
Bu^ tells me straight; that once I was a King.
579
That once I was, (aye me) that now I am not,
And now I am not, would I had bin never.
Less feels he want, that yet to plenty came not.
"To have bin happy: Is unhappy ever,
But to forget my self I will endeavor.
One of the Souls perfections, Memory
Is unto me a Cause of misery.
580
Restless remembrance, how do thou torment
The feeling Soul, with a sad apprehension
Of former pleasure, present discontent?
Of many wrongs in Act, more in Intention
And they without all compass of prevention.
"It is some Comfort (though a wretched one)
"To know, Our sorrows are at their high-noone.
581
"But to feel misery in a high degree,
(And sure, I am not senseless of my smart)
"Yet still to fear, that It will worser be,
"Is a most eating Corr'siue to the heart.
But (O) my thoughts why do you bear a part
In these sad dumpes: This plain-song only sing,
I was not borne, nor shall I dye a King.
582
So when the tempest of my stormy passion
(Which at the first, wrought strongly on my sense)
Was somewhat calmed, then I in better fashion
Began to sift the moving Causes, whence
My great disasters did at first Commence.
And after such a serious scrutinie,
I found, That Sin had caused my misery.
583
I did forget my duty to my God,
My Subjects they neglected theirs to me.
It was high time for him to use the rod,
And lash me me foundly: When that he did see
How milder medicines could not work on me,
"When the still growing Gangreane hazards life,
"The skillful Surgeon needs must use the knife.
584
I writ awry, and God has ruled me thus
With his blacke-lead, to make my lines more straight,
"It is a Justice sweet and gracious,
"To make a daring Sinner feel the weight
"Of his own sins; and so unload the freight
Wherewith the burd'ned Soul, did sink before
"The more we feel, humbled we are the more.
585
And God is gracious, when by punishments
He makes the Sinner see his woeful case
Who upon sight and sense thereof repents;
Humbling himself before the Almighties face,
And that makes way unto ensuing grace:
For then does CHSIST that good Samaritan
Power Wine and Oil into the wounded Man.
586
When the seared Soul (that feels no smart at all,
But is by pleasure nusled in its Ill)
Does still remain a poor Captiued Thrall
To Sin, and Satan: Who commands him still
Both in his understanding, and his will.
Till at the last comes death, and rings his knell;
Who living fears not, dying finds Hell.
587
This I know true, by selfe-experience;
For being thus mur'd up in misery.
I then began to have a feeling sense
Of mine own Sins: which blinded liberty
K^pt from my sight: Or did so qualify,
That I did hold my self in best estate,
When my condition was most desperate.
588
But seeing now my danger: I began
To cast about, how to prevent the Ill.
I found, there was nor help nor hope, in man;
For they that wronged me now, would wrong me still,
And they had able means to work their will.
At last I found a Supreme Dietie,
Who could or mend, or end my misery.
589
O then my Soul, advance thy thoughts to heaven.
If there be hope of help, there it does rest,
And only by that hand it must be given
That festred sore, that matters in thy breast?
That worm with-in thee, will not let thee rest.
Till thy Repentance, makes thy peace with God
And thou can bless his hand, and kiss his Rod.
590
Heau'n-seeking Soul, (whoeuer that thou be)
Let me acquaint thee with one meditation.
Which was like Ajax's buckler unto me
A seu'n-fold shield, temp'red in such a fashion
As did abate the Edge of all temptation.
And this It was: As I sat musing long,
My heart grew hot, and I spoke with my tongue.
591
Number the Moates, that in the Sunbeams fly.
Number the Sand, upon the beachy shore.
Number the sparkling Diamonds of the sky.
But number not my sins: for they are more,
Yet join in one, Moates, Sands, Stars, Sins, All ^oure.
Nay, be they many more, then all these are,
The mercies of my God are more by far.
592
And mine he is: and all those mercies mine,
Not by deserving worth, that is in me;
But by that Interest, which is truly thine
(O blessed JESUS) and transferred from thee
To me most sinful wretch: So mine they be.
So God is mine: And this I fully know,
Because my blessed JESUS makes him so.
593
But how comes JESUS to be thine? By faith,
Which Apprehends him, and applies him too.
That may be false: O no: The Spirit says
(The Sacred Spirit) That all which he did do
Whilst he did live, And all he suffered too
By his free Grace does unto me pertain,
Nay, Is made truly mine: And there is my claim.
594
Thy Claim is grounded on a weak foundation,
What if that Spirit does inform a Lie.
Then where is thy strange presumption of Salvation?
O no: It is Gods Spirit certainly.
And he is a God of truth, and verity.
How know thou this? Because his motions tend
To make me good and happy at my end.
595
Because he makes me see my own demerit,
And what is lustly due to me by right,
And then he Comes, and like a blessed Spirit
Presents my gracious Savior to my sight,
Makes me lay hold on Christ, with all my might.
And tender him unto the God of heaven
To clear my score, and make our reck'nings even.
596
In these good thoughts, I spent my best of Time,
My Cousin * Leicester well respecting me, Henry Earl of Lecester kept him at
Kenelworth.

Which to my foes did seem a heinous Crime.
Who after Consultation did agree,
Some less Indulgent should my keepers be.
And * Gurney, Tho. Gurney Job. Maltrevers, Knights.
and, * Maltrevers chosen were,
To rid me of my life, them of their fear.
597
They that have Ears to hear of my extremes,
And feeling hearts, to comprehend my woes.
And yet have Eyes as dry as Sunny beams,
Whence no moist Tears (poor Pitties tribute) flows.
Within such minds whole mines of marble grows
Flint-hearted men that pi^tie not my moan,
Some Gorgons head, has turned your hearts to stone.
598
And what have I to do with stony hearts?
With men of marble, what have I to do?
I take no pleasure in Pigmalions Arts,
I would not work on stone, or marble woo
He loved his stony-maide, and had her too.
She was transformed at his incessant moan,
So were my foes, but changed from men to stone.
599
And would to God, I had been changed like the^,
Then without sense, I should have borne my pain.
"And senceless hapless are halfe-happie men,
"who feel no grief, what need they much co^plain,
But I was touched, being struck in every vein.
That my extremes, to their desires might bring
The fatal Period, whence their fears did spring.
600
And first, They hurried me from place to place,
(...) might have Intelligence of me.
(...) clothed me with garments vile and base,
(...) my self, that I unknown might be,
And least, I should the cheerful daylight see.
I still removed, when Sol his course had run,
My day was night, and Moone-shine was my Sun.
601
I did lament, that woes to words might yield,
And said: Fair Cynthia with whose brightsome shine
This sable-night does beat a silver shield.
Yet thou art gracious to these griefs of mine.
That with thy light do cheer my weeping Eyne.
Thou borrowest light, to lend the same to me,
I lighten those, that my Eclipsers be.
602
The glorious Sun (thy Brother) lends thee light,
My Son makes me obscure, unlike to thee.
En^i^^ions love, thou did with love require,
My love distresseth, and disdaineth me;
Yet both too like in often changing be.
O no, for thou being wan'd, do wax again,
But still her love continues in the wayne.
603
Some do ascribe the Oceans ebbs and flows
Unto thy Influence, working in the same.
I wot not that, but this poor Edward knows,
Men ebb and flow, as Fortune list to frame;
Whose smiles, or frowns do make or mar our game.
Then since we all must stoop unto her lure,
When she is false, how may our states be sure.
604
But cease (fair Phoebe) cease thy beauteous shine,
Spend not thy rays on such a wretch, as I;
Against who^ the very Heavens themselves repine,
Whose presence, All good-boading stars do fly,
Then give me leave, that I obscure may dye.
And suffer me, unsought, unseen to go;
"Some ease It is, not to be known in woe.
605
And that, the humid vapors of the night
Might be of force, to make weak nature fail
They made me ride cold, and bare-headed quite
To whom both hats and heads were wont to veil,
Whilst I with prosperous wind at will did sail.
But now, I was reproached with hateful Crimes,
O Times, O Men; O Change of men, and Times.
606
Think not, that I was Marble, not to have
A sense of Ill, after a feeling fashion,
Which made me sometimes for to fret, and rave,
Sometimes to weep* and humbly beg compassion,
As I was swayed by variable passion.
Remembering what I was, some storms did pass,
And straight a calm, remembering what I was.
607
Traitors (quoth I) Why do you use me thus?
Know you not me? Forget you whom I am?
Was not great Long-shanks Father unto us?
I Kingly Edward, Second of that name?
Why kneel you not? Often have you done the same.
Why should you not? since you are sworn to do It,
And by our birthright we are borne unto It.
608
From forth the Loins of many Kings came I,
This head has been Impaled with a Crown,
And will you now a simple Hat deny?
I Will be revenged: They do not fear my frown,
Too well, too well they know, my Sun is down.
My day is done, Now does my night begin;
And Owls, not Eagles use to fly therein.
609
I have bin Graced, let me be gracious now,
I have Commanded, Let me now request.
Your sometime. King has humble knees to bow,
And weeping Eyes to crave some little rest;
Man's heart is flesh: He has no flintie breast.
One * Aristomines had a hayrie heart ^linius.

But you are stones: else would you rue my smart.
610
And that I might be wretched every way,
That every sense might have his proper pain.
The Byrd, to whom Promethius was a prey.
The waking Serpent, that does rest restrain,
Hunger I mean, did gnaw on me amain
Hunger, which often forced me eat such food,
As weak'ned Nature, and corrupted blood.
611
I that Lucullus-like, was served at will,
With whatsoever Sea, or Land affords,
Would now be glad of Crumes, to feed my fill,
Such want does often follow wastfull boards,
Better the frugall fare of Roots, and gourdes,
Which keeps the Soul and body both in health,
And God does bless with great increase of wealth.
612
Camelions feed upon the peircing Air,
O that kind Nature, had but made me such,
The Salamander does It Is strength repair
Amid'st the fire, when It the flame does touch,
Against whose happy state I did not grudge,
But only wished my self, to have like means
For hunger is the Extremest of Extremes,
613
I thought sometimes, to Eat my very flesh,
My brawn-lesse arms would do some little good,
But still my stomach loathed such a mess,
And would not serve me to digest my blood.
My teeth should rather tear the stones for food,
I Would soften them with tears, and ceaseless moanes,
But stones were hard, and men more hard then stones,
614
And for to make me fret my self to death,
They crossed, and thwarted me in every thing,
Sweete-sugred words like to the Panthers breath,
You pleasing Tongues, whose Chimes so sweetly ring*
Where are you now? why sooth you not your King
Yea, so you will: But that is not my Case
And flatterers tune not to the mean, or base,
615
How deadly Is the venom of fair toungs?
Whose Nectar-tearms do seem more smooth then oil
And all the breath, that comes from their lungs
Is sweet in show, but full of gall, and guile.
Believe me, There Is more danger in their smile
Then in their frown: for seen is soon detected.
"But they hurt most, that are the least suspected.
616
O why are Princes like to brazen Pots
Which being great, are lifted by the Ears?
Little see they, their reaches, and their plots,
Whose tongus are tuned to sooth them many years
Till turns are served: and then It straight appears.
That Honey gone, the Combs are soon rejected,
And wanting means, the man is less respected.
617
May it please your Highness: was my wonted style:
Whose pleasure now is less esteemed then mine:
Did I look Cloudy? Who durst seem to smile?
Or was I pleasant? Who durst then repine?
Spoke I? Apolloes words were less divine.
What e're I did, Applause graced every thing.
And this the cause: Because, I was a King.
618
But now the Springtime of my Bliss is done,
Those Nightingales that did so sweetly sing
In this my winter, all are fled, and gone
Nay turned to Serpents, that both hiss and sting.
So Bells to Marriage-Feasts, and Burials ring.
A King: No King: Hap, and mishap does bring,
And none so hapless, as a King, no King.
619
And that my words might unrespected be,
And neither they, nor I regarded ought.
They gave it out, my senses failed me,
And I was mad, and helpelesly distraught,
It Is true, I have been mad, and dearly bought
My madness: I was mad, when I did blot
My Soul with Sin: When I my God forgot.
620
But now my senses are restored again,
And I begin to see, how mad I was;
To put my trust, in things that are so vain,
To change my heavenly gold, for earthly glass,
To dote on shadows, letting substance pass,
And now my God has purged that Lunacie.
With bitter Potions of Calamity.
621
And (O) this sickness is too general,
The world does groan under this mad disease,
This frantic humor does distract us all,
We only seek the present sense to please,
And whilst we live, so we may float at ease.
We quite forget the place, where we must Land,
The Throne of Judgment, where we al must stand.
622
Why should mankind, be so extremely mad,
As for the short fruition of base pleasure,
(Which often Is repented, when it is had)
To loose a soul, more worth then Worlds of treasure?
This is Indeed a madness above measure.
Thus once I rau'd, and therefore now I rue,
Thus rave you now, and therefore so shall you.
623
And least my Torments should but seem to cease
Or breath a while, They would not let more rest,
Of quiet sleep (The harbinger of peace
The Common Inn both unto man and beast)
My weary Eyes could never be possessed,
My head waxt light, yet heavy was my heart;
Two Contraries, One Cause, but no desert.
624
I that had once so many Princly bowers,
And in the same, so many beds of state,
With sweet Perfumes, and beauteous Paramouts
And melody, such as at Plutoes gate
Once Orpheus played, and all most delicate
To charm the senses, and bewitch the Soul,
Must now not sleep one hour without Control.
625
O Justice! what a Tallie do thou keep
Of all our sins, and how thou pay'st them right?
"Though God does wink, yet does he never sleep
"The Eye of heaven sees in the darkest night.
My wast of Time in sleep (then thought but light)
Was chalked up, and now he pays the score
With want of that, which I abused before.
626
Fond men (quoth I) you have in all bin cruel,
But yet in this, you are too much unwise,
If to my Torments you would add more fuel,
You should permit some slumber to mine Eyes,
That being waked, fresh sorrow might arise,
Nor can I last, my strength with watching spent,
"For bows grow weak, that never stand vnbe^t
627
Besides, Continual thinking of my woe
So duls my senses, that I feel It less,
"As Paths grow plain, whereon we always go
"So Hearts grow hard, that never find redress,
And you will make me senseless by excess.
I know, you hate me, show your hate therefore,
And let me slumber, for to vex me more.
628
And that my grief might work on me the more
By apprehension of my present fall,
And sad remembrance of my state before.
They wreathed a Crown of Hay: and therewithal
They Crowned me: and King eft-soones did call.
Phurp, Phurp, (say they) God save this jolly King
O save me God! whom Div'ls to death would bring.
629
And thou meek Lamb, that by thy precious blood
Have made Atonement twixt my God, and me,
(Which was more Sovereign for a sinners good
Then sweetest mirrhe, or purest balm could be)
In my weak steps I somewhat follow thee.
The Sponge, the Spear, the Cross, y^ Crown of Thorn
Thy ensigns are, and may not else be borne.
630
Thy head was Crowned with Thorn, mine but with Hay.
Thou knew'st no sin, my sins the sands exceed.
Well may I follow, when thou lead'st the way,
And (O) that I might follow thee Indeed
Then of the Tree of Life, my soul should feed.
My soul that has no other hope but this,
Who will be thine, Thou always wilt be his.
631
Sweet Savior Christ, these are the hopes I have,






632
And that I might even of my self be hated,
They shau'd off all my beard in my disgrace.
The Instrument a Razor blunt, rebated.
And from a muddy ditch, near to that place
They fetched cold filthy water for my face.
To whom I said, that even in their despite,
I would have warm: My tears should do that right.
633
These drops of brine, yt pour down from mine eyes,
Mine eyes, cast up to heavens high glorious frame,
That from, whence God all earthly deeds descryes.
That God, that guerdons sin with death and shame.
Shall witness, yea, and will revenge the same.
That you have bin most cruel to your King,
Whose death, his Doom: His doom your deaths will bring.
634
Unmanly men, Temember what I was,
And think withal, what you your selves may be,
I was a King: A powerful King I was:
You see my tall, and can your selves be free?
But you have friends, why, you were friends to me
And yet, you see how much your love is changed;
So others loves from you may be estranged.
635
But you are young, and full of able strength,
And am not I? What boots my strength or youth,
Both now seem firm, but both shall fail at length,
"Old Age cold Ache: and both sad grief pursu'th,
But you are wise, the more should be your ruth
Of mine estate, whose wrack may teach you this
That balefull chance may clowd your greatest bliss.
636
You are not, No, you are not Beasts by birth,
Nor yet am I made of a seneclesse stone.
We all are framed, and all shall turn to Earth,
You should have feeling Souls, for I have one.
Then see me at least, relenting to my moan.
I Pity crave, and craving let me have It,
Because one day your selves may need to crave It.
637
But these sad motives could not work at all
In their hard steely hearts the least remorse.
They rather added wormwood to my gall,
And exercise of Ills did make them worse.
So violent streams hold an their wonted course.
And being fleshed in Cruelty before,
Use made the habit perfect more and more.
638
And least one torment should be left vntry'd,
They shut me in a va^lt, and laid by me
Dead Carcasses of men, who lately died,
That their foul stincke my fatal bane might be,
These were the Objects that mine eyes did see.
These smells I felt, with these I did converse,
And unto these, These plaints I did rehearse.
639
O happy Souls, whose bodies here I see
(For you have played your parts, and are at rest)
Yet somewayes hapless, you may seem to be
That which your bodies I am thus distressed.
Perhaps you grieve (If that you know at least)
That by your means, your King is thus tormented.
Grieve not (dear souls) for I am well contented.
640
It Is not your bodies (senseless as they are)
That do inflict these Torments on your King,
But the fierce Agents of proud Mortimer,
From them my plagues proceed as from their spring,
And (O) just Heaven! Let them their tribute bring
Back to the Ocean, whence they first did flow,
And in their passage, still more greater grow.
641
But what poor souls have you deserved so ill?
That being dead, you must want burial.
Nothing but this: I must my fates fulfill,
And still be plagued with woes unnatural,
My wretchedness must still transcend in all.
The living, and the dead must do me spite,
And you (alas) for me must want your right.
642
But you are happy, free from sense of wrong;
Here are your bodies, but your souls are well.
Death, do not thou forbear thy stroke too long,
That with these happy souls my soul may dwell.
And soul be glad to go: Here is thy Hell.
And even in this, thou art happy, that it is here,
O better so, Then it should be elsewhere.
643
What see thou now, but Objects of disgrace?
What do thou hear, but scorns, and words of spite,
What do thou touch, that Is not vile and base?
What do thou smell, but stench both day and night?
What do thou taste, that may procure delight?
Thy sight, thy hearing, touching, taste and smell
All cry for Heaven, for here is now thy Hell.
644
This darke-some Vault, the house of Acharon,
These wicked men like Fiends do torture me.
This miseries sink resembles Phlegeton,
My acted Sins like fearful furies be,
And he that would a whole Infernal see.
Let him observe the plagues, that I endure,
And he shall find them Hells true portraiture.
645
The Earth it self, is weary of my pain,
And like a tender Mother moanes for me,
From me thou came, return to me again,
Within my womb I Will keep the safe (quoth she)
And from these vile abuses set thee free.
Never shall these fell Tyrants wrong thee more,
He that pays death, discharges every score.
646
These bodies that thou see thy Brothers were,
Subject to many wants, and thousand woes,
They now are cleared from Care, and freed from fear,
And from the pressures of Insulting foes,
And now, they live in joy, and sweet repose,
Thy self can witness, that they feel no woe,
And as they rest, even thou shall rest thee so.
647
Their eyes, that whilst they lived often Tyded tears
Thou see, how sweetly they Enjoy their rest,
Those harsh unpleasing sounds that wronged their Ears,
Are turned to Angels tunes among the blessed.
Their Souls that were with pensive thoghts possessed,
Now in their Makers bosom without end,
Enjoy that peace, whereto thy Soul does bend.
648
And thou have need of peace (poor wretched Soul)
If ever any Soul had need of Peace.
God being in Arms against thee does enroule
All Nature in his list, which does not cease
To fight against thee, and does still Increase
Thy wretchedness, forbear rebellious dust,
To war with him, who is most great and just,
649
O would to God, that I had died ere this,
Then had my sins bin fewe^ then they are.
Then had my Soul long since reposed in bliss,
That now Is wandering still in ways of Care,
"Life's grief exceeds life's good without Compare.
Each day does bring a fresh supply to Sorrow,
Most wretched now, yet shall be more to morrow.
650
My careful mother might have helped me
When I lay sprawling in her tender womb.
If she had made her burd'ned Belly be
My fruit-lesse birth-bed, and my fatal Tomb,
Sure had she known her Sons accursed doom.
She never would have wronged her self so much,
To bear a wretch, save whom was never such.
651
My tender Nurse is guilty of these pains,
She might have put some poison in my pap,
Or let me fall, and so dashed out my brains,
When she full often did dance me on her lap,
A thousand ways had freed me from mishap.
But he whom Heaven ordaines to live distressed,
Death will delay to set that wretch at rest.
652
For Death's the weary Pilgrims rest and joy,
This world of woes a hard and flintie way,
Our birth the path, that leads to our annoy
Our friends are fellow^passengers to day
And gone to morrow, Honor Is a stay
That either stops, or leads us else amiss*
Pleasures are Thieves, that Intercept our bliss.
653
And in the passage, as the way does lie
We meet with several Innes, wherein we rest
Some at the Crown are lodged, and so was I:
Some at the Castle: So am I distressed;
Some at the Horn, That married folks do feast.
Though men have diverse Innes, yet all men have
One home, to which they go, and that is the grave.
564
Yet whilst we travail Fortune like the weather,
Does alter fair or foul, so does our way
If fair, then Friends like fowls do flock together,
If foul, Each man does shift a several way
Only our virtues, or our vices stay
"And go with us, whose endless memory,
Does make us live, or dye Eternally.
655
This Is the freight, that men cannot unload
No, not by death* Therefore Mortality
Work for thy self, whilst here thou have abode
For on the present has dependancie
Either thy endless bliss or misery.
And death's the Convoy to conduct us home
Come death to me, that I to rest may Come.
656
Perhaps thou fearst me, being great and hye,
"O death! Man were a thing Intolerable
"Were he not mortal: But even Kings must dye.
"No privilege does against death Enable,
Both fat and lean are dishes for his Table.
The difference this: The poore-one has his grave,
The great-one, he his Monument must have.
657
"Our fates may be concein'd, but not Controlled,
"Before our dated time we cannot dye,
"Our days are numbered, and our minutes told
"Both life and death are destined from on high.
And when that God, that rules the Imperial sky
Shall find It fit, then thou shall go in peace,
Mean while with patience look for thy release.
658
Thus unto Care I paid his due: Complaint,
And joynd withal my tributarie tears,
Such my laments (for grief finds no restraint)
As they at last, did come unto their Ears,
That by the Castle past, which caused such fears
In their selfe-guilty souls, that used me so,
As they resolved by death to end my woe.
659
To which effect came Letters from the Court,
Written by Tarleton, at the Queens command,
In such a cloudie, and ambiguous sort,
That diverse ways, one might them understand
By pointing them; That if they should be scanned,
He and his Letters might be free from blame,
And they Delinquents, that abused the same.
660
The words were these: * (Kill Edward Edward um^^ occidere nolit^ timere b^num
est.
do not fear
It Is good) which being Comma'd diversely
As pleased the Reader, double sense may bear.
O Art! Thou art the Earths chief treasury
But being Employed to practice villainy,
What monstrous births from thy fair womb do spring,
So Gr^mmar here is made to kill a King.
661
Which to effect, They first removed me
From forth the place, where I before did lie,
And made a show, as if they seemed to be
Compassionated, for my misery.
And would hereafter grant Immunitie
From such unworthy usage: So we see,
The Sun shines hot, before the shower will be.
662
But being ouer-watch'd, and wearied too,
Nature was much desirous of some rest,
Which gave them opportunity to do
What they desired, for being with sleep oppressed
They clap great massy Beds upon my breast.
And with their weight, so kept me down withal,
That breath I could not, much less Cry, or Call.
663
And then into my Fundament they thrust
A little horn, as I did groueling lie,
And (that my violent death might shun mistrust)
Through that same horn, a red hot Spit, whereby
They made my guts and bowels for to fry.
And so Continued, till at last they found,
That I was dead, yet seemed to have no wound.
664
And here I pitch the Pillars of my pain,
Now, Ne plus vltra, shall my Poesy be,
And thou which have described my tragic reign,
Let this at least give some content to thee,
That from disastrous fortunes none are free.
Now take thy web out of the Loomes again;
And tell the world, that all the world Is vain.
THE AVTHORS Noli peccare.
1
Forbear to Sin: Deus videt.
God has thee still in sight,
Nothing is hid from his all seeing Eye.
Though thou putt'st on the Sables of the night,
Thou can not cloud thy self from him thereby;
All time, all place, all Ends, and all thy means
He better sees, then thou the Suns bright beams.
2
Forbear to Sin: The Angels Angel^ trista^tur.
grieve for thee
When by thy Sin thou grieu'st thy loving Lord.
Those noble natures our Attendants be,
To whom both day and night they do afford
Their dearest service: O unkind too much
To cause their grief, whose love to thee is such.
3
Forbear to Sin: Diabolus accusat.
For even that damned Fiend
That moved thee first, and soothed thee in thy Sin.
When he has once attayn'd his cursed End,
And made thee Act his ill, will straight begin
To aggrauate thy guilt: He Will urge thy shame
Against thy self, that urged thee to the same.
4
Forbear to Sin: Conscientiaterret.
For out of Sin does breed
A biting worm, that gnawes the Sinner still.
Devouring wolf, that on thy self do feed,
Black Register, that do record our Ill.
And makes the Soul the book, where thou do write
Sad thoughts by day, and fearful dreams by night.
5
Forbear to Sin: Mors minatur.
Death stands at the Door,
Ready to Enter on thy house of Earth.
One day being spent, The lesser is thy store
Of time to come: Man dies from his first birth.
Who ever writes, or speaks of any-One,
Still ends his tale with Mortuus est, He Is gone.
6
Forbear to Sin: ^^dicium instat.
There is a day of Doom,
There are Records, where thy sins are Inrol'd,
There is a just and fearful Judge, from whom
Lies no appeal: Who cannot be controlled
Whom teares-almes, prayers may here to mercy move
But the^ there is no place for peace or love.
7
Forbear to Sin: ^nferni ^cr^ciant.
Because there is a Hell,
Where cease-lesse, ease-lesse, Endless torments be,
Where Diu'ls, and all the damned Souls do dwell,
Whom Millions of years shall never free.
Where to remain, Is grievous past Conceit,
And whence, not any hope to make retreat.
Therefore (to End as I did first begin)
Let these respects make thee forbear to Sin.
-- Quorum si singula, duram
Flectere non possunt, possunt tamen Omnia, Mentem.
FRAN. HVBERT Miles.
Timens Deum, non habet quod timeat vlterius.
FINIS.

