A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the 4. of December. 1597.

Wherein is discoursed, that all buying and selling of Spiritual promotion is
unlawful.

By JOHN HOVVSON, Student of Christes-Church in Oxeford.

AT LONDON, Printed for Th. Adams. 1597.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the 24. of December 1597. by John Howson,
Student of Christs-Church in Oxford.
The text.
And Jesus went into the Temple of God, and east out all them that sold and
bought in the Temple and overthrew the Tables of the money changers, and the
seats of them that sold doves:

And said to them; it is written, mine house shall be called the house of
prayer: but yea have made it a den of thieves.

Mat. 21.12. and 13.
IT is affirmed by them that have best labored, and even spent their spirits
to discover the profound mysteries of the holy scriptures, that the text
contextus, the web of it, is so cunningly and so skilfully wouen by the holy
spirit of God, that it is, omnibus accessibilis, but paucissimis penetrabilis;
Aug. Epist. 5.
that is to be handled and felt of any man, but few eyes can pierce to the
groundwork of it. Which truth wrought this confession in Chrysologus an
ancient learned and devout Writer, so called for the golden sentences which
proceeded from him, that Singula scripturae verba, si libris singulis
mandarentur, etc. Sermon. 64.
which is, If there were a book written, a particular book of every
particular word almost, in the holy Scriptures; yet the misteris of them could
not by that means be sufficiently discovered to us.

Wherefore (right Honorable, etc.) it is not to be expected at my hands,
that in this short time, limited to the measure of my strength and your
patience, I should deliver unto you whatsoever is noteable or noted already by
so many reverend and learned Fathers (old and new) of the litterall,
historical, moral, or allegorical sense of this scripture; nor to make
application according to the variety and abundance of sense, which the spirit
of God has imparted to you, most reverend Fathers and learned Divines: for I
do not presume to speak that quod potissimum dicendum esset; which is indeed
most fit to be spoken; seeing it is a great matter, and above the common and
ordinary reach, nihil dicere quod dicendum non est: Hug in Ecclesiast. Hom. 1.
to say nothing which were not better unsaid, than spoken.

Wherefore as Saint Luke divided his first Sermon, (...) Act. 1. his Gospel,
which comprehended the whole life of our Savior Christ, into two parts, into
those things, quae coepit Jesus Facere, Act. 1.
and Docere; which he did, and which he taught, into his Doings, and into
his Sayings: so do I divide this Text, in Factum, and Dictum; into a Deed of
his, and into a Speech of his; into an Action of his, and the Reason of it. The
Action in these words, And Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out all
them that sold and bought in the Temple, etc. The Reason; And said unto them it
is written, etc.

The Action.
The Action was a reformation of certain abuses or prophanations of the Temple
of God: In which I observe these circumstances. First the Author, who;
secondly the Time, when; thirdly the Place, where; fourthly the Matter,
what; and fifthly the Manner, how this reformation was performed.

1. The author.
For the first, the Author of this reformation is our Savior Christ Jesus, who
performed it not as a man only, or the true son of the blessed Virgin Mary,
or the supposed son of Joseph, not as he was factus sub lege, Galath. 4.
made under the law; nor to suffer in the flesh; 1. Pet. 4. nor to be crucified
concerning his infirmity 2. Cor. 13. but as the only begotten of God, the
chief Priest, and the King of Kings, whose dominion is from sea to sea, and
from the river to the ends of the land. Psalm. 72. whose office and authority,
that is his Kingdom and Priesthood was prefigured by the two crowns, the
silver and the golden crown, which were hung up in the Temple. Zach. 6.

Now in this Author of this reformation, Two things required in a reformer.
I observe for this present, two things, which are required in all good
reformers. One is his authority, that he is a King and a Priest: the other his
conditions and qualities, that he is without fault himself that reformeth
other. Without the first, that is authority, there can be no reformation;
without the second, hardly any good reformation.

That it was performed by our Savior who was King and Paul when he came to
Athens, though he saw Idols and Altars, Act. 27.
and one ignoto Deo, to the unknown GOD yet he offered no violence, but
preached unto them the GOD which they knew not; and though he saw Idols and
Idolatry in the Temple of Diana, yet he offered no violence; Acts. 19.
but preached only, they were not Gods that were made with hands; and pulled
not down the sign of Castor and Pollux in the ship of Alexandria that
carried him to Rome: Acts. 28.
) so it is convenient that the Princes and civil Magistrates in their
reformations of the Church and Religion take counsel and advise of the
Priests and the Prophets: and therefore King David when he would have built
the Temple, 2. Sam. 7.
he sent for the Prophet Nathan, and took counsel of him. 4. Reg. 12.
And Ioas did nothing amiss in the presence of God, so long as he was informed
by Iehoiada the Priest. And Ezechias did the thing that pleased the Lord, and
remained steadfastly in the ways of David his father, Eccles. 48.
while Esaias the great Prophet, and faithful in his vision, commanded him. And
God stirred up the spirit of Zorobabel, the Prince of Judah, Agg. 2.
and the spirit of Iehosua the high Priest, that they jointly together might
restore the building of the Temple; all which argue, that the wisdom and
knowledge of the Priest is to be joined with the authority of the Prince in
establishing or reforming the Church of God.

2. Heb, 7. 1 ^et, 2. 2 Cor, 5. 1 Ioh, 3. 8. John.
Secondly, that it was performed by our Savior Christ, who was holy, harmless
and undefiled; who did noe sin, as Saint Peter says, who knew no sin, as
Saint Paul says; who had no sin in him, as Saint John says; and therefore
might safely say, which of you can rebuke me of sin? It argues that they
which are reformers of Churches, yea and of Commonwealths, should be holy,
harmless, undefiled, and vncorrupt, as much as may be, least under the
color of reformation they bring in a deformation, and where they be chosen to
be Rephaims, Deuteronomy, 2.
that is, Physicians or reformers of vices, they become Zanzumins corrupters,
wicked and abominable. For although ex malis moribus bonae leges causaliter,
Evil manners are the occasion of making good laws: Yet wicked men are seldom
the authors of good laws: but Valerius Flaccus turpissimus author erit
turpissimae legis. Valerius Flaccus, Vell. Patere.
a wicked and corrupt man, will be the author (as far forth as he may) of a
wicked and corrupt law: or if not of a wicked law, yet of a cunning law, with a
fair gloss and pretense of the common wealth, when he is indeed intentus
sibi, Pachimer.
attentive only to his own profit and private gain; with a fair gloss and
pretense of the safety of the state, when he seeks to satisfy his own
malice, or effect some revenge; as the Priests and Pharisees made a law to put
our Savior Christ to death, least the Romans should come, Ioh, 11.
and take away both their place and their nation; with a fair gloss and
pretense to maintain the privileges of the people, or the authority of the
Senate, as amongst the Romans, Sal. in Cat.
when pro sua quisque potentia certabat, every man endeavored to advance and
increase his own honor with a fair gloss and pretense to relieve the poor,
when; ex ipso remedio morbi nascuntur, poverty is increased in some other
estate. Plin. l. 2. op. 20.
These and a number the like, are the issues and effects, when wicked and
corrupt men do aspire to the place and authority emendandi, id est,
disperdendi, as Pliny says, of reforming that is deforming a state: whereas if
they be holy, and just, and incorrupt, as our Savior Christ was, I say not in
essence, but in imitation: Scuerissimar^i sed iustissimarum legum author.
nay but as just as Lycurgus the heathen was, who was the maker of most severe,
but most just laws, the reformation would be just though somewhat severe, as
was this reformation of our Savior Christ.

For the Time if we consider it, in respect of our Savior Christ, as in what
time of his life it was done, 2. Circumstance. The Time. 4. Reg. 12. 4. Reg. 23.
as we consider and observe in what year of a Princes reign he begins his
reformation; as it is said, in the 23. year of Ioas reign he repaired the
Temple; and Josias in his 18. year reformed religion: may it please you to
understand that it was done toward the end of his life, when he was even now
going to his passion. And least you should gather hereby, that the reformation
of religion, or of the Church, or abuses thereof, should be the last thing
which a good Prince or Magistrate should regard, when Aristotle could say;
that with every good Magistrate, in every good Common wealth, (...) the first
and the chiefest thing is, the regard of establishing or reforming of religion,
Polit. l. 7 cap. 8
and the Church of God: you shall understand, that with the like action he
began his office, as it appears in Saint John's Gospel, where also with a
whip of little cords, presently after his first miracle, at his first coming
to the Temple, John. 2.
he cast out the sheep, and the oxen, and the sellers of them: So that if
Omnis Christi actio be nostra instructio, every action of our Savior Christ
be a lesson for us, we may learn by this that it is not only the last
office, which a good Prince or Magistrate should put in practice, to reform
the abuses in the Church of God, but the first also; and not only the first,
but also the last, the Alpha and Omega, and not the first and the last, but his
continual endeavor. And therefore where all ancient Writers agree that this
was put in practice twice by our Savior; some learned men of later time say,
Aret. super. 21. Matthew.
Ter hoc fecit Christus, Christ did it thrice. First in the beginning of his
preaching; John 2. Secondly, in die palmarum, that is in this place; and
thirdly when he returned out of Bethania, Mark. 11.
and cursed the Fig Tree. So that if it be demanded what is the first duty or
virtue of a Magistrate; we may answer out of this example; to reform the
abuses and prophanations in the Church of God? And if we demand what the
second duty or virtue of a Magistrate is? we may answer out of this place; to
reform the abuses and profanation of the Church of God? and if we demand
what is the third duty or virtue of a Magistrate; we may answer; To reform,
etc? Not that the Commonwealth or civil affairs should be neglected but
because if the subjects do, 1. Pet 2.
Deum timere, Fear God, that will follow naturally which lies orderly in the
text, they will Regem honorificare, Honor their King: if they fear God,
Xenoph. in Cyropaep. 8.
they will honor their King: and as Cyrus could say very well, if all the
subjects were (...), true servants of God, they would give the King his honor.

If we consider the time in respect of the season of the year, or according
to the division of days, which the wise man makes, where some days are said
to be chosen and sanctified, Eccles. 33.
as the holy days and solemn feasts; and some to be numbered only, as the
first or second of such a month: both this reformation and the former John. 2.
was, in festo Paschatis, when he came to Jerusalem to celebrate the feast of
the Passover. Deuteronomy. 16.
For at three feasts in the year, all the males were bound by the law to
appear before God in Jerusalem, in the feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the
Tabernacles. Lyra super. 2. cap. John.
And although as Lyra notes in two feasts of Pentecost and the Tabernacles,
those that dwelt far off were sometimes dispensed with; yet there was no
dispensation for the feast of Easter. Now our Savior Christ until his Passion
did observe the law duly, and consequently at these feasts did ascend to
Jerusalem.

Now it is probable that to the imitation of this, it was provided in former
and ancient times of Christianity, as appears in Concilio Agathensi Can. 18.
Council. Agathe^. sub. Xisto. 3. circa. anu^. 440.
That all Christians of lawful age should jointly together at their parish
Churches receive the Sacrament of the Lords supper, at three special feasts in
the year, at the feast of the Nativity, Easter, and Pentecost: and although a
dispensation were admitted sometimes at two of these feasts, yet at Easter (no
remedy) all should receive. Which kind of imitation of some ceremonies of the
old law, observed by antiquity, I cannot condemn: For although old things are
passed away, yet behold new things are come in their place. 2. Cor. 5.
And although all things are not to be made and ordered, as Moses was
commanded to make the Tabernacle, Heb. 8.
(...), according to the example or pattern that was showed him in the mount;
that is according to the example of the old law: (for we refuse the carnal
observations of the law, and such types and figures as represent our Saviors
coming in the flesh, or those benefits and blessings which were proper and
peculiar unto the Jews) yet as the Jews had a King, though their kingdom be
now abolished; so we have a new King, Vbi est qui natus est rex Iudaeorum?
Math. 2.
a King which is borne both to Jews and Gentiles. And as they have an old
Testament, so we have a new Testament: 2. Cor. 3.
and as they had the spirit, so we have a new Spirit; I will give unto you a
new heart and a new Spirit: Ezech. 36.
and as they had Commandments, so we have a new Commandment; A new
Commandment Give I unto you: John. 13.
and as they had an inheritance promised them, the land of Canaan; so we have
a new inheritance promised us; Apoc. 21.
I saw a new heaven and a new earth: and as they had their Temple, so we have
our Churches: and as they had their Sacraments, so we have our Sacraments: and
as they had their Sabbath, so we have our Sunday: And as they had their
Feasts, so we have our Feasts and new Holydaies, to put us in mind of those
blessings we have received of the bounty of God: one feast to remember his
Nativity, another to put us in mind of his Passion, another of his
Resurrection, another of his Ascension, another of other spiritual blessings,
either performed to us by our Savior Christ or his blessed Apostles.

And no doubt if some ceremonies were necessary to be observed among Gods
people to retain the memory of blessings received, and maintain the hope and
expectation of the Messiah to come, seeing we that are Christians are as
unthankful and forgetful of the manifold blessings of God as they were, and
it is as hard a matter and as miraculous to us, to believe that which is past
1600. years since, as for the^ to believe that which was to come, seeing
neither they, nor we, are eyewitnesses of it, but give credit to other; they
to their Prophets whom in things to come they firmly believed; we to our
Evangelists and Apostles whom we cannot deny, or suspect in things that are
past; we have as good use of our rites and ceremonies as they had of theirs. I
give this brief note the rather because as S. Basil complained of his time,
Basil. ep 70.
it is reckoned a great fault and even superstition amongst us. Si quis
paternas traditiones diligenter obseruet, if a man observe dilligently the
rites and ceremonies comma^nded by the Church and received from all antiquity.

And yet here we find that our Savior Christ according to the ancient
custom of the Jews goes up yearly to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover,
and satisfy the law and the ceremonies of the law, that reached not to him:
and suffered himself to be circumcised, which needed not even by the reason
of the law, because he was intacta matre natus; and his mother fulfilled the
ceremony of purification, which was not necessary, because she was not
comprehended under the law, for non suscepto semine conceperat; she conceived
not as other women did, Luke, 1.
but was ouershadowed by the holy Ghost: and he was subject to his parents,
which was not subiectio necessitatis, Lyra.
but pietatis, not matter of necessity, but rather example of piety and
obedience: and here we find him not only observing the sabbath, but other
sollemne feasts, to teach us, Super. Ioh. 2.
says Marlorat, to come to Church on holidaies, as well as on Sundaies. A
great negligence or rather contempt by little and little crept in amongst us, I
mean not them that are irreligious, and little regard any service of GOD, but
even of such who have even in their mouths, though not templum Domini the
temple of the Lord (for they regard not the place,) yet ^abbatum Domini, the
Lords Sabbath; but think no day holy, or lawful to be devoted to the service
of God, but the seventh day only.

But as the Jews being too much affected to the letter of the law, or misled
by the Pharisees the interpreters of it, thought the fifth Commandment to be
violated only by murder and slaughter of a man, and the 6, commandment
broken only by actual adultery; but our Savior playing the interpreter,
tells them, Verily, verily I say unto you, that he that is unadvisedly angry
does murder, and he that looks after a woman to lust after her does commit
adultery, Math. 5.
though there be difference in the sins: so we say unto you who think the
violating of the seventh day, to be only against the fourth commandment, we
say that the breach and profanation not only of the greater sollemnities, viz.
Christmas, Easter, Whitsontide, etc. are the breach of the Sabbath, but also
the profanation of the smaller feasts, which are appointed for the service of
God, and the memory of those blessings we have received by the means of his
servants, is the breach of the Sabbath. And therefore in the holy Scriptures we
find, not only the seventh day called the Sabbath, but al other feasts and
holy days, either appointed by God, or the lawful Magistrate, as in the 23.
of Leuit. where the first day of the seventh month, Leuit. 13.
and many other feasts are called the Sabbath: And least you should think
that these feasts had the name only of a Sabbath, and not the sollemnization;
you may read that Hester and Mardocheus in remembrance of the deliverance of
the Jews, proclaimed a feast or holydaie to be observed yearly, and added
this law, Nulli liceat hos duos dies absque solemnitate transigere: that it
should be lawful for no man to pass over those days, but in great
sollemnity; and the new feast instituted by Judas Machabaeus, Eneauia. Ioh. 10.
our Savior observed, as we read in the Gospel; and walked not in the
streets, but came In porticum Solomonis, into the house of God, into that
place where in all probability, he did use to teach, when it is said he came
into the Temple: and thus far by occasion of the second circumstance.

The third circumstance. Chrysostom in opere imperfecto.
The third circumstance is the place where he began this reformation; and that
was in the Temple of God, and Jesus went into the Temple of GOD. S.
Chrisosotome, in opere imperfecto, or the author whosoever, notes it to be
the property of a good son, first to visit his fathers house when he comes
to town, and perform that duty and honor which is due unto him: And here
we see, our Savior Christ when he comes to Jerusalem, first to visit his
fathers house Templum Dei, the Temple of God, though now for the abuse thereof
it might be called Templum Iudaeorum, the Temple of the Jews, as Saint John
calls the feast of the Passover, Ioh 2.
Pascha Iudaeorum, not Pascha Dei, because the Jews abused it by their
inventions, as Saint Origin notes upon that place; Origin. Ibid.
but considering the first institution, he calls it the Temple of God, though
by abuse it was become a den of thieves. And wherein should a good son rather
busy himself, than in reforming the abuses of his fathers house, the
government whereof is committed to him, as our Savior told Joseph and his
blessed mother; Luke, 2.
must I not go about my fathers business?

Now although the people were called the people of GOD; and the City, the
City of God, as we read every where in the Psalms and Prophets, though as
it is in the prophecy of Esaias, Esaias, 1.
The faithful City was become an harlot, and had neither Judgment, nor
Justice in it, and the people of God become, a sinful nation, and a people
laden with iniquity; yet he begins not his reformation there, but in the
temple of God.

Giving this as a lesson by his example to all Princes, and Magistrates to
whom it may appertain, that as a Physician when he comes unto a sick man,
first demands the state of his stomach, and labors especially to order
it, (because if the stomach be sound, the body is strong, if the stomach be
sick, the whole body is weakened;) so the Magistrate when he finds the body
of the common wealth diseased, or distempered, let him first inquyre after the
stomach how that is affected, that is, what is amiss in Church and
Churchmen; for from thence as from the root, or from the heart, or from the
fountain, or from the stomach, proceeds the health, or the diseases, the
sins or the virtues, of the Prince and the people: Chrisost. in opere
imperfecto.
as S. Chrysostom observes, De templo omne bonum egreditur, de templo omne
malum procedit, From the Temple comes all good, and from the Temple
proceeds all evil: For the virtues of the Priest are like the ointment,
which being powered upon Aarons head runs down to his beard and so along to
the border and skirts of his garment, that is, first affect the Magistrate, and
them that are seated in higher places, and so by degrees the meanest people:
and the sin of the Clergy is like a rheum, which ascends out of the
stomach into the head, and from thence spreads it self, into all parts of
the body: according to that of Leuiticus, Si sacerdos qui vnctus est
peccauerit, faciet delinquere populu^, Leuit. 4.
If the Priest which is the anointed of the Lord, shall hap to sin, he shall
cause the people to sin also. So that if the people be good and virtuous, the
Priest may say as Saint Paul said to the Corinth. Nonne opus meum vos estis in
Domino? 1. Cor. 9.
are not you my workmanship in the Lord? If the people be ill, they may say to
the Priest, Hug. Card.
Nonne destruction nostra vos estis? are not you our destruction? yea, no
question, you are our destruction. Wherefore though many other things were
amiss amongst the people of the Jews, yet because they proceeded from the
disorder of the Temple, as the effect from the cause, according to the
counsel of God by the prohet Ezechiell, a sanctuario meo incipite, Ezech. 9.
Begin at my sanctuary; and the rule which his Apostle Saint Peter learned of
him, that judgment must begin at the house of God, 1. Pet. 4.
he begins his reformation at the Temple of God.

The fourth circumstance.
But let us consider the fourth circumstance what it was that he reformed there:
He cast out all those that sold, and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the
tables of money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves. Now because
these abuses, buying and selling, of sheep, and oxen, and doves, and
money changers, and that in the Temple of God, may seem somewhat strange unto
you, may it please you to understand, that according to the commandment of
God, all sorts of people from all the regions of Jury, came up to this most
royal and ample Temple, especially on festival days, to offer sacrifice unto
the Lord. The richer sort offered oxen, goats, sheep, etc. the poorer sort,
pigeons, and turtle doves, etc. But it happened oftentimes, that they which came
far off, brought no sacrifices with them; wherefore the Priests to make a prey
of the people, as Saint Jerome notes, sold themselves, or caused to be sold
by others, sheep, and oxen, and doves, and whatsoever was necessary for the
sacrifice: and for this merchandising in the Temple, had their pretense out of
the letter of the law; Deuteronomy. 14.
where they that dwelt far off, were commanded to sell their offerings at
home, and with that money buy oxen and sheep, etc. when they came to
Jerusalem. Now the Priests seemed to provide for this law, that none that came
far off might want sacrifices; but indeed under pretense of that, studied
their own profane profit and gain.

Now because it happened that some came thither that were so poor, that they
had no money to buy the^ offerings, they placed there money changers, who upon
security would lend them the money: but because usury was forbidden by the law,
and yet they would make some gain of their money they were contented to take
smaller trifles, which would yield them money, as raysons and apples, and such
kind of stuff, as they call (...), thinking by this means to avoid the law;
whereas the Prophet Ezechiel says vsura a and superabundantiam non accipietis;
Ezech. 22.
you shall not take either usury or increase.

Others that are learned are of opinion, that these money changers, these (...)
as they be called in the text, were placed there to change their moneys that
came to that place to buy their sacrifices, as to change greater money for
smaller, or good for silver; or foreign money for current money; and were
called (...) of (...), which signified an halfepenny, which was given for the
change, which may be gathered to be more probable, because Saint John calls
them (...) of (...), Ioh. 2.
which signifies small money, and serves for change; so that it should seem
these money changers, were such as Caietane notes to be in Rome for such
purposes, in gradibus Diui Petri, upon S. Peter's stairs.

Moreover may it please you also to understand for your better instruction in
this story, and that you may perceive what these abuses were, that the name of
the Temple is sometimes taken properly and strictly pro domo templi, for the
body of the temple, which was divided into two parts, as our churches are, one
was called Sanctum, the holy place, where there was the Altar of incense, the
Table, and the Candelsticke; and the other was Sanctum sanctorum, the holy of
holiest, where was the Arc of the Testament, and the two Cherubins: into that
part that was called Sanctum, the Priests only entered to offer incense, and
none other; into the Sanctum sanctorum the high Priest entered only, and that
but once a year.

Sometimes the Temple is taken more largely, and signifies a certain
quadrangle compassed in with a wall, before the Temple; and it was called
Atrium Sacerdotum, the Priests Court, where there was an altar for burnt
offerings; and into this not only the Priests did enter, but the Levites also,
who did help them to flea and wash the sacrifices: now at the gate of this
Court the common people stood, and offered their sacrifices to the Priests.
Into none of these places came our Savior; not into the Sanctum sanctorum,
because he was not high Priest; not into the Sanctum, because he was no Priest;
not into the Priests Court, because he was neither Priest nor Leuite.

But beside these, there were two other places to pray in, sub diuo, abroad in
the air; in one the men praid, in the other the women praid: and these Atria
or Courts were called by the name of the Temple; as in the Acts it is said,
that Peter and John went into the Temple about the ninth hour to pray. Act. 3.
And this is the place which is noted here by the name of the Temple, Lyra
super. 21. Matt.
and to be thus grossly abused by the means of the Priests. Now our Savior,
to show his zeal to his Fathers house, and his authority together with his
power, as also to inform us, that no temporal or base gain ought to be
exercised in Gods house, but to be reckoned foul and dishonest, whatsoever
fair pretense it may carry with it: finally, to show that nothing was fit
for that place, but holiness and prayers and devotion he cast out the buyers and
sellers, and the money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves, out of
the Temple.

Now out of this fourth circumstance among many things worthy the observation,
they that have to do with the reformation of the Church or Commonwealth, may
learn not to take away the use of good things, because they be abused, but to
remove the abuse, and restore the thing to his proper nature and first
institution: For our Savior finding these gross abuses in the Temple, does
not offer to pull down the Temple, or persuade the Magistrates to turn it to
profane uses, or to build them goodly palaces or courts of the ruins of it;
Erasm.
to convert the vessels of gold and silver to their own pleasures, as Baltasar
did; or to the maintenance of their lawful wars, or unlawful delights: but
he takes away the abuses of it, he drives out the buyers, and the sellers,
and the money changers; and that which was appointed for a house of prayer and
service of God, he restores again to the first institution.

For seeing all the estates of the world, the estate of Princes, the estate of
Priests, and the estate of the Nobility, yea and the estate of the people,
where they have any estate, a paruis initijs ad maiora proficiunt, do by
degrees enlarge their authorities, and of small beginnings grow into greatness,
donec in vitium vsque luxurient, and at last run, riot and abuse their
authority when it is at the highest. If in our reformations we should not
follow this pattern of our Savior, but remove good things for the abuse of
them; many strange, many dangerous, and unnatural alterations would ensue both
in the Church and Commonwealth. And we find by experience, that this
argument Ab abusu, ad non vsum, From the abuse of good things to the abolishing
of them, as it has bred heresies and schisms in the Church; so also
rebellions and treasons in the Commonwealth.

The Manichees altogether condemned Christianity, because there were found many
ill Christians: to whom Saint Austen answered, Contra Faustum. lib. 5. cap. 11.
Vestrum oculum maleuolus error in solam paleam nostrae segetis ducet, nam and
triticum ibi cito inderetur, si and esse velletis. Your malicious error
carries your eye to the chafe only of our corn: you might as easily
perceive the wheat, if you were so disposed. The Donatists refused the
Sacraments, because the Priests were wicked which administered them: to whom
Saint Austen said, Necesse est vt semper erretis, quamdiu propter hominum vitia
Dei sacramenta violatis. Contra litt. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 30.
You can never possibly be free from error, so long as you violate the
sacraments of God for the faults of men. The Anabaptists would remove Princes
and Magistrates, because many have abused their authority and government: to
whom we answer, though Mali abutuntur rebus bonis, Evil men abuse good
ordinances; yet, if a kingdom were not a lawful state and calling, holy
David, Josias and the like, would not have bin Kings: for Boni non vtuntur
rebus malis, those that are good meddle not with bad matters: And we find
that the rent in the kingdom of Israel, was because, 3. Reg. 12.
Rehoboam abused his government: and the alteration of the state of the Romans
under the Kings, was because, Quae honest habere licebat, Salust in Cat.
per turpitudinem abuti properabant. For the common people by reason of their
ignorance, invincible ignorance, being not able to discern between the true
use of that which is good, and the abuse of it; nor between that fault that
proceeds ex natura facti, Th. 1. ques. 41. art. 6.
out of the nature of the fact it self, because it is malum simpliciter,
simply evil, and that which proceeds ex abusu boni, from the abuse of that
which is good, which is malum per accidens, evil but by an accident; will
allow of a tyranny, as Saint Austin notes, which is the woorst state of
Government, De bono coniugals cap. 14.
si regia clementia subditos tractet, If he handle the subjects with the
clemency of a King; and condemn a Monarchy, the best kind of government, Si
rex crudelitate tyrannica saeuiat, if being a King he show the cruelty of a
tyrant, being not able to discern between the just use of an unjust
authority, and the unjust use of a just authority. They will with Lycurgus
root out all the Vines in a Country, because men will be drunk, and even mad
with wine; whereas Plutarch says, they should rather dig wells and
fountains near unto them; and as Plato counsels, Insanum Deum alio sobrio
repressum, castigare; that is take away the abuse by mixing some quantity of
water with it. They will with Cotta, Viues de Concord. lib. 4.
as Cicero reports, condemn reason and knowledge in men, because oftentimes
it is the cheifest instrument of sin and iniquity, and being given unto man as
an excellency above other creatures, does make him much worse than any brute
beast. De interiori domo Cap. 50.
They will forbid reading and diversity of study, because as S. Bernard notes,
Prolixa lectio memoriam legentis obliterat, Over much reading hurts the
memory of the reader; not considering with S. Bernard that often times Crimen
non est in rebus, Ibid.
sed in vsu agentis, the fault is not in the things, but in him that uses
them: nor with S. Aug. de doct. ch^. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Austin, that In multis non vsus rerum, sed libido vtentis in culpa est, In
many things not their use, but the disorder of him that uses them must be
blamed: nor that the rule is not, Arist. topic, 1.
Cuius abusus malus est, ipsum quoque malum est; but Cuius vsus malus est, id
est, per se malus est, ipsum quoque malum est, that which may be abused is
evil, but that which cannot be well used; which is the same which the
Canonists have, Nauarus enchir, cap, 14.
Si vsus principalis alicuius rei sit mortifer, mortiferam quoque rem ipsam
efficiet: that is, if the principal use of any thing be deadly, it shall make
the thing it self of like nature.

Now our Savior here teaches them another lesson, not to pull down Churches
for the abuse of them, or the abuse of the Priest; but reform the abuse and
retain the good use. And although our Savior when the Jews were incorrigible,
and would not be reformed, nor repent them of that sin of sins, the putting
to death, to shameful death, that innocent Lamb, the very Son of God, our
Savior Christ Jesus, threatened the destruction of the Temple and the miserable
captivity of the whole Nation, and performed it: So that Jerusalem became as
Jericho was an execrable thing; for although Julian, Joshua 6.
and the Greacians and the Jews, endeavored to repair it and build it again,
yet it was impossible, by reason of earthquakes and fires from heaven, which
consumed the stuff, and troubled the workmen, as Theoderet reports: yet this
was but a remoouing of their candlestick, as I may call it, Theod lib. 5. ca.
10.
not the putting out of the Candle; a remoouing of the Temple of God and the
Priesthood to another Nation, that is, to the Gentiles; not an utter subuersio^
of Churches and ecclesiastical State; or to use our Sauiors words in this same
Chap. Ver. 43.
A taking away of the Kingdom of God from them and giving it to a Nation that
should bring forth the fruits thereof; as when Saul became incorrigible, and
abused his State, Samuel said not, the Lord has rent away the kingdom from
Israel this day, and will have no more Kings but Judges, etc. but, The Lord
has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to thy
neighbor, 1. Sam. 15.
who is better than thou: that is, has removed the insufficient from the
place of government, and put in his room one more sufficient. To teach us,
that as for the sins of Princes and abuse of their State, the manner of
government is not altered by God, nor their priueledges abrogated, but the
Office translated to a fitter person; so, for the abuse of Churches and
Churchmen, neither the Churches ought to be defaced and ruined, nor the state
of the Clergy to be disgraced and villified; but those that are disordered
must be displaced, and their honors bestowed upon better men. For this is a
lesson set down in the rules of the law, as an axiom or maxim in nature, and
not in a law positive or human constitution, 6. decr^t. de ^eg. iuris.
that, Semel Deo dedicatum, non est ad vsus humanos vlterius transferendu^;
That which has been once dedicated to God, is not any more to be transferred
to the uses of men. And it seems to be so evident by the light of Nature,
that children acknowledge it as Plato confesses; who speaking of a truth as
evident as he took it, as that two and two make four, Nos dicimus (says he)
quod pueri solent; Quae recte data sunt, Plat. Phileb.
eripi non licet; We say as children use to do: Things well given, must not
be taken back again: and therefore no marvel if it were a case ouer-ruled by
the more ancient sort of heathen Philosophers in their Courts of justice, Plin.
2. Epist. lib. 10 Epist. 74. and 75.
Si facta aedes sit, licet collapsa sit iam, religio tamen eius occupauit
solum: If an house has been once dedicated to God, though it be fallen down
and utterly decayed, yet the soil is holy, and the ground religious, and not
to be employed to civil or profane uses.

The fifth circumstance.
The fifth circumstance in the Fact, is the manner how our Savior performed
this reformation, He cast out them that sold and bought, etc. An extraordinary
course is used by our Savior, and therefore the more obseruable. For whereas
in all other places and against all other sins he uses words, and
reproves and reprehensions; and those also tempered with humility, mildnes and
gentleness: Here he uses force and execution, and external discipline, and
present correction, by casting them out of the Temple, by making a whippe of
small cords, John. 2.
and so whipping the^ out; by overthrowing the tables of the money changers,
and the seats and chaires of them that sold doves: and whereas he says of
himself, that he was sent into the world, not to judge the world, but that
the world might be saved by him; John, 3.
yet in this case, in this sin, in this abuse, and profanation of the
Temple, as it were forgetting his accustomed gentleness, and the end of his
coming, he exercises punishment, strikes with a whippe, overthrows the
tables, casts abroad the money, and to conclude, casts them out of the
Temple; and that by himself alone, and with his own hands.

If her excellent Majesty, being famous and renowned for her singular
clemency, should come to this City and with her own hands, punish a fault or
misdemeanor, it were a good argument that, that kind of sin were most odious
unto her; here our Savior the Prince of peace and fountain of mercy comes to
Jerusalem, and with his own hands does punish the abuses, and the
prophanations of the temple of GOD. Adam sinned, Genesis 3.
and he sent his Angels or Cherubins to cast him out of Paradise. The wicked
Sodomites sinned, and he sent his Angels, Genesis 19.
and it rayned fire from heaven and consumed them. The whold world corrupted
their way upon earth, Gen 7.
and he sent rain from heaven and destroyed them with a flood. Pharaoh would
not harken to his voice to let the people go, Exodus 8.
and he sent Frogs and Grashopers etc. and wasted his country. 2. Sam. 24.
David sinned by numbering his people, and he sent an Angel and smote them
with pestilence. Dan. 13.
The Elders sinned against Susanna, and God sent the Child Daniel to do
judgment on them. Only this sin of profaning and abusing his Temple, he
corrects and chasteneth with his own hands, he sends not his Angels, he
sends not fire, he sends not water, he sends not his Prophets, but he
comes himself and takes punishment of them.

But you will say; How could this be, that our Savior Christ, being one man,
and unarmed, without a guard or soldiers after him, without any humane
authority or external calling, in the presence of the Priests and the Scribes,
who hated him with deadly hatred, and at that present time sought after his
life, who made profit of those buiers and sellers, who also were many in
number, and most attentive and greedy after their gain, and had (as I said
before) an honest pretense out of the law for this their marchandizing;
notwithstanding all these circumstances, without tumult, without noise, without
contradiction or resistance, he should be able to cast them all together out
of the Temple?

Hierom super 21. Math,
But the answer is plain, That it was done by a miracle, as the ancient
Fathers do jointly testify: and S. Jerome says, that this was the greatest of
all his miracles. Some think says he, yt the greatest miracle he wrought, was
ye raising of Lazarus from the dead; and some think that the giving of sight
to ye blind was the greatest miracle; some the voice that was heard at Iordane
when he was baptized; some his transfiguration in the mountain, where he
showed his triumphant glory and majesty: but says he, of all the signs yt ever
he wrought, this seems most miraculous in mine eye, that one man at that time
contemptible, so far forth vile and base in their eyes, that he was afterward
crucified; in despite of Scribes and Priests, could cast out with whips such a
multitude of men and cattle, which a pretty army of men could have hardly
performed: but (says he) Igneum quiddam and sidereum radiabat in oculis eius;
There was some fiery and starry brightness that glistered in his eyes; and the
majesty of his Divinity did shine in his face: so that neither Scribes, nor
Pharisees, nor Priests, nor buiers, nor sellers, Ori. supe 2, Job.
durst resist and withstand him. And S. Origin says, that this was a greater
miracle then the turning of water into wine, because their inanimata materia
subsistit; a matter without life and soul does yield unto him: but in this,
tot millium hominum domantur ingenia; he daunteth the hearts and courages of
thousands of men. For you shall understand, that some miracles were wrought
upon ye bodies of men, which we most admire, because they are subject to the
sight of our eyes: and some upon the minds of men, quantum ad immutandas
inferiores vires, concerning the change of their inferior faculties, as the
Schoolmen say; which though they were more miraculous, yet to us they seem
not so. And this distinction may be gathered out of the Hebrews, where he
says; Heb. 2.
that God bare witness to Christ, (...), by signs and wonders, (...), by diverse
powers, which wrought upon the minds and souls of men. The miracles which he
wrought upon bodies are observed by you al, but the miracle which he wrought
upon their minds and souls were these and the like: first, the informing of
his Disciples with knowledge and understanding, Luke 21.
I will give you a mouth and wisdom where against all your adversaries shall
not be able to speak or resist. And therefore it is said in ye Acts, Act, 4.
that when the Jews saw the constancy of Peter and John, and understood that
they were unlearned men, and without knowledge, admirabanter, they thought it a
miracle. Math 9.
The second is the calling of Matthew; for as soon as he said, follow me,
though he sat at the receipt of costome, yet presently he rose up and followed
him: Fulgur diuinae Maiestatis videntem ad se traxit; The lightning of his
divine Majesty drew him unto him so soon as he did but see him. The 3. is in
ye Gospel of John, Ioh. 18.
where as soon as he said to the band of men and officers that came with Judas
to apprehend him, I am he; they went backward, and fell to the ground: S. Austin
writing upon that place, says it was a miracle. The forth is in S. Lukes
Gospel, Trae. 112. supe. Job. Luke 4.
where they of the Sinagogue led him to the edge of an hill, to thrust him
down headlong, but Jesus passed through the midst of them, and went his way:
where S. Chrisostom says; Stare in medio insidiantium and non apprehendi, To
stand in the midst of those that waylaid him and not to be taken, showed his
Divinity, and was a miracle. Finally, as I have showed you before, with this
facility to cast out the buiers, and sellers, etc. and not to be resisted,
argued the power of his Divinity, and was a miracle. And this of the fifth
circumstance.

I amplify this point, and urge all these circumstances of our Saviors force,
and extraordinary violence used in this place, and the miraculous perfourming
of it; to show unto you how odious this sin is, of profaning the Church of
GOD with buying and selling. And no question, if this merchandising (which had
so fair a pretense for it as the letter of the law, and the ease and benifit
of ye whole nation) was so odious to our Savior Christ; our merchandising, and
buying and selling in the Church of God, cannot be less odious and offensive
to him.

For our buying and selling in the Church of GOD, our Symonie, as we call it,
has no pretense for it in the law of Moses, nor in the law of the Gospel,
nor in Ecclesiastical or Canon laws, nor in the Civil and National laws of
any Country. The law of Moses provided so liberally for the Priests and the
whole family of the Levites, by the free cities, and the demaines which were
allowed them in every Tribe, that there was neither use nor abuse of buying and
selling till Ieroboams time, 3. Reg. 13.
who erected an altar against the altar of GOD, and made of the lowest of the
people (that would fill his hand) idolatrous priests. In the new law of the new
Testament there was gratis accepistis, gratis date; the Apostles received their
gifts freely, and gave them freely; the people received the word freely, and
freely of their own accord they laid down the price of their land at the
Apostles feet. The Ecclesiastical and Civil laws forbid nothing with
greater regard, since the Church was endowed with peculiar maintenance, than
the buying and selling of Spiritual offices, and Ecclesiastical perferments:
and I know none, either ancient Father, or Schoole-man, or late Writer, which
applies not this Scripture, and this Action of our Savior Christ, to our
Simoniacall buying and selling of orders and offices in Christian Churches. So
that if all councels and ancient reverend Bishops, which had the constituting
or confirming of Ecclesiastical laws be not deceived, this Simonie is a wrong
to the state of the Church: if all good Princes and Statesmen, and Parliaments
be not deceived, who have the making and establishing of Statute Laws, this
Simonie is prejudicial to a Commonweal: if all interpreters be not deceived,
it is a sin against the law of God, and severely chastised in this place by
our Savior Christ, either mistically and figuratively, or by necessary
consequence. For if those things which by nature were vendible, as sheep and
oxen, and to that purpose, to offer them in sacrifice to God, might not be
bought and sold in the house of GOD or the precincts of it; much less may
offices Ecclesiastical, or Tithes, or the maintenance of Gods Ministers, which
by nature are not saleable, be bought or sold in the Church of God.

For what? If the sin of Simon Magus (of whom this fault has denomination)
consisted in buying only, and not in selling of that which was spiritual;
seeing buying and selling are both in a predicament (for nothing is bought but
that which is sold, and contra) and the Apostles had sinned as grievously in
selling, as Simon did in buying: and the Schoolmen say well, Th. 22. quest.
100. art. 1.
that Vendentes conformantur Simoni in intention si non in actu; Sellers are
conformed to Simon Magus in purpose, though not in action; because he would
have bought the holy Ghost, to sell his miracles. May not the Church impose one
name to both these sins, which are cousin germans, nay brother germans, as
well as buying and selling should be comprehended under the word of
merchandising? or that, seruus, vas, ager, arbor, pecus, should be contained
under the name of pecunia, as S. Austin notes in his Books of Christian
Learning?

Again; If the sin of Simon Magus properly consisted in the buying of a
spiritual thing, of the working of miracles, which is merely spiritual; as
the gift of preaching or the gift of prophesying; and the gift of preaching and
the maintenance allotted for it, by what name or title so-euer you call it,
concur to the making of a perfect Preacher, as the soul and body to the
making of a perfect man; so that as the soul separated from the body, though
it lives, 1 q. 3. Si quis obiecerit.
yet it lives not corporaliter, bodily; so Preaching separated from the
maintenance, though it lives, yet it lives not ciuiliter or humaniter, as
civility and humanity would it should, as GOD has appointed it to live in
this world: may not the buying and selling of a Bishopric or Benefice, which
is annexum quiddam spiritualibus, somewhat annexed to spiritual affairs, be
accounted Simonie; when not only the soul of man is said to live, but the
body also which is annexum quiddam, is said to live ex union animae, by the
union of the soul: when, not he only that kills the soul is said to do
murder, but he also that kills the body which has no life but by means of
the soul; when not he only is said to sin against the Majesty of a
Prince, who offers injury to his person, or crown, but he also that does
violence to those things which are annexed to his crown and dignity?

This selling and buying in the Church of God, which by the general consent of
interpreters, Fathers and Schoolmen, is here punished by our Savior Christ,
and is justly called Simonie, and a true branch of the sin of Simon Magus is
so common and usual in the Church of England, that I must needs say, that
either you esteem it not as a sin, or if you take it for a sin, since our
Savior is ascended into Heaven, you think there is no GOD to punish you for
it.

To hold it no sin, is to hold the heresy of Simon Magus (for so it is
called) that is, Caiet. in 8. Act.
to think that the holy Ghost may be bought and sold; for when Officium curae
animaru^ praecipuum ac spiritualissimum Dei donum sit; The office of the charge
of souls is an especial and most spiritual gift of God: to buy or to sell
the office of the charge of souls in general, that is, to buy or sell Orders,
or to buy and sell the office of the charge of these or those souls; that is,
to buy or sell a Presentation, is Simonie, and that in his own nature, and not
because it is forbidden by Ecclesiastical or Civil Law. And it is not only
vulnus cancrosum, as Saint Ambrose calls it, a wound that has a canker in
it, and therefore will creep along through every joint of the body of a
Commonwealth, as we find by our miserable experience, 1. q, 1. reperiuntur.
and so requires ignitum ferrum, a hot coulter or sharp sword, that is, the
extremity of civil punishment; nor execrabile flagitium only, a detestable
sin, and therefore anathematis opprobrio condemnandum, to be condemned and
cursed with Excommunication, the highest censure of the Church; Act. 8.
but it is that (...), that wickedness or sinfulness that Saint Peter
speaks of, and that (...), that bond or bundle of iniquity, that contains
many sins fast chained together: which argue, that the heart is not right, and
from which we may pray to be delivered, not simply as from other sins, but
if it be possible, as Saint Peter counseled Simon Magus pray unto God, that if
it be possible this thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

But forasmuch as since the time, that good Christians are degenerated into
cunning politicians, it is not so much regarded, what is good for the state of
the Church, as what is fitting and behoofefull for a Commonwealth; nor such
reckoning made of eternal reward, or eternal punishment, as of present
pleasure and of punishment inflicted on our body, or goods: and we say with the
Policitians, Aug. de ciuit. Dei li. 2 cap. 2.
Pace secura sit resp. floreat copijs referta, victorijs gloriosa, and quid ad
nos? If there be peace and plenty and prosperity, what care we for the state of
the Church? I will give you some reasons amongst many, why this selling and
buying in the Church, which is the utter undoing of the state of the Clergy,
as it is not lawful by the word of God; so not tolerable in regard of the
policy of a Christian Commonwealth.

First, as much as in it lies, it takes away the society

It is well known and confessed, that the state of the Clergy in every good
Christian Commonwealth, has had his lot and portion, not only spiritual in
the Lord, but also temporal in the Commonwealth, being an estate of men, as
of the best desert, if they do their duties; so not to be fed by the air, as
the Cameleons are, but by the fruits and increase which proceed from the
earth: and therefore they have had allotted them by the law of nature, as
Melchisedech had; by the law of Moses as the Priests had; and by the
confirmation of our Savior Christ, haec oportet fieri, these things must be
done; and by civil and provincial laws in Christianity, not only the Tithes
of the fruit of the earth; because they have bellies to be fed, and backs to
be clothed, Number. 35.
and families to be maintained: but they had their Cities and their lands
belonging to them among the Jews, and their parts in the sacrifice and
offerings: and amongst the Christians their demaines, and temporalties; because
that state was not anarchicall, or without authority and jurisdiction. Lastly,
they had their special privileges, namely not to serve in the tabernacle
before 25. Number. 8.
year old, not after 50. their Cities of refuge and Sanctuaries, etc. In the
famine of Aegipt they had an ordinary allowance of Pharaoh; Number. 35.
so that when he bought all the land of the subjects in Aegipt, Genesis 47.
yet the Priests land was not sold: so great were their privileges among the
Heathen.

Now if their Christian privileges which have been many, shall be made void,
against the rule of the 12. Tables, Priuilegia ne irroganto, Lud. Charend. ad
Leg. antiq. Romans
let them not infringe the Privileges: Cassiod lib 2. epist. 20.
and against all reason when Theodoricus said, Intra regulas constituti iuris
non debet munificentia principum arctari, the bounty of Princes ought not to
be straightned within the bounds of the law; if where aequalitas is not
aequitas, that is equity joined with equality, the maintenance of all
dignity, and superiority and authority be taken away, which will breed
contempt; for as virtue is discouraged without reward, so authority is
disarmed without just maintenance; finally, if those necessaries which should
maintain nature, which is contented with a little course cloth for the back,
and course bread for the belly, be retained by force or fine slight from that
state, or a great part of it, which is ordained as the Sun is, ad continuos
cursus, to continual labor and travail in the house of God; and not only
taken from them, but given to a nation which brings forth worse fruit: it is
out of all doubt, that as when one serpent eats another (...), a dragon is
engendered which deuoureth all; so when one State eats up another, it brings
forth a monstrous and unnatural state in the commonwealth, and so by
consequent a dangerous change. So that we are much to fear, that as before
the coming of our Savior in the flesh, the Roman Commonwealth being changed
by little and little, ex pulcherrima and optima, Aug. de ciuit. Dei. li. 2. ca.
19.
pessima ac flagitiosissima facta est; so the Commonwealth of England and of
Christianity, by this foul sin of Simonie and Sacrilege, before the second
coming of our Savior, of a most religious and well ordered Commonwealth,
will become irreligious and simoniacall.

Secondly, this buying and selling in the Church of God, desolate and forsaken
Widows the two Universities, the two fruitful Mothers and full of Children,
though now ready to give up the ghost, and power out their souls in their
Mothers bosoms. For if we that be bred up in learning, suffer in our
childhood in the Grammar schools magnum and grave malum, Aug. confess. lib. 1.
cap. 9.
a great and grievous affliction (Saint Austin compares it to the torments of
martyrdom) and when we come to the University, if we live of the Colleges
allowance, are, as Phalaris objected to the Leontines, (...), Epist. 53.
needy of all things but hunger and fear; or if we be maintained but partly by
our parents cost, do expend in necessary maintenance, books, and degrees,
before we come to any perfection, five hundred pounds, or a thousand marks.
If by this price of the expense of our time, our bodies and spirits, our
substance and patrimonies, we cannot purchase those small rewards which are
ours by law, and the right of inheritance, a poor Parsonage or a poor
Vicarage, of forty or fifty pound a year; but we must pay to the Patron for
the lease of a life (a spent and out-worne life) either in annual pension, or
above the rate of a Copyhold, and that with the hazard of the loss of our
souls, by simonie and perjury, and the forfeiture of all our spiritual
preferments in esse and in posse, both present and to come: what father after a
while will be so improuident, to bring up his son to his great charge, to
this necessary beggerie? What Christian will be so irreligious, as to bring
up his son in that course of life, which by probability of necessity ( quae
cogit ad turpia, Iuuenal.
enforcing to sin) will entangle him in simonie and perjury? When as the
Poet says; Inuitatus ad haec, aliquis de ponte negabit. A beggars brat taken
from a bridge where he sits in begging, if he knew the inconvenience, had
cause to refuse it.

2. Objections answered.
But you will say, that learning is to be desired, and will be desired for it
self; because as the Stoics say, Doctrina est pretium sibi, Learning is her
own recompense: and the Minister must consider fructum, Phil. 4.
non datum, the good that he does, not the reward he must have: and therefore
though this be a fault, yet no danger thereby of decay of learning. For the
former, it is most true, that Learning is Lux animi, and oblectatio vitae, the
light of the mind, and delight of the life, and for it self to be desired;
but of Gentlemen, who can live without it; and of Stoickes and Philosophers,
which had no passions, which lived as souls without bodies, so far in love
with the food of the one, that they took no regard what became of the other.
But if Gentlemen only should be learned, a competent measure would serve
their turn, the dephts of professions are above their endeavors, they are so
painful: and you shall find as few Scholars that do reach to that height
of Philosophy, as to feed their minds and to starve their bodies, as you
shall find Gentlemen that are come to that height of Christianity, to forsake
all and follow Christ, or to love their enemies and study their good.

But the Romans, who made Aedes honori and virtuti gemellas, that is, joined
the Churches of Honor and Virtue the one close to the other; and those wise
men who upon sepulchers and monuments engraued these titles, Virtuti and
Honori, Symmac. lib. 1. epist. 37.
to Virtue and Honor; and our Founders and Benefactors, who appointed opulenta
praemia literarum professoribus, plentiful rewards to the professing of
learning: Symmac. lib. 10. Epist. 25.
they knew well enough, that Non deficit studium, quod praemium largius habet;
and that Virtus aemula, aelitur exemplo honoris alieni; Study is never scant,
where the recompense is large; and virtue which is evermore in aemulation, is
fed by the example of honor in other men. And again on the other side, that
learning would be much discouraged, A. Gel. petijt sibi aes dari (...) Cassiod.
if Scholars should come to Gentlemen as the Philosopher came to Herod to
beg a penny to buy him bread; because Probata virtus inhonora cessat, Virtue
though it be commended, yet if it be not honored and rewarded will soon be
discouraged.

For the latter, that we must not seek datum but fructum, Dignus est operarius
mercede sua, The workman is worthy of his hire. That law that binds him that
labors to minister unto you spiritual things, binds you to administer
unto him corporal things, and not sell them to him: si spiritualium eorum
participes facti sunt gentiles: if Gentlemen be partakers of their spiritual
things, they must administer unto them worldly things: for as Saint Paul said,
Romans 15.
he was debtor illis, a debtor unto all; so on the other side, Ibid.
debitores eorum sunt, they are debtors to the Apostles. And this is the
division spoken of by the Son of Sirach; In diuisione sortis da and accipe,
give and take, not sell and take. Eccles. 14.
And Saint Paul calls it (...). Phil. 4. to communicate one with another
after the manner of giving and receiving: to signify (says Caietan upon that
place) that the maintenance of the Clergy is due secundum rations dati and
accepti; which therefore should be Communicationes and Commutationes, not
Venditiones. And as in a Commonwealth, though we owe our selves and all our
endeavors to our Prince and Country, Seruitia tamen per moderata compendia
prouocantur; yet some reasonable consideration pulls on our service; so also,
though we owe our selves and our labors to your salvation and aedification,
and not to preach is a woe unto us, 1. Cor. 9.
and if I do it willingly I have my reward, the increase of grace, the
increase of knowledge, and everlasting life, Euge bone serve, Matthew. 25.
Well done good servant, that is, a reward spiritual, a reward at Gods hands;
yet for all that seruitia, etc. our endeavors are stirred up with temporal
rewards, Cass. 2, 11.
and necessary maintenance: and not only ours but other men's, who by our
preferments, or at least just maintenance, may be encouraged to this kind of
calling. For as Marriage is honored, why? because by that, reparatio
posteritatis acquiritur posterity is kept in reparation: so our labors and
callings must be honored and regarded; because not out of our loins (as in
Moses law proceeds the seed of the Priesthood) but out of our honors and
preferments.

Another Objection answ.
But you will say; This complaint needs not, for many of the Clergy are rich
enough; and what estate is there in the world, but some of that calling do
live in poverty? To which I answer; That in what estate soever prodigality
or supine negligence is found, there poverty will follow, and no remedy for
it. But there is no calling within this Commonwealth wherein a painful and
industrious man may not live decently and plentifully in that kind of
function, except only in the Ministry: where, if they have not money to buy
them a Benefice, or preferment as we call it* they must live of the alms of
the poor of the parish, for reading some Lecture, as the Popish priests did of
Dirrges and Masses; and have their collection together with the old and the
lame, and the blind, and such as are a burden to the commonwealth. Oh (says
Saint Bernard) what a perverse order is this, coelestibus terrena mercari, to
buy earthly with heavenly things? How much better were it, and more agreeable
to reason, vt pro carnali victu carnalia opera exercerent; nec fierent
inuersores rerum, aut inhonorarent spirituale ministerium; that they should use
bodily labor for bodily food without either changing the nature of things, or
discrediting their spiritual calling.

As for those that are rich in the Clergy, the number (God knows) is very
scant; and those either Antiqui Heroes nati melioribus annis, which began with
the beginning of her Majesty's reign, when Benefices went a begging as
Ministers do now; or those whose best reuenew is parsimony and miserable diet,
without hospitality; or else those, who are enriched by land or other patrimony
left unto them by their parents or friends. And yet the greatest part of these,
who by their titles of dignity and outward appearance seem rich unto you, they
have (...), a needy kind of wealth, and estate vnestablished; Consess. 12.
or as Saint Austin calls it copiosam inopiam, and ignominiosam gloriam, a
plentiful penury, and inglorious glory. Their dignities and honors for the
most part are titular, like the Archdeaconrie of London in King Henry the
seconds days: Epist. 151.
which Petrus Blesensis reported to Innocentius then Bishop of Rome, to be
Draco non habens vnde possit viuere nisi vento, A Dragon (a stately name or
title, the Archdeacon of London) not having whereof to live, except of wind:
for says he, Ille honos est in solis, and nndis, and puris intellectibus, That
preferment stands in only, and naked, and pure supposals. So that if the
Clergy may take denomination of the greater part, of an hundred for one, it
is a poor Clergy; and hereafter when the Prince or the State shall have need
of their purses, they must answer with Saint Peter; Argentum and aurum non est
mihi, Silver and gold have we none, but that which we have, we will readily
afford; a prayer or a blessing, a lecture or a sermon.

Wherefore to conclude this point, though learning of it self be never so
precious, yet if students after they have spent their time, their spirits,
their lives, their patrymonies for the good of the Church or commonwealth,
Cass 2, 28.
shall be thus neglected, nay skorned and despised (for exprobrata militia
creditur, quae irremunerata transitur, his service in the Wars, his service
in the Church, his service in the commonwealth is despised, as base, which is
passed over without a reward) we shall not need Iulians Edict, or Domitians
law, good arts of themselves will go into banishment.

Thirdly, this buying and selling in the Church of GOD, will procure an
insufficient and an unlearned Ministry; for Strenuus and segnis fato
potiuntur eodem, the learned and the unlearned are in like possibility to have
the presentation at the patrons hands. Balaams Ass if he can but speak, if
he come laden with coin, shall be preferred before Balaam his master, In
laudibus Basil^^.
if he were as honest as he was wise. And we find it already by experience,
that as Greg. Naz. said, if there be a Samuel amongst our Prophets, (...), who
is a seer as they called him, or a learned man; there is a Saul also (...), a
base and an ignorant Prophet: by which means that order and calling which is
in toto Christianismo (...), Ibid.
the most reverend and holy calling in all Christianity, is become in toto
Christianismo (...), the most base and ridiculous calling in all Christianity.
Wherefore though the Romans thought it stood with their Commonwealth, Patere.
manner rudem Corinthiorum intellectum, that the Corinthians should continue in
rudeness and ignorance; and though the Papists thought it good, and to stand
with the policy of their Church, to keep the people in blind simplicity: yet
it cannot stand either with the policy of any Christian Church or
Commonwealth, to have ignorant teachers, ignorant Priests, ignorant Preachers;
but seeing it is a curse which God threatens in his displeasure to disordered
Commonwealths, and erit sicut populus, sic and sacerdos, that the Priests
should be either as wicked or as ignorant as the people are, and this buying
and selling effects this curse, it seems most inconvenient for a
Commonwealth.

Simony, does remove all hospitality, and all means of hospitality from the
state of the Clergy, which does not only hinder and hold back the fruits of
our preaching, because as Saint Gregory notes, Egentis mentem doctrinae sermo
non penetrat, Greg. Pastor.
si hunc apud eius animum manus misericordiae non commendat; The word of
instruction does not pearce the mind of the needy, unless the hand of
mercy do further commend it unto him: and secondly hinder us from that great
blessing and commodity that Cassiodore speaks of, Cassiod. 1.9.
Nonnulla pauperibus largiendi, Of giving somewhat to the poor: but thirdly,
it is also injurious to the Commonwealth; for as Tacitus notes, there
commonly follows dissolutio imperii si fructus quibus Resp. sustinetur,
Annal. 13.
diminuuntur; a dissolution of the State, when the fruits and revenues are
diminished, which maintain the Commonwealth. Now, seeing hospitality is the
best reuenew which is left to comfort and relieve the poorer sort, which abound
at this time in this Commonwealth; they are very injurious to this State, who
make not only the superfluity of the wealth of the Clergy, which are bona
pauperum, the goods of the poor, but the very necessary maintenance of the
Preachers themselves, which are bona Christi, the goods of Christ; the goods of
Gentlemen or Nobility.

Fifthly. This buying and selling in the Church of God, Simonie, if it do not
effect a dissolution of this State; yet it does foreshew and portend some great
evil to ensue. For we read in the Ecclesiastical History, Socrat. lib. 7.
cap. 33.
that when certain fugitive slaves profaned the Church by murdering one
Priest, and wounding another; one that stood by suddenly uttered these words,
(...), that the profanation of the Church did foreshew no good to ensue; and
he alleged for the confirmation of it two verses out of a Greek Poet, (...),
(...).
Nam saepe signa talia dari solent, cum sacra foedum templa polluit scelus. And
says Socrates, He that said thus was not deceived; for it foreshewed troubles
and divisions among the people, and the banishment of him that was author of
them. And we find, that not long after this profanation of the Temple, this
buying and selling of oxen, and sheep, etc. and the buying and selling of the
Priesthood which for money was now become annual; the destruction of
Jerusalem ensued, and the dispersion of the whole Nation: And the flourishing
Kingdoms and Churches of Graecia and Armenia were forsaken of God, and became
subject to the Turks, when they began to maintain this heresy, Alph. de Cast.
Licere res Ecclesiasticas vendere; that it was lawful to sell the goods of the
Church. And it is a received observation among our Writers, that Ecclesia and
Imperium pariter defecerunt, when the Church began to be profaned by Simonie
and Sacrilege, the Empire began to be greatly eclipsed. And what else can we
look for after this profanation of buying and selling in the Church of God,
but some curse to ensue; when Ecclesiastica possident Laici, Bernard. epist.
224.
holy places and holy things are possessed by profane men, as Saint Barnard
says, who instead of Prayers which the Priest should offer, do send up into
heaven daily sacrifices, quotidianas hostias, not peace offerings, sed clamores
pauperum, lachrymas viduarum, planctus orphanorum; The cries of the poor, the
tears of the widows, and the miserable complaints of children and orphans?

Wherefore, seeing this buying and selling in the Church is so heinous in the
sight of God, and so inconvenient for a Commonwealth; give me leave
(honorable Lords, and reverent Fathers of the Clergy) who have your places of
state and dignity, both in the Church and Commonwealth; give me leave in all
humility I beseech you, not to exhort you to that, which I hope you do
already; nor to dehort you from that fault, from which I am persuaded that some
of you are as free and innocent as Saint Peter was; but to counsel him that
stands, to take heed least he fall into this sin: which is by so much the
more heinous in you, than in an inferior Minister, as it had been in Saint
Peter to have exacted money of Simon, for the imposition of hands, than in
Simon Magus for offering it. For the sins and offenses of the Shepherds are
greater than the sins and offenses of the Sheep: First, because they cannot
excuse themselves by simplicity or pretense of ignorance, as the sheep may:
secondly, because they are placed to correct them that go astray; not to lead
them amiss by ill example: thirdly, because while the shepherd wandereth by
the steep and dangerous places of sin, the whole flock who are taught to
follow the Shepherd, do fall down headlong into the gulf of iniquity. And
by this reason, the sins of Governors are not only personal, but do
oftentimes engender heresies in the minds of the ignorant and inferior
people; every one thinking that lawful to be done, which his Superior, his
Governor, 1. q. 1. quisquis.
and his Pastor does; which is a kind of heresy. And for this cause
(peradventure) in the Canon law, Simonie is called heresy; because when the
inferiors buy their orders, or their institutions, or their presentations of
their Superiors, whose steps and examples they think they should follow, they
are persuaded they may do the like when occasion serves, without any offense,
both by the example of their Superiors, as also by ye law of all nations; for
as Seneca says Quae emeris vendere gentium ius est, It is the law of nations,
that a man may sell what he has bought: De benef. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Wherefore you that do stand, take heed least you fall, and become Authors of
this damnable sin, and pernicious heresy.

Secondly. You that are my Brethren of the Clergy, forasmuch as consensere
mores peccatis, this sin is become customable in this land; and videtur
licitum quia publicum, and it is thought lawful because it is so common; and
there is no Simonie wherein you are not one party, if not both; I will be
bolder with you: and yet that my words may carry more credit, I will use S.
Bernards exhortation; Epist. 42.
Long a vobis remouete malum tempori vetus, sed cupiditati nouum, si moniam,
etc. Remove, remove far from you this Simonie, for age an old sin (being
the first heresy that sprang up in christianity after the ascension of our
Savior Christ) though fresh and new in daily practice. Remove I say this
Simonie, and covetousness, and ambition the author of it; for these are not
sins whereunto spiritual men are subject, but these are the temptations of
mere carnal men. The first temptation wherewith the devil assaulted our
Savior Christ, was for the necessary sustenance of nature by food, when he
said; Si filius Dei es, Math. 4.
If thou be the son of God, make these stones bread: to want necessaries to
maintain nature, bread for the belly, and cloth for the back, is a great
temptation, and may fall upon a spiritual man; and therefore he says, Si
filius Dei es, If thou be the son of God; as though this temptation might
move the very son of God: but yet for all that, let not this temptation
force you to Simonie, Eccles. 11.
but after the counsel of the Wiseman, Stand still in thy state, and trust in
the Lord; for it is an easy thing for the Lord, subito honestare pauperem,
suddenly to make a poor man an honest man, as our phrase is; that is, a rich
man, or an honorable man. The second temptation wherewith the devil assaulted
our Savior, was vain-glorie; whereunto also a spiritual man is very subject:
for when we have avoided all sins of omission and commission, if it were
possible to avoid them all, vincenda superbia restat, pride and vain-glorie
they will assault us; and therefore to this temptation he also says, Si
filius Dei es. But the third temptation was a gross and a carnal temptation,
when he showed him all the riches and kingdoms of the world; that is, the
temptation of ambition, and covetousness, the proper and natural temptations
of carnal men: and therefore in the two first he said, Si filius Dei es, but
not in the third; which cannot agree to spiritual men, such as you should be
in life and profession.

This third temptation, which is the temptation of covetousness and ambition,
the authors of simonie, has made the Church of England as the Temple of
Jerusalem was, a den of thieves: Lud. Charond. Leg. antiq. Romans
therefore above all things remove these sins from you. It was a law of
Romulus at the first foundation of Rome, Nequis nisi per portam vrbem
ingreditor, that no man should enter the city, but by the gates thereof; and
therefore when Remus went over the wall, he was slain as an enemy; Ioh. 10.
and our Savior made a law at the very foundation of Christianity, that he
that comes not in by the door, Qui non intrat per ostium, fur est: What then
is he but a thief and a robber, that comes into the offices and honors of
the Church, per ruinas Ecclesiae, per desolatas macerias, by the ruins of the
Lordships, revenues and demaines of the Church, that so he may spoil others,
and enrich himself? The Merchant buyeth not his wares, but with hope to sell
them at a better price; and can we hope that any man should buy a Bishopric,
and not sell the prebends, the dignities, and benefices belonging to it? No,
no, says S. Bernard, Qui non fideliter introiuit, Bernard. de bonis deferendis.
neque per Christum; quid ni infideliter agat, and contra Christum? He that
has not faithfully entered, neither by Christ; how is it possible that he
should not deal unfaithfully and against Christ?

Wherefore, long a vobis remouete, etc. Remove far from you that old
evil, old in time, but new and fresh in daily practice, simonie, and ambition
and covetousness, the authors of it; In vita Nazianzeni.
and say with Greg. Naizanzen when he resigned his Bishopric, non a Deo
excluduntur qui priuantur throno; not to be a Bishop or a Deane, etc. is not
to be banished from heaven, or from Paradise as Adam was; but, to compass an
office or dignity by simonie, is as Leo said, accipere spiritum mendacii, to
receive the spirit of lying; as S. Gregory writes, to have non subsistens
sacerdotium, a Priesthood not subsisting; according to S. Ambrose, Anathematis
opprobrio condemnari, to be held an Anathema; in Elizeus h^s judgment, to
deserve a leprosy; in Saint Peter's sentence, to merit damnation; and in our
Saviors practice, to be whipped and scourged out of the Church of God: wherefore,
Long a vobis remouete, etc. Remove far from you this evil, old in time,
but fresh in practice; this simonie, and covetousness and ambition, the
authors of it.

And you that are Gentlemen and patrons of Benefices, think not your selves
free from this sin of Simony, because Simon Magus offered to buy and not sell
the spirit of God, or that which was not lawful to be sold; for as I said
before, it had been a greater sin in Saint Peter, Nic. de Clemang. epist. ad
Gerson.
a Simone pecunias exigere, quam in Simone offerre, To require money of Simon,
than in Simon to offer it: here we find that our Savior Christ cast out of
the Temple, not only buyers but sellers also, eiecit vendentes and ementes;
and Gelasius affirms that dantem and accipientem damnatio Simonis inuoluit,
Epist 1. cap. 23
the sin of Simon Magus wrappeth up together both the buyer and the seller:
and therefore if you be pares culpa, equal in fault, you shall be pares
poena, equal in punishment in Gods justice, though you be unequal by your
Statute law. And so S. Greg. says, Anathema danti, anathema accipienti, 1. q.
1. quicunque
Cursed be he that buyeth, and cursed be he that sells, cursed be he that
gives, and cursed be he that takes; and he that says Simony in the giver is
heresy, says that simony in the taker is Infidelity, and subject to the
punishment of Infidelity; Greg. lib 9. ep. 53.
Auaritia in dandis ecclesiasticis honoribus infidelitatis perditioni
subijcitur, etiamsi tenere fidem, quam negligit videatur, Covetousness in
giving Ecclesiastical preferments is subject to the same destruction whereunto
Infidelity, although it seem to hold ye same faith which indeed it regards
not.

And no doubt if you were not infected with the spice of infidelity, so that
you neither believe the Scriptures themselves, nor the general and universal
consent of the most holy Fathers, the interpreters of them, in the heinousness
of this sin, and the certainty and gravity of the punishment of it, you
would not touch the hallowed thing, nor sell that which is not yours; or that
which is worse, dare sanctum canibus, give that to your dogs, to your hawks or
your horses, etc. which is the portion allotted to Christ and his Ministers:
you would not make that private which belongs to the Church or the
Commonwealth, and in that respect is consecrated pietati and fidei, Policrac.
lib. 7. cap. 17.
to godliness and faith, and only committed to you upon trust; you would not
reap that which you have not sown, nor take away that which you have not
given; you would not make the monuments of your forefathers liberalities, the
eternal testimonies of your covetousness; you would not muzzell the mouth of
the ox that treads out the corn, either by taking money as a fine for a
Benefice, or retaining your Tithes, as an annual rent. Cic. not. deor. 2.
In the times of your ancestors. Tanta vtilitas putabatur percipi ex bobus, vt
eorum visceribus vesci scelus haberetur; That regard was had of the oxen that
trod out the corn, that to rob them of their portion, was accounted
sacrilege: they took that saying of our Savior Christ for Gospel, Beatius
est dare quam accipere, Act, 20.
A happier thing to give unto them, then to take from them. If the Priests of
Moses law were thus reckoned of, why not we? We are not inferior to them:
Si quod euacuatur per gloriam est, multo magis quod permanet in gloria est; 2
Cor, 3.
If that which should be abolished were glorious, much more should that which
remains be glorious. If the Priests in popery, who either taught you not,
or if they taught you, they taught you but vanities, were thus reckoned of, so
that they could live like Princes on S. Peter's patrimony; why should we,
which in your consciences preach unto you the Gospel of Christ sincerely, be
spoiled and robbed of that very little that is left unto us?

Is it not sufficient to have taken from the body of this one state, the
superfluous rank blood of so many Monasteries, and by their abuse irreligious
houses, and to have abated that (...), fullness of blood in our Bishoprics;
and so far to have opened the veins of the Priests for fear of a Pleurisy
by impropriations, customs and compositions, that for very weakness they are
ready to faint in the streets, but you must draw out that little lifeblood
which is left by selling your Vicarages, or retaining your Tithes?

Peradventure you are of opinion (as I understand some are now adays) that
either there is no Priesthood in Christianity; or if there be any, we be all
alike Priests, because S. Peter says, you are a royal Priesthood, regale
sacerdotium; 1 Pet. 2.
and hereof infer, that seeing Tithes are due to the Priest only, and either
there are no Priests, or if there be any, we are all alike Priests, either
Tithes are not due, or if they be due, they belong to us all. But, beloved
Christians, that text of S. Peter is borrowed out of the 19. of Exodus, where
God speaks it of the Jews, as S. Peter does of the Christians: wherefore if
all the Jews in one respect were a Priesthood, and yet nevertheless had the
order of Priesthood distinguished from them; the like may hold in
Christianity, that all may be Priests, and yet have a distinct order of
Priesthood and Ministry. But by that text you may as well prove your selves
Kings as Priests, and challenge unto you the offices and privileges of
Princes; but as the virtue of that text will not defend you from Treason, or
the punishment of Treason wheresoever you be subjects, if ever you challenge
the pre-eminence or privileges of Kings; no more will it defend you from
sacrilege, and the punishment of it, if you challenge the title or privileges
of the Priesthood.

Abac, 2.
But you shall find that Vae, that Curse which the Prophet Abacuck pronounced
against Nabuchodonosor, who enriched himself with the spoils of the East,
Vae accumulanti non sua, Woe unto him, that heapeth up those things which are
not his own: Thesauros quos deuorauit euomet (says Job) and de ventre eius
extrahet eos Deus, He shall cast up the treasures which he has devoured, and
the Lord shall draw them out of his belly: you shall find that this wicked
gain according to the Greek proverb, (...).
brings a rod at his back; you shall find as it is in Eccles. that he has
touched a Scorpion, which no man touches without evident danger, by reason of
the poison which he has in his tail, which Galen says is mole minimum, but
facultate maximum; like the sin of Simony and Sacrilege, where it is in
quantity small, it is in quality heinous; you shall find a more grievous
punishment, 1 q. 1. Cito. ex. Ambros.
as S. Ambrose notes, than the punishment of Idolatry, which God puts down
as very grievous in the second Commandment, which is to be punished not only
on himself, but on his seed also to the third and fourth geration; whereas
Ieroboams selling of the Priesthood, turned to sin unto his house even to root
it out and destroy it from the face of the earth, 3 Reg, 1^.
and the sin of Gehezi who sinned in Simony and coueteousnes, was punished with
a leprosy upon himself and his seed for ever.

And although you have lived long in this sin, and in flourishing state, and
not felt the hand of GOD upon you, ye are not therefore to think it no sin,
or that God cannot or will not punish it; for although as the Poet says, Mars
vltor galeam quoque perdidit, Iuuen. Sat. 4.
and res Non potuit seruare suas, Mars a false and counterfeit Idol might leese
his helmet etc. and could not help it; yet our GOD by the strength of his arm
can do it, with strange rain or with strange hail, or with terrible tempest,
or with consuming fire, Wis, 16.
or by scarsitie and famine, or with plague and sickness etc. for he has mill
nocendi arts, a thousand ways to punish you: and as he said to Senacherib,
can put a hook in your nostrils and a bridle in your lips, and make you bring
it back again the same way that you carried it out, 4 Reg, 19.
as the Philistines did the Ark of God.

Or do you not doubt of his power and ability to do it, but of his truth,
and because, as you imagine, he does not, therefore will not return this
evil on your heads? Adam might as well have argued against Gods truth who
said, what day thou shall eat of that apple thou shall surely dye, for he died
not that day, but became mortal and was sure to die, and as I may say, fell
into a consumption, which left him not until the hour of his death. And I
doubt not to affirm that Gods punishments are already begun upon us, and
although as yet they are but medicinae, non poenae; medicines, not punishments;
and God like a good Physician gives us sometimes sharp potions to recover our
health; that is suffers us to have detrimentu^ in minori bono, Thom. 22 q.
87. art. 7.
vt augeamur in maiori, loss in a lesser good, that we may gain in a
greater; suffers us to have detrimentum pecuniae, and sanitatis, propter
bonum animae, loss of money and health for the good of our soul; yet if these
medicines will not cure us, he will cut off that part of the Church or
Commonwealth, which is diseased and incurable, though to the hazard and
destruction of the whole body.

And I tell you true, it is no good sign or argument of Gods love to us, that
he suffers such sins, such capital sins to reign amongst us without
their due punishment; 2. Match, 6.
For those whom he loves not (as the Author of the Machabees says) he
forbeareth until they come to the fulness of their sin; but it is a token of
his goodness and love (says he) to a nation, not to suffer sins long to
continue, but straight way to punish them; as we find in the children of
Israel his elect people, who suffered more temporal punishments for their
sins than the most Idolatrous nations, whom he reserved to a final
destruction.

And therefore triumph not in your sins, nor comfort your selves in this
impunity; for it is an argument that you are out of Gods favor, and that when
he strikes he will strike you home; when his anger is lenta, slow, thenit
is magna, Valor lib. 1. c. 1.
great, and tarditatem supplicij grauitate compensat, and requiteth the
slacknesse of the punishment with the weight thereof. And it is most true and
very obseruable that Julius Caesar said to the Ambassadors of the Switzers,
That it is a common custom with God to suffer those whom he loves not, but
intends to punish, to enjoy peace and rest, and wealth, and pleasure, and
abundance for a long time, Quo grauius ex commutatione rerum doleant, Comme^t,
lib. 1.
that the change when it comes may grieve them the more.

Wherefore to conclude, seeing this buying and selling of sheep and oxen,
which were for sacrifice, and was a far less sin then our buying and
selling of spiritual things, was so odious to our Savior Christ, that first
of all other things he reformed that, and that diverse times, and by force and
violence, and by miracle; seeing by the opinion of the Fathers, interpreters
and schoolmen this Simonie is a sin and an heresy in Christianity
intolerable; seeing it cannot stand with a commonwealth, but thereby one
state will eat up another; learning and the Universities will be decayed; the
Church be supplied with ignorant pastors; hospitality removed from the
state of the Clergy; and to conclude, it is a sign and forerunner of some
evil to ensue to the commonwealth: give me leave I beseech you honorable,
worshipful, etc. who are called, if not inplenitudinem potestatis, unto the
fullness of power; yet to some good measure of ability and power, Peter
Blesens. Epist, 151.
vt auferantur scandala de regno Dei, To remove scandalls from the kingdom of
God, and from this Church, from this kingdom and commonwealth; give me leave
I say, to exhort you, to beseech you, and even to adjure you, by this example
of our Savior Christ, that you would use your best endeavors to remove this
evil, to cut off this scandal, this Simonie, this buying and selling, and
reduce this disorder ad honestatis gloriam, to the glory of this Church and
commonwealth. You honorable, etc. according to the power and wisdom that is
given you from above, may be a means to amend it, non est meae humilitatis
dictare vobis, vel sic, vel sic faciendum, De consider. l. 2.
as Saint Bernard said to Eugenius Bishop of Rome, it will not stand with the
meannesse of my place and knowledge, to say that thus, or thus it may be done,
but no doubt it would greatly be eased, if the rich patrones who are pares
culpa, nay superiores, equal, nay superior in offending, and sin only
through covetousness, might be pares poena, with the poor Priest, who is
tempted to Simonie by extreme necessity.

I have been somewhat earnest and zealous against this sin, but marvel not
at it, Gregor.
for I have read that partem habebit cum Simone qui contra Simoniacos pro
officij sui loco vehementer non exarserit, 1. q. 1. quisqis.
He shall have his portion with Simon Magus, who according to the place he
bears, is not very earnest against the committers of Simony. All that we can
do is to speak unto you out of these places, and that will be the less
regarded, because we shall be thought to speak for our selves; but I have
given you reasons why it cannot stand with a commonwealth, and protest I
speak it not so much in commiseration of our own selves, who by our
covetousness and ambition have brought this evil upon us, and having guilty
consciences have blushed to reprove it, as in compassion of our successors who
shall suffer for our sins, and live in an age when the finger of the sons
will be heavier on them, then the loins of the fathers, are now upon us;
because commonly wicked parents bring forth progeniem vitiosiorem, An off
spring or progeny worse then themselves; when if the ministers shall be
liberally bred as we have been, nescient fodere, They will have no skill to
dig for their livings, and if they know themselves and the worth and
dignities of their calling, erubescent egere, They will blush and be ashamed to
live in misery, and yet of necessity will be compelled turpiter mendicare,
Judge, 17.
To go up and down as the Leuit did to find them places to dwell in, and be
household Levites to some mean Micha, for a suit of apparel and meat and
drink.

But the time is past, so that I cannot stand upon the second part of my text,
which is the reason why our Savior uses this chastisement upon the
prophaners of the Temple, which contains matter of very great and necessary
observation, and offers a larger discourse then this former; this that has
been spoken is sufficient to try maisteries both with my strength and your
patience: wherefore because in this one speech I cannot perform that which I
first intended, as S. Bernard said in the like case, facio finem vbi non est
finis, Sermon. 36.
I make an end where there is no end; and end my Sermon, but end not my text:
beseeching God in the merits of our Savior Christ Jesus, who at the feast of
the Passover entered into the Temple of Jerusalem, and cast out the buyers and
the sellers there, to purify this Church of England, and all the Prelates
Ministers and members of it, from all Simonie, Coueteousnes, Sacrilege and
impious merchandising to give grace to the Shepherds, which care to feed
their flocks, and to the people with all humanity to entertain their Pastors
etc.

FINIS.

