AN APOLOGY OF INFANTS IN A SERMON: Proving, by the reueal^^ will of God, that
children preuen^^d by death of their Baptism, by Gods election, may be saved.

By W. H. Preacher in the Tower of London.

Seen and allowed by Authority.

BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY


AT LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin for Thomas Man. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD ROBERT DEVOROX, EARL of Essex, and one of her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council: all graces fit for so worthy place
and trust be multiplied.
THE great Messiah, the Lord Jesus (right Honorable) being on the Cross ready
to dye, cast his eye aside, and saw his mother and the disciple standing by,
whom he loved, on whose breast he leaned: and said to his mother, Woman behold
thy son: John 19.26.
and to the disciple, Behold thy mother. This voice then spoke from the altar
of the cross on earth: The same voice seems to speak still from the arch of
heaven, the Church being graven on the palm of his hands, Esaias. 49.16.
and her walls ever in his sight on the one side, and seeing the Nobles of the
world on the otherside, especially such Nobles who^ he loves, on whose
shoulders his truth leans, in whose breast the love of the truth dwells:
He seems to say to the Church, as to a faint and weak woman of them: O woman
behold thy sons the Nobles of the earth: Psalm. 45.16. Thou shall have
children the Pote^tates through the whole earth. And to them: O ye sons of the
Nobles, Galath. 4.26.
behold your mother also. This mother, the true Church, makes you the sons
of God. That voice then wrought obedience: he to whom it was spoken, took it
to heart, and took her home: So ought the Peers and States of the world,
especially whom Jesus has loved by education in the truth, to take this
mother the church, her sons and daughters, the truth and her defense home to
them, to surround it with their power and countenance, even as in two circles
Israel with all their tribes and governors did hemme in the Tabernacle of God,
Numb. 3.38. In the inmost circle Moses and Aaron on the forefront of the
Tabernacle Eastward stood next to it: verse 24. On the other side three families
of Leui: The Gersonites pitched their tents behind the Tabernacle Westward:
verse 29. The Kohathites had their standing on the South side: verse. 35. The
Merarites on the North side. These were the inward lists of it. In the outward
wall of it (so to speak) Eastward did Judah claspe it in, and his associates
Issachar and Zabulon: Number. 2.5. On the South side, verse. 10. Re^ben fastened his
standard with Gad and Simeon: On the West, verse. 18. joined Ephraim with
Manasses and Benjamin: On the North, verse. 24. as closing up all, came Dan with
Asher and Naptali. So strongly and politically was Gods Tabernacle and Church
then managed and conducted: in so sightly manner did it march on with this
alarm: Number. 10.35. Arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be scatrered. In so
puissant and stable manner did it take up his standing with this solemnity:
Return O Lord to the many thousands of Israel. The Nobles who thus stand
about Gods Church at this time, and lend their shoulders for his truth to
lean upon, have a greater place the^ Naamans: 2. King. 5.18.
the King to lean on their hands: then Atlas, the arch of heaven to rest upon
their shoulders: they have the honor to be the noble disciples who^ Jesus
loves, on whose breasts he leans, in whose hearts he dwells: to whom he
having said, Behold your mother, the Church, the truth: they do not only
take her home to them under their roof, dwell with it, converse with it: but
enter into a strict vow and solemn protestation, (for this is the heroical
protestant) as Ruth the Moabitish did to Naomi: concerning her cleaving to the
truth and Gods people, though discouraged by contrary example of one that lay
in the same womb, though aboured with by the womb that bare her: she said,
Ruth. 1.16.17.
Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to depart from thee: whither thou go, I
will go: where thou dwell, I will dwell: thy people shall be my people: thy
God, my God: where thou dyest, I will dye: and there will I be buried. The Lord
do so unto me, and more also if ought but death part thee and me. The
obedience to this voice of God, to take the love of the truth home to you,
seeing it has dwelt in your family and progeny long, and now hereditarily
rests in your Honor: and the experience of your care, by whose means not
only the standard of the preaching of the word is lift up in this place,
(tanquam in arce Minerua Phidiae) in the midst of captiued enemies (which was
not before) but by whose fruits of faith also it is cherished: emboldened me
to present this firstling of my labors in this kind, in the cause of many
speechles infants, to your Honor: remembering what Salomons mother said to him:
Open thy mouth for the dumme in the cause of all the children of destruction
Open thy mouth, Pouer. 31.8.
etc. The argument, though diminutiue and low, yet parents love to hear of the
state of their children in this life: much more of life to come, specially the
godly. Even grave fathers after serious matters dispatched, forbear not to use
modificatio^ of speech, to lispe with the little ones: saying, Chesippus, not
Chrysippus: as he in Tullie: Coniah, Iere. 22.
not Ieconiah: as in the scripture. But why do I seek further? Have not these
little ones the Dukes and Pecres of heaven for their Patrones? Matthew. 18.10.
Their Angels (says Christ) always behold the face of God the father in
heaven. And he that set a child in the midst of his Apostles, striving for
honor, Matthew. 18.3
with this charge: Verily, except ye be converted and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: and he that humbles
himself as this child, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven: knew that
the case of little children, their harmlesnes, innocence, mildnes, are matters
for all sorts to meditate upon, to school them to GOD. In which argument David
so profited, Psalm. 131.2. that he professes even before the Lord, that he
demeaned himself as a weaned, even as a weaned child, though the court and
field had been his nurse. But I may not exceed the measure of a Preface: The
Lord ripen the good work he has begun in your Honor, and increase it with
the mighty increasings of God.

Your Honors in the Lord to be commanded: William Hubbocke.

To the Reader.
AS the blessing of peace is great, Zach. 8.8. streets full of children
playing, so among them to come suddenly the stroke of God, Exodus 12.29.
as at midnight in Egypt, Virgil. Aeneid. lib 4. Si quis mihi paruulus aula
Luderet AEneas. Act. 20.9. 1. King. 17.18. Jonas 4.7. 2 Samuel 12.17.
in every house a dead child, to fall dead from a window as Eutichus, to
sicken in the field, and die at home presently, as the woman of Sareptaes
child: especially if it enjoy not the next morning sun, as Jonas shade,
especially if it dye as David's child did before circu^cisio^: so it before
baptism: and the former joy doubleth the grief, silly leauened people lift up
their voice as Agar did for hers, Genesis 21.19.
in a gentiles distrust as a people without hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
(as though their babe were Ismael and of Egypt, and not of the Israel of
God: as though they were Agar of Sina engendring unto bondage, and not of Sion,
bearing children unto God) moning there is no water: they blame not themselves
that they keep not hours with God and his Church, in regard of gossips and
outward complement, breaking out as the Sareptane: 1. King. 17.18.
O thou man of God, what have I to do with thee? Would to God they would
think also with that good woman: God in my child brings my sins to
remembrance, that departure of children might cause departure from iniquity.
For many take on piteously with God and man if their children miss Baptism:
but take no care if they miscarie their own Baptism, Math. 28.19.
forgetting the fellowship of the blessed Trinity, into which they were
baptized: so that the water of Baptism is not the sweet water of life unto
life, Act. 8.23.
but Marah, as in Simon Magus: A gall of bitterness still in him. Christ should
dissolve the works of the devil, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
but a bond of iniquity in him still. To such it should be fearful in their
ears which is written: The children which ye said should be a pray, Deuteronomy.
1.19
and your sons and daughters, which have no knowledge between good and evil,
they shall possess mine inheritance: but as for you, Numb. 14.32. Your
carkeises shall fall in the desert. Where is he that has David's heart, a man
after Gods own heart? he moned for fear of death, 2. Sam. ^.
but never moved to have respite of life for circumcision, which no doubt he
would if it had been so dangerous to have dyed without it: at least where is
the mouth of Job? Blessed be the Lord that gave me children: blessed be the
Lord that took away my children: blessed is he in giving, blessed in taking
away, and blessed in the manner though strange: of him it is said, Job. 1.21.22.
He sinned not with his mouth, nor charged God foolishly. But thy child is
thine Image, and thy shadow: and behold as Jonas shade, it vanished from thee
in a night, it vanished before thou well lookedst upon the face of it: and how
pitiful a thing? Jonas 4 11.
But the pitiful God tells him and thee also: that he pitieth little ones
that cannot discern between right hands and left, even to the number of six
score thousand in one city: and that in Ashur, and Nineveh; and is his
compassion shut up from the seed of Christians? Yea but if it had been
sprinkled with water of Baptism, John 5.7. When the bedridden man for 38.
years had none to help him into the sovereign water, Christ healed him
without water saying, verse. 17. Though the Angel move not always the water,
verse. 4. but at times, yet says he, My Father still works and I also work.
And though the spring of Baptism should sometime be dammed up: it follows
not infants to be damned: for as Christ said to his Disciples, Genesis 21.19.
Ioh. 4.32. I have meat that you know not of: so the Angel tells Agar, and
all mothers of water that she sees not: and Christ here tells of salvation,
which the Angel and the water wrought not. Thou missest thy children in thine
arms: behold they are in the hand of God, they are plucked from thy breasts,
but are in Abraham's bosom: not in thy cradle below, but in the throne of
immortality above. How often is it seen among men that friends take a babe
from a weak mother, a daughter, a nurse, and bring it up for their own: Exodus
2.10.
as Pharaos daughter did Moses, so that the parents peradventure never see it:
or not till long after. What else does God when he takes the child from the
womb, or breast, to have it nursed in heaven lost it should have ill bringing
up here? A conflict with such dispositions upon a like sudden accident, made
me gather against the next Lords day, these remembrances touching this
argument, which now I have more perfectly recognized. Then it bred such
alteration in their apprehensions and opinions that heard it: that as once they
who said of Paul, Act. 28.4.
he was a murderer, (as if some should say, infancieida,) when they saw the
revealed glory of God: they changed their minds. These also are a holy seed,
Luke 15.31. The child that was dead to me, is alive: he that was lost is
found: blaming themselves as David, Psalm. 73.23. so foolish were we even as
beasts, until we went into the sa^ctuary of God, where we understood the end
eue^ of these little ones. Math. 9.
The Lord of the harvest give blessing to this, according to the riches of his
glorious wisdom, and teach us to abound not with captious knowledge, which by
scanninges, descantings, comparings puffs up, 1. Cor 8.1. But to abound with
love which builds us up to one head over all, even the Lord Jesus, to whom
be ascribed salvation for ever.

A SERMON PROOVING, THAT THE UNBAPTIZED, PREVENTED BY DEATH, may be Gods
children: and by his election may be saved.
THE TEXT.
1. Pet. 3.21. To this Arc of Noah, the figure also that now saves us, even
Baptism agrees, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
questioning of a good conscience to God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

22. Who is at the right hand of God, gone into Heaven, to whom the Angels and
powers, and principalities are subject.


THis Scripture, as touching my purpose at this time, opens the means of our
salvation, and that two ways, touching GOD in Christ, and touching us.
Touching god in Christ: who is the cause of it, the supreme and sovereign
cause of it, the cause of causes, even Christ the alone cause of our salvation.
The means of performing and purchasing it, are set down by four actions: the
first, his rising from the dead: the second, his sitting at the right hand of
God: thirdly, his ascending into heaven: fourthly, his subiecting of Angels
unto him. The condition on our part is twofold: outward, the element of water
in Baptism: inward, the questioning of a good conscience to God. Of the type
Noah's Arc and the complement of it, in the correspondence of Baptism unto it:
elsewhere has been at large handled.

Now further, I observe affirmatively, what saves: Namely, Christ apprehended
by faith, from a good conscience: as being risen, ascended, sitting at Gods
right hand, subduing Angels and all for thy good. Secondly, I observe
negatiuely what saves not: namely, the outward washing of Baptism: water of
it self, being readier to drown, then to save: seeing of old they baptized
with their bodies under the water, Act. 8.38. Matthew. 3.16. and not sprinkled
alone, which yet was indifferent, as appears Act. 9.17.18. Act. 16.33. Cyp.
lib. 4. epist. 7. Thirdly, that it is necessary and fit to be had, if it may
be had after Christ's institution. So that the Prince, Minister, or parent, or
whosoever he be, sore offends, by whose negligence, or means it is omitted,
or cannot be had. For the first, all scripture aims only at this point,
Jesus to be the Christ: all the sacrifices of the old Testament did
foresignifie it: John did point at him, This lamb takes away the sins of the
world: GOD proclaimed it from heaven by an apparition of a Dove, with a
celestial oracle, when he was crowned with the holy Ghost: This is my
well-beloved sin in whom I am well pleased: that is, Matthew. 3.17.
I am not pleased in the Prophets, in any holy men or women, not in thee, nor
in thy people, O my servant John Baptist, nor in this water of Jorden, but in
him I am well pleased, even for all other that believe in his name: 1. John
2.1.2
of him (says John) If any sin we have an advocate with the father, and he
is the propitiation for our sins. Act. 4.12.
There is no salvation in any other, no name under heaven, by which we may be
saved: no name neither of person, as Angels or Saints: nor yet of other
creature, as Water, Bread, or Wine.

This I need not to stand upon among Christians: the means of application to
us must be thought upon rather, which is by faith unfeigned, which makes the
questioning of a good conscience toward God: here a good conscience well
examined is mentioned. But to Timothy and to the Hebrews, it is thus
expressed: unto Timothy thus: 1. Tim. 1.5.
* The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, from a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. Again to the Hebrews thus: Heb. 10.22.
* Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our
hearts from an evil conscience. Then what sanctifies the conscience? faith.
Now a good conscience is here described, to be such an one that makes such an
inquiry into it self, by straight examination, as in Gods presence:
examination of a good conscience to Godward, tho men mislike: So that that is
not an ill conscience that sins: for then who is free? but that which
suffers sin to lie upon it self unexamined, that flattereth it self, that
bolstereth sin in it self and others. Paul would be one among them that
stoned Steven, Act. 7.58. Act. 22.20.
at least he would keep their garments: if it should come to voices, he would
give a voice, Act. 9.1.2.3.
yea he put himself to pain to molest men and women that loved the truth,
Act. 23.1. Act. 24.16.
and yet when he had believed in Jesus Christ, he professed before the
Council, that he had served GOD in a good conscience.

Therefore that is not an evil conscience, always that has been defiled, but
that which lies in the defilement. For if thou risest from sin, this rising,
sitting at the right hand of God, this ascension, this subduing of heavenly
powers, are for seruiceablenes unto thee: they be as a bunch tied together to
besprinkle thine heart. Thou art clean: even as David professes of himself,
after he had been bathed in pleasure, and been dyed red as scarlet in the blood
of Vrias, that if God wash him, Psalm. 51.7.
blood it self, and adultery shall be as clean washed off, as though they
had never been. A man so scoured shall be as white as snow in his cleanenes
from the clouds: a man so spotted shall be as clear as the picked, the
smooth and clear transparent glass, when the sun beams do shine upon it.
Yea but some will say: though with God it be so, that my sins be taken away,
Psalm. 51.3.
yet my sin is always before me, it runs in my mind, I can have no rest
for it. Yet again remember, as the scripture says, 1. Ioh. 3.20.
Though thy heart condemn thee, yet this Christ so rising, so ascending, so
sitting in glory, that Angels that do homage unto him, even as he is man: is
greater then thy condemning heart to save thee. And therefore beloved, to the
man or woman, whom sin or satan has deceived, his own flesh, or the world,
I say, let not sin lie unexamined, unquestioned with never examining the heart
and raines: but rather still as sin steals upon thee, search it out, as
with tents we search the bottom of our sores, lance the wound, 1. Cor. 11.31.
sit in commission upon thy self, cast thy self, and damn thy self, and
thou shall be saved: if thou do thus, thou have the right use of Baptism,
of the Supper, of the Word, of Prayer, and all the good that can come to a man
by Christ's death, resurrection, ascension, sitting in glory, and power over
Angels: thou shall stop the mouth of Satan: Apoc. 12.10. He is an accuser of
the brethren. Do thou therefore step to God before him: when satan sees, that
thou have done so much against thy self, by accusing thy self, as he desired
to do, he will depart confounded. Lastly, it appears that a man that bears
with his own soul in sin, or with others, that winketh at it, that lends
the^ countenance of letter, cloth, good, word, excuses, colors, shifts, that
never calls himself to question, whether he stand in state of grace, in what
case he is with God, being frosen in his dregs: this man has no part with
Jesus in the holy city, his Baptism washes him not, his body sprinkled
toward men, but not his conscience to God: Christ rose from death, he lies
still in sin: Christ sits at Gods right hand, he sits upon the seat of
wickedness: Christ ascended, and he descends downward to hell: Christ has
Angels under him, he devils above him.

The 2 part.
Now by the way of passage of speech, to the next part, even out of this place,
I reason thus: He that saves us, must have risen from death, ascended into
heaven, sit at Gods right hand, Angels also to adore him: but no Angel, nor
holy man, or woman ever did rise for us, or ascended for us: Baptism has no
such power to raise from death, nor has it self mounted to heaven, nor has
any place at Gods right hand, nor do the Angels worship it. Therefore no
salvation of necessity depends upon Baptism, though it should be most
holilie ministered. The Popish Church has two errors in it: the one, Council.
Trid. censur. Colon. in dial. 7. de Sac.
that sacraments by the work wrought by the receiving of them, bring grace to
the receiver, unless some enormous sin be upon him, which they term mortal.
Another, that children, infants, innocents, if they dye without Baptism, they
are damned.

O cruel sentence, and bloody decree. The first is refuted by that we have
said already, that in them that have years, no grace comes by the
sacrament, but a disgrace rather, no good but evil, if there be not a good
conscience toward GOD examined, and washed with the fruits of Christ's death
and passion. For here are understood the works of his humiliation, as his
incarnation, dwelling in the shape of a servant, his crucifying, and such like,
though there are touched only four works of his exaltation. And our Apostle
says plainly, though Noah's Arc saved, yet saying that the washing of the
flesh saves not, he seems to say, gather not that outward washing saves.
How then say our adversaries, that all are damned that have not Baptism? Test.
Rhemis. Ioh. 3. verse. 5.
or do they say so? No not all, say they. Who then? and who not? All infants
(say they) that dye without Baptism. O pitiful and cruel sentence, whose
ears will not tingle at it? infants who cannot speak, think, or do ill, the
child whose flesh is scarce curded in the womb: whose bones are scarce
gristled out of the womb: from the darkness of the womb pass to the utter
darkness for ever. Thus speaks the dragon all gored with blood. Apoc. 12.3.


But does the lamb of God say so also? no doubt this lambs blood extends it
self even to these little la^bes and sucklings. Is there no pardon from this
general da^natorie sentence and cruel definitive? are none excepted? Yes, God
does accept the^ as baptized, who are martyred before they could be baptized,
The. in Ioh. 5. verse. 2.
and they that depart this life with desire and vow of Baptism. Only they?
Yea only they, who earnestly intend, desire and seek for the same: that is a
few, very few O happy and rare case, of them above all others to be singled
out unto life. What is their proof that the unbaptized must needs be damned?
Ioh. 3. Unless a man be borne of water and the holy Ghost: This is general,
even against all whosoever have not outward water: and if general, why not to
martyrs and the other that dye with desire of Baptism? But they can make
general when they will, Pighius Hierar. eccl. l. 1. c. 4.
and special when they will: even as blasphemously they have said of the Word,
it is a nose of wax: Linda. in praef.
so they make the sacrament a scale of wax. But suppose a Martyr, or a
Christian converted, not yet instructed in the doctrine of Baptism, as they
that led the Martyrs to death, seeing their patience, faith, zeal, were
suddenly converted, and cried out, Christianus sum, I am a Christian, and
thereupon suffered with them: how could they desire that, they know not of?
were they damned? for this Popish divinity makes all damned, who in their
own persons do not earnestly intend, desire, and seek for Baptism of water,
even as earnestly as the proportion of the speech carries it: as the man
desired to be in the water, John 5.6.7.
when it was troubled, and had none to help him. What then became of John
Baptist, for who baptized him? He indeed said to Christ, Math. 3 14.
I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? He desired it:
but that is not enough, seeing he lived in a time when he might have had it:
John. 3.22. and 4.2.
for Christ's Disciples then baptized. Or what shall we say of the Apostles,
who seem ( Act. 1.5.) to be borne indeed of the spirit, but not of the
outward water, except Paul, or Andrewe, John 1.36.40.
and some that were John's disciples, to have been baptized with the holy
Ghost, but not with water? What dare they say of the thief, who was neither
Martyr, Acts 9.18.
nor yet was so far instructed to desire baptism of water, but by special
influence of Gods sudden touch of his heart, and lightening of his mind, Luke
23.42.
desired to be with Christ in his kingdom, and obtained that princely
paradise? Last of all, seeing themselves confess that the desire of parents,
or godfathers, Catech. Trident.
as they term them, serves for to procure grace to children baptized, who
have not the wit nor grace yet to ask it: why should not the desire of
parents, or friends, who hunger and thirst for the righteousness of God in
Baptism, for the infants to be borne, or already borne, and yet dying
without baptism, be accepted in Gods sight? Themselves, for the innocents, and
Martyrs whom Herod tragicallie murdered in the massacre of Bethlem, and yet
they not baptized, nor baptism desired for them, least of all this baptism of
blood, which al lamented, al fathers and mothers cried out upon: themselves I
say confess these not only saved, The Test. in Math. 2.16.
but gloriously saved, to be Martyrs, and solemnize their feast.

And thus the ground and foundation is weak: their building also upon it,
pau^cheth. In the primitive church of the world, no doubt many children dyed
before the eight day uncircumcised, as David's child begotten in adultery, 2.
Sam. 12.18.
which dyed even the seventh day: the greater grief, if it be as they would
have it in baptism, that it came so near the just time, and missed the seal
of the covenant: as it were a man escaping all shipwreck to die in the port
and haven. Likewise the Israelites remained uncircumcised without all desire to
have it, counting it a rebuke, because they learned heathenishnes of Egypt,
Josh. 5.8.
or kept themselves uncircumcised, as meaning to return into Egypt, Number.
14.4. Yet who dare be so peremptory, Baptism the great Circumcision, so
called by Epiphanius
as to pronounce damnation upon them? for look how baptism answers
circumcision, so the deceasing without baptism should be by suite and
proportion, no worse thing then dying without circumcision. Unless a man will
say, that the state of the Gospel has less mercy and pity then the law,
and that it went harder with infants under Christ, then infants under Moses,
seeing Christ also became an infant, to save and redeem infants: seeing also
on them by Herod was laid the first testimony, that the world should hate the
Lord Jesus, even yet, as it were a babe and suckling, Math. 3.16.
and that unto death. Add hereunto that seeing the Lord appointed a set time
to circumcision, Genesis 17.12.
which was hard and dangerous, somewhat for life, Ge. 34.25. in the Sichemites
who were soar for the cutting three days and not able to defend themselves.
I mean the eight day, and designed no certain time to baptize, that seeing
it is freer for disposing of, that least of all necessity depends upon it:
whereas if the 2 or 3. As some in Cyp. time. l. 3. cp. 8. ep.
the 7. or 8. day had been appointed or such like, then the deferring of
baptism beyond that time, had been great offense: but the departing of the
child before that time no disparagement to salvation.

Lombard l. 4. sent. did. 2. ca. si vero.
Indeed Lombard the master of the sentences, that is of the sente^tious and
positive divinity, (out of whom they gather their tenants and co^clusions)
gives da^natory sentence upon infants that die without circumcision, as upon
the^ that dye without baptism. But here he is noted with a black coa^e of
dislike. None commonly hold with master Lombard in this: Magister hic non
tenetur.
only our countrieman Beda thinking that very hard, does labor to salve and
qualify it thus: that in time of necessity of death, they circumcised
peradventure before the 8. day without offense. But who dare pluck up the
stakes of the time appointed by God, Quaest. 3, de Baptismo.
or remove them? It is but a fancy. The Jesuits in their controversies, yield
the infants of the Jews that were prevented by death before the 8. day, to be
saved: because they say, God set down this time. Whereas the liberty that it
is arbitrary to the church, when to administer baptism, so no neglect be of
that holy seal, argues rather, that the prevention of it should be no more
prejudicial to the saving of thy child unbaptized, then of it uncircumcised.
And the other reason which the Jesuits give, why Jewish infants might be saved
without circumcision: namely, that the parents prayers and offeringes might be
a remedy to succor them, will serve for the infants unbaptized, if they mean
of prayers before death: namely, that the devotion of the godly, of godly
parents, who many times pray, exercise devotion in their hearts for their babe
unseen, (as Job for his alive, Job. 1.5. Genesis 25.22.
as Rebecca went to the Lord for the babes in the womb) that it may have
life, the mother a good hour: that it may prove the servant of God: shall be as
auailable for their children, as the offringes of the Jews for their
uncircumcised. But see the force of truth, how great it is, that it makes
stiff adversaries to yield somewhat, namely that by privilege and
dispensation infants unbaptized may be saved, for so at last they say.

Genesis 15.6.
But we prove more then a special privilege: Abraham before the law was
justified by faith: Romans 4 3.
even while he was yet uncircumcised. John the baptist, Luke 1.15. Iere. 1.5.
in the womb was filled with the holy Ghost: Jeremy uncircumcised was
sanctified from his mothers womb: so Paul unbaptized was sanctified also from
the womb: Gal. 1.15.
if Moses and Jeremy had dyed without circumcision, had they been damned? if
John Baptist and Paul had dyed in the womb, had they perished? God forbid:
where then is absolute necessity? Therefore indeed salvation depends upon
Gods election of old, Ephesians. 1.4.5. Romans 9.21.22.
when in his everlasting counsel, seeing a ruin like to come upon all, he
sorted the souls of men and women, some to mercy, some to wrath: and this
election remains sure and immovable in his church having this seal, not
that man knows by baptism, or not baptism, 2. Tim. 2.19,
who are his absolutely: but * this the Lord knows who are his: so that
indeed the holding of the necessity of baptism to salvation overthrows
Gods election, destroys his omnipotency, and the freenes of his purpose from
everlasting. Of Jacob God says, Him I have loved: Romans 9.13.
in him is understood the corpse of the faithful, the communaltie of the
saints.

Gods love is no fancy that want of baptism may break off* for then it were
a heavy case, that the negligence or contempt of the parent or minister should
debar the helpeles child from the society of salvation. Esau hated of God:
in him is understood the brood and spawne of the wicked: therefore salvation
depends upon Gods acceptance, and receiving into favor, and not upon the
outward elemente of water, even ritually and formally administered: for to say
that water has this power, it is to deifie it, to make it God, to make it an
Idol, to sacrifice to it, and to bring up again a Neptune, a God of the water
with the gentiles.

Therefore neither had Jacob perished if he had died in the womb, seeing GOD
spread his banner of love over him: neither Esau was saved, because he lived
till his foreskin was done away, seeing the Lord had no liking to him. The
scripture is rich in examples of Gods favor before any touch of Sacraments,
besides these already touched, the children of the Hebrews, (also as it is
charitable and probable to think, David's child,) Abraham, Jacob, Jeremy,
John Baptist, the Apostles, Paul, the thief upon the cross, whom all the
scripture commends; to leave the uncertain, as Nicodemus, Joseph of
Arimathia, Gamaleel, etc, Before any sacrament received: Luke 19.9.
of Zacheus it is said, This day is salvation come into thy house, O Zache:
this day, not the day of his baptism: so the Act. 8.37.
Eunuch accepted to God by faith before his baptism: so Cornelius a man that
feared God before his baptism: so Lydias heart opened, by the Lord, Act. 10.2.
by the key of the word, Act. 16.14.
as it were turned about by the preaching of it before baptism: so the iaylour
in the same place: so Mary Magdelene that was carried to sin as if 7. devils
drove the tide, with wind and sail: Luke 17.50.
Her faith saved her, as Christ says, not her baptism, unless you say she
baptized herself with her tears: which though they were holy and precious
water, fit to be preserved in Gods bottle, Psalm. 56.8.
falling from her humbled cheeks, and a contrite heart which God wiped with
his mercy: which had many sins forgiven, because she loved much: yet they
are not this actual baptism of water which we speak of. So says Hierome of
Asella, sanctified from the womb.

And in deed the very use of the Sacraments which we give and afforde the
elect only as we hope, proves a non necessity of salvation in them and by
them. For why are children baptized, 1. Cor. 7.11.14.
because they are holy, though only one parent should believe: how holy? and
who holy? how holy, Quaest. 3 de bapt. necess.
not as the Jesuits imagine holy, that is legitimate, no bastard: but holy,
because of the glorious profession of Jesus Christ, because of the covenant of
grace: Genesis 17 7. Act 2.39.
I will be thy GOD and the God of thy seed. Who holy? only the baptized
children of the christians: no, it is generally and universally said your
children: as likewise of the whole Jewish race it is spoken, the root being
holy, Rom 11.16.
so are the branches. And why are the grown and them of discretion baptized?
is it not that we see some reason to seal unto them Gods mercy? for baptism
is a s^^^e as was circumcision. Romans 4.11.
Now as among men the conditions are agreed upon, then the seal annexed: so
God receives into covenant, and then seals. Men possess their cattle and
instruments, and then mark them: they choose and levy soldiers, and then give
them pressed money: And yet as with a good landlord, the right of my tenement
cease not, having the promise of a faithful man, though the father should
die, without sealing unto me, seeing an honest son comes in place, who
will be a seal unto his fathers words: so though GOD the father should prevent
us of baptism, yet in that he has promised a state of life to me and mine in
his son he will seal it to us, for him has the father Ioh. 6.27.
sealed. An honest soldier will venture his life in the battles of the lord,
though he had not his pressed money. The claim of the owner is good, though no
actual mark should be upon his good. This is the mark of Gods children,
Beza confess. c. 4. s. 48. de bapt. infant. Chytreus Bern. ser. 66. in Cant. Au
l. 1. de peccat. meritis. Pet Martyr. lo. com. clas. 4. c. 8. sect 7.
Zuinglius. de Baptismo. page 68. tom. 2.
The Lord knows who are his.

Now if children in the womb as John Baptist, or before baptism, and in
their infancy have faith, as diverse think, or have the spirit of God as
others, seeing they are parts of the Church as woe all profess, and members
of the body of Christ, as we all say, how can they perish? none can take his
sheep, nay not the least lamb of a day old, John 10.29. nay not yet eaned
nor brought into the world, out of his hand, though Satan should stand by to
devour it upon the very birth, Apoc. 12.4.5.
as he did once, for the child the very son of God, which was taken up to
Gods throne. And why may it not be, that as in earthly paradise, so in the
heavenly Church? Genesis 1.11.12.
As there are some trees and herbs seeding, some budding, some bearing
fruit: so in the heavenly paradise on earth, the Church, some of Gods servants
in the womb, some budding out, some new washed, as it were from the pooles. If
the first Adam could bring an everlasting taint upon them, shall not the
baptism and death of the second Adam wipe it out? The infant cannot reason,
yet it has the seed of reason, as it has a soul, though it know not so much
of it self. Thus some argue: May it not have faith shed in the heart of it?
Ephe. 3.17.
for who can tell how God dwells in the heart of the elect? Romans 8.9.
He that has not the spirit of God, is none of his. Is not this the glorious
impression and stamp of that heavenly seal, that the child is assumpted into
the association and fellowship of the blessed Trinity, Matthew. 28.19.
into whose name it is baptized? Children must come to Christ. Mark. 10.13.
(...): or as Luke 18.15. (...).
What children? Little ones: they that are come to little reason, but that they
abuse in trifling, yet theirs is the kingdom of God. If theirs be the kingdom
of God, then are they clean: Apoc. 21.27.
for no unclean thing may come in his pure sight. Now what makes clean, but
faith and Gods spirit? their hearts being purified alike by faith. Act. 15.9.
The working of Gods spirit, is like the insensible pearcing of the wind,
Ioh. 5.8.
which gets in no man knows how. And may it not get in into the hearts of
little children? if their children be holy, who can sanctify them, but the
sanctifier? 1. Cor. 6 11.
why may not Gods spirit his wind get into them? and if they be sanctified,
then not damned.

Wherefore these speeches of the child unbaptized: It is an heathen, an
infidel, it is damned, I would not have my child in the like case, for
millions: are speeches indeed heathenish, full of infidelity, of rash
judgment, and uncharitableness; not only by damnatorie speeches against the
dead: but against the living God, that has taken them away as he would. Does
not the spirit speak better things? Luke 6.37.
Judge not, and thou shall not be judged: condemn not, and thou shall not be
condemned: nay acquit, assoyle, deliver, and thou shall have a measure of such
merciful construction measured unto thee: not as thou use to do, sparingly,
straight by the brimmes of the measure: but with a measure pressed down,
shaken together, and running over. And yet Protestants speak so. So natural a
thing is Popery, so quickly do we drink in error before we be taught it.

Ephe. 4.20.
Have we so learned Christ? are his laws so full of ruefulnes? Of Draco the
lawgiuer it is written, that al his laws were death: death if thou do this,
death if thou do not that, still the fatal noise of death ended the law.
Therefore they note the pen to drop cruelty, the ink and writing to be
blood. But Christ is no Draco, a Dragon: Ioh. 1.29.
He is a lamb that takes away the sins of the whole world, a world of
sins: much more this lamb of God to heal these little la^bes of his flock.
His laws are not laws of Draco, they speak peace: Heb. 12.24.
his blood cries better things then the blood of Abel: for that cries
vengeance upon Cayne his brother. Genesis 4.10.
But Christ's blood cries with a strong voice as of a mighty Angel: my blood
for all blood: Romans 5.10.
my body for all sin, even of mine enemies. This were to make Christ an
Herod: for Herod sent out his men of war to sley and murder most butcherly,
infants from two years old downward, Matthew 2.16.
among whom were some uncircumcised: then Rachel in Rama lifts up bitter voices
of lamentation; no comfort: they are not. Indeed if Christ were not a Herald
of peace rather, then a Herod, and that he sent out his messengers of war,
as death and grave to devour, the devil and hell to damn the unbaptized:
then indeed might Rachel lift up her voice, and put on her mourning weed:
then every mother and father, sister and brother, might howl and weep, and
answer one an other with doleful echoes and remediles complaints, no
comfort, no consolation, because they are not: nay, because they are, that is,
they are in endless sorrow: for better it were not to be at all. But blessed
be God who has sealed a better covenant: Genesis 17.7.
With thee and thy seed I make my covenant: blessed be God who has cleared
our comfort: 1. Cor. 7.11.14 Esaias. 9.6.
Your children are holy: Blessed be God that concerning the child borne in
Esai, has caused heaven and earth to hear a better melody from an army of
heavenly soldiers: Luke 2.14.
Glory to God on high, peace on earth below, good will toward men. Do I
speak this alone? do not likewise the general voice and language of Canaan,
Nehe. 13.24. Esaias. 19.18.
I mean the Israel of God, speak so?

Does our Church alone think so? and does not other Churches make up the
harmony? Rogers in the English Creed set out by authority, page 33. par. 2
art. 25
The Creed of our Church confesses this among the errors of the Papists: that
so many as are not incorporated into the visible Church, by the Sacraments, at
the least of Baptism, are assuredly damned: So does two co^fessions of
Switzerland, the confession of the Church of Bohemia, the Protestant Church of
France, so of Flanders, so of Auspurge, so of Saxony, and Sweueland, which may
be seen more at large in the book of the Harmony of confessions. Alanus Cope
reckons this up as one of our errors in England: Dial 6. cap. 9.
Infants before they are baptized, to belong to the people of GOD And to this
agrees most soundly even he which has now, by the disposition of God, the
chief place in this Church, In his reply in the great volume page 516.
and professes that he misliketh the opinion of these, who think out of Ioh.
3. infants to be condemned, being not baptized as much as any. It shall be
ambition to muster the names of them who have borne the standard in their
places, and are on our side: so does Aret. proble. theol. par. 2 de (...) sacr.
Aretius at Barnes, Calvin instit. l. 4. c. 16. sec. 26.
Calvin and Confess. c. 4. sect. 49. Zuingl. de prouid. Dei. c. 6. tom. 1. pa.
369.
Beza at Geneua: certainly Zuinglius at Zurich, calls them sacramentaries who
attribute so much grace to the sacrament, so much virtue to Baptism of it
self. Such a cloud of witnesses has this truth, and this is not only the
consent of the later Churches, but even a long has testimony from this
Apostle, Baptism saves, but I mean not says he, the washing of the water,
but the examination of a good conscience toward God.

Ephe. 5.26.
The Apostle Paul says, Christ gave himself for the Church to sanctify it by
the lauer of water: but how? through the word. Psalm. 8.2.
In David's time the Church professes GODS praise, out of the mouth of
sucklings: In the primitive Church the Cathecumen the not baptized not only
saved, but glorified as Martyrs: such an one was Heraclides Origens scholar,
beheaded under Seuerus: and Rhais a woman, who^ Origin says, to have obtained
Baptism by fire. Cyp epist. ad lubia.
Cyprian about the 260. year after Christ, professes that not only suffering
for Christ, De conse. distinc. 4. ca. Baptismi.
but faith and conversion of the heart supplieth the want of Baptism. The
council of Nice says, our Baptism is not to be considered with sensible
eyes, but with the eyes of the mind. Ambros. in sine Ora. sunes. de obitu Vale^.
Ambrose about 380. year after Christ says of Valentinian the Emperor, who
dyed without Baptism: Christ baptized him when men's offices failed: again,
his faith washed him. Saint Austen, Aug. in l. de side ad Petrum.
though he is alone almost except them that suruiued in his own age in the
necessity of Sacraments, making out of the sixth of John a necessity of the
supper even for infants: Ioh. 6.53.
because it is said, Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, you have no life in you: contrary to the rule of the Apostle, that
none should eat but they who can examine themselves: 1. Cor. 11.23.
yet in diverse places where God assisted him more, and he remembered himself,
Aug. l. 13. de ciuit. Dei. ca 7.
he yielded also to this truth, making faith and a contrite spirit to be in
stead of Baptism, for thus he says, he that said: Unless a man be borne of
water and the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. said
as generally: He that confesses me before men, Luke 12.8.
I will confess him before my Father and the holy Angels: And again, Luke
9.24.
He that leeseth his life, shall save it: and again, Psalm. 116.15. Precious
is the death of the Saints in the sight of God. Nay he rather commends them
that dye sometimes without Baptism, for others for fear of death defer not
their baptism further: but these for love to God defer to live longer, he
exemplifieth also in the thief: and Aug. lib. 4. de baptis. in don. cap. 24.
again, then is Baptism fulfilled, when not the contempt of religion, but
when the instant or moment of necessity excludes from visible Baptism. Sermon
ad infantes.
Again, none is deprived of the benefit of the sacrament, so long as he
finds in himself the thing which the sacrament signifies: again, among whom
do you reckon children unbaptized? verily among believers. Aug de verbis
Apostoli. ser. 14.
So. l. 3. de quaest. vet. test. The invisible sanctification may be without
the visible sign, as the visible sign without the true sanctification. In
sermon. de 40. Martyribus
Basile says of the iaylour or keeper of the 40. Martyrs, who became a Martyr:
he was baptized by his own faith, (...).
not by the hand of another: not in water, but in his own blood. Hieromes
judgment of Asella we heard above.

Yet the diversity of customs and practice of old is strange herein with the
multitude of humane inventions crept in even in the primitive church, that we
may bless God for this purity of Baptism which we enjoy. De consecr. did 4.
cap. non ratione and in seq Terrul de Baptis dutiuscule loquitur.
For they used only solemn times for baptizing, as Easter at Rome, by Victors
constitution, at Easter and Pentecost in Tertullians time: or the time of
marriage, or at their dying day, or on the feast of the Epiphany, as in Asia
insomuch that as Christ at 30. years of age was baptized: Baptism more
syncerely performed now then of old.
so Gregory at 30. years old, though his father were a Bishop. So Austen
about the same time, so Ambrose a Bishop elect before he was baptized, and in
a Synod of Rome 40 years are appointed, except for the sick, In 4. Orat. de.
Lauac. sanct.
and great with child, who might at all other times be baptized And
Nazianzene appointed the 4. year, when they could give a reason of their
faith: so that when a man once departs from this, that any thing saves,
speedy Baptism, or Baptism deferred: Baptism or no Baptism, nay prayer or
no prayer, word or no word, when any thing saves, but this only Savior
Christ, who rose, ascended, reigns over men and Angels, one error increases
upon another, one invention accrueth upon his former: hence came the cross:
Origin. ho. 2. in Psalm. 38. Tertul. de resur. Cyp. de haer. bapt.
hence a kiss in Baptism, l. 3. ep. 8. Cyp. hence a ring. Tertul. l. de
pudicitia. hence to have oil, Tertul. de Cor. mil. and l. x. contr. Mar.
Hiero. ad Lucifer.
and milk, and honey in Baptism, not to wash all the weak after Baptism: as
nyce men wash not after the trimming a while from the barber. Even Constantine
the good Emperor superstitiously desired to be baptized in Jordan, as Naaman
would carry some earth from thence (whereas he should have carried water rather,
2. King. 5.^7.
but that superstition is foolish) which yet Constantine obtained not, but was
baptized at Nicomedia feared by death to defer it further. Hence it came that
they deferred Baptism till death, that al sins might be forgiven at once, and
grew to baptizing by De consec. did. 4. ca constat. and in seq.
lay people, and women, and sometime to approve Baptism with sand: and yet the
story of a Jew Baptized with sa^d, Niceph. l. 3. c. 37.
who after had water added to him auoweth their fear to depart from the
institution.

So good a thing is it to stick to the pure and vnmedled beginning of word and
sacraments, to look to the originals and clear fountains. God ordained it
pure and in simplicity, without mixture of additaments, Eccle ^.31.
but men found out many inventions, as the scripture speaks in another case,
how good then is it to give that unto God which is due unto God, that unto the
creature which is due unto it, that unto Baptism which appertains unto it?
The Synod of Neocaesaraea notes these errors by the consent of 17. Bishops: he
that is baptized in sickness not to be admitted to the office of any Ad
Presbyterium. Eusebius. l. 6 c. 43
ministration in the Church. Epist. 77. ad Hugo.
Bernard in a long Epistle, proves in his time that this truth continued
until his time, proving that not the absence but contempt of Baptism
condemns. And this is not only the voice in Sion, Babylon heard of it, and
the strength of the truth has made diverse of them to yield, and has provoked
one against another. Tho. Par. ^. q. ^8 art. 3.
Their Thomas who said more for Popery then them all, though as pitch he
defile holy Baptism, and many other holy things wherewith he meddled: yet
says he, a man expecting the set time of the Church for Baptism, though he
be prevented by death, he is saved. Bellarmine (Reader of Rome) Quaest. de
Baptis.
in his Dictates is greatly troubled not with answering us, but with Caietane,
the flower of their Cardinals, with Gerson Chancellor of Paris, with Titleman a
devout Papist: that as Christ wroong out testimony from Satan, so has the
truth in this point set falsehood upon the rack, and made it confess.

Nay, these Papists being urged but by their own consideration of the matter,
they leave a sound testimony. So does Biell a great schooleman: So does
Alzimoney discourse, Tract. de Baptis.
a diligent and learned writer on their side, saying: Necessary is twofold,
either absolute, as meat for life, or as convenient, and fit to atchieue our
purpose, as the horse for the end of our journey. Baptism is necessary this
last way. So that the adversary gives judgment on our side: so great a
consent has this truth: such a peale of voices God has raised to repeal the
bloody Herodian decree of Rome: so strong a cry of Churches near and far
off, at home and abroad, of later and more ancient, of Scriptures, Councels
and Fathers, friends and enemies, crying out upon them that menace hell and
death and wrath to the babes unwashed, who measure so hard a measure to poor
infants, as because they enjoy little of this life, they must leese all the next
life, not heaven, but a hell, no honor of burial, but to be buried
separatly, as though they should infect the rest.

And yet see pitiful hearts in the midst of cruelty some drop of mercy,
Limbus infantum.
an easy hell, a brimme of hell, not so bad as the damned is the hell for
these forlorn innocents, a hell not so bad as for the actual sinners. Who
says so? Bellar de purg. lib. 2. ca. 6. col. 790. A. in mayor. ^olum.
Bellarmine, Florence Council, Innocentius the 3. the Schoolmen: but no more:
and these be their proofs: As if one should say, a corrupt vpstart Judge, his
court, bench, and a pack of false Notaries: but none of them having any gray
hair of antiquitic. This admiration of the effect of Baptism, and thus to be
enamored upon the element, made the heretics Marcion and his, Tertul. lib. 1.
and 4. in Marcion. Philastr.
and the Cataphrygians and theirs, to baptize even the dead: even as the
Papists baptize even bells, and that not by mean Ministers, but even by
Bishops. O foolish and mad generation: But have they no reason for it?

Yes, they make a show of miracle, of Scripture, of Fathers. That they may
seem to be mad with reason, Scripture, Fathers, miracles: Miracles out of
Euodius: Scriptures especially 2: John 3. Mark 16.16. Fathers among the
ancient, especially Austin. I my self have in this argument alleged Fathers,
contrary to my ordinary use, seeing indeed Gods voice alone should be heard.
2. Cor. 10 13.
But to let you see the line of exposition, that I go not alone in a
singularity, but have the consent of the Pastors of other ages and Churches.
Alanus Cope tells a fabulous miracle to prove it: A woman whose son dyed
unbaptized, brings him dead before the memory of S. Steven, moaning that she
had lost her child in this life and in the life to come: Suddenly life enters
into him, a Priest is sent for, the child was baptized, and presently dyed
again. O spirit of witchery which makes them to trust lying fables: for
first of al himself lets fall somewhat that staineth his witness: he says
in Austins sermons of late imprinted at Iouaine, The book not written by
Eudius ^ut to him.
two clauses to too vnindifferent to condemn millions of infants: The miracle
a night witness: Alanus Copus Dal. 3. cap 25.
the testimony vpstart. Why of late printed? Why at Louaine? Secondly, herein
they bewray that the voice of God has nothing against these babes: seeing as
Christ said to the woman, when none durst condemn her, John 8. Neither do I
condemn thee: So when Christ condemns them not, that they must set
testimonies from vauts and sepulchers, and from the withered bones of the dead
men. But yet these little ones, their bones are not bruised: Mark. 10.14.
theirs also is the kingdom of God. For thirdly, why did not the mother carry
it to his own grave, and not to S. Steuens tomb? or rather, why did she at
all bring a damned carcass within hallowed ground, against their custom? and
good reason if for ever, it be Gods enemy, a damned miscreant, why should it
have the honor of burial? Fourthly, if it were damned before, and the soul
gone to hell: is there redemption from hell, against all truth, and their own
judgment? Fifthly, why presently a Priest sent for? might she not think the
same power that restored life to her child, able to preserve him in life? or
was not the life quite gone at al, and this devise taken up by co^pact to
nourish superstitious minds, or if it must needs be presently baptized,
because this their false Saint Steven gave it such a weak deadly life, that
would not hold out, why might not her self, or some woman present (for it is
not improbable others also to have gone with her in neighborhood or
superstition) according to their doctrine, have baptized it: but they must
tarry the time till a Priest come, who hold in their good divinity in such a
case of necessity, that even women may do it: or lastly, why did she not go
to Saint Steven for a second life?

But liars and inuentors have no absolute good memories: let us come to their
scriptures, they are two: the first, Ioh. 3 5. Except a man be borne of water
and the spirit, he ca^nnot see the kingdom of God. This place necessarily
infers say they, the necessity of baptism. Why? the words; are plain, and
yet if so, it is as plain for them that use a hot (...).
Iron in Baptism, not to go from this matter, for example, because it is said,
Christ shall baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire: and not to go from
this place, it is as plain for an old man to be borne again: so plain that
^^^^enus once mistook it, though a master in Israel. But to come to the
meaning: does water signify here of necessity, the element of water used in
Baptism: how know they that? for in the former chapter no occasion Nicodemus
who dissembled, then for infants: neither is any mention made of Baptism all
the time of his abode in Galile, where he was at the marriage, or whilst he was
judgment, even to profess the name of God openly, else thou can not see the
kingdom of God: Unless thou verse. 3.
Except a man, that is, of such a judgment as thou already art, and all
natural men be, verse. 4.
be borne again and altered in the spirit, they cannot see the kingdom of
God. When he marueiled what it was to be borne again, I say, unless he be
borne again of water and the spirit: making it all one to be borne again of
the spirit and of water: and the spirit, making it all one to be borne again
of one of them and of the^ both: and which is the more exclusive? for that
which he had said in one word, Except a man be borne of the spirit, he after
expounds the manner how the spirit must work, as water in washing us, in
sanctifying us, in renewing us. For he says, Unless a man be borne of water and
the spirit: which to be the meaning, the tenor and passage of all the speech
had with Nicodemus, shows, as first the opposing of earthly birth, and
spiritual, verse 6. That which which sentence proves rather, that water saves
not: as though fleshly, earthly, and carnal things can go no further then
flesh, earth, nor have no further effects: A man's soul is a spirit: water an
elementarie body: an earthly thing can not purge a spiritual substance: no
proportion between the agent and patient, the doer and sufferer: even as of
old the blood of beasts could not take away sins, Heb. 10.1.2.3. so not now
the washing of water can take away sin. Secondly, the ascribing of the means
to Gods free will, verse. 8. and his love, verse. 16. by the work of the He that
believes is saved: he that believes not is damned. So that unless a man will
say that infants have faith, this touches infants nothing at all: and if they
have faith, then those only saved, who have this faith by the gift of God. So
that this general rule, Except, proves this: that without conversion of heart,
and renewing of the spirit of our mind inwardly, there is no salvation. And
that He that drinks of the water which I give, shall never thirst: for
Baptism is not generally a well of water to everlasting life, therefore it is
meant of Gods spirit: and the miracle of Christ healing without water, John 5.
declares that the eleme^t ought not to be in that credit. So John 7.39. He
that believes, rivers of water of life shall flow out of his belly. But if
any man ask: how will you prove water to signify the spirit here? I answer,
even hence, verse. 39. This he said of the spirit: It also has the accord of
the old Testament, so Iere. 2.3.10. Ezech. 36.25. Esai. 4.4. The Lord shall
wash Lastly, I ask whether if this proposition, verse. 5 be general
exclusive, Except a man be borne of water and the spirit, etc. why the former
proposition, verse 3. which is first by nature, consisting of as general
terms in art: Except a man be borne of the spirit, etc. be not as general:
which if it be, and what reason can be showed to the contrary, then it being
also general and exclusive, why should it not shut out the necessity of
material water?

Here also if absolutely material Valentinian, and many other who in prison,
or war desire it. The other place, Mark. 16.16. answers it self, ascribing
all to faith, for having said, He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved: adds straight way to prevent error, but he that believes not, and not
he that is not baptized, shall be damned. Now as for Austen, it is true that
he in the matter of the sacraments necessity, yea in both of them made it an
exigence of necessity, both to be performed: so that as upon this place, he
groundeth though falsely as upon a foundation of water, the necessity of
Baptism, so upon the next place, Ioh. 6.53. Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Not only he but
Innocentius and all that age almost ground a necessity of the Supper, insomuch
that they gave it to infants contrary to the rule of Paul, Let a man examine
him self, etc. and the meaning of this place, which is of the spiritual
receiving of Christ and incorporating into him by the spirit in general, and
in particular by the means of the spirit working in the word, in Baptism,
or in the Supper, or in whatsoever. Fitly is it said to this purpose by Saint
Hierome in Psalm. 147. When we hear the word of the Lord, the flesh of
Christ and his blood is powered in at our ears.

Let us now come to the use, The third and last part.
comfort, end, and necessity of Baptism: which though it be not absolutely,
and simply necessary, yet in his due place and time, if it may be had
according to Christ's institution, cannot be neglected, without great sin.
For herein of diverse men there are diverse extremities: as of the most of the
Papists, who make it absolutely necessary: so of the Manichees on the other
side, who generally cut off al signs, Aug. in Faustum. lib. 19.
because they making God not to be the author of these sensible and earthly
things, thereupon inferred, that the worship by these earthly things could not
be grateful to him. So the Cathatists, who because God is a spirit, and men
must worship him in spirit, rejected all help of earthly means. And last of
all, Aug. haer. 88.
the Pelagians who because they exempt men from original sin, do think
Baptism needles, to purge that which is not: wherein you may first see the
notable, wilful, and spiteful malice of the Rhemists, who in John 3.5. join
the Caluinists and Pelagians together, as both promising alike life eternal to
children dying without Baptism: when as they differ as hell and heaven in the
causes of salvation. For Calvin acknowledges children to be under original
sin: Pelagius did not: yet Calvin thinks not the elect of God to perish, if
in some case they be prevented of outward Baptism. Lastly of Anabaptists, who
would not have infants baptized, but them of years: against whom at this time,
beside that which is said above, this may be sufficient: that seeing children
have sin, they ought to be washed: and seeing they belong unto GOD, they ought
to be sealed. As for the Manichees, seeing we acknowledge the same Lord
Creator of heaven and earth, one God maker of both, the same almighty and most
holy spirit to have made the greatest Angel and most despised worm: and
that he made al things good, and to a most excellent end, that therefore both
against them and the Catharists, 1. Tim. 4.8.
though it be true that bodily exercise profits little; as washing by water,
taking of bread and wine, much reading, much repeating of prayer, much hearing
and sitting by it to hear, much preaching also, unless the spirit also concur
and our inward desire: yet as God made body and spirit, and therefore must be
glorified in both: so seeing he made both visible and invisible things, both
spiritual and corporal things, both serve for his glory, both are helpers of
our faith; if first we remember, that we use them, when we have the express
word of God for them. As because the Lord bids us baptize with water:
therefore in doing so we build upon the rock: and we think we should tempt
GOD, if when he should teach us the washing away of our sins in Christ, by
the pouring on of water, we should refuse such a comfortable and lively
representation, and deserve to hear the check that K. Achaz had, Esai.
7.11.12. who being in weakness of faith when Jerusalem was besieged, would not
ask a sign, when the offer was made in Christ, but was reproved as one not
that despised the minister and bringer of the sign, but had grieved the God of
the minister, and author of that sign. Is it a small thing to grieve men,
Esaias. 7.11.
but you must also grieve my God? says Esaias.

The defeating of Baptism seems to come three ways: one by open contempt
and despising of Gods wisdom in it: Heathenish and profane men cannot tell
what to make of the sprinkling of water, nor of the blessing of it in the name
of the blessed trinity, as the Infidels, and Atheists, and Paynims do unto
this day, being ignorant that Christ Matthew. 28. when he ordained Baptism,
said: Al power in heaven and earth is given unto me, go and baptize, I am with
you for ever: So that here is not naked water, or the bare clement, or a few
words repeated: but here is the power of God with it, his wisdom to establish
it, his constancy to auowe it, his holiness to sanctify it, his mercy to
bless it: so that as an odd thing, or new thing they which despise it,
despise not ma^s advise, but Gods counsel against them selves, Luke 7.30. as
did the Pharisees. And he that will not follow Gods counsel, how shall he
thrive, though all the heads in the world should devise for him? Another
disappoyntme^t of Baptism comes by negligence, as in the people of Israel
intermitting circumcision for 40. years, Exodus 4.24.
as in Moses, who no doubt acknowledged Gods ordinance for circumcision, and
yet either having learned Egyptian or Midianitish manners, or to please his
wife, deferred to do it, so that God had like to destroyed him in the Inn for
it. Which I would have parents consider, that defer their childrens baptism
from Lords day to Lords day, and from one time of assembly to another, for no
end but to get such and such witnesses, such and such furniture of their
houses, and such other complement, and outward circumstances, till death strike
their children: which sin though the Lord may remit the^, yet their comfort
cannot be so great, as if they had taken the due time which the Lord offered
them: seeing by their means it comes to pass, when Minister and place and
time and all did concur, they only were wanting, by the sin of omission:
which thing governors Ecclesiastical are to look unto, lest that if every man
by this example should defer if death should intercept, Anabaptistrie might
creep in and scarce any child be baptized. The Primitive Church suffered them
to want an honorable burial, Council. 1. Braccar.
who deferred their baptism. Of the third defeatement of Baptism, by
unavoidable necessity, we have spoken at large, when either the child is
prevented by death in the womb, or out of the womb: either by negligence or
contempt in parents and friends, as in these two last cases: or when parents
and minister, and all are willing, death creeps in and preuenteth both.

Such occurrents may be matter of meditation to parents, and Ministers, and
the whole people, of the suddennes of death, of the uncertain joy and stay of
posterity, that he suffers us to beget, but not to possess; to have a sight
of our babes, and then suddenly takes them to himself; of Gods almightines,
that he does what he will, and that sometimes he saves with means, sometimes
without means, as sometimes damneth with means, sometimes without means: but
yet not so that any of these accidents overthrow the election of God. What then
establishes the substance of Baptism? what overthrows it? Here we must
consider the institution: Matthew. 28. Go: Who? The Minister: Do what? baptize,
that is, power on the water, or dippe it in water: Whom? all nations, that is
men, not bells, etc. How? not in the name of the water, or power of it, or any
other name in heaven or earth: but of the blessed Trinity. So that a Midwife
to baptize, or a private man, to whom it was never said, Go, and baptize:
likewise to use sand, as sometime has bin, or some other licour: As oil and
water, by Haeret. I^^n. ib. 1. cap. 18.
also to apply it to bells, and then forsooth Bishops alone must do it, as the
Papists use: and lastly not to do it in the name and power and virtue of the
Trinity, I take it to be the violating of the Lords institution: in which
kinds we ought to refuse it. But if other circumstances only be annexed or
not accompany it, Eccle. 7.31.
as it may be truly said of this sacrament: (God made it simple and righteous,
and vncompounde, but man found out many inventions) these things may a little
exercise our zeal and faith and patience: but they cannot abridge the counsel
of God in thee and thine: and therefore if thou may have it without the
additamentes of men, the better it is: if not, yet the seal of God remains
sure, they shall bear their iniquity of stubble, so mean a matter built upon
so good a foundation that have brought it up, or maintain it: until God purge
them by his trial of fire, as in the word, so in the sacrament, 1. Cor. 3.15.
when as the stubble shall vanish, but the good foundation shall save them. Do
thou as much as thou can communicate with God in his institution: for as we
are to desire not only the milk of the word, 1. Peter 2.2.
but the sincere milk of it: so in the Lords seal, we ought rather to take
his engrauing alone then any characters of man.

And to draw to an end, I would not only have men peremptory for the
Sacrament, but for the word also, which is the life of the Sacrament: what is
water without the word, but water? therefore if the neglect or the contempt of
the Sacrament be a sin, is not the despising of the word, and neglect of it
a sin also? because many are wonderful passionate, The necessity of the
word to be thought on, as of Baptism
if God himself prevent of Baptism, but themselves for themselves and others,
are nothing compassionate: making no care nor conscience of their assiduitie
and diligence to hear the word. Surely the word has saved without Baptism,
but baptism without the word never: Ioh. 15.3. You are clean because of the
word: and that you may know the words despising has power to damn also,
consider what the scripture says, Ioh. 12.48. The word shall judge you: and
again, He that despises the word his prayer is abominable: Prou. 28.9.
and again, Math. 10.40.
He that rejects the Preacher, rejects him that sent him, which is the
Lord: and again, Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.14. Romans 14.23.
which faith alone pleases GOD. Christ Math. 23.16. calls the Pharisees blind
guides, fools and blind: because they counted it sin to swear by the gold
of the Temple, but by the Temple to swear was nothing: so to swear by the
Altar, nothing, but by the offering upon the Altar a sin. Now fools and
blind, which is greater, gold or Temple, Altar or offering? For the Temple
contains God that dwells in it: the Altar, that is God worshipped at it. So
let the despisers of the word either vanish and wonder, Act. 13.31. for Gods
work upon their blindness that can see a mote of contempt in Baptism, and not
the beam of contempt in the word, or else acknowledge their blindness:
Baptism is as gold, it is as a holy offering: but yet the word sanctifies it,
and if it be not offered as it were upon the holy Altar of the word, this gold
becomes dross, because there wants Gods word, as fire to try it: and
though it be the offering of the fruit of thy body, thine own flesh to the
Lord, yet unless thou do it as the Lord has commanded, there is a savor of
death in it, and not of life: The propo^tion must be kept, Leuit. 17.4 In
sacrifices disobedience is as murder: and why not in sacraments?

Wherefore beloved, let us not despise Baptism, let us not despise the word:
Baptism is good, and holy, and comfortable with the word, the word is
wholesome, and comfortable in his place, with Baptism and without it, let us
get a spirit of discerning spirits, to distinguish between outward washing
and inward, between the leaven of popery, who sour the sweet water of
baptism and make it Marah, let us rather season it with casting in some part
of the tree of life, 2. King. 2.21.
as Eliza did to the waters of Jericho, and healed the land from untimely
birth. Let us preserve a good conscience by communing with our hearts daily
examined, so shall neither we, nor our church have untimely birth for salvation,
as they had in Jericho: so shall not Baptism be unfruitful to us, but be
laden with all the benefits of Christ's resurrection, ascension, glory at Gods
right hand, and dominions over Angels, and then neither death nor life.
Baptism, nor not Baptism, neither things past, present, nor to come, shall
separate us from the love of Jesus Christ: Romans 8.38.
which shall bring us unto God.

Errata.
In the epistle to the reader, page 4. line 27. for, insancicida, read
infanticida. p. 45. l. 18. for, Secondly, r. Seventhly. p. 59. l. 17. for, that
is God, r. God that^s.


