THE Good Hous-wiues Treasury.

Being a very necessary Book instructing to the dressing of Meats.

Hereunto is also annexed, sundry wholesome Medicines for diverse diseases.

* Imprinted at London by Edward Allde. 1588.

A Book of Cookrye very necessary for all such as delight therein.
To make White broth.
TAke a long marrow bone and cleave it long-wayes, take out the marrow, and set
on ye bones with your Capon or Cock, lay the breast downwardes, when it is
sodden ye may take the Capon forth and put it in a basin with hot licour, and
lay the breast downwards, if you will you may sees a hinder Leg of beef with
it also, you must set it on betimes that the strength of your meat may be
sodden in your broth: then take the fat as it rises, no broth till the meat be
sodden as much as it shall be, then take three pintes or a pottle of the
uppermost of your broth for two platters, let it settle, and then take the
cleerest and strain it through a cloth and put the fat to it: then set it upon
the fire in a Pipkin, and take half a dossen of large mace, half a spooneful of
whole pepper, as much sugar as will sweeten it, if you will you may put in a
pint of Muskadine or white wine, when it has sodden a good while put in your
marrow you took out of the bones with half a dossen of Dates cut in half, let
it but simper after you have put these in till you take it up, take to this
broth four or five yolks of eggs in some Vergis, half a porrenger full with
some sugar, and when you take up the broth to serve in, then put it to it, let
not the broth sees after you have put in the eggs but simper a little and
stir it well, then you must take Currants and Prunes and seethe them by
themselves in fair water, when they be sodden you must lay Prunes, and
Barberries about the Platter, if you will: straw a little Sugar and Sinamon
about it also, lay Prunes, Currants and Barberries about the Capon, with the
marrow, Mace and Dates, but the Capon must be first broke up but not asunder,
for the Wine, you need not put it in unless you will, the broth will be good
notwithstanding.

How to make White broth either for Capon, Mutton or Chickin.
TAke a leg of Beef or a rumpe, or else a short marow bone, and cleave it
long ways and take out the marowe whole, and sees the bone with the meat, if
you make but a little take any one of these above, and when they be well
sodden, take three pintes or a pottell of the uppermost of the broth and strain
it through a boulter or streyner while your meat is a seething, bind in a
handful of herbs then take a fair Pipkin and put in the clearest of the
broth to a quarte of broth: a pint of white Wine or half a pint of
Muskadine, put in half a dossen of great Mace, a little whole Pepper, Sugar,
salt and a little stick of whole Sinamon, bind in a few herbs, namely,
Endive, Succory, Marigoldes, Margerum, Percelye a little Time, and a little
Rosemary, let all these seethe half an hour, then put in half a dossen Dates
cut in half, put in the marow that you take out of the bone, take Currants and
Prunes, bind them in a cloth and sees them in water by themselves, and when
you have put in your marowe and Dates: let your broth seethe no longer then
while your marow is hot thoroughly, then take four yolks of eggs and three or
four spoonefuls of Rosewater, beat them well together: take half a porrenger
full of broth and mingle it with it and stir it well together, then put it
into your Pipkin of broth and stir it well till it seethe up, then dishe it and
lay the fruit upon the meat.

How to make stewed Broth either with Veale, Mutton or Cock.
TAke it and set it on in a fair Pipkin of water, and when it is sodden and
fair skimmed, take a handefull of good herbs and put in it, and grated
bread, Prunes raisons and Currants, Nutmeg, Pepper and sault, and let them boil
all together.

How to make broth either for Birds, Rabits or Mutton.
TAke a short marow bone and cleave it a sunder, and take out the marow, the^
sees the bone in fair water, then take a porrenger full of the uppermost of ye
broth half a pint of white wine put in a pipkin, then put in your meat, and
if it be birds or rabits: put in their bellies percelye, butter, Mace, whole
Pepper, Sugar Sinamon and Currants, and leave on the birds heads, and put in
but a little of al these things before named, but if it be mutton then put all
these into the brothe, besides the fruit that is put in, put in a little
grated bread, bind in a few herbs, half an hour before you take up the
broth, put in ten roots of white Endive, cut off but a little of the root or
else it will fall a sunder, then put in your marow, and let it sees no longer
then till it be thoroughly whot.

How to smeare a Rabbet or a neck of Mutton.
TAke a Pipkin, a porrenger of water, two or three spoonefuls of Vergis, ten
Onions clean pilled, and if they be great quarter them, mingle as muchy Pepper
and salt as will season them, and rub it upon the meat, if it be a rabbit: put
a piece of butter in the bellye and a piece in the broth, and a few Currants if
you will, stop your pot close and sees it with a soft fire but no fire under
the bottom, then when it is sodden serve it in upon soppes and lay a few
Barberies upon the dishe.

How to make Broth for a Carpe or a Pike.
TAke water and yest, and boil them together, then take whole Mace, Currants,
Pruines, Pepper and Salt, Percelye, Time and Rosemarye bound together, with a
little Vergis and Vinegar, and a good piece of sweet Butter, and boil them all
together. To all kind of Fish the same broth, excepting prunes.

How to roste the Fillet of a leg of Veale.
TAke the fat of the Kidney cut it in pieces as big as ones finger, then take
Pepper, salt and Nutmeg, and so lard it with that and the fat together, and
let it be very well roasted, then make Venson sauce to it with Vinegar, grated
Bread, Sinamon, Sugar, a little pepper and two or three whole Cloves.

To make minst Pyes.
TAke your Veale and perboyle it a little, or mutton, then set it a cooling:
and when it is cold, take three pound of suit to a leg of mutton, or four
pound to a fillet of Veale, and the^ mince them small by them selves, or
together whether you will, then take to season them half an ounce of Nutmegs,
half an ounce of cloves and Mace, half an ounce of Sinamon, a little Pepper, as
much Salt as you think will season them, either to the mutton or to the Veale,
take viij. yolks of Eggs when they be hard, half a pint of rosewater full
measure, half a pound of Sugar, then strain the Yolks with the Rosewater and
the Sugar and mingle it with your meat, if ye have any Orrenges or Lemmans you
must take two of the^, and take the pills very thin and mince them very
small, and put them in a pound of currants, six dates, half a pound of prunes
lay Currants and Dates upon the top of your meat, you must take two or three
Pomewaters or Wardens and mince with your meat, you may make them woorsse if
you will, if you will make good crust put in three or four yolks of eggs a
little Rosewater, and a good deal of sugar.

To make a Chickin Pie.
IF you will make one so big, take nine or ten Chickins of a month old,
trusse them round and break their bones, take to season them withal a quarter
of an ounce of Sinamon, and a quarter of cloves and Mace, a little Pepper and
Salt, as much as you think will season your Pie two or three Orrenge peeles
small shread, take the marow of a short marow bone cleave it long ways and
take out the marowe as whole as you can, then cut it in four or five pieces
and put it in your pie take half a pound of Currants, a good hand full of
Prunes, eight Dates, four cut in half and four shred, a pound of Sugar with
that in your crust and all, half a dossen spoonefuls of Rosewater, so heat
your Oven reasonablye, and let it stand in two hours and a half or three
hours, a quarter of an hour before you draw it take three yolks of eggs,
four or five spoonefulles of Rosewater, beat them together and let the^ boil
a waume stir it still till you take it off, when it is somewhat cool put in
three or four spoonful of Vergis and a little sugar, and put it into your pie
quish your cover and so serve it in.

To make a Pippen Pie.
TAke a dossen of fair pippens, a pound of Sugar in the crust and Pie, half
an ounce of Sinamon, two orrenge peeles shred fine, two spoonefulls of
Rosewater, then heat your Oven and let it stand in two hours or two and a
half, and make a vent in the lid thereof: this Pie is good when the Quince is
out of season.

To make a Quince Pie.
TAke eight or ten fair Quinces, pare them without and wipe them within then
take an ounce of Sinamon, a pound and a half of Sugar, a little Saunders, and
in every of the^ a Cloue or two, then heat your Oven reasonablye, and let it
stand in six hours, this Pie is not to be made after Easter then they be out
of season, you must make no ve^t in it but with your sugar put in five or six
spoonefulls of Rosewater.

How to make an Eele Pie.
TAke two penyworth of very fat Eeles when they be flead and very fair washed,
sees them in a little fair water, and Salt till they be half sodden, that
they may slip from the bones, cut away the sins on every side, then slip
them from the bones, and shred them somewhat fine with a knife and take two or
three Wa^dens and shread them very fine to put among them, or Pippins or other
apples, if you do want wardens, then take a little Salt, a little Pepper,
Sinamon, cloves Mace and Sugar, and season it withal put in a quarter of a
pound of sweet butter, so put it in paste, and bake it not too rashlye, you
may put in the yolke of an egg and a little Vergis when it is half baked if
you will but I think it is better without.

How to make a Florentine.
TAke the call of a leg of Veale, and all the fat of a loyne of Veale, and
the marow of a short marow bone, and half as much Veale as this does way,
the^ shred them al together, and take Currants, Sinamon, Sugar, dates, shred two
or three yolks of Eggs, Nutmegge and a little pepper, boil al these together
upon a soft fire half an hour, and put thereto four or five spoonful of
Rosewater, and a little Orrenge peele fine shread, then when it is half cold
put it in paste and set it into the Oven, and let it stand no longer then the
crust be baked, then Ice it or lay sugar upon it, as for the Chuites you must
put in no Eggs nor boil it, but put in a few Prunes, let them be half sodden
in water.

An other how to make a Florentine.
TAke the kidneyes of a loyne of Veale when it is half roasted, and shread it
very small upon a trencher, then take a porringer full of marowe and shread it
a little, and put it among the meat with a penny dishe of Butter, take four
yolks of eggs and mince them very small when they be hard and put them in
currants as many as you think good, four or five Dates cut small, four or
five spoonefull of rosewater, and put in Sinamon, sugar and a very little
Ginger, set them upon a chafindish of coals in a platter, and stir it till
you think it be enough, put in a little Orrenge or Lemman peele if you have any,
make very good paste, and drive it out so thin that ye may blow it up from the
table, then cut it round as big as your platter is by the nethermost brim,
spread the platter with a little butter, and lay the paste on and then put in
your meat, and lay it a good deal hyer in the middle then else where, then
make such a cover as you make to a pudding in a platter, and then set it in
the Oven till the paste be baked, and then Ice it with a little rose water and
sugar, and set it in a little and serve it to the board.

How to make Dousets.
TAke a pint of Flower wet it with water, Butter, and an Egg white and al,
and make not your paste too lithe when they be raised prick them with a pin
on the bottom, then harden them either on the harthe or in the Oven, and take
a pint of Cream, three Eggs but one of the Whites, beat them well and
mingle them with the Cream, the^ take Sinamon, Nutmeg, Sugar, and a little
Salt, and a quarter of a spoonefull of Flower, stir them altogether and
strain the^ through aboulter or strainer, then fil^ them in the Oven: let them
stand in half an hour and then take them out.

For Tarte stuff either Wardens, Barberies or Damsons.
TAke a fair Pipkin and fill it full of any one of them: put in two or three
spoonfulls of fair water, then set it upon the hot harth without any coals
about it and so let them boil while they be soft ready to strain, and then
strain them into a fair basin, and set them on a chafindishe with coals and
let them boil and put in Sugar, and Sinamon sufficient to sweeten them and put
it into a fair glass and so use it as you need.

How to make Prune Tartes.
IF you will have a Tarte in a great platter take two pound of Dammaske Prunes,
half a pound of great Raisons, if you will have the Tarte all black take so
much or else but half, take a quarte of very good cream, eight yolks of Eggs
beat them together and then set them on a fresh fire to seethe, let it be
stirred continually til it have sodden a dossen wames then take it up and put
it in a fair cloth or a boulter strainer, tie it hard with a Packthrid close
to the stuff and hang it on a nail till all the whey be run out, that it
may be somewhat stiff, then put in as much Sugar as will season it powder or
other, a little Ginger if you will* that which you keep for the white put in
three or four spoonful of Rosewater, take half of that for green if you
will, then take two or three handefull of Spinidge, clean picked from the
staulkes: wash it clean, but you must dry it well in a cloth and stamp it
and wring out the juice of it: and put some of that juice to the white till it
be made green: take the whites of Eggs and mingle it as you did ye yolks and
ye may put juice of Spinidge either to the white or ye yellow, you may make
your tarte of four colors if you will as black, white, yellow and green, or
all of one or two colors which you will: when your Prunes and Raisons be
washed cover them close and seethe them in fair water: seethe them no longer
then you may easily strain them: nor with too much water, when they be sodden
power the water clean from them, and let them be strained with as little licour
as you can, then put in after they be strained three quarters of a pound of
Sugar: three quarters of an ounce of Sinamon, a quarter of an ounce of Ginger,
put it in a fair Pipkin or skillet and set them on the fire: and let it seethe
and be well stirred a prittye while till it be somewhat stiff: then take off
it and put in a quarter of a pint of Damask rosewater, make it not limber but
that it may cut when it is in the Tarte.

How to make Iellye either of capon, cock, Veale, chicken or calves feet,
Tenche or Barnell: you may make Ielly of any one of these or two of them
together.
IF you will make a pottell: take a knockell of Veale or a shoulder, and a young
Cock: cut of all the fat that you see, and wash it in as many waters till
the water be clear: lay it in water an hour or two: and cut it in half a
dossen pieces, but be sure you chop no bone asunder that has any marow in it
when you take it out of water have a Beer pottle pot with fair water and put
the water and the meat in a fair pipkin and set it upon a fire at one end of
your chimney and not again the fire, let there be no fire under the bottom of
your pot and let it seethe very softly: and take off the fat as it rises and
do not stir the meat any thing in seething nor when you poor out the Ielly,
when it has sodden four or five hours take a little of it in a spoone and
set it a cooling: when it is so stiff that you may cut it with a knife power it
out into a gally pot or else some other narrow mouth pot: and when it is cold
take off the fat that is uppermost if the bottom be any thing black pare it
away then take to every pint of the ielly a quarter of a pound of Sugar if
you will have it strong of the spice: take half an ounce of Sinamon, a race of
ginger, one Nutmegge, two or three Mace and bruise it very groce and put into
every pint so much spice and Sugar as is written: and one white of an egg
with a little piece of the shell beaten very well, and as ye froth of your white
of the Eggs does rise cast it into your Iellye: half a pint of white Wine,
and half a pint of damask rose water and two spoonful of white Wine
Vinegar, if you make three pintes or a pottell put in of these three things
thus much or else according to the quantitye: that you make, if you will keep
it a fortnighte or three weeks: put in very little Vinegar and set it in the
could place that you have in your house and keep it in gally pots or
glasses: when you set it on the fire you must stir it continuallye while it
seethe up have your ielly bag a branche of rosemary in the end of it and a
few round strawes of hay, and when it seethes up pour it into the ielly
bag, and when it is run once through put it into the ielly bag again with a
great spoon very softly and when it is very clean put it up in such things as
you will have it and cover it not till it be cold.

How to make black Puddinges.
TAke Otmeale and steep it in sodden Milk, then take Hogs suet and good
herbs and chop them small, then put in Fennel seed, pepper and Salt,

How to make white Puddinges.
TAke grated bread, currants, yolks of eggs, Nutmegs, Sinamon, and some Sugar,
salt, and Beef suet: and temper them with Cream.

How to make Liuering Puddinges.
TAke the Liver of a Hog, and give it three or four waumes over the fire,
then either grate it or choppe it very small, and take a little grated bread
and two eggs well beaten whites and all, and Currants, Nutmegges, Pepper, and
Salt, and Hogs suet.

How to make a Lenton Pudding.
TAke grated bread, a little Sugar, nutmegges, Sinamon Salt, and yolks of
Eggs, tempered with a little cream.

A Haggas Pudding.
TAke the Haggas of a Calfe, perboyle him, and when he is cold choppe him very
small: then take a little grated bread and put two yolks of Eggs with good
herbs chopped very small, and currants Nutmeg and salt.

How to make Sausages.
TAke the Fillets of a Hog, and half as much of the suet of the Hog: and
choppe them both very small, then take grated bread, two or three yolks of
eggs a spoonful of groce pepper, as much salt, temper them with a little
cream, and so put them into the skins and broyle the^ on a gridiorne.

To make fresh Cheese.
TAke new milk and put a little running to it, and when it is scumde break it:
then take some Sugar, Sinamon and rosewater, and so put it in a cheese moule,
and put Cream to it.

For a Tansie.
TAke either walnut tree leaves or lettice alone, or all other good herbs,
stamp them and strain them* and take a little Cream and grated bread, nutmeg,
pepper and Sugar, four Eggs two of the whites: beat them together and so
frye it in a pan.

To make Fritters.
TAke a little fair warm water, as much Sack, and take half flower half
bread, mingle them altogether: then take five or six eggs and break therein
whites and all, a little nutmeg, Pepper and salt, and cut in Appells very
small: then take a fair skillet with Suet and let it boil on the fire and so
put the batter in it.

For a Posset.
TAke a posnet full of cream and seethe it and put Sugar and Sinamon in it,
then take half Ale and half Sack and put Sugar and Sinamon in it.

Porke Sauce.
TAke Vinegar, Mustard, Sugar and Pepper.

Piggesauce.
TAke half Vinegar, and half Vergis, a handful of percely and Sage chopte
very small, a Pomewater shredde very small, then take the grauie of the Pigge,
with Sugar and Pepper and boil them together.

Sauce for a Gooce.
TAke Vinegar and appells shred very small, two spoonfulls of musterd a
lit-Pepper and Salt: and take Sugar sufficient to sweeten it, then boil it
well together.

Capon sauce.
TAke water, Onions, pepper, and some of the grauie and salt, and boil the^
together

How to make Almond milk.
TAke a piece of the screge end of a neck of mutton, a good handful of huld
barley a good handful of cold herbs, a little salt then take a handful of
almonds and blanch them and grind them in a stone mortar, and strain the
licour through a fair bolter, then put in a little Sugar, and so give it to
drink.

How to make white or red Vinegar.
Fetch your Vinegar at Saint Katherins a grote a gallon to the quantitys of
six gallons and put thereto a pottle of Elder flowers such as will shake off
when they be ripe, and see your vessel be close stopped up and filled, and
thus you may renew your vessel every year with Vinegar and flowers according
to the quantitye but let the old remain: this may you do either with strong
or small beer and the remnants of barrells.

How to still Rosewater that it may well keep.
WHen that you set your still up upon the plate: sifte as many fine ashes upon
your plate as may be half an inch thick at the least: and lay them every where
alike saving in the middle a little thicker, and upon the ashes strew a little
beaten baye salt every where a like, then set on the bottom of your still
somewhat stooping that it may be higher behind then before forcasting the
water well out in the stilling, when you still: gather your roses as dry as
you can and put them into the still presently if the Roses be dry if you have
more then you can still when they be new gathered put them into a flaskit not
too thick for it will mare both the Roses and the water, when you still: cover
your Roses with papers and cast a cloth over the papers, that water that ye
will keep longest take it always away before the cake be through stilled and
keep that water by it self, and that which is last stilled by it self: that
ye comes last of the cake is not so good as that which comes first, let your
glasses be washed a fortnight before you need them because they must be very
dry before you put in your water, stop not your glasses before they be through
dry for they will be mustye: set them in a window a day or two that the Sun
may come to them, and when they be very dry: stop them with wax or cork and
some sercenet about the Cork or wax: and cover them with leather or
parchement, and set them by til you have occasion to occupy them, every glass
that is filled with Rosewater as soon as it is filled, set it into an Oven
after you have drawn Pyes or white Bread, and let it stand in a week or more
till you have occasion to heat your Oven again: if it be not too long, and so
set it in twice or thrice before you set them up for all the year, and set
your Glasses in a Basin or piece for fear of bursting: when you set up your
Glasses for all the year, wrap them in woollen and set it in a Cubbert or
shelfe, and keep this water in this order and it will last two or three year.

How to make very sweet Cakes either of Damask or red Roses.
TAke your Roses very fair colored and somewhat close, if you will make your
cakes large take a pecke of Roses to every cake or half a pecke, and put two
Cakes together bottom to bottom, and put into every cake besides two handful
of sweet Margerum roots and all, for at that time of the year cut Margerum is
not sweet, cut of the roots of sweet Margerum, and two good handful of
lauender and an ounce of the best Damask powder you can get, a quarter of a
pound of orris and one ounce of Cloves, let not the cloves or the orris be
beaten much, when you do searce your orris see it be not woormeaten and smell
well, all this powder will serve but for four cakes, straw into your still some
Roses first in the bottom, then Margerum, Lauender, and some powder and then
Roses again and a little powder, then Lauender and margerum, more powder then
you did before, then put a few Roses in the top somewhat thin, when they be
half stilled take them forth and lay them betwixt two papers and lay not
one Cake against another before they be cold, then save them in papers, and
cut the papers bigger then ye Cakes, and sewe them round as soon as you can
put them into an Oven after they be stilled: and heat the Oven no hotter then
if it were after Pyes or Cakes, and let them stay no longer the^ a day or a
night: then take them out and when they be cold lay them betwixt your clothes,
and if they be not dry then set them in again a week or a fortnight, and
after they be through dry: prick the papers on both sides unto the brim every
where thick, these cakes will continue three or four year.

How to preserve Cherries.
TAke three pound of Cherries and clip off half the stalks, three pound of
Sugar and as much rosewater as will wet the Sugar and no more, then put in all
your Cherries and set them over the fire and shake them three or four times
for burning to the bottom of the pan, let them seethe in every place a like,
and skumme them continually: it is no matter for taking up sirrop for it will
go to the bottom: and you may put it in again where it does seethe faster,
and in any wise have some clear fire by to put under where it does want, and
let it sees a reasonable good pace always, and when it rises to a froth al
over have three or four spoons by you, and set out a little in a spoone that
you may see whether it do Ielly or no: as soon as the sirrop in your spoone
is cold set out more til you see it be ready: for the color will alter very
much if it seethe past the time, therefore when it is of a reasonable thick
Ielly take them off, cover them not until they be cold, put them up in
glasses or gally pots and break the Ielly as little as you can.

How to preserve Gooseberies.
TAke four pound of Gooseberies pull off the blossoms off the tops, but not
the stalks, take four pound of sugar to them, and first put in two pound of
sugar, and do no more the^ wet them in rose water, you must lay your
gooseberies one by one and not one upon another, and set them upon a soft fire
little more the^ embers, and you must keep them still ready to seethe but not
to seethe, for the space of three or four hours, they will yield much
licour, and as your licour encreseth so cast your sugar which is left on the
top in every place a like, some at one time and some at an other, and when they
have been on the fire three or four hours, let them sees very softly scarce
a quarter of an hour and skumme them with ye back of a spoone or a knifes
point, and so set out in a spoone to cool as is above said, and when they be
Iellied take them off the fire, and do to all your preserved things in
putting them forth and glassing of the^ as is before written, and preserve all
your things if you can either with earthen or in pewter, and your pewter must
be scoured with fair water and beaten sand, and if you have no pewter nor
earthen pan the^ take a brass pan which is very sweet and scour it with
lome very bright.

How to preserve Damsons.
TAke four pound of Damsons, three pound of sugar to them, lay your damsons
one by one in a fair Charger, and put one pound of sugar in the bottom every
where a like, then put in your damsons, and throw one pound of Sugar on the
top of them, and take half a dossen spoonefull of red Rosewater, and take a
feather and sprinkle it every where upon them, set them upon a Trivet and a
very soft fire under them, and let them boil every where a like very softlye,
as your sirrop increases, so put on the rest of the Sugar, and when it
begins to Iellye set it forth in a spoone as you do ye other, you must let
them boil four or five hours very softlye, and as the scumme rises so take
it off, and as you do the other aforesaid: so do this, cover the^ with a
fair platter in the boiling, and as the stream of the water rises take off
the platter once in a quarter of an hour, and wipe the water of it with a
cloth, and lay it on again as long as it is a boiling, and when they be boiled
enough take off the Platter and cover it no more, then take twentye Cloves
being somewhat bruised not broken, and that being taken off the fire put in the
cloves and put them down in the sirrop.

How to preserve Pear plummes either white or black.
TAke four pound of fair peareplums and take four pound of sugar to the^ as
much rosewater as will wet the sugar, to the white pear plums Damask rose
water, and to the black plums red Rosewater, keep out one pound of your Sugar
vnwet, lay in your Pear plummes one by an other, and set them upon a very
soft fire for the space of two hours, let them be ready to boil but let them
not boil and as the sirrop increases throw ye rest of the Sugar upon them,
and every hand while turn and cover them with a dishe as you do the Damsons,
and wipe off ye water also: and when they have been upon the fire two or three
hours, then let them boil half an hour softly, or a little while more or
less till they be Ielled, and take heed the color alter not from white,
when they be boiled enough, power the sirrop upon them till they be cold.

Preserve your white Bullesse even as your Pear plummes.

How to preserve Barberies.
TAke a pound of Barberies and stone them but pull the^ not off the bunches
take the fairest and reddest bunches you can get, when the stones be taken out:
way one pound of them and take a pound and a half of Sugar to them, wette the
Sugar verry well with read Rosewater, and set it on the fire and as soon as
it boyleth up draw the scumme on one side and put in the barberies and dip
them well in the sirrop with a spoon, and let them boil very softly the space
of a quarter of an hour every where a like, you must dip them down and turn
them as soon as they be on the fire, then take the^ off when they have boiled
almost a quarter of an hour, di^ and pour sirrop upon them till they be half
cold.

How to preserve Quinces.
TAke four pound of Quinces and four pound of Sugar, a quarte of fair water
and let it boil once up and have four whites of new laid eggs, and one of
the shelles, and beat them very well for the space of half an hour, with a
pint of fair water, and when your sirrope first seetheth up, cast in the
whites of Eggs that you have beaten, and stir them till they have sodden two
or three waumes, then take it off the fire and pour it through a Ielly bag,
and put a rosemary branche in the bottom, then pare your Quinces and core them
and set on the same sirrop, and put in your Quinces and let the^ lie one by an
other easily that you may well turn the^, that you bruise not one another, and
let them seethe every where a like, and turn them very often, and when they
have boiled two or three hours, take the kernells that you pull out of your
Quinces, and keep the Ielly of the kernells as whole as you can, then core them
and make two or three balls of the kernels and put them in the pan with the
Quinces, and when your Quinces have well boiled that it will Ielly very well
that you may cut it, take them off and pour them into a fair basin or earthen
vessel, and fill the holes of the Quinces with sirop, the^ take a stick of
sinamon and a score of cloves being somewhat bruised, and put the same into the
sirop.

How to preserve Orrenges.
TAke of the highest culloured orrenges and the thickest rindes that you can
get, let not the rindes be soft, pare them very thin, core the^ and pull out
the meat of them, when you have done so: lay them in the water and shifte them
thrice a day for three days, and set on two pannes or kettells with fair
water, and when the water does sees put in your Orrenges, and let them sees
till the water be somewhat bitter, then shifte them into the other water and
two or three more waters as long as the water tastes bitter, or has any high
color, and when they are somewhat tender take them off and let your sirrop be
ready for the^, take to four pound of Orrenges, four pound of sugar and use
your sirrop as you must the sirrop of Quinces, and be often turning of your
Orrenges, and let them sees very softlye two or three hours till your sirrope
be somewhat hye, and then take them off and pour sirrop upon them till they be
somewhat cold, put in a few Cloves among them.

How to make a Cullis for a sick body.
TAke a Cock or a Capon set him on the fire in a fair pipkin, and when it
seethes scumme it clean, then take herbs according to the party that is
sick, two or three dates, a handful of Raisons of the Sun stoned, and let
it but simper on the fire till all the meat be consumed away, then stamp them
altogether and strain them through a fair boulter and so give the party to
drink.

Here ends the Book of Cookrye.
Wholesome Medicines.
A remedy for such as cannot digest their meat, but Vomit it up again.
TAke mintes and stamp them well, and crummes of bread burned in the fire, and
Vinegar, and make thereof a salve, spread it upon a linen cloth, and then set
it upon a brick, and put thereon ye powder of Cloves, then lay the same upon
the stomach and you shall find great help therein.

For the green sickness.
TAke one penny worth of Turmericke, and one pound of Saffron, and beat them
small: and take a quart of new milk and a garlic head, which being stamped and
strained put it into the aforesaid, and warm the^ all together and drink it
morning and evening and walk after.

For a Burning or Scalding.
TAke the fat of the guts of a Sheep, and the trittles of a Sheep and
seethe them together, and take a course cloth and strain them together and
make a cake of it and melt some of it in a Saucer and with a feather anoint the
place three times a day.

For a Fellone, Ancome, or any such thing.
TAke a quarte of the dragges of strong Ale and a little small Otemeale, as
much white castle soap as a Walnut, and boil them together and stir them til
it come to be made a plaster, and then lay it to the sore being spread upon a
cloth.

For an Itche or an heat.
TAke a spoonefull of living Brimstone fine beaten, take a Porringer full of
deeres Suet, a penywoorth of Champhry and beat it with a blaunched Almonde,
and boil them altogether until it come to an ointment, and then anoint the
itch or the heat.

Lyppe Salve.
TAke a good piece of fresh Butter, as much Deeres suet half as much wax, two
or three spoonful of good sallet Oil, and boil them together til it come to
an ointment.

For the running of the raines and the whites.
TAke the pith of an Ox back and wheat flower and Muskadine and make a little
Cake thereof and bake them upon the harthe, and then eat thereof every morning
and drink a cup of Muskadell after it and it will help you.

For the fleam in the stomach.
TAke the yellow root of a dock and stamp it and strain it with good Ale and
drink a good draught of it and it will make you vomit and help you of the
fleam in the stomach.

To draw up the euelaw.
TAke half a pint of Sack, half a spoonful of bruised pepper, heat it very
hot, then put it into a narrow mouth pot, and let the party draw the air up
into his mouth as hot as he can suffer it.

For them that do vomit.
TAke half a Capon and three pintes of water, and let it sees half away, and
put into it half a pint of read Rosewater, an ounce of sinamon sticks, and a
quarter of a pint of juice of quinces, then seethe it altogether and strain it
and drink of it evening and morning when you list.

FINIS.

