A true and plain report of the Furious outrages of France, and the horrible
and shameful slaughter of CHASTILLION the Admiral, and diverse other Noble and
excellent men, and of the wicked and strange murder of godly persons,
committed in many Cities of France, without any respect of sort, kind, age,
or degree.

By ERNEST VARAMVND OF FRESELAND.

AT STRIVELING in Scotland, 1573.

TO THE READER.
YOu must cease to marvel, my good cuntreymen of Scotland, that I have caused
this book printed in our country of Scotland to be published altogether in the
English phrase and orthographie. For the language is well enough known to our
cu^treyme^: And the chief cause of my translating it, was for our good
neighbors the Englismen, to who^ we are so hiely bound, and upon whose good
Queen at this present, in policy depends the chief ^^aye of Gods Church
in Christendom. I know not vvhatrespects have stayed the learned of that land
from setting out this history: Therefore supposing the causes to be such as I
conceive them, I have been bold to set it forth in their language in our
country. And you, good cuntreyme^, that have received so honorable succors from
England, and from vvhenceal Christendom hops for charitable assistance, must
be content to yield that this is framed to serve their understanding: Ye
Englishmen our good neighbors, friends, brethren, and patrons, I pray you
conster rightly of my labor, that my purpose is not here to offend any amity,
nor violate any honor, nor prejudice any truth, but to set before you astorie
as I found it, referring the confirmation thereof to truth and proves, as in
all historical cases is lavvfully used. How many histories written in Latin,
Italian and French, by Iouius, Paradine, Belleforest and other, are printed in
Italy, France and Flaunders, and published and freely had and read in your
land, although they contain matter expressly to the sclander of your state and
princes? Matters of that nature are published, the burden of proving rests
upon the author, the judgment pertains to the reader, there is no prejudice
to any part, Books are extant on both parts. The very treatises of divinity
are not al vvara^ted that be printed, you must take it as it is, only for
matter of report on the one part, so far to bind credit as it carries
evidence to furnish your understandings, as other books do that make rehearsals
of the acts and states of princes, commonweals and peoples. But howsoever it
be, good Englishmen, thank God that you have such a sovereign, under vvho^
you suffer no such things, and by the noble and sincere aid that your good
Queen has given us in Scotland, I pray you gather a comsortable confidence,
that in respect of such honorable charity to his church in Scotland, god vvil
not suffer you at your need to be succorlesse in England, as by daily miracles
in preserving your Queen he has plainly shevved: and the rather ye may trust
hereof, if ye be thankeful and faithful to God and her, and that ye pray
heartily to God, either by mediate operation of your Queens justice, or by his
own immediate hand vvorking, to deliver his church and people from the common
peril to both these realms, and to the state of al true religion in
christendom. Farewell, and God long preserve both your good and our hopeful
sovereign to his glory. Amen.

A declaration of the furious outrages of France, with the slaughter of the
Admiral.
IT were to be wished that the memory of the fresh slaughters and of that
butcherly murdering that has lately been committed in a manner in all the
towns of France, were utterly put out of the minds of men: for so great
dishonor and so great infamy has thereby stained the whole French nation,
that the most part of them are now ashamed of their own country, defiled with
two most filthy spots, falsehode and cruelty, of the which, whether has
been the greater, it is hard to say. But forasmuch as there flee every where
abroad Pamphlets written by flatterers of the Court, and men corruptly hired
for reward, which do most shamefully set out things sayned and falsely
imagined, in stead of truth, I thought my self bound to do this service to
posterity, to put the matter in writing as it was truly done in deed, being
well enabled to have know ledge thereof, both by mine own calamity, and by
those that with their own eyes beheld a great part of the same slaughters.

In the year of our Lord. 1561. when there seemed to be some peril of
troubles to arise by reason of the multitude of such as embraced the Religion
(which they call reformed (for before that time the usual manner of punishing
such as durst profess that Religion, was besides loss and forfeyture of all
their goods to the Kings use, to burn their bodies) at the request of the
great Lords and nobility there was holden an assembly of the estates in the
Kings house at Saint Germans in Lay, near to the town of Paris, at which
assembly, in presence, and with the royal assente of King Charles the ninth,
which now reigns, it was decreed, that from thencefoorth it should not be
preiudicaill to any man to profess the said Religion, and that it should be
leefull for the^ to have public metings and preachings for the exercise
thereof, but in the suburbs of towns only.

At this assembly, Francis Duke of Guise, being descended of the house of
Loraine, and at that time Grand master of the Kings household, was not present.
But when he was informed of this decree, he boiled with incredible sorrow and
anger, and within few days after at a little town in Champagne called Vassey,
while the professors of the said Religion were there at a Sermon, he
accompanied with a band of soldiers, set upon them, and slew men and women
to the number of two hundredth.

There was among these of the Religion (for so hereafter according to the
usual phrase of the french tongue we intend to call them) Jews of Burbon of the
blood royal, commonly called Prince of Conde, after the name of a certain
town, a man of great power by reason of his kindred to the King. Therefore when
the Duke of Guise most vehemently striued against that law, and as much as in
him lay, did utterly overthrow it, and troubled the common quiet thereby
stablished, Gaspar de Coligni Admiral of France, and Francis d'Andelot his
brother, Captain of the Fantarie, and other Princes, noble men and Gentlemen
of the same Religion, come daily by heaps to the Prince of Conde, to complain
of the outrageous boldness and intemperate violence of the Duke of Guise.

At that time Catherine de Medices Pope Clements brothers daughter, and mother
of King Charles, borne in Florence a City of Italy, had the governance of the
Realm in the Kings minority. For though by the law of France, neither the
inheritance nor the administration of the realm is granted to women, yet
through the cowardly negligence of Anthony King of Navarre, the said Catherine
de Medices the kings mother, against the custom of the realm, was joined with
him in that office of protectorship. She fearing the presumption and fierce
pride of the Guisians, wrote to the Prince of Conde with her own hand: which
letters are yet remaining, and at the assembly of the Princes of Germany at
Franckforde, holde^ under Ferdinand the Emperor, were produced and openly
read about ten years past: wherein she earnestly besought, him in so great
hardness and distress not to forsake her, but to account both the mother and
the children, that is, both her self and the King; and the Kings brethren,
committed to his faith and natural kindness, and that he should with all
speed, provide for their common safety: assuring him, that she would so
imprint in the Kings mind his travel taken in that behalf, that he should
never be loser by it.

Within few days after the Duke of Guise well knowing how great authority the
name of the King would carry in France, and to the intent that he would not
seem to attempt any^thing rather of his own head than by the priuitie of the
King, and having atteyned fit partners to join with him in these enterprises,
he got the King into his power. Which thing being known abroad, and many
hard encombrances thereupon sodaynely rising, and a great part of the nobility
of France maruellously troubled with it, the Prince of Conde by advise of his
friends, thought it best for him to take certain towns and furnishe them with
garrisons: which was the beginning of the first civil war. For the Prince of
Conde alleged the cause of his taking armor, to be the defense of the Kings
Edict, wherein consisted the safety of the common weal, and that it could not
be repealed without most assured undoing of the nation of France, and
destruction of the nobility, by reason of the exceeding great multitude of
those that daily joined themselves to that Religion. Of which number such as
being of noble birthe, were in power, dignity, wealth, and credit above the
rest, thought it not meet for them to suffer the punishments and cruelty
accustomed to be extended upon the pr^fessors thereof, beside that, they held
them discontented that the Duke of Guise a new come, a stranger translated
from the forests of Loraine into France, did take upon him in France so great
courage and so high dominion and power. Thereto was added the Queen^ mothers
singular care (as was reported) for conservation of peace and repressing the
rage of the Guisians. Upon which opinion it is certain that above twenty
thousand men having regard only to the Queens inclination, joined
themselves to the side of those of the Religion, and to the defense of their
profession, which at that time had besieged the force of the Kings power.

After certain battayles and many losses on both parts, and the Duke of
Guise slain, within a year peace was made with this condition, that they of
the Religion should have free liberty thereof, and should have assemblies
and preachings for the exercise of the same in certain places.

This peace continued in force, but not in all places, during five years: for
in the most towns and jurisdictions, the Officers that were affectionate to
the Romish side, whom they commonly call Catholics, did all the displeasures
they could to those of the Religion. Therefore, when Ferdinando Aluares de
Toled^, commonly called Duke of Alua, was leading an army not far from the
frontiers of France, against those of the low country which embraced the
reformed Religion; against the will of the King of Spain, the Queen mother
caused to be levied and brought into France six thousand Switzers for a
defense, as she caused it to be bruted, but as the success has proved, for
this intent, that the Prince of Conde, the Admiral and other noble men of the
Religion, if they escaped the treasons prepared for them, and listed to defend
themselves by force, and try it by battle, might be sodaynely oppressed ere
they were provided. For the courtiers which then had the managing of these
matters, did not at that time well trust the soldiers of France. Many things
pertaining to the course of that time, and the renewing of the war, must here
for have to our present purpose be necessarily omitted.

When the war had endured about six months, pe^ce was made with the same
conditions that we have above rehearsed, that all men should have free liberty
to follow and profess the Religion reformed. For this was ever one and the
last condition upon all the wars. But within few days or months after, it
was plainly understood, that the same peace was full of guile and treason, and
finally, that it was no peace, but most cruel war cloaked under the name of
peace. For forthwyth all those towns which they of the Religion had yielded up,
were possessed and strengthened with garrisons of soldiers of the contrary
side, saving only one town on the sea coast in the parts of Xantoigne
commonly called Rochell. For the men of that town about two hundredth years
past had yielded themselves to the Kings power and allegiance, with this
condition, that they should never be constrained against their will to receive
any garrison soldiers.

Also the Prince of Conde and the Admiral were advertised, that there was
treason again prepared to entrap them by Tauaignes, a man given to murder and
mischief, which had lately been made Marshall of France, and that if they did
not spedely avoid the same, it should shortly come to pass, that they should
be deceived and taken by him, and delivered up to the cruelty of their
adversaries.

V^ on the receyt of these aduertisementes, they immediately make have to
Rochell, carrying with them their wives and young children, which was the
beginning of the third civil war, the most sharp and miserable of all the
rest.

There was at that time in the court, Charles Cardinal of Loraine, brother to
the Duke of Guise, which (as is above said,) was slain in the first war,
one accounted most subtle and crafty of all the rest, but of a terrible,
cruel and troublesome disposition, so as he was thought intolerable even at
Rome it self. This man, they of the reformed Religion reported to be the most
sharp and hateful enimye of their profession, and him they abhorred above all
other for the cruelty of his nature, and named him the firebrande of all
civil flames. He at the beginning of the third civil war, persuaded the
King to publish an Edict, that no man profess any Religion but the Romish or
Popish, and that whosoever would embrace any other, should be compted as
traitors. In that same Edict Printed at Paris, this sentence was expressly
contained, and for the strangeness of the matter, and for that it stained the
Kings name with the most dishonorable spot of perjury and breach of faith, it
was in other impressions afterward omitted. And it was further then declared,
that albeit the King had in many Edictes before that time permitted the
freedom of Religion, yet this meaning ever was to reteyne and cause to be
retained of all men, the only Romish or Popish Religion within his Realm.

After many overthrows on both parts given and received, whereas the end of
this third war was thought likely to be the harder, by reason of the breach
of says in the years before, and on the other side the state of the Realm by
reason of the wast that the Cities were brought unto, and the extreme poverty
of the mean people and husbandmen, did require some treaty of composition,
the King sent messangers to the Admiral, to signify unto him in the Kings
name, that the King himself had at length found out a most sure way of peace
and concord, namely that the armies of both parts joined together, should
go into the low country against the Duke of Alua, which had been the author
of the late calamities in France. He signified further, that he had great
causes of querels against the king of Spain, and this principally, that he had
invaded and held by force, suddenly slaying all the souldyers there, an Island
of the newfound world, called Florida, which had been taken by the French and
kept under his dominion: and likewise the Marquesdome of Final, the
inhabitants whereof had but a little time before yielded themselves to the
Kings subjection and allegiance. He said that the most steadfast band of
concord should be that foreign war, and that there could no other better
mean be devised to drown the memory of the former dissentions in eternal
forgetfulness.

To the performance hereof, he said it was a matter of most apt opportunity,
that Lodouic count of Nassaw, brother to the Prince of Aurenge, had been now
two years in the Admiralls camp, to whom the Admiral gave principal credit
in all things, and that by him and his fellows of the low country, and other
whom he understood to favor his part, it might easily be brought to pass
that certain Cities might be surprised, and thereby great advantage be
attained to the atchieuing of the war.

The Admiral hearing these things was maruellously troubled. For albeit he
doubted not of the Kings fidelity, yet therwithall many things fell into his
mind to be considered: as the power of the Cardinal and the rest of the
Guisians, who were well known to have been at all times most affectionate to
the King of Spain. For the Duke of Guise had left a son, a very young man,
called Henry, to who^ the Queen had given all the offices and places of honor
that his father had borne before, being unfit thereto by age, and against the
ancient laws and customs, and also through the traitorous infidelity of
certain of the Kings counsaylers, whom she knew for their affection to Popish
Religion to be most addicted to the Spanishe King, and that diverse of them had
great yearly pensions of him, and did disclose unto him the affairs of the
Realm. He remembered how hereby it came to pass, that the same Kings
Ambassador (which among strange nations seemed utterly incredible) was
admitted into the privy Counsel of France, and that one Biragio ^ Lumbard,
and (as it is reported) a traitor to his own country, otherwise altogether
unlearned, and specially ignorant of the civil law, was yet for the
subtlety of his wit advanced to so great honor, that he executed the
Chauncellers office, Michael Hospital being displaced, a man known to be such
a one, as there was not in all degrees of men any either more wise, or more
learned, or more zelously loving his country. Herewithall he considered the
slanderous cauillations of his adversaries, to whom hereby might seem an
occasion given, as if the Admiral were of a troublesome nature, and could not
abide any quietness, nor could long rest at home without some tumultuous
stir. Hereunto the messangers replied as they were able, and therewithal
alleged this cause of so sudden hatred against the Spanishe King, that one
Albenie late returned out of Spain, had infourmed the King and the Queen
mother for certainty, that King Philip a few months before, had poisoned his
wife the French Kings sister, and had spread rumors of her thoroughout all
Spain, such as for the honor of many persons are meet not to be disclosed.
But nothing moved the Admiral so much as the cherefull earnestness of Lodouic
of Nassaw, who as soon as he was advertised of that purpose of the King,
omitted nothing that he thought might serve to encourage the Admiral
thereunto.

The Admiral persuaded hereby, nothing fearing the infidelity of those of the
Court, gave his mind to hearken to composition. And so was the third civil
war ended, and the peace concluded with the same conditions that were before,
that every man should have free liberty to use and profess the Religion.

Within few months after this, diverse Princes of Germany, that favored the
Religion reformed, and among those the three Electors, the Pa^sgraue, the Duke
of Saxony, and the Marquis of Brandeburge, sent their Ambassadors into France
to the King, to gratulate unto him for the new reconciliation of his subjects.
And because they accounted it greatly to behoue them selves that the same
concord should remain steadfast and of long continuance, they promised, that
if any would for that cause procure trouble, or make war upon him either
within his own dominions, or without, they and their followers should be ready
to defend him. To this embassage the king first by words, and afterward by a
book subscribed with his own hand, answered and gave his faith, that he
would for ever most sacredly and faithfully observe his Edict of pacification.

Hereby so much the more willingly the Admiral suffered him self to be drawn
to the said purposes, for the low country, although oftentimes calling to
mind the nature of the Queen mother, he used to say to diverse, and specially
to Theligny, to whom he afterward married his daughter, that he greatly
suspected the rolling wit of that woman. For (said he) so soon as she has
brought us into that preparation against the low country, she will leave us
in the midst.

Nevertheless, the Count of Nassaw writes to his brother, and they
conferring their aduises together, send messengers to the King, that if it
please him to deal with the matter of the low country, they will shortly so
do, that he shall by their many and great services, well perceive their
affection and devotion toward him. The King writes again to them in most
loving terms, saying that their message most highly pleased him, and he gave
to them both his hearty thanks.

About the same time Maximiliane the Emperor pitying the estate of the Prince
of Aurenge (as he said) treated by his Ambassadors with the King of Spain,
and had in manner obtained, that the Prince should have all his goods restored
unto him, but with this condition, that he should have no house within the
territory of the low country, but settling his residence and dwelling
elsewhere, he should freely enjoy all his revenues. Which matter being
reported to the French King, he immediately sent messengers to the Prince of
Aure^ge willing him to look for nothing by that dealing of the Emperor, saying
that it was but a fraud and guilefull devise intended for this purpose, only to
break up his leuying of soldiers that he had begone in Germany: and assuring
him, that if he would credit and follow him, he would give him aid
sufficient to recover his estate.

The Prince of Aurenge persuaded by these promises of King Charles, continued
his musters, and determined a while to bear the charges though they were heavy
to him, while such things as were necessary for the war, were in preparing.
In the mean time Lodouic in disguised apparel went to Paris to the King.
Forasmuch as the season of the year by this time seemed not commodious to
levy an army, for the winter was at hand, by assent they deferred the matter
till the next summer.

These things thus hanging, the Prince of Aurenge his capitaynes by sea, did
oftentimes set upon the Spaniards and Portingals, and such ships as they took
they brought into the haven of Rochell, which then was in the power of the
Prince of Condees part: and there they openly uttered and sold their prizes to
the men of the town and other merchantes of France, whereupon the
Embassadoure of Spain made often complaints to the Kings privy council.

And forasmuch as they thought it very auaylable to this enterprise, that
Elizabeth Queen of England might be brought into league with them, the King
committed the dealing in that matter to the Admiral. For, a few months
before, the King had with most sweet alluring letters, gotten him to the Court,
where he was most honorably entertained: and to take from him all occasion of
distrust upon his adversaries, or of otherwise suspecting of the Kings or
Queen mothers affection toward him, first, all the Guisians of a set purpose
departed the Court. Then the King gave the Admiral free liberty to take with
him what company and with what furniture he would: and because it was thought
that he had more confidence in the Marshall Cosse, than in the rest, therefore
the King commanded the said Marshall to be ever at hand with the Admiral,
and to assist him in the Kings name if any need were.

The matter of the league with England, the Admiral so diligently and
industriously handled, that within short space after by Ambassadors sent, and
by faith given and received, and oaths solemnly taken on both parts, it was
confirmed. Concerning the procurement of other leagues and amities, such as
might seem to further the enterprise of the low cuntrie, the Admiral also
traveled in the kings ^^ame, and by his commandemente, and had in a manner
brought all these things to an end. And of all those leauges, the first and
principal condition was, that the liberty of Religion should continue, and
that the king should most diligently and sincerely observe this Edict of
pacification.

Though these things seemed to be handled secretly, yet by the letters both of
Biragio the vicechancellor, of whom we made mention before, and of Moruilliers
whom for his hipocriticall leanenesse children commonly called the Chimera or
bugge of the Court, and by aduertisements of Cardinal de Peiue, a man most fit
either to invent or execute any treason, they were carried to the Bishop of
Rome, who by advise of his Cardinals sent by and by one of their number, called
Alexandrine, in the midst of most sharp winter into France, with these
instructions, to persuade the king to enter into the society of the league of
Trent, whereof the first and principal article was, that the confederats
should join their powers and make war upon the Turks and Heretics, meaning
by the name of Heretics, all those Princes that did permit the use of the
reformed Religion within their dominions.

The Cardinal Alexandrine was honorably received in the court, but yet
dismissed without atchieuing his purpose. For so was it bruted among the
people, and commonly believed throughout France: albeit he himself secretly
seemed to return very merry and cherefull to the Pope: and as it is reported,
did sometime say that he received such answer of the King as was needful not
to be published, and that the King and Queen mother had largely satisfied him.

Forasmuch as it was thought a matter greatly auayling to the enterprise of the
low country, to send certain ships into the English Seas, that if any aid
should be sent into the low country to the Duke of Alua out of Spain, it
might so be stopped, Strozzi and the Baron de la Guarde were appointed for that
purpose, to whom the king gave in commandment to rigge for the certain ships
of Bordeaux and Rochell, well armed and well appointed, and to provide with all
speed al things needful for those ships. The Ambassador of Spain somewhat
moved with this preparation, made diverse complaints to the kings counsel on
the behalf of the king his master, and yet never received any other answer,
but that the king, thought it not likely, and that he would send Commissioners
to Bordeaux and to Rochell, with letters and commandment that there should be
no preparation made to the sea, and if any had been made, it should be enquired
of. What instructions were secretlye and closely under hand given to these two
captains of that navy, we do not certainly know. But this no man can doubt
of, but that they had commission to distress all such ships wherein any
Spanishe soldiers should be transported into the low country, and that all
this preparation to the sea, was ordained against the Spanish king and the Duke
of Alua.

And moreover that the Admiral at the same time received commandment from the
king, to send espials into Peru, an Islaind of the new found world, most
plentiful of gold above all the other, now being in the Spaniards dominion, to
learn if there were any good enterprise to be attempted or achieved for the
get^ing of it. Which matter was committed to a certain gentleman, one of the
Admirals train, who went thither accompanied with a certain Portingall, a man
most skillful of those Nauigations, whom the Admiral had joined with him by
the kings commandment, and is not yet returned.

Now it can not be expressed how many and how great tokens of most loving
mind the king at that time showed to the Admiral, and to the County
Rochfoucault, and to Theligny, and to the rest of the chief noblemen of the
Religion. First, all such things as in the former wars had been taken away in
the towns, fermes and castles of the Admiral and d' Andelot, the king caused
to be sought out and restored. If there were any other whom the king
understood to be beloved and esteemed of the Admiral, or to have attained
any special honor in the said late wars, those he liberally benefited and
rewarded. To the Admiral himself he commanded one day to be given a hundred
thousand pounds of his own treasure in recompense of his former losses. When
his brother the Cardinal Chastillion, endowed with many great and welthie
benefices, was departed his life, the king gave him the fruits of one whole
year. Also the king wrote to Philibert Duke of Sauoy, that he should do him a
most acceptable pleasure, if he did not only deal more gently with those that
in the former wars had aided those of the Religion, but also would use
clemency and mildness toward all other that professed the same Religion
within his dominions.

And for that there was old enmity between the Guisians and the Admiral,
whereby it was to be doubted that perilous contentions would arise in the Realm
of France, the king willed it to be signified to them both in his name, that
they should for his sake and the commonweals, give over those displeasures,
and he prescribed them a certain form of reconciliation and agreement, the
same whereof the foundations had been laid almost six years before in the
town of Molins, where the king calling to him the greatest estates of his
realm after consultation and deliberation had upon the matter, pronounced the
Admiral not guilty of the death of the Duke of Guise, wherewith he was charged
by the young Duke of Guise and his kinsmen: and so the king by the advice of his
Counsel had ended that controversy.

Furthermore, the Cardinal of Loraine (who as we have said was the very forger
of all the former wars) to take away al jealousy of new practices, was
departed to Rome, and took with him his familiar friend the late created
Cardinal Peluey, one reputed a most subtle and crafty person, under pretense
of going to the election of a new Pope in place of the old Pope then lately
deceassed.

But there was none greater and more assured toke^ of public peace and
quietness than this, that the king purposed to give his sister Margaret in
marriage to the Prince Henry the son of the Queen of Navarre, which Prince
had in the last war defended the cause of the Religion, and been sovereign
of their army. Which marriage the king declared, that it should be the most
straight bond of civil concord, and the most assured testimony of his good
will to those of the Religion.

Yea, and also because it was alleged that the said Prince Henry was
restrained in conscience, so as he might not marry the Lady Margaret being of
a contrary Religion, a Catholic and given to the rites of the Romish Church,
the king for answer said that he would discharge her of the Popes laws, and
notwithstanding the crying out of all his courtiers to the contrary, he
permitted him, that without all ceremonies, in the porch of the great church
of Paris the marriage should be celebrate in such a form as the ministers of
the reformed Church misliked not.

Which thing being by report and letters spread through the world, it cannot
be expressed how much it made the hearts of those of the Religion assured and
out of care, and how it cast out al fear and ielosies out of their minds,
what a confidence it brought them of the kings good will toward them: Finally,
how much it rejoiced foreign Princes and states that favored the same
Religion. But the Admirals mind was much more stablished by a letter which
about the same time Theligny brought him with the kings own hand and sealed,
wherein was contained, that whatsoever the Admiral should do for the matter of
the intended war of the low cou^ntrey, the king would allow and ratify the
same, as done by his own commandment. About that time Lodouic of Nassaw with
the Queen of Navarre a Lady most zelously affected to the Religion, came to
the French Court. The league was made between king Charles and the Prince of
Aurenge, and the articles thereof put in writing. The marriage was appointed to
be holden in the town of Paris. For which cause the Queen of Navarre during
those few days repaired thither to provide things for the solemnity of the
wedding. For the same cause the king sent to the Admiral one Cauaignes, a man
of an excellent sharp wit, whom for the Admirals sake the king had advanced
to great honor, requiring the Admiral to go before to Paris, as well for the
said preparation, as also for the matter of the war of the low country,
promising that he himself would within few days follow after him: assuring
him that there was now no cause for him to fear the threatenings and mad
outrages of the Parisians. For in as much as the same town is above all other
given to superstitions and is with seditious preachings of Monks and Friars
daily enflamed to cruelty, it is hard to express how bitterly they hated the
Admiral and the professors of that Religion. Whereto was added a grief of
their mind conceived certain days before, by reason of a certain stone
cross gilted and builte after the manner of a spire steeple, commonly called
Gastignes cross, which the Admiral with great earnest suit obtained of the
king to be overthrown: for he alleged, that being erected in the midst of the
rage of the civil war, as it were in triumph to the reproach of one of the
Religion, it was a monumente of civil dissension, and so a matter offensive to
peace and concord.

The King well knowing this deadly hate of the Parisians to the Admiral, wrote
his letters to Marcell the provost of the merchants (which is the highest
dignity in Paris) with sharp threatenings if there should be raised any stir
or trouble by reason of the Admirals coming. To the same effect also the Duke
of Aniow the kings brother, and the Queen mother wrote to the same Marcell and
the rest of the magistrates of Paris, so that now there seemed utterly no
occasion left for the Admiral to fear or distrust. And within few days
after, the king sent Briquemault a man of great virtue and estimation, to the
Admiral, with the same instructions, saying that the matter of the low
country could not well be dealt in without his presence.

The Admiral persuaded by thus many means, and filled with good hope and
courage, determined to go to Paris, where so sone as he was arrived and had been
honorably and lovingly entertained of the king and his brethren and the Queen
mother, and consultation entered among them about the preparation for the low
country, he declared to the king at large, how the Duke of Alua was in leuying
of great power, and preparing an army, and that if the king should dissemble
his purpose, it would come to pass that many thereby would show themselves
slower and slacker to the enterprise, and that now were offered great means
to do good, which if he let slip, he should not so easily recover the like
again hereafter. And therefore it was best to take the advantage of this
opportunity.

A few days before, Lodouie of Nassaw went secretly into the frontiers of
the low country, and took with him as partners of his journey and privy to
his counsel three Frenchmen of great credit with the Admiral, namely
Saucourt, la Noue, and Genlis, to whom the king had given in charge to see if
they could by any means attempt and possess any towns bordering upon his
realm. They gathering diverse other gentlemen into their company, went
speedily into the low country, the Admiral not knowing of it. Who as soon
as he understood of their going thither, wrote unto them that he much marvelled
what they me^t, saying that he well knew there could be no power gotten
ready before.xl. days end and that they should be well advised to do nothing
rashly, nor to overthrow with have their devises that seemed not ripe to be
executed.

The county of Nassaw inflamed with the sight and desire of his country, and
fearing the mutablenesse of the king, did first at the soden set upon
Valentiennes, but being repulsed by the Spanish soldiers that were in garrison
in the Castle, he hastily departed to Montz, and took the town, being a place
very strong by nature and well furnished with all things necessary for the
war. Which thing being by report and messangers spread abroad in the low
country, and carried into France and Germany, both encouraged all them of the
Religion with great hope, and also seemed to have now plainly and openly
deciphred and disclosed the mind of the French king. Moreover Genlis returning
to Paris, when he had made report to the king of all the matter as it had
proceeded, easily obtained of him, that by his assent he might levy certain
bands of footmen and horssemen of France, and carry them to succoure Montz.
But by the way when he was entered into the bounds of the low country, having
with him to the number of four thousand footmen, and about four hundredth
horssemen, they were beset by the Duke of Alua, and the most part of them
distressed: which thing was well known to have been wrought by the means of
the Guisians, which by daily messages and letters, advertised the Duke of Alua
of their purposes and preparation. Which falsehod of theirs, many most
affectionate to the Romish Religion, were highly offended with, because a great
number addicted to the same Romish Religion were in that company.

With this loss, and with the rescue of the town of Valentiennes, the King
seemed to be much troubled, for he feared least his counsels being disclosed to
the Spanish king, would at length breed some cause of querel and war.
Howbeit, when he began to remember, that a great part of his secrets was
already revealed to the Duke of Alua, he oftentimes resolved to utter his mind
plainly, and to make open war. But he was withdrawn from that purpose by
certain men which the Admiral had long before conceived, that they would so
do. Howbeit, he gave the Admiral liberty to send whatsoever he thought meet
to further the Prince of Aurenge his enterprise, and as great supply either of
footmen or of horssemen as he could to the army which the Prince of Aurenge
had leuyed in Germany. When the Admiral for that cause had made request that
he might leauie thirty troops of horssemen, and as many ensigns of footmen,
he easily obtained it.

For the entertainment of these footmen it behooued to have money, wherefore
at the request of the Admiral, the king called for his Tresurer and commanded
him to deliver to the Admiral so much money as the Admiral should think
meet, and charged him, that he should not in any wise after the usual manner
of the accounts of finances, write the causes of the receipt, but only set it
down in this form: This sum of money was paid to the Admiral such a day
by the kings commandment, for certain causes which the king has commanded
not to be written: and to this warrante the King subscribed with his own hand.

Also the King wrote to Monducet, his Embassadoure in the low country, to
travel as earnestly as he could, for their deliverance, that were taken at the
overthrow of Genlis, which commaundment it is said that Monducet did most
faithfully and diligently execute.

Not long before this, Ioane Queen of Navarre above mentioned, died in the
Court at Paris, of a sudden sickness, being about the age of forty and
three years, where, as the suspicion was great that she died of poison, and
her body was sort hat cause opened by the Physicians, there were no tokens of
poison espied. But shortly after, by the detection of one. A. P. it has been
found that she was poisoned with a venomed smell of a pair of perfumed gloves,
dressed by one Renat the Kings Apothicarie an Italian, that has a shop at
Paris upon saint Michaels bridge, near unto the palace: which could not be
espied by the physicians which did not open the head nor looked into the brain.
It is well known that the same man about certain years past, for the same
intent gave to Jews Prince of Conde a poisoned pomander, which the Prince
left with one le Gross his Surgion: le Gross delited with the same, was by
little and little poisoned therewith, and so swelled, that he hardly escaped
with his life.

By her death, the Kingdom came to the Prince Henry her son, to whom as is
abouesaid, the Kings sister was promised and contracted.

Things being as it seemed throughout all France in most peacible estate, and
the concord of all degrees well established, the day was appointed for the
marriage of the king of Navarre, which day all they that fancied the Religion
esteemed so much the more joyful to them, because they saw the King
wonderfully bent thereunto, and all good men judged the same a most assured
pledge and stablishmente of civil concord, whereas on the contrary part, the
Guisians and other enemies of common quietness greatly abhorred the same
marriage.

When the day came, the marriage was with royal pomp solemnized before the
great Church of Paris, and a certain form of words so framed, as disagreed
with the Religion of neither side, was by the kings commandment pronounced by
the Cardinal of Burbon the king of Nauars uncle: and so the matrimony
celebrate with great joy of the king and all good men, the bride was with
great train and pomp led into the Church to hear Mass, and in the mean
time the bridegroom who misliked these ceremonies, together with Henry Prince
of Conde, son of Jews, and the Admiral, and other noble men of the same
Religion, walked without the Church door, waiting for the Brides return.

While these things were in doing at Paris, Strozzi, who as we have said, had
the charge of the kings power at sea, houering upon the coast of Rochell, did
now and then send of his captains and soldiers into the town, under color
of buying things necessary: and sometime he came thither also him self. The
like was done at the same time in another part of France, by the horssemen of
Gonzague Duke of Niuers, nere to the town of la Charity, which has a bridge
over the river of Loyre, and remained till that time in the power of those of
the Religion, by reason of the great number of the^ there inhabiting. This
troop was of those horssemen which the King has accustomed to keep in
ordinary wages in every country, whereof the most part were Italians,
country men to their Captain Jews Gonzague, to whom the Queen mother had
given the daughter and heir of the Duke of Niuers in marriage. They requested
of the townsmen, that they might make their musters within the town, saying
that they had received warrante from the King so to do, and showed the Kings
letters therefore. At Lions the gouernoure of the town, commanded a view to
be taken of all those that professed the Religion, and their names to be
written in a book and brought unto him: which book shortly after, according
to the success, was called the bloody book.

After the marriage ended at Paris, which was the time that the Admiral had
appointed to return to his own house, he moved the king concerning his
departure. But so great was the preparation of plays, so great was the
magnificence of banquets and shows, and the King so earnestly bent to those
matters, that he had no leisure, not only for weighty affairs, but also not
so much as to take his natural sleep. For in the French court, Dauncings,
Maskings stageplayes (wherein the King exceedingly delights) are commonly
used in the night time: and so the time that is fittest for counsel and
matters of governance, is by reason of nightly riottous sitting up, of
necessity consumed in sleep. So great also is the familiarity of men and the
women of the Queen mothers train, and so great liberty of sporting,
entertainment and talking together, as to foreign nations may seem incredible,
and be thought of all honest persons a matter not very convenient for
preservation of noble young Ladies chastity. Moreover, if there come any pandor
or bawd out of Italy, or any Scholemaster of shameful and filthy lust, he
wins in short time marvelous favor and credit. And such a multitude is
there begone to be of Italians, commonly throughout all France, specially in
the court, since the administration of the realm was committed to the Queen
mother, that many do commonly call it Fraunce-Italian, and some term it a
Colonie, and some a common sincke of Italy.

These madnesses of the Court, were the cause that the Admiral could not have
accese to the Kings speech, nor entrance to deal in weighty matters. But
when they that were sent from the reformed Churches to complain of injuries
commonly done to those of the Religion, understood of the Admirals purpose to
depart, they did with all speed deliver to him their books and petitions,
and besoughte him, not to depart from the Court till he had dealte in the
cause of the Churches, and delivered their petitions to the King and his
counsel. For this cause the Admiral resolved to defer his going for a
while, till he might treat with the kings Counsel concerning those requests:
for the King had promised him that he would shortly entend those matters, and
be present with the Counsel himself.

Besides this delay, there was another matter that stayed him. There was owing
to the Rutters of Germany, which had served on the part of the Religion in
the last war, great sums of money for their wages, in which matter the
Admiral traveled with incredible earnestness and care.

Concerning all these affairs, the Admiral (as he determined before) having
access and opportunity for that purpose, moved the Kings privy Counsel
the.22. day of August, which was the fifth day after the king of Nauarres
marriage, and spent much time in that treaty. About noone, when he was in
returning home from the counsel, with a great company of noblemen and
gentlemen, behold, a Harquebuzier out of a window of a house near
adjoining, shot the Admiral with two bullets of lead through both the
arms. When the Admiral felt himself wounded, nothing at all amazed, but
with the same countenance that he was accustomed, he said, through yonder
window it was done: go see who are in the house. What manner of treachery is
this? The^ he sent a certain gentleman of his company to the king to declare
it unto him. The king at that time was playing at Tennise with the Duke of
Guise As Soon as he heard of the Admirals hurt, he was maruellously moved as
it seemed, and threw away his racket that he played with on the ground, and
taking with him his brother in law the king of Navarre, he retired into his
castle.

The gentlemen that were with the Admiral brake into the house from whence he
received his hurt, there they found only one woman, the keeper of the house,
and shortly after also a boy, his lackey that had done the deed, and
therewithal they found the harquebuze lying upon the table in that chamber
from whence the noise was heard: him that shot they found not, for he in great
have was run away out at the back gate, and getting on horssebacke, which he
had waiting for him ready sadled at the door, he rode a great pace to Saint
Anthonies gate, where he had a fresh horse tarying for him if need were, and
another at Marcelles gate. Then by the kings commandment a great number rode
out in post into all parts to pursue him: but for that he was slipped into
bywayes, and received into a certain castle, they could not overtake him.

At the sure of the king of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde and other, the
King by and by gave commission for inquiry to be made of the matter, and
committed the examining thereof to three chosen persons of the parliament of
Paris, Thuan and Morsant and Viol a counselor.

First it was found that the same house belonged to a Priest a Canon of saint
German, whose name is Villemure, which had been the Duke of Guises
scholemaster in his youth, and still continued a retayner toward him. Then
the woman which we said was found in the house, being taken and brought
before them, confessed that a few days before, there came to her one Chally
sometime a master d'hostel of the Duke of Guises house, and now of the Kings
court, and commanded her to make much of the man that had done this deed,
and to lodge him in the same bed and chamber where Villemure was wont to lie,
for that he was his friend and very familiar acquaintance, and that Villemure
would be very glad of it. The name of him that shot was very dilligently kept
secret. Some say it was Manreuet, which in the third civil war
traitorously slew his captain monsieur de Mouy, a most valiante and noble
gentleman, and straightway fled into the enemies camp. Some say it was
Bondot, one of the archers of the Kings guarde. When the woman's confession was
brought to the king, he immediately called Monsieur de Nance, captain of his
guard, and commanded him to apprehend Challey and bring him to him. Challey
as soon as he heard the stroke of the piece, fled into the Kings castle
called the Louure, and hid him in the Duke of Guises chamber, from whence he
conuayed him self away as soon as he had heard of the kings commandment*
When de Nance was infourmed of his departure, he answered that Challey was a
gentleman of good worship, and there was no doubt but when need were he
would appear before the King and the magistrates.

While these things were doing, and the Admirals wound in dressing, Theligny
went by his commandment to the King, and most humbly besought him in the name
of his father in law, that his majesty would voutsafe to come unto him, for
that his life seemed to be in peril, and that he had certain things to say,
greatly importing to the King; safety, which he well knew that none in his
Realm durst declare to his majesty. The King courteously answered that he
would willingly go to him, and within a little while after he set forward. The
Queen mother went with him, and the Duke of Aniow, the Duke of Monpensier, a
most affectionate subject to the Church of Rome, the Count de Rhetz, the
Queen mothers great familiar, Chauigny and Entragny, which afterward were
chief ringleaders in the butcherie of Paris.

When the King had lovingly saluted the Admiral as he was wont to do, and had
gently asked him some questions concerning his hurt and the state of his
health, and the Admiral had answered with such a mild and quiet
countenance, that all they that were present wondered at his temperance and
patience, the king being much moved (as it seemed) said, The hurt my Admiral
is done to thee, but the dishonor to me: but by the death of God (says he) I
swear I will so severely revenge both the hurt and the dishonor, that it
shall never be forgotten. He asked him also how he lik^d of the Judges that he
had chosen, to who^ he had given commission for examining the matter. The
Admiral answered that he could not but very well like of those that his
majesty had allowed of, yet he besought him if he thought it good, that
Cauagnes might be called to counsel with them, albeit that it was no hard
matter to find out, for it was no doubt (said he) that this good turn was
done him by the Duke of Guise, the revenge whereof he referred to God. This
only he most heartily and humbly besoughte of his royal majesty, that the
fact might be duly enquired upon. The King answered that he would take
earnest care of it, and revenge that injury with no less severity than if it
had been done to himself. Then the kings brethren and their mother with
drawing themselves a while, the Admiral as it was afterward known by his own
report, began to advise the king to have in memory those things that he had
often told him of the dangerous intentions of certain persons: and he told
him, that though he himself had received a great wound, yet there was no less
hanging over the kings head: and that long ago there was treason in practizing
against his life, which if he would do wisely he should avoid betimes. Further
he said, that though so soon as God should take him to himself out of this
life, he doubted not but that his same should be brought into sundry slanders
by envious persons, and such as ought him evil will by reason of the late
wars, nevertheless he had oftentimes disclosed unto the king the authors of
the dissentions, and opened the causes thereof, and that God was his witness of
his most faithful heart to the king and the common weal, and that he had
never holden any thing dearer than his country and the public safety.

The king after such answer made hereunto as he thought best, spoke aloude,
and heartily entreated the Admiral to suffer himself to be removed into his
castle of the Louure, for that he thought some peril, least there should
arise some sedition among the commons already in disorder, or any stir in
that mad and troublesome City Whereto this speech of the king tended could
not then be understood. For though the co^monaltie of Paris has ever been
accounted the most foolish and mad of all other, yet is it ever most easily
appeased, not only with the coming and presence of the king, but also with
the very sound of his name. The Admiral most humbly and largely thanked the
king, and made his exuse upon the counsel of the Physicians, which feared that
shaking would increase his pain, and therefore had taken order that he should
not be stirred out of his place. Then the Count de Rhetz turning to certain
gentlemen of the Admirals friends, said, I would the Admiral would follow the
kings counsel; for it is to be feared that some such stir may arise in the
town, as the king shall not easily be able to appease. Which speech being
uttered, although no man did yet suspect whereto that advise tended, yet the
Admiral and his friends thought it good to request of the king to assign unto
him certain of the soldiers of the guarde for his safety. The king answered
that he very well liked of that devise, and that he was fully determined to
provide as well for the Admirals safety as for his own, and that he would
preserve the Admiral as the ball of his eye, and that he had in admiration the
constancy and fortitude of the man, and that he never before that time believed
that there could be so great valiantness of courage in any mortal person.

Therewith the Duke of Aniow the Kings brother commanded Cossin captain of
the Kings guarde, to place a certain band of soldiers to ward before the
Admirals gate. There could hardly a man be found more hateful against the
Admirals part, nor more affected to the Guisians tha^ this Cossin, which the
success plainly proved, as hereafter shall appear. The Duke of Aniow further
added, that he thought it should be good for the Admiral, if more of his
friends and familiars that lodged in the fauxburges did draw nearer about him:
and forthwith he commanded the kings herbingers to warn those to whom they
had before assigned lodgings in that street, to remove from thence, and to
place the Admirals friends in their rooms. Which counsel was such, as
none could possibly be devised more fit for those things that followed. For
those which might have by flight escaped out of the suburbs were now holden
fast enough, being enclosed not only within the walls of the town, but also
within the compass of one narrow street. The next day after, the Vndermasters
of the streets commonly called Quartermen, ^urueyed all the vittailing houses
and Innes from house to house, and all the names of those of the Religion,
together with the place of every of their lodgings they put in books, and with
speed delivered over the same books to those of whom they had received that
commandment.

After noone the Queen mother lead out the King, the Duke of Aniow, Gonzague,
Tauaignes, the County de Rhetz called Gondin, into her gardens called
Tegliers. This place because it was somewhat far from resort, she thought
most fit for this their last consultation. There she shewede them, how those
whom they had long been in wait for, were now sure in hold, and the Admiral
lay in his bed maimed of hoth his arms and could not stir, the king of
Navarre and Prince of Conde were fast lodged in the castle, the gates were kept
shut all night, and watches placed, so as they were so snared that they could
no way escape, and the captains thus taken, it was not to be feared that any
of the Religion would from thencefoorth stir any more. Now was a notable
opportunite (said she) offered to dispatch the matter. For all the chief
captains were fast closed up in Paris, and the rest in other towns were all
unarmed and unprepared, and that there were scarcely to be found ten enemies
to a thousand Catholics: that the Parisians were in armor and were able to
make threescore thousand chosen fighting men, and that within the space of one
hour all the enemies may be slain, and the whole name and race of those
wicked me^ be utterly rooted out. On the other side (says she) if the King do
not take the advantage of the fitness of this time, it is no doubt but that
if the Admiral recover his health, al France will shortly be on fire with the
fourth civil war.

The Queens opinion was allowed. Howbeit it was thought best, partly for his
age, and partly for the affinities sake, that the king of Nauarres life should
be saved. As for the Prince of Conde, it was doubted whether it were best to
spare him for his age, or to put him to death for hatred of his fathers name.
But herein the opinion of Gonzague took place, that he should with fear of
death and torment, be drawn from the Religion. So that counsel brake up, with
appointment that the matter should be put in execution the next night early
before day, and that the ordering and doing of all should be committed to the
Duke of Guise.

The Admiral being en^ormed of stir and noise of armor, and threatenings
heard every where through out the town, and preparation of many things
pertaining to tumult, sent word thereof to the King: who answered, that there
was no cause for the Admiral to fear, for all was done by his commandment,
and not every where, but in certain places, and that there were certain
appointed by him to be in armor, least the people should rise and make any
stir in the town.

When the Duke of Guise thought all things ready enough, he called to him
the abouesayde Marcell, and charged him that he should a little after midnight
assemble together the masters of the streets whom they call Diziners into
the town house, for he had certain strange and special matters in charge
from the king, which his pleasure was to have declared unto them. They all
assembled bytime. Carron the new provost of merchaunts, guarded with certain
Guisians, and among the rest Entragne and Pnygallart, made the declaration: He
said that the kings meaning was to destroy all the Rebels which had in these
late years borne arms against his majesty, and to root out the race of
those wicked men, it was now very fitly happened that the chieftaynes and
ringleaders of them were fast enclosed within the walls of the town, as in a
prison, and that the same night they should first begin with them, and
afterward for the rest as soon as possibly might be, throughout all parts of
the Realm the King would take order: and the token to set upon them, should be
given, not with a trumpet, but with tocksein or ringing of the great bell of
the palace, which they knew to be accustomed only in great cases: and the
mark for them to be known from other, should be a white linen cloth hanged
about their left arm, and a white cross pinned upon their cappes. In the
mean time the Duke of Guise made privy thereunto the Captains of the Kings
guarde, both Gascoignes, Frenchmen, and Switzers, and bad them be ready to go
to it with good courage. Shortly after, the Duke of Guise and the bastard son
of king Henry, commonly called the Cheualier, with a great band of armed men
following the^, went to the Admirals house, which Cossin kept besieged with
harquebuziers placed in order on both sides of the streate.

The Admiral advertised of the stir and the noise of the armor, although he
had scarcely ten persons in his house able to bear harness, and in his
chamber only two surgions, one preacher and one or two seruitors, yet could
not be made afraid, trusting (as he often rehearsed) upon the Kings good will
toward him, approved by so many and so great means of assurance, having also
confidence that the commonaltie of Paris if they once understood the King to
mislike of their mad fury, how much so ever they were in outrage, yet so
sone as they saw Cossin warding the gate, they would be appeased. He repeated
also the other for keeping of the peace, so often openly sworn by the King and
his brethren and their mother, and entered in public records, the league
lately made with the Queen of England for the same cause, the articles of
treaty couenanted with the Prince of Aurenge, the kings faith given to the
Princes of Germany, some towns attempted and some taken in the low country
by the Kings commandment, the marriage of the Kings sister solemnized but six
days before, which it was not like that he would suffer to be defiled with
blood, finally the judgment of forain nations and of posterity, shame and the
honor and constancy of a Prince, public faith, and the sacred respect of the
law of nations, all which it seemed monstrous and incredible that the king
could assent to be stained with so outrageous a cruel deed.

Cossin when he saw the noblemen draw near, knocked at the gate, which as is
abouesaid, he was commanded by the Duke of Aniow to keep. Whereupon many
applied the old proverb, A goodly guarde to make the woolfe keeper of the
sheep. When he was entered without in manner any difficulty, he carried in with
him a great company of armed men, and after those followed the great Lords.
Such as Cossin found at the entry of and within the porch of the house, he
slew with a partisan that he had in his hand. Which when the Admiral
understood, he caused those that were about him to lift him out of his bed,
and casting on a nightgowne upon him, he rose upright on his feet, he bad his
friends and servants to flee and make shift for them selves, and to take no
more care for him, for he said that he was ready with most willing heart to
render into the hands of God, now calling for it again, the spirit that he had
lent him to use for a time: and said that this violent cruelty was prepared
not so much for his destruction, as for the dishonoring of Christ and the
tormenting of so many Churches, the defense of which Churches he had at the
potition of all godly men with his many dangers and calamities sustained.

In the mean time there came up the stairs into the hier part of the house,
one Benuese a Germayne, brought up in the house of the Duke of Guise, and to
whom it is said, that the Cardinal of Loraine had given one of his bastard
daughters in marriage: and with him came Cossin the Gascoine, Attin a Picarde a
retainer and familiar of the Duke d'Aumal, one that a few years before sought
to murder d'Andelot by treason, and also one Ha^fort an Auernois, all weaponed
with swords and targets, and armed with shirts of maile.

When they were broken into the Admirals chamber, Benuese came to him, and
bending his drawn sword upon him, said, Art not thou the Admiral? he with a
quiet and constant countenance, (as we have since understood by them selves)
answered, I am so called. And then seeing the sword drawn upon him, he said,
young man, consider my age and the weak case that I am now in. But the fellow,
after blaspheming God, first thrust his sword into the Admirals breast, and
then also stroke him upon the head, and Attin shot him through the breast with a
pistol. When the Admiral was with this wound not yet thoroughly dead, Benuese
gave him the third wound upon the thigh, and so he fell down for dead. When
the Duke of Guise, which stayed in the court with the other noble men, heard
this, he cried out alowde, have thou done Benuese? he answered, I have done.
Then said the Duke of Guise, our Cheuelier (meaning King Henry's bastard
abouesaide) unless he see it with his eyes, will not believe it: throw him
down at the window. Then Benuese with the help of his fellows took up the
Admirals body and threw it down through the window. When by reason of the
wound in his head, and his face covered with blood they could not well
discern him, the Duke of Guise kneeled down on the ground and wiped him with
a napkin and said, now I know him, it is he. And therewithal going out at the
gate with the rest of the Lords, he cried out to the multitude in armoure,
saying: my companions we have had a good lucky beginning: now let us go
forward to the rest, for it is the Kings commandment: which words he did often
repete alowde, saying, Thus the King commands: This is the Kings will, this
is his pleasure. And then he commanded the token to be given by ringing
tocksein with the great bell of the palace, and alarm to be raised, and he
caused it to be published, that the conspiratours were in armoure and about to
kill the king. Then a certain Italian of Go^zagues band, cut off the Admirals
head, and sent it preserved with spices to Rome to the Pope and the Cardinal
of Loraine. Other cut off his hands, and other his secret parts. Then the
common laborers and rascals three days together dragged the dead body thus
mangled and berayed with blood and filth, through the streets, and afterward
drew it out of the town to the common gallows, and hanged it up with a rope
by the feet.

In the mean time, those of the noble men's bands brake into all the chambers
of the admirals house, and such as they found either in their beds, or
hidden, they mangled them with many wounds, and so slaughtered them. Of that
number were two young children, pages, of honorable birth. There was also the
Count Rochfoucault, which for the excellent plesantnesse of his wit, and for
his valiantness was hiely beloved of King Henry, and so seemed for the same
cause also to be beloved of the king. Him was de Na^ce abouesaid commanded to
kill, but he refusing it for their old acquaintance and familiarity: one
Laberge an Auernois offered him self to the king to do it, but with this
condition, that the king should give him the captaineship of horssemen which
Count Rochfoucault had. There was also slain Theligny the Admirals son in
law, a young man of singular towardness both of wit and courage, to whom the
king these many years had both in words and countenance made show of so great
good will, as that no man was thought to be more hiely in his favor. He
crying out, that it was now grievous to him to live, for that he had ever
commended to his father in law the faithfulness of the King, refused not the
death offered him. And many other most flourishing young noble men and gentlemen
were every where butcherly murdered in that street. Then the noble men's
bands, and Cossins soldiers went ransacking from house to house: and the
Admirals house and all the other houses were all sacked and spoiled, even in
like manner as is used to be done by soldiers greedy of pray in a town taken
by assault: and many by this robbery, were of beggars sodeinly become rich
men. For the Duke of Guise, the Duke of Monpensier, the Cheualier king Henry's
bastard, Gonzague, Tauaignes, and the other great Lords, did with reward of
the spoil and booty encourage the multitude to the slaughter, and cried out
aloud that this was the kings will. So all the rest of the day from morning to
evening, the rascal multitude, encouraged by spoil and robbery, ran with
their bloody swords raging throughout all the town: they spared not the aged,
nor women, nor the very babes: In joy and triumph they threw the slain bodies
out at the windows, so as there was not in manner any one street or lane,
that seemed not strawed with murdered carcases.

While these things were thus a doing in the town, the King of Navarre and
the prince of Conde, whom the King had lodged in his own castle of the
Louure, were by the kings commandment sent for and conveyed unto him. But
their company, their seruitours of their chamber, their friends reteining to
them, their scholemaisters, and those that had the bringing up of them, crying
out alowde to the Kings fidelity for succoure, were thrust out of the
chambers, and by the kings guard of Switzers hewed in pieces and slaughtered in
the kings own sight. But of that number of persons slain, no man's case was so
much lamented of many, as Monsieur de Pills, in whom it is hard to express
whether there were more godly zeal in Religion, or prowess in war. Whereby
having in the late years, specially by the defense of the town of Saint John
d'Angeli, which the King then besieged, gotten great honor of cheualrie, he
was thought very well beloved and hiely esteemed of the King. Him and Leranne
the son of Odou, by the French Kings commandment (which was not then
understood whereto it tended) the King of Navarre had stayed in a wardrobe
adjoining to his own chamber, and caused them to lodge there al night. A
little before day, hearing of the running of men, and noise of armor, and cries
and killings, they rose in have, and immediately de Nance, whom we have before
spoken of, came to them, and commanded them in the kings name to come down
into the court, and to leave their weapons behind them, and lastly to depart
out of the castle. When de Pills saw himself thrust out among the multitude
of the murdering soldiers, and beheld the bodies of them that were slain, he
cried out with a very loud voice that the king might well hear him,
protesting upon the kings fidelity, and detesting his traiterous infidelity,
and therewith he took off a rich cloak which he wore, and gave it to one of
his acquaintance, saying, take here this token of Pills, and hereafter
remember Pills most unworthily and shamefully slain. Oh my good Monsieur de
Pills, said the other, I am none of them: I thank you for your cloak, but I
will not receive it with that condition, and so refused to take the cloak: and
immediately de Pills was thrust through by one of the guarde with a partisan,
and died. And this end had this most valiante and noble gentleman. And then
his body was thrown into the quarrey with the rest, which when they that
passed by did behold, the soldiers cried out, there they be that made assault
upon us, and would have killed the King. Leranne being thrust through with a
sword, escaped and ran into the Queen of Nauarres chamber, and was by her kept
and preserved from the violence of those that pursued him. Shortly after, she
obtained his pardon of her brother, and committing him to her own Physicians,
restored him both to life and health.

While things were in doing at Paris, Strozzi, which (as we have aforesaid)
was come with all his power to Rochell, sent a great number of his soldiers
into the town, under color of a banquet to be made to his friends in the
castle called la Cheine, but by reason of the iealosie and watches of the
towns men, by whom he saw his treason was espied, he went away without his
purpose. But they of la Charity, which as we have before showed, were trapped
by the Italian horssemen, taking less heed to the safe keeping of their town,
were a little before night surprised, and within few days after put to the
sweard.

The next day following, where any that had hidden themselves in corners at
Paris could be found out, the slaughter was renewed: also common laborers and
porters, and other of the most rascals of the people and desperate villains,
to have the spoil of their clothes, stripped the dead bodies stark naked and
threw them into the river of Seane. The profit of all the robberies and spoils
came all for the most part to the hands of these laborers and the soldiers,
and to the Kings treasure came very little or nothing. The only gain that
came to him, was that which might be made of the vacations (as they term them)
of offices and of places of Magistrates, Captains and other romes of charge,
whereof yet he gave a great part freely away to diverse of the Court. For the
Admirals office he gave to the Marquis de Villars, the Chancellorship of
Navarre, after the murder of Francourt, he by and by gave to Henry Memne de
Malassise, which had been the truchman and messenger in the treaty of the last
peace: the office of the master of the Finances after the slaughter of Prunes
he gave to Villequier, the office of President des aides when Plateau was
slain he gave to de Nully: the other offices he sold as his manner is, to such
as gave ready money for them. For it has been the custom now lately of
certain Kings of France (such as among foreign nations has not been heard of)
to put to sale all the profits, rights, and benefits of the crown, and to
keep an open market for money, of all judicial offices, and of all the rooms
belonging to his treasure and finances, according to a rate of price set upon
every one of them: and there is not in manner one in all France, that does not
openly justify that he bought his office for ready money, and that no man
ought to marvel if he desire to fill up the empty hole of his stock again.
And therefore justice is through all France usually bought for money, and
though there be never so many murders committed, yet is there no process
awarded to enquire thereof, till present coin be paid to the rakehelles and
scribes.

This butcherly slaughter of Paris thus performed, and four hundred houses
(as is abouesayd) sacked, immediately messengers were sent in post into all
parts of the Realm, with often shifting their horses for have, to command all
other Cities in the Kings name to follow the example of Paris, and to cause to
be killed as many as they had among them of the reformed Religion.

These commaundments it is wonderful to tell how readily and cherefully the
greatest part of the Cities of France did obey and execute. But the king,
fearing (as it was likely) the dishonor of false treachery and perjury, sent
letters to the governors of his provinces, and also speedy messangers into
England, Germany, and Switzerland, to declare in his name, that there was a
great commotion and seditious stir happened at Paris, which he was very sorry
for: that the Duke of Guise had raised the people, and with armed men made
assault upon the band that was assigned to the Admiral for his guarde, and
had broken into the house and slain the Admiral and all his company and
household servants, and that the king had hardly kept safe from those dangers
his own castle of the Louure, where he kept him self close with his mother
and his brethren: the true copy of which letters is hereafter inserted. But
the same most mighty, and by the consent of all nations commonly called the
most Christian King, within two days after came into the Parliament
accompanied with a great train of his brethren and other Princes. The counsel
being assembled, he sitting in his throne, began to speak unto them, he
declared that he was certified; that the Admiral with certain of his accomplices
had conspired his death, and had intended the like purpose against his
brethren, the Queen his mother, and the king of Navarre, and that for this
cause he had commanded his friends to slay the said Admiral and all his
confederates, and so to prevent the treason of his enemies.

This his testification and declaration, the king commanded to be written and
entered in the records of Parliament, and that it should be proclaimed by the
heraldes, and published by Printers. And he willed a book to be set forth to
this effect, that the slaughter of the Admiral and his adherentes was done by
the Kings commandment, for so was his majesty's express pleasure, because
they had conspired to kill him and his brethren, and the Queen his mother and
the King of Navarre. And farther, that the King did forbid that from
thenceforth there should be no more assemblies holden, nor preachings used of
the Religion.

After the kings oration ended, Christopher Thuane President of that
Parliament, a man very notable for his light brain and his cruel heart, did
with very large words congratulate unto the king, that he had now with guile
and subtlety overcome these his enemies, whom he could never vanquishe by
arms and battle, saying that therein the King had most fully verified the
old saying of Jews the eleventh his progenitor King of France, which was wont
to say that he knew never a Latin sentence but this one, Qui nescit
dissimulare nescit regnare, He that can not skill to dissemble, can not skill
to be a king. But Pibrace, the advocate of the Finances, made a short oration,
the sum whereof was to this effect, that although the king had just and great
cause to be displeased, yet he thought it more agreeable with his majesty's
clemency and goodness, to make an end of the slaughters and common spoil,
and not to suffer such outrages to be any longer committed without judicial
proceeding in the cause: and besoughte his majesty that from thenceforth it
would please him to use the law, which is well known to be the only
stablishment of kingdoms and empires: and that there had been already given
to the commonaltie too perilous an example to follow. An arrest of Parliament
with the Kings royal assent being made to that effect, there were immediately
Haroldes and trumpeter^ sent round about all the town, and an Edict proclaimed
in the kings name, that from thenceforth the slaughters and common butcherly
murtherings should cease, and that all persons should abstain from pillage and
robbery.

This being known, there were diverse speeches used of this matter throughout
the town, and specially of learned men. The most part said, that they had read
many histories, but in all memory of all ages they never heard of any such
thing as this. They compared this case with the horrible doings of king
Mithridates, which with one messenger and with the advertisement of one letter,
caused a hundredth and fifty thousand Romans to be slain. Some compared it
with the doing of Peter of Arragone, which slew eight thousand Frenchmen in
Sicile, which Isle they had surprised in his absence. But yet this difference
appeared between those cases and this: that those Kings had exercised their
cruelty upon foreins and strangers: but this king had done his outrage upon
his own subjects, being yielded not so much to his power, as to his faith and
credit. Those kings were bound by no promise but such as was given to the
strangers themselves: this king was with new made league bound to the Kings
and Princes his neighbors to keep the peace that he had sworn. Those kings
used no guilefull means unworthy for the majesty of a king, to deceive: this
king for a bait and allurement abused the marriage of his own sister, and in a
manner besprinkled her wedding robe with blood. Which dishonor and indignity
no posterity of all ages can forget. Some again discoursed, that though this
cruel advise seemed to many Courtiers to have been profitable, yet not only
the honor of a King, but also the estimation and good same of the whole nation
was against that show of profit. They alleged how Aristides did openly in the
audience of all the people, reject the counsel of Themistocles concerning the
burning of the Lacedemonia^s navy, although it must needs have followed, that
the power of the Lacedaemonians their enemies should thereby have been utterly
weakened. Furius Camillus received not the children of the chief Lords of the
Phalisce, betrayed to him by their schoolmaster, but stripped him naked and
delivered him to be whipped home with rods by the same children. Pausanias has
left it reported that the posterity of Philip of Macedon fell into most
great calamities, for this cause, that he was wont to set light by the
reverend conscience of an oath and his faith given in leagues. Some cited the
law of the twelve tables: Si patronu^ clienti fraudem facit, facer est^. If
the patron or sovereign defraude his client or vassal, be he out of
protection. They disputed also, that like faith as the vassal owes to his
Lord, the Lord owes also to his vassal: and for what causes and for what
fellonies the vassal loses his tenancie, for the same causes and fellonies the
Lord loses his segniorie. Some said that the right hand in ancient time was
called the pledge of the faith of a king, and that this if a king shall
despise, there is no communion of right with him, and he is no more to be
accounted a king, neither of his own subjects nor of strangers. Kingly
virtues in times past have been reported to be these, justice, gentleness and
clemency: but cruelty and outrage have ever been dispraised both in all
persons and spec^ally in princes. Scipio has in all ages been praised, who was
wont to say, that he had rather save one citizen than kill a thousand enemies:
which sentence* Antoninus the Emperor, surnamed Pius the kind or virtuous,
did often repete. It was a most shameful by word of young Tiberius to be called
Clay tempered with blood. They said also, that kings have power of life and
death over their subjects, but not without hering the cause, and judicial
proceeding: that there cannot be alleged a greater authority, than the
dictators had at Rome, in whom was the sovereign power of peace and war, of
life and death, and without appeal, yet was it not lawful for them to execute
a citizen his cause unheard. Only thieves and murderers take away men's lives
without order of law and hearing their cause. Who can doubt (said they) but
that this so great outra^e, so great sheading of Christian blood is the fruit
of the curssed life of the courtiers? For (said they) now throughout all
France whoredom and loose lewdness of life are so free and usual, that now
the most part of the women of France seem to be in manner common: and the
wicked blasphemies and continual execrations and dishonorings of Gods most
holy name and majesty, are such as God cannot longer bear: and true it is,
though incredible among foreine Nations, that the catholics of France have
prescribed them selves this for a special mark to be known from other men,
that at every third word they blasphemously swear by the head, death, blood,
and belly of God: and wonderful it is, that the King him self is so much
delighted in this custom of swearing and blaspheming: and this as it were a
pestilente infection is spread abroad and common among the very plowmen and
paysants, so as none among them now speaks three words without most filthy
blaspheming and horrible execration of God. Who can longer bear the vile
vnchastities, the bawdes and ruffians of the Court? Finally, very nature it
self does now as it were expostulate with God for his so long suffera^ce and
forbearing, and the very earth can no longer bear these monsters.

Now as touching the Admirals supposed conspiracy, who can think it likely
that he should enterprise any such thing within the walls of Paris? For in
the Court there is continually watching and warding a garrison of the kings:
and at the entry of his castle the guardes of Gascoines, Scotts and
Switzers, are continually attending: and the king himself both always before,
and specially at that time, by reason of his sisters marriage, had a great
train of Princes, great Lords, noblemen and gentlemen about him. Moreover it
was well known, that in Paris within three hours space might be assembled and
put in armoure threescore thousand chosen armed men, specially against the
Admiral, whom no man is ignorant that the Parisians most deadly hated: beside
that, the noble yo^g men that came thither with the king of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde by reason of the marriage, and brought with them their wives,
their sisters and their kinswomen, thought at that time upon nothing but upon
triumph and exercises of pastime, and gaye furniture of apparel and
ornaments. Finally, at whither of these two times can it be likely that the
Admiral attempted this conspiracy? was it before he was hurt? why? at that
time he found the king his most loving, or at least his most liberal and
bountiful good Lord: neither could he hope ever to have a more favorable
sovereign in France. Was it then after he was hurt? as though forsothe
helying sore of two so great wounds, aged, maimed of both his arms, the one
whereof the Physicians consulted whether it were to be cut off, accompanied with
three hundredth young men, would set upon threscore thousand armed men, or in so
small a time could lay the plot for so great, and so long and so heinous a
fact: for he lived scarce forty hours after his hurt, in which time he was
enjoined by the Physicians to forbear talk. Again, if he had been detected
of any such crime, was he not committed to Cossin and to his keeping, and so
environed, all the ways beset about him, and so in the kings power, that if it
had pleased the king he might at all times in a moment be carried to prison? why
was not orderly enquir^e and judicial proceeding used according to the custom
and laws and general right of nations, and witnesses produced according to
the form of law? but be it that the Admiral and a few other of his
confederats and followers had co^spired, why yet proceeded the outrageous
cruelty upon the rest that were innocent, why upon ancient matrones, why upon
noble Ladies and young gentlewomen and virgins that came thither for the honor
of the wedding? why were so many women great with child; against the laws of
al nations and of nature, before their delivery thrown into the river? why
were so many aged persons, many that lay sick in their beds, many gownemen,
many counselors, advocates, proctors, Physicians, many singularly learned
professors and teachers of good arts, and among the rest Petrus Ramus that
renoumed man throughout the world, many young students, executed with out
hearing, without pleading their cause, without sentence of condemnation?
moreover, if the Admiral had slain the three brethren, who doubts but that
all countries, al Cities, all Parliaments, finally, all sorts and degrees of
men would have spedily taken armor and easily have destroyed all of the
Religion, having them enclosed within their towns, and having just cause to
render to al foreign nations for their common slaughters and killing of them?
As to that which touches the king of Navarre, what can be imagined more
absurd and unlikely? had not the Admiral him four years in his power. Did
not he profess the same Religion that the Admiral did? which of those of the
Religion, which of them I say (as Cassius was wont to reason) should have
gained or received profit by the killing of the king of Navarre? did not the
Catholics hate him? and the Admiral could not hope to have any man more
friendly to him, nor by any other man's means to have revenge of his injury.
Lastly, in their houses that were slain, what armor, what weapons were
found, by which conjectures judges use to be lead to trace out a fact? These
matters wise men throughout the town of Paris commonly muttered.

But now to return to our purpose. At such time as the Kings prohibition
abouesaide was proclaimed at Paris, not only in other towns, as at Orleaunce,
Angiers, Viaron, Troys, and Auxe^^e, the like butcheries and slaughters were
used, but also in the town of Paris it self, in the very gaoles that are
ordained for the keeping of prisoners, if any had escaped the cruelty of the
day before, they were now tumultuously slain by the raging and outraging
multitude, in which number were three Gentlemen of great reputation, captain
Monins a man very famous in marciall prowess, Lomen the kings secretary, a
man of great estimation for his long service in the Court, and Chappes a
lawyer near fourscore year old, a man of great renown in the Court of
Paris. And because we have made mention of Angiers, we think it good not to
omit the case of Masson de Rivers. This man was a past^r of the Church, and
esteemed a singular man both in vertuousnesse of life, and in excelle^ce of wit
and learning, and was the first that had laid the foundation of the Church at
Paris. As soon as the slaughter was begone at Paris. Monsorel a most cruel
enemy of the Religion, was sent to Angiers in post to preuente all other that
might carry tidings of the murdering. As soon as he came into the town, he
caused himself to be brought to Massons house. There he met Massons wife in
the entry, and gently saluted her, and after the manner of France, specially
of the Court, he kissed her, and asked her where her husband was, she answered
that he was walking in the garden, and by and by she brought Mo^sorel, to her
husband, who ge^tly embraced Masson and said unto him: Can thou tell why I am
come hither? It is to kill thee by the Kings commandment at this very instant
time, for so has the king commanded, as thou may perceive by these letters,
and therewith he showed him his dag ready charged. Masso^ answered that he was
not guilty of any crime, howbeit this one thing only he besoughte him, to give
him space to call to the mercy of God, and to commend his spirit into Gods
hand. Which prayer as soon as he had ended in few words, he meekely
received the death offered by the other, and was shot through with a pellet
and dyed.

Now to return to Paris, the Admirals body being hanged up by the heels
upon the common gallows of Paris, as is aforesaid, the Parisians went thither
by heaps to see it. And the Queen mother to feed hit eyes with that
spectacle, had a mind also to go thither, and she carried with her the king and
both her other sons. But the next night following, the body was conveyed
away, and (as it is thought) buried. About that time, where as many of the
Court secretly muttered that the king should by this fact incur dishonor,
not only among foreign nations, but also with all posterity in time to come
for ever, Moruillier, of whom we have made mention before, one that is
accounted the principal lewd practiser and wicked sycophant of all France,
and the first authoure and chief mean of bringing the Jesuits into France,
came to the Queen mother and told her that it was best that some of those
that were lately taken fleyng and hiding themselves should for manners sake be
brought to open judgment, and after the accustomed manner should be enquired
upon, that they might be condemned by the Sentence of certain judges piked out
for that purpose, and so openly executed in sight of the people. There were
called to counsel hereupon Birage, Limege, Thuan and Belleure. They not only
allowed Moruilliers opinion, but also gave advise, that a man of hey made in
figure for the Admiral (for his body, as we have said, could not be found)
should be dragged by the Boureau thorough the streates, his arms and ensigns
of honor broken, his memory condemned, his castles and fermes rased, his
children pronounced infamous, unnoble, and intestable, and all the trees in his
woods to be hewn down to the height of six foot. There was among those
that were apprehended, one Cauaignes, master of Requests to the King, and
Briquemault, of whom we have before spoken. This Briquemault had spente his
time in service in the old wars in the time of king Frauncis and king Henry,
and was for the war accounted a man of great experience among the best now
living, and was near about threescore and ten years old. As soon as they
were carried into prison, there were presented unto them all the tormenter and
the hangman, and they were threatened with torture and tearing their bodies in
pieces, unless they would presentlye subscribe with their own hand, that
they were of counsel with the Admiral to kill the King and his brethren, and
the Queen mother, and the king of Navarre. They all cried out that they were
ready to suffer death most willingly forasmuch as the kings pleasure was it
should be so: but so great torture they could not bear, and therefore humbly
besought his royal goodness and clemency to pardon the^ that torment, and
yet trusting upon the mercy of God, they hoped that they should suffer
exceeding great pains, rather than stain themselves with so great shame, or
confess an untrue crime against themselves. They that were first assigned
their judges, hearing their cries and defenses, and fearing the judgment of
the world, said plainly that they would not draw upon themselves most
assured infamy for condemning them. Therefore there were new judges appointed
in their places: to them was adjoined such a tormenter and norarie, as were
thought fittest for the purpose. And so Briquemault and Cauaignes were quickly
condemned by a shadowed form of law, and led to the gibbet standing in the
principal street of the town, and in sight of many thousands of men gazing at
them. To this spectacle the Queen mother led the King and her other sons,
and her son in law the King of Navarre.

It was thought commodious for playing of this last act, that Briquema^lt
should in hearing of all the people ask pardon of the king, and for that
purpose there were some suborned to put him in mind, that if he would he
might easily purchase his life, for the king was of nature full of clemency
and mercy, and if he would ask pardon of his majesty with confessing his
offense, he should easily obtain it. He answered with a valiant and bold
courage, that it was not his part but the kings to ask pardon of God for this
fault, and that he would never crave forgiveness of that offense whereof he
well knew himself and had God to witness that he was clear and innocent.
Nevertheless, he besought God to forgive the king this fault. So were these
two excellent and famous men with halters fastened about their necks thrown
by the hangman from the ladder and hanged, and there withal also the man of
straw made for figure of the Admiral, was tied fast and hanged with them,
after a preposterous order of law, whereby the Admiral was first slain and
then condemned.

But whereas in a manner in all towns there were great slaughters committed,
yet was there none more horrible nor more outrageous than the butcherly murder
at Lions. So soon as the letters from the Court were brought to Mandelot
governor of the town: first, by a crier and trumpet he caused to be
proclaimed, that all the professors of the Religion should appear presently
before him at his house. They without all delay repaired to him. As soon as
they were come, he commanded them all to suffer themselves to be led to priso
by such officers as should be assigned them. They obeyed his word and followed
the officers that led the. By reason of the great multitude, they sorted them
into sundry prisons. Then Mandelot willed the common executioner to be
commanded in his name to take some to help him, and to kill those that were
in prison. The executioner answered, that he used not to execute the law upon
any but such as were condemned, and in public and open places, and therefore
willed him to seek another slaughter man if he would. Mandelot thus refused by
the executioner, commanded the garrison soldiers of the castle to do it. The
soldiers answered that it was against their honor, to use weapon upon men
bound and lying suppliant before them. If they had raised any rebellion, or had
offended or provoked them, they said they would most readily have fought with
them. Being thus refused by them also, at the last he committed the matter to
the watermen and butchers. Those fellows being let into the prisons, went to
it with chopping knives and butchers axes. Such as they found prostrate at
their feet, pite^^sly holding up their hands to heaven, crying upon the
mercy of God and men, they did for sport cut off their fingers and the tops
of their hands, and throughout the whole town was heard such a cry and
lamentable howling of women and children, that innumerable people, even such
as were zelously given even to the popish Religion, did detest that cruelty,
and judged that not me^ but outrageous savage beasts in shape of men were
entered into the prisons. It is well known, that a great number of honest women
in the town great with child, were so slighted with the horror of it, that
they were delivered before their time. And out of the Court of the jail called
the Archbishops prison, the blood was seen in the broad day light, to the
great abhorring and fear of many that beheld it, run warm and smoking into
the next streets of the town, and so down into the River of Seen. There was in
that fame Archbishops prison an aged man called Francis Collut, a merchant of
cappes, and two young men his sons, whom he had eucr caused diligently to be
taught and instructed in Religion. When he saw the butchers come toward him
with their Axes, he began to exhort his children not to refuse the death offered
by God For (said he) it is the perpetual destiny of Religion, and that often
such sacrifices do betide in christian Churches, and Christians in all ages
have ever been and for ever to the worlds end so shall be as sheep among wolves,
doves among hawks, and sacrifices among priests: Then the old father embraced
his two young sons, and lying flat on the ground with them, crying aloude upon
the mercy of God, was with many wounds both he and his sons slaughtered by
those butchers: and long time afterward their three bodies had knit together
yielded a piteous spectacle to many that beheld them. In the mean time Mandelot
in jest and soorne (as it seemed) caused to be proclaimed by the crier, that no
man should commit any slaughter in the town, and that if any would detect
the doers of any such slaughter, he would give him a hundred crowns in reward
for his information. And from that time they ceased not to kill, to rob and
to spoil. The next day after, which was the first day of September, the
greatest part of the dead bodies were thrown into the River of Seen, and the
rest of them Mandelot, to feed and glut his eyes and heart with blood, caused
to be carried by boat to the other side of the water, and there to be thrown
down upon the green grass nere unto the Abbey called Esne. There the people
of Lions, specially the Italians, of whom by reason of the ma^te there is great
store in the town, satisfied their eyes a while, and did such spites as they
could to these heaps of carcases, and so exercised their cruelty not upon
the living only, but also upon the dead. And there happened one thing which for
the abominable cruelty is not to be omitted, There came to that spectacle
certain apothecaries, and among these bodies they perceived some very fat
ones, by and by they went to the butchers, and told them that they did use to
make certain special medicines of man's grease, and that they might make some
profit thereof. Which as soon as the butchers understood, they ran to
the heaps and chose out the fattest, and launced them with their knives, and
pulled out the fat, and sold it for money to the apothecaries.

While these things were doing at Lions, the king being ^nfourmed that diverse
of the Religion had left their wives and children, and were fled out of the
other ^wnes, and ^^ked some in the woods, and some among their friends such as
took pity on them, he practiced with fair words to allure and call them home
again. He sent to every part messengers and letters, affirming that he was
highly displeased with those slaughters and horrible butcheries, and that he
would that such cruelty should be severely punished: and if the Admiral with
a few of his confederates had entered into any secret practi^e, it was no
reason, that so many (...) should bear the punishment due to a few. Many
swetely beguiled with these wor^es of the king and with the letters of the
governors, retired home again to their dwellings and houses, specially they
of Rhoan, Diepe, and Toulouse. There were scant two days passed when they were
again commanded to prison, where they were all shut up. Then were murderers
a new appointed of the most base and rascal of the people, to torment them
with all kind of torture, and then to slaye them. And throughout the whole
realm of France for thirty days together there was no end of killing,
slaying and robbing, so that at this day there are about a hundredth thousand
little babes, widows and children, that were well borne, that now fatherless
and motherlesse live wandering and in beggerie. About this time the King
caused to be proclaimed, that such as had any office or place of charge,
unless they would spedily return to the Catholic, Apostolic and Romish
Church, should give over those their temporal rooms. There was no town nor
any so small a village or hamlet wherein all the professors of the Religion were
not compelled either to go to Mass, or presently to take the sword into their
bosoms: and in many places it happened that such as being amazed with the
sodainenesse of the matter had abiured their Religion, yet notwithstanding were
afterward slain,

And while these things were still in doing, yet the king in the mean while
sent abrod his letters and messages into all parts, and caused to be
proclaimed with trumpet, that his pleasure was that the Edictes of pacification
should be observed: and although they could not have freedom to use and
exercise their Religion in open places, yet they should have liberty permitted
them to retain and profess it within their own houses, and that no man
should meddle with or disturb the goods and possessions of those of the
Religion.

And the same King which but few days before, had by letters directed to all
the governors of his Provinces signified that his cousin the Admiral was
slain by the Duke of Guise to his great sorrow, and that himself was in great
danger, the same King I say, now caused it with sound of trumpet to be
proclaimed that the traiterous and wicked Admiral was slain by his will and
commandment. He that in few days before had by new authority confirmed
the liberty of Religion permitted by his Edicts of pacification, the same king
did now not only take from the professors there of their offices and honors,
but also prescribed them in precise form of words ^ form of abiuring and
detesting their Religion. Which things least any man should doubt of, we
shall hereafter set down the very true copyes of the said Letters, Edictes
and Abiuration.

THE KINGS LETTERS, TO the Governors of Burgundy, whereby he charge those of
the house of Guyse, for the murder committed upon the Admirals person, and for
the sedition which happened at Paris, and commands that the Edict of
Pacificatio^ should be kept and retained.
COusin, you have perceived what I wrote unto you yesterday, concerning my
cousin the Admirals wounding, and how ready I was to do my endeavor to search
out the truth of the deed, and to punish it, wherein nothing was left undone or
forgotten. But it happened since, that they of the house of Guyse, and other
Lords and Gentlemen their adherents (whereof there be no small number in this
City) when they certainly knew that the Admirals friends would proceed to
the revenge of his hurt, and because they were suspected to be the authors
thereof, were so stirred up this last night, that a great and lamentable
sedition arose thereof, insomuch that the Guard by me appointed for his defense
about his house, was set upon, and he himself with certain of his Gentlemen
slain, and hauock of other made in diverse places of the City: which was
handled with such a rage, that I could not use the remedy that I would, but
had much ado to employ my Gardes and other defense for the safety of my self
and my brethren within the castle of Louure, to give order hereafter for the
appeasing of this sedition, which is at this hour well appeased thanks be to
God, and came to pass by a particular and private quarrel of long time
fostered betwixt those two houses. Whereof when I foresawe that there would
succeed some mischievous purpose, I did what I could possibly to appease it,
as all men know. And yet hereby the Edicte of Pacification is not broken,
which I will to be kept as straightly as ever it was, as I have given to
understand in all places throughout my Realm. And because it is greatly to be
feared, that such an execution might stir up my subjects, one against
another, and cause great murders through the cities of my Realm, whereby I
should be greatly grieved, I pray you cause to be published and understood in
all places of your government, that every person abide and continue in the
safegarde of his own house, and to take no weapons in hand, nor one to hurt
another upon pain of death: commanding them to keep and diligently to observe
our Edicte of Pacification. And to make the offenders and resisters, and such
as would disobey and break our will, to be punished, you shall assemble out of
hand as great force ^s you can, as well of your friends as of the^ that be
appointed by me and of others, aduertising the captains of Castles and Cities
in your government, to take heed to the safegarde and preservation of the
said places, so that no fault ensue on their behalf, aduertising me also so
soon as you can, what order you have given herein, and how al things have
passed within the circuit of your government. Hereupon I pray God to keep
you, Cousin, in his holy safegarde.

At Paris the.xxiiij of August. Signed CHARLES, and underneath, BRVLARD.

ANOTHER LETTER FROM the King to the Lord of Prye, his Lieutenant general in
Touraine, upon the same matter that the former letter was.
MOnsieur de Pry, you have vnde* stood how my cousin the Admiral was hurt
the last day, and in what readiness I was to do as much as in me lay, for the
trial of the fact, and to Wuse so great and spedie justice to be done as should
be an example throughout all my Realm, wherein nothing was omitted. Since it is
so happened, that my cousins of the house of Guise, and other Lords and
Gentlemen their adherents, which are no small party in this to wne, as all men
know, having gotten certain intelligence that the friends of my said cousin
the Admiral intended to pursue and execute upon them the revenge of this
burte, for that they had them in suspicio^ to be the cause and occasion thereof,
have made such a stir this night passed, that among them on both parts has
be^e raised a great and lamentable tumulte: the Guard that was set about the
Lord Admirals house, was distressed, himself slain in his house with diverse
other Gentlemen, as also great slaughter has been made of other in sundry
places and quarters of this town: which has been done with such fury, that
it was impossible for me to give such remedy as was to be wished, I having
enough to do to employe my Guard and other forces to keep my self in safety
in the Castle of Louure, to the end to give order for the appeasing of the
whole vproare, which at this hour (thanks be to God) is well quenched, for
that the same happened by the particular quarrel that has of long time been
between those two houses, where of always having some doubt that some unhappy
effect would e^sue, I have (as is well known to all men) before this time
done all that I could for to appease it, nothing in this last fact tending to
the breach of my Edicte of pacification, which contrary wise I will in all
things to be maintained, as at any time heretofore, as I do give it to
understand thorowout my Realm. And forasmuch as it is greatly to be feared
that this may stir up and cause my subjects to rise one against another, and
to commit great slaughters in the to wnes of my Realm, whereof I would be
maruellously sorry, I pray you that immediately upon the receyte hereof, ye
cause to be published and done to understand in all places of your charge, that
every man as well in town as in country, remain in rest and surety in his
house, and do not take arms one against another, on pain of death: And that
more diligently than at any time heretofore, ye cause the last Edict of
Pacification to be kept and carefully mainteyned and observed. To the intent
above said, and to punish such as shall do to the contrary, and to distress
all such as shall rise and dysobey our pleasure, ye shall immediately assemble
all the strength that ye are able, as well of your friends being of our
allowance as others, aduertising the governors, and captains of towns and
Castles within your charge, that they take goodheede to the surety and safe
keeping of their pieces, in such sort as there ensue no default, informing me
with speed of such order as you shall take therein, and how all things shall
proceed within the compass of your authority. I have here with me my brother
the King of Nauarie, and my Cousin the Prince of Conde, to take such hap as my
self. I pray the creator, Monsier de Prye, to hold you in his holy safegarde.

From Paris this.xxiiij. of August. Thus signed CHARLES, and underneath PINART.

These letters are all of one argument as the former be, and written all in one
form, and al one day to Monsier de Prye the Lieutenant of Touraine.
THE KINGS LETTERS TO the officers of Burges, upon the same matter that the
former were.
Our loving and faithful, we doubt not but by this time you know of the
sedition which to our great grief happened in Paris a few days* since,
wherein my Cousin the Admi^all, and certain others of his side were si^i^e, and
a great murder committed upon diverse in many places of this City. And least
the news thereof should change the quiet estate, wherein Burges has hitherto
ben maintained since the Edict of Pacification, if remedy were not foreseen,
it is the cause that we writ this letter presently unto you, whereby we command
and expressly ordeine that every one of you according to his charge do see
that no commotion or insurrection be against the inhabitants of the said
City, nor that no murder be committed, as it is to be feared, by those which
pretend to break the Edict of Pacification, and thereby would execute a
revenge of their long and private grudge, to our incredible vexation and
anguishe of mind. For this cause it is your part to give to understand and
publishe throughout that City of ours and other places pertaining to it, that
every one should quietly and peacibly keep their houses, without taking weapons
in hand, and offending one the other, upon pain of death, and well and
diligently to keep our Edict of Pacification. And if any go about to contrary
this our intent and mind, to cause them to be punished and rigorously
chastised by penalties imposed on such offenders in our ordinances, having a
watchful and diligent eye to the safegarde of that our City, in such sort
that no inconvenience arise in your service toward us, as you would have us
to know, that you are our loyal and obedient subjects.

Given at Paris the.xxvij. day of August. 1572. Thus signed. CHARLES, and
^^^owe. De neuf-ville.

A LETTER OF THE TREAsorer of the leagues of the Switzers, written by the kings
commandment unto the said Leagues, of the same argument that the former
letters were.
NOble Seigniours, Monsieur de la Fontaine, Ambassador for the King your
assured and perfect friend and confederate, and I his Treasorer in this
country, having commandment of his majesty to communicate with you, as with
them whom he accompteth his chief and sure friends, of a chance which lately
happened in the City of Paris, his own person and court then being there,
whereof he received so much more grief and displeasure, because it befell on
such a time as he least feared, or looked for such a thing. The matter is this.
On the.xxvij. day of August last, the Admiral as he went from Louu^e, was with
an harquebuze shot hurt in the hand and arm, whereof when his majesty was
advertised, he commanded incontinent that search and punishment were had of
the offendour, and the authors of such a mischief; whereunto when he had
readily laid his hand by his officers, and committed the inhabitants of the
house, where the harquebuze was shot, to prison, they which were the cause
first of the mischief (as it may easily be presupposed) because they would
preuente the inquisition thereof, heaping one transgression upon another, on
the.xxiij. and.xxiiij. of the said month assembled a great troop of people in
the night, and moved the people of Paris to a very^ great sedition, who in a
rage set upon the Admi^rals lodging, and enforcing the Guard which his Majesty
had set for the Admirals surety and keeping, slew him with certain other
gentlemen in his company, as the like also was committed upon others in the
City, the matter growing in the very same instant to such an outrage and
commotio^, that whereas his Majesty had thought to provide remedy for
appeasing thereof, he had much a do with all his Gardes to keep his house at
Louure, where he lodged with the two Queens, his mother and the Spouse, the
Lords his brethren, the King of Navarre and other Princes. Think therefore ye
noble Seigniours, in what a perplexity this young and courageous King now
stands, who, as a man may say, has held in his hand thorns in stead of
a Scepter ever since his coming to the Crown, for the great troubles which
have almost ever since been in his Realm, and therefore by the good and wise
counsel and assistance of the Queen his mother and the Lords his brethren,
thought to enjoy and establishe a more sure repose in his Realm, and a more
happy government for himself and his subjects, after he had taken away (as
he thought) all occasions of dissentions amongst his subjects by the means of
his Edicts of Pacifications, and of the marriage of the King of Navarre to the
Lady his sister, and the Prince of Code to Madome de Neuers Besides all this,
to the intent nothing should be left undone that might serve for the quieting
of all things, and especially for the Admirals safeguard, his Majesty as every
man knows, has done his endeavor to the uttermost, to appease and reconcile
his principal and most dangerous enimyes unto him. And so God the true judge
of the Kings Majesty's good and pureintent, brought to pass, that the peoples
rage being quieted within a few hours, every one went home to his house and
the king had special regard to nothing more than to see nothing attempted or
innouated contrary to his Edicts of Pacification, and the repose of his
subjects as well of the one Religion, as of the other. And for that purpose
has sent to diverse of his Governors and Officers in his provinces, to look
diligently to the observing of his Edictes, with express commandment to
hold their hands there, that every one might pe^ceiue that the chance at
Paris happened for some private quarrel, and not for any purpose to alter his
Edicts, which his Majesty will in no wife suffer. Which is the principal
thing, noble Seigniours, that his Majesty has commanded us on his part to
assure you, and to let you understand the dangers that depend over him and
his neighbors, not so much for this sedition, for he trusts in God that
shall grow no further, and his Majesty will keep his Realm in as good repose
as it has been since his last Edict of Pacification, but for the great
mustering and assembling men of war in many places, specially in the low
cou^treyes, where it is yet uncertain on which side God will give the
victory, nor whether the conqueror will employ his force, after his conquest.
Wherefore his Majesty prays you, continuing the good love and intelligence
which has always been bewixt the Crown of France and his allied and
confederate friends the Seigniours of the Le^gues, to have good regard to
him, and his Realm, in case that need shall require, as he will have to you
and your prosperous estate, if it be requisite, employing in the mean while
your great and singular wisdom to the preservation of the union of the Nation
in League, which is the only cause to make you, not only able to send succor
to your friends, but also maintain your selves in estimation, that you may be
a terror to your neighbors, how great so ever they be, his majesty promising
you in all occurrentes as much friendship, favor and assistance, as you can
desire, and to be as entier and perfect a friend, as ever your nation had any.

A DECLARATION OF THE King, concerning the occasion of the Admirals death and
his adherents and accomplices, happened in the City of Paris the. 24. of August.
1572.
Imprinted at Paris by John Dallier Stacioner, dwelling upon S. Michaels
bridge, at the sign of the white Rose; by the Kings license.
BY THE KING.
HIs Majesty desiring to have all Seigniours, Gentlemen, and other his
subjects, understand the cause of the murder of the Admiral and his adherentes
and accomplices, which lately happened in this City of Paris the xxiiij. day of
this present month of August, least the said deed should be otherwise
disguised and reported than it was in deed; his Majesty therefore declares
that which was done, was by his express commandment, and for no cause of
Religion, nor breaking his Edictes of Pacification, which he always intended,
and still mindet^ and entendeth to observe and keep; yea it was rather done to
withstand and prevent a most detestable and curssed conspiracy begone by the
said Admiral the chief captain thereof, and his said adherents and accomplices,
against the kings person, his estate, the Queen his mother and the Princes his
brethren, the King of Navarre, and other Lords about him. Wherefore his
Majesty by this declaration and ordinance gives to understand to all
Gentlemen and others of the Reli^gion which they pretend reformed, that he
min^deth and purposes that they shall live under his protection, with their
wives and children in their houses in as much safegarde as they did before,
following the benefit of the former Edictes of Pacification, most expressly
commanding and ordaining, that all Governors and Lieutenants general in
every of his Countries and Provinces* and other Justices and Officers to whom
it appertains, do not attempt nor suffer to be attempted and thing in what
sort soever, upon the persons and goods of them of the Religion, their wives,
children, and families, on pain of death against the faulty and culpable in
this behalf.

And nevertheless to withstand the troubles, slanders, suspicions, and
defiances that may come by sermons and assemblies, as well in the houses of the
said Gentlemen, as in other places, as it is suffered by the said Edictes of
Pacification: it is expressly forbidden, and inhibited by his Majesty to all
Gentlemen and others of the said Religion, to have no assemblies for any cause
at all, until his Majesty has provided and appointed otherwise for the
tranquillity of his Realm, upon pain of disobedience and confiscation of
body and goods. It is also expressly forbidden under the pain aforesaid,
that for the foresaid occasions, none shall take or retain any prisoners, or
take ransom of them, and that incontinently they certify the governors of
every province, and the Lieutenante general, of the name and quality of
every such prisoner; whom his Majesty has appointed shall be released and
set at liberty, except they be of the chief of the late conspiracy, or such
as have made some practice or devise for them, or ^ad intelligence thereof: and
they shall advertise his Majesty of such, to know his further pleasure. It is
also ordained, that from henceforth none shall take or arrest any prisoner for
that cause, without his Majesty's commandment or his Officers, nor that none
be suffered to roame abroad in the fields, to take up dogs, Cattle, Beefes,
Kine, or other beasts, goods, fruits, grain, nor any thing else, nor to hurt
the laborers by word or deed, but to let them alone about their work and
calling, in peace and safety.

At Paris the.xxviij. of August. 1572. Signed, CHARLES, and underneath, FIZES.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO the officers of Burges, of the same argument that the
former declaration was.
Our trusty and well-beloved, we considering that under the color of the death
of the Admiral, and his adherents and accomplices, certain Gentlemen, and others
our subjects, professing the Religion called Reformed, might rise and
assemble together to the prejudice and hinderance of the tranquillity which we
have always desired should be in our Realm, the doing of the said murder being
counterfeited and given out otherwise than it was. We have therefore made a
declaration and ordinance, which we s^nd you, willing you to publishe the same
incontinently by sound of Trumpet, and setting the same up in such places of
your Jurisdiction, where cries and Proclamations are usually made, to the end
that every one might know it. And although we have always been diligent
obseruers of our Edicts of Pacification, yet seeing the troubles and seditions
which might arise amongst our subjects by the occasion of the said murder, as
well of the Admiral as of his companions, we command you, and ordeine, that
you particularly forbid the principals of the Religion, pretended reformed,
within your Jurisdiction, that they have no sermons nor assemblies either in
their houses, or in any other places, to take away all doubt and suspicion
which might be conceived against them. And likewise that you advertise such as
dwell in the Cities of your Jurisdiction, what you judge meet to be done, to
the intent they might in this point follow our mind, and keep them quiet in
their houses, as they may do by the benefit of our Edict of Pacification, and
there they shall be under our protection and safegarde: but if they will not so
retire themselves after you have given them warning, then shall you set on them
with all strength and force, as well by the prouostes of the Marishals and their
Archers, as others which you can gather together by Bell ringing or otherwise,
so that you bewe them all to pieces as enimyes to our Crown. Besides, what
commandments so ever we have sent by word of mouth either to you, or others
in our Realm, when we were in fear, upon just occasion, knowing the
conspiracy that the Admiral had begone of some mischaunce that might fall unto
us, we have and do revoke, willing you and others that no such thing be
executed, for such is our pleasure.

Given at Paris the.xxx. of August 1572. Thus signed, CHARLES, and underneath,
De Neuf-ville. Published in judgment.

REMEMBRAVNCES AND INstructions sent by the King to the Count of Charny his
general Lieutenant in Burgundy, of the same argument.
THe King considering the commotion lately happened in Paris, wherein the L.
Admiral Chastilion with other Gentlemen of his side were slain, because they
had mischeuously conspired to set upon the Kings Majesty person, the Queen
his mother the Princes his brethren, the King of Navarre, and other Princes and
Lords near about them, and upon his estate: and least they of the Religion
called reformed, not knowing the true causes of the said rebellion, should
arise and put them selves in arms as they have done in the troubles that he
passed, and devise new practices and fetches against the weal of his Majesty
and tranquillity of his Realm, if he should not cause the truth of the matter
to be known to all Gentlemen and others his subjects of the sa^e religion how
it passed, and what his pleasure and mind is in their behalfes. And thinking
that for remedy hereof it is very needful for the Governors of the
Provinces in his Realm to go round about their gouernementes: for this
occasion he will^^h that the Count of Charnye grea^e E^q^ire of France, and
his Majesty's Lieutenant general for the government of Burgundy, shall go
diligently through all Cities and places of the said government, and as he
arriueth in every pl^ce, he shall devise the best ways that he can to make
peace, union and quietness amongst the Kings subjects as well of the one
Religion as of the other. And to bring it the better about, he shall gently
call before him in open or private place as he shall see best cause for his
Majesty's service herein, the Gentlemen of the places, and the Burgeses of the
Cities of his government, that be of the Religion, and shall declare unto them,
and cause them to understand the truth of the said commotion, least any have
misreported it to them, otherwise than it was in deed. And shall tell them,
that under the color of the L. Admirals hurt, wherefore his Majesty would
have caused iustic^ to be done according to the good order that he had
appointed, the said Admiral and Gentlemen of his Religion which were in the
City with him, without looking for the execution of the said Justice, had
made a mischeuous, unhappy, and detestable conspiracy against the Kings
Majesty's person, the Queen his mother, the Lords his brethren, the King of
Navarre, and other Princes and Lords with them, and against the whole estate,
even as certain of the chief and adherents of the said cospiracie
(acknowledging their faul^) have confessed. Wherefore his Majesty was
constrained (to his great grief) to resist and prevent so mischievous,
pernicious and abominable a purpose. And that which he suffered to be done on
Sunday the.xxiiij of August upon the Admiral and his accomplices, was not for any
Religion, nor to go against the Edict of Pacification, he entending
nevertheless that they of the Religion should still live and abide in all
liberty and safety, with their wives, children and families in their houses,
as be has and will maintain them, if they be content to live quietly under
his obedience as he desires. For the which cause he wills, that the Count
Charnye shall offer and give to them his letters of safe guard in good and
authens^yke form, which shall be of as good force and virtue, as if they
should come or be taken from his own Majesty: and by the authority of them,
they shall be preserved from all wrongs, violences, and oppressions: enjoining
and forbidding most expressly all his catholic subjects whatso ever they are
to attempt nothing, upon the persons, goods, or families of any of the
Religion which keep themselves quietly in their houses, on pain of death. And
if any be so rash, or evil advised, to do against this Iniunction, or to
violate the safeguard promised, his Majesty wills that ready and rigorous
punishment be done, to the intent that their example may serve to hold in
others not to do the like: which is the true and only means of assurance
that his Majesty can give to them of the Religion, with his word and promise
which he gives them to be their good and benign Prince, protector and
preserver of them and of all that touches them, so long as they live and
continue under his obedience without doing or enterprising any thing against
his will and service. And because his Majesty has often known that the
enterprises and co^sultations taken in hand by them of the Religion against his
service, have been concluded amongs them as assemblies at se^mons which
Gentlemen had liberty to cause to be made in their houses and Lordships,
therefore my L of Charnye shall particularly give to understand to Gentlemen
which were wont to have such sermons, that his Majesty in consideration that
nothing has more moved and set on the Catholics against those of the Religion
tha^ such preachings and assemblies, and if they continue it is certain that
it will be a cause to increase and maintain the said commotions, desires that
they should cause them to cease off until he has otherwise provided and
appointed, and that they apply themselves hereunto as a thing greatly serving
the effect of his intention, which is gently to bring his said subjects to a
true and perfect amity, union and concord one with another, committing all
divisions and partialities to oblivion. And because this may seem ^ard at the
begi^ning, my L. of Charnye shall cause it to be fair and gently spoken to
them, least they enter into some strange conjecture or suspicion. For so his
said Majesty would proceed in all true sincerity toward them which
conform them selves to his will and obedience, wherein he exhorts them to
live, with all the best persuasions that he can, and shall assure them in so
doing to be surely maintained and preseued as his other subjects the
Catholics, as his Majesty would that he should do. And to the intent his
said subjects the Catholics should know how to use and behave them selves
herein, my L. of Charnye shall tell the^, that his Majesty's pleasure neither
is nor has been that any wrong or oppression should be done to them of the
said Religion; which like good and loyal subjects will gently keep themselves
under ^is obedience. Declaring unto the said Catholics; that if they forget
themselves and hurt those of the Religion which in such sort behave themselves
toward his Majesty, and those also which for that end have received of his
Majesty or of my L. of Charnye letters of safeconduite, he will cause them to
be punished and chastised in the field, as trangressours of his
commandments, without any hope of grace, pardon, or remision. Which the
said L. of Charnye shall express and declare. unto them, with as plain words
as is possible, and cause it also to be as straightly executed. And after that
following his Majesty's intent, he has pacified them by this means, which is
the way that his Majesty best likes of; and searched the di ectio^ to assure
a tra^quillitie betwixt the subi^ctes and to set some assurance betwixt the
one and the other, such as shall conform themselves herein to his said
Majesty's will, he will comfort, and make them the best and most gentle
entertainment that he possibly can. But if any of the Religion become self
willed and stubborn to his Majesty, without having regard to his said
warnings, and shall assemble in arms together, making practices and devises
against the weal of his service, then the L. of Charnye shall run upon them
and hew them in pieces before they have power to fortify them selves and
join together. And therefore he shall assemble as much force as he can, as
well of the ordinary, as of other men of war, Soldiers, Footmen of the
garrisons, and inhabitants of the Catholics within the Cities of his
government, and shall besiege them which hold and make them selves strong in
Cities about of his government, so that the victory and authority may
remain in his Majesty.

At Paris the.xxx. of August. 1572. Signed, CHARLES: and underneath BRVLARD.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO the L. of Gwich, whereby it may plainly be perceived, how
they would search out all them of the Religion which had any charge in hand
during the troubles.
MY L of Gwiche, I understand that the iij. brethren Daggonels, and one Por^^er
the host at the sign of the Adventure, Mossoner, Crispine, and Captain Grise,
which were the principal of the faction in Burgundy, and were the cause of
the taking and recovering of the City of Mascon in the late troubles, and of
all the decay which happened in that country, be kept prisoners in Mascon. And
because I understand they hope to escape out by ra^some (which I would in no
wise should be done) I ord^ine and commau^d that you keep them safe, for as
much as I hope by their means to discover a great many things which greatly
touch the weal of my service. And if there be any other prisoners of the new
Religion in Mascon, which have been factious, you shall likewise keep them, so
that they escape not by paying ransom, for I would not for any thing in the
world that there should be taking of ransom among my subjects. And thus my L.
of Gwiche I pray God keep you in his holy tuition.

Written at Paris the.xiiij. of September. 1572. Signed, CHARLES, and
underneath, BRVLARD.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO Monsieur de Gordes his Lieutenaunt general in Daulphine,
wherein he sends him word, that the best proof of his doings is the
accusations and complaints of them of the Religion against him, whereunto he
should have care to answer.
M. De Gordes, by your letters of the first of this month I perceived the
order which you appointed in your Government since the advertisement which you
had of the execution of the Admiral and his adherentes: and since I am sure
you forgot nothing which you thought might serve for your assurance of those
places whereof you had occasion to doubt. And to the intent you should have the
more means to make your self known, I have prepared that the soldiers of
Corsica which I had appointed to go into Province, should return to you, and
thereupon have written to my Cousin the Count of Tend, who will not fail to
send them unto you, for as much as there is no need of them now in that
country. He should also send you word of the time of their departing, to the
end that you might have laysure to provide to receive them, and appoint their
places where they should be in garrison. I have seen that which you writ to me
concerning the continual payment in Daulphine, what is due for the last year,
whereupon I will advise of the state of my sines the means that may be, and
according thereunto there shall be no fault, but they shall be provided for. For
the reparation of the Bridge of Grenoble, they of the same place must devise
the means wherein they should best help them selves therein, and when they have
advertised me, I will appoint them necessary provision. Touching the soldiers
appointed for the Baron of Adresse, because the occasion why I appointed the^
to be levied now cease, I have written to him to send them back and dismysse
them again: wherefore there is no need to make provision for their
maintenance, nor likewise to tell you any thing else concerning the answers
which you have made to the remembrances which they of the Religion have
presented against you. For your doyngs are well known and plain unto me, and
thereupon I will take no better proof than their accusation. Wherefore you
shall put yourselfe to no more pain on that side. Moreover I have herewith
sent you a copy of the declaration which I made of the Admirals death and his
adherents, and made to be understood that it should be observed and followed,
and that all murders, sackings, and violences should cease. Nevertheless I
have heard complaints of diverse places that such extraordinary ways continue,
which is a thing, that does much displease me. By the means whereof I advise
you, in doing this charge once again put unto you, that you give order
throughout your government to cause all hostility, force, and violence to
cease, and that the said declaration be straightly observed and kept, with
punishing those that withstand, so rigorously, that the demonstration thereof
may serve for an example, seeing my intent is that they should be punished as
behooves, and to mark them which wincke or dissemble thereat. This present
letter shall serve also for an advise of the receipt of those letters which you
wrote the.v. of this present, whereby you send me word, that you received no
message by word of mouth from me, but only letters of the.xxij. xxiiij.
and.xxviij. of the month passed, whereof put your self to no further pain,
for that charge was only for such as then were near about me, which is all
that I have at this time to say unto you. Praying hereupon the Creator to keep
you in his holy and worthy tuicion.

VVritte^ at Paris the.iiij. day of September. Signed CHARLES, and beneath
FIZES. And above. To M. de Gordes knight.

THE KINGS LETTERS TO the Duke of Guise, his Lieutenant general in Champaigne
and in Prye.
COusin, although in all my former letters I have given you to understand well
enough how much I desire that al my subjects, as well of the nobility as others
which profess the new Religion, and quietly use them selves in your
government, should by you be maintained and preserved in all surety under my
protection and safeguard, without giving them any hinderance by trouble in their
persons, goods, and families: yet nevertheless I have been advertised that in
certain places of my Realm there have been many sackings and pillings done by
such as dwell in the houses of them of the said new Religion, as well in the
fields as in the Cities, under color of the co^motion which happened in my
City of Paris the.xxiiij. day of August last, a thing beyond all measure
displeasant and disagreable unto me, and for the which I would have provision
and remedy. Wherefore I pray you, Cousin, that above all things as you desire
that I should know the good affection you bear to the good weal of my
service, you take that matter next your heart to preserve and maintain within
your government according to that which I have so plainly told and written to
you heretofore, that all such of the new Religion which behave them selves
quietly, take no wrong or violence, whether it be for the preservation of of
their goods or persons, no more than to my Catholic subjects. And where any
wrong or outrage shall be offered them against my will, as I baue before
declared, so do I now by these presents declare, I will and intend that you
shall make some evident and notorious punishment of such as are herein
culpable, so that their correction may serve for an example of all other, that
I may see my self thoroughly obeyed herein as I would be, and my commandments
received amongst all my Subjects in another sort than they have been
heretofore. Assuring you cousin, that the best news that I shall receive from
you, shall be to bear say that you chastise those well, of whom I am
disobeyed. And thus Cousin, I pray God to keep you in his holy tuition.

Written from Paris the.xxviij. of September. 1572. Signed CHARLES: And
underneath BRVLART.

REMEMBRANCES SENT BY the King to all governors, and Lieutenantes of his
Provinces, to put out and remove all those of the Religion from their estates
and charges, although they would abjure the same, saving such as have but small
estates and offices, to whom his Majesty permits continuance, on condition
that they abjure the said Religion according to the form of Abiuration sent
for that purpose.
THe King considering how much his officers and Magistrates of Justice, and
such as have the administration and dealing of his Fynes and payments, which be
of the new Religion, are suspect and hated, and put his Catholic subjects in
great mistrust if they should presently exercise their offices after these
fresh commotions, for cause that the said offices be in their hands that now
keep them: therefore least the people should thereby be brought to a new
occasion of stir, and they of the new Religion be in danger or bazard of
their own persons, although they would abjure their said new Religion, and
profess the holy faith and Catholic Religion of Rome: his Majesty desiring
to avoid the new mischiefs and troubles which may come, has advised to
discharge the said officers from the exercise of the said offices, until he
shall otherwise appoint. And yet nevertheless, in the mean while, if the
said officers be obediente unto his will, and live quietly in their houses,
without attempting, practicing or taking any thing in hand against his
service, they shall receive their wages, and they that will resign their said
offices to Catholic persons, and come to his Majesty shall be very honorably
provided for. And as touching other small offices without wages, which cannot
be troublesome, as Notaries, Sergeants, and such where the officers have none
authority, which cannot be so odious nor mistrustfull to the people as the
other, his Majesty is advised, that such small officers which will abjure the
said new Religion, and profess the faith Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish,
and therein live continually hereafter, shall continue in the exercise and
enjoying of their estates: but they that will continue in their new opinion,
shall depart from their offices, until his Majesty has otherwise provided.
And this is for the great mischief and inconvenience that may betyde them, if
they should exercise their said estates, because of the great mistrust and
suspicion which the Catholics have conceived of them of the new Religion.
Nevertheless his Majesty well considering that the most part of the said
officers have none other way to live, but the exercise of their said offices,
wills that they shall be in thoyse to resign to Catholic and capable
persons, and then to come to him for that effect, and he will grant them the
greatest favor and moderation of his treasorie that is possible. The which
resolution and pleasure of his Majesty he wills to be declared to the said
officers of the new pretended opinion, as well by governors and Lieutenants
general of his Provinces, as by them of his Courts of Parliament, of the
Chamber of his accomptes, of the Court of his aids, them of his great
Counsel, of the Treasorie of France, the Generals of his Fynes, his Baylifes.
Seneshals, Prouosts, Judges or their Lieutenants, and every one of them as
shall appertain. And to this intent his Majesty wills and intends that
every one of them in their calling shall send particularly and apart for every
of the said officers of the new Religion, which be of their incorporation,
charge and Jurisdiction, and shall admonish then in this behalf to conform
them selves to his Majesty's mind: and if any of them in authority, because
of their said estates, will return to the bosom of the Catholic and Romish
Church, it shall be said to them that his Majesty likes very well of it, and
that he takes a great and singular affection therein, and that it shall give
him the greater assurance and credit of their good will, and that his Majesty
will not bar the^ from his service hereafter, but will provide for them as
their behavior shall deserve. And notwithstanding, for the reasons abouesayd,
he wills that they shall cease from the exercise of their estates and
offices, until he otherwise appoints. And because that in many places of the
Realm they have proceeded by way of seasing the goods of them of the new
Religion which be dead or absente, and hide themselves: and sometimes of those
which be in their own houses, although his Majesty gave to understand by his
declarration of the.xxviij. of August last, that be would and intended that
they of the new Religion should enjoy their goods, nevertheless, to the intent
there should be no doubt of his purpose, and that no mistrust might arise
thereupon, he declares, wills, and intends again, that according to his
declaration of the.xxviij. of August, they of the new Religion which be
living, whether they be present or absent, and be not culpable or charged with
the last conspiration, or to have attempted against his Majesty or his estate,
since his Edict of Pacification, shall be restored to their houses, and put in
possession of all and singular their good; moveable or immovable. And that
the wydowes and heirs of them that be dead, may and shall succeed them, and
appres bend all and singular their goods, and that they shall be maintained in
them, and kept under the protection and safeguard of his Majesty, so that no
hurt shall be done or said unto them in any manner of wise or sort. VVilling for
this purpose that all necessary surety shall be given them, and that all
officers, Magistrates, Mayors and others which have public charge shall
maintain them in all safety, forbidding al persons of what estate, quality or
condition so ever they be, not to hurt them in person or good^s upon pain of
death. And nevertheless his Majesty wills, that they of the new opinion
shall submit themselves, and promise upon pain to be declared rebels and
trai^ tours to his Majesty, that they shall hereafter live under his obedience
without attempting any thing to the contrary, or taking their parts that do
attempt against his Majesty and estate, or things against his ordinances, and
to acknowledge none but his Majesty or such as he shall appoint under him to
have authority to command them. And if they know any that shall enterprise
against his Majesty, and service, to reveal them incontinent to him and his
officers, as good and faithful subjects. And to take away all doubt and
suspicion as well from the nobility as others, because that in the declaration
of the* xxiiij. of the last month, these words are contained ( Except they be
those of the chief, which had commandment for those of the new opinion, or
those which made practices and devises for them, or those which might have had
intelligence of the said conspiracy.) His Majesty declares that he means
not of things done and past during the troubles which were before the Edict of
Pacification in August. 1570. and that there shall be no inquisitio^ thereof, and
none shall be troubled in goods or person therefore (but for that respect they
shall enjoy the benefit of the Edict of Pacification) but that the said words
extend only to those which be found to be guilty or accessarie to the last
conspiracy done against his Majesty and estate, and that other which are
imprisoned, shall be set at liberty. And as touching them which will make
profession of their faith, and return to the Catholic Religion, his Majesty
desires that his governors and officers shall excyte and comfort them as
much as they can, to that effect, and execution of that good will: and that
their friends and kinsfolks should also be exhorted to do the like for their
part. And if any should hurt them in goods or body, his Majesty wills
ready and speedy execution to be done on them: And to the intent that they
may follow the form which has been kept, in professing the faith which they
do make that return to the Apostolic and Romish Church, there is sent
herewith a memory thereof.

From Paris the xxij. day of September. 1572. Signed, CHARLES, and beneath
PINART.

THE FOVRME OF ABIVRAtion of heresy, and confession; of faith, which they
which have swarued from the faith, and pretend to be received into the Church,
ought to make.
THIS IS THE ABIVRATION which they caused all of the Religion to make in
France, to save their lives. Printed at Paris by Nicolas Roffet, dwelling in
the new streate of our Lady, at the sign of the Mower: with the Kings
Privilege.
FIrst, they which have swarued from the faith, and desire to return into the
compass of our holy mother Church, ought to present themselves to their
Curates or vicars to be instructed of that which they ought to do: that done,
they shall be sent unto the reverend* Bishop of the dioces or his Chancellor
or official, to make the said Abiuration and confession in manner and form
following.

IN. borne at. etc. in the dioces of. etc. and dwelling. etc. acknowledging by
the grace of God the true faith Catholic and Apostolic from the which I have
through my fault gone astray and separated my self since. etc. and desirous to
return to the flock of Christ's true shepefold, which is the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Romish Church, confess to have Abiured and cursed all the
errors and heresy of the Lutherians, Caluinistes, and Hugonotes, and all
other heresy whatsoever wherewith I have heretofore been diffamed or touched:
and I agree to the faith of our holy mother the Church, and desire you in the
name of God, of his son Jesus Church, and of the glorious Virgin his mother
Marie, and of all the Saints of Paradise, that it would please you to
receive me into the flock and shepefolde of Gods people, which live under the
obedience of the Pope ordained our Savior Jesus Christ's vicar in the said
Church, submitting my self patiently to abide and willingly to do the
penance which it shall please you to enjoin me for the absolution of my
faults committed, whilst I was in the foresaid sects, whereof I ask and
require pardon of God, and of his said Church, and of you (that be appointed
my pastor by God the Creator) absolution, with such penance as you shall judge
to be wholesome for the satisfaction of my sins and offenses. And to the intent
you should know that I have and do make this Abiuration from my heart, I
confess moreover before God and you, that I believe that which is contained in
the Simbole or Creed of the Apostles, and Athanasius, and other confessions of
faith made and approved by the whole Councels of the Catholic, Apostolic, and
Romish Church: that is: I believe in one only God, the father almighty,
Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things visible and invisible, and in
one L. our Lord Jesus Christ, the only son engendered by God the father
before the constitucion of the world, God of God, Light of Light, true God of
true God, engendered not Created, Consubstantiall with the Father by whom all
things were made, who for us me^, and for our salvation, descended from heaven.
etc. as in the belief of Morning prayer. I believe likewise, acknowledge and
confess all that which is contained in the books as well of the old as of
the new testament, approved by the said holy and Apostolic church of Rome,
according to the sense and interpretation of the holy Doctors received by the
same, rejecting all other interpretation as false and erroneous. I acknowledge
the seven Sacraments of the said Catholic, Apostolic and Romish Church,
that they were instituted by our L. Jesus Christ, and that they be necessary
for the salvation of mankind, although that all of them are not of necessity
to be conferred to all, that is to say. I confess that the said seven
Sacraments are these, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist which is the Sacrament
of the altar, Penance, extreme unction, Order, and Marriage, and that the said
Sacraments confer grace, and that of them, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order,
can not be reiterated without sacrilege. That the said Sacraments have the
effect which the said Church teaches, and that the form and usage wherewith
they be ministered to Christians, is holy and necessary. I acknowledge also
that the holy Mass is a sacrifice and oblation of the very body and blood of
our savior Jesus Christ under the form of bread and wine mingled with water,
which substaunces of bread and wine under the said forms (are in the Mass
by the words which serve for consecration, said and pronounced by the Priest)
transubstanciated and trans formed into the substance of the said body and
blood of Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding, that the qualities and accidents
remain in the said forms after the said consecration, and that the Mass is
wholesome and profitable as well for the quick as the dead. I acknowledge and
confess the co^comitance, that is to say, that in receiving the body of Jesus
christ under the form of bread alone, I likewise receive the blood of Jesus
Christ. I confess that Prayer and intercession of Saints for the quick and
the dead is holy, good and helthfull for Christians, and is not contrary (for
any respect) to the glory of God. That prayers made in the Church for the
faithful which are dead, do profit them for the remission of their sins, and
lessening of their pains incurred for the same. That there is a Purgatory
where the souls abiding are succored by the prayers of the faithful. I
confess that we must honor and call upon the saints which reign with Jesus
Christ, and that they make intercession for us to God, and that their Relics
are to be worshipped. That the commandments and traditions of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Romish Church as well they which pertain to the form and
ceremonies of divine service, and to assist the same, which I think be to
draw Christian people to pity and turning to their God; as fasting,
absteyning from meats, observation of holy days, and ecclesiastical
policy, according to the tradition of the Apostles and holy Fathers continued
since the primitive Church till this time, and afterward brought into the
Church by the ordinances of Counsels received in the same of long and ancient
time, or of late, be good and holy, to the which I will and ought to obey as
prescribed and appointed by the holy ghost, the author and director of that
which serves for the keeping of Christian Religion, and of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Church. I believe also and accept all the articles of
original sin, and of Justification. I affirm assuredly that we ought to
have and keep the Images of Jesus Christ, of his holy mother, and all other
saints, and do honor and reverence unto them. I confess the power of
indulgence and pardons to be left in the Church by Jesus Christ, and the use of
the^ to be very healthful, as also I acknowledge and confess the Church of
Rome to be the mother and chief of all Churches, and conducted by the holy
ghost: and that other pretended particular inspirations against the same, come
of the suggestion of the Devil, the Prince of dissension, which would
separate the union of the mystical body of the savior of the world. Finally,
I promise straightly to keep all that was ordained at the last general
council of Trent, and promise to God and you, never more to depart from the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church: and if I do (which God forbid) I
submit my self to the penalties of the canons of the said Church, made,
ordained, and appointed against them which fall back into Apostasy. The which
Abiuration and Confession I have subscribed.

THE KINGS LETTER TO M. de Guyse and other Lieutenantes and Governors of his
Provinces, by the which he wholly abolisheth and subuerteth all the Edictes of
Pacification, and wills that only the Romish Religion should take place in
his Realm.
THe King knowing that the declaration which he made upon the occasions which
lately chanced in the City of Paris, the remebrances and instructions of his
will which be sent round about to all Governors of his Provinces, and
Lieutenants general therein, and particular letters to the Seneshals, and his
Courts of Parliament, and other officers and Ministers of Justice, can not his
thereto stay the course of murders and robberies done in the most part of the
cities of this Realm, to his Majesty's great displeasure: has advised for a
more singular remedy, to send all the said Governors into every of their
charges and gouernements, assuring him self, that according to the quality
and power which they have of his Majesty, they can well follow and observe
his intent, the which more fully to declare, his Majesty has caused his
letters patentes to be dispatched, which shall be delivered them. Besides the
contents whereof M. de Guise the governor, and Lieutenant general for his
Majesty in Champaigne and Brye, shall call before him the gentles men of the
new Religion abiding within his government, and shall tell them that the
Kings will and intent is to preserve them, their wives, children and families,
and to mayntaine them in possession of their goods, so that on their part they
live quietly, and render to his Majesty obedience and fidelity as they ought:
in which doing the King also will defend them, that they shall not be molested
or troubled by way of Justice or otherwise in their persons and goods, by
reason of things done during the troubles, and before the Edict of Pacification
of August* 1570. And afterward be shall lovingly admonish them to continue
no longer in the Error of the new opinions, and to return to the Catholic
Religion, reconciling themselves to the Catholic Romish Church, under the
doctrine and obedience whereof, Kings his predecessors and their subjects have
always holily lived, and this Realm has been cares fully conducted and
maintained: Showing to the^ the mischiefs and calamities which have happened
in this Realm, since these new opinions have entered into men's spirits: How
many murders have been caused by such which have fallen from the right way
holden by their Ancestors. First they made them separate them selves from the
Church, then from their next of kindred, and also to be estranged from the
service of their king, as a man may see since his reign. And although the
authors and heads of that side, would have covered their doyngs under the
title of Religion and conscience: yet their deeds and works have shown well
enough that the name of Religion was but a visarde to cover their driftes and
disobedience, and under that pretense to assemble and subborne people, and to
make and compel them to swear in the cause under the title of disobedience,
and by such ways to turn them from the natural affection which they owe to
the King, and consequently from his obedience, being notorious that what
commandment so ever the King could make to them of the new Religion, they
have not since his reign obeyed him otherwise than pleased their heads. And
contrariwise, when their said heads commanded them to arise and take to their
weapons, to set upon Cities, to burn Churches, to sack and pill, to trouble
the Realm and fill it with blood and fire, they which went so astray to follow
them, forgot all trust and duty of good subjects, to execute and obey their
commau^dements, Which things if the gentlemen will well consider, they shall
easily Judge how unhappy and miserable their condition shall be, if they
continue longer therein. For they may well think of them selves, that the king
being taught by experience of so great a danger, from the which it has
pleased God to preserve him and his estate, and having proved the mischiefs
and calamities which this Realm has suffered by the enterprises of the heads
of this cause, their adherentes and accomplices, that he will never willingly be
served with any gentleman of his subjects that be of any other Religion than
the Catholic, in the which also the king, following his predecessors, will
live and die. He wills also to take away all mistrust amongst his subjects,
and to quench the rising of discordes and seditions, that all they of whom he
is served in honorable places, and specially the gentlemen which desire to be
accounted his good and lawful subjects, and would obtain his favor, and be
employed in charges of his service, according to their degrees and qualities,
do make profession hereafter to live in the same Religion that he does: having
tried that discords and civil wars will not cease in a state where there be
many Religions, and that it is not possible for a King to maintain in his
Realm diversities in Religion, but that he shall leese the good will and
benevolence of his subjects, yea and they which are of a contrary Religion to
his, desire nothing in their heart more than the change of the King and of his
estate. For the reason abouesayde, the Duke of Guise, to bring the matter to
this pass, shall take pains to persuade the nobility and others infected
with the said new opinion, to return of them selves, and of their own
frewill to the Catholic Religion, and to abjure and renounce the new without
any more express commandment from the King. For how so ever it be, his
majesty is resolved to make his subjects live in his Religion, and never to
suffer what so ever may betyde, that there shall be any other form or exercise
of Religion in his Realm than the Catholic. The said Duke of Guise shall
communicate with the Principal officers and Magistrates, having the Principal
charge and administration of Justice in Cities of his government, his Majesty's
declaration, to the intent they should know his mind, and the good end
whereunto he tends for the uniting and quietness of his subjects, to the
intent the said M. de Guise and the said officers and Magistrates, should with
one concord, intelligence and correspondence proceed to the effect above
said, so that fruit and quietness may thereof ensue, such as his Majesty
desires, not only for himself, but for the whole Realm. The Baylifes and
stuardes which are not in Religion accordingly qualified, shall within one
month resign their offices to gentlemen capable, and of the quality required
by the Edict, which may keep and exercise the same. And to the intent this
should be done, his Majesty does now presently declare them deprived after
the said month, if they do not then resign, that they shall have no occasion
or color of excuse to delay their resignations, and yet permits them in the
mean while to resign without any syne paying. All Baylifes and stuardes shall
be resident at their offices upon pain of loss of the same, and if they can
not so be, the^ they shall be bound to resign. All Archbyshops and Bishops
shall likewise be resident in their dioces, and such as for age and other
disposition of person can not preach the word of God, nor edify the people,
and do other functions appertaining to their charge and dignity, shall be
bound to take a conductor to comfort them, and to employ them selves to the
duty of their charge. To the which conductour they shall appoint an honest
and reasonable pension according to the fruits and revenue of their living.
Also persons and vicars shall be resident at their benefices, or else shall be
admonished to resign them* to such as will be resident, and do their duty.
Archbyshops and Bishops shall take information of them which hold abbeyes,
Prioryes, and other benefices in their dioces, of what quality so ever they
are, and how they do their duty in the administration of them, whereupon they
shall make process by word unto the Governors, which shall send them to the
King to provide therein as reason shall move him. They shall compel the Curates
actually to abide at the places of their benefices, or else shall appoint other
in their steades according to the disposition of the Cannons.

At Paris the.iij. day of November. 1572. Signed, CHARLES.

LETTERS OF M. DE GORDS the Kings Lieutenaunt in Daulphine, to certain of the
Religion in his government, whereby the exhorts them to come back again to
the Religion of Rome, and how the King is determined to suffer none other.
SIr I am sufficiently advertised of you behauior, but you should remember what
aduertisements I have before sent you to return to the Catholic Religion of
your self, which is the best hold and stay that you can chose for your
preservation and health, putting from you all those which persuade you to the
contrary, who would abide to see any commotion or disorder rather than abate
any point of their opinion. And by this means you shall make evident to the
King, the will which you say you have to obey his Majesty, counsailing you for
as much as I desire your well doing, that this is the best for you to do,
without loking for any more open commandment: otherwise assure your self,
there can but evil come of it, and that his Majesty would be obeyed. And thus
I pray God to advise you and give you his holy grace.

From Grenoble the sixth of Dece^ber. 1572. Your entire good friend, GORDES.

THE ANSWER OF THE Gentlemen, Capitaines, Bugeses, and other being in the
town of Rochell, to the commandments that have been given them in the name
of the King, to receive garrisons.
WE the Gentlemen, Capitaines, Bugeses, and other now being in this town of
Rochell, do give answer to you Mounsier N. and to such commandments as
you give us in the name of his Majesty, that we can not acknowledge that that
which is signified unto us, and the Proclamation which you require that we
should cause to be published, do proceed from his Majesty. And thereof we
call to witness his Majesty himself, his letters of the.xxij. and.xxiiij. of
August, his own signet, and the publishing of the same letters, by the which
his said Majesty lays all the fault of all the trouble lately happened, and
of the cruel slaughter done at Paris, upon those of the house of Guise,
protesting that he had enough to do to keep himself safe within his Castle
of Louure with those of his Guard. And we shall never suffer our selves to be
persuaded that so foul an enterprise and so barbarous a slaughter has at any
time entered into the mind of his Majesty, much less that the same has been
done by his express commandment, as the paper imports which you have
exhibited unto us, nor that his Majesty has been so ill advised, as himself
to cut of his own arms, or to defile the sacred wedding of Madome his own
sister with the sheding of so much noble and innocent blood, and with the shame
of so cruel a fact to disteine the nation of France and the blood royal
which has heretofore ever among all nations borne the name of frank and
courteous: nor that he has had mind to deliver matter to writers to set forth
a tragical history, such as antiquity has never berd speak of the like,
and such as posterity can not report without horror. But that it was first
laid at Rome, and afterward hatched at Paris, by the authors of all the
troubles of France. And howsoever it be, we are ready to maintain that out
of the mouth of his Majesty does not proceed hot and cold, white and black,
and that he does not now say one thing and by and by an other, as he should do
if the paper that you present unto us had passed from him, protesting that he
will inuiolably keep his Edict, and immediately breaking the same in declaring
that he commanded those murders to be committed, having also made protestation
before, that it is to his great grief, and done by the outrage and violence of
those of Guise against whom he was not able to make speedy resistance in time
as his Majesty desired. And in this quarrel, we the Gentlemen, Capitaines, and
other that make you this answer, are ready to try it by combat man to man,
or otherwise, to maintain the honor of our King against all those that so
profane holy things, and as much as in them lies do by such words and titles
vilainously defile the excellence of his Majesty and of the noble Princes of
his blood. Which we may right well conjecture and estimate, by the
slaughters that are yet in doing, as well in the town of Paris as else where,
upon so many noblemen, gentlemen and other, men, women and children, and upon a
great number of young scholars (the maintenance under God, of Realms and
commonweals in time to come) and by many other barbarous, unnatural and
unmanly acts generally committed. We think therefore and judge that herein
treason is enterprised against the person of his Majesty and of my lords his
brethren, and that the Guisians mean to invade the Crown of the Realm as
they have of long time practiced, and how so ever it be, we say that his
Majesty is forced by the power that they have taken upon them and usurped by
mean of the rebellious stir of the commons of Paris. As for that which they
say that the Admiral and those of the Religion had conspired against the
Kings Majesty and his brethren, these be allegations of as great truth and of
as good likehoode, as their manner of proceeding in justice has hene orderly,
beginning at execution before examination of the fact. But it is now no need
to tarry for time to discover it, for the matter is plain to be seen with eye
and groped with hand, and all those of the Romish Religion that have remaining
any drop of nature of man, do confess it and hold down their heads for
shame, cursing both with heart and mouth the cruel executers of this
abominable enterprise, and the wicked disturbers of common quiet, which can
yet no more suffer, than they hitherto have done, that this poor Realm
should long enjoy the benefit of that peace, which the King alone next under
God, had wisely caused to be made and to be accordingly observed, whereof this
Realm began to feel the good taste, to the great contentment of all persons,
except the enemies of peace and of this Realm, namely the Guisians. Finally,
when his Majesty being out of their hands and power shall declare what is
his pleasure, we will endeavor us to obey him in all things, wherein our
consciences, which are dedicate to God alone, shall not be wounded, in which
case we will rather forsake the earth than heaven, and our frail and
transitory houses rather than the heavenly mansons. But hitherto, the law of
nature, and the duty that we owe to our natural Prince, to the preservation
of his Crown, and to the safety of our lives, our wives and children, does
command us to stand upon our guard, and not to put us in the mercy of those
that have received the same bloody commission from the Guisians under the
pretended name of the King, to use us in the same manner as they have wickedly,
traitorously and unnaturally done to those about his Majesty, and as it were
under his wings and under the skirtes of his robe, which the traitors strangers
have stained with the true French blood, without that his Majesty has been
able to remedy it, nor to stay their cursed attemptes: so much less is he
able now so far off to defend us as he would, which his Majesty's good will
being known unto us, does arm us for our defenc^, and for the safegarde of
our lives, and of the privileges which he has given us, until such time as he
shall be able by himself to defend us against his enemies and ours.


