The Travails of an English man. CONTAINING HIS SUNDRY CAlamities endured by
the space of twenty and odd years in his absence from his native Country;
wherein is truly decyphered the sundry shapes of wild Beasts, Birds, Fishes,
Fowls, roots, plants, etc. With the description of a man that appeared in the
Sea: and also of a huge Giant brought from China to the King of Spain. No
less pleasant than approved. By I. H.

Published with authority.

Imprinted at London for William Wright, and are to be sold at his shop near
unto Paul's School. 1591.

SEMPER EADEM.



TO THE MOST HIGH AND Mighty Princess, Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen
of England, France, and Ireland, defendres of the faith, etc.
Your Highness most humble subject I. H. heartely prays for the continuance of
your Majesty's most prosperous reign.
ABout xxiii. years past (most gracious and renowned Sovereign) being pressed
forth for one of the Gunners in your Majesty's ships for the West Indian
voyage, (of which Sir John Haukins was general) such was our success before
his return into England, we were distressed through want of victuals, nor could
we obtain any for money: by means whereof many of us (though unto our
Generals great grief) were constrained to be set on shore in the West Indies,
amongst the wild Indians. Since which time (most dread Sovereign) I have
passed sundry perilles there in the wildernesses, and escaped many dangers,
wherein my life stood often in hazard, yet by the providence of the Almighty I
was preserved. And being now returned into to my native Country of England, I
do in all humbleness prostrate my self (together with the discourse of my
travels) at your Highness feet, humbly beseeching your Majesty to accept the
same at your subjects hands, as our Savior Jesus Christ accepted the poor
widows mite. And thus I humbly take my leave, praying for the prosperous
reign of your most excellent Majesty.

The late and wonderful Travail of an Englishman, with his slavery and
misery sustained for 23. years space together.
NOt untruly nor without cause, said Job the faithful servant of God (whom the
sacred Scriptures tell us, to have dwelt in the land of Hus) that man being
borne of a woman, living a short time, ^s replenished with many miseries, which
some know by reading of histories, many by the view of others calamities, and
I by experience in my self, as this present Treatise ensuing shall show.

It is not unknown unto many that I I. H. pouder-maker was borne at Bourne, a
Town in Lincolnshire, from my age of twelve years brought up in Redriffe
near London; with M. Frauncis Lee, who was the Queens Majesty's powder-maker,
whom I served, until I was pressed to go on the voyage to the West Indies,
with the Right worshipful Sir John Haukins, who appointed me to be one of the
Gunners in her Majesty's ship called the Jesus of Libbicke, who set sail
from Plimmouth in the month of October 1567. having with him an other ship
of her Majesty's, called the Minion, and four ships of his own namely, the
Angel, the Swallow, the Judith, and the William and John. He directed his
Vizeadmirall, that if foul weather did separate them, to meet at the Island of
Tennerif. After which by the space of seven days and seven nights, we had such
storms at Sea, that we lost our long boats and a pinnisse, with some men
coming to the Tennerif: there our General heard that his vizeadmirall with
the Swallow, and the William and John, were at the Island called the Gomero,
where finding his vizeadmirall he ancored, took in fresh water and set sail
for Cape Blanke, where in the way we took a Portugal Caruill, laden with fish
called Mullets: from thence to Cape de Verde. In our course thither we met a
Frenchman of Rochell called Captain Bland, who had taken a Portugal Caruill,
whom our vizeadmirall chafed and took. Sir Frauncis Drake was made Master and
Captain of the Caruill, and so weekept our way till we came to Cape de Verde,
and there we ancored, took our boats, and set soldiers on shore. Our General
was the first that leapt on land, and with him Captain Dudley there we took
certain Negros, but not without damage to our selves for our General, Captain
Dudley, and eight other of our company were hurt with poisoned arrows, about
nine days after the eight that were wounded died. Our General was taught by a
Negro, to draw the poison out of his wound with a cloue of garlic, whereby he
was cured. From thence we went to Surroleon, where be monstrous fishes called
Sharkes, which will devour men, I amongst others was sent in the Angel with
two pinnaces into the river called the Calouses, that were there trading with
the Negros, we took one of them with the Negroes, and brought them away. In
this river in the night time we had one of our pinnaces bulged by a seahorse,
so that our men swimming about the river, were all taken into the other
pinnaces, except two that took hold one of another, and were carried away by
the sea horse, who has the just proportion of a horse, saving that his legs be
short, his teeth very great and a span in length, he uses on the night to go
on land into the woods, seeking at unawares to devour the Negros in their
cabbins, whom they by their vigilancie prevent, and kill them in this manner.
The Negros keep watch, and diligently attend their coming, and when they are
gone into the woods, they forthwith lay a great tree overthwart the way, so
that at their return, for that their legs be so short, they cannot go over it:
then the Negroes set upon them with their bows, arrows and darts, and so
destroy them.

From thence we entered the river called the Causterus, where there were other
Caruelles trading with the Negros, and them we took. In this Island betwixt the
river and the maine, Trees grow with their roots upwards, and Oisters upon
them. There grow Palmita trees, which be as high as a ships maine mast, and on
their tops grow nuts, wine and oil, which they call Palmita wine and Palmita
oil. The Plantine trees also grow in that country, the tree is as big as a
man's thigh, and as high as a fur pole, the leaves thereof be long and broad,
and on the top grow the fruit which is called Plantaines, they are crooked and
a cubite long, and as big as a man's wrist, they grow on clusters: when they be
ripe they be very good and dainty to eat, Sugar is not more delicate in taste
than they be. In this land be Elyphants, which the Negros kill in this manner:
they seek out their hants where they rest in the night, which is against a
tree, that they saw three parts in sunder, so that when the Elephant leans
and stretch himself against it, the tree falls, and he with it, then he
roareth, whereby the Negros know he is fallen, then they come upon him and kill
him.

From thence with the Angel, the Judith and the pinnaces, we failed to
Surreleon, where our General at that time was, who with the Captains and
soldiers went up into the river called the Faggarine, to take a town of the
Negroes, where he found three kings of that Country with fifty thousand
Negroes beseeging the same town, which they could not take in many years
before that they had warred with it. Our General made a breach, entered, and
valiantly took the town, wherein were found five Portugals, which yielded
themselves to his mercy, and he saved their lives, we took and carried
thence for traffic of the West Indies five hundred Negroes. The three kings
drove seven thousand Negros into the sea at low water, at the point of the
land, where they were all drowned in the oze, for that they could not take
their canowes to save themselves. We retourued back again in our pinnaces to
the ships, and there took in fresh water, and made ready sail toward
Reogrande. At our coming thither we entered with the Angel, the Judith, and the
two pinnasses, we found there seven Portugal Caruils, which made great fight
with us. In the end by Gods help we won the victory, and drove them to the
shore, from whence with the Negroes they fled, we fetched the caruils from the
shore into the river. The next morning sir Frances Drake with his Caruell, the
Swallow, the William and John came into the river, with Captain Dudley and his
soldiers, who landed being but a hundred soldiers, and fought with seven
thousand Negroes, burned the town, and returned to our General with the
loss of one man.

In that place there be many musk cats, which breed in hollow trees, the
Negroes take them in a net and put them in a cage, and nourish them very
daintily, and take the musk from them with a spoone.

Here we left the Ethyope land,
And took the Indian voyage in hand.
Here by the way died Captain Dudley.

In sailing toward the Indies, the first land that we escried, was the Island
called Domineco, where at our coming we ancored, took in fresh water and wood
for our provision, which done, we sailed toward the Island called Margarita,
where our General in despite of the Spanyardes ancored, landed, and took in
fresh victuals. A mile off the Island there is a rock in the sea, wherein do
breed many fowls, like unto Barnacles, in the night we went out in our
boats, and with cudgels we killed many of them, and we brought them with
many of their eggs abord with us, their eggs be as big as Turkies eggs,
and speckled like them, we did eat them, and found them very good meat.

From thence we sailed to Burborata, which is in the maine land of the West
Indies, there we came in, mored our ships, and tarryed two months trimming
and dressing our ships, and in the mean time trading with certain Spaniards
of that cuntry. There our General sent us unto a Town called Placentia,
(which stood on a high hill) to have entreated a Bishop that dwelt there for his
favor and friendship in their laws, who hearing of our coming, for fear
forsook the Town, whereupon one of our company made these English verses
following.

Unto the Bishop we were sent,
To crave his favor in the laws:
He knew not the good that we meant,
He fled for fear and not for cause.
We took such a journey up the hill,
That few or none have done so ill.
In our way up the hill to Placentia, we found a monstrous venomous worm,
with two heads, his body was as big as a man's arm, and a yard long* our
master Robert Barret did cut him in sunder with his sword, and it made it
as black as if it were colored with ynke.

Here be many Tigers, monstrous and furious beasts, which by subtletie
devour and destroy many men, they use the traded ways, and will show
themselves twice or thrice to the travelers, and so depart secretly, lurking
till they be past, then suddenly and at unawares they leap upon them and
devour them, they had so used two of our company, had not one of them looked
behind. Our General sent three ships unto the Island called Corussa, to make
provision for the rest where they remained until his coming. He sent from
thence the Angel and the Judith to River de hache, where we ancored before the
town. The Spaniards shot three pieces at us from the shore, whom we requited
with two of ours, and shot through the Governors house, we wayed ancor, and
ancored again without shot of the town, where we rid five days in despite of
the Spaniards, and their shot. In the mean space there came a Caruil of advise
from S. Domingo whom with the Angel, and the Judith we chased and drove to the
shore, we fetched him from thence spite of 200 Spaniards hargabush shot, and
ancored again before the town, and rid there with him, till our Generals
coming, who ancored, landed his men, and valiantly took the Town, with the
loss of one man, whose name was Thomas Surgeon, we landed and planted on the
shore for our safties our field ordinance, we drove the Spaniards up into the
country above two leagues, whereby they were enforced to trade with our
General, to who^ he sold most part of his Negros.

In this river we killed a monstrous Alagarta in this port at Sun set: seven
of us went in the pinnice up into the River, carrying with us a dog, unto
whom with rope yarne we bound a great hook of steel, with a chain that had
a swiuel, which we put under the dogs belly, the point of the hook coming
over his back fast bound, as aforesaid, we put him over board, and vered out our
rope by little and little, rowing away with our boat, the Alagarta came and
presently swallowed up the dog, then did we row hard, till we had choked
him, he plunged and made a wonderful stir in the water, we leapt on shore,
and haled him on land: he was 23 foot by the rule, headed like a hog, in
body like a serpent, full of scales as broad as a sawcer, his tail long and
full of knots, as big as a fawcon shot, he has four legs, his feet
have long nails like unto a dragon, we opened him, took out his guts, flead
him, dried his skin, and stuffed it with straw, meaning to have brought it
home, had not the ship been cast away. This monster will carry away and
devour both man and horse.

Now to S. Amart, where we landed, traded, and sold certain Negros: there
two of our company killed a monstrous adder, going toward his cave with a
cunnie in his mouth, his body was as big as any man's thigh, and seven foot
long, upon his tail he had sixteen knottes, every one as big as a great
walnut, which they say, do show his age: his color was green and yellowe, they
opened him and found two cunnies in his belly.

From thence to Cartagene, where we went in, mored our ships, and would have
traded with them, but they durst not for fear of the king, we brought up the
Minnion against the Castle, and shot at the Castle and Town: these we
landed in an Island, where were many gardens, there in a cave we found certain
Buttesios of wine, which we brought away with us, in recompense whereof our
General commanded to be set on shore woollen and linen cloth to the value
thereof. From hence by foul weather we were forced to seek the port of S.
John de Low: in our way, twhart of Campeche, we met with a Spanyard, a small
ship, who was bound for Santa Domingo, he had in him a Spanyard, called
Augustine de villa noua, that was he that betrayed all the Noble men in the
Indies, and caused them to be beheaded, wherefore he with two Friars with him
fled to S. Domingo, them we took and brought with us into the port of S. John
de Low. Our General made a great account of him, and used him like a Noble
man, in the end he was one of them that betrayed us, when we had mored our
ships, and landed, we mounted the ordinance that we found there in the
Island, and for our safeties kept watch and ward. Two days after we discovered
the Spanish fleet, whereof Lushon a Spanyard was General, with him came a
Spanyard, called Don Martin Henerico, who^ the king of Spain sent to be his
vize-king of the Indies. He sent a pinnice with a flagge of truce unto our
General, to know of what Country those ships were that rode there in the King
of Spaines port, who said they were the Q. of Englandes ships, which came in
there for victuals for their money, for the which if your General will come in
here, he shall give me victualles and all other necessaries, and I will go out
on the one side of the port, and he shall come in on the other side. The
Spaniard returned for answer, that he was a vize king, and had a thousand men,
and therefore he would come in. Our General said, if he be a vize king, I
represent my Queens person, and I am a vize king as well as he, and if he have
a thousand men, my powder and shot will take the better place. Then the vize
king after counsel among themselves, yielded to our Generals demand, swearing
by his King and his Crown, by his commission and authority, that he had from
his King, that he would perform it, and thereupon pledges were given on both
parts. Our General bearing a godly and Christian mind, void of fraud and
deceit, judged the Spaniards to have done the like, delivered to them six
Gentlemen, not doubting to have received the like from them, but the faithless
Spanyardes, in costly apparel gave of the basest of their company, as
afterward it was well known. These things finished, proclamation was made on
both sides, that on pain of death no occasion should be given, whereby any
quarrel should grow to the breach of the league, and then they peaceably
entered the port, with great triumph on both sides.

The Spaniards presently brought a great Hulke, a ship of nine hundred, and
mored her by the side of the Minion, and they cut out ports in their other
ships, planting their ordenance toward us, in the night they filled the
Hulke with men, to lay the Minion aboard, as the sequel did show, which made
our General doutfull of their dealinges, wherefore, for that he could speak
the Spanish tongue, he sent Robert Barret aboard the vize-king, to know his
meaning in those dealings, who willed him with his company to come in to him,
whom he commanded presently to be set in the bilbowes, and forthwith a
Cornet (for a watchword among the false Spaniards) was sounded for the
enterprising of their pretended treason against our General, whom Augustine
de villa noua sitting at dinner with him, should then presently have killed
with a poynado which he had privily in his sleeue, which was espied and
prevented by one John Chamberlain, who took the poynado out of his sleeue.
Our General hastily rose up, and commanded him to be put prisoner in the
Steward room, and to be kept with two men. The faithless Spaniards, thinking
all things to their desire had been finished, suddenly sounded a Trumpet, and
therewith three hundred Spaniards entered the Minion, whereat our General with
a loud and fierce voice called unto us, saying, God and Saint George, upon
those traiterous villains, and rescue the Minnion, I trust in God the day
shall be ours, and with that the Mariners and soldiers leapt out of th Jesus
of Libbicke into the Minnion, and beat out the Spanyardes, and with a shot
out of her fiered the Spaniards vize-admirall, where the most part of three
hundred Spanyardes were spoiled, and blown over board with powder. Their
Admiral also was on fire half an hour, we cut our cables, wound off our
ships, and presently fought with them, they came upon us on every side, and
continued the fight from ten of the clock until it was night, they killed
all our men that were on shore in the Island, saving three, which by swimming
got aboard the Jesus of Libicke. They sunk the Generals ship called the
Angel, and took the Swallow, the Spaniards admiral had above threescore shot
through her, many of his men were spoiled, four other of their ships were
sunk, there were in that fleet, and that came from the shore to rescue them,
fifteen hundred we slew of them, five hundred and forty, as we were credebly
infourmed by a note that came to Mexico. In this fight the Jesus of Libicke had
five shot through her maine mast, her foremast was stroke in sunder under the
hounds with a chain shot, and her hull was wonderfully pierced with shot,
therefore it was impossible to bring her away. They set two of their own ships
on fire, intending therewith to have burnt the Jesus of Libbicke, which we
prevented by cutting our cables in the half, and winding off by our
sternefast. The Minion was forced to set sail and stand off from us, and come
to an ancor without shot of the Island. Our General courageously cheered up his
soldiers and Gunners, and called to Samuel his page for a cup of Beer, who
brought it him in a silver cup, and he drinking to al his men willed the
Gunners to stand by their ordenance lustily like men. He had no sooner set the
cup out of his hand, but a demi Culuerine shot stroke away the cup and a
Coopers plain that stood by the maine mast, and ran out on the other side of
the ship, which nothing dismayed our General, for he ceased not to encourage
us, saying, fear nothing, for God who has preserved me from this shot, will
also deliver us from these traitors and villains. Then captain Bland meaning
to have turned out of the port, had his main mast stroke over board with a
chainshot that came from the shore, wherefore he ancored, fired his ship,
took his pinnice with all his men, and came aboard the Jesus of Libbicke to
our General, who said unto him, that he thought he would not have run away
from him: he answered, that he was not minded to have run away from him,
but his intent was to have turned up, and to have laid the wethermost ship
of the Spanish fleet aboard, and fyred his ship in hope therewith to have set
on fire the Spanish fleet, he said if he had done so he had done well. With
this night came on. Our General commanded the Minnion, for safeguard of her
masts to be brought under the Jesus of Libbicks lee: he willed Sir Francis
Drake to come in with the Judith, and to lay the Minion abord, to take in men
and other things needful, and to go out, and so he did.

At night when the wind came off the shore, we set sail, and went out in
despite of the Spanyardes and their shot, where we ancored, with two ancors
under the Island, the wind being northerly, which was wonderful dangerous, and
we feared every hour to be driven with the lee shore. In the end the wind
came larger, we wayed ancor, and set sail, seeking the river of Pannico for
water, whereof we had very little, and victuals were so scarce, that we were
driven to eat hides, cats, rats, parrats, munkies, and dogs, wherefore our
General was forced to divide his company into two parts, for there was a
mutenie among them for want of victuals, and some said that they had rather
be on the shore to shift for themselves amongst the enemies, then to sterue on
shippe-boord. He asked them who would go on shore, and who would tarry on
shippe-boord, those that would go on shore, he willed to go on foremast, and
those that would tarry, on baft mast: fourscore and sixteen of us were
willing to depart. Our General gave unto every one of us six yardes of roane
cloth, and money to them that demaundedit. When we were landed, he came unto
us, where friendly embracing every one of us, he was greatly grieved that he was
forced to leave us behind him, he counseled us to serve God, and to love one
another, and thus courteously he gave us a sorrowful farewell, and promised if
God sent him safe home, he would do what he could, that so many of us as lived
should by some means be brought into England, and so he did.

Since my return into England I have heard, that many misliked that he left us
so behind him, and brought away Negros, the reason is this, for them he might
have had victuals, or any other thing needful, if by foul weather he had
been driven upon the Islands, which for gold nor silver he could not have had.

And thus our General parted to his ships, and we remained on land, where
for oursafeties, fearing the wild Indians that were about us, we kept watch all
night, and at sun rising we marched on our way, three and three in a rank,
until that we came into a field under agroue, where the Indians came upon
us, asking us what people we were, and how we came there. Two of our company,
namely Anthony Goddard, and John Cornish, for that they could speak the
Spanish tongue, went to them, and said we were Englishmen, that never came in
that country before, and that we had fought with the Spaniards, and for that
we lacked victuals, our General set us on shore, they asked us whither we
intended to go, we said, to Pannico. The Captain of the Indians wylled us
to give unto them some of our clothes and shirtes, which we did: then he bad
us give them all, but we would not so do, whererevpon John Cornish was then
slain with an arrowe, which an Indian boy that stood by the Captain shot
at him, wherefore he struck the boy on the neck with his bow, that he lay
for dead, and willed us to follow him, who brought us into a great field,
where we found fresh water, he bad us sit down about the pond and drink,
and he with his company would go in the mean space to kill five or six
dear, and bring them to us. We tarryed there until three of the clock, but
they came not: there one of our company whose name was John Cook, with four
other departed from us into a grove to seek relief, where presently they were
taken by the Indians, and stripped as naked as ever they were borne, and so
returned to us.

Then we divided our selves into two parts, half to Anthony Goddard, and the
rest to James Collier, and thus severally we sought for Pannico. Anthony
Goddard with his company, bid us farewell, they passed a river, where the
Indians robbed many of the^ of their clothes, and so passing on their way, came
to a stony hill, where they stayed. James Collyer with his company, that day
passed the same river, and were also robbed, and one of them slain by chance,
we came that night unto the hill, where Anthony Goddard and his company rested,
there we remained till morning, and then we marched altogether from thence,
entering betwixt two groves, where the Indians robbed us of all our clothes,
and left us naked, they hurt many, and killed eight of us. Three days after we
came to another river there the Indians showed us the way to Pannico, and so
left us: we passed the river into the wilderness, where we made wreaths of
green grass, which we wound about our bodies, to keep us from the sun,
and gnats of that country. We traveled there seven days, and seven nights,
before we came to Pannico, feeding on nothing but roots, and Guiauos, a fruit
like figs. At our coming to the river of Pannico, two Spanish horsemen came
over unto us in a Canowe, they asked us how long we had been in the wilderness,
and where our General was, for they knew us to be of the company that had
fought with their countrymen: we told them seven days and seven nights, and
for lack of victuals our General set us on shore, and he was gone away with
his ships. They returned to their Governor, who sent them with five Canowes,
to bring us all over. Which done, they set us in array, where a hundred
horsemen with their lances, came forceably upon us, but did not hurt us, they
carried us prisoners to Pannico, where we remained one night. In the river of
Pannico, there is a fish like a Calfe, the Spanyardes call it a Mallateen, he
has a stone in his head, which the Indians use for the disease of the
Collicke, in the night he comes on land, and eats grass. I have eaten of
it, and it eats not much vrlike to bacon. From thence we were sent to
Mexico, which is threescore leagues from Pannico. In our way thither, 20
leagues from the sea side, I did see white Crabs running up and down the
sands, I have eaten of them, and they be very good meat. There grows a fruit
which the Spaniards call Auoco^^es, it is proportioned like an egg, and as
black as a cole, having a stone in it, and it is an excellent good fruit.
There also grows a strange thing which they call Magei, it serves them to
many uses, below by the root they make a hole, whereat they do take out of it
twice every day, a certain kind of licour, which they sees in a great
kettell, till the third part be consumed, and that it wax thick, it is as
sweet as any honey, they do eat it. Within twenty days after that they
have taken all the licour from it, it withers, and they cut it down, and use
it as we use our hemp here in England, which done, they convert it to many
uses: of some part they make Mantles, ropes, and thread: of the ends they make
needles to sow their saddels, pannels, and other furniture for their horses:
of the rest they make tyles to cover their houses, and they put it to many
other purposes.

And thus we came to Mexico, which is 7 leagues about, seated in a great fen,
environed with four hills, it has but two ways of entrance, and it is full of
creeks, in the which in their Canowes they pass from place to place, and to
the Islands there within. In the Indies ordinarily three times a year be
wonderful earthquakes, which put the people in great fear and danger:
during the time of two years that I was in Mexico, I saw them six times, when
it comes it throws down trees, houses, and churches. There is a City 25
leagues from Mexico, called Tuscalia, which is inhabited with a hundred
thousand Indians, they go in white shirts, linen breeches, and long mantles,
and the women wear about them a garment much like unto a flannen petticote.
The Kings palace was the first place that we were brought unto in Mexico,
where without we were willed to sit down. Much people, men, women, and
children came wondering about us, many lamented our misery, and some of their
clergy asked us if we were Christians, we said, we praised God, we were as
good christians as they: they asked how they might know that, we said, by our
confessions. From thence we were carried in a Canowe to a Tanners house, which
stands a little from the city: the next morning two friars and two priests
came thither to us, and willed us to bless our selves, and say our prayers in
the Latin tongue, that they might understand us, many of our company did so,
whereupon they returned to the vize-king, and told him that we were good
Christians, and that they liked us well, and then they brought us much relief,
with cloths, our sick men were sent to their hospitals, where many were cured,
and many died. From the Tanners house we were led to a gentleman's place, where
upon pain of death we were charged to abide, and not to come into the City,
thither we had all things necessary brought us, on sundaies and holydaies,
much people came, and brought us great relief.

The vize-king practiced to hang us, and caused a pair of new gallows to be
set up, to have executed us, whereunto the Noblemen of that country would not
consent, but prayed him to stay until the ship of advise brought news from
the king of Spain, what should be done with us, for they said they could not
find any thing by us, whereby they might lawfully put us to death.

The vize-king then commanded us to be sent to an Island thereby, and he sent for
the Bishop of Mexico, who sent four priests to the Island, to examine and
confess us, who said, that the vize-king would burn us, when we were examined
and confessed according to the laws of their country. They returned to the
Bishop, and told him that we were very good Christians. The Bishop certefied
the vize-king of our examinations and confessions, and said that we were good
Christians, therefore he would not meddle with us. Then the vize-king sent for
our master R. Barret, whom he kept prisoner in his palace, until the fleet
was departed for Spain. The rest of us he sent to a Town seven leagues from
Mexico, called Tothscoco, to card wool among the Indian slaves, which
drudgery we disdained, and concluded to beat our masters, and so we did,
wherefore they sent to the vize-king, desiring him for Gods sake and our
Ladies, to send for us, for they would not keep us any longer, they said that
we were devils and no men.

The vizeking sent for us, and imprisoned us in a house in Mexico, from thence
he sent An. Goddard, and some other of our company with him into Spain, with
Lushon, the General that took us, the rest of us stayed in Mexico 2 years
after, and then were sent prisoners into Spain, with Don John de valesco de
varre, admiral and general of the spanish fleet, who carried with him in his
ship, to be presented to the K. of Spain, the anatomy of a Giant, which was
sent from China to Mexico, to the vize-king Don Martin Hennerico, to be sent to
the K. of Spain for a great wonder. It did appear by the anatomy, that he
was of a monstrous size, the skull of his head was near as big as half a
bushel, his neck bones shoulder plates, arm bones, and all other lineaments of
his other parts, were huge and monstrous to behold, the shanke of his leg from
the ankell to the knee, was as long as any man's ankell up to his wast, and of
bigness accordingly.

At this time, and in this ship, were also sent to be presented to the king
of Spain, two chests full of earth with ginger growing in them, which were
also sent from China, to be sent to the king of Spain. The ginger runs in
the ground like to liccoras, the blades grow out of it, in length and
proportion like unto the blades of wild garlic, which they cut every
fifteen days, they use to water them twice a day, as we do our herbs here
in England, they put the blades in their porrage, and use them in their other
meats, whose excellent savor and taste is very delightful, and procures a
good appetite.

When we were shipped in the port of S. John de Low, the General called our
master Robert Barret and us with him, into his cabin, and asked us if we
would fight against Englishmen, if we met them at sea, we said that we would
not fight against our Crown, but if we met with any other, we would do what
we were able. He said if we had said otherwise, he would not have believed
us, and for that we should be the better used, and have allowance as other men
had, and he gave a charge to every one of us, according unto our knowledge.
Robert Barret was placed with the pilate, I was put in the Gunner room,
William Cawse with the bote-sunne, John Bear with the quarter-maisters, Edward
Rider, and Geffrey Giles, with the ordinary mariner, Richard the masters boy
attended on him and the pilate: shortly after we departed from the port of S.
John de Low with all the fleet of Spain, for the Port called the Hauana: we
were twenty six days sailing thither. There we came in, ancored, took in
fresh water, and stayed sixteen days, for the fleet called Numbredetheos,
which is the fleet that brings the treasure from Perowe.

The General of that fleet was called Diego Florres de Values. After his
coming, when he had watered his ships, both the fleetes joined in one, and Don
de Valasco de varre was the first fifteen days general of both the fleets,
who turning through the channel, called the Bahama, his pilate had like to
have cast away all the fleet upon the Cape called Caneuerall, which was
prevented by me I. H. and our master Robert Barret, I being in the second
watch, escried land, and called to Robert Barret, bidding him look over
board, for I saw land under the lee bow of the ship: he called to the
bote-sunne, and bad him let fly the fore sail sheate, and lay the helm upon
the lee, and cast the ship about. When we were cast about, we were but in
seven fadome water: we shot off a piece, giving advice to the fleet to cast
about, and so they did. For this we were beloved of the General, and all the
fleet. The General was in a great rage, and swore by the king, that he would
hang his pilate: for he said, that twice before, he had almost cast away the
Admiral. When it was day, he commanded a piece to be shot off, to call to
council: the other Admiral in his ship came up to him, and asked what the
matter was, he said, that his pilate had cast away his ship and all the fleet,
had it not been for two of the Englishmen, and therefore he would hang him.
The other Admiral with many fair words persuaded him to the contrary.

When we came in the height of the Barmotha, we discovered a monster in the
sea, who showed himself, three times unto us from the middle upwards, in which
parts he was proportioned like a man, of the complexion of a Mulliato, or
tawny Indian. The General did command one of his clerks to put it in
writing, and he certified the king and his nobles thereof. Presently after
this, for the space of sixteen days we had wonderful foul weather, and
then God sent us a fair wind, until such time as we discovered the Island
called the Fiall.

On S. James day, we made rackets, wheels, and other fire works, to make
pastime that night, as it is the order of the Spaniards. When we came near the
land, our master R. Barret conferred with us, to take the pinnise one night,
when we came on the Island called the Serres, to free our selves, from the
danger and bondage that we were going into, whereunto we agreed, none had any
pinnice a stern then but our ship, which gave great courage to our
enterprise: we prepared a bag of bread, and a buttesio of water, which would
have served us 9. days, and provided ourselves to go, our master borrowed a
small compass of the master gunner of the ship, who lent it him, but suspected
his intent, and closly made the general privy to it, who for a time dissembled
the matter, in the end seeing our pretense, he called R. Barret, commanding his
head to be put in the stocks, and a great pair of iron bolts on his legs, and
the rest of us to be set in the stocks by the legs. Then he wylled a piece to
be shot off, and he sent the pinnice for the other Admiral, and all the
captains, masters, and pilates of both fleets, to come aboard of him. He
commanded the maine yard to be struck down, and to put two pullies, on every
yard arm one; the hangman was called, and we were willed to confess our
selves, for he swore by the king that he would hang us.

When the other Admiral, and the rest were come abord, he called them into his
counsel chamber, and told them that he would hang the master of the
Englishmen, and all his company. The Admiral, whose name was Dego Flores de
Values, asked him wherefore: he said, that we had determined to rise in the
night with the pinnice, and with a ball of fire-worke to set the ship on
fire, and go our ways: therefore said he, I will have you, the Captains,
Masters, and Pilates, to set your hands unto that, for I swear by the King
that I will hang them. Dego Flores de Values answered, I, nor the Captains,
Masters, and Pilates will not set our hands to that, for he said, if he
were prisoner, as we were, he would have done the like him self. He counseled
him, to keep us fast in prison, till he came into Spain, and then send us to
the contratation house in Civil, where, if we had deserved death the law would
pass on us, for he would not have it said that in such a fleet as that was,
six men and a boy, should take the pinnice, and go away, and so he returned to
his ship again.

When he was gone, the general came to the main mast to us, and swore by the
king, that we should not come out of the stocks till we came into Spain:
within sixteen days after we came over the Bar of S. Lucar, and came up to
the Hurcathoes, then he put us into a pinnice in the stocks, and sent us
prisoners to the Contratation house in Civil. From thence, after one year we
broke prison, on S. Steuens day at night, seven of our company escaped, Robert
Barret, I, I. H. John Emurie, Humphrey Roberts, and John Gilbert, were taken,
and brought back to the Gontratation house, where we remained in the stocks
till twelfe tide was past. Then our keeper put up a petition to the Judge of
the Contratation house, that we might be sent to the great prison house in
Civil, for that we broke prison, whereupon we were presently led thither, where
we remained one month. And then from thence, to the Castle of the Inquisition
house in Triana, where we continued one year, which expired, they brought us
out in procession, every one of us having a candle in his hand, and the Cote
with S. Andrews cross on our backs: they brought us up on an high scaffold,
that was set up in the place of S. Frauncis, which is in the chief street of
Civil: there they set us down upon benches, every one in his degree, and
against us on another scaffold sat all the Judges, and the Clergy on their
benches, the people wondered, and gazed on us, some pitying our cases, other
said, burn those heretics. When we had sit there two hours, we had a sermon
made to us, after which one called Bresinnia, secretorie to the Inquisition,
went up into the pulpit with the process, and called Robert Barret and John
Gilbart, whom two Familiars of the Inquisition brought from the scaffold before
the Judges, where the secretorie read the sentence, which was that they should
be burnt, and so returned to the scaffold, and were burnt.

Then I Job Hortop, and John Bone, were called, and brought to the place, as
before, where we heard our sentence, which was, that we should go to the
Galleys, and there to row at the oars end ten years, and then to be brought
back to the Inquisition house, to have the cote with S. Andrews cross put on
our backs, and from thence to go to the everlasting prison remediless, and so
we were returned to the scaffold from whence we came. Thomas Marks, and Thomas
Ellis were called, and had sentence to serve in the Galleys eight years, and
Humphrey Roberts, and John Emerie to serve five years, and so were returned to
the benches on the scaffold, where we sat till four of clock in the after
noone. Then we were led again to the Inquisition house, from whence we were
brought. The next day in the morning, Bresinia the secretorie came thither to
us, and delivered to every one of us his sentence in writing, I with the rest
were sent to the Galleys, where we were chained four and four together, every
man's daily allowance was twenty six ounces of course black biscuit and water.
Our clothing for the whole year, two shirts, two pair of breches of course
canuas, a red cote of course cloth, soon on, and soon off, and a gown of
hair with a Friars hoode, our lodging was on the bare bords, and banks of the
Galleys, our heads and beards were shaven every month, hunger, thirst, cold,
and stripes, we lacked none, till our several time expired, and after the
time of 12 years, for I served two years above my sentence, I was sent back
to the Inquisition house in Civil, and there having put on the cote with S.
Andrews cross, I was sent to the everlasting prison remediless, where I wore
the cote 4. years, and then upon great suite, I had it taken off for 50
ducats, which Hornando de Soria, treasurer of the kings mint lent me, whom I
served for it as a drudge 7 years, and until the month of October last,
1590. and then I came from Civil to S. Lucar, where I made means to come away
in a fly-bote, that was laden with wines and salt, which were Flemmings goods,
the king of Spaynes subjects, dwelling in Civil, married to Spanish women, and
sworn to their king. In this month of October last, departing from S. Lucar,
at sea, off the sothernmost Cape, we met an English ship, called the Galleon
Dudley, who took the Flemming, and me out of him, and brought me to
Portsmouth, where they set me on land, the 2 day of December last past, 1590.
From thence I was sent by M. Muns the lieutenant of Portsmouth, with letters to
the R. honorable the Earl of Sussex, who commanded his secretorie to take my
name and examination, how long I had been out of England, and with whom I
went, which he did. And on Christmas even I took my leave of his honor, and
went to Redriffe.

The Computation of my imprisonment.
I suffered imprisonment in Mexico two years.
In the Contratation house in Civil one year.
In the Inquisition house in Triana one year.
I was in the Galleys twelve year.
In the everlasting prison remediless, with the cote with S. Andrews cross on
my back, four years.

And at liberty I served as a drudge Hornando de Soria 3 years, which is the
full complement of 23 years.

Since my departure from England, until this time of my return, I was five
times in great danger of death, besides the many perils I was in, in the
Gallyes.

First in Port of S. John de Low, where being on shore, with many other of our
company, which were all slain saving I, and two other that by swimming got
aboard the Jesus of Libbicke.

Secondly, when we were robbed by the wild Indians

Thirdly, after we came to Mexico, the vize-king would have hanged us.

Fourthly, because he could not have his mind to hang us, he would have burnt
us.

Fifthly, the General that brought us into Spain, would hane hanged us at sea.

Thus having truly set down unto you my travels, misery and dangers, endured
the space of 23. years, I say:

Let patience now the standard bear,
And forgiveness give the charge
Of bleege, and eke the ancour tear,
Of spightfull malice barge:
Expect the end of prisoned race,
And hope of future hap:
That each good gift of fortunes grace,
May fall within our lap.
Extremeties cannot always last,
Each thing does bow and bend:
In time both joy and woe does wast,
And all things have an end.
FINIS.

