New Sonets, and pretty Pamphlets.

Written by Thomas Howell Gentelman.

Newly augmented, corrected and amended.



Imprinted at London in Flete street, at the sign of the S. John Evangelist,
by Thomas Colwell.

To his approved (...) Master Henry Lassels Gentelman, Thomas Howell wysheth
heartily well.
WHen I had first gathered together these few simple Sonets, I thought nothing
less, then to commit so unskillful a collectio^ of fond phansies, unto the
Printers charge, having persuaded my self before, that they were grown in a
more frutelesse soil, and unlearned head, then may well answer, either the
expectacion of the freindly Reader, either the judgments of the learned either
the freidly ear to which I now commend the^, whose cheerful ledes of
freindship so^^en ^n me a frutelesse Feilde, do justly require more profitable,
and more plentiful (...) then these trifling toys are. But afterward I had
purposed to imprinte them, being required e^^sones, by such a friend, to whose
earnest request in this matter (after many denials) I did seem (as reason
would) partly to yield* aduenturynge rather the blasing a broad of these few
Phansies, to the plain declaring of my un learnednesse and ignorance, then by
vnfreindly denial to repel the earnest desiers of such my approved freinde. I
thought none more meet to whom I should present the^ then, unto you) my friend
good Ma^^er Lasiels) being a friend faithful a hearty helper* and a welwiller
of mine, not doubtyng, that you will as well accept the purpose of my Pen
herein, as I do already conceive of you by offering the same the only good will
of my welmeaning heart. Though they be in deed bare toys of small effect,
yet take them as cheerful as Jews once King of France, accepted the hearty
gift of a poor man, but a rude present for a Prince, being only a slender
Radish root, which he yet (considering not the value of the root but the good
will of the geuer rooted in his heart) highly esteemed before all other costly
iuels. So if small gifts en crease a good opinion and a good opinion aug
menteth love, and love by proof establishes freindship, and does ratify the
same, I doubt not then, but that this sign and small gift, or rathe simple
shift shall be an occasion to ratify that good will of yours with, my intent is
either to requite if I might, or remember as I can, or at the least wise not to
tread it under foot as I will not, to show such ingratitude, the sauadge
beast the Lion would not, where of Aulus Gellius makes his report. Wherefore
good Master Lassels, receive these my base and baraine labors, which in sign
of this new returned year I give unto you, committing it to the judgments of
the skilful, whose favor I crave, for that my Pen is not as well perfected as
I would wish it, both for the Readers commodity, and also the pleasure of you
my freinde, for whose cause I know it shall bear the less reproach, and of
some more accepted, in doing whereof I shall confess a token of your
friendship more added to the number of proofs which I have at sundry times
received of you before. Fare ye well.

Your assured freinde Thomas Howell.

TO HIS FAITHFUL AND Fellow Master Henry Lassels.
SOme prudent heads: with policy, do ponder how to please, the freendly man
by whose desert, they have found healpe or ease,
And other some: there be again, which valiently do ^eeke, to do some deed by
venture great, that lookers on might like,
whereby Dame Fame should never cease, triumphant Trumps to solid, the policy
and valientnesse, which has in them been found.
But I offrancke, and meare good will, and not to gain the praise, as one that
wanth a cunning skill, to imetate their ways.
Do present these my triflyng toys, and far vnconning writes: remembryng how
the wise man says, the change of things, delites.
Which not alone apereth true, by meats whereon we feed, but change in all
things does renew, the apetite in deed:
When as the Uitale spirits be filde, with vewe of learned Book, the world
eyes do willing crave, on lighter things to look,
And Music sound, does much delight, the ears and mind of man, whose
pleasant tunes, so mighty be, that banish cares they can:
The cause for which, it has this gift, is the variety, in it contaynde, by
learned shifte, of skillful Hermonie.
Does not the sound: of homely Pipe, that Shepperds rudely bloe, refresh the
hearts: of rusticke route, their simple skill to shoe.
Which is sufficient proof inoughe that change contents the mind, wherefore
I will: prick on my Plough, some further change to find
By tillinge often my fruitelesse feilde, whose bare and barin soil, god knows
has scarce the power to yield, one Corn for all my toil,
But yet where wanth the finer flower, the coursest sort does ease: in like
case things of little power, the mind sometime may please,
Accept therefore my Lassels true, these toys in freindly part, from him that
means: to thee naught else, but show of faithful heart:
Use them for change: as Music rude, for such is sure their grace, Or else as
coursest Flower is used, when fine is out of place.
Thine till not his own Thomas Howell.

John Keeper Student to the Upright Reader of these pretty Pamphilets.
AS Feilde is none so ill, where fruitless weeds do groe, but y^ some herb
of virtue good, his pearyng flowers may shoe
So though in Howels soil, ilwillers seem to see, at first naught else but
thriftlesse thorns, and Thistles wild to be:
Yet who shall view his Feildes, and rightly them peruse, shall see that fruits
and frutfull Herbs, do spryng of his sweet muse:
For plainly he depayntes, the fits of youthful love: whose modest Pen from
honest act, no mindful man will move.
Here learn affects to rule, and youth in care to spend, beware thou may by
others harms, how youthly toys do end:
Here reap, with other fruits, precepts of mortal mind. Are these no Herbs
of goodly grace, in fertile Feilde to find?
Also his fined phrase, shall get deserved praise, whose cunnyng verse of
youthly years, grave acts of age displayes.
Wysh him more works to Pen, by this his tried skill: and hope to see by tract
of time, more fruits of painful quill.
To Howels happy hand, restore thou thanks for this, and wish him after
death to live, in witty works of his.
Finis.
IOANNES KEEPER OXON. AD tho Howell.
AVreamellislui voluuntur scripta Govveri,
Chauceri florent acta diserta senis,
Sic quoque Chauterida similis captobis honores,
Perg^re si vigilans vt modo pergis aues,
Vibene c^pisti, nullos male linque labores,
Gloria sudore est, desidia^que dolor.
Finis.
William Howell. to his Brothers Book.
GO Book whereas thou may the best to please:
Pass not for curious heads or folish brains,
Of learned see thou crave thy grief to ease,
With rigor not to judge where love remains,
Go yet I say the best to please, be true,
Care not for them that mend Appelles show.
FINIS.


He declares his great mishappes, and lamentable sorrows of heart.
WHen each wight wonted is, to take by nature rest,
I lie alas through greeping grief, and thought so sore oprest,
That from my going to bead, until the time I rise,
Sleep once has skarse the power to close my weeping wakefull eyes,
In which long loathsome nights, my Pen full often I blame,
For that the woeful state of me t'indite he does not frame:
Whose youthful years and days, by nature were not ripe,
When cruel fate them clean cut of, at one most soden wipe:
Though life do yet remain to length my time in tears,
Which fliyng fame seems not to cease, to blow in each wightes ears,
For singe me often God knows, a heavy heart to bear,
When outwardly I seem to show, a glad and merry chere,
And eke a careful mind, more troublously itost,
Then is the shipman on the Sea, in danger nie the lost:
Whose care no greater is, then life and goods to save,
When I of God continually, with humble voice do crave,
That he by death will quite, my grief away expel,
And give to me a place among, the saved souls to dwell:
Which now long times have been, so tossed with unrest,
That scarce I may the woes sustain, that lie in woeful breast,
To think on my mishaps, which do me still betide,
When happy hap to find redress, full fast away does glide,
What greater grief may grow in any honest mind,
Then is to want such wonted wealth, as it some time did find:
Such providence for man, does Fortune often procure,
When smilingly she seems to train, with bayte of golden leure,
By mean whereof she will, a canckred poison lay,
Full closely coucht in pleasant bayte, with that poor soul to tray,
As I but lately tried, who does her bayts so taste,
That secretly I sup the smarts, which caufe me pine and waste:
Would God when I began, to enter first to life,
That present death had pearst my heart, and rid me clean this strife,
So should my Parents not, have been at such great cost,
To bring me up on whom by fate, their great good gifts are lost:
Ne yet have left to me, no whit such wealth at all,
Whereby from wealth to misery, might chance a soden fall,
But should the same else where, have well bestowed I say,
Which they in leaving unto me, did naught but cast away,
Whose heavy helpless haps, increasing every hour,
Does force me weep, when others sleep, where fortune does not low*
Thus pass I forth the night, when wish does want his will,
Whom fortune seeks by great despite, most cruelly to spill,
And when the dawninge day, I do perceive and see,
And eke how Titan lifts up, him self in first degree,
Whose glorious glyttering beams, does move each thing to joy,
Save only I whose hapless hap, has wrought all mine anoy:
Then from my coutche I creep, all clad with woe and care,
And for to walk in Desert place, my self I do prepare,
Where none but woeful wights, do wandering wayle their grief,
Where violence does vengance take, where never coms relief:
Where pleasure plays no part, nor wanton life is lead,
Where daintiness no danger makes, ne finesse once is fead:
Where deep despair does dwell, in owgle loathsome lake:
Where feurious feendes do fersly fight, an sorrows never slake:
Even there in doleful Den, I do drive forth the day,
Where as my pitious plainte and woe, no time has once to stay,
And then a new I wish, that I had never been,
To void the painful piteous plight, that now I wretch amin,
Within whose troubled head, such thronge of thoughts does rise,
That now on this and then on that, I cease not often to vise,
Among which thoughts I note, this one that does ensew,
Which as the young Bird brought from neast, and put in cage or mew,
Does joy in that her life, as much as though she might
From wood to wood, or feilde to feilde, at pleasure take her flight,
which plainly does declare, a man from birth brought up,
In mean estate that never knew, the taste of wanton cup,
Does hold himself so well content, with his degree,
That he in life does seldom seek, to crave more greater see.
But I as bird unlike, that flew her timely flight,
Throughout the groves and fertile field, in joys and great delight,
Which shall no sooner feel her self, to be restrainde,
From her such wonted liberty, as some time she retainde:
But forth withal she does, such inward thought conceive,
That yelding up her pleasures past, her life therewith does leave,
when as the bird in Cage, with chirpyng cheer does singe,
That never knew the place wherein, she had more better b'inge:
So I do plainly see, each wight that wealth has taste,
And afterward does want the same, with sorrow is imbraste,
Wherefore since life appointed was, in me this long to last,
In simplest sort would God I had the same to this time past,
Then should I sure have liude content with this my pay,
Which now because of careful change in woe do wast away.
Finis.
Keeper to his friend Hovvell.
WHen surging Seas with raginge blastes be blown,
In which is man with ship of troublous sail,
He must beware least Hulcke be overthrown:
When deathly seas compels weak heart to quail:
So though thou be returned from Port of bliss,
With hoysing waves and winds so hardly tossed:
Thou may thy self full well assure of this,
Thou art not he that first has had the lost.
It is a healpe sometimes in misery,
To have a sort as felows eke of thrall,
Ah many man has felt the chance of thee:
When witless youth does range so prodigal.
Then hoyse thy sail and be not ouerblowen,
The fear of harms may not thy stomach slake.
And rise from couche when cheerful light is showen,
And draw thee back from pains of Plutoes lake.
Have stronger heart then simple Birds on tree,
Let manly corpse, a manly mind embrace,
No woes can help: then friend be ruled by me,
Let patience in quiet breast have place:
For all disease for cares and woes each one,
A quiet mind, is only salve alone.
Finis.
The restless pains of the Lover forsaken.
IN spring time when fresh flowers, in Feilde do flourish fair,
When Trees do bud and blosoms bear, when temperate is the air
When Birds with chirping cheer, when Beasts that be but brute,
As course of kind does force them forth, through love begins great suit.
Then I whose fancy fed, my sprites to sport and play,
To Forrist fair of pleasant air, began to take the way:
As I did pass throughout a valey fair and green,
Where Birds did singe and Beasts to run often pleasant I had seen.
All hushed I found it tho, such silence was there kept,
As midnight then if it had been, and all things sound had slept:
Where at amasde I stood, and listening long might hear
At last a hollow sounding voice, with loud lamenting cheer.
In shrubs hard shrouded by, a woeful wight there lay,
Whose careful corpse through pining pain, was welnie worn away:
Where pouring out his plainte, he cursed his cruel fate,
That led him forth to hope for hier, where he in fine found hate.
He sight and beat his breast, and bid all men take heed,
By him to trust no filed words, where as they show no deed:
For filed words me fed, to follow fancy so,
That like the hooked Fish betraide, I languish now in woe:
I look and long so: death, she leapes alofte in joy,
Whose subtel sleights alas quod he) has wrought all mine anoye:
That fie on her fair face, fie on her fained there,
For her sake eke alone I bid, fie on all women there.
Whereby he lookte aside, and finding where I stood,
Like one that sought to live alone, from me he fled as wood:
For whom such griping grief, my heavy heart did knawe,
That I my self there deep de^^de, like link of Lovers law.
Finis.
The britlenesse of things mortal, and the trustiness of Virtue.
TO you fair Dames whose favor now does flourish,
To you whose dainty days in joys are spent:
To you whose corpse Dame nature yet does poolish,
To you whom Cupide chiefly does frequent,
To you I write with heart and good intent:
That you may note by this which I do say,
How natures gifts soon wear and waste a way.
Your lofty looks the time will pluck full low,
Your stately steps Age eke will alter quight,
Not one thing now that does give pleasant show,
But time of cuts and forseth to take the flight,
Save Virtue sole in which who does delight,
When wealth, when pomp, when beauty shall them leave,
Virtue alone to such will stick and cleave.
Where is fair Helines beauty now be come,
Or Cressed eke whom Troylus long time served,
Where be the decked dainty Dames of Rome,
That in Aur^lius time so flourished:
As these and many mo are vanished,
So shall your youth, your favor, and your grace,
When nothing else but virtue may take place.
To virtue therefore do your selves apply,
Call Cressids life unto your youthly mind,
Who past her time in Troy most pleasauntly
Till falsinge faith to vice she had inclinde,
For which to her such present plagues were sinde,
That she in La^ers lodge her life did end,
Which wonted was most choysly to be tend.
Her comely corpse that Troylus did delight
All puffed with plages full lothsomly there lay:
Her Azurde veins, her Cristall skin so whight,
With Purple spots, was fallen in great decay:
Her wrinkeled face once fair does fade away,
Thus she abode plagde in midst of this her youth,
Was forced to beg for breaking of her truth.
Lo here the end of wanton wicked life,
Lo here the fruit that Sin both sowes and reapes:
Lo here of vice the right reward and knife,
That cutth of clean and tombleth down in heaps,
All such as treads Cresids cursed steps,
Take heed therefore how you your youths do spend,
For vice bringee plagues, and virtue happy end.
Finis.
The description of his lothsom life, to his friend.
LIke as the woeful wight, in Irons cold does lie,
And hopes at Sise to be releast, is then condemde to die:
Even so alas my lot, as contrary does fall,
As his who looked for sugar sweet, and found most bitter gaul,
My reastlesse labor now I justly may compare,
To Sisiphus that never sleapes, or else to T^stius care,
For after sturdie storms, when calm I think to find,
More rougher rage a new does rise, to gripe my grieved mind,
And when my careful case, by means I seek to cure,
Most deepist dinte of inward woe alas I do endure.
The cause of this my grief yet will I closly keep,
And secretly my sorrows suppe when others sound do sleep.
Finis.
The Lover almost in desperation, month his estate.
MY careful case, and heavy pining plight,
Constrains me, against my will to wright,
The plungid state wherein I live and dwell,
Does force me forth my trimbling tale to tell,
My heaped woes, all solace settes aside,
Whose secret smarte, alas I feign would hide,
But as the subject Ox to yoke must yield,
So vanquished wightes are forced forsake the field.
My lucklesse lot, denies me all relief,
I seek for help, but find increase of grief,
I languish still in long and deep despair,
Yet fear to show the cause of this my care.
I couit naught that reason might deny,
I seek not for to clime the cloudie sky,
But what I seek, if I the same might find,
Then should be easde mine discontented mine.
Finis.
The unfortunate end of Cresus King of Lydia, a worthy note for
Covetousness sake.
WHen darkness dim the earth did hide, and hushed was wood and field,
when Beasts and Birds of painted pride, to take their rest did yield,
When Seas and waves of waters wild, their roaring seemde to slake,
And each thing else in silence sat, on sleep their ease to take,
Then I whose wakefull troubled head, no quiet rest could find,
Lay mewsing how I best might ease, mine discontented mind:
At last I starte from out my bead, and having present light,
Did find a Book whereon I read, to drive away the night,
In which the life of Cirus King of Persia I found,
Written by one hight Xenophon, from whence I take my ground,
The wondrous works and worthy deeds, of Cirus then I read,
His regale rule his liberal heart, and how in wars he spead:
How he through his benevolence, not only each heart won,
But kept himself thereby more sure, then town or garrison:
Who when at any time he stood, of Gold or men in need,
with wealth and will his people have, to strength him still with speed:
And brief to be such noble deeds, by Cirus d^^ne I find,
As justly sure deserved has, to win immortal mind,
Which I now pass over to them, that better can indite,
As one who most unable is, his life at large to write:
But only this I note therein, as thing of wonders prise,
A mirror meet for Maiestrats, to set before their eyes.
When Cressus he that cormrant King, which over Lyde did reign,
Seeing the largeness Cirus used, wild him his hand restrain:
He said to heap his friends in wealth, was unto him great pleasure,
If he then chaunst to stand in need, he took them for his treasure:
O noble King, would God thy life were graven in Tables of Gold,
That Cresus kind which now does live, thy bounty might behold,
So should they se what Fame thou wanne, in lands and countries cost,
where Cresus King was clean ^^^sumde, with that he hon^rd most:
Who ended thus his greedy guts, were ^^de and set on flote,
with glittering Gold that (...) was* and powered down his throat.
Finis.
The contempt of Riches.
THe state of worldly things, is strange and most unstable,
Both mirth and woe to man it brings, through Fortune variable,
Wherefore I hold him best, that has sufficient,
That likes the lot which God has given, and therewith stands content:
For they that seek most highest, them selves for to advance,
Are often seen to be the niest to dangerous mischance:
Example by the tree which grows upon the Hill,
That subject is unto each blast, when trees below are still,
The higher state always the greater care does bring,
The greater care the lesser ease, which proves the mean surest thing,
And Hystories divine us bidth from cares and woes,
And wills us all to view the birds, and Lyllies fresh that groes,
The Byrds ne sow nor reap, and yet do want nothing,
The Lilly eake it does compare with Solomon the King,
Afirming plain that he in all his princely power,
Was never decked like unto the simple Lilly flower:
A void such care therefore, as quails the courage often,
And put thy confidence in him, that sits in Throue a lofte:
Content thy self always, with that he shall assine,
Against those whom he does exalte, se thou do not repine,
If riches do increase, be thankful for the same,
If want of that do chance to prease, do not thy Fortune blame,
Better it is of both, to be content with ought,
With great and heaped howrdes of gold, then have unquiet thought:
Did not Diogenes, prefar the shining Son,
Before the mighty kingdoms great, that Alexander won:
When this great conqueror would, have given him gifts of gold,
He said like gift thou can not give, as thou from me do hold.
Tho sundry others mo, whose works were wondrous wise,
I might here name to like effect, yet let this said suffice,
For nothing here so sure, that certain may remain,
Acompte therefore all worldly power, as transitory vain.
Finis.
The unquiet estate of the Lover, wherein is wished redress.
LIke as the Captain stout, constrainde is in the end,
Oprest with power to yield himself, and what he did defend:
So I with Cupid caught, am forced at last to yield,
To you whose virtuous ways, has won of me both Forte and field,
I may no longer cloak the scortchinge flames of fire,
That still in s^acret breast does burn, through want of my desire:
But forth it finds away, that hid has line full long,
And love does boldly bid me seek, to have redress of wrong.
Since then in you it lies, on me to work your will,
By mercy for to length my life, by contrary to kill:
Let pity move your mind, in humble wise I sue,
And seek to save the Captive heart that wishes well to you.
For here I do confess the only state and stay,
Of my led life and eke my death, to rest in you always:
Whose grant of grace has power, to glade my griped breast,
Whose stay thereof has like effect, to further mine unrest.
Grant yea therefore my dear, let nay be out of mind,
As I have vowde to work your will, till death shall do his kind:
And thus I cease to write, the twenteth part of grief,
That my poor payned heart endures, as yet without releife.
Finis.
Liberalitee.
Where wise do suffer want,
And driven in hard distress:
Cut not thy cantle skante,
That maiste their cause redress.
Finis.
Providence.
TWyse happy is the wight,
Whom others harms does cause
To shonne the snare, of noisome care,
That grows by breach of laws.
Finis.
Good advise, to his faithful friend.
OF Lovers restles lives, I li^t not wright,
Let learned heads describe their playnfull plight:
But plain in terms I wish thee even as well,
As those that can their tales more trimly tell.
Whose friendly meaning if thou will receive,
First fly from Uice and unto Virtue cleave:
Next seek by honest means, such wealth to win,
As may thee help what need thou shall be in.
Count not thy Chickens that vnhatched be,
Way words as wind, till thou find certaintee:
For filid words that deeds do never yield,
May well be likened to the baren field.
Be ware of had I wiste whilst youth does last,
Whose stealinge steps do pass away in have:
Provide in time, thine aged years to chearishe,
And let fair words go feed, the fond and foolish.
Acompte each thing, as proof the same shall try,
Trust not to far before thou find cause why:
For under Flowers so fair often poison lurkes,
Whose show of flagrant smell much mischeefes works.
Take heed least Argus with his crastie Net,
And wily subtle sleights do thee be se^:
Thus wishinge aye thy wealth, I make an end,
Least tedious talk should naught but thee offend.
Finis.
Youth still bevvayleth, When naught it avails.
MY retchlesse rage of wanton youth,
With grief I do lament:
When unto mind I call the truth,
How I my time have spent.
Finis.
An humble suit to his friend, requesting Love for Love.
I Saw of late a woeful wight,
That Willo wandes did wind to wear:
Whose face declarde the painful plight,
Which he through love then present bear.
He lookte a loft as though he would
Have fled unto the starrie skies:
But still he stood, as though he could,
Not once heave us his heavy thees.
His feathered hands he flashed forth,
And thither feign he would have ^^ead:
But wofullman he was full wroothe,
To see his limbs all lade with lead.
You are the bright and starrie sky,
I am the man in painful plight:
My l^^^es are lade I cannot fly,
My corpse may not sustain my weight
I read the woes of Sigismonde,
The child of Tanckred Salerne king:
Her love to Guystarde did so bound,
She fanced else none other thing.
For riches naught nor for his wealth,
Whereof he had but slender store,
His virtue was her only health,
She likte that well she sought no more.
They had their hoped hap and joy,
If Tanckred could content him so,
But he by workyng their anoy,
Unto himself brought deepest woe.
You Sigismonde are fair and bright,
Would I had Guystardes virtuous life,
And Tanckred chaste clean out of sight,
Then would I wish for such a wife.
I read how Luna loved one,
Of birth but mean of right good fame,
By name iclipt Endimione,
Whose love was quite deuoyde of blame:
In Laemi Hill it thus befell,
She saw him sit all sad alone,
It Is I (que she) I know full well,
For whom he mournes and makes his moan:
She was not shamde of Laemi Hill,
Nor yet of Lovers simple state,
But straight consents, unto his will,
And him did choose for loving make.
O Luna look upon thy Love,
Endimion makes his moan to thee,
Be not ashamde let pity move,
And love me like as I love thee.
Finis.
The Commendation of the mean in all things.
AS mean in Music sounds best,
So mean estate lives most in rest:
The higher climde the fall more deep,
The deeper fall the double pain,
And pensife pain does careful keep,
In man each lively lim and vain,
Which proves what change or chance do fall,
Contented mean exceeds all.
Finis.
I. K. To his friend H.
THe high estate is dangerous,
The poor degree is burdenous,
The richer sort are covetous,
The needy soul is dolorous.
The youthful imps are prodigal:
The aged thyrst for goods so thrall,
The bolder men foolehard ye call,
The fearful wights are dastards all,
Then ill eschew, embrace things clean,
Howell, welfare thy golden mean.
Finis.
He lamenteth the ungrateful person for inconstancy.
ALas I unhappy and most woeful wight,
Whom Fortune so deeply has now in despite,
That tongue cannot tell ne Pen have power to wright,
My pitiful playnt and heavy pining plight.
How shall I to case me, vnborden my breast,
Of these double dolours that breeds mine unrest,
When speech wants power, when Pen is vnprest,
And wit wants conning thereunto adrest.
This great restless rage in my mind does renew,
And where I feign help would find harm does ensew:
But yet was I never found false or untrue,
Which causes me much more my dolors to rue.
She that I did honor, above all the rest,
To whom I reserved, the heart in my breast,
Has me quite forsaken and broke her behest,
And another taken, to love and like best.
And seems now slightly to bear me in hand,
That I was cause only of breatche of her band,
But truth if me tried full searched and scande,
Then trespass in me should she non understand.
Wherefore to the Spider I may her compare,
That cruelly kills what is caught in her snare,
For she by like tyranie nothing does spare,
Most spitefully to spoil thus my carcas with care.
Finis.
The shevving of his good Heart.
THe Glove for gadge is rightly given, where things concluded (...),
Wherefore I do account thereof, more then of gold or fee,
Of which if I were storde, like Cresus in his time,
I vow to thee if thou so would, it should be wholly thine,
Where to if I with Solomon, in wisdom might compare,
And beauty had like Absolon, whose match is very rare,
Like eloquence to Cicero, in power Caesar's pear,
Yet would I be as now I stand, your faithful servant dear:
And thus I rest in Haven hope, whose bosom does embrace
Your glove as you till trackte of time, may purchase further grace.
Finis.
The declaration of the unstableness of fickle Fortune.
WHere Fortune favors not, what labor may prevail,
Whom frowning fate will needs thrust down, what shall he win to wail?
With patience to yield, for such Ideeme most best,
And cast their cares and griefs on him, that rewleth fates behest,
We see by perfect proof, that none so Princely goes,
But that by will of God the hiest, out of this world he floes,
Since then such fickle force, in mortal might we find,
Let nothing that shall hap thee hear, to much torment thy mind:
For all to live a like, of this assured be,
Was never yet nor shall be seen, but cache in his degree:
As like the Potters pottes, be made to sundry use,
So some men serve and some are serude, here needs no fine e^scuse,
The laboring man to toil, that spares ne night nor day,
Gets skarce to feed his famely, when some howrde heaps that play,
Yet does he not despair, nor yet from labors fly,
But lives content when worldlinges make, of wealth their miscrie,
Who gripte with greater grief, if Fortune list to lowre,
Then such as erst did feed at fill, upon her fruitfulst flower:
Which change full often has chaunst, through her vnconstantnesse,
And whom she lately laughed upon, thrown down remediless.
Was Alexander great, that many dangers past,
For all his mighty conquestes won, not poysned dead at last.
A Kings son eke I find, for Fathers tirannie,
Constrainde to work in Smithes Fordge, by hard necessity,
Such is the fading force of Fortunes fickle flower,
Whose fruitfulst fruit both ripes and rots in less space then one hour.
Such is her tickle trust, such are her slipper steps,
That what she seems to sow in joy, with sorrow often she reapes.
Attribute all to him that rules fate therefore:
To him I mean which left the rich, and fed the pinyng poor,
For thus do I intend, whilse vit all breath shall last,
Though erst I practisde many means, which proof has tried in wast.
Finis.
Themislocles answer, concerning his Daughter to be married.
THemislocles by whose great skill, the Athenians long were led,
His only Daughter did bestow, on mean young man to wed,
Which when his freindes did wonder sore, these words he did express
My daughter dear has won (quod he) more wealth then ye do guess:
Whom I account much better plaste, when truth I truly scan,
Upon a man that money wants, then money wanting man.
Finis.
The Lamentation of the woeful man, having for entire Love no goodvvyll.
THe time that I began, to enter first to life,
Would God the sisters three had cut the threade with fatale knife
Would God that death had been, with arowes ready bente,
To pearce the woeful heart of mine, which now with care is spente.
Then should I not at all, have followed fancies lewre,
Whose outward show of sugar sweet, is mirt with poison sour:
As now I am constrainde, by destnie sure I think,
That still does find but bitter taste, yet cannot choose but drink.
Thus I God knows full often a heavy heart do bear,
^hen out wardly I seem to show a merry careless cheer,
Desembling eke my case, in hope of happier day,
But aye from time to time I find naught else but my decay.
I pine in secret flanies, like ware consumde with fire,
I wish, but always want my will, lo this mine only hier:
What Paps did give her food, that naught regardes my woe?
What Tiger fearce alas could hate, the heart that loved her so.
Great cruelty it is, to slay the yielding wight,
That mercy still does sue to have, and uses none other fight:
But since my hapless hap alas must needs be so,
With speed come death to end my life, and rid me of this woe.
Finis.
The Lover declares his constant heart never to forge the thing that was
decreed.
SHall any wight prevail, to bring to pass by power,
Away to move, or rule our love, that faith has firt tindewre.
Shall either force of friends, or froward frownyng foes,
Cause us forgo our hoped joys, bought with so many woes,
No, no, for my part here, a vow to thee I make,
That first each torment shall me tear, care I my faith forsake.
Finis.
An admonition, concerning the tracte of time.
As time all things finds out,
So time each thing must bide.
In time therefore I wish,
That time may well provide.
Finis.
A friendly admonition to his friend, that craved good Counsel.
Condemn no cause till it be thoroughly known,
Each brutish broyle that forth abroad is blown:
Believe not lightly, least by some such act,
Thou chance repent of deed informer fact.
Accuse no wight of crime till troth thou try,
Ne credit then thine ear before thine eye:
Such false report abroad may often go,
As perfect proof shall find out nothing so.
In judgment rash se that thou never be,
Deal not in things that pass capasitie:
Thy portion spend that some thou have to spare
If thou will live deuoyde of woes and care.
Finis.
A pithy Precept.
When youth has run his race,
Old age does step in place:
In youth therefore beware,
Least age be clad with care.
Finis.
Another.
Who wants force against his foes to fight,
Shall seldom be deuoyde of painful plight.
Finis.
The expressing of his unlucky happes diversely chanced.
Like as the ship of force does drive,
Which way the wind shall him constrain:
So out of native soil I live,
As destnie does me lead and train,
Now here, now there, now up, now down,
As Fortune listes, to smile or frown.
And as the horse the rider rides,
Of force must take such way as he:
With pricking spours does perse his (...),
Shall think most first for him to be,
So I of force must yield to bide,
Such hope as fate will me provide.
As I by proof do plainly see,
Which long have sought in hope to find,
Some place to ease my misery:
With toil I toste and troubled mind,
By seas by land, in many a coaste,
In danger often, like to be loaste.
I wish and want what should I say?
I seek and find nothing at all,
I toil, and still in great decay,
I feign would rise, yet still do fall,
With sondrie cares I am oprest,
But Pen be still, and take thy rest.
Finis.
His complaint to the God Cupide, because he with his Darts perseth him alone.
OCupid Uenus darlynge dear,
Whose power no mortal might may bide,
If once in hand thy bow thou bear,
And flaminge forckers by thy side,
Why do thou this lie still and sleep?
When I to thee do wayle and weep.
Wheare is become thy wonted power?
Art thou vanquished and put to flight?
Or else art thou disposde to lowre,
On me alone most woeful wight:
Say no, say no, Oh I thee pray,
And turn the heart breeds mine anoy.
In which time ^arbes and trees, that Winters wind did wear,
Enforce them selves to bud and grow some pleasant fruicte to bear.
The little Bird that reason wants, does then with chirping cheer,
From twig to twig, and bushe to bushe, greet often his lotted fear:
The flotinge Fish in sturdie streams, that travels day and night,
Does eke unto their fancied fears repeare with all their might,
The weak and wreatched worms forgets not this day,
Whom we may find about this time fast coplide by the way:
As nature has decreede all these by course of kind,
In things that reasons rule does want, right so has man asingde,
For witness of the same in this apoin^ted time,
That every man and woman eke shall have a Ualentine,
In sign of that her force which no wight can subdew,
Lo this the only cause I say, that all things does renew:
Lo this the cause also, why Fortunes lots be had,
Whose hoped hap and hapless hope, does make both woe and glad.
But I above the reast, may Fortune highly praise,
Who has given me the fear Dame, that lives in these our days:
Such one I say whom Nature has, with Virtue so I deckte,
That none there is or shall have power, her name once to deteckte:
Even such a one whom I as Fortune has asignde,
Will always be at her commands, till death shall do his kind.
Finis.
To a proud Dame.
THe fem so fond of unadvised brain,
That mountes in seat by pride of blinded heart,
No praise may get, but shows a wisdom vain,
Lo pass degree in seat by no desert:
Be thou content to sit on squared stool,
Least seeming wise thou prove the fonder fool,
It might been said by prudent voice of grace,
Presuming Dame retire from stately place.
Finis.
The lamentable end of Iulia, Pompeyes wife.
SOre plungde in piteous pains and woeful smarte,
Bespred with tr^ckling tears, on death like face,
Down trils the drops on cheeks, and sighs from heart:
To hear and see her hus bands grievous case,
Thus goes the spouse O woeful Julia,
Besprent with blood, when Pompeis cote she saw.
Down deap she faules, in lamentable sound,
Of sense bereft, so great was Julis strain:
The child conceived within, with deadly wound,
Untimely fruit came forth with proching pain,
When all was done, for love her life she lost,
For Pompeyes sake she yielded up her ghost.
So dead she lay bewaylde with many tears,
A Matron wise, a famous ornament,
O Caesar had lived full cherefull years,
If thou with Pompey could have been content,
But Ciuell wars, has wrought this fatal law,
To Pompeye death and death to Julia.
Ye Matrones grave, and worthy spoused mates,
Ye maiden Nymphs, which live in larger parts,
O read and see vewe not and judge of states:
And follow eke such faithfulness of hearts,
Such lively love embrace, says virtue grave,
As Julie true for mate her life she gave.
Finis.
To his frovvarde friend.
THis is not solom Sophocles,
In learned trade which treads,
This is not hardy Hercules,
That conquered Hydras heads.
Fear not his bousteous vantinge word,
Though he would see me to braule,
He will advise his angry sword,
On whom his strokes do fall:
Words be but wind, to purge his heat,
His stomach to abate,
Wherein he shows his manly feate,
When most he seems to prate,
Time may a swage these choloricke fomes,
Where Hercles is so bold,
Think not good Hercles all are momes,
When all thy Cards be told.
We know the Wood by sight of trees,
We know the fire is hot,
We know your power and wise decrees,
Though fools you call our lot,
Farewell good hardy Hercules,
As hardy as thou art,
Thou may be vexed with little Bees,
Though greater be thy heart.
Finis.
A friendly salutation to his beloved.
THese lines view dearest friend,
Wherein I close my heart:
Behold therein my great good will,
Provoked by just desarte.
This simple slender show
Accept, your heart to move,
For this my heart and golden will,
Restore your golden love.
For if great riches could
Encopled mates the more,
I have both seen, and live as now,
Wherein I might have store,
But naught I care the wealth,
Nor yet the gorgeous gain.
My hands and heart I only give
Thee only to obtain:
You only would I crave,
Before all other wight.
Before the fairest proferde Nymphs,
You most do me delight.
Whose choice is now at will,
To take or else refuse:
And if it lay so much in me,
You only would I choose:
Accept my proferde love,
As trust by truth may bind,
If it thee please I am thine own,
O my approved friend,
In worthy state to stay,
I will forsake thee never.
My heart my joy my only care,
I will thee love for ever:
Accept and vewe these lines,
And think my heart you see,
Beholding eke this menssenger,
Sometimes consider me.
Suppose I present were,
To talk in friendly part,
But though my body absent be,
Yet bound you have my part.
Finis.
Complaint of ingratitude.
MY Pen in piteous part,
Cannot in half descrie,
The inward woes in moning heart,
That gripes me secretly.
If outward face could moan,
The woes of inward shape,
The senseless trees, and Flintie stone,
Would rue my hapless hap.
O heart with care oppressed,
So plungde in penury,
The sobbing sightes of great unrest,
Will cause me wretch to die.
Into untimely grave,
Mishap shall me conuaie,
The darte of death I need not crave,
I see no prompter way.
Thus I have plight the pain,
Of toyling hand and mind
To help the grace that can reward,
Yet show it self unkind.
I. K.

Finis.
After his good fortune, fallen into mishap.
AH wretches set in wretched vale,
Where naught is sure but death so pale:
All worldly goods and joys so gay,
As withred flowers they vade away.
When Fortune thee does hiest extoule,
Yet somewhat still does vex thy soul,
Then virtue crave vain joys despice,
For wisdom still shall bear the price.
I. K.

Finis
A Dialogue touching the matrimonial degree.
Sith we are now in pleasant place,
Where each may speak his mind at will,
And quietly debate the case,
Accordingly by simple skill,
I mean to reason this with thee,
Who will be bound and may go free.
What bands you mean first let me know,
And then I will some answer make,
In diverse sense your words do grow,
And diversely they may be take,
Though commonly they be aplide,
To those that are in wedlock tide.
My meaning is as ye do guess,
Now let me hear what you can say,
If I shall right my mind express,
And speak the truth without delay,
I think him void of wit to be,
That will be bound and may go free.
In wedlock state, is no such band,
No freedom lost by taking wife,
If that the truth b^e rightly scande,
She causes long and happy life,
A verteous wife enlarge thy days,
Of husbands age divine books says,
Who hastes to wyue in hope of that,
May grope for Eles and catch a Snake,
And prove as wise as Pusse our Catte,
That sekinge fish fell in the lake.
Let them that list therefore for me,
I will not bind and may go free.
Well then I see who will contend,
If thou so wilfully be bente,
I do fall out to little end,
Take heed therefore lest thou repent,
The life thou now calst liberty,
Here after through extremity.
The Batcheler most ioyefully,
In pleasant plight does pass his days,
Good feloship and company,
He does maynteine and keep always,
With Damsels brave he may well go,
The maride man can not do so.
Though dainty Dames thee now delight,
And bewties beams thine eyes do blind,
When time shall come of perfect sight,
The weddid life thou suerst shall find,
For God himself to avoid sin,
The weddid state did first begin.
Finis.
Time gives trial.
Though yet to thee it skante appear,
The end shall show what truth I bear.
Finis.
The Bridle of youth.
THe wild and wanton Coulte, that romes in pasture still,
And takes his food with careless lips, without restraint of will,
Is all unmeet to serve upon, till first by perfect guide,
With Bit and Bridle strong he be, from wanton will fast tide:
Wherefore each worthy wight, a rider ^it does find,
To check and break such carlesse Coultes, as shall to them be sinde,
So likewise beardlesse boys, that reasons rule does shonne,
In steed of Rider they by Rod, from vice to grace are won,
And both unseemly were, for princely pears to use,
A lack therefore in such I deem, as would them thus abuse.
Finis.
A farevvell to his worshipful friend. T. D.
DO bloysterous blastes that blow, compel to hoyse thy sail,
To drive the ship to calmer Port, unto thy more aduaile.
O cease ye froward fluds, return O ship to stay,
For thou in Bark so well befraught, have al our joys away,
But since the witless winds, have causde good ship to flee,
The self same blast shall shortly force, a sort to sail with thee,
And since thou will away, what hapless hap befell,
That does proceed of inward woe, I can but say farewell,
Farewell O Justice just, that did uprightly stand
And eke to raise the fallinge poor, that had prepared hand,
Farewell thou friendly heart, that would do dwell always,
With toward mind and plighted pains, that sought thy founders praise
Farewell of mind so mild, vpspronge of right degree,
Soms inward thoughts urge outward woes, that find y^ want of thee,
Farewell thou worthy wight, in guile that can not feign,
That will do well as thou have don, not one there coms again,
Farewell if needs it must, so does our loss befall,
Of honest wights though hence ye go, yet have the hearts of all,
Farewell a friend to each, farewell a foe to none,
Lo here in grief my last farewell, farewell O friend alone.
Et puis, and clemens, and carus es omnibus vnus*
Nature prudens, condition probus:
Viue Diu, venerande faue, reverend valeto,
He^ mihi quod possum dicere, tr^ste vale.
Finis.
I. Keeper to his friend. H.
HOwell haunte hope bartely,
Her happy hap have humbly,
Have hardy heart hold honesty,
Her hearty heart I hight to thee.
Finis.
The life of man likened to a Stage play, where on we ought warelie to Walk.
Since earth is stage whereon we play ourparts,
And deeds are deemd according to deserts,
Be wary how you walk upon the same,
In playing your part win praise and banishe blame,
Remember how your tale once told straight way,
An other steps on stage his part to play:
Lo whom of force you must give up your place,
As he that has all ready run his race.
Your port, your power, your wealth and wearing weds,
You then must yield to such as shall succeed:
As things but lent to play your part withal,
Whose heir shall be even as desarte does fall.
Not he that plaieth the stateliest part most praise,
Nor be that wears ritchest robes always,
But he I say that bears him self most best,
Whether his part be with the great or least.
Take heed therefore and play your part so well,
That afterward you may in saftie dwell:
Grope not to greedely for worldly gain,
The end whereof is transitory and vain.
But be suffisde with that sufficient is,
And seek the things that bring eternal bliss,
So shall you hear not only win great praise,
But after eke enjoy most happy days.
Finis.
Regard thy end.
Unpleasant is the plight, of that most woeful wight,
That seeith with perfect sight, his life from him take flight,
And wants power and might, to slay and flee such spite.
Finis.
The lamentable history of Sephalus with the unfortunate end of Procris.
To the tune of Appelles.
WHo lust to vewe the heavy happes,
Of faithful lovers long a go,
And eke suruaye their after clappes,
Must needs me thinks lament for woe,
If that my heart were framd of flynte
From tears yet hardly might it stinte.
I read some time of Sephalus,
A lusty youth of noble blood,
Of face and favor amorus
In Natures favor far he stood,
If near would make a man agaste,
To mark his lymbs and members plast.
So straight, so square, so trym was he,
So fair of form so wise and sage,
He semde a sample sure to be,
And Lantarne to the younger age,
And to conclude, he passed those,
That thought they made a goodly gloss.
This brute (as youth will have a spurte,
When lusty blood be gyns to broyle,)
Did flee from fredom to the court,
Where Uenus only kepes the coil,
Thus reason banished quite a way,
He warns will to bear the swaye.
Then fancy forced by and by,
The wandringe eyes as skowtes to be,
In secret sort for to epsy,
Or publykely to mark and see,
If any Lady wear in sight,
That might deserve this worthy knight.
But sone alas they have espyde,
The mark wheareat they shot so long,
Fair Procris beauty is descryde,
She blazed so bright her mates among,
Lo Sephalus does now be gynne,
His Ladies favor first to win.
^ewe days were past less years were spent
Till flattringe Fortune struck the stroke,
To love each other both were bent,
Love did them both so sore provoke,
What will you more if Fortune say,
Yt shall be thus say you not nay.
Now nothing grieved Sephalus,
But for to be a brydged fro,
His Ladies sight most gloryus
What greater greef might any grow
Fair Procris Parents were so hard,
That she as Bird in Cage was barde.
But Sephalus by fine deuyse,
Of wytty head and wary wit,
Did put in practyse to intyse,
His Lady thence what hap should hit,
By letter then he did conclude,
That she her kepers should delude.
And to a Forest bye a pace,
Which he in letter namd also,
Where here he did mean to ^y^^ her (...)*
If that it would her pleace to go,
The letters red she sought his will.
In every point for to fulfill.
And to the appointed place she hide,
Expectinge still her Sephalus,
She gave the flippe unto her gyde,
Oh tracte of time most tedyus,
Oh Procris sure thine is the wrong,
That Sephalus a bydes so long.
But never is the same to long,
The Proverb says that comes at last
She spyde him in the end among,
A sort of trees not making have,
His Boowe was bent his arowe fast*
In Nut to shoot already plast.
She would not call for fear of foes,
Nor yet to him she would repair,
Lest that she should the Dear vnroes,
That Sephalus had spyde at layre,
She geues him leave to range his fill,
Full loath she is his sport to spill.
The time did pass no game was found,
And Sephalus was welnere tyrde,
Fair Procris absence did him wound
For she was all that he desyrde,
He stood not still he trugde about,
Lose if he might find her out.
Lo fortune brought him nere the place,
Where Procris still alas did stand,
She blusshed yet to she we her face,
She made no sign but with her hand,
She took the bows and them did shake,
A fearde to great a noise to make.
But Sephalus when he espyde,
The leaves to wagge and bows to shake*
He thought some beast did there him hyde,
And at his coming did awake,
Wherefore to see he thought it best,
If he might find him taking rest.
And as he peeped here and theare,
He spyde a thing of coler dark,
And indginge it an ouglie Bear,
Dyschardgde his bow and hit the mark,
Through sturdy stroke and deadly wound,
He nailed Procris to the grownde.
Alas unawares did Sephalus,
His Lady kill and murder thus,
Oh greeff of greefs most dolorous,
Oh hap of Happs most pyt^ous
Dear Ladies step your foot to mine
To mourn with me your hearts inclyne.
When Sephalus his Precris found,
Imbrude with blood on every side
The arowe stickinge in the wound,
That bleedinge sore did gape full wide,
He cursed the gods that skies possessed
The systers three and all the rest.
And fayntly spoke, no Lady no,
You shall not vanishe hence a lone,
My ghost alas your friendly foo,
Shall wait your precious soul upon,
And with that word to end his life,
He ^^ue him self with bloody knyfe.
Lo Lordynges, here by take a vewe,
And Ladies mark what I shall say,
Each one to life must say adue,
And to the earth her own repaye,
There is no choice we see it so,
When death does call we needs must go.
Finis.
A freindly admonishment to (...) freinde to choose a wife.
HEre live in love: for thy behoue, let reason rule thy choice:
so shall thou wear: Ulisses ear, to shun the Sirens voice,
Beware and care: before thou stare, on women's painted eyes,
like Crocodiles: with poisoned smiles, they will thee clean disguise,
If thou to catch: intendst a match, to live in marriage sport:
first mark and hear: what fame she bear, among the wiser sort,
For market men: can tell thee then, how does the market go,
if well thou hear: then draw thee near, and be in suit not ^^o,
In women's minds: are diverse winds, which stur their Aspin funge,
to prate and chat, they know not what, by that much strife is sprung,
But take thou heed: and ever dreede, to match with carters kind,
for carters seed, is base of breed, whose manners ill we find,
They will devise: both tales and lies, to bring thy house to square:
no honest man (if that she can,) with her shall credit bear,
Such rusticke kind: such faults will find, when they desarue the blame
and will be proud: and scould full loud, not passing for her fame,
The servants good: from meat and food, she will debar with pain:
and yet complain, as though thy gain, by them were spent in vain,
To blind thine eyes: she will have spies, to bring thee tales and lies,
as though for thrift, good huswiues shift, she does for thee devise,
When she in deed, her self will feed, and take her private gain,
and make the wear king, Midas ear, as though she took the pain,
But in her Wine, she will divine, and blab the secretminde:
to such her mates: as chats and prates, according to her kind,
By this I say, a fool in play, by her thou shall be made:
and all the town: will call thee clown, which ridest on such a Jade,
Again a maid, of honest trade, if thou will seek to have:
though riches want: yet like the Ant, by travel will she save.
An still enough, thy man at plough, and all thy servants else,
shall of her meat, both drink and eat, no toys nor lies she tells,
In quiet rest, she makes nest, to lodge thy weary bones:
(...) keep, in quiet sleep, from all deep sights and groans,
Among her maids, with honest trades, she puts her hand in use:
and always dreades: her husbands deeds, with scoldyng to abuse,
Besides all this: thou shald not miss, but have an honest fame:
for such a wife: is chaste of life, and like Ulisses dame,
He is a cokes: and worthy strokes, whose wife the Breeches bear:
a Cuckolds hoode, to do him good, deserves he to wear,
Take heed therefore: and keep in store, this short admonishment:
Least had I wist: alas I mist, then do to late repent.
Finis.
The Lover deceived, writes to his Lady.
To the tune of in ^re^^ when dedalus.
WHo would have thought that face of thine, had been so full of doblenes
Or eles within those Cristall eyne, had rest so much unstableness,
Thy face so fair thy look so strau^g, who would have thought so full of chau^g
But truth it is as most men say, in Cutlers blade is had much craft,
Who chepneth thine and make no say, may buy on broken in the have,
And then repent and say as I, lo what it is, to trust the eye.
In sleper hold who can put trust, or judge a glass of sure me^tall,
Thou art to blame to seem so just, and prove so false in the trial,
But since thou art so false in deed, best pluck the up and fyyll the seed,
So young in years, so old in craft, some petie it is that thou so art,
More petie it is that nature grafte, so good a face with a false heart,
But since thou art in such a case, to sell thy self and hide thy face.
The Ducke untaught of very kind, does swime and diue after y^ Dame,
And thou like wise of s^iper mind, do show of whom thy nature came,
Thou fou^dest in thy mothers papes, to bait with craft thy pleasant trapes,
So as the new and false does please, the changing mind within her graft,
So does the old and true dissease, her subtle wits and preiuie crafts
And say true man trust not to much, y^ ^alfe reward y^ comes of such.
Farewell for ever and this my last.
Finis.
In vttringe his plaint, he declares the uncertainty of fained friendship.
To the tune of winters (...) return.
IF tears may try my troth, that trickle down my cheeks,
or if my good will may be known, by proof of days or weeks.
Then do I wrong receive, where friendship crave I most,
and where in deed in every storm, my vessel has been toste,
And through the tempests all, my Ship has safly sayld,
and yet no Seas could shake my Bark, my hope has so preuaild,
Oh help ye Courtiers now, and Soldiers every each one,
to wayle my present heavy fate, my Fortune fled and gone,
And curse this wicked world, wherein most frindes do fainte,
and namely such as tracte of time, has taught their toungs to painte
Which promise more by words, then will or works performs,
such have the curnels eaten all, and I coumpte them the worms,
That guawes the hearts of men, in pieces every day,
and such alas have led my Ship, a weary wilksome way,
From whence if I return, I shall but wander still,
and find noe path to tread upon, that can content my will,
Hear have I hoyst my sail, as hye as wind can blow,
here had I trendes whose nod or beck, a world might over throw,
And still my staienge staff, did stand by one alone,
whose gentle heart is now become, as hard as Marble stone,
To me the case is such, that mishap thus is mine,
when I am worn unto the bones, he letts me starve and pyne,
He lettes me sink or swyme, and shifte by slight of brain,
as though my head so gamesome were, to set on every maine,
Since frendshipe feeble grows, and men can causles change,
and will this day familliar be, and turn to morrow strange,
I will go seek my happes, through fludes and salt Sea foam,
and rather perish on the Rocks, then thus to starve at home,
Amongst my cheifest friends, a mid my natuie soil,
where never yet in any point, I suffered blot or foil,
Where all the world might say, I sucte up many a wro^nge,
where well a way some other think, I poor man live to long,
Where let my truth be tried, I crave but small reward,
and where when fortune does me right, the prince may me regard.
Finis.
The (...) Keeper to his friend Howell.
OF late when Primrose began to pear, on Medows bancke so green,
When Daises whit and Rose full red, most cheerful al were seen,
A lusty wight of sturdye blood, in chiefest times of might,
I saw to ride with courage hie, on Palfray trimly dight,
A Courtier right in brauest weed, of purest silks so gay,
with curious Chain of goodly gold* so clad in courtlike ray,
Of lively years, as fresh as Flower, a fine young man he was:
of manly mind not caring ought, how days or years did pass.
Not ought did want that might prefer, the greatest ioylitie:
for heart and hands, both legs and limbs, were then in sovereignty,
As thus he rode incoradge bold, as well him semde full brave:
he met in Field an aged man, well ny his ghastly grave.
Of coulor pale with writhed brows, and wrinckled face to note,
who leande unto his feeble staff, with slender legs god wot,
Most homlie was his ragged ray, as man that card for none,
of lims so lean in hungrye corpse, a simple soul alone,
This lusty youth when once he saw, where such poor man abode,
he plies his spurs to horses sides, and fast he thither rode,
And askde from whence and what he was, and what was Fortunes rage,
why toil of youth could not provide, for this gray hored age.
This aged man when he beheld, that lusty lad so nie,
he lifted up his crooked corpse and gasde with white of eye,
And pointed up his shaking hands, that naught were else but bones,
with feeble voice and sobbing sighs, thus poures he out his mones,
Welcome good son, I wish thee well, in these thy timely years:
and God increase by his decre, thy life in happy cheares.
But (...) have seen and tried to true, that those that run thy race:
though youth be brave, yet age shall wayle, in most unhappy case.
For I in times have serude in Court, as brave as brauest of all:
but witless yoath, could not for see, ill haps, that might befall,
I wayle my case, and rue the men* that run the self same way:
whose ends will chance a like to mine, lest forwit, will, do stay,
Wherefore young man, take heed betime, least folly work thy pain.
youth stands not still, for times do fleet, as fluds do flow amain:
And since thou art a seruitour, this learn of aged man,
a miserable life thou ledst, if toils with fruits thou scan.
Of serving men therefore will I, declare the state to thee.
that thou forewarnde by me may learue, to flee that misere.
When first thou comst to service trade, it s^mth full sweet a far
but wary be, most sweet to men, all unexpert, is war.
And eke this talk that I declare, by preofe I know it true:
would God I had not seen it tried, my hapless hap to rue.
Beware by me, in present youth, who was in ioylitee:
he happy is whom others harms, do wary cause to be.
Thy master first will thee accept, and love thee passing well:
when lust^^ Age and limbs of youth, and riches do excel:
As long as thou can bear thy charge, thy proper costs to spe nde,
which thou to honor well thy Lord, do liberally extend,
As long as thou with m^ncy storde, or qualities art freight,
most ^ay^e thy master speekes to thee, most joyful is his plight:
(...) cheerful pears his pleasant face, all times continually:
And still he says, he full is bent to help, and chearish thee.
^ayr words they say, make fools to feign, trust not swet promise kind
before the deeds agree to words, which thou by proof shall find.
For though thou be, in favor greatst, yet coms a sudden blast,
that Masters love, may turn to hate, as one dispisde at last.
^till shall thou plie, both carks and cares, for masters worthy state:
to ride, to r^^, in heat and cold, at times both er and late,
In perels plungr and dangers great, thou fealst continually:
thy life thou do adventure often, for Masters cause to dye,
When others ^^^ape in quiet bed, thou ridst in nights that be,
in shewres and (...) to do the thing, that Lord commits to thee.
(...) of^ (...) swords, in groves and bushie place,
(...) for Masters cause, thou runst in painful race.
(...) in presence be, to show thy diligence,
(...) is, but all thine own expense.
(...) address, both here and theare to go:
(...) and (...) to talk and ^^yle, this is thy endless woe,
(...), now mistress speaks, now up and down go now,
(...) thou theare, at all commaundes be thou.
Yet when thy Master likes thee well, thy (...)
and thus between Caribdis rocks, thou ^ailst in doubtful state*
If both thee love, it is but for times, they stand (...),
for master geues, his ear perhaps, to fau^inge (...).
And then a preuie foo^ may work, a treuthles ^ale to ^ell:
that favor flees, and master (...), whom late he loved full well*
O cruel tongue, O masters fond, that so will bend (...) ears,
to cause a faithful servants ^ar^, to m^ne in (...) c^e^re^.
But thousand ways besides may ^rowe, displeasurs great in place,
that shall thee bring from joyful heart, into a doleful case.
This is the surest certainty, of service that may fall,
this is the woeful haps of men, in place illiberall.
At beck thou art, to come and go, a bondage it is ye see.
wh^ wild li^^^t (...) servitude, if well he may go free?
The crouked clown, with all his ^oyle, fealth not one half thy pain,
to whom the tylled soil restores, for labors grateful gain.
But thou for fruits so (...) deserved, by long applied care,
perchance may get but only hate, not one good word to spare.
O Barraine land, O frutelesse feilde, to bring a fort to woes:
for when they hopde to have reward, naught else but hatred groes.
What man can judge of such a soil, that has both eyes to see,
but that he will account the end, a mortal misere:
If once thou hapst away to be, when master calls thee well,
what checks thou have at thy return, I need not here to tell.
Yea often we see for absence small, though cause full great appear,
thy master taunth, and maistris frowns, as Heg of Hell she wear.
And once if thou from favor fall, then labors flatteryng spies:
to hoyse thee out of favor clean, by lewd and knauish lies.
And commonly this thing does hap, when youth and goods are spent,
for then to drive thee of in deed, his mind is fully bent:
And soon will he give credit then, to those that thee deprave:
alas for all our carkes and cares, this is reward we have,
When faithful man has thus long served, in truth of tried heart:
in thend shall vice ingratytude, retracte his just desarte,
O youth beware, O men be wise, what fool so blind is he.
that will spend out his youthful years, such seruingman to be?
A seruyngman, what mome will love, their names are adsous,
their life abhorde as wicked ways, and trade most impious,
This will the hellish sclaunderous lips, of honest man report,
and though the seruinge man be good, yet rayles the enwous sort:
When thus is spent thy golden youth, and many goodly years:
and left the ways of surer life, where greater fruits appears:
When spent be goods both stock and store, and all in service ear:
and lived long at charge of friends, whose bags for thee go bare.
Then comth on thee displeasures great, at one unhappy hour.
that master hates whom well he loved, and turns thee out his dowre.
Then age with charge and toyling pains, so many years of trust,
are now at once on sudden lost, and all is laid in dust:
Thus thou for toil and great expense, have smaller reward to take:
now age draws on and all is spent, and all men thee forsake,
And thou art left in beggars state, that were in youth so fine,
what misery is like to this, what woes then like to thine?
In hope, some live to be preferde, for work to have his gain,
but hope may miss, though wide he gap, he gapeth perchance in vain
Where one we see to be preferde, three live for lack as staruid.
and other eke shall have the fruits, that they have well deseruide.
And this is cause that I ol^e man, am poor whom none regard,
for I have felt for service long the masters short reward,
What greater plagues or woes can be, then lost deserved meede,
and Lord to turue his servant of, in time of greatest need:
Of service long this is the end, as still by proof ye see,
for faithful hearts of servants true, these are rewards that be.
For long expense and charge of frein^s, this is reward again,
for lost of time in golden youth, this is the tried gain.
For toyling pains and labors long, this fruitelesse ends that be:
alas this is the death of some, when Lords ingrate they see,
But chief when age, does once appear, that labor none they have,
the mistres cries what makst thou hear, be packing doting knave:
So are they like unto the Dog in Hunt that runs his race,
who has in youth been well esteemde, and liuide in careless case,
But when in age he weried is, that hunting all is past.
go hang, they cry the cursed our, this is roward at last.
This is the end, this is reward for pains and lost of age:
O learn young man that service then, in none inheritage.
A sign of this of youth ill spent, an aged man am I,
alas no refuge is for me, O death now let me die.
O wretched state, O cruel course, O port of penury,
O pit of pagnes, O pesilent race, O sincke of misery,
O witles wates O frutles factts, O badge of beggars state,
O plumpe of pains O endless woes. O man unfortunate.
Retire my son this race to run, that life vnsertaine is,
who lives in state of Seruitours, lives still in doubtfulnes.
What is the cause, ingratitude, withdrawes the helpyng hand,
since serving weights by daily toil, are praise of noble band,
What is the state of noble troop, if saruants have no powers,
alone is known a princely port, by train of seruitoures?
By service dew is well distinct, of state the right degrees:
as servants serve in hoping hearts, and crouch with humble knees.
Where are the men more courteous, then men of service free:
what men are more of comely corpse, then Courtly servants be?
Who knows the course and trade of men, but servants daily care?
who are more feate or trim traind up, then manerd servants are?
Who strong or tall of personage, but men of servants route?
who bears the cares and bront of wars, but servants arms so stout:
What then of more necessity, then seruitours full true:
why then shall they have ill rewards, in thend their states to rewe?
Lo here good son I have declarde, some part of thy degree:
be ware be times, hereafter say, that I have told it thee:
Then came this courtly Courtier, wherein his praise redownes,
and gave unto this aged man, for help full twenty Crowns,
And said till death in mindful breast, this counsall will I grave,
and eke in time I hope by wit, thereof the fruits to have,
I thanckes restord with hartye love, which tongue does faint to tell:
god thee preserve in happy days, O ^ather dear farewell:
Fare well (quoth he) with thousand thanks, and God thy journey speed
which thus have help my aged years, in times of greatest need,
Thus said: that aged man full glad, with lingering steps on went.
and laith his corpse in pleasant shade, of Oken tree to bent:
For tongue with talk now werie was, and heart for gift was glad;
wherefore he went to recreat, his limbs that weakness had,
And laying down his body weak, he laid his Staff him bye,
and leande his head on Elbow bare, and closde his sleeping eye.
Finis.
Howell to his freinde keeper.
THe serving state which you reject,
By open cause that you detect,
Deserves so great a praise in deed,
As great contempts cannot exceed.
Who serves not God is void of bliss,
In noble service freedom is,
And he that has clear eyes to see,
Perceaues that all men servants be.
For Princes greatst serve God above,
And men them serve in God by love,
As God gives gifts who him regards,
So Lord his servant true rewards.
What great rewards of Masters be,
By service got we daily see?
Some Knights be dubde for their awards,
To greater state, thence forth prefarde.
And eke we see in meaner sort,
The Lords that keep the stately port,
Their servants keep in ioylitie,
And them prefar to dignity.
If servants then receive their meede,
And each man servant is in deed,
In this disprayse of them so pressed,
Include your self emongst the rest.
They are preferred, why say ye noe,
Their Masters gifts do daily grow,
Exalt therefore good Courteours,
And eke the court of Seruitours.
Finis.
keeper his answer to. H.
Friend How I hope thou quietly,
To serve thy Lord most faithfully,
No man to much can praise such men,
No Master good depraues my pen.
I speak of Master Covetous,
Unkind, unjust, discourteous,
Unsweet, unmeet, to serve at all,
Not good, not just, not liberal.
Therefore ye take my word amiss,
All saruants are most true it is:
Yet I do guess by inward mood,
All servants serve not Masters good.
Finis.
Imprinted at London in fleetstreet beneath the Conduyt. at the sign of S.
John Evangelist by Thomas Colwell.


