CERTAIN GREEVANCES, WELL WORTHY THE SERIOVS CONSIDERATION OF THE RIGHT
HONORABLE AND HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT.

Set forth by way of Dialogue, or Conference between a Country Gentleman, and
a Minister of Gods word; for the satisfying of those that do clamor, and
maliciously revile them that labor to have the errors of the Book of Common
Prayer reformed.

By JEWS HEVVES, Minister of Gods Word.

Printed in the Year 1640.

A DIALOGVE OR CONFERENCE, BETWEEN A COUNTRY Gentleman, and a Minister of
Gods word, about the Book of Common Prayer.
Gentleman. I Am very glad that I have met with you, and did long to speak
with you, that you might satisfy me in some things, concerning the book of
Common Prayer; therefore I pray you, tell me truly (as I hope you will) is
there any thing in it, contrary to Gods word?


Minister. Yes verily, it is full of Popish errors, and does appoint horrible
blasphemies, and lying fables to be read to the people, in stead of Gods holy
word, and has caused the Church of England to groan under the abominations of
the Church of Rome, even from the infancy of it, in Queen Elizabeth's time,
until this hour; and now there is great hope, that a time of refreshing and
deliverance is at hand, through the blessing of God, on this Parliament.


Gent. I never heard any blasphemy, or lying fable read in the Church.


Min. I think so, because (it may be) that you were never in the Church on
those days, wherein they are appointed to be read.


Gent. Upon what days are they appointed to be read.


Min. On the fourth of October, in the forenoone, it appoints an horrible
blasphemy to be read for the first lesson, out of the 12 of Tobie and the
ninth verse; where it is written, that Alms do save from death, and purge
away all sin: which is a maine ground of Popery, and an horrible blasphemy
against Christ and his blood, that cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

Also in the 15. verse of that chapter, it is written, that there are seven
Angels, that do present our prayers, which is an other horrible blasphemy
against Christ, who only does present our prayers, Rev. 8.3, 4.


Gent. These are horrible blasphemies indeed, I pray you let me hear some of
the fables that are in it.


Min. On the fourth of October in the afternoon it appoints a lying fable to
be read out of the 11. of Tobie, where it is written, that Tobie going to the
door to meet his Son Tobias coming from Rages did stumble, and that his
son ran unto him, and laid the gall of a fish to his eyes, and that the
whiteness did scale off, and he restored to his sight.

On the 30. of September, another lying fable is appointed to be read of an
Angel that was sent to scale the whiteness from his eyes, and to give Sara
the daughter of Raguel to his son Tobias in marriage, and to bind Asmodeus an
evil spirit, that was in love with her, and had killed seven men that had
been married unto her.

On the first of October an other lying fable is appointed to be read, how
Tobie being about to send his son Tobias to Rages in Media for a wife, did
bid him go and look for a man to go with him, and that he went and found an
Angel, and brought him to his Father, who promised to give the Angel wages,
and agreed with him what he should have by the day, and sent him with his
son and his dog.

On the third of October another lying fable is appointed to be read, how
Tobias being come from Rages did call the Angel unto him, and bad him take a
servant and two Camells, and go to Rages for money, and that the Angel went
and carried writings, which he delivered to Gabael, who brought baggs of money
sealed up, which he delivered to the Angel.


Gent. O horrible, how have the Bishops deluded King Edward the sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and our gracious King Charles, and the whole estate, and
made them believe, that there was nothing in the Service Book contrary to Gods
word.

God Almighty deliver us from them: now that you have showed me the blasphemies
and lying fables; show also what are the Popish errors that are in it, and
first tell me, whether the Service book does command, that all both Ministers
and people shall bow their bodies, when the name Jesus is read?


Min. The Bishops only, without any warrant from God, but from the Pope.


Gent. I have heard that the Name Jesus was a common name among the Jews, was
it so?


Min. Yes, Syrach of Jerusalem had a son whose name was Jesus, Eccles. 50.23.
also Joshua the son of Nun was called Jesus, Acts 7.57. and one of Saint Paul's
fellow laborers was called Jesus, Col. 4.11.


Gent. Why do the Bishops make an Idol of the name Jesus, by causing men to
bow their bodies, and to put off their hat when it is read?


Min. Because they mistake the word of God, where it is written, that at the
name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven, of things on
earth, and of things under the earth, Phil. 2.10.


Gent. What is the name of Jesus?


Min. As by the name of our gracious King Charles is meant, not the name
Charles, (which is a common name) but the authority and power that God has
given him over all people within his own dominions, as when men are pressed to
the Kings service, they are pressed in the Kings name, that is, by virtue of
authority and power from the King, even so, as by the name of King Charles is
meant his authority and power, etc. so, by the name of Jesus is meant the
authority and power, that God has given him over all things in heaven and in
earth, and under the earth.


Gent. What is meant by things in heaven?


Min. By things in Heaven are meant the holy Angels and souls of the
faithful, that have no knees.


Gent. What is meant by things on earth?


Min. By things on earth, are meant all mankind living on earth, whether they
be Elect or Reprobate.


Gent. What is meant by things under the earth?


Min. By things under the earth, are meant the devils and damned souls in
hell.


Gent. What is meant by bowing of the knee?


Min. By bowing of the knee is meant subjection, Isa. 45.23. and not bowing of
the body, when the name Jesus is read; as Pope Anastatius did command, An. 404.


Gent. What is meant by bowing of every knee, of things in heaven, of things on
earth, and of things under the earth?


Min. Thereby is meant, that all the holy Angels and Saints in heaven, and all
mankind on earth, and all the Devils and damned souls in hell shall submit
themselves to Christ, and acknowledge him to be Lord of all, and to have power
over all, to save and to condemn whom he will.


Gent. What do you think of them that kneel when they receive the Communion
bread?


Min. The Papists say, that they are Idolaters, because they kneel, and do
not believe the real presence as they do.


Gent. Who was the first that brought in kneeling?


Min. Pope Honorius, about the year of our Lord, 1220. after that the error
of Transubstantiation was hatched at the Council of Lateran.


Gent. I have read in Gods word, that the Apostles did not kneel when Christ
himself delivered the bread unto them. I have read also in the book of
Martyrs, that the ancient Counsels in the Primitive Church did make Canons
against kneeling, lest it should prove an occasion of Idolatry, ought not we
to conform our selves to our Savior Christ and his Apostles, and to the
Christians of the Primitive Church, rather then to the Devils Vicar general
the Pope?


Min. Yes verily; for it is gross hypocrisy in us to make a show, as though
we were more godly and zealous then the Apostles and Christians of the
Primitive Church.


Gent. What other error do you find to be in the Service book?


Min. The interrupting of the Minister by the Clarke, and the whole
Congregation, is a foul error, and such an error and confusion, as does much
offend God; and that therefore many are unwilling to come into the Church, till
the Service be all read.


Gent. How do they interrupt the Minister?


Min. By rehearsing his words with a loud voice, and by taking words out of his
mouth, and by mingling their prayers with his. The Minister when he prays, is
the mouth of the people, speaking to God for them: therefore they ought to be
silent, till he has done speaking, and then to say Amen. 1 Cor. 14.16. and not
to interrupt him by rehearsing every word after him, as in the Confession of
sin, when the Minister says, Almighty and most merciful Father, we have
erred and strayed out of thy ways, like lost sheep: and in the Letany, when
he says, O God the Father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners; the
Minister must stop, and be silent, till the Clarke and people, have with a loud
voice rehearsed every word after him; in which time, it is impossible for the
Minister to keep idle and by-thoughts, from coming into his mind.

Also, when he prays for the King, saying, Lord save the King, they interrupt
him, by mingling their prayer with his, saying, And mercifully hear us when we
call upon thee. The Minister being interrupted and put out, in praying for the
King, does pray for Ministers, saying, Indue thy Ministers with righteousness;
they do then also interrupt him, by mingling their prayer with his, saying,
And make thy chosen people joyful.

Throughout the whole Letany they do interrupt him by mingling their prayers
with his. They do also, without any warrant from God, but from Pope Hormisda,
interrupt the Minister, when he reads the Psalms, by taking every other
verse out of his mouth, to read it for him with a loud, hackering and confused
noise, especially in Country Churches, where the people cannot read well.

The Minister when he reads or preaches Gods word, is the mouth of God,
speaking to the people, therefore they ought to be silent, and to hearken with
reverence.

When they read the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth verses of the fifty
Psalm, they are likened by some to women scoulding and accusing one another.
The Clarke and people do begin to scould with, and to accuse the Minister,
saying, When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst unto him, and have been
partaker with adulterers; then the Priest accuses the Clarke, saying, Thou
have let thy tongue speak wickedness, and with thy tongue thou have set forth
deceit; then the Clarke and people do set upon the Minister again, and do
accuse him, saying, Thou sit and speak against thy brother, yea, thou
have slaundered thine own Mothers son.


Gent. I remember that in the Churching of women, the Minister is called
Priest, tell me, I pray you, is that name a fit name for a Minister and
Preacher of the Gospel.


Min. No verily; For we read in Gods Word, of no more orders of Priests, but
of two, the order of Aaron, and the order of Melchisedech.

Of the order of Aaron, were the Leviticall Priests, whose office was to offer
Sacrifices, which together with the Sacrifices was abolished in Christ his
death.

Of the order of Melchisedech was Christ only, and shall remain Priest for
ever.

A third order of Priests is to be found no where, but in the Masse-booke, and
in our Service-booke.

The name Priest, belongs to every Christian man and woman, as well as to the
Minister, according as it is written, Revel. 1.6. that Christ has made us
Kings and Priests unto God: the meaning is that Christ has made all the Elect,
(men and women) Priests, to offer the Sacrifices of praise, and of thanks unto
God.


Gent. What do you think of the Priest and Clarke, when they do Church a
woman?


Min. I will not tell what I think, but I will tell you what some do say.


Gent. What do they say?


Min. They say that the Priest is like a witch.


Gent. Why do they say that the Priest is like to a witch?


Min. Because he does as a witch does, when she says the Lords Prayer.


Gent. What does a witch when she says the Lords Prayer?


Min. She leaves out these words, but deliver us from evil, and so does the
Priest, when he does church a woman.


Gent. Why will not a Witch say these words?


Min. Because the devil will not let her, till she has bewitched so many as
he would have her: For by the evil that is praid against in that petition, is
meant the devil, and the sin whereunto he tempts: therefore the devil
will not have her to say these words, because when she says them, she
prays, that God will deliver her from him, and the witcherie whereto he
tempts her.

The Priest does also skip over the conclusion of the Lords Prayer, for thine
is the Kingdom, power and glory: and therein also they say that he is like to
a witch, when she does say her Creed; for when she says the second Article,
And in Jesus Christ his only son, she skips over these words, our Lord, and
so does the Priest slip over the conclusion of the Lords Prayer.


Gent. Saint Luke leaves it out, therefore the Priest may leave them out, Luke
11.4.


Min. It follows not, that therefore the Minister may leave them out; for
Saint Luke did not write any thing of himself, but what the holy Ghost would
have him to write.


Gent. Why would not the Holy Ghost have him to write them?


Min. Because it was sufficient, that Saint Matthew had writ them, Mat. 6.13.


Gent. Some do think, because Saint Mark and Saint John do make no mention
of the Lords Prayer, that therefore the Minister may omit the reading of it,
and that because the Evangelists and the Apostles did not use to say it as a
prayer, therefore none, neither Minister nor People ought to use it as a prayer.


Min. The truth is, that our Savior Christ did make it for all Christians to
use as a prayer, and also for a pattern to pray by.


Gent. Where do you find that our Savior Christ would have it used as a
prayer?


Min. In the 11. chapter of the Gospel written by Saint Luke, and the second
verse, where it is written, that our Savior said; When you pray say, Our
Father which, etc.


Gent. Where do you find that our Savior would have it used for a pattern?


Min. In the sixth chapter of the Gospel written by Saint Matthew, and the ninth
verse, where it is written, that our Savior said, After this manner pray you,
Our Father which, etc.


Gent. Why will not the Witch acknowledge Christ to be the Lord?


Min. Because the devil would have her to take him, and not Christ for her
Lord.


Gent. Why do some say, that the Priest and Clarke when they do Church a
woman, are like to a couple of Players acting their parts.


Min. Because the Priest does skip over these words, but deliver us from evil,
and does leave them to the Clarke to say for his part; and as soon as the
Clarke has said them, the Priest says, Lord save this woman thy servant, then
the Clarke comes in again, with his part saying, which puts her trust in
thee; then the Priest, as though he would not have the woman to put her trust
in him, turns her over to the Clarke, and bids him be unto her a strong
Tower: then the Clarke answers and shows wherein saying, from the face of
their enemy.


Gent. This is a very strange kind of giving God thanks for women's safe
deliverance, from the pain and peril of child birth.


Min. It is indeed, and no small grief to honest women, not only because
there is no thanks given to God for their safe deliverance from the pain and
peril of childbirth, but also because thanksgiving is turned to a Jewish
kind of purification: for they must come with a veil to cover their faces
after the Jewish manner, signifying thereby, that by childbearing they were
made unclean, and that they were ashamed of their uncleanness, or that they
had played the harlots, and were ashamed to show their faces, and Judah thought
that Thamar was an harlot, because her face was covered with a veil, Genesis
33.14, 15.

It is a great offense, not only to honest women, but also to every true
Christian man, to see his wife go to the Church like a Jew, or like an Harlot.


Gent. Many do say, that the manner of administering the holy Sacrament of
Baptism prescribed in the Service Book is very absurd, and full of popish
errors, and so rediculous as they cannot but laugh at it; I pray you tell me,
what do you find in it to be so absurd and ridiculous, as they can not but
laugh at it?


Min. The interrogatories ministered to infants that have no understanding; and
the answer of the Godfathers and Godmothers are so absurd and ridiculous, as
they cannot but laugh at them: as first, the Minister must examine the infant,
and ask him, if he does forsake the devil and all his works, the vain pomp
and glory of the world, the coveteous desires of the same, the carnal desires
of the flesh, so as he will not follow nor be led by them: he must also ask
him, if he does believe all the Articles of the Christian faith, and if he
will be baptized in that faith?


Gent. Were not these interrogations administered to infants in the Primitive
Church?


Min. No, these or the like were then administered to such as were of years,
when they were converted and came to be baptized, and afterward commanded by
the Pope to be administered to infants.


Gent. What answer does the Godfathers and Godmothers give?


Min. They give no answer, but do counterfeit the Infants voice (as if he were
a conjured Ghost) speaking within them, and answering to the first
interrogation, concerning the Devil and all his works, the vain pomp and
glory of the world, the covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires
of the flesh, that he does forsake them all; and to the second and third,
concerning the Articles of the Christian faith, that he does believe them all;
and that he does desire to be baptized in that faith.


Gent. What does the Minister after he has received these feigned answers?


Min. He does baptize the Infant, and does mark him on the forehead with a
Cross, which does offend many, because they take it to be the mark of the
Beast, mentioned Rev. 14.9.


Gent. Why do they take it to be the mark of the Beast?


Min. Because there is no one thing in all Popery, set on the forehead, and on
the hand, but a cross; made on the forehead by the Priest in Baptism, and by
the Bishop on the right hand in Confirmation, saying, Signaculum, Christi, in
manu tua dextra trado tibi: therefore they say, that it is a mark wherewith
the Beast does cause all that are of his Church to be marked; according as it
is written, that he has made all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond
and free, to receive a mark on the forehead, and on the right hand, Rev. 13.16.

It is written, Rev. 14.9. that if any receive his mark on the forehead, and
on the hand, he shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, therefore some
do keep their children unbaptised, rather then have them marked with the mark
of the beast.


Gent. What fault do they find with the prayers that are made at the
administration of Baptism?


Min. They find fault with the Popish errors that are in them, as in the
first prayer before Baptism, it is written, that God has sanctified the flood
Jorden, and all other waters, to the mystical washing away of sin. The truth
is, that there is no mystical washing away of sin in water, but a real and
true washing away of sin in the blood of Christ, 1 Ioh. 1.7. The water in
Baptism does but signify, that as foul things are washed and made clean in
water, so the souls of the Elect, defiled with sin, are made clean in the
blood of Christ, 1 Ioh. 1.7.

In another prayer, the Minister prays that the Infant may receive remission
of sins, by spiritual regeneration. The truth is, that the children of God
have their sins forgiven, and are sanctified by faith, Romans 5.1. and not by
spiritual regeneration, which is but an effect of faith, purifying the heart,
Act. 15.9. or to speak more plainly, it is God that justifies, Romans 8.33. by
accepting of the sufferings and obedience of Christ, as a sufficient recompense
and satisfaction, and does by faith assure the hearts of his children, that for
the merits of the sufferings and obedience of Christ, his wrath is pacified,
and his Justice satisfied.

In another prayer, thanks is given to God for regenerating the Infant with
his holy Spirit. The truth is, that the children of God do receive the Spirit
of God to regenerate them, not by sprinkling of water in Baptism, but by
hearing the Gospel preached, 2 Cor. 3.8. Act. 10.44. To make mention of all
the Popish errors that are in other prayers and Collects, would be too tedious.


Gent. What do they say of the Catechism in the Service book?


Min. They say, that it is full of Popish errors, as first in the Rubric
before the Catechism, it is written, that Children baptized, have all things
necessary to salvation, and are undoubtedly saved. The truth is, that they have
no knowledge of sin, nor of the wrath and curse of God due to sin, nor of
Christ, nor of the Articles of the Christian faith, and therefore have neither
faith nor repentance, without which none can be saved. It is true, that
Infants, borne of the Elect, are undoubtedly saved, by virtue of Gods
everlasting covenant of grace, so many as are of the number of the Elect, I
say, so many as are of the number of the Elect, because many of the Elect, that
are now Saints in heaven, have brought forth children that are Reprobates and
damned souls in hell: For, Adam had Cain as well as Abel, and Abraham had
Ishmaell as well as Isaac, and Isaac had Esau, whom God hated, as well as
Jacob, whom God loved.


Gent. This error, you say, is in the Rubric, what error is in the
Catechism?


Min. In the Catechism, it is affirmed, that Christ has redeemed all
mankind. The truth is, that Christ came into the world, not to redeem all
mankind, but the Elect only; therefore the Evangelist S. Luke setting forth
the genealogy of Christ, begins from Joseph, and ascends to Adam, and
from Adam does descend to Sheth, who was the first of the Elect that was borne
after the death of Abell, and makes no mention of Cain, nor of any of his
posterity. And S. Matthew, beginning from Abraham, and from Abraham descends
to Isaac, and from Isaac to Jacob, and makes no mention of Ishmaell, nor of
Esau, nor of any that came of them.

Also our Savior Christ says, that he gave his life a ransom for many, Mat.
20.28. and that his blood was shed for many, Mat. 26.28. He does not say, that
his blood was shed for all mankind, but for many, that is, for the Elect
only, who are many, though but few in comparison of the multitude that are
Reprobates.

It is also affirmed in the Catechism, that we are made the children of God in
Baptism.

The truth is, that whosoever is not a child of God, before he be baptized,
shall never be a child of God, because all that are the children of God, were
(before the world was) made the children of God, by virtue of Gods eternal
decree of election. It also affirms, that there are two Sacraments generally
as necessary to salvation; intimating that the Sacraments are necessary to
salvation, so as if a child die before he be baptized, he shall be damned,
which is the cause that Midwifes do take upon them to baptize. Intimating
also, that there are more Sacraments then two; therefore it is written in the
Rubric before the Communion, that every Parishioner shall communicate thrice
in the year, and also receive the Sacraments; meaning the five Popish
Sacraments: For there are none other.

It affirms also, that Godfathers and Godmothers, do promise and vow three
things, first, that the Infant shall forsake the devil and all his works, the
pompes and vanities of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the
flesh; secondly, that he shall believe all the Articles of the Christian faith;
thirdly, that he shall keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of his life, which no man is able to do of himself.

The truth is, that the Godfathers and Godmothers, do neither promise nor vow,
that the Infant shall do these things.


Gent. What then do they?


Min. They do nothing, but counterfeit the Infants voice, as if he were a
conjured Ghost within every one of them, speaking and saying, that he does all
these things.


Gent. Are there any other things that do offend and discourage the people
from coming into the Church till service be all read?


Min. Yes.


Gent. What are they?


Min. They are the perverting of the meaning of the holy Ghost, in many places
of the Psalms, Epistles, and Gospels, by putting in, and leaving out of words,
and also of the meaning of our Savior Christ in many places of the Revelation.


Gent. Wherein is the meaning of the holy Ghost perverted, by putting in and
leaving out of words?


Min. In the Psalm 106.30. Phineas prayed, are put in for Phineas executed
judgment. Psalm. 105. Not obedient, are put in for, not disobedient. Psalm. 125.
these words, The rod of the ungodly comes not on the lot of the righteous,
are put in, for rests not on the lot of the righteous. In the Epistle on
monday in Easter week, these words, Israel remembered, are put in, for, He,
that is, God remembered. To make mention of all the places in the Psalms,
Epistles, and Gospels, would be too tedious.


Gent. You said, that the service Book does pervert the meaning of Christ in
diverse places of the Revelation, I pray you show me some of those places.


Min. The fourteenth Chapter is appointed to be read on Childermasse day, after
the Popish manner, for an Epistle, of purpose to pervert the meaning of Christ.


Gent. What was the meaning of Christ in that Chapter?


Min. The meaning of Christ in that chapter, was, and now is, to show, that in
time of greatest persecutions, when the heathen persecuting Emperors, and
after them the Popes did rage most against the Christian Religion, and
professors thereof, Christ had his Church (though invisible) 144000 preserved
by him, and kept chaste and undefiled with spiritual fornication of Idolatry.


Gent. How is the meaning of Christ perverted?


Min. By misapplying that to children slain by Herod, which was written of
Christians persecuted and slain by the Heathen persecuting Emperors and Popes.


Gent. Why does the Pope pervert the meaning of Christ, by misse-applying that
to the children slain by Herod, which was written of Christ and his Church,
persecuted by the Heathen Emperors and the Popes.


Min. The Pope, and so many of our Lord Bishops, as are Popish, do pervert the
meaning of Christ, by causing that Chapter to be read on Childermasse day, of
purpose to keep weak Christians in blindness, so as they shall not be able
to give an answer to the Papists, when they shall ask them, where their
Religion and Church was an hundred years ago, before Martin Luthers time.


Gent. What other meaning had Christ in that Chapter?


Min. His meaning was to show that in his good time, he would give a free
passage, and good success to the preaching of the Gospel, as (thanks be to
his holy Majesty) it has had in many Kingdoms since Martin Luthers time, and
shall have every day more and more.


Gent. I am glad to hear this, I pray you go on, to show where the meaning of
Christ is perverted.


Win. On Michaelmasse day, the twelfth Chapter, from the seventh verse to the
thirteenth, is appointed to be read for an Epistle, it being no Epistle, but a
prophecy of a battle fought in heaven, between Michaell and his Angels, and
the Dragon and his Angels, and of the victory that Michaell and his Angels, had
over the Dragon and his Angels; and of the casting of the Dragon and his Angels
out of Heaven.


Gent. What is meant by Heaven?


Min. By heaven is meant, not the highest heaven, but the Church of Christ
militant here on earth.


Gent. What is meant by Michaell and his Angels?


Min. By Michaell and his Angels are meant, Christ and his true followers,
especially, the faithful Preachers of the Gospel.


Gent. What is meant by the Dragon, and his Angels?


Min. By the Dragon and his Angels, are meant, the Devil, and the Heathen
persecuting Emperors, and the Popes.


Gent. What is meant by the battle?


Min. By the battle is meant persecutions, raised by the Heathen persecuting
Emperors, and the Popes, and popish Princes, against the Christian Religion,
and the professors thereof.


Gent. What is meant by the victory, that Michael and his Angels, had over the
Dragon and his Angels.


Min. By the victory, is meant the victories that Christ gave to Constantine
the Christian Emperor, and that he has, does, and daily will give to
Christian Princes, fighting his battle against Antichrist, and his partakers,
and to the faithful Preachers, against false Teachers.


Gent. What is meant by the casting of the Dragon and his Angels out of heaven?


Min. Thereby is meant the utter confusion and overthrow of Antichrist, by the
spirit of Christ's mouth, that is, by the preaching of the Gospel, so as he
shall be deprived of all dignity, and shall have no place in heaven, that is,
in the Church of God, to domineere any more, as thanks be to God, the
Archbishop of Canterbury is deprived of all dignity, and shall never have place
again in heaven, I mean in the Church of God, to domineere as he has done.


Gent. Why is this Prophecy appointed to be read on Michaelmas day?


Min. It is appointed to be read on Michaelmasse day, of purpose to pervert the
meaning of our Savior Christ, by misse-applying to Michaell and all Angels in
the highest Heaven, the victory that Christ has and daily does, and will
(every day more and more) give to true Christians, that do follow him,
fighting his battle against Antichrist.


Gent. I do hear many find fault with new orders that the Bishops have made,
I pray you tell me what those orders are?


Min. They have made an order that the Communion Table shall be turned to an
Altar, as Pope Sixtus did, to usher in Popery, about the year of our Lord 264.
and that Churchwardens shall present their Minister, if he do not admonish the
people to resort to him, and open their grief of conscience, that they may
receive the benefit of absolution; as appears by Bishop Wren his Book of
Articles, Chap. 4. Art. 22. and that no prayer shall be made in the Church for
sick persons, but according to the order prescribed in the Service Book;
Bishop Wren did bind the Churchwardens of his Diocese, by an Oath, to present
their Minister, if he did use any other form of prayer.


Gent. What form of prayer does the service Book prescribe for sick persons?


Min. It prescribes no form to be used in the Church?


Gent. What then?


Min. The Minister must go home to their houses, and salute them, as the
Mass Priest does, saying, Peace be in this house, and to all that dwell in it;
and when he is come where the sick person is, he must kneel, and read three
or four lines of the Letany, and Lord have mercy upon us, and the Lords
Prayer, till he comes to the last Petition, and has read half of it; ( Lead
us not into temptation) the other half, ( but deliver us from evil) he must
leave (as the Mass Priest does) for the Clark to read; and then as soon as
the Clark has read it, the Minister must (as the Mass Priest does) skip over
the conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory for ever; and in
stead thereof, he and the Clark must read five versicles of a line or half a
line long, and a short prayer, and an exhortation, and the Creed, and then
absolve the sick person from all his sins, in the Name of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, and begins the absolution with an untruth, saying, that Christ
has left power to his Church, to absolve all sinners, that do truly repent
and believe in him.

The truth is, that Christ has not given power to his Church, to forgive
sins, and that there is no Church that does take upon it to forgive sins,
but the Synagogue of Satan, the Church of Rome, and so many of the Lord
Bishops, and of the Clergy of England, as are Popish, whose error is grounded
upon their misse-taking of the words of our Savior Christ to Peter; I will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind
on earth, shall be bound in heaven; whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall
be loosed in heaven.


Gent. What is meant by the kingdom of heaven?


Min. By the kingdom of heaven, is meant the Church of Christ on earth, where
Christ does rule and reign, by his word and holy Spirit, in the hearts and
consciences of the Elect, and is commonly called the kingdom of grace.


Gent. What is meant by the keys of the kingdom?


Min. By the keys of the kingdom, are meant the grace and power that Christ
gave to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, and their successors, to preach the
Gospel.


Gent. It is written, Luke 11.52. that Christ did reprove the Interpreters of
the Law, because they did take away the key of knowledge from the people, what
is meant by the key of knowledge?


Min. By the key of knowledge, is meant the opening and showing the true sense
and meaning of the Scriptures, whereby the people are brought to the knowledge
of God, and of him whom he has sent Jesus Christ.


Gent. It is written, Mat. 23.13. that the Scribes and Pharisees did shut up
the kingdom of heaven against men: how did they lock and shut it up?


Min. They did lock and shut the people out of heaven, by their unfaithfulness
and idleness in opening and showing the true sense and meaning of the
Scriptures, and by their false expounding and interpreting of the Scriptures.


Gent. Christ said to Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven; What is meant by loosing and binding on earth and in heaven?


Min. By loosing and binding on earth and in heaven, is meant the authority
and power that Christ gave to Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, and to
every faithful Preacher, (not to forgive sins) but to declare and pronounce
forgiveness of sins to all that by their preaching shall be brought to true
faith and repentance; and that as verily as forgiveness of sins, is declared
and pronounced, by preaching, to them that do truly repent and believe in
Christ, so verily does God, of his free mercy, forgive them their sins, for
Christ his sake, and that as verily, as the wrath and judgments of God, are
threatened to come on them that will not repent and believe in Christ; so
verily, the wrath and judgments of God shall come upon them.


Gent. Go on, I pray you, as you have begun, to show the new orders.


Min. Another new order is, that none at their Table shall talk of the holy
Sccriptures, nor of divine matters, and that Churchwardens shall present such
as at their Table shall talk of the holy Scriptures, or of divine matters,
Wren, Chap. 4. Art. 31.


Gent. Out upont, this is a most devilish order; God Almighty, deliver us from
Lord Bishops: this order does make my heart to rise against them.


Min. It is indeed, a most devilish order, and shows plainly, that if some
of them might have their wills, they would forbid men to read the holy
Scriptures at home in their houses, as in Churches they forbid the Genealogy
of Christ, the Book of Canticles, both the Books of Kings (save the eight
first Chapters of the first Book of Kings) and of Chronicles, and the Book of
Revelation, save some few pieces, that are appointed to be read for Epistles
after the Popish manner.


Gent. Why will they not suffer the Genealogy of Christ to be read to the
people?


Min. They have no warrant for it from God, but from the Pope, who says, that
ignorance is the mother of devotion: therefore the Genealogy of Christ is
forbidden to be read, of purpose to keep the people in blindness, not able to
see the truth of God, in fulfilling his promise to Abraham, and to David, that
Christ should come of them, and of their seed, nor to see that Christ came not
only of Abraham, and of David, who were Jews, but also of Rahab, and of Ruth,
who were Gentiles, and that therefore Christ, is not a Savior of the Jews
only, but also of us Gentiles.


Gent. Why is the Book of Canticles forbid to be read?


Min. It is also forbid, of purpose to keep the people in blindness, not able
to see the ardent love and affection of Christ toward them, least thereby they
should be stirred up to love Christ, and to be zealous of his glory, and to
abhor the Pope, and his Antichristian Religion.


Gent. Why are the Books of Kings and of Chronicles forbid?


Min. Because they do show, that godly Kings did ever love Gods true Prophets,
and did hearken unto them, and were zealous in maintaining the true Religion,
and in suppressing Idolatry.


Gein. Why is the Book of Revelation forbid?


Min. Because it shows that Antichrist shall be destroyed, and that Rome
shall be set on fire, and ruinated for ever; and that all that do live and die
in the Romish Religion, trusting to the Popes pardons, and their own merits,
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and be cast into the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone.


Gent. I do wonder, that the godly Bishops, who in King Edward the sixth his
time, did make the Service Book, that they being godly, and so zealous of Gods
glory, as they did lay down their lives for the truth in Queen Mary's days,
that they did so pester the Book with such horrible blasphemies, lying fables,
and popish errors.


Min. We are much bound to praise God for them, and to judge charitably of
them, because they were but newly crept out of the pit of darkness, the Church
of Rome, and for want of a better, were glad to take the Masse-booke for their
pattern. They were truly zealous of Gods glory, according to the measue of
knowledge that God did give unto them, and did suffer martyrdom in Queen
Mary's time.


Gent. Wherefore did they suffer?


Min. They suffered for denying the Popes supremacy, and for denying the bread
and wine in the Lords Supper, to be the body and blood of Christ.


Gent. I do also wonder much more at our Bishops, many of them being great
learned men, that they should suspend, imprison, and deprive, so many godly
Ministers, for refusing to subscribe to the Service Book.


Min. It is a sign that the true fear of God is not in them; for, if it were,
they would not dare to do as they have done.


Gent. Bishops have been ever since the Apostles time; have they not?


Min. The name Bishop, was a common name, given by the Apostles to every
Preacher of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.3. Tit. 1.7.

From the Apostles time to the year of our Lord 334. there were in Rome (which
is now the seat of Antichrist) thirty-three godly Preachers, commonly called
Bishops, who suffered Martyrdom for the truth, under the Heathen Emperors;
only one of them did flee, and hide himself in the Hill Soracte, till the
time of Constantine the first Christian Emperor, and then returned to Rome,
and was the first Roman Bishop that escaped Martyrdom, and had a great living
bestowed upon him by Constantine. So also had diverse other Bishops, whereupon
many of them, (living in wealth) did in short time, after the death of
Constantine, grow idle and proud; especially, one of them, on whom Constantine
had bestowed great revenues, which made him so proud and stout, as he did
overtop all the other Bishops, not only in Rome, but also throughout the whole
Empire, and did alter, chop, and change, and add his own devises to the
public worship and service of God, and did make Canons for the establishing,
and putting of his devises in practice, and through the power of Satan, by
false doctrines, signs, and lying wonders, did seduce the Christian Emperors
that succeeded Constantine, and drew them to acknowledge him the head of the
Church, and vicar of Christ, which made him so proud and potent, as he did
subdue and bring under the Emperors, and took upon him to excommunicate
diverse of them, and to curse them, with bell, book, and candle.

Henricus the Emperor, being excommunicated, came in submissive manner to be
absolved, and (in the cold winter, in frost and snow) did wait at the Bishops
gate, with his wife and child, barefoot and bareleg, three days and three
nights, before he could have audience.

Frederick the Emperor, was made to hold his stirrup, and to lie down on the
ground for him to tread on his neck; and at length, the Bishop of Rome came to
be the great red Dragon, Rev. 12.3. and with his long tail of false doctrine,
flattery, promises, and preferments, did draw the third part of the stars of
heaven, that is, so many of the other Bishops, as were not sound in heart, and
did cast them to the earth, that is, drew them to be earthly minded, like
himself, and to give over studying sound divinity, and to join with him in
studying how to supplant the Christian Religion.


Gent. From this that you have said, I do gather, that they whom Christ, by
his Apostles, did ordain and appoint to Preach the Gospel, and not only
they, but also all that were in the primitive Church, lawfully called to preach
the Gospel, were Bishops de jure divino, of divine institution. How long, I
pray you, did they continue to be de jure divino?


Min. They continued to be de jure divino, till they came to be Antichrists,
that is, adversaries to Christ, then they fell from being Bishops, de jure
divino, of divine institution, and came to be Bishops de jure Pontificio, of
the Popes institution, who is therefore called Pater Patrum, the Father of the
Fathers, meaning the Bishops, therefore to distinguish the Bishops, that are de
jure Pontificio, of the Popes institution, from the godly Bishops, that were de
jure divino, of divine institution, they commonly called Prelates, or Lord
Bishops.


Gent. Why are they called Prelates?


Min. The word, Praelati, Prelates, comes of praeferor, to prefer:
therefore they are called Praelati, Prelates, because they are preferred, and
do prefer themselves, before and above their brethren and fellow Ministers.


Gent. Why are they called Lord Bishops?


Min. They are called Lord Bishops, because they do Lord it over their
brethren, and over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. and have been the chief
supplanters and persecuters of the Christian Religion, ever since the title of
Prelates and Lord Bishops was given unto them.

In Queen Mary's time, blooddy Bonner, Lord Bishop of London, and Gardner,
Lord Bishop of Winchester, were fierce and cruel, like Dragons, in shedding
Christian blood, and in supplanting the Christian Religion, planted by King
Edward the sixth, till God in mercy, did bring Queen Elizabeth to the Crown;
then, when in her first Parliament, the House was about to establish the true
Religion, the Lord Bishops that were of the House, being nine in number, did
stand up to cry it down, and to have the Romish Religion continued; but
thanks be to God they prevailed not.

When Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, few or none did study Divinity in
the Universities, therefore Tradesmen (such as were of honest life and
conversation) were made Ministers to read Service, and in stead of Preaching,
to read Homilies, till the Lord Jesus (in his good time) did thrust forth
Laborers into his harvest, out of the Universities, who did discover the
Popish errors, wherewith the Service Book was pestered, and the unlawfulness
of the Romish Ceremonies. Then the Lord Bishops (who till then were quiet) did
bestirre themselves to disturb the peace of the Church, and to bring in a
cursed division; according to the words of our Savior Christ, Luke 12.51.
Think you that I came to give peace on earth? I tell you, nay, but rather
division; which cursed division has continued ever since; and in every
Parliament since that time till now, when humble Petitions were made for
Reformation, the Lord Bishops only, and such as were seduced by them, and made
to believe that the Ceremonies were lawful, and that there was nothing in the
Service Book contrary to Gods Word, did bend all their forces against
Reformation.

In the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when she began to be sickly,
and not like to live long, then Doctor Bancroft Lord Bishop of London, knowing
that King James was to succeed her, and fearing that his Majesty would reform
things amiss in the public worship and service of God, and in the government
of the Church, did License a Book written by a Jesuit that he kept in his
house, wherein it was written, that it was in the Popes power, as a gift
appropriate to Saint Peter's chair, to depose the Kings of England, and to give
authority to the people to elect, choose, and set up another.

As then, so now, it is thought, that the Archbishop of Canterbury fearing this
Parliament, has devised an oath, to stir up so many as he can, to resist the
Reformation, that many do pray for, and hope to see, to the glory of God.


Gent. There was a little Book written of late, and dedicated to the House of
Parliament, that had most of those things in it, that you have spoken of,
concerning the Service Book and the Bishops.


Min. There was so, but the Author whereof is much grieved every time that he
does think upon it, because it was dispersed without his consent, and printed
false, by putting in and leaving out of words, so as it was not fit to be
presented to the House of Parliament.


Gent. It made mention of Judgments that God has showed upon the Church; I
pray you show me what those Judgments were.


Min The most remarkable, and fearful Judgment, was showed on the Parish
Church of Withcombe, in Devonshire, being a very fair Church, newly trimmed,
having a very fair Tower, with great and small Pinnacles, one of the famousest
Towers in the West part of England.

On the 21. of October 1638. in service time, was heard a fearful Thunder,
much like the noise or report of great Cannons, and a most strange and
fearful darkness, and a strong loathsome smell of brimstone; and a fearful
blast, that struck in at the North side of the Tower; and tearing through a
strong stone wall, came into the Church, through the highest Window, and took
with it a great part thereof; and with a mighty power struck against the
North-side wall of the Church, and did batter and shake it very much; and went
toward the Pulpit, and in the way took with it the Lime and Sand from the
wall, and grated the wall, and defaced it, being newly whited; and tore away
the side Deske of the Pulpit; and colored the Pulpit black, and left it
moist, as if it had been newly wiped over with Ink.

There was also a most fearful Lightning, which did affright the people, and
scalded them so, as the most part of them fell down, some on their knees, some
on their faces, and some one upon another crying.

The Ministers wife had her Ruff and linen next her body burnt off, and her
body grievously scorched.

One Mistress Ditford sitting in the Seat with her, had her Gown, two
Wast-coats, and her linen next her body grievously scorched.

Another woman running out of the Church, had her Clothes set on fire, her body
scorched, and her flesh torn on her back in grievous manner.

One Master Hill, a Gentleman, had his head smit against the wall, and dyed the
next day.

Sir Richard Reinolds Warriner, had his head cloven, his skull rent in three
pieces, whereof two fell into the next Seat, the other fell in the Seat where
he sat; his brains fell entire and whole into the next Seat behind him; his
Blood dashed against the wall; some of the skin of his head, flesh, and hair,
to the quantity of an handful, was carried into the Chancell, and stuck fast
upon one of the Posts, between the Church and the Chancell; his Body was left
in the Seat, as though he had been alive, sitting asleep, and leaning upon his
elbow, resting on the Deske before him, with the forepart of his head and face
whole.

A man that sat next unto him, in the same seat was scalded, and burnt all
over, on that side next unto the Warriner.

In the second Seat behind the Warriner, a man was in a most grievous manner
burnt, and scalded all over his body, so as he was all over like raw flesh, and
lived in great misery about a week.

A dog near the Chancell door, was whirled up three times, and fell down dead.

Some seats in the body of the Church were torn up, and turned up-side down,
and they that sat in them had no harm, notwithstanding that they were thrown
out of them into other seats, four or five seats higher.

About the number of eight boys, sitting about the rayles of the Communion
Table, were taken up and thrown on heaps within the rayles, and had no hurt.

A man sitting on the Church Beer, at the lower end of the Church, had the
Beer torn in pieces under him, and himself thrown into a seat by the wall
and had no hurt.

A beam broke in the middle, and fell between the Minister and the Clarke,
and hurt neither.

The Church was very much defaced, and torn, and a great stone near the
foundation, was torn out and removed.

Stones were thrown out of the Tower, as thick as if there had bin an hundred
men throwing them, some of such weight and bigness, as no man was able to lift.

One of the Pinnacles of the Tower was thrown down into the Church.

A very great stone was thrown from the Tower, over the East end of the Church,
and over the Churchyard, and over an hedge into a Close.

Another great stone was thrown an hundred yards from the Church, which sunk
into the Earth so far as it could not be seen.

A Bowling-Alley near the Churchyard, was turned up into pits and holes.

A Wine-Taverne near the Church, had the side next the Church torn up, and
the covering carried off; and one of the Rafters broke into the house.

A little before night, some were sent into the Church to fetch out the dead
bodies, who found a couple of little children, walking chearefully, hand in
hand, and seemed by their countenances, that they had been nothing affrighted
with the fearful sights that they saw, nor with the lamentable crying of the
people, nor to have cried because their mothers were gone.

On Whitsunday last, 1640. in the Parish of Anthony in Cornwell, when the
people were kneeling at the Communion, great claps of Thunder was heard, as
though diverse Cannons had been shot off at once; and extraordinary and most
fearful flashes of Lightnings, and a terrible and unspeakeable strange sound,
to the great amazement of the people; and when the Minister was turning toward
the Communion Table to give the Cup, after he had given the Bread, he saw (to
his thinking) a flaming fire about his body, and withal, heard a terrible and
unspeakeable sound, and had no hurt, save that the outside of one of his legs
was scalded.

Presently after that, diverse balls of fire came into the Church, and struck
one Ferdinando Reepe on the sole of his left foot, with such violence, as he
thought his foot had been split in pieces, and was for a while deprived of his
senses.

One John Hodge was stricken in the knees, and thighs, and lower part of his
body, so as he thought every part of his body to be unjoyned.

One Dorothy Tubbe was stricken so, as she thought her legs and knees were
struck off from her body.

One Anthony Peeke was fearfully struck in all the lower parts of his body, so
as it seemed as dead; and felt the water in his bladder, as it were boiling
hot, and thought that he had been shot through, and was lift up from kneeling,
and set upon the form by which he kneeled.

One Susan Collins was struck in the lower part of her body, so as it seemed to
her, to be struck off from the upper part, and was scalded on the wrest on the
right hand.

A great fire, far redder then any Lightning came into the Church, and struck
one Nicholas Shelton on both sides of his head, as though he had been struck
with two flat stones, and did shake his body as though it would shake it in
pieces, whereby he lost his sight and his senses.

One Roger Nile, was struck on the backbone, on the right side, and on the
anckle on the inside of his left leg; so as for a while he was not able to
stand.

After the fire there was heard in the Church, as it were the hissing of a
great shot; and after that a noise, as though diverse Cannons had been shot off
at once, to make one single and terrible report.

The noise did not descend from above, but was heard and seemed to begin close
at the Northside of the Communion Table.

After this fire and noise, then followed a loathsome smell of Gunpowder, and
Brimstone, and a great smoke.

The Church had no harm, save that seven or eight holes and rents were made in
the wall of the Steeple, some on the inside, and some on the outside, and
impressions on the stones in diverse places, as if they were made by force of
shot, discharged out of a great Ordnance, so as in diverse places, light might
be seen through the walls.

In this storm was no body killed, save one dog in the Belfree, and another at
the feet of one kneeling to receive the Cup.

As soon as this fearful storm was over, they that were weak, not able to
stand, were (through the mercy of God) restored to their strength; and they
that were frantic, to their senses; and he that was blind, was restored to
his sight; and came all to the Lords Table, and received the Wine, and went all
safe home, praising God; and returned all in the afternoon, to give God thanks.

Besides, the fearful signs of Gods wrath showed on Churches, diverse
strange and fearful sights have been seen in the Air, and on the Land.

The like we read were seen in Germany, and in other Countries beyond the Sea,
a little before their wars and ruin began: Therefore pray heartily for the
King and his Council, and for the whole House of Parliament, that all may
join together in the fear of God, to reform what is amiss, especially, in
Gods Worship and Service, and that in time, before the wrath of God be kindled.


Gent. These fearful judgments do show, that God is not pleased, but much
offended with the public worship and service, which is prescribed unto his
holy Majesty, in our service book, therefore I have no heart to come into the
Church, till the service be all read.


Min. Do not refrain, but come into the Church, and there do as the godly in
Jerusalem did, and as the three godly children, and Joseph of Arimathea did.


Gent. What did the godly in Jerusalem?


Min. When they saw that the chief of the Priests, and of the people, did
bring the abominations of the heathen into the public worship and service of
God, and so polluted the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.14. they did not
refrain, but came and brought their Sacrifices, and did mourn and cry unto
God against those abominations; so do you come and offer unto God your
sacrifices, of prayer, of praise, and of thankesgiving, and mourn, when you
see the Minister and people, do after the abominations of the Church of Rome,
and cry unto God against those abominations.


Gent. What did the three godly children?


Min. They did not go about to pull down the golden Image, that
Nebuchadnezzer had set up, but did refuse to worship it; so you ought not to
go about to put down that which public authority has set up; as some, to
keep the Minister from being heard in reading the Service, did sing aloud, so
as he could not be heard, and was feign to give over, In stead of singing, they
ought rather to have mourned and cry in secret unto the Lord, and to join with
the Minister and the Congregation, save only in those things wherein they do
after the abominations of the Church of Rome.


Gent. If we do so, we are sure to be complained of to the Bishop.


Min. When you are complained of, and brought before the Bishop, do as the
three godly children did, when complaint was made of them to Nebuchadnezzar,
they answered boldly, saying, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer
thee in this matter; For, behold, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver
us from the hot fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand O King.
But, if not, be it known to thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods,
nor worship thy golden Image: So do you, when you are presented, and brought
before the Bishop, be not afraid to speak, but tell him boldly, with
reverence, that you will not do after the abominations of the Church of Rome,
as he would have you. If he cast you into prison, take it patiently and
chearefully, as the three godly children did, when they were cast into the hot
fiery Furnace.


Gent. What did Joseph of Arimathea?


Min. He did not go about to take down the body of Christ, till he had begged
and obtained leave of Pilate; whose example serves to teach all Christians,
that in things concerning the authority of the Magistrate, they ought to
acquaint him, and ask his leave before they attempt any thing.


Gent. I thank you for your good counsel, The God of all grace, direct all the
Nobles, Knights, and Burgesses, of the house of Parliament, to go to our
gracious King Charles, as Nehemiah did to Artaxerxes, and Hester to Ashuerosh,
that thereby they may find such grace with his Majesty, as Nehemiah found with
Artaxerxes for Jerusalem, and Hester with Ashuerosh for her self and the Jews.


Min. Amen, Amen, for Christ Jesus his sake.


JEWS HEVVES.
FINIS.

