H. His Devises, for his own exercise, and his Friends pleasure.

Vincit qui patitur.



Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreate, beneath the Conduite, at the sign of
the Saint John Evangelist, by H. Iackson.

ANNO. 1581.

VIRTUES IN ARDVO


To the Right Honorable, and most virtuous Lady, the Lady Marye Countess of
Pembrooke.
THE LITTLE POET ACCIVS NOT knowing which way to cover the smalenesse of his
person, which was somewhat less then the mean, thought best to have a great
picture drawn for his Counterfeyte: This Poet no doubt had some meaning in
this devise, for pictures often go there, where the person whom they represent
are not admitted: And it might be that strangers seeing the great shape, would
imagine Accius to be a tall man. Tewcer a cunning Archer, but a faynte hearted
Soldier, then wanted no courage when he was close covered with the Target of
his brother Ajax. Ulysses, whose ripe wit made full amends for his weak body,
thought no adventure dangerous, though never so perilous, if he were protected
with the shield of Pallas. So I right Noble Lady knowing my ability to write,
to be far less then the person of Accius, and so more lykely to incur
more rebukes: my courage therefore more faynte then either Tewcers, or Ulysses,
and so more needing some strong defense, have adventured to place in the
forefrunt of this little treatise, the title of your name, as a great
portrature to a little body, as a sure shield to a weak Warrior, as a safe
defense against any danger. For as they which should see the picture of Accius,
would imagine it to answer his person: so if the Reader hereof, behold your
name in the first leaf, he will deem the whole Book the more fruitful, and
the framer thereof the more skillful: but if he shall once perceive your Honor
to be Patroness to this labor, he will either love it, because he does honor
you, or will not dare to reproach it, because he perceyueth you are as ready, and
knows you are as able to defend it, as either Ajax was to guard Tewcer, or
Pallas to guide Ulysses. I cannot right virtuous Lady, imagine there was any
greater cause that might induce Accius to frame so big a picture: or cause
Ajax to shield Tewcer: or move Pallas to regard the safety of Ulysses: then
my self now have to use your Honors defense. Accius his picture might with a
stranger cover the shortness of his person: your name shall to the Reader be
recompense for the greatness of my ignorance. Tewcer fled to Ajax because he
was his own brother: I presume to seek aid of your Honor, because I am your
poor servant. Pallas did defend Ulysses because she knew he followed and
loved her: Your Ladyship (I trust) will be my protection, because I honor and
serve you, which I have done in times past, now do, and ever hereafter will do,
in such sort, that the world should be witness, if my ability to show it,
were as great as my will is ready to perform it, I would be found equal in
dutiful zeal toward your Honor, to Ulysses in hearty affection toward Pallas.
Therefore right Noble Lady, let me be bold to remember you in behalf of my
self, of that which Demosthenes is reported to have spoken to Alexander, in
defense of the Athenians. You have (said he) most worthy Emperor, by fortune
no greater good then that you may: by nature no better gift then that you
wish to do good to many. The credit and estimation your virtuous life, and
rare wisdom has procured you: the honorable courtesy and sweet behavior
wherewith Nature has plentifully endued you, shall not be either unfitly or
unfruitfully used, if you shall vouchsafe to employ the one in defense, and show
the other in good acceptance of this slender work of your servant, which as I
did write at idle times in your house, to avoid greater idleness or worse
business: so I present it humbly unto you, as a testimony of my bounden duty,
ever craving your Honor to pardon my bold presumption: and still beseeching the
Almightye to bless you in earth with much honor, and in heaven to crown you
with eternal felicity.

Your Honors humble and faithful Servant. Tho: Houell.

The Table of the Contents of this Book.
NO assurance, but in Virtue. Prosperity ought not cause presumption, nor
adversity force despair. Once warnde, twice armde. Flattery the Veil of
Frawde. No greater contrariety, then in the passions of Love. In uttering of
sorrow, some solace. Misery the end of Letchery. The pains of Lovers great,
but mine grievous. Ruin the reward of Vice. The best Natures soonest abused.
He lykeneth his lotte to Virgils. All of green Willow, Willow, Willow, Willow,
Since all of green Willow shall be my Garland. All of green Laurel. No new
fancies shall alter old lyking. A Dream. The lamentable end of Iulia Pompeis
Wife. Secrecy, for some sorrows, a needful remedy. The end of life, the
beginning of bliss. They soonest yield remedy, that have felt like extremity.
A Posie. Unthankfulness of mind, a monster in Nature. Noble minds either
conquer or cover. Vng ie seruirey. Do or be still. He denies quickly, that
gives slowly. Women are words, men are deeds. Envy ever depraueth desert. A
Winters morning muse Man's life lykened to a stage play. To his Mistress.
Reward does not always answer deserte. Who hurt, must heal, Of Love. Of
Bays and Willow. An Epitaph upon the death of the Lady Katherine, late
Countess of Pembrooke. Vltimum vale. In adversity is best seen Virtues
excellency. Sorrow disclosed, somewhat eased. Omnis fortuna superanda ferendo
est. Of sufferance comes case. H. his Reply to his friend. A. M. H. to
himself. Written to a most excellent Book, full of rare invention. The
complainte of a sorrowful wight, found languyshing in a Forest. Of Fancy.
Answer. Ever sought, never found. A Poesy. Answer. Every thing is as it
is taken. To his Lady of her doubtful answer. Help best welcome, when most
needful. Of the Golden world. Of Gold. A. W. Answer, H. Of Friends.
Answer. E. L. Reply to the same. Another way. To his Friend M. S. In
mediocritie most safety. To the same. That valiant hearts are desirous to
aspyre. Answer. Another way. To his Friend E. R. of the Be. Sure counsel,
sound friendship. They perform not best, that promise most. Beauty the bayte
Vanity. Of Fortune. A Sonet. To her Lover, that made a conquest of her, and
fled, leaving her with child. Being burdened to feign his good will, he
answers thus. Change of Country, shall not change fancy. Where ability
fails, will suffices. Man's impiety, fayns false Deity. In love small
iarres, sometime breed best content. What Nature seuereth, Art hardly
joins. He wysheth well to the Crabbe and Maple Tree in Milfeelde, for the
Ladies sake that met there under them. Being charged with finenesse he
answers thus. Such Saints, such service. I follow what flies from me. No
grief to want of due regard. Of Anger. A New years gift. Another. Another.
Another. An Epitaph. A Dream. Love asks love. The variable thoughts of a
Lover. R. T. Answer. Another way. Godliness passes riches. His answer to
one that wrote, faynte hearts that fear to sin, fair Ladies syldome win.
To I. N. H. To his mishap. Falsyfying of faith, breeds many complaints. To his
Song, sent to his Mistress. A Poesy. Answer. The vanity of rytches.
Discord makes weak, what concord left strong. Of one that came to borrowe
money. Answer. Truth fears no trial. He complayneth his mishap, with
promise to keep her honor. G. To his Lady. For small offense, small
punishment. Loves myghtinesse grows by Lovers weakness. A comparison of his
troubles. I. K. to H. being sick. Answer H. Of Friendship. Answer. G. H.
H. To M. Admonition to his Friend. Who seeks this Worlds felicity, Fyndes
nothing else but vanity. To a Flatterer. Answer. Reason and Fancy do often
vary. A Poesy. Certain Verses translated out of Petrark concerning Rome,
written by him many years since.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
WHere none but Nature is the guide, Minerua has no part,
Then you her Nurcelings bear with him, ye knows no aid of art.
I wake my wyts to please my self, naught reaking praise or blame,
I force my pen to purge my brain, though matter small I frame.
In which attempt, if lack of skill, have led my Muse awry,
Let my well meaning mind the miss, in each respect supply.
If patterns wrought by Art, of curious workman here thou seek,
Thy travail then thou shall but lose, to look and never leeke.
But if good will may thee suffice, peruse, and take thy pleasure,
In Natures school my little skill: I learned all by leisure.
Here nothing placed is, that may the virtuous sort offend,
Though envious Carpers bark and snarle, at things they scarce can mende.
Whose chiefest grace is wise to seem, by blotting others deeds,
Whose painted flowers in proof full often, fall out but stinking weeds.
The chaste desire with honest ryme, mistykes no whitt in mind,
But venomde Spyders poison take, where Be does honey find.
With greater ease a fault is found, then well to welde the rest:
It differs much to fell the tale, and words misplaste to wreste.
By patterns here displayed to thee, thou may perhaps preuente
The poisoning bayts of bitter sweet, whose bliss brings sharp euente.
Disloyal love and filthy lust, thou here art taught to flee:
With other Sawes to sundry ends, though he wed rough they be.
That life is like a Bubble blown, or smoke that soon does pass,
That all our pleasures are but pains, our glory brittle glass.
That Fortunes fruits are variable, no hold in Princely mace:
That women's minds are mutable, that death draws on apace.
That worldly pomp is vanity, that youth unawares decays:
That high estate is slipperie, that only virtue stays.
Here learn thou may: with diverse notes, gaynst fraud and flattery,
That may suffice to warn the wise, to void such battery.
And eke thou here may view and see, how Be wtie cruel haste:
Does make, to shun the gallant face, where she but late was plaste.
That she is Natures privilege, and so is said to be
Because the seldom gives that gift, but where she cause does see.
That beawtie is a dumb disceite, not having word or art:
And yet with stlente craft she can, persuade the hardest heart.
She conqueres where she coms by kind: for Creatures fair procure,
By naked looks, such yielding hearts, as they wish to allure.
Whose vain delyghts if thou vesier, thy thryfte goes to the ground,
(And yet by honest love we see, the greatest wealth is found.)
Apollos troop my faults will pass, and way my want hercin,
Whose freindly favor if I gain, I prise not Pan a pin.
The travel mine, the pleasure thine, if ought thou here do leeke,
Thy good report, for pains ymployed is sole reward I seek.
Virtus honorem parit.
Faults escaped in the printing.
In the Sonet entiteled Ruin the reward of Vice, the second line, for joy,
read joys. And in the fyft staff of the same Sonet, the last line, for
forsing, read falsing.

In the answer to the poe sie written of Fancy, the last line, for you read
your.

In the Golden world, the xvij vearse and first word, for Gor, read For.

In the Sonet entiteled her lover that made a conquest of her, the viii.
staff, the last line, for shameful, read shameless.

In man's impiety, faines false deity, the first verse, for feign, read faynde.

In Sorrow disclosed somewhat eased, for settled sorrows, read sorrow.

In such saints, such service, toward the end of the Sonet, for when, read
whence.

In what Nature seuereth, art hardly joins, the last line of the first
staff, for soon, read same.

In the vanity of riches, after the sixth line read, For who has most of such
a store, the more he fears as thrall. Which is there lacking.

In Discord makes weak, what, etc. the last line save one, for guide, read
guyle.

In Reason and fancy do often vary, the first word, for there, read where.

Delightful Discourses to sundry purposes.
No assurance but in Virtue.
WHo wisely skans, the weak and brittle stays,
That Natures Imps, within this vale possess,
The diverse haps, the strange uncertain ways,
That headlong forth we run beyond all guess,
Shall soon perceive, that every worldly joy,
Short pleasures yields, imixte with long anoye.
Though whorde of heaped store, for more delight,
Our Cofers keep, to please our greedy lust:
Yea, though our time we pass in joyful plight,
And in this life repose our chiefest trust,
Yet worldly pomp, when all is said and done,
Does vade away, like Snow against the Son.
A time of birth Dame Nature does us give,
A time to dye she likewise does provide:
No sooner do we first begin to live,
But straight to death unawares a way we slide,
And yet alas, our fancies are so frail,
That all our joy is here to hoyse up Sail.
But such as set their Heaven of lingering life,
In pleasures lap, whose froward tickle wheel
(Says wisdoms son) with frowning turn is rise,
To drown their bliss, that blyndly so do reele,
By search shall find, each fleeting pleasure vain,
When Uertues Impes, with Virtue high shall reign.
Then who so sees, the Sugar strawde on Gall,
And shunnes the same, by sacred Uertues skill*
Shall safely stand, when Follyes children fall,
That heedlesse hold, Dame pleasures wanton will,
Thus Virtue stays, when Uices steps do slide,
So are they blessed, that do in Virtue bide.
Prosperity ought not cause presumption, nor adversity force despair.
WHere Fortune favors not, what labor may prevail?
Who^ frowning fate will needs thrust down, what shall he win to wail?
With pacient mind to yield, is sure the soundest way,
And cast our cares and grief on him, that fatal force does sway.
For Death with equal pace, does pass to Princes gate,
And there as at the Cottage poor, does knock in one like state.
The time or manner how, the highst no more can tell.
Then poorest Peysant placed here, in base estate to dwell.
Sith then such feeble stay, in mortal might we find,
Why should the want of worldly dross, in dole once daunt our mind.
The Iylman pore in toil, that spends the weary day,
Whose wealth will scarce supply his want, when some whoorde heaps yt play.
Falls not to flat despair, ne yet his labor leaves,
Though scarce ye stubble proves his share, when others shock the sheaues
But lives with mind content, more free from care and strife,
Then those yt hunger highest hap, where dangers dwell most rife.
Though proud ambition blind, puffed up with glory vain,
Detest their state that riches want, with hawty high disdain.
The Seas often troubled are, by winds that whyrling fly,
When shallow streams yield water clear, in valleis low yt lie.
High Mountains set on fire, by lightning eke we see,
When Pastures placed underneath, in nothing altered be.
The foremost front in fight, are nearest deadly wound,
The lofty tree is soonst blown down, and leueld with the ground.
So such as thirst to clymbe, to danger most are thrall,
Whose slyding glory sawced is, with honey mixed with Gall.
For who so gript with grief, if Fortune list to lowre,
As those that erst did feed at full, upon her fairest flower?
Which change full often has fallen, through her vnconstansnesse,
And whom she lately laughed upon, thrown down remediless.
Was Alexander great, that many dangers past,
For all his mighty conquest won, not slain himself at last?
A kings son eke I find, for Fathers tyranny,
Constraynde to work a Smith in Forge, by hard necessity.
Such is the fading force, of Fortunes fickle power,
Whose fruitfulst fruit both rypes and rottes, in less space then an hour.
Such is her tickle trust, such are her slipper steps,
That what she seems to sow in joy, with sorrow often she reaps.
Attribute all to him, that fate does guide therefore,
With wylling mind embrace thy lot, where rich thou be or pore.
Once warnde, twice armde.
WHylste slye deceyte, by sleight of smyling cheer,
Yeeldes tickling hope, to dandle on our days:
We dread no guyle, no doubling drift we fear,
Our sound belief such settled trust does raise.
But when in fine, we find our selves missed.
We blame the frawde that so our fancies fed.
And gripte with grief, our former trust we wayle,
Exclayming loud that falsehood so can feign,
When glosing shows clokt under friendships veil,
Falls out but sleyght, to foster hope in vain.
Lo thus full often, what deemde has been the sun.
Proof Cynthea finds, whose course more low does run.
As some have tryde through time and travel spente,
Who trained by trust, have deemde good hap there plast,
Had swayed the soil, where ruin all to rent,
Has due desert, with rigor down defast.
Whose short regard, for long employed toil,
May warn the wise of frawde to fear the foil.
Flattery the Veil of Frawde.
Fair words foul deeds, pretended and forethought,
Who can but hate, that holds the fear of God:
Feign you that list, such practice proves but naught,
Uyle diuelishe driftes, provoke Jove's wrathful rod,
Which sure will fall, if we in sin persevere,
Shame is the fruit, of frawde and foul endeavor.
Wherein behold, some mask in Nets at Noone,
Yet deem they walk in clouds of close disguise:
Hoyste up in thought, to reach beyond the Moon,
When all the world, their covert cunning spies.
But these to name, my pen and speech shall spare,
Who medleth least, least cumbred is with care.
It me suffizen may to note their driftes,
That ween by wyles, the world to weald at will:
Their glosing shows, their slye and guylefull shifts,
To train such on, as find not out their skyll.
Whose turns to serve, though fools a time be dandled,
The wyser wincke, that see how things are handled.
No greater contrariety, then in the passions of Love.
IN will to strong, in work to weak is love,
In hope to bold, in fear more faynte then needs:
In thought a thousand guyles it stryues to prove,
In guyle, suspicion painful passions breeds.
Suspicion easily yields to light belief,
And light belief to jealousy is thrall,
The jealous mind deuoures it self with grief,
Thus love at once does frye, freese, rise and fall.
On pleasures paste to think, it takes delighte,
Whiles present bliss, by fond conceyte it balkes,
Although the fruit it find, be pensive plight,
For better chance, yet careless on it walks,
These are the seeds that Venus Baby sowes,
As taste they shall, the bitter crop that mowes.
In uttering of sorrow, some solace.
MY careful case, and pensive pyning plight,
Constraynth my Pen, against my will to wright:
The plunged state, wherein I live and dwell,
Does force me forth, my doleful tale to tell.
My heaped woes, all solace sets aside,
Whose secret smarte (alas) I feign would hyde,
But as the subject Ox, to yoke must yield,
So vanquished wightes, are forste forsake the feelde.
My lucklesse lotte, denies me all releife,
I seek for help, but find increase of grief.
I languishe still, in long and deep despair,
Yet shun to show the cause of this my care.
I covet naught, that reason might deny,
Ne do I seek by means to mount on hye:
But what I seek, if I the same might find,
Then easde should be, mine discontented mind.
Misery the end of Letchery.
O Fylthy Letchery,
Fire of foul fraylty,
Nursse to ympietie,
War, pride and ielouste,
Whose substance is gluttony,
Whose smoke is infamy,
Whose sparks are vanity,
Whose flame obscurity,
Whose coals impurity,
And ashes mysery.
The pains of Lovers great, but mine grievous.
THe Frost in flame that Lovers find,
And swelting heat in chilly cold,
So quite contrary are by kind,
As strange it seems to behold,
Strange is the fear that makes them fainte,
And strange the care that chokes their joy,
Yet stranger passions me attaynte,
The only Nursse of mine annoy.
Ruin the reward of Vice.
TO you fair Dames whose bewties brave do floorish,
To you whose dainty days in joy are spent:
To you whose praise Dame Nature seeks to poolish,
To you whose fancy Venus does frequent.
To you I write with heart and good intent,
That you may note by view of what I say,
How Natures gifts soon vade and slide away.
Your lofty looks, time down full low shall raze,
Your stately steps age eke will alter quite:
Your frail desire that kindles Cupids blase,
Whose heat is prone to follow foul delight,
The whip shall be, that shall you sharply smite:
When every vice that sproong of Fancies fittes,
Repentance brings, to those the same committes.
Is not the pride of Helens praise bereft?
And Cresside staynde, that Trojan knight imbrased:
Whose bewties bright but dark defame has left,
Unto them both through wanton deeds preferred.
As they by dynte of Death their days have ended,
So shall your youth, your pomp, and bewties grace,
When nothing else but virtue may take place.
Then shake of Uice ye Nymphs of Cressids Crew,
And Virtue seek, whose praise shall never die:
With fylthie lust your bodies not imbrue,
As did this Ilion Dame most wickedly,
Whose bliss by bale was plagude so grievously,
That lo her life in Lazars lodge she ended,
Who erst in Court most curiouslye was tended.
Her Corpse that did King Priams son delight,
Consumde with cares, sent forth sad sighs full cold:
Her azurde veins, her face and skin so white,
With purple spots, seemde ugly to behold.
Each lymme alas corruption began unfold,
In which distress, and bitter strain of ruth,
She begges her bread, for forsing faith and truth.
No sorrow then might salve her lewd offense,
Nor raze the blotte that bred her black defame:
Her doleful days alas found no defense:
It Was now to late to shun the sheet of shame,
Which had bewrapt her wrackfull blemished name,
So broad was blown her crime and cursed case,
That worlds bewrayed her frowning fates disgrase.
Lo here the end of foul defiled life,
Lo here the fruit that sin both sowes and reapes:
Lo here of Uice the right reward and knyfe,
That cuttes of clean and tumbleth down in heaps,
All such as tread Dame Cressids cursed steps,
Take heed therefore how you your pryme do spend,
For Uice brings plagues, and Virtue happy end.
The best Natures, soonest abused.
Betwixt my hope and dread, grew such debate,
When first I sought these naked lines to frame,
That long I pawsde, as doubtful to dilate,
Whether best proceed, or else leave of the same.
Till hope at last, despair does banishe quight,
And wylles my Pen assay in verse to wright.
Fear not (quoth hope) to show thy wylling will,
(Small seeds sometime may light on grateful ground:)
If none had wrote but Clarks of Tullies skill,
Sweet sawes had sunck, which now aflote are found,
Then cast of dread, despair no whyt at all,
Diseases great are cuerd with Medicines small.
These cheerful words, no sooner began revive
My Muse, but straight in mind I me bethought,
How Gnatos sect through flattery do contriue,
Each guilefull gloss, till they their wyles have wrought,
Whose great abuse, though briefly here I touch,
I spare to speak, what might be said of such.
Of friendship sound, though sundry yield a show,
Yet few there be, in whom is tried trust:
Such frawde in friendly looks does daily grow,
That who most fawnes, often proves the most unjust:
Who sooner shall well meaning minds betray,
Then such as best can Sinons pagent play.
As Sailors erst, by Sirens songs alurde,
Devoured were that lackt Ulysses skill,
So Noble minds by such have been procurde,
To credit toys, that turnde to greater ill.
The Serpent wise, to stop her ears deemes meet,
When Charmer seems to charm with voice most sweet.
For like as shadow plaste before the eyes,
Is not the thing that it does represent:
Nor al proves Gold that shines when touchstone tries,
Though fair it seem unto some foul intent:
No more do words that pass from flattering sort,
Yield such effect as they do often report.
Some friendship feign to give the greater gleeke,
Displeasures doubt another sort constraines:
To soothe up things, which they perhaps mislike,
By means whereof unseen, great mischief reigns.
Some fawn to serve their turn, where fortune smiles,
But if she frown, they flee with all their wiles.
Such shows right well, comparde may be to shade,
That seelde is seen, but where the Sun does shine:
For as those shapes with every cloud do vade,
So Flatterers fail if Fortune once decline.
Use Serpents skill against this subtle kind,
Floodes drown no Fields, before some brack they find.
As fire does fine, and separate Gold from dross,
And shows the pure and perfect from the vile:
So tried is when wrackfull storms do toss,
The faithful friend from such as mean but guyle.
For like as Doves delight in buyldings new,
To Cressus Court, so flocks Corebus crewe.
Let wisdom therefore weld your ways and deeds,
Whose prudent poise brings darkest doubts to light:
To quick mistrust in trustiest, treason breeds,
The hasty credit often deemes wrong for right.
Accounte of those, whom Uertues reign does guide,
For such will stand, when glosing Gnatos slide.
He lykeneth his lotte to Virgils.
THough Virgils Uearse, for lofty style were rare,
Surmounting far my feeble Muses might:
Yet in this point my case I may compare
With his, what time another claymde his right,
And say with him, though I the seed did sow,
Another seeks the fruit thereof to mow.
Like as the toyling Ox the Plow does pull,
And has but stalks, when others share the ears:
Or as the sheep that Nature clothes with wool.
Brings forth the Fleece, the shearer from him sheares,
Even much alike it fares now with me,
That forced the ground, where others reap the Fee.
I bred the Bees, thou would the Honey have,
I tylde the soil, thou seekste by guyle the gain:
I owe the Tree, thou deest the branches crave,
Thou prickst for praise, where none but I took pain.
What deeds deny, some win by naked words,
I hatchte the brood, though thou possess the birds.
Who so does hold the light, whilst others Mask,
No Masker is perdie, you know right well:
Nor all whose shows would claim the greatest task,
Deserves the same, when truth her tale does tell.
Though mine the wrong, yet seems the loss so light,
As shame forbids me more thereof to write.
All of green Willow, Willow, Willow, Willow, Sith all of green Willow shall
be my Garland.
Embrace your Bays sweetly, that smile in love,
And deck you with Laurel, that dwell in delig^^
To me most unhappy, still spurnde by dispight.
Is given writhed Willows to express my state rig^
Pursuing the Panther whose sweet does abound,
A most cruel Uiper my hard fate has found:
Whose nature to Spyders I well may compare,
That mercylesse murders, what is caught in her snare.
The Lion does tender the beast that does yield,
The Tiger seems constant, once conquered in field:
Bellona shows favor to Captives that sue,
But Venus refuses my dolors to rue.
How shall I to ease me unburden my breast,
Of these pensive passions that breeds my unrest:
When speech wants power, when voice is vnprest,
And wit wants cunning to compass loves hest.
Yet what auayles words, where ears words do flee,
Though words to the mind, true messengers be?
Or what vayleth wit, where will is untoward?
The sacrifice lost, where Saints be so froward.
All of green Laurel.
TO sing of sorrow still,
Attending Venus will,
Were now but lack of skill,
Pity lies dead:
Then cast of mourning cheer,
Let joyful plight appear,
Where clouds do never clear,
Comfort is fled.
Look up to the Laurel, and let Willow go,
And trust to the true friend, embrace not thy foe,
Sing all of green Laurel:
By travail who stryueth, to win thanklesse wight,
Is like one that washes a black a Moore white,
Let all of green Laurel bedeck thy Garland.
Though some distill their tears,
That wrythed Willow wears,
Yet fainte not at their fears,
Seem not to dread:
The wisest have done so,
The Ualiant wrapped in woe,
Have taken overthrow,
By Fancy led.
Where wit is constrained by will to give place,
Their songs are of sorrow, that joys would embrace,
Sing all of green Laurel.
Let no deceytfull shows of Venus bright shine,
Have power once to pierce the sound heart of thine,
So shall the green Laurel set forth thy garland.
Waygh not the wavering mind,
That fleetes with every wind,
Till thou some stay do find,
Trust not to far.
Unto Dame Constancy,
Bend still thy battery,
Fly fast from flattery,
With beauty make war.
So shall thy well lyking not harm thee at all,
For faith fixed firmly, such favor will fall,
That all of green Laurel, etc.
When others in dolor their wrack shall bewail,
Thy ship on the sound seas in safety may sail,
Where crownde with green Laurel, in joy thou shall sing.
No new fancies, shall alter old lyking.
THough Paris praise, Apollos Impe began stayne,
When change of choice his fickle humor fed,
And Carthage cries, with strayned voice complain,
On periurde Prince, by night that faithless fled.
Though Iasons heste Medea found untrue,
And others mo there be whose fancye past:
That skorne the old still haunting after new,
Within whose hearts no leeking long may last,
Yet till sir Phoebus beams shall lose their light,
And Ocean Seas do cease to ebb and flow:
Until the day shall turn to perfect night,
And Natures course against her kind shall go.
My fixed faith unspotted shall remain,
What would you more, I vow I do not feign.
A Dream.
WHen Phoebus bright was settled in the West,
And darkness dim, the earth had ouerspread:
When sylent night, that moves each thing to rest,
With quiet pawse, had plaste me in my bed,
In stombring Dream, me thought I heard a wight,
His woes bewail, that grew through loves despyght.
Whose wearing weed and vestures all were green,
Save that his loins with black were girded round:
And on his breast a badge of blewe was seen,
In sign his faith and truth remained sound.
He sighed often and said, O blisfull hier,
When hope with hap, may joy in his desire.
But still to hope, and find therein no fruit,
To be in bed, and restless there remain:
To seek to serve, and daily make pursuit,
To such as set but light of weary pain,
Does breed such balefull dole within the breast,
As quyte bereaues all joy and quiet rest.
Though taste of sower, deserve the sweet to gain,
Yet cruel Fate I see the same denies:
So that desire and wisdom proves but vain,
Without accord and favor of the Skies.
But steadfast hope, seem not (quoth he) to quayle,
The heavens in time, may turn to thine avail,
Scarce had he thus his woeful speech concluded,
When wake I did, and saw my self deluded.
The lamentable end of Iulia Pompeis Wife.
SOre plungde in grievous pains and woeful smarte,
Bedewed with trickling tears on Death like face:
Down trylles the drops on cheeks and sighs from heart,
To hear and see her husbands doleful case.
Thus goes this spouse, the woeful Iulia,
Besprent with blood, when Pompeis Cote she saw.
Down dead she falls in lamentable sound,
Of sense bereft (so great was sorrows strain)
The child conceyude within by deadly wound,
Untymely fruit came forth with pinching pain.
When all was done, for love her life she lost,
For Pompeis sake, she yielded up her Ghost.
So dead she lay, bewaylde with many tears,
A Matrone wise, a famous Ornament:
O Caesar she had seen full cheerful years,
If thou with Pompey could have been content,
But civil wars has wrought this fatal strife,
To Pompey death, to Iulia loss of life.
Secrecy, for some sorrows, a needful remedy.
LIke as the captive Wight, in chayned lincks does lie,
And hopes at Sise to be releast, is the^ condemde to dye.
Even so alas my lot, by frowning fate does fall,
That sought to feed on sweet delight, but found most bitter Gall.
My restless labor lost, I justly may compare,
To Sisiphus that never sleeps, and grief to Titius care.
For after sundry storms, when calm I think to find,
More rougher rage a new does rise, to strain my daunted mind.
And when my quelling cares, I seek by means to cure,
Most deepest dynte of inward woe, alas I do endure.
Prometheus pincht with pain, nor Ixion whyrlde on wheel.
More grypes by grief do not sustain, then I unhappy feel.
The sum of my unrest, yet covert will I keep,
And secretly my sorrows sup, when others sound do sleep.
To ease my pensive breast, a Uearse though here I frame,
The bursting forth of sorrows mine, shall breed no further blame.
My sides shall shryne this smart, my heart shall wast with woe,
Ere I the secret of my cause, bewray to friend or foe.
Save only to the Saint, that swayes my life at will,
Whose pity may prolong the same, or cruelty may kill.
The end of life, the beginning of bliss.
WHy should we fear to dye?
Or seek from Death to fly,
When Death the way does make,
Each worldly woe to slake,
By whom we pass to joy,
Where never comes annoye.
Our tryflying tryumphs here,
Though we esteem them dear,
Are like to vapors vain,
That waste with little rain.
Deluding Dreams in deed,
Whereon our fancies feed.
What yield our pleasures all,
But sweetness mixed with Gall,
Their pryme of chiefest pride,
Unwares away does slide,
Whose show of sweet delight,
Often dymmes our perfyte sight.
Though Jove in lofty seat,
Have placed Princes great,
With Regal rule to reign,
His glory to explain,
Yet vades their pomp and power,
As does the wythred Flower.
Lo here the surest stay,
The world does yield us aye,
Thy dearest friend to day,
To morrow falls away,
Whose want thou do bewail,
When tears may naught prevail.
Sith life is myserie,
Uoyde of felicity,
Full of anxietie,
Given to impiety,
The death I happy call,
That does bereave such thrall.
They soonest yield remedy, that have felt like extremetie.
THe flames of fire and clouds of cold, repugnant in my breast,
Has quite exiled me from joy, and rest all quiet rest.
Yet often (alas) in show I smile, to shade my inward smarte,
When in my laughter waves of woe, well nie do burst my heart.
Whose driery thoughts I would to God, were seen so full to thee,
As mine afflicted mind in pain, does power them out on me.
So should perhaps thy frozen heart, now hard as Flintie stone,
Within thy breast with melting tears, take ruth on this my moan.
But as he well cannot discern, what tempest Sailors try,
That never crossed the checking tides, yt surge with waves on hye.
No more can thou my cares descry, for want of ryper skill,
Although in deed the shows thereof, do plead for pity still.
In vain therefore my pensive plaintes, by Pen I do express,
When both thy will and want of skill, denies to yield redress.
The cruel fates (I fear) forbids; that I such bliss should find.
Or sacred Jove some other hap, has to my share assignde,
A Poesy.
Sith follye it is to wish, what may not be enjoyed,
And wisdom to eschew the harms, wherewith we are anoyed.
Let reason guide thy thoughts, when fancy most does fight,
And count him victor of the Field, that conquers bewties might.
Unthankfulness of mind, a monster in Nature.
ON thanklesse Friend, whose travail is imployde,
With Asses Damme shall reap ungrateful meede:
Whose wanton Fool by her sweet milk acloyde,
Often kicks the Nurse, that does it choycely feed,
As do the Uipers brood, whose yongling long,
When mothers care with tender love has cherisht:
Requite the same with such ungrateful wrong,
That in reward, her life by them is perished.
Whose Nature is unkindly to devour,
The womb whence first they took their living power.
To whom we may the ungrateful sort compare,
That Uiper like seek spoil* where they should spare.
Noble minds either conquer, or cover.
AS Scipio smylde to cloak his covert smarte,
What time he saw his happy state declyne*
So some alike do shadow grief of heart,
With outward mirth, when inwardly they pyne.
And to the world yield forth such shows of joy,
As few would deem, they once did taste annoye.
When they in deed, with Scipios grief complain,
Their short regard, for long employed pain.
Vngie seruirey.
TO serve but one, a constant courage shows,
Who serves more, he rightly serves none:
Base is the mind that bends so many Bows,
Next God, a Prince we ought obey but one.
One God, one Prince, he serves, defends and fears,
Vngie seruirey, for his word that bears.
Do, or be still.
THe shallow streams, do murmour more then deep,
And Cowards brag, that dares no weapons prove:
Those Dogs byte least, that greatest barkings keep,
Some do but feign, whose shows seem far in love.
Sound is the Tree, whence friendships fruit does spring,
Do or be still, let none but Sirens sing.
He denies quickly, that gives slowly.
Lingering delays, flacke payments do foreshowe,
Better no promise, then no performance:
Slight are the sorrows, slakte with comforts flow,
Either send, or end, yield some assurance.
Shyfting delay, mistyking off does breed,
They soon deny, whose Suitors slowly speed.
Women are words, Men are deeds.
IF naught but words in women to be found,
Then what are they, men, women, or Monsters,
That yield like fruit? or else a hollow sound,
Which substance none, but air forth vtters.
By deeds and not by words, men praise obtain,
Monsters, no men, whose deeds their words do stayne.
Envy ever depraueth deserte.
THou snarling Curre, that crept in Maunger lies,
And lets the Courser there to reach his right:
Thy malice great, and swelling false surmise,
Thought should bark, before thou secret bite.
But sithe thy cankered nature (needs I see,)
Must byte or burst, I open war denownce,
Against thy kind, what ever so thou be,
Which seeks by guile our buyldings down to bownce.
With Sirens voice thy tune thou seekst to feign,
As though in deed our brains so barren were:
We could not compass tryflyng toys most plain.
Unless our light we sought some other where.
Thou barkst abroad of Books, from whence it came,
But can thy head (in faith) no better guess:
The toys themselves do bid thee cease for shame,
Lest more thou spurn, more folly thou express.
Well Momus mate, and son of Zoylus sect,
That so can carpe at every wylling mind:
Raze nothing down, till something thou erecte,
Spare others spoil, sithe naught in thee we find.
Let them enjoy the fruits of their desire,
That seeks good will, and craves no other hyre.
A Winters Morning muse.
AS by occasion late, toward Brutus City old,
With quiet pace alone I rode, in winter sharp and cold.
In my delating brains, a thousand thoughts were fed,
And battle wise a war they made, in my perplexed head.
I thought on tymely change, and musde on yearly waste,
How winter aye deuours the wealth, that pleasant summer plast.
I saw the naked Fields vnclothde on every side,
The beaten bushes stand al bare, that late were decked with pride.
Whose fainting sap was fled, and fallen from top to root,
Each tree had new cast of his Cote, and laid him at his foot.
The small and syllie Byrds, sat houering in the hedge,
And water Fowls by Winter forced, forsook the Fenny sedge.
Thus Nature altering quite, her earthly childrens cheer,
Does show what brittle stay of state, and feeble hold is here.
Who as in slender things, she shows her yearly might,
So does she like attempt her force, in all degrees aright.
For as I musing rode, I plainly might perceive,
That like both change and chance there was, man's state that did bereave.
I saw the mounting mind, that clymbde to reach the Skies,
Advanced up by Fortunes wheel, on tickle stay that lies,
Fall soon to flat decay, and headlong down does reele,
As fickle Fortune list to whyrle, her round unstable wheel.
Was never Prince of power, so safe in his degree,
But deemde sometime the meaner sort, to sit more sure then he.
Then to my self I said, if Fortune stand unsure,
And highest type of worldly hap, uncertain do endure.
Why thirst we so to reign? why hunger we for heap?
Why press we forth for worldly pomp, with brech of quiet sleep?
Which like a Mothe eats out, the gain of godly life,
With all that stretch their vain desire, to wrest this world in strife.
Whose fruit of toyling pain, by sweat and sorrow sought,
Is lost in twinkling of an eye, our name consumde to naught.
Yea though by worldly wyles, we thousand driftes devise,
A God there is that laughes to scorn, the wisdom of the wise.
When thus along my way, I diversely had musde,
I found whom Fortune high did heave, on sudden she refusde.
Then he by Virtue stayde, me thought the rest did pass,
So far as does the purest Gold, the vile and basest brass.
Even he I deemed blessed, that wearing Uertues Crown,
Does live content, not caring ought, how Fortune smile or frown,
Man's life likened to a Stage play.
Sith earth is Stage whereon we play our parts,
And deeds are deemde according to desartes,
Be wary how thou walkst upon the same,
In playing thy part, thy course uprightly frame.
Remember when thy tale is told, straight way
Another steps on stage his part to play,
To whom thou must resign thy former state,
As one that has already playde his mate.
All wealth, pomp, power, high hap and princely Mace,
Must yeelden be to such as shall take place,
As things but lent, to play our parts withal,
Our meede no more, then our deserts do fall.
Not he that plays the stateliest part most praise,
Nor he that wears the riches robe always,
But he whose Uertues shall exceed the reast,
How so his seat be with the great or least.
Take heed therefore, and keep each Cue so right,
That Heaven for hyre unto thy lotte may light.
With greedy mind so wrest not worldly gain,
That soul do spill, for slyding pleasures vain.
Suffised be with that sufficient is,
And seek the things that bring eternal bliss,
So shall thou here not only purchase praise,
But after eke enjoy most happy days.
To his Mistress.
May name of servant, to familier seem,
For such whose service never swarude awry:
Can Noble minds so base of those esteem,
That freely yield for them to live or dye?
No, no, some further fetch conceived is,
Which has withdrawn from me that wonted name:
How so it be, if I be more amiss,
Then sound good will has once desarued blame.
The wrekfull Gods power down upon my head,
Such sharp revenge as never man did feel:
And let my Ghost in Lymbo low be led,
To Tantals thyrst, or proud Ixions wheel.
What would thou more? if I not wish thee well,
In Plutos Den, then let me live and dwell.
Reward does not always answer deserte.
Since my desire is pressed to please,
Though not with glosing show:
And eke my deeds if proof were made,
Should tell what faith I owe.
Where to shall I impute my hap,
To Fate or want of skill:
When naught I find but tickle trust,
Where most I mean good will.
Who hurt, must heal.
THe sparks of love within my breast, do daily so increase,
That every vain on fire is set, which none but you may cease.
So that in thee consists my woe, in thee likewise my wealth,
In thee with speed to have my death, in thee to give me health.
O pity then his restless state, that yeeldes him to thy will,
Sith lo in thee it wholly lies, my life to save or spill.
That neither do I gloss or feign, I Jove to witness call,
Who knows the heat of fixed hearts, when they to love are thrall.
And shall I thus a woeful Wight, in rigor still remain?
Shall such as small good will me bear, thy grace from me restrain
Shall false perswation so prevail, to let our wished joy?
Shall faith and troth for their reward, reap naught but sharp annoy?
Or else shall want of pyning wealth, retract my just desire.
Do not the Gods at pleasure theirs, the low estate raise higher?
Is not the world and all therein, at their disposing still?
Does it not rest in them to give, and take from whom they will.
No recklesse race (...) shall thou run, ne follow vain delight,
In yielding help to cure his harm, that holds thee dearst in sight.
Ne yet from tip of Fortunes wheel, you shall ne slide nor swerve,
Such hope I have of better hap, the Fates do yet resarue.
Thy person, not thy pelf, is all I wish and crave,
Which more I vow I do esteem, then heaps of coin to have.
The greatest Princes aye by proof, lead not the pleasantst life,
Nor every maid that maryeth wealth, becoms the happiest wife.
Of Love.
ANd if Love be Lord, who or what is he?
If Love be not, who then bereaues my rest?
If no such thing, alas what ayleth me?
What breeds such broyle, what wounds my yielding breast?
To tell what it is, does pass my knowledge far,
But who so loves I see does live in war.
Of Bays and Willow.
Show forth your Bays that boaste of sweet delights,
For I ne may such blisfull hap attain:
The Willow branche most fit for woeful wightes,
Behold I bear, a badge of secret pain.
Which lo my sides enshryne, and shall do still,
Till cruel Fate has wrought on me her will.
An Epitaph upon the death of the Lady Katherine, late Countess of Pembrooke.
IF such do mourn, whose solace is bereft,
And sighs seem sharp to those whom sorrows sting:
If cares increase where comfort none is left,
And griefs do grow, where pensive thoughts do spring
Then be we sure, our Lord in sad annoy,
Does wayle her death, whose life was all his joy.
If he (alas) with sobs her loss bemones,
May servant spare their sighs abroad to send?
Shall they in secret shrowde their gryping groans,
When masters playnts may have no power to end?
No, no, deep dole our pensive sides would pearce.
If we in tears our sorrows not rehearce.
Then mourn with me my woeful fellows all,
And tryll your tears your drooping cheeks adowne:
Gushe forth a gulf of griefs, let floodes down fall,
To wayle her want, that sprang of high renown.
Who whiles she liude, did sundry seek to aid,
But Death, O Death, thou have them all dismayde.
The cheerful spring that does each soil adourne,
With pleasant shows, whereby delight is taken:
Does move our minds, alas the more to mourn,
Our Lady lost in source of sorrows shaken.
Which lo in Uer to heaven has taken the way,
To her great gain, but oh to our decay.
If Princes love, if husbands care or Coin,
If Noble friends, if proof of Phisicks lore:
By long attempt could sickness vndermoyne,
Or search of foreign soil might health restore.
We should not yet have seen the son to vade,
Whose clipsed light, has turnde our shine to shade.
But when the twyste of this our fyme is wownde,
No means by man may serve the same to stretch:
Our lottes are laid, our bodies have their bownde,
Time swiftly runs with short and curelesse breatch.
Though world we weld in seat of Princely sway,
Yet swarues our state, as shade that slydes away.
The glittering shows of highest glory here,
Consumes to naught, like clouds dispersed with wind:
And all that Nature from the earth does rear,
Returns again, whence first it came by kind:
But Uertues web, which lo this Lady sponne,
Shall last for aye, new these her days be done.
Her praise on earth like Palm shall florishe still,
Her Noble deeds shall live and never dye:
Her sacred steps that sought each vice to kill,
Shall mount aloft, though low in earth she lie.
Who even when latter pangues oppressed her most,
Did mercy crave in yielding up the Ghost.
What would you more, her life and death was such,
As deeper head could not commend to much.
Ultimum vale.
FArewell thou Pearl that Princes favor found,
Farewell the Saint that shielded our annoy:
Farewell the Haven whose harbor was full sound,
Farewell the Bark that brought her Chiefetaine joy.
Farewell thou Spowse to him that held thee dear,
Farewell the Lamp that gave such gladsome light:
Farewell of modest Dames a Mirror clear,
Farewell the shryne where virtue shyned bright.
Farewell thou mind that mente to no wight ill,
Farewell the heart that lodged honor aye:
Farewell the hand that helped the needy still;
Farewell the staff that sought the weak to stay.
Lo here in tears my last farewell I take,
What Heavens will have, the earth must needs forsake.
In adversity, is best seen Virtues excellency.
WHen Boreas rough, had leauelesse left each free,
And horie Hiems began his reign to hold:
In walking forth, I might discern and see,
A stately Palm, her branches green unfold.
At sight whereof, when I a time had mused,
By malice means, I saw the tree abused.
I saw how swelling Envy in the top,
Sat shrouded close, embrasing slanders cup:
By whom stood Hate, aye ready pressed to crop,
Each springing spray, so soon as they shot up.
And Flattery eke, did fiske from place to place,
By Synons art, to seek the Palms disgrace.
As Tennys Ball, yet make the highest bownde,
When greatest power is plaste to press the same:
Or as a Bell sends forth the brimmest sownde,
When deepest down the Ringer plucks the frame.
Even so in sort, this Tree did rise and spring,
That Envy sought by burden low to bring.
Which to your virtues may alude right well,
Though Malice fainte, to match you with her might:
Yet few so sure in these our days do dwell,
That Envy never spurns with deep dispight.
If such then be, or if hereafter shall,
The Gods grant you, as to the Palm does fall.
Sorrow disclosed, somewhat eased.
Sith kindled coals close kept, continue longest quick,
And secret smarte with greater power, the pensive mind does prick.
Why should I cloak the grief, from whence such passions grow,
Unless my brain by Pen I purge, my breast they ouerflow.
When night with quiet pause, each creature calls to rest,
Through quelling cares and pinching thoughts, I lie so sore oprest,
That from my settling down, until the time I rise,
Sleep hardly wins the force to close, my watchful drooping eyes.
The Skrich Owl me besides, her doleful tunes does shreeke,
Whose cries my cares may represent, that rest in vain do seek.
To think on the mishaps, which daily me betyde,
When surest hope of sweet redress, I see away does slide.
The hardest heart by proof, does yield an inward pante,
When good desires are deprest, by wrack of Irus want.
Want makes best natures fall, that else would upright stand:
Want makes the valiant faint in fears, though strong be heart and hand.
Want drowns in dollor deep, the pleasants wits yt be,
Want daunts the finste conceited head, and makes it dull we see.
Want makes the old wife trot, the young to run outright,
Want makes the noblest heart and mind, to seem but base in sight.
Want makes the Lion stowte, a slender pray to leeke,
Want plucks the Pecocks plume adown, want makes ye mighty meek
Want is the sowrce whence sorrows spring, yt hasts ye life's decay,
Want loads the heart with heaped cares, that crush al ioys away.
Need has no law some say, extremes, extremes do urge,
The passions that by want do pain, what physic well may purge?
Unhappy is the hour, that such sharp sickness brings,
And thrice unhappy is the wretch, whom want so deadly stings.
Aye me that such sour sauce, false Fortune should procure,
When slily forth she seems to throw, her train on golden lure.
By sleight whereof she does, a piersing poison place,
Full closely coucht on pleasant bayte, to work our more disgrase.
As I but lately tried, who do her guyle so fast,
That secretly I sup the smarte, that my good days defaste.
The time that I began to enter first to life,
Would God the sisters three had cut, the thread with fatal knyfe.
Would God that Death had been, with bow and arrows bente,
To pierce the woeful heart of mine, which now with care is spent.
Whose hard and crooked fate, increasing every hour,
Does force me wake when others sleep, where Fortune does not lower.
And when the dawning day, I do perceive and see,
And how sir Tytan vaunts himself, full brave in first degree,
Whose gladsome golden beams, do move each thing to joy,
Save only me, whose wrackfull woes, have wrought my sad annoy.
Then from my couch I creep, al clad with cloak of care,
And forth to walk in desarte woods, my self I do prepare,
Where none but woeful wights, do wandering wail their grief
Where violence does vengeance take, where never comes relief.
Where pleasure plays no part, nor wanton life is led,
Where dainty looks no danger makes, nor nice desire is fed.
Where former joys do vade, and turn to passions strange,
Where al delights condemde are shut, in sharp repentance grange
Where settled sorrows sits, with head hangde on her breast,
And wrings her hands for follies past, her present pains yt pressed.
Where Dolor ruthful Dame, with sad Despair does dwell,
Where Furies fierce do swarm and flock, not distant far from Hell.
Even there in doleful Den, drive forth I do the day,
Whereas my painful piercing woes, at no time find delay.
Within whose troubled head, such throng of thoughts do rise,
That now on this, and then on that, in mind I still devise.
Among great thoughts thrown up, I down will set the least,
How syllie bird in prison pente, taken from the Nurse in neast.
Does joy in that her life, so much as though she might,
From wood to wood, or field to field, at pleasure take her flight.
By whom I learn how man, from Cradle aye brought up,
In base estate that never felt the taste of pleasures Cup,
Does hold himself so well, content with his degree,
That he in life does seldom seek, his state more high to see.
But I as Bird unlike, that flewe in prime her flight,
Through gallant groves and fertyle fields, in ioys and sweet delight.
Which shall no sooner feel her self to be restraynde,
From her such wonted liberty as sometime she retaynde,
But forthwithall she does, such inward woe conceive,
That yielding up her pleasures past, her life therewith does leave.
When as the bird in Cage, does sporting sing and play,
Who never found the place wherein, she felt more happy day.
Lo thus the greater often, are taught by things but small,
To know what restless grief it breeds, from fortunes grace to fall.
I therefore wish my life, which all to long does last,
In symplest sort had ever been, from time to time ypaste.
So I by custom should, have likt my present pay,
Which now by taste of wrackfull change, in woe do wast away.
Omnis fortuna super and a ferendo est. Of sufferanee comes ease.
WHo wayles at pain of sorrows deadly smarte,
By wayling much increases sorrows might:
In greatest griefs who shows the quiets heart,
By patience drives sharpst grief to speedy flight.
Repine, grief grows, be still, grief soon decays:
Suffrance the salve for grief at all assayes.
As Balls if thrown against stones do soon rebounde.
But fast they stick, if cast they be at durte:
So griefs naught harm where yielding none is found:
Once fainte, and then they cause some mortal hurt.
By proof and trial, this most true we find,
Least hurt by grief is done to stowtest mind.
Patience and stowtnesse lodged in thy breast,
Shall void from thence, grief sorrow and unrest.
A. M. Vt animo,
sic amico.
H. His Reply to his friend. A. M.
THe helthfull wight, with pleasure well may sing,
And courage hie to cheer the sick may show:
But if disease his happy state should sting,
Those lofty tunes would fainte and fall more low.
For Turrets tops that seems to reach the Skies,
By thundering storms to shieuers small are shaken,
The strongest hold where stowtest Soldiers lies,
Mauger their might, more greater force has taken.
The soundest ship long tossed with tempest, leakes,
In Wrestling winds, the hugie Cables fail:
The brazen piece surchargde with powder breaks,
And valiant hearts ore whelmde in woe, do quayle.
The craggy Clyftes by floodes are fret at length,
The hardened steel obeyes the hammers stroke,
The stiffest bow still bente, does lose his strength,
Base Fortunes blows, all joy likewise does choke.
How may he then possess a quiet mind,
That cause of rest does seelde or never find.
H. to himself.
WHom desteny shall deny,
A happy life to find:
Why should he wayling lie,
With pensive heart and mind.
What gain by mourning got,
What lost by little care:
When needs must light to lot,
What desteny does prepare.
Written to a most excellent Book, full of rare invention.
Go learned book, and unto Pallas sing,
Thy pleasant tunes that sweetly sownde to hie
For Pan to reach, though Zoylus thee does sting,
And lowre at thy lawde, set naught thereby.
Thy makers Muse in spite of enuies chinne,
For wise devise, deserved praise shall win.
Who views thee well, and notes thy course aright,
And syftes each sense that couched is in thee:
Must needs extol the mind that did thee dight,
And wish the Muse may never weary be.
From whence does flow such pithe in filed phrase,
As worthiest wit may joy on thee to gase.
How much they err, thy rare event bewrayes,
That stretch their skill the Fates to overthrow:
And how man's wisdom here in vain seeks ways,
To shun high powers that sway our states below.
Against whose rule, although we strive to run,
What love foresets, no human force may shun.
But all to long, thou hidste so perfect work,
See not desire, how feign she seeks to find:
Thy light but lost, if thou in darkness lurk?
Then show thy self and seem no more unkind.
Unfolde thy fruit, and spread thy masters praise,
Whose prime of youth, grave deeds of age displaies.
Go choice conceits, Mineruas Mirror bright,
With Rubies rich yfret, wrought by the wise:
Pur^^ed with Pearl, and decked with delight,
Where pleasure with profit, both in their guise.
Discourse of Lovers, and such as sold sheep,
Whose sawes well mixed, shrowds mysteries deep.
Go yet I say with speed thy charge deliver,
Thou needst not blushe, nor fear the foil of blame:
The worthy Countess see thou follow ever,
Till Fates do fail, maintain her Noble name.
Attend her will, if she vouchsafe to call,
Stoop to her state, down flat before her fall.
And ever thank thou him, that first such fruit did frame,
By whom thy praise shall live, to thy immortal fame.
Where Sorrow is settled, delyght is banished.
THe Sable sad be wrapped has my lymmes,
(A suit most fyt for one repleat with grief.)
Whose strayned heart in sowrce of sorrow swymmes,
Where wrackfull woes at no time find relief.
Whose food is fear, whose drink is dolor deep,
Whose sauce is sighs, whose taste sharp passions are:
Whose rest is ruthe, where sorrows never sleep,
Whose comfort clipsed is with clouds of care.
Whose help is frozen, whose hap has hard euente,
Whose hope is queld with clogge of cold despair:
Whose trust is tyerd, whose toil in vain is spente,
Whose pensive plaintes but beat the barreyn air.
Where naught I find, but drugges of bitter taste,
Whose doleful days in dark annoye do waste.
The complainte of a sorrowful wight, found languishing in a Forest.
WHen spring in lively green, each field has decked anewe,
And strowde the soil with flowers sweet of sundry kinds of hew.
What time the cheerful buds, and blossoms brave in fight,
Inuites the weary dulled mind, abroad to take delight.
Then I by fancy led, a time to sport and play,
To Forest fair of pleasant air, began to take the way.
And as I past through out a Ualley fair and green,
Where sundry sweet and rare delights, I erst had heard and seen.
All whuste I found it tho, such silence was there kept,
As if it midnight then had been, and all thing sound had stepped.
Whereat amazde I stood, and listening long, might hear,
At last a doleful sounding voice, with low lamenting cheer,
In shrubs hard shrouded by, a woeful wight there lay,
Whose corpse through care and lingering grief, was welny worn away.
Where pouring out his plainte he cursed the time, and when
That first on earth he placed was, to lead his life with men.
Whose selfeloue seemth so sweet, that friendship yeeldes no taste,
And double dealing gains such price, that plainness is displast.
Alas, quoth he the Babes, one womb brought forth and bare.
Will now object, what are we bound, the one to others care.
Whereas good nature bids, go meet thy friends distress,
And bear some part of his mishap, that he may bear the less.
If friend to friend thus do, who faster friend should be,
Then he (alas) in thy distress, that naught will do for thee.
Ah woeful man he says, thy lotte has fallen thee so,
That sowrce of sorrows thee besets, with waves of wailful woe.
When he where favor most, thou should by nature find,
Does causeless shake thee of in care, and shows himself unkind.
O wretch in dolor drencht, O mind with moan oppressed,
O gulf of grief, O sea of sighs, that strain the pensive breast.
If well by Pen thou could, thy present passions show,
The harl that hardened now remains, would soon relente I know.
But since my hap is such, as reap may no redress,
Come forth you Forest Driads all, your mournful Tunes express.
Draw near you Satyrs four, and strain your doleful cries,
To wayle the woes of him (alas) in languor deep that lies.
Be witness woods and Fields, ye Trees record my bale,
You Naides eke that haunt the Springs, repeat my woeful tale.
And say unto the wight, that bydes unfriendly bente,
How death would be so sweet to me, as joy to his content.
For better twere of both, then restless still remain,
By ending quyte my lothed life, to end my lingering pain.
Here sparing further speech, aside he cast his eye,
And fynding me, as one dismayde, away he sought to fly.
Whose will when I perceaude, to shun my sight full bente,
I to him stepped, and askte the cause, that moude him to lamente.
Whereto no word he gave, but stands like one amazde,
And with a strange and ghastly look, long time on me he gazde.
His face was thin and lean, his color dim as lead,
His cheeks were wanne, his body weak, his eyes deep sunck in head.
His heart straynde, his mind tossed, his wit with woe nere worn,
A rufull thing it was (alas) to view him so forlorn.
With deep fet sighe from breast, sent forth by inward pain,
His feeble voice and foltring tongue, he began at last to strain.
And thus to me he said: O what art thou in woe:
Me Myser wretch that here do find, with grief perplexed so?
Whose present state to learn, why do thou thus require?
Small gain to thee, great pain to me, to yield so thy desire.
Yet sith against my will, thine ears have heard the plainte,
Which in this desarte place I paste, to ease my breast attainte.
Thus much at thy request, I further will reveal,
As for the rest this corpse of mine, for ever shall conceal.
Whom erst a friend I found, me causlesse has forsaken,
What would thou more this is the sum, that I with sighs am shaken.
But cruel fate I fear, does force it so to be,
Adue farewell, let this suffice, inquier no more of me.
Which said away he goes, God knows a woeful wight,
And leaves me there with sorrow freight, yt sought to take delight
Of Fancy.
THe kindled sparks of fire, that Fancies motions move,
Do force me feel, though I ne see, nor know not what is love.
Desire on ruth does run, embracing grief for game,
Whose joy is like the Flies delight, that fries amid the flame.
It yields and mercy craves, yet wots not who makes wars,
The only thing it sees or knows, is one that love preferres,
Answer.
YOu love belike to freese amid the flame,
To weep in joy, to joy in great distress:
To laugh in tears, to leap and yet be lame,
Midst grievous mirth and gladsome heaviness.
To sinck in dread, and not to seek redress,
You Titius like do play this woeful part,
You love the Grype that tyers upon your heart.
Ever sought, never found.
THe more I strive, the stronger is my thrall,
The stronger thrall, the weaker still mine aid:
The weaker aid, the greater grief does fall,
The greater grief, the more with doubt dismayde.
Where life I reach, there dollor biddes me die,
In sweetest soil, I strain the greatest Snake:
My cares increase, when comfort draws most nie,
From dainty pray, I pearsing poison take.
Still pynde in told, I parched am with heat,
As fire I fly, upon the flame I run:
In swelting gleames, my chylly corpse I beat,
Congealde to Ice, where shynes the cleerest sun.
Lo thus I live, and living thus I dye,
Drownde in despair, with hope advanced hye.
A Poesy.
THe valiant mind, by venture gains the Goal,
Whiles fearful wightes in doubt do blow the coal.
Answer.
BUt wary wightes, by wisdom shun the snare,
When venterous minds through have, are wrapped in care.
Every thing is as it is taken.
SOme only for disporte, a kind of mirth does raise,
For which of some they find dislyke, of some they purchase praise.
The Tale that some clowte up, with rude uncivil sense,
Does more delight the ears of some, then sweetest eloquence.
The Fool sometimes does please, when wise aside are shake,
Then true it is that every thing, is as men list it take.
Who has by knowledge skyll, of every foot the length,
Or can he always hit the mark, yt draws the greatest strength
Some carpe at others factes, that naught themselves will vewe,
And some by high disdain do seek, to mende Apelles shue.
What some in others spurn, themselves would not forsake.
But wily Fox from lofty Uine, does vow no grapes to take.
A word paste forth in sport, to earnest often does turn,
So where there was no fire before, great flames on sudden burn
Not one man's children all, echs Nature is not leeke,
But who has mean to measure will, shall give the greater gleeke.
First look then leap, the blind does run in many a brake,
And each thing still by proof we see is as men list it take.
Who so does rule his rage, by wisdoms sacred skill,
No doubt shall shun full great annoy, that follows rashness still.
And who his tongue can stay, till place and time do serve,
His mind at large may better speak and greater praise deserve.
Though friends like friends would shade, the sun beams for thy sake.
Yet al things are assuredly, as men them list to take.
But al not friends in deed, of friendships bounds that bostes,
Take heed, no house may long endure, propt up wc rotten posts.
Some rotten are at heart, yet bears a friendly face,
And under cloak of fawning shows, a Serpents sting thimbrace.
It Is hard to know of whom we certain count may make,
For though they smile, yet thee they deem, as they thee list to take.
As they thee list to take, such shall be their report,
Malicious minds are ever pressed against the virtuous sort.
Be chary in thy choice, least frawde thy faith abuse,
Of sundry sects embrace the best, the flattering flock refuse.
Thus warely run thy race, eschew the lurcking Snake,
Embrace the good, as for the rest, no force how they thee sake.
To his Lady of her doubtful answer.
TWixt death and doubtfulnesse,
Twixt pain and pensiveness,
Twixt Hell and heaviness,
Rests all my carfulness.
O vain security,
That will not liberty,
Fie on that fantasy,
That brings captivity.
My life is lothsomnesse,
My pleasure pastimelesse,
My end your doubtfulnesse,
If you be mercylesse.
In doubt is iealoste,
Hope helps misery,
Most women commonly,
Have aunswers readily.
Help best welcome, when most needful.
THe bitter smarte that strains my mated mind,
Through quelling cares that threate my woeful wrack:
Does prick me on against my will I find,
To plead for grace, or else to pine in lack.
As fainting soul sokt up with sickly pain,
Prays Phisicks aid in hope of health again.
Whilste Sea rooms serves, the shipman fears no foil,
In quiet Port there needs no Pilotes Art:
But when through weary winters tyring toil,
Clear Summers calmes to careful clouds conuarte.
And streaming storms at hand do danger threate,
Then Masters aid is sought in perrill great.
So I right Noble Peer and Lodestarre mine,
Whose Pynnis small an upright course has run:
In service yours, am forced now in fine,
Mine ancors worn, my sails and tackling done,
In humblest wise your honors help to crave,
My foredriuen ship from swallowing up to save.
You are the Haven whereon my hope depends,
And I the Barck upon the dry shore driven:
You eke the lan^de that cheerful Pilotte lends,
And I the wight, whom Seas to wrack has given.
What rests then, if Harbor you deny,
But that my ship must perish, sinck and dye?
For now to late to sownde some other shore,
And he that has and should by nature aid:
Withdrawes his hand, and says he may no more,
Lo thus alas, I live like one dismayde.
Twixte death and doubt, still surgde upon the sand,
Stayde up by hope to light on fyrmer land.
But oh, O me, where Autumn fruitelesse slydes,
A barren hope to Hiems falls by kind:
In Harvest time, whose travail naught prouydes,
A nypping Winter shall be sure to find.
So careless youth that wastes his years in vain,
In age repents bereft of hope or gain.
As years increase, uncertain hope seems hard,
When sickness sharp has gathered greatest force:
Then Phisicks cure does seem a sweet reward,
Which you may yield, if please you take remorse.
My stepdame strange, I Fortune yet do find,
Which makes me more to dread some wrack behind.
For where I seek the depth of hope to sound,
To help my self, and stay my credit still:
To front my course, does crooked hap rebounde.
Through such I fear, as ever mente me ill.
Or else in state I stand the most accursed,
(If service long me shrowde not from the wurst.)
Though some be slow to reach relief at need,
And with delays the matter will delate:
Yet Noble mind then shows it self in deed,
By gyuing strength unto the weakened state,
I seek no store to live and lie at rest,
I wish but aid in that I am oppressed.
Which if you grant, you shall great honor gain,
And eke encourage those of younger days:
With cheerful hope themselves and friends to strain,
To serve a wight that so his servant stays.
And I releast from wrackfull woes unrest,
Will blase your praise till life shall fail my breast.
Of the Golden world.
THe golden world is past says some,
But now say I that world is come:
Now all things may for Gold be had,
For gain of Gold, both good and bad.
Now honor hie for Gold is bought,
That erst of greater price was thought.
For Gold the Fool alofte does rise,
And often is plaste above the wise.
For Gold the subtle show their skill,
For Gold the wicked win their will.
For Gold who shunnes to wrest a wrong,
And make it seem as right and strong?
Who spares to plead as pleases thee,
If bring thou do a golden fee?
The Fatherless is quyte forgot,
Where golden gifts do fall to lot.
Gor Gold the Wyddow is oppressed,
And rightful heirs are dispossessed.
Poor Irus cause at door does stand,
If Croesus come with Gold in hand.
What mischief may almost be thought,
That now for Gold not daily wrought?
A heap of ylles for Gold are clokte,
Yea vice for Gold has virtue chokte.
For gain of Gold the Flatterer smyles,
And on thee fawnes with sundry wyles.
I will not here through golden traps,
Say Lovers light in Ladies laps.
But brief to be, what can you crave,
That now for Gold you may not have?
Then truth to tell, and not to feign,
Right now the golden world does raygne.
Of Gold.
O Gracious Gold,
Whose glittering hie:
Does cheer and hold,
Each gazing eye.
The sweet delight,
That dwelles in thee:
Does spoil each spite,
And pouertee.
Thou liftes aloft,
Who late was low:
By thee Fools often,
The wise orethrow.
What joy, what gain,
What worldly thing:
Does want to them,
That Gold do bring?
Gold buyldeth towns,
Gold makes joy:
Gold cheereth clownes,
Gold quelth anoy.
Gold all can do,
Gold reigns alone:
Alas what woe,
Where Gold is none.
As I poor wight,
By proof do see:
Which gladly seek,
That will not be.
But well I were,
If I might catch,
White silver clear,
Which all men snatch,
A. W.
THe want of Coin so grypes my breast,
That what to do I know not best,
I trudge, I toil, I seek, I sue,
But aye good hap bids me adue.
Answer. H.
IF nipping need Legittimus constraynde,
in hand to grype the heavy Hammer great:
With which through want his Princely corpse he paynde.
on stythie hard, in Vulcans trade to beat.
If he (I say) of crowned king the son,
(...) by fate was forste such bitter blastes to bide:
Despair not thou thy wrackfull race to run.
for wealth as shade from each estate does slide.
Pluck up thy heart, thy hap not yet so hard,
since Princes great have felt a fall more deep:
King Dionise from regal rule debarde,
for his relief a Grammar school did keep.
By which thou may thy wandering mind suffice,
That Fortunes wheel now up, now down does rise.
Of Friends.
AS fire does fine and separate Gold from dross,
And shows the pure and perfect from the vile:
Right so is tryde, when nipping storms do toss,
A faithful friend, from such as mean but guyle.
Whylste Fortune smyles, and thou no want do feel,
Of friends no doubt thou shall have heaped store,
But if she once do whyrle aside her wheel,
They slinke away, as though unknown before.
Like Doves that leave the old and ruynous tower,
And flocking fly to buyldings brave and new:
So feigned friends, when fortune seems to lowre,
Their flight do take, and bids thee straight adieu,
Thus he which erst had friends on every side,
Not having one, alone does now abide.
Answer. E. L.
IF perfect trial might as soon be had,
Of perfect men, as of the pure Gold:
It were not hard to know the good from bad,
Their difference soon might easilye then be told.
For Fire less than in an hours space,
Will find the fault of Gold, and make it plain,
But men have means to counterfeyt such grace,
That they will ask at least a year or twain.
And yet at last will not be tryde at all,
For some perchance will bide a toutch or two,
And will not seem to fly when you shall fall:
But offer you what they and theirs can do.
Yet not so sound as they should be in deed,
But make a means to make you serve their need.
Reply to the same.
THat longer time the Friend than Gold should try,
I never yet denide nor would defend:
How feigned friends do fail, if fate do wrye,
Is total sum whereto my tale does tend.
For every thing has certain time I know,
The full effect to work of Natures charge,
The tender twig in time a tree does grow,
And little Babes in time do prove more large.
Some fruit scarce ripe, when some do drop away,
Some bloume, some bear according to their kind,
Some soon shoot up, some longer space do stay,
Each takes the time that Nature has assignde.
The Marble stone in time by watery drops
Is pierced deep, and eke in time does fall,
The stately towers with fine and curious tops,
For time in time, no doubt tryes all in all.
Which trial first, occasion seeks to make,
As fire by heat the Gold does fine and pure,
In need likewise occasion men shall take,
A friend to try, from such as stand unsure.
But some a time will seem to stay say you,
And after fail, perceiving further need:
No doubt you here have aymde the mark to true,
For such is sure the fruit of subtle seed.
These friends are like to one that undertakes,
To run the race, whereby to gain the praise:
Who running well, at first, on sudden slakes,
And in the midst his race leaves off and stays.
Not aye does prove the glorious morning show
The fairest day, ne all that shines is gold:
And therefore friends in deed are hard to know,
For some a storm or two, like friendship hold.
The flowers yet in time from weeds appear,
Whose difference first in spring we scarce discern,
The sun orecast with cloud in time does clear,
And eke in time our friends from such we learn.
For as one tutch or two no perfect proof
Does make of friends, no more does Gold one heat.
Yet time us tells who links, who lies aloof,
Who byrds does yield, and who the bushe does beat.
Wherefore I end, as Gold by fire is tryde,
So friends by proof at needful times are spyde.
Another way.
WHen once you have false fortunes fickle wheel,
perceyude with pain, and tryde with troubled toil:
The sound to see, and forged friend to feel,
it is not hard, for falshed has the foil.
If then you find that Fortune stands your foe,
let wisdom welde your wit, and all your ways:
So feigned friends their faith that do forgo,
shall be ashamde, and you attain to praise.
For though the wheel with care do cast you down,
Yet Pallas plays, when Fortune false does frown.
To his Friend M. S.
IF friendship true be tryde when wealth does fail,
from such as feign, and flee if fortune dowre:
If he a friend that seems not then to quayle,
but seeks to help and aid his friend to power.
My Staplee then a friend thou art in deed,
That helps thy friend in time of nipping need.
In mediocritie, most safety.
AS mean in Music sounds best,
So mean estate lives most in rest.
The higher clymde, the fall more deep,
The deeper fall, the doubler pain,
Declyning pain does careful keep,
In man each lively limme and vain.
Which proves what change or chance do fall,
Contented mean exceeds all.
To the same.
THe high estate is dangerous,
The poor degree is burdenous.
The welthie sort are covetous,
The needy soul is dolorous.
The youthful Imps are prodigal.
The aged be to riches thrall.
The bolder men foolehard ye-call,
And fearful wightes are dastards all.
Then ill eschew, embrace things clean,
Well fare the sweet and golden mean.
That valiant hearts are desirous to aspyre.
Each valiant heart and Noble mind,
with leftie courage hye:
The mighty Mountain seeks to scale,
and lets the Molehill lie.
Answer.
THe mounting mind that hasts to climb,
when Fortune whirles her wheel:
With double dolor is deprest,
if down he chance to reele.
Another way.
TO climb to high must needs be naught,
the fear to fall does breed disease:
To sink to low brings careful thought,
dispayring pain can never please.
The golden mean gives quiet rest,
Who lives between extremes does best.
To his Friend E. R. of the Be.
WHere as thy mind I see does mount,
to build thy nest on hye:
I think it good in meaner sort,
thy wings thou guide to fly.
For lofty trees on Mountain tops,
with every blustering blaste
Are shaken sore, when trees below
do stand both firm and fast.
The Be whose force but feeble is,
to Beasts of bigger power:
Her self does feed with Honey sweet,
when greater taste things sour.
Which proves the mean with mind content,
more happy life we see:
Than is to taste the sour, and sit
in seat of high degree.
From thorny shrubs and barren soil,
sweet sap the Be does suck:
When bigger beasts in fertyle Fields,
with nipping storms are stuck.
And he within his simple Cell,
does dwell in safety sound:
When such as seek to sail aloft,
in dole are often times drounde.
Seek not therefore with troubled mind,
at stately port to riue:
But live content as does the Be,
within his homely Hiue.
So shall thy food be Honey sweet,
though Fortune smile or frown:
And eke in safety shall thou sit,
when higher tumble down.
Sure counsel, sound friendship.
OF Lovers restles lives I list not write,
Let learned heads describe their painful plight,
But plain in terms, I wish thee even so well,
As those that can fine Tales for Lovers tell.
Whose friendly meaning if thou will receive,
Detest disloyal love, to Virtue cleave,
And seek by honest means thy state to stay,
The virtuous life does syldome bring decay.
Count not the byrds that vndisclosed be,
Waygh words as wind that yields no certainty,
For polisht words that deeds do never yield,
May likened be unto the barreyn Feelde.
Provide in youth, thy aged years to keep,
And let fair speech go lulle the fond a sleep,
Sir Machiauell such cunning now has tought,
That words seem sweet when bitter is the thought.
Whilst youth, strength, skyll, wealth, friends and coin will stretch,
Thou fair art borne, by many a guilfull fetch,
But if these helps but once begin to fainte,
Adieu farewell, cold comfort finds complainte.
Take heed therefore, retire in time from those,
To serve their turns, that teach their tongues to gloss.
Whose golden shows, although do promise much.
In proof fall out but Copper in the touch.
They perform not best, that promise most.
WHat hold in hope, or trust to fair allure,
She that my sweetest years beguylde can tell:
By whom I learn there is no way so sure,
Ne speedier mean to guide a man to hell.
Lo, he that list such feigned hope to prove,
Shall subject line, and nere reign over love.
The pleasure of her piercing eyes me thought,
Should be the lights that lead to happiness:
Alas I was to bold, but she more naught,
To false such faith, and meaning nothing less,
What heaven is hid in love, who seeks to see,
Must sue and serve a better Saint than she.
Though time has stayed the rage of my desire,
Yet does her sight renew my festred wound:
I curse she art that causde me to aspire,
In hope of truth, where no trust could be found.
But till my soul shall break this careful gayle,
Love may not maystred be, nor I prevail.
Beauty the bayte of Vanity.
A Flattering form has shows that soon do pass,
And vade away as does the wythered grass.
The more it hastes to reach the rypest years,
The more it faylth, and worse the form apeares.
Of pleasant Flowers, the Rose that has no Peer,
The Uiolets fresh, and Lyllies white and clear.
Do not always retain their hew and sense,
And floorishe still with smell most redolente.
So though thou seem of feature passing all,
And bearst the form and form as principal,
Whose beauty shows, has blasde thy shape in sight,
Which thou in Glass to view, take great delight.
Yet time on poollisht form shall furrows plowe,
And wrythed wrinckles peer on blemished browe.
That loathe thou shalt, to note thy changed hew,
And hate thy form in Mirror bright to view.
Lo Lady fair, that beauty is but vain,
Experience shows, when Virtue void of stain,
Does florishe fresh, whom if thou do embrace.
The more she grows, the greater is her grace.
Of Fortune.
O Fortune false how double are thy deeds,
Thy painted Flowers are naught in proof but weeds.
Who are brought down, by thy most froward frowns,
Still subject live, and trouble them redownes.
To slipper happes annexed are their days,
To Lions force, their bodies are but prays.
What so they win by meritte or deserte,
Is from them rest, by power that does subuerte.
Now welthy men do tell the wisest tales,
And muck is made an equal weyghing schales.
No reason yet, but right should be of force,
And virtue would that want should find remorse.
But as the tossed Bark bydes better bliss.
And sharpest thrall in time released is,
And as the feeble Reeds are rent by Seas,
Yet spring again, when swelling waves appease.
So hope I will, though now the ebb be low.
A spring in time with former course may flow.
A Sonet.
IF wayghtie burdens may be light,
Or fair denial det requite:
If Justice can be termed error,
Or dross for good and perfect treasor.
If May may be without delight,
Or Snow of other hew than white,
If Cunning can be without skill,
Or women without headstrong will,
If Pardon where there is no sin,
Or Loss where every man does win,
If Paradise in Hell you see,
Or sylent whereas women be.
Then shall not Love be termed hate,
Nor low degree the happiest state,
But all this must prove contrary,
And therefore Love is Loyalty.
Flee it, and it will flee thee,
Follow it, and it will follow thee.
To her Lover, that made a conquest of her, and fled, leaving her with child.
AT strife to whom I might,
commit my secret tears:
My heart the Mountains sight,
and hollow Echo fears.
I doubt the Dryades,
amids the Forest chase,
And thinking on the Seas,
I dread the Marmayds grace.
What shall I trust the Skies?
then me the winds bewray:
Poor soul whom Jove denies,
each caytife does betray.
Ha heavy heart, thy meede,
O tell, tell out thy mind:
Ponder his fylthie deed,
that left his shame behind.
And like a Cowarde fled,
fearing the child unborn:
Whose mother he should wedde,
that has the Babe forsworn.
Was ever Maid so mad,
that might her faith forgo?
Was ever boy so badde,
to use a maiden so?
His tears did me beguyle,
and clean oppressed my power,
As does the Crocodile,
in seeking to devour.
How could I well deny,
when needs it must be so:
Although a shameful I,
should have a shameful no.
O faythlesse friend my guylte,
that first with guyle began:
O foolish friend that spylte,
her mirror on the man.
What has thy Country done,
or native soil avoid:
To force thee it to shonne,
wherein thy Lover ioyde.
No foreign Haven can hide,
ne color thine intent:
If life in Babe abide,
that does thy fault present.
And when thy fame has worn,
within the Italian cost:
Thou shall be laughed to scorn,
of them that loud thee most.
The Gods will have a share,
in gyuing him his hier:
That faythlesse falsely swear,
and prooude himself a lier.
And I thy mortal foe,
by fylthie lust beguylde:
To wreake me of my woe,
will slay thy silly child.
In stead of quiet grave,
wherein his corse should rest:
Thy Impe his hearse shall have,
in bowels of a beast.
My dainty tamed womb,
that to thy share befell:
Shall find no doubt a tomb,
amids the mayds in hell.
Being burdened to feign his good will, he answers thus.
IF mine thy little care,
if thine my restless state,
If thine the brunts in breast I bear,
of mine to love or hate.
Then try thou should to true,
that falsshood naught did frame:
Though now my smarts thou list not rue,
but makes my grief thy game.
But out alas I die,
this change is nothing so:
For I in languishe still do lie,
and fawn on thee my foe.
Who smiles to see my smarte,
and laughes when I do weep:
Regarding naught my faithful heart,
yet from me do it keep.
Thus heart to feign vnskilde,
in being whole is broke:
In health is hurt, alive is kilde,
by dinte of dolors stroke.
And being mine, is stolen,
and led by lyking lust:
Does leave the way of certain stay,
and lean to tickle trust.
Thou say I do not love,
would God thou did not lie:
Such fond affects may nothing move,
such one thou say as I.
The Sages sure were wise,
yet forced now and then:
By flashing flames of Cupids fire,
to she we themselves like men.
Dame Natures force will show,
what so therefore befall:
It Is sure my simple state so low,
thou do mislike with all.
My thoughts do mount on hie,
though Fortune seem but base:
Whose yielding walls before thee lie,
to rear or down to raze.
Change of Country, shall not change fancy.
TO syfte my fate in foreign soil,
a time though I depart:
Yet distaunce none, ne time, nor toil
shall pluck from thee my heart.
But as I erst unfeignedly,
have vowde me wholly thine:
So will I stand assuredly,
how ere the world enclyne.
Where ability fails, will suffyceth.
IF knowledge mine could compass wylling will,
To sound her fame, so well as deeds deserve:
Or if in Uerse by praise of Poets skill,
I able were to write what I reserve.
Then should my pen put forth what now I hold,
And to the world her virtues rare unfold.
But sith in me such sacred lore does fail,
I leave the same to Sophos learned brain:
As one whose bare and naked Muse does quayle,
To undertake her glory to explayne.
Least lack of skill that might in me appear,
Should clipse the light which now does shine so clear.
A perfect Pearl it self does show so well,
That naught it needs a foil to blase the same:
Her praise likewise, the rest does so excel,
That finer wits will spread her Noble name.
What should I then upon her feature stand,
Which shows it self like sun against the sand?
Her curious shape, who views and does not praise,
In Noble mind she second is to none:
Not Fortune, but deserts, her fame does raise,
For Fortune bows to Uertues lofty throne.)
Where lo she settled sits, in seat so bright,
As Hesper clear with gleames of glittering light.
Man's impiety, faynes false Deity.
LUst long is feign a God of love to be,
Whose peeuishe power some deem is dangerous.
A cunning Archer that could never see,
Set forth he is, with shaftes right perilous.
A wanton winged boy forsooth he is,
And Venus son, whom she does clip and kiss.
Down from the Heavens he shoots the flaming darts,
That Fancy quickly burns with quenchlesse fire:
Bereauing Reason quite in all her parts,
Preferring will with doting fond desire.
Is this a God? no, no, a Devil sure,
To fylthie lust that does the weak allure.
For Gods to Virtue, not to vices win,
Their powers provoke to good and not to ill:
It Is against their kind to foster fylthie sin,
Each heavenly grace, does heavenly gifts fulfill.
Then you that feign Dan Cupide is a God,
Recante in time, least Jove reach forth his rod.
In love small iarres, sometime breed best content.
WHat state more sweet, more pleasant or more hie,
Then loves delight, where hearts do jointly joy?
If vile suspect, fear and ielosie,
With gawling grudge did not the same annoy.
Yet where this sour, with sweet some deal does blende,
Loves perfection often it does amend.
For thirst the water sauourie makes to seem,
And after fasting, meat is had in price:
He knows not peace, nor can thereof esteem,
That in the wars has never broke the Ice.
Hope is reuiude, and shakes of sorrows past,
When service long does reap reward at last.
Distaunce of Friends may suffered be with ease,
When safe return exiles each former fear:
The farther of, the more does meeting please,
Things hardly had, obtaynde, are holden dear.
Despair not then, though eyes debarred be,
From that fair sight, the heart does howerly see.
What Nature seuereth, Art hardly joins.
IN faith does frozen Ianus double face,
Such favor find, to match with pleasant May:
May Horie Hiems now sweet bliss embrace,
Where fertyle June by flat repulse had nay.
No surely no, though jealous heads misdeeme,
A false untroth to me they soon does seem.
For Frost with Fire may never long agree,
And May by course ought mayntaine Venus right:
When shyuering Ianus does deny we see,
The pleasing sport that May would most delight.
Then jealous slander shut thy chaps for shame,
Deprave them not, whose deeds are void of blame.
Since sprinkling showers of sweet Auroraes fludde,
In Hiems reign are dried up with cold:
Whose Silver drops bedewes the blowming budde,
And makes the fertyle foil her fruit unfold.
Who can believe? not I, I vow in deed,
That Ianus old should gain such youthful meede.
He wysheth well to the Crabbe and Maple Tree in Milfeelde, for the Ladies sake
that met there under them.
THe cheerful bird that skips from tree to tree,
By shilfull choice does rooust and rest at night:
Although by wing and will he may go free,
Yet there he pearkes, where most he takes delight.
As Thrush in thorn, and golden Finch in Fearne,
Great byrds in groves, the small in bushie hedge:
The Lark allow, in lofty tree the Hearne,
And some in Fenne, do shrowde themselves in sedge.
So some men bost in Bays, whose branch they bear,
Some Hawthorne, hold, as chief of their delight:
Some woeful wights, the wrethed Willows wear,
Some Roses reach, and some the Lyllies white.
Some Plane tree praise, as greet Darius son,
Whose often recourse thereto, does well express,
That virtues rife therein this Prince had won,
To like the same above the rest I guess.
The Oliander eke, whose Roselike flower,
Fair Polixene so passing well did please:
Some lift aloft, and some the Pien pure,
Yet trees I know that far surmounteth these.
Not for their dainty fruits, or odoures sweet,
Ne yet for sumptuous she we that others yield:
But for the Ladies sakes, which there did meet,
I give them praise as chiefest in the field.
O happy trees, O happy boughs, whose shade
I shrouded has such Noble virtuous wightes:
By whom you were, and are a Mirror made,
Who of your selves do yield no great delights.
O fertyle ground, in yielding wise that lends,
Such causes great of Ladies perfect joys,
O blissful place so fit for faithful friends,
In pleasures ryfe, to rid them from anoyes.
What wonder may it he, to those shall hear,
In Maple hard, or crooked Crabbe tree sour:
Such sugared talk, such jests, such joyful cheer,
Such mylde affects, as if it were Cupids bower?
Now since these Noble Nymphs ybreathed have,
Upon these plants, in uttering forth their mind:
If any seek their secrecy to crave,
High Jove I pray these trees may she we their kind.
Help Satyrs eke, you Gods that keep the wood,
The poisoning breath of Boreas rouuh resist:
And thou whose silver drops bedewes each bud,
Refreshe these trees with sweet Auroraes mist.
And Jove if thou in Milfeelde show thy might,
Convert them soon, to fruits of more delight.
That Maple may be Mulberie,
And Crabbe tree eke a Medler be.
Being charged with finenesse, he answers thus.
NOt fine good Lady mine,
but plain as plain may be:
Your curious head may fiuenesse frame,
it longs not to me.
My simple meaning plain,
not carved with mincing style:
Unfayned friendship seeks to show,
deuoyde of frawde or guile.
No Gnatos part I play,
ne like Corebus true:
By glosing words to seek to painte,
or publishe more than true.
My chief delight to please,
is all which I desire:
With nising Nymphs I list not deal,
whose looks alost aspire.
Plain truth aye yields such trust,
as needs no fined phrase:
And my delight has less desire,
Dame bewties beams to blase.
Whose heasts in heart I hold,
and will till time I die:
Yet truth might truly match delight,
with things that seem more hie.
But needelesse here to tell,
What all men sees right well.
Where niceness fine is fled,
Does virtue spring and spread.
Let finenesse then be plaste*
Where finenosse is embraste.
Such Saints, such service.
THy countnance changde, though clokt in covert sort,
Not all things well, long since did make report.
Though thou unkind, and twice unkind again
To me thy friend, would not imparte thy pain.
See yet at last, how time the truth has told,
What thou would not, lo time does here unfold.
No doubtful drift whereon demurre dependes.
So close is kept, that time not tries and ends.
And art thou changde? does fancy so persuade?
To heap thy harm, do secret flames invade?
Will thou from me so hide thy cause of pine?
Have thou forgot, I rest still wholly thine?
Where is become thy manly mind, which late
Could so dehort thy friend, in frail estate?
May one so well approou'd in Pallas feelde,
By view of simple piece, seem thus to yield.
Shall Bussard blind, thy constant dealing daunt?
Art thou so fond with carren Kyte to haunt?
Or will thou stoop, and bend thy self to serve,
A thanklesse Trull, whose deeds right naught deserve?
Whose peeuishe pride, descries the Pecocks grace,
Though she God wot, be far more vile and base.
Naught else but want of wit, makes pride presume,
The feet well viewd, down falls the Pecocks plume.
Whose own conceyte, so dimmes her dazeled sight,
That deem she does for day, the duskishe night.
To base she is for thee to lure and call,
Though she by lofty looks would conquer all.
Thy food to fine her fylthy gorge to fill,
Of dainty pray to judge, she has no skill.
By course of kind, she does for carren crave,
Be ruled by me, her diet let her have.
Do way the Kyte, that so does scratch and scowle,
My Keeper keep hence forth some finer foul.
For look as vessel aye, yields certain taste
Of licoure, such as first therein was plaste.
So dunghill birds, on dunghill still we find,
To show the branch when first they came by kind.
Cast of therefore thy care and changed cheer,
Call home thy heart, let woonted plight appear.
Hoyse up thy sails, and launch from wrackful shore,
Who runs on rocks, often bruised is full sore.
I follow what flies from me.
IUie we the fertile tree,
but fruit I none may get:
Most dainty food I see,
yet starve for want of meat.
Where drink stands me before,
there greatest drought I take:
My thirst encreast the more,
when most I would it slake.
So hunger stryues to feed,
when hap withholds repast,
So thirst craves drink with speed,
when thrall says stay a cast.
Thus Tantals toil I try,
against the stream that row:
As hope would heave me hie,
despair does sink me low.
No grief to want of due regard.
WHere sorrow sunck in breast, has sokt up every joy,
What comfort there but cruel care, the source of sharp anoy?
Adieu delightful days that wretch right well may say,
Whose good endeavor made him dream, till wakt wc cold decay.
Adieu deluding hope, that lulde thee so on sleep,
As sleep thy senses so bereaude, that waking yet do sleep.
Since all the fruit thou findst, for long employed pain,
Falls out but brakes and brambles sharp, how may thou tears refrain.
When ruth is made reward, for faith that favor sought,
What heart can choose but pine away, in plaint and pensive thought?
And curse each practice still, through drift of glosing guiles,
That dandled on true meaning minds, by frawde and hellish wiles.
To serve their turns till they, unto the bones are worn,
And then on sudden shake them off, in greatest need forlorn.
Most like the worms that feed upon the kernels sweet,
For saking husk when food is spente, to perish under feet.
So they the hearts of men, do gnawe in pieces sinale,
When youth and coin are both consumde, yt leaves them to their thrale.
As some by to much proof, have tried all to true,
Enforst to bid their golden time, so fruitless spent adiewe.
Of Anger.
APoyson piercing to the death,
A Traitor to the life:
A Foe to friendships constancy,
a friend to deadly strife.
Armed against good counsels force,
weak in adversity:
A spoyler of such guiltless blood,
as is condemde by thee.
A troubled wit, a reaklesse hand,
a wrathful heart to spill:
A partial Judge, a jealous wife,
where anger has her will.
A wastefull pursse, a greedy Foe,
a false suspecting thing:
A tickle stay, a proud disgrace,
a cruel Serpents sting.
A whip to ease, a rack to rule,
a fury to good rest.
A black infecting Spring they say,
that poisons man and beast.
A hasty heat, a burning flame,
a wild devouring whelpe:
A forcelesse wind, a fury short,
and last a silly help.
A New years gift.
L LOng may you live, and happy years enjoy,
A Among your friends, to stay in blisfull state
D Deuoyde of Foes, safe shrouded from annoye.
I In all your works: God grant you happy fate,
K Kindle your care to compass heavenly things:
P Press down the world, let not his power prevail.
E Esteem him not, a Sirens song he sings.
M Most happy they, where most his flatteries fail.
B Begin no act, but first foresee the end:
R Reach forth your hand to help the needy still,
O Observe such rules as may your state defend.
O Offense forbear: fear ever to do ill.
K Know God and seek his holy hests to hold,
E Example give, to make the good more bold.
Another.
L LEt wisdom welde your wit and all your ways,
A Among the best your credit twill enhaunce:
D Detest each Uice, by Virtue purchase praise,
I In Noble moulde, a Noble mind advance.
M March on with those against frail desires that fight,
A And gain the Gole where glory great does dwell*
R Resist each wrong, endeavor to do right,
I Embrace good will of such as wish you well.
S Suspend to deem the worst, what ever breed,
A And poyse each point before you verdit give,
V Until you syft the depth of doubts in deed,
I It skill shall show to let the matter live.
L Last bear in mind as course does change the year,
E Even so all Natures works in time do wear.
Another.
L LAy down your Pens, that pen unworthy praise,
A Aduaunsing Dames which naught may claim by right:
D Direct your course a Ladies fame to raise,
I In each respect that well deserves your light.
G Grace is a gift deuyne given from above,
C Cancel the scrowles that others praise pretend:
A All writs are void that substance none do prove,
V Virtue and blood, this Lady both commend.
E Each perfect good in her does fyrmely rest,
N Noble by birth, by Nature affable,
D Disposed well, all ill she does detest,
I In every action modest and stable.
S Set shape aside, where Virtue has no place,
H Here shape and Virtue both are ioynde in Grace.
Another.
T Time and trust does try both weak and sure,
O O blisfull hap that trust in time may reach:
T The patients pain which sickness does procure,
H Has health or onde, at last to be his leache.
E Effects (alas) I see do fall out hard,
L Lost labor reapes the crop of lyngering grief,
A And friendships force, through falshoode is debarde.
D Despite denies deserte to reach relief,
I I see some smyle as they wers gyrte with gladness,
S Stayde up by hope, though ^^^ncht in deep despair:
P Preferring sport, but daunted down with sadness.
E Enjoying naught, yet feign to fly in the air.
K Kept far from you (God grant) all such almoye,
E Embraste to be with them that live in joy.
An Epitaph.
WHat hydes this hearse but quiet silente rest,
The surest end of his uncertain time:
Whom neither sword, nor fire, nor age oppressed,
But to his Ghost gave way, in haste to clime
Aloft, lo here the justice of such fatal breath,
To have a God the author of his death?
Faith and good nature, honor death and rise,
The Noble heart procures favor most,
These marks, these flowers of his age are rise,
Wherein both soul and sh^^^e may justly boste.
Where his desires lodge, the Gods can tell,
Here lies the corse that lived and died so well.
A Dream.
TO clime the high and hauty hill,
Where Poets preace for praise by skyll,
I list no labor waste:
The water Nymphs I never vewde,
Nor Ladies of the Lake persewde,
That poor Acteon chaste:
King Arthurs Knights long since are fled,
In force that did excel,
And all those Ladies now lie dead,
Whose lives old Poets tell.
Revealing, their dealing,
I purpose not to write:
But dreaming, a strange thing
Lo here I do recyte.
A fair Pauillion finely pight,
In sleep appeared in my sight.
Amidst whereof in green and white,
The Goddess sat of all delight,
Be set about with Ladies true,
Which did to her such service due.
As few I deem, the like has seen.
I done to any earthly Queen.
Her Nymphs all they were,
Of such comely theere,
Helens face, may give place,
Where they appear.
THese Ladies on this Goddess bright,
Attendance gave both day and night,
To work what she would will:
Some sitting here, some standing there,
As for the time they placed were,
According to their skill:
For Venus then in Majesty,
Me thought at Banquet sat,
Attended on most curiously,
As best beseemde her state,
Some serving,
Some caruing,
In Office as they stood,
Some playing,
Some singing,
With glad and cheerful mood.
That sure me thought in Heaven I was,
To see this sight it so did pass,
But at the last, this Banquet past,
Of Suitors then a Noble route
There did appear, with drooping cheer,
Beseeching Venus them to hear,
Who straight enclynde, with wylling mind
To peise the playntes that each put out.
Where withal kneelde down,
A wight of renown,
Who cryde thus, O Venus,
Let fate cease to frown.
Have pyttie on her painful plight,
Whose life is led without dellight,
In sighs and sorrows still:
My youth said she with age I waste,
For wealth my Parents me so plaste,
God knows against my will.
With that another stepped in place,
And craude with wayling voice,
O Noble Goddess of thy grace,
Grant me my wished choice.
Thus seeking, Dame liking,
They call on Venus hie:
Still suing, renewing,
Their plaintes with watery eye.
Some out do cry on jealousy,
And some of great vncourtesie,
With tears complain, that find disdain
Where they have loved faithfully.
Another sort, do eke resort,
Exclayming loud on false report,
Whereby their fame, and Noble name
Without desert, often brute does blame.
And some Ladies say,
Their Lords run astray,
Whose wanting, and scanting
Often works their decay.
AS thus in course each made his plainte,
I woeful wretch through love attainte,
In prease my self did vaunte:
And unto Venus as I thought,
I hasted fast, and her besought,
My Ladies love to grant.
But out alas, even therewithal
A sudden thundering noise:
As heaven and earth should fail and fall,
My sprites from sleep did raise.
Then waking, heart aching,
I languisht lay in woe,
Bewayling, the failing,
Of wyshed purpose so.
And to my self lo thus I said,
What straunged sight has me dismaide.
May Uisions rare, or dreams declare.
Such sudden change from joy to care.
From great delight, such moning cheer,
May Goddesses abide to hear?
No, no, naught else but fancy sure,
My yielding heart does lead and lure.
Aye the wight to mind,
Where love does me bind,
Whose servant, attendant
The Gods me assignde.
Love asks love.
I Saw of late a woeful wight,
That wyllow twigges did wind to wear:
Whose face declarde the pensife plight,
Which he through love did present bear.
He lookte aloft as though he would
Have clymed to the starry skies,
But still he stood as though he could
Not once lift up his heavy thies.
His feathered hands he forced forth,
And thither feign he would have fled,
But woeful man it was no worth,
For all his limbs were lade with led.
You are the bright and starrie sky,
I am the man in painful plight:
My limbs are lade I cannot fly,
My wings may not sustain my weight.
I read how love did Gismond wound,
The child of Tancred Salerne king:
Her favor Guistarde constante found,
She fancied else no other thing,
For riches naught, nor for his wealth,
Whereof he had but little store,
His virtue was her only health,
She likte that well, she sought no more,
They had their hoped hap and joy,
If Tancred could content him so,
But he by working their annoye,
Unto himself brought greatest woe.
You are that Gismond fair and bright;
Would I had Guistards virtuous life,
And Tancred chaste clean out of sight,
Then would I wyshe for such a wife.
Some say how Luna loved one,
Of low estate and little fame,
By name yclipt Endimion,
Whose love was quite deuoyde of blame.
In Laemi hill it thus befell,
She saw him sit all sad alone,
It Is I (quoth she) I know full well,
For whom he mournes and makes his moan.
She shamed not of Laemi hill,
Nor yet of Lovers simple state,
But soon consentes unto his will,
And him did choose to be her mate.
O Luna look upon thy Love,
Endimion makes his moan to thee:
Be not abasht, let pity move,
That love for love may yeelden be.
The variable thoughts of a Lover.
I Live in hope and yet despair,
Rejoicing most when grief does grow:
I mount aloft above the air,
Yet lead my life in Limbo low.
I never seek, though much I find,
Yet find I naught and still do seek:
I see what best contents my mind,
When most in mind I do misleeke.
One holds me in captivity,
So sure that I ne once may swerue:
Albeit I live at liberty,
As free from bands that I deserve.
R. T.
THe ship that late I saw bear lofty sail,
Deep lanched in the waves of waters wild:
Whose courage stowte I deemde no storm might quayle,
When I her viewde so fast and fyrmely field.
With tempest tossed, is forced now sail to streeke,
And in her prime does houering harbor seek.
Answer.
THough streaming storms, force ship to harbor haste,
To whom the Seas with rigor great threats wrack:
Whose cables cut, and ankers worn to waste,
Is forste streeke sail in her so great a lack.
When Neptune yet with Septer plaste in hand,
Shall calm the furious rigor of the Flood:
This Ship repayrde, may safely sail to land,
Naught dreading Eolus breath, that her withstood.
So H. does hope his Howlke such port shall find,
When storms be past, as will content his mind.
Another way.
LEt none mislike a man for his mishap,
But think how chance does check the greatest might:
Aeneas he, Ulysses worthy wight,
By land and seas, did danger great entrap,
None for deserts are luide in Fortunes lap.
Chance roules us round, and reaks ne wrong nor right,
Ne lewd is he on whom lewd luck does light.
Was not Iobe just, though sokte in sorrows lap.
They err that deem all goes as men deserve,
At length Aeneas ran his weary race:
Ulysses eke and Iobe, God did preserve,
So I poor wretch whom Fortune does disgrace,
Do hope thylke God will guide my crased barge,
Which beats the seas, whilst none of her takes charge.
B. Godliness passes riches.
THe slender store that verteous wights possess,
More worth then is the wickeds great excess.
Yet strange to see what soil some worldlings take,
For riches vain, that soon will them forsake.
Whose greedy guts, no reason may suffice,
The muck on moulde so blinded has their eyes.
His answer to one that wrote, faynte hearts that fear to sin, fair
Ladies syldome win.
HE much more valiant is,
whose steps are slow to sin:
Then who so seeks unlawful means,
his Ladies love to win.
And greater praise deserves,
his will that can subdue:
Than thou which boldly brags, to gain
the thing thou well may rue.
A pleasure short thou seekst,
procuring lasting pain:
A poison sweet thou do embrace,
that sundry wightes have slain.
A door that lets in Death,
a scourge that whips the soul:
A vice that Virtue overthrows,
who does it not control.
A flame of burning fire,
that reaues all reasons rules:
A gulf of foul desire,
that often makes wise men fools.
To I. N.
GOod will put forth my Pen in haste,
and made me bold to crave:
And Love lay on me sore to seek,
that I suppose you have,
Pleasure drew forth my doubtful care,
and held my hand aright:
And Use transported like a guide,
the vain desire I wright.
Hope flattered so these troubled thoughts,
that comfort of the pain:
Would force me to appose thy (...),
with fancies of the brain.
Slow of it self my little skill,
but that thy truth professed:
Will pardon both my light offense,
and grant this poor request.
To tell if air may alter grief,
or where like luck betide:
Thy self, that under Country Havens,
doste seek thy self to hide,
And if love be, what thing it is,
if not, what moves my pain:
Good Nedham write, or come in haste,
and I shall write again.
H. To his mishap.
THe Gallie slave that stirs the fleeting Ore,
In foming Seas, to cut the mounting wave:
With heavy cheer does wish the gladsome shore,
In hope that end his thraldom then shall have.
Or else does hope amidst his pyning woe,
That ship will sink, and end his travel so.
The sickly wight whom Fevers pinche full sore,
With gasping breath, and panting heart in bed:
And yields himself content with Natures lore,
Reuoltes again, who was by hope misled,
If vital breath yet chance to fail him than,
Now past his pain, becomes a happy man.
An end of woes these seely folk obtain,
An end of thrals at length by ^^^^^^es they find:
Deuoyde of cares, and I as wretch remain,
To whom alive the Gods above assignde.
That living yet, a thousand times should dye.
And long time dead, unburied yet should lie.
Falsyfying of Faith, breeds many complaynts.
MY idle head retaynes the busy hope,
My gasing eye gives over her desire:
My reaching hand would after favor grope,
My legs yield up and leave me in the mire.
It Is light t'outrunne, but not to outread the wise,
Thus find I strife to hinder my devise.
The time too short, to wear so speedy grief,
I still pursue, that shunnes my wylling hold:
Skill is to weak to yield my woe relief,
My cares like clouds, infect my heart with cold.
So that if heat should melt so cruel frost,
My heart were drownde, and all the love were lost.
Between two Adamants of equal weight,
I am the piece of iron to behold:
Without desert, lo I am made the baight,
Denide the joy that my desires would.
My taste of love, is lost as you may guess,
That know how Sickmen savor bitterness.
Who would his will, must bear the bitter lot,
The Faucons foot distraynth the Princes hand:
When love was made, his eyes were quite forgot,
The highest towers in greatest danger stand.
O slipper hold, that for a silly eye,
Can find no peace, but ever seeks to die.
Die, and do all the wretched train of love,
To know the torment of my boiling smarte:
Her might on me poor man she meant to prove,
Whom I had thought, should heal my wounded heart.
O cruel penance to my pore desire,
In such great heat to bring me to the fire.
To his Song, sent to his Mistress.
SOng in the sweet place,
Where as my Lady was
walking.
Think if thou should stand,
She would reach outher hand,
wylling.
Touch not her tenderness,
Stoop to her stateliness,
hie thee.
Spirit without carkesse,
Mercury bodilesse,
ply thee.
Tell her I will come,
Knowing not how soon,
speed well.
Love may no let have,
This is all I crave,
farewell.
A Poesy.
THe streaming storms, that fast on me do flow,
The secret sighs, that waste my woeful breast:
The Isie cold I feel like flakes of Snow,
The hidden harms that breed my great vnteast.
By Fancies force do cause such troublous tide,
That ship now shakes, which late in road did ride.
Answer.
WHere reason rules, affections fond do fly,
And bewties beams (...) bittirnesse may breed:
Where wisdom will, by virtues skill does lie,
Cupidos flames are quenched forth with speed.
Let reason then thy will by wisdom guide,
So shall thou safely shun this stormy tide.
The vanity of rytches.
THe stately Palace Princely plasse,
the hoorde of glyttering Gold:
The Patrimony large of lands,
cannot from sickness hold.
Nor can they cure the crased corpse,
or deck the mind at all:
Gold is the Father to the Flock,
of Flatterers by lotte:
It is the sum of grief or woe,
who has, or has it not.
For who it has, he quakth in fear,
least Fortune rob his thrifte:
Who has it not, laments because,
he knows not how to shifte.
Wherefore of rich or poor I judge,
as wisdom small I hente:
In best estate is he, with his
that lives with mind content.
Discord makes weak, what concord left strong.
THe quiet pawse that silente night,
Does bring from trauayles past:
Of day no sooner had by sleight,
A nuumber on me cast.
But in my sleep there did appear,
Six sauadge men in moss and hair.
A Faggot bound the foremost wight,
Me thought in hand did bear:
Which jointly and alone through might,
All sought to break and tear,
Yet still in vain their strength they tryde,
Each part to other was so tide.
Till wresting long, a stick at last,
One forth by sleight does wring,
Whereby the Bundell knitte so fast,
A sunder soon they fling.
Then each a seuerde piece does spoil,
Which late conioynde, no force could foil.
This done me seemde they vanishte quite,
And there my Dream did end:
Yet so amazed with the sight,
That out a sighe I send.
I cursed the frawde that friends defast,
Whose broken band each harm does have.
The wrack of Realms hereby is wrought,
The force of Foes increast:
The spoil of famous Princes sought,
And right by wrong suppressed.
Foul fall therefore the guide of those,
That friendships band do seek to lose.
And happy they that do restrain,
Their ears to hear when Sirens feign.
Of one that came to borrow money.
IN loan what loss, I want and would,
Two Gods I bring to entreat for Gold,
Persuasion may procure the thing,
That force would undertake to bring.
Answer.
THe loss of Friends by bringing home again,
Such Interest I seek not so to gleane,
Two Goddesses to match your Gods there be,
Inopie and Impossibility.
Truth fears no trial.
THe Muses calde a Court of late,
Wherein they deemde of sundry deeds:
To scan each cause in seat they sat,
The summond peer and law proceeds,
The truth they sought of all men's hearts,
And deemde of each by his deserts.
So some were saude, and some I saw,
Condemde to dye by Justice might:
Among the which by course of law
Approcht to bar a worthy wight,
Whom festred Envy sought to spoil,
By forged lies his faith to foil.
Upon whose talk he was araynde,
Hold up thy hand quoth Doubt by name,
Thou art accused to have staynde
Thy credit, and thy faith with shame.
And brief to be, by verdite just,
Condemde thou art for thine vntruste.
To whom the Captive began reply,
I grant if this be proved true:
That I well worthy am to dye,
And here I crave no more of you.
But perfect trial of my case,
(The guilty only pleads for grace.)
A Queste was then impanelde new,
And his accusers calde in sight:
Suspicion did the suit pursue,
He was indicted by Despite.
The Muses now with all the rest,
Made Conscience foreman of the quest.
Wherewith Suspicion fled for fear,
Despite durst not maintain his suit,
The cause was calde, the captive clear,
Thus did the last, the first confute.
And he that erst should needs have did,
No trespass made, when truth was tried.
Lo thus behold, the guyltlesse wight,
Had Conscience not been present tho:
Through false report and deep despite,
Condemde had been to death to go.
By which you well may learn and see,
The faultlesse often condemned be.
Let pity therefore move your mind,
To stay your doom till truth be tryde:
So you by search shall easily find,
That I from truth did never slide.
As time by trial shall declare,
I ask no more, so spoil or spare.
He complayneth his mishap, with promise to keep her honor.
THe wandering Outlaw borne to woe,
and bred a banished man:
Untaught the subtle sleights of love,
of love this tale began.
When first my senses drank the sweet,
that gave my body blood:
I felt no Foe to let my love,
nor God against my good.
Till lust misreckned my delights,
my wandering joys to end:
And found her out to stay such toys,
to stand my trusty friend.
I boast the grant if all were given,
it may, would God it might:
O happy man, more happy maid,
if all had hit aright.
Mishap withholdes no mean to hope,
to purchase my pretense:
Beauty me ravished first, and now
renength without offense.
Thus like a child again, untaught
the sleightes of dayntie minds:
Such nurture take I of my Nurse,
as Nature justly binds.
These sides enshrine her stately love,
if other thoughts she have:
She shall possess that I profess,
and yet her honor save.
G. To his Lady.
I See in love some farther fetch there is,
Than reason can reveal to me that would:
Accuse the cause that makes me think amiss,
And find the fault of such vntempred mould.
Of sundry works do diverse wonders grow,
Yet skill shows why, and how they should be so.
I see the Sun both move, and melt, and change,
At once both dry and dew the dustie sand:
Yet are the raging storms of love so strange,
As I forbear the cause to understand.
Except I should impute it to the wurst,
And curse the kind that never Lover durst.
I see the star that guydes my stirring love,
The goodly Saint that sacrifice deserves:
Sometime I sail, and sink for fear to prove,
And often my solemn obsequies reserve.
Yet but for love her passing gifts divine,
Nature had never made them half so fine.
I see the secrets of my woeful eyes,
Must seek to rest on no such perfitnesse:
Would they had kept her still above the skies,
Where first she took alluring comlynesse,
But since her shape no mortal man may crave,
Yield honor such as fittes her best to have.
For finale offense, small punishment.
MY Lady gives the reyne to her despite,
And lightly she believes what others feign:
With death she vows my service to requite,
And pays me not with like good will again,
So that she seeks to trusse up my good will,
With trusting those that ever meant me ill.
The murdring Knyfe for my offencelesse crime,
I see preparde to gore my guyltlesse blood:
The cruel voice of rough condemning rhyme,
Has scapte her mouth, and may not be withstood,
Yet let her date my death with this one line,
Here lies my Servant buried in his Shrine.
If mercy fail, there is no other charm,
If that prevail, ungracious luck farewell:
My guiltless trespass shall escape the harm,
That envy wished on me to have befell.
Of my estate, let her say yea, or nay,
I most regard her doom for to obey.
From heaven the grace of gentle minds descends,
And like the maker should the matter be:
Then let my Mistres when she wrath pretends,
Affects of mercy in the Gods fore see,
And when she graunts to follow them in that,
Let her recure and pardon she knows what.
Loves myghtinesse grows by Lovers weakness.
IF power of war had yielded to renown,
Of courteous hearts, the Gods had then agreede:
Disgraded Saturn had not tumbled down,
Nor love had durst in Goldlike Arts proceed.
O cowardly Gods against your kind to see,
Your selves, your sons, the slaves of love to be.
Could love take league with Jove against his will,
Or stain the stream of Neptunes water Springs:
And could not Pluto keep his honor still,
But give the Heavens and Hills to other kings?
In faith the face amongst sweet souls should dwell,
That conquered these, in spite of powers in Hell.
A comparison of his troubles.
GReat swelling floodes are soon dried up,
with meaner calmes I see:
And mighty Frostes, with gentle heat
are wont dissolude to be.
The darkest clouds in the air tossed,
depart with no great wind:
Yet can the tempest of my care,
no quiet harbor find.
I. K. to H. being sick.
THe sickly state, thou griped art withal,
When brute had blown and sounded to mine ear:
From ear to heart, the sudden noise did fall,
And there begins to change my choice of my cheer.
For choice is past, needs must I match with moan,
When hope is cracked, what comfort may endure?
The best part eke of me, to grief is gone.
Scant then the parts beside, may well be sure,
Yet fear not H. quayle not, be of good cheer,
Thy Keeper bids thee have a hardy heart:
Be like a man, the weather will be clear,
If not for thee, yet cause not me to smarte.
So being bold in thine extremity,
Thou shall save two, that is both thee and me.
Answer H.
THe plunged state wherein I restless lay,
When these thy lines were brought before my view:
A certain time began to cease and stay:
And still me thought my pinching pain withdrew,
To bear from thee, such comfort did ensue,
But when at last, I learned had thy greese,
My comfort fled, bereft was all relief.
And then a new my crased corpse in pain,
Lay languisht long, not knowing what were best,
A thousand thoughts within my troubled brain
So mooude my mind, that uneath could I rest,
The slypping joys that worldly wights possessed*
Lo then I saw, full soon away did slide,
And nothing was, that still might stand or bide.
No Forte so strong, no Bulwark raysde so sure,
But time consumes and tumbleth down at last:
Man's force is frail, and like the feeble flower,
That bendes and breaks with every little blast,
His dangers great, his pleasures soon surpast,
As now by me appears, whose joys do vade,
Whose grief does grow, whose comfort glides to glade.
Whose life like smoke, does slily slynck away,
Whose Rock is reelde, whose fatal thread is spunne,
Whose dream does end, whose slumbring sleep does stay,
Whose web is wouen, whose Glass is welnie run,
Whose part is playde, whose tale is told and done,
Whose will does yield to leave this wretched vale,
Where naught is sure, but driry Death most pale.
Of Friendship.
WHo holds himself most dear, and has his want,
Although he would, he may not store his friend:
But he that seeks his secrets there to plant,
Where wealth is free, shall find a quiet end.
Give me the poorest man to triumph on,
Or welthiest friend, or let me live alone.
Answer. G. H.
GJue me the equal friend, for greater state
Will ever grudge the want of low degree,
And eke the mean repine at welthier mate,
Thus envy breaks what friendship did decree.
By just agreeing port no jar does grow,
Where wealth ne want denies the friendly show.
H. To M.
THe crased Bark full often is saned by Pylots care,
The greatest griefs by pleasant joys assuaged are.
The daily toils by some quiet rest are always eased,
The vering spirits by Music sweet, seem somewhat pleased,
My only joy regard you this my woeful case,
Since none but your disdain, my sorrow can delace.
Admonition to his Friend.
IF thou will be rightful,
Always stand thou faithful.
To do well be careful,
Note friends and be thankful.
Uaine talk fly and learn wit,
Mark wise speech and love it.
Always pray, and boast not,
Eschew pride, and vaunte not.
Hate no man, disdain not,
Take time and sleep not.
Each virtue train justly,
Regard betters wisely.
Offend no wight wrongly,
And declare always truly.
So God sure will love thee,
And good men will praise thee.
When Virtue shall grace thee,
All fame shall embrace thee.
Who seeks this Worlds felicity, Fyndes nothing else but vanity.
WHo seeks on earth to find, his Mansion sure to dwell,
Forsakes his God, forgets his heaven, and hies him fast to hell.
For why no flesh has force, eternity to find,
But as of Clay it came, to Clay it must convert by kind.
If Beauty blind thine eyes, or Coin it be thou crave,
Be sure thereof they clogge thy soul, when carcass comes to grave.
Not strength, not honors stage, nor Empire held alone,
But conscience clear must only serve, before the heavenly throne acounts.
Suppose before thy Prince, thy only tale surmounts,
Triumph not thou, for the angels trumpe, calls thee to more
More pleasure here thou takes, in toys on earth below,
More feeble thou, more force is theirs, to yield thine overthrow.
No comfort do conceive, in vain and tryflying toys,
No minutes mirth can counteruayle, aye during deep annoyes.
On earth the force of flood, and flame thou do desire
To shun, then chiefly seek to avoid, the force of endless fire.
On earth thou do desire, delights that be but vain,
In heaven the whylst thou do neglecte, the joy yt shall remain.
Then dye on earth to live, and live on earth to dye,
Repose thy trust in heavenly things, and joy eternallye.
To a Flatterer.
AS soundes from hollow things,
dee naught but air implie:
So words from faythlesse friends,
show naught but flattery.
Answer.
Calm Seas least feared be,
more danger when they swell:
Yet in all Tides we see,
they use to sound them well.
Reason and Fancy do often vary.
THere Fransie bids us run, and Reason stay,
And press our powers, that frayltie naught prevail:
Affection blind does bear so great a swaye,
That we in greatest danger hoyse up sail.
We burn our selves, and yet do blow the fire,
And trust the aid that leaves us in the myer.
Desire assayes with Fancies wings to fly,
When hap with holds, to yield our will success:
Hope would advance it self unto the sky,
Despair sinkes down, and sits in sad distress.
Desire, despair, hope, hap, by fancy pressed,
Thus join their battle in affections breast.
Reason resistes, vain hope, hopes Lead will swymme,
Wit would prevail, affection will not yield:
Desire with Frayltie ventures life and lymme,
Enforcing Reason to forsake the field.
And thus with Fancies lore our reason led,
In Follies brake, we often bring fools to bed.
Look ere you leap, beware least footing fail,
Example take by poor Acteons fall:
We think that pretty fancy may prevail,
And therefore listen to his luring call.
But when most greedy Dogs do us devour,
Fancy stands aloof, not able to succor.
A little bewhing Curre does often procure,
Assault of greater Dogs, as does appear,
So while we rashely yield to Fancies lure,
More eger Curres are ready us to tear.
Our own desire, affection, lust, and will,
Are those same Dogs which do their masters kill.
Yet neither counsel, wisdom, sense, nor art,
Can bridle youth from his desired joy:
Grave precepts have no power to stay his heart,
From working of his own extreme annoye:
And though our selves do know such things are vain,
Yet do we seek the self same things to gain.
What madness thus to strive against all sense?
To sue, where Reason would we should refrain:
Against all counsel thus to make pretense,
And void of wisdom so to beat our brain,
To buy repentance with so deep desire,
And with such heat to set our thrift on fire.
And yet no help, when Fancy freightes our boat,
But Follyes force, perforce will hoyse up sail:
Till midst the waves of had I wist we floate,
We think our pleasant course should never fail.
Unless Gods special grace do make a stay,
Our nature weak thus works her own decay.
A Poesy.
Since nothing stays in good or happy state,
Where Uice aboundes and Virtue does abate:
Why do we not our lives with speed reform?
That Conscience clear may feel no gnawing worm.
Certain Verses translated out of Petrark, concerning Rome, written by him
many years since.
A Flame from Heaven stream down upon thy head
Thou wicked one, that from the water cold,
And Acornes wild, (that whilom was thy bread)
Art mighty made, enrichte by others Gold.
Since thy delight is settled all on ill,
Shame thee destroy, and sorrow soon thee spill.
Thou Nest in whom the treasons hatched are,
That through the world abroad are spread this hour:
Slave to Wine, chambring and delicious fare,
Where Lust does try the strength of all her power.
In Closets thine, young gyrles and aged Siers,
With Belzabub do dance in foul desiers.
He Bellows, Fire, and looking Glass does bear,
Amidst them all, but why I blushe to tell:
Naked to wyndes, and bare foot late thou were,
No beds of Down unto thy share befell.
Course clothes did serve thy corpse from cold to shrowde,
Scarce God thy peer, thou now art grown so proud.
Thou Babylon that buyldes thy Neast so hye,
By covetous frawde thy sack to brimme do fill,
With Gods great wrath and vices out that fly:
Whose poysning smell a world of souls do kill.
Gods to thy self thou makst, not Jove nor Pallas,
In Venus and Bacchus is all thy solace.
In searching long, what should of thee ensue,
My self with toil I feeble brought and low:
But at the length me seemde a Sultan new,
I saw preparde to work thy overthrow.
That will erect Baldacco seat for those,
Which (though not when I would) shall thee depose.
Thy Idols on the ground shall scattered lie,
Thy Towers proud to heaven that enemies be:
And Turrets all by fire down shall fly,
Then shall just souls the friends of virtue, see
The golden world a new begin to reign,
And ancient works show forth themselves again.
Thou sorrows source, the sink of many a one,
Thou Schole and Temple whence all errors grow:
Once Rome, but now that cruel Babylon,
For whom the world in tears does ouerflowe,
* Exclayming on thy cursed wickedness,
* Bewrapped in the veil of holiness.
O Forge of false deceyte, prison to ire,
Where goodness dies, and evils all are bredde:
To those that live, thou art a hellish fire,
* The ruin eke of many wretches dead.
A wonder strange though spared thou be yet,
If Christ in fine not tread thee under feet.
Thy ground was first on humble poverty,
But now thy pride does press thy Founders down:
Thou shameless strumpet seeking suffraintie,
Where rests thy hope? what in thy triple crown?
In thy adulteries or base borne rytches
Begotte in guile? vain are all such wytches.
Since Constantine may now return no more,
The mournful world that sighs thy state to see:
Consume and cut thee quick unto the core,
That all to long is forced to bear with thee.
* Of Rome the fall, here Petrark does unfold*
* As view they may, that list the same behold.
In patientia victoria.
FINIS.

