A rich Storehouse, or Treasury, for the Sick, full of Christian counsels,
wholesome doctrines, comfortable persuasions, and godly meditations, meet for
all Christians, both in sickness and in health.

Whereunto is annexed a Comfort for poor Prisoners, and also an Exhortation to
repentance.

Written in Dutch, by Gaspar Huberine, and Englished by THOMAS GODFRIE Esquire,
late Remembrauncer of the first Fruits and Tenthes, at the request of his
daughter Marie, wife unto John French, Gentleman of the Inner Temple.

SIRACH. 7. Take pleasure in visiting the sick: For that will make thee
beloved. Imprinted at London by Ralph Newberrie, dwelling in Fleetestreat a
little above the Conduit.

ANNO. 1578.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DESIRNA REPOS



TO THE RIGHT noble and most virtuous Lady, the Lady Catharine Howard, all
temporal prosperity in this life, and in the life to come everlasting
happiness.
RIght worthy and honorable, it is a marvel beyond all maruels, that man,
amongst all the creatures of this world, in his creation so singular: namely,
and only endued with a reasonable soul, for his safety attended with Angels,
and above al made unto the image of God: so insensibly rejecting and forsaking
him self, does suffer to be snared and inchaunted with the vain, transitory,
and counterfeit felicity of this world, griping so greedily thereat, as if
this carcass, being subject unto so infinite and manifest calamities, and in
the end to death and destruction, had obtained everlasting continuance: whereas
the scripture, to repress our presumption, and security of life, and to
manifest our corruption of nature, continually puts us in remembrance, that
all flesh is nothing but grass, worms meat, dust, and putrefaction: yea,
and that the greatest and the goodliest of this whole world, with all their
show of commodity, bravery, and beauty, which men so much adore and
embrace, is but vanity: and that, if they were weighed in balance with
nothing, nothing would be found heavier then they: then, what manifest want of
judgment and sound knowledge may be thought to be in man, that so highly
esteems things of so small value? whereas, if they would with their inward
and immortal man, judge and examine the end of all things, thereby
discovering the nobleness of their own creation, then would they perceive,
that the greatest bladder puffed up with the wind of worldly vanity, is easily
dissolved with the smalest needle of Gods justice: And so retire from sin
full ways that lead to destruction, and endeavor to tread the tracke of
eternal felicity. Meaning, in no wise hereby, to persuade the contempt of the
good gifts and blessings of God, namely, health, wealth, beauty, and
infinitely such others: but warely to use them, as Abraham, Job, David, Judith,
Susan, with innumerable others, as gifts not of their own, but of God, given
for the advancement of his glory, and profit of their brethren, to which
every man, what so ever, especially is borne: without which end, much better
had he never been created: and wisely to examine the life and end of Dives,
who in the eyes of me^, was the happiest in this world, but woeful wretch that
so abused the good gifts of God, would have given all, and much more if he
might, to have made exchange with Lazarus estate, which in this world was
most abject and miserable. This matter being of more importance, then the
tongue may express, or man's heart may imagine, the rather to move the dullness
of our disposition, has been set down by the wisest that ever was amongst
men, in speech and terms no less strange then marvelous, after this manner:
Put away displeasure out of thy heart, and remove evil from thy body: for
childhood and youth is but vanity. Remember thy maker the sooner in thy youth,
or ever the days of adversity come, and or the years draw nighe, when thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them, before the Sun, the light, the Moon
and stars be darkened, and or the clouds turn again after the rain, when the
keepers of the house shall tremble, when the strong men shall bow them
selves, and when the millers stand still because they be so few, and when the
light of the windows shall wax dim, when the doors in the streates shall be
shut, when the voice of the miller shall be laid down, when men shall rise up
at the voice of the bird, and when the daughters of Music shall be brought
low, when men shall fear in high places, and be afraid in the streates: when
the Almond tree shall flourish, and be laden with the Grasshopper, and when all
lust shall pass, by cause man goes to his long home, and the mourners go
about the streates: or ever the silver lace be taken away, and or the golden
well be broken, or the pot be broken at the well, and the wheel upon the
cisterne: then shall the dust be turned again unto earth, from whence it
came, etc. For as much as these certain and terrible days shall come upon us,
when no time may be revoked, no remorce accepted, no remedy used, or any
succor obtained, but by the only means contained in this small treatise,
left into my hands without any patron, I thought it no less convenient unto
my bounden duty, then meet for the view of your reposed mind, to make a
present thereof unto your honor, not only hoping, but also most humbly
beseching, that it may please you of your great nobleness, to accept the
patronage thereof. Thus craving pardon for my presumption, I commit your good
Ladishippe to him, who is plentiful in all good graces and blessed gifts,
beseeching him, in this life, to be your chiefest riches, and in the life to
come, your perfect honor, etc.

Your humble servant, Ralph Newberrie.

To the Christian Reader.
AS all actions (Christian Reader) in general, depend upon their special
occasions: so the publishing of this preset book or manuell, proceeds from ^e
several reasons. The first, from the na^ll affection and loving kindness,
which ^^ildren are bound in conscience to show ^eir tender parents, wherewith
I, among ^ther above the rest, feel my self in^dly touched toward my good
and loving ^er: whom, as in his life time obedient^ ^euerenced: so now also,
after his death ^unerall, I am no less careful to have remembered: and
therefore under his ^e, have caused to be set forth this god^d Christian
exercise of his own transla^ for the comfort of all faithful people, as
^onument of maintenance in his memo^. The second, from Christian love and
^ritie, the bond of all perfection, where^ the soldiers of Christ are
specially ^rged: which then (indeed) most natu^ appears, when we,
(perceiving the bodies of our brethren and sisters so infeebled and consumed
with sickness, or otherwise by law, through desert of death, judged and
condemned, that they are past all temporal recovery,) succor nevertheless
their appassionate souls, with comfortable restorities of the spirit, that
they may the more willingly forsake the wilderness of this world, and
constantly travel the high way to heaven. The third, from a godly desire, to
have other semblably occupied, in bestowing (I mean) such their talents, as
GOD (the rich and gracious giver of all good things) has committed and put
under their credit: that in so laboring, they in their Christian calling may
feel their consciences discharged, the members of Christ his mystical body
benefited, and finally, almighty GOD our Creator glorified. To whom, with the
Son, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, power, majesty, and dominion, for
evermore. Amen.

Thine in Christ, Marie French.

To his worshipful and ^ell learned brother in law, Adolph Baunweyler, grace
and peace through Christ.
SIrach in his writing, the seventh Chapter, warns us, that we should
willingly visit the sick. And our savior Christ, Matthew. 25. will at the last
(...) accept and take this work of cha^^^^, that is to say, to visit the
sick, even though it were done to him self. For ^r Lord Christ him self
says) What so (...) you have done to any amongst these my ^^llest brethren,
that have you don unto me. (...) as much then, well-beloved brother, (...) this
work to visit the sick, is such ^ighe and special work of charity, (...)
such a one, as Christ at Doomes day (...) allow and thereby acknowledge us ^e
his disciples: therefore it will be^^ us, not alonly with our whole ^rtes
delight to show it, but also to ^e diligent care, how and after what ^t, we
may properly and rightly visit the sick. And that is specially done in two
manner of ways. For every sick body has specially need of two manner of
remedies. First, that his soul be helped, for if the soul be once helped, then
will the body be easily helped afterward. Therefore, first to remedy the soul,
is to exhort the sick body to repentance, and make him to understand his
sin, teach him to call to God for help, and after that again, to comfort
and lift up his fearful conscience, and set forth and paint unto the sick
body lively Christ, (which is the throne of grace) whereof we have a fine
example of king Ezekia, there did the Prophet Esaias use this manner and order
with the sick king: warned him first to repentance, laid before him Gods
judgment, 2. Paral. 32. And as soon as he had humbled the king, and called to
God for grace, the Prophet then comforted him, and after that, remedied his
bodily sickness. 4 Reg. 20. and Esaias. 38. Sirach also puts us in mind of
like order, in his 38. Chapter. specially, that we in our sickness should
confess our sins, and amend, then to call to GOD for grace and help, after
^^e to take physic. Seeing then that visitation of the sick, is to be
prac^^^^ after two manners, as is abouesaid: before have I taken upon me to
(...) the first way, after the order of the ^^ptures: but not for the learned,
for (...) need it not, but for the well dispo^^^ that they might have some small
en^^^, and one Christian to visit and co^^^ an other, as much as is necessary
to ^^tion. The other way to visit the (...), as touching the body, is done in
^^y ways, specially with attending ^n them, giving them meat and drink, ^ng
them up, and laying them down, ^nselling them wherein they need, ^n other
like helpings, exercises, and ^ngs: these ways can every man after (...) sort
do, if he be disposed after the (...) of charity, to deal with his bro^^:
and therefore here not necessary ^y much more, although that I before (...)
time, in my book of Gods wrath, (...) sufficiently showed, how one should (...)
fort the sick: Yet I have thought it ^^d at this time, to set forth a little
form very short, and also declare briefly certain warnings and comforts,
after diverse sorts: out of which every man may take one, two, or more comfortes,
to be made unto the sick, as a man thinks good, or as his spirit shall move
him, and as he for the time shall think necessary for the sick person. For
one sick body is far unlike an other, some have more temptation the^ an
other, one has been beforehand beter instructed in gods word then an other:
therefore no man shall be bound to bring out all that is herein written. And
well-beloved brother in law, I have thought good to commend this little
comfortable book unto you, to the intent that you, and other good folk, as
time and opportunity shall serve, may use it as necessity shall require: and
you shall see it good chiefly therefore, because you hitherto with great
diligence and earnestness, have taken upon you to study the scriptures. Our
Lord God grant you his grace, that ye may use the holy scripture to his
praise, and to the profit and commodity of your neighbors. Amen.

Gaspar Huberine.

How sick folk are to be visited, persuaded, admonished, and comforted.
FIrst well-beloved, Almighty God has sent you this sickness, al for the best,
(as without dout will soon appear) for, To the^ that love God, Romans 8.
things must serve to the best. As Saint ^aule witnesses in his. 8. Chapter to
(...) Romans. Therefore be not afraid, (...) the Lord God is so good, that he
can, ^^d will turn all troubles and aduer^ies which happen or come to his
elec^^^ to the best purpose.

What is to be said to them that be about sick folk. Secondly, well-beloved in
the Lord, ^he holy Apostle Saint Paul in the 12. Romans 12.
^hapter to the Romans warns us, ^at we should weep with them that ^lepe.
Eccle. 7.
And Syrach also remembers ^his 7. Chapter, where he says, Be sorry with
them that be sorrowful. For as much then as we in the Lord Christ be all
members amongst our selves, each one to other, it is meet, that every member,
according to his propriety, nature, skill, and ability, with comfort make
have and repair unto the sick, feeble, sick, and diseased member. Therefore
shall we as it were suffer, take, and pity, and be troubled with this sick
body, and each of us with all diligence and carfulness and earnestness, of
hearty love look unto, and attend upon it: be careful for it, pray to GOD
for it, and (to be short) help and comfort it the best we can, even as every
of us would, (if we were sick,) require of other.

Thirdly, well-beloved, ye shall mark and consider, that all things come from
God, whether they be sickness, poverty, adversity, as witnesses Syrache in
his 11. Chapter, where he says thus, All things come from GOD, ^^le. 11.
adversity and prosperity, life and death, poverty and riches. And further,
holy Saint Paul in the ^^rst Epistle to the Corinthians, and 11. 1. Cor. 11.
Chapter, says, When we are judged, then (...) we corrected by the Lord. He
says, By the Lord, (not by an evil man, or by the ^^uel,) but by the Lord him
self are we ^^rrected. Therefore, If we live, we live to ^^e Lord: If we dye,
we dye to the Lord. Romans 12.
Therefore whether we live or dye we be the ^ordes. As Saint Paul says in the
12. ^o the Romans.

Fourthly, you shall further earnest^^ mark, understand, and know, that ^ot
only al punishments and sufferings ^^me from God, and be laid upon us ^^y
God: but ye shall also earnestly be^eue, that GOD fendeth unto his chil^^en, as
a very merciful father, such pu^^shmentes and sufferings of mere fa^our and
grace (to his own) for their ^^ofite and commodity.

For there be two causes, why God ^^ndeth unto us adversities, troubles, ^^d
passions, seeing that God has two ^^tes of children upon the earth.

Some many times lead a long time (...) unrepentant life, they cannot not
abide that a man of love and good will say any thing unto them, but continually
run foreward in their mischiefous, froward, and naughty ways. They have
GOD very little before their eyes. Therefore must God lay hold on them,
restrain and draw them back, and to true repentance and godly living drive
and enforce them, or else they will dye in their wicked and froward
conversation. Therefore does God lay in the neck of backsliders from him, some
adversity, that they may look well about them, and mark well who is at their
backs, and lays such a yoke on their necks, at the last to know
themselves, and learn what they be, whereabout they go, and how they against
GOD have so grievously offended. Thus God corrects them through punishments,
and learneth them (as the Prophet Esaias says in the 28. Chap.) that does the
soul very much good, ^^tie. 28.
and such adversity is a precious medicine, for trouble only makes a man
take heed to the word. Esaias 28. Then does ^e word of God very well savor
unto us, ^^en it is pouldred, mingled, or sawced with ^ubles and passions. For
when trouble is at ^de, then we seek to God, and when God ^h visit us, then
we call earnestly. Esai. Esai. 26.
(...). Therefore does God many times ^mplaine against his foolish ignorant
^ople, Esaias. 9. where God says, Esaie. 9.
The ^^ople do not turn back to them that have ^icken them, nor inquireth
after the Lord ^d of Sabbath. Which is a great token ^an unrepentant and
stubberne heart. ^esides that, it is a great and heavy ^ne against the Lord
God: from while God mercifully defend us. Amen. The other cause wherefore our
Lord ^d lays troubles and adversities vp^^ ^his children, is this specially,
because ^e Lord God will lead his chosen chil^en from faith to faith, and
continual^ makes them expert and cunning in ^e knowledge of God, and will thus
^oue them in faith and godly know^ge, whereby his name by this mea^s may be the
better known, co^men^d, and praised, as we see in good David, Jonas, and Job,
etc.

Fifthly, seeing that ye perceive and know that ye are flesh, and fleshly
weakness, has many times prevailed, and you had the upper hand upon you, and
you have oftentimes given over your self to your old Adam, and followed
flesh and blood too much, and thereby many times displeased our Lord God.
Thus shall you therefore before the high majesty of GOD, humble your self,
acknowledge your offenses, ask mercy, have a severe purpose to abstain from
sin, and (if God will again restore you) to live in a good, perfect,
Christian, penitent life, to embrace Gods mercy in Christ our deliverer, and
stay and hold your self, with an holy hope upon his comfortable promises.
Therefore thus say earnestly after me with heart and mind.

Almighty, everlasting, and most merciful God and Father, I acknowledge from
the bottom of my heart, and say with my mouth, that I am a poor and damnable
sinner. For I am in sin conceived and borne. Besides that, from my youth
hitherto, all the imaginations and thoughts of my heart have been very wicked,
and inclined to al sin and unrighteousness. There is also no true fear of
God, no faithful love of God, no perfect faith of God in my heart hitherto, (oh
Lord) founden. Also I have with my mouth (oh God) little called upon God my
lord, and in my trouble fled unto him for succor. I have also been very
unthankful to God my Lord, for all his wonderful benefits, both bodily and
ghostly. Likewise also have I little praised or set foreward the thanks due to
God, and the same acknowledged and confessed: much less have I rightly ben
desirous to set forward, and maintein Gods true service. To be short, I have
not in my whole life time done and brought forth any good thing, whereby before
god I have brought forth any godly conversation, to his glory, honor, and
praise, whereunto he has chiefly created and made me. All this I confess, and
it grieueth me from the bottom of my heart, that I have so grievously offended
thee, my very God, Lord, and father, especially with evil thoughts, words, and
deeds.

Again, I acknowledge and confess thee my Lord and God, that I have not
rightly and truly obeyed them, to whom I ought obedience. Also I have
oftentimes grievously offended my neighbors, and not sufficiently showed unto
them Christian charity and love: but have been many times disdainefull,
angry, fierce, and very sour. Also I have been many times kindled in evil
lusts and desires, in forbidden love. Also I have been many times ouerseene
with lewd thoughts. I have also many times ben too straight to my neighbors,
harmed them, not helped them, defended them, nor comforted them. I have
likewise offended and hurt my neighbor by word, spoken evil behind his back,
and condemned him. To be short, all wicked desires and lusts have taken in me
very mighty vpperhand. Therefore I acknowledge this my sinful life, require
mercy, have pity upon me Lord heavenly father, for the bitter passion and
death of thine only son our Lord.

Hear your comfort.
Thus says Saint Paul in the first Epistle to Timothy the second Chap.
There is one God and one mediator between God and man, 1. Tim. 2.
specially the man Jesus Christ that has given him self for all, for our
deliverance. Believe this comfortable saying, hold fast on Jesus Christ our
only Lord and Savior, so shall you in your consciences rest in peace and
quietness with God the Lord. God grant his grace thereunto, Amen.

But if the sick body be so weak, and cannot make such a long confession,
you may use an other shorter in this manner.
An other confession to the Lord God.
OH thou merciful, gracious, good God and father, I wretched, sinful, sick,
miserable, forsaken creature, come now before thy high and mighty majesty,
as a poor sinful creature, full of sin and unrighteousness, and confess
unto thee from my heart, that I have grievously sinned against thee from my
youth hitherto, with wicked thoughts, words, and deeds. These do I acknowledge
and confess altogether generally, for I am not able to remember and number
the^ all at length particularly, therefore my God, be gracious to me a poor
sinner, through the deserts of thy loving Son our Lord Jesus Christ, which was
therefore slain for me wretched sinner, to the intent that I should be and
remain thy child for evermore. Amen.

Hearken to this comfort. Thus says S. John the holy Evangelist, in his first
Epistle and the third Chapter, The blood of Jesus Christ Gods Son, ^. John.
3
makes us clean from all sin. Believe these wholesome, comfortable, and
gracious words, stand steadfastly in a true belief, so shall you be a child
of everlasting life. Amen.

Sixthly, now dearly beloved, seeing you have humbled your self before our
Lord God, confessed your sins, and have cried for grace and mercy, ye shall
now call unto our Lord God, from all your heart, first and chiefly seek for
help, and say thus.

OH thou merciful good God and father, I come now to thee in my great
necessity, and cry unto thee, and complain from the bottom of my heart, as to
my loving father, my grievous passions and griefs, and exhort thee that thou will remember thy comfortable promises, for thou have graciously promised that
I shall be heard, where thou in ye 50. Psalm. 50
Psalm. say, Call upon me in thy necessity or trouble, and I will hear thee,
and thou shall praise me. And Saint Mark in the 11. Mark. 11
Chapter says, What so ever you ask in your prayers, only believe that you
shall receive it, and so shall you have it. Unto these thy promises come I
forsaken, miserable wretch, and crave of thee help and comfort, therefore my
chiefly beloved Lord and father, help me out of this my grief and trouble, and
forsake me not in any of my torments, for thine only begotten dear Son
Jesus Christ's sake. Therefore shall I always highly laud and praise thy name,
and give thee thanks from ye bottom of my heart for all thy benefits, and set
forth and number the same always.

Seventhly, now dear friend, seeing that your offenses committed might make
you afraid, and weaken your faith, that ye dare not with all confidence and
sure trust require at Gods hand, and hope for help and grace, and trust surely
upon his mercy, you shall in this manner call upon God for forgiveness of
your sins, and speak thus.

Oh thou most dear Lord, and very loving God, seeing thou have made us so
many and great promises, whereby we might be richly comforted and strengthened
in all our troubles and adversities, I am bold to put thee in remembrance
once again very earnestly of thy true promises, which thou have made unto me,
in the 6. of Saint Matthewe, where thou have promised me forgiveness of all my
sins, if I do forgive my neighbors that wherein they have offended against
me. Matt. 6.
For these be thy words, If you forgive other their faults, so will also your
heavenly father forgive you your offenses. Therefore come I unto thee, and stay
me upon thy word, specially that thou will forgive me all my sins, according
to thy merciful promise, freely, for nothing, so that I also do forgive
other. For these now I pray unto thee my Lord and God, that thou will send
into my heart thy holy spirit for thy bitter passion and death sake, that he
may make clean my sinful heart, lighten and kindle a fervent heat in me, that
I also may forget and forgive. For (of mine own power) I can do nothing, and so
from the bottom of my heart shall I forgive every man, both my friends and
enemies, what so ever they have done against me, and put out of my heart all
manner of malice, hatred, enimitie, and displeasure.

And seeing that I now, through thy grace, perceive such love against mine
enemy, so am I now persuaded, according to thy promises, that thou now have
clearly forgiven me all my sins, of mere mercy without my deserts. For
there have I a perfect sign and good assurance, seeing I have (according to
thy promise) forgiven every man, that thou also have forgiven me all. Do with
me according to thy promise, for thy word is true, and whatsoever thou say,
that keep thou assuredly. Upon this thy word do I stay, and without all
doubt believe I thy promise, that I have now gotten forgiveness of all my
sins, wherefore I have now a free, safe, and joyful conscience, that I know
not now of any sin in me, and that I have obtained from God peace and joy in
the holy ghost, that I certeinely persuade my self of. Amen. Eighthly, now
well-beloved, the holy scripture shows us of two giuings of Christ our lords
body unto us. The first is the general giving, where Christ gave us wretched
sinners his body upon ye cross, for an offering for our sins, this giving is
made unto us our own through true faith, specially when we surely believe Gods
promises. Ioh. 6. John. 6.
Of this giving witnesses Christ himself. Ioh. 3. ^ohn. 3.
where he says thus, So has God loved the world, that he has given his own
son, to the intent that all that believe on him, should not be destroyed, but
enjoy everlasting life. And further, the holy Apostle S. Paul, Romans 8. Romans 8.
witnesses likewise and says, If God be on our side, who can be against us,
which has not spared his own son, but has given him for us all? And Romans
4. Romans 4.
Christ is for our sin sake given, and for our righteousness sake raised up
again. And to the Ephe. 5. Ephe. 5.
says S. Paul moreover, Christ has loved us, and given him self for us an
oblation and sacrifice. These and such like sayings you shall diligently mark,
and steadfastly believe, that Christ our only savior has given and offered up
his body and blood upon ye cross for you a sufficient sacrifice for ever, and
ye shall not need to seek or to hunt after any other sacrifice, satisfaction,
or redemption for your sin, but lay fast hold upon this innocent lamb, John.
6.
which has borne the sins of the whole world.

The other giving of the body and blood of our lord Christ, is an especial
giving which is delivered unto us in ye sacrament. Whereof Christ speaks,
Matthewe 26. Math. 26
And holy Saint Paul in the 10. and 11. 1. Cor. 10.11
Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians. This second delivering of the
body and blood of Christ, in the sacrament, is an assuring and an a certeyning
of the establishing of the first delivering or giving. For it confirms the
first giving, which we receive by faith. And the second does not profit or
comfort us, without the first, but is rather hurtful and damnable. Therefore
warns us also the holy Apostle S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11
in the 11. Chap. of his said first Epistle to the Corinthians, that we
should well try our selves, before that we receive the holy sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, that no man receive them to his condemnation. This
proof stands upon three points.

First ye shall acknowledge your self for a miserable sinner, that of him self
and by him self can do nothing, nor has any power to do any thing, whereby
he might be delivered from his sin. God him self does forgive, reconcile,
and pardon, gives true comfort, and purchases blessedness, specially to them
that do thirst after the grace of GOD. And so of mere grace and mercy in
Christ only, do long after the kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, examine well your selves, whether ye believe as Saint Paul says in
the 13. Chapter of his second Epistle to the Corinthes, 2. Cor. 13
Try your selves (says he) whether ye be in belefe, prove your selves etc.
Specially yt ye earnestly and steadfastly believe the godly promise, yt is
promised in the Sacrament. Item, wherefore that godly meat is given unto you.

Thirdly, examine your self well, whether ye can and will forgive your
neighbor, whether they be friends or foes that have offended or hurt you,
whereby ye can show toward al men, a Christian, friendly, loving and
courteous heart, and good will. For this pray unto our Lord God now once
again. And if for your sickness you can not speak it with your mouth, yet in
your heart inwardly say thus.

My Lord Jesus Christ I come again as a wretched sinner unto thee, that have
many times offended thee, and have deserved nothing but thy everlasting
displeasure and punishment. But seeing thou art so gentle and merciful, thou
willest not the death of a sinner, but that he repent and live: therefore have
thou established among us a new Testament, which was long before promised by
thy holy prophets, that thou would take our sins from us, through thy
death, and the same never after remember. And also before thy death have made
thy last will, and therein have made us an assured promise that thou would
give us thy body (for our redemption) to be slain, and shed thy blood for
remission of our sins, For thus sounds thy gracious promise: Take, eat,
this is my body, which shall be given for you. This is the cupp^ of the new
testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you, for the forgiveness of your
sins. This thy promise do I believe steadfastly, and for assurance thereof, I
have before this time in my good health of body, many times in the congregation
of God received the holy Sacrament of thy very body and blood, whereof at this
present I do not doubt, but am now certainly and assuredly persuaded of al
thy graces and mercies. Be it unto me according to thy word.

Here it is good to put the sick body in remembrance shortly, what has been
said before, after this manner.
Ninethly, now dear friends I have told you in the beginning, how that all
adversities and troubles come from our Lord God, and be laid upon his (of
fatherly and true love.) Therefore shall you be certeinely persuaded, that this
your sickness is by God therefore laid upon you, that the old man with Christ
should be nailed upon the cross, that the sinful body should cease, and a
new and perfect man appear thereof, which with Christ shall enjoy
everlasting joy and felicity: For, Flesh and blood can not enherit the
kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 15.
As saint Paul witnesses 1. Cor. 15. The old man must full and whole be
destroyed, and as Christ in the 12. Chap. of Saint John says, ^ohn. 12.
Except that the wheat corn fall into the earth and die, so remains it but
one corn: But if it die, it brings forth much fruit. Thus must all both
within and without us be forsaken, the old Adam with all his wisdom, reason
and understanding come to naught, whereby a new man may appear at that day, as
Saint Paul says 1. Cor. 15. Where he speaks thus: ^. Cor. 15.
That which we see is not lively, except it first die. It is sown in
corruption, and shall rise again in glory. It is sown in dishonor, and
shall rise again in honor. It was sown in weakness, and shall rise again
in might. It was sown a natural body, and it shall rise again a spiritual
body. When this corruptible body has put on incorruption, and this mortality
has put on immortality: then shall be fulfilled the saying which is written,
Death is swalowed up in victory, Death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy
victory? God be praised that has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Secondarily, seeing the case stands thus, you shall now further resign and
forsake your own will, and give it over to Gods will, and pray as our Lord God
has taught us to pray Matthew. 6. Matt. 6.
and say: Father, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. And as Christ
Gods son him self at the hour of his death has done, and has set forth
unto us, an example to be followed, where he said upon mount Oliuet, Matthew 26.
Mat. 26.
Father, not my will, but thy will be done. So shall ye also do unto him,
conform your self in all things to God him self our Lord, and give over all
things to him, our body, our life, our soul, our estimation, our goods,
friends, wife, children, and all, etc. and say thus.

NOw my Lord and God, will it none otherwise be, but that I must at this time
needs drink the cup of my passion, that thou haste filled for me to drink,
let thy will be done. As thou willest, so will I also, I am willing and ready,
I am thy child, and thou art my loving father, thou will not destroy me, that
I know right well. Oh only give thou me grace, strength, power, mercy,
patience, to suffer all things willingly, that I may to thee keep a right
holy day, continually hold fast by thee, and willingly to suffer thee to do
with me according to thy fatherly good will and pleasure. Then shall I three
days long rest and lie with Christ in the grave, and hope for a joyful
resurrection of all believers at domes day, according to the comfortable
promise of Christ, John the 6. John. 6
where Christ says thus: This is the will of him that sent me, that he that
sees the son and believes on him, have everlasting life, and I will raise
him up at the latter day.

Thirdly, ye shall also further understand and believe certeinely, that this
your sickness, how great, how sore, how grievous to suffer, how long and
painful soever it be, yet is it not sufficient to appease and pacify Gods
wrath, to take away your sins, and to purchase you everlasting life. For ye
shall steadfastly believe this, that deserving of any Saint, nor your own
work, how precious so ever it be, or may be, can get you heaven, or can
deserve it. For Saint Paul says Romans 8. Romans 8.
That All the sufferinges in this world be not worthy of that glory that
shall be showed unto us.

Fourthly, ye shall undoubtedly believe, that the only passion and death of
our Lord Jesus Christ, is a sufficient oblation for your sins. For, The
Lord Jesus is made for us from God, to be our wisdom, our righteousness,
our sanctification and deliverer, as the Apostle saint Paul witnesses in ye
first to the Corinthians the first Chapter. 1. Cor. 1.
For there is none other name given to men, nor there is in none other health
wherein we shall be saved, then only in the name of Jesus Christ, etc. As
likewise witnesses Saint Peter Acts the fourth, Act. 4.
For God has made him that never knew sin, for our sakes to be sin, to
the intent that we should be made in him righteousness, auayleable before
him. 2. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 5.
Therefore we now believe (says Saint Paul further,) Romans 3. that man is
made righteousness without the works of the law, only through faith, As
Saint Peter also says in the tenth Chapter of the Acts. ^ctes. 10.
Of Christ (says he) witness all the Prophets, that through his name all that
believe in him, shall have forgiveness of their sins. For Christ (says S.
Peter further) 1. Pet. 2. ^ Pet. 2.
has offered up our sins on his body upon the cross, that we being dead to
sin, might live to righteousness, by whose wounds ye are made whole. Such and
like sayings is the holy Scripture very full, that altogether witnesses that we
be made just, righteous, and sanctified through faith in Jesus Christ, without
any our own doings. For Christ is the only ransom for our sins, for we be
bought through the precious blood of Christ.

Fifthly, ye shall now forgive every man willingly from ye bottom of your
heart, forget, and forgive what so ever has been done against us, whether ye
know it, or know it not, whether it be with word or deed, by any means
done against you: for seeing that our Lord God of mere grace has cast
behind him, and forgiven you so many sins, which you have so many times
committed against him, from your childhoode till this time, small and great
sins, which many and oftentimes ye have committed all the days of your life,
so that if God should reckon all your old sins, and deal with you after his
strong judgment, ask satisfaction, punish those offenses, he might grievously
visit you as a righteous God: and yet does he not so, nor never hereafter will
do, but as a merciful father, of special grace forgets and forgiueth all,
and the same will never more think upon, nor reckon, but cover them, and
scrape them out.

Likewise does he also require for thanks, laud, and praise, none other
thing, but ye forgive and forget your neighbors, what so ever they have at any
time offended against you. And you shall not only your offenders gladly and
heartily forgive: but also again, show your self against them thankful. And
for the poor widows and fatherless children, according to your ability
provide something, whereby they may be fed, clothed, and maintained, so shall
they at the last day be your witnesses, that your faith was a perfect faith,
seeing it is lively by works, ^ala. 6. ^ Pet. 1.
Gala. 6. Make your election sure, through such works of love, as Saint Peter
says. 2. Pet. 1.

If the sick body be any thing rich, then a body may be the more earnest and
diligent, to exhort them to alms giving: but so, that the sick person be not
persuaded to put trust in his own works, and bring him into a vain hope,
that he shall purchase heaven by his alms. Therefore consideration must be had
to the soul, that it be not lead out of the right way, into the way that is
full of briers and thorns.
How they that stand by, are to be exhorted to pray for the sick.
Tenthly, beloved in Christ our Lord, seeing we be at this present here
gathered together, I put you in reme^berance yt ye will be mindful of our true
and Christian duty, that we are bound one to an other as members of Christ,
that ye will diligently and earnestly remember the griefs and sicknesses of
this our friend, and not only have an earnest compassion upon him, but also
earnestly and truly pray to our Lord God for him, that our Lord God will
behold his own son, in whom he does much delight, that he will mitigate and
shorten the great sickness, pains, and passions of this our sick friend,
and grant unto him a true Christian patience, that with all confidence, he may
wholly put his affiaunce and comfort in Gods mercy, and continually unto the end
steadfastly abide in true faith upon Christ our deliverer, and in those
things that apperteine to our blessed hope, to remain and abide willingly,
and patiently take and bear such his cross laid upon him, until our Lord
God of his mercy do visit him, and deliver him, and bring him at his appointed
time out of this trouble and misery, to everlasting joy and felicity. Seeing
then that our Lord Christ has promised us, then we be gathered together in his
name, he will graciously hear us, and grant those things that we desire. Now
let us call upon almighty God in true faith, and pray, in the name of Christ
our Lord, so will he certainly at the last hear us, according to his fatherly
will and good pleasure, therefore make your prayer to GOD our heavenly father,
and say, Our father, etc. Almighty GOD, vouchsafe mercifully to grant our
prayer, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

If the sickness do linger and drive off, so that the patient be assaulted
with grievous sickness, then may a body sometime show him of these comforts
following, and always declare one comfort or two. For like as a body must now
and then relieve the sick body, with comfortable medicines, and brothes:
likewise shall now and then relieve and quicken the soul, whereby the soul may
have her sustenaunce. And yet we shall not be tedious to the sick, and make
him have no delight, or be offended in his head, and ever to have regard,
whether he be troubled with any temptation, and whether he have a desire and
lust to hear Gods word: for the sick must have his ease and quietness. So
that with too much reading and crying upon him, ye bring him into raging, or
passions, and make his head idle, feeble, and weak. Herein ought every body to
use discretion, and put difference.
FFirst well-beloved in Christ, let not any tentatio^ make you faint hearted: for
Christ is a valiant and mighty king, over death, sin, and all adversity.
Therefore abide upon this stone, which is Jesus Christ, stand fast, and so
cannot the gates of hell prevail against you. Then this Lord and King is gone
before you unto death, he has trode^ the pathe, and made the way, and also
has ouerthrown death, and taken his strength from him: so that death cannot
hurt you, hinder you, nor keep you back. Therefore be not dismayed even in
the midst of death, and think thus. In the name of God, Gods will be don.
All this gear will be gone within a twinkling of an eye. Then shall I pass
thorough the snares of death. Then have I thrown at my back all misfortune,
fear, and desperation. For this present death is unto ye faithful a safe port,
through which I shall go into heaven. Then must sin, death, hell, pains,
passions, hunger, thirst, frost, trouble, and all adversity together cease
and leaue-off. Therefore be not dismayed, for if GOD be with you, who shall be
against you? Say, avaunt and fare well now the whole world, and also the
Prince of this world, which would hinder you the way to everlasting life:
for as much as Christ is your Justice, your Loadesman and your Guide.

Secondely, well be loved, if Gods wrath, threatening, and punishment, should
fear you, dismay you, or trouble your mind, as though our Lord God as an
earnest and severe Judge, should deal with you according to his extreme
justice for your sins past, then shall you from henceforth call upon our Lord
Christ, the unspotted Lamb of GOD, which has taken your sins upon him,
and thus flee from ye place of Gods justice, and commit your self to the
mercy seat of Christ our Lord. For ye have a special and faithful promise
of our Lord Jesus Christ: for he has bestowed and given him self for
wretched sinners, and so bound and pledged him self for all penitent sinners,
that he will stand to them, and deliver them from Gods wrath. Also Saint Paul
witnesses 1. These. 1. 1. These. 1.
God has our Lord Jesus (says the holy Apostle) raised up from death, that
has delivered us from the wrath to come. And 1. These. 5. 1. These. 5.
says Saint Paul further, God has not appointed us to inherit his wrath, but
to inherit his blessedness, through our Lord Jesus Christ, which died for
us. Mark and consider this diligently.

Thirdly, well-beloved, if the world do trouble you, and though some folks,
specially your enemies and evil willers rejoice and be glad that you (according
to their desires) be so grievously handled, and that you be now by God so fore
punished, and that they therefore mock, scorn, despise you, and make great
cheer at your trouble: yet let not that trouble nor tempt you: for seeing that
wicked people mocked Christ at the hour of his death, and made great cheer
at it: likewise shall you of the world not escape such things. Seeing you be
a member of Christ, you must suffer in your body, all such troubles as wanted
in Christ's passion, as Saint Paul says, Col. 1.
the first Chap. to the Colossians. Therefore is the world a stubborn, proud,
and wicked child of satan which is full of all wickedness, dissimulatio^,
mockery, and backbiting. Christ for our comfort has told us before, that we
must suffer and bear many things of the world, and that the world should
laugh us to scorn, and should rejoice at our trouble: and we on the other
side, a little while should be pensive and sorrowful. But Christ comfort us
and says, Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. John 6. John. 6
And John, 17. John. 17
In the world you shall have sorrow and care: but comfort your self, I have
overcome the world. Thus shall you in faith bear all the wickedness of the
world, suffer, and overcome. For, Our faith is the victory that has overcome
the world, John. 15. John. 15


Fourthly, moreover dearly beloved, if Moses the lawegiuer set upon you, and
will make you afraid with his debt book, and put you out of countenance for
your great debtes and notable sins, which you are bound to satisfy and pay
the terrible judgment of God, as yt ye are a breaker or transgressor of gods
laws, and therefore, will call you to account, and give evidence against you,
and condemn you with your own hand writing and your own conscience (knowing ye
same to be true) complain upon you, and accuses you: then shall you before
Moses by and by bring forth your Christian liberty, whereby Christ has made
you free, and delivered you from the law, and from the curse and malediction
thereof. For, If Gods son have made you free, then be you free in deed,
John. 8. John. 8
And as Saint Paul further does show and confirm such freedom, Galat. 3.
Galat. 3
where he says thus, Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law,
when he was made a curse for us. Thus can the curse never more ouerrunne nor
trouble you, seeing it has once all together fallen upon Christ the most
innocent Lamb. Therefore, seeing Christ is the end of the law, whosoever
believes on him is made righteous, Romans 10. ^om. 10.
Therefore says Saint Peter, Be you lusty and strong. Acts, 15. ^ctes. 15.
that ^e are now taught, that forgiveness of sin^es comes by this man, and
of all them whereof ye could not be made righteous in the law of Moses. Who so
ever believes on Christ, is righteous. Here is now only all sins taken
away. So that no man can, or dare, lay any thing to the charge of the
faithful, neither Moses nor the law. Therefore be of good comfort.

Fifthly, furthermore dearly beloved, I do advise you, that you will not
suffer the great weight and burden of your sins to press, and weigh you
down, and trouble you. For sin, I assure you, is an heavy burden, to a
fearful conscience. Wherefore continually cast your sins from you, and out
of your consciences, and cast them upon Christ, for he is the right carrier
of our sins as holy Saint John witnesses, John. 1. John. 1.
where he says, Behold, this is the Lamb of God that bears or carries away
the sins of the world. Therefore let the Lord and valiant Champion take up
your sins, and carry them upon him self. For God has appointed him
thereunto, as Saint Paul says, where he says thus, GOD has appointed him
(namely Christ) that never knew sin, to be sin it self for our sakes: to
the intent that we should be by him that righteousness, that is auayleable
before God. Behold, this righteous and innocent Lord has taken all your sins
upon him self, borne them, satisfied for them, and ransomed them, and has
clothed you, decked and trimmed you, with his innocent righteousness and
justice: For, Christ (says the Prophet Esaie. 53. Esaie. 53.
) is for our sins wounded, and for our sins beaten and smitten. Correction
is laid upon him, to the intent that we should have peace, and by his wounds
should be healed. Behold, for Gods sake, and think upon this with all diligence
ernestly. Christ (says ye Prophet) is wounded for our sins, whereby we might
be made whole. The wrath and the correction is clean gone over him, to the
intent that we should be without correction, and might enjoy peace with GOD. So
have you deliverance in Christ by his blood, namely forgiveness of your sins
according to the richness of his grace, Ephe. 1. ^^he. 1
For, Christ is therefore come into this world, to make sinners holy and
blessed. 1. Tim. 1. ^im. 1
As Christ witnesses of him self, Matthew. 18. ^tt. 18.
And Luke. 19. ^^k. 19
The son of man (says he) is come to seek and to make blessed that that is
lost. For God has not sent his son into the world, that he should condemn
the world, but that the world by him should be made hapie, whosoever believes
on him shall not be judged, ^^m. 3 ^ohn. 4
Also, Christ is the forgiveness of our sins. Believe this comfortable
saying, from the bottom of your heart, and stay your self more upon Gods
merciful promise, then of the deceites of satan, and of the dangerous
imaginations of your reason. Give God the honor, because he is so merciful a
God, that of a wretched sinner he will make a child of God, if a man will only
trust upon him.

Sixthly, moreover well-beloved, though now death at the last will come and stare
in your face, and should with his grievous countenance make you afraid: for he
is such a captain and giant, that he will make one believe, he will eat up
the whole world, and therefore he gapeth so wide: yet be not afraid of him, for
he aduaunceth him self maruellously, and is ougly to behold: howbeit, he has
no power nor strength any more, to overthrow you. For Christ has matched
him, and thoroughly wounded him, seeing that he has laid hand upon Christ the
right Lion, therefore is all his strength taken from him. Therefore he shall be
to the faithful no more death, but only a sleep, as Saint Paul in the second
Epistle to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.
the first Chapter, does witness and declare very plainly and comfortably,
where he says, Christ Jesus our savior has taken the strength from death,
and brought us the light, life, and a being, by means of the Gospel, that
shall never corrupt nor perish. Yea, the faithful shall never taste of death,
as Christ witnesses him self, being the very truth, John the eight Chapter,
where he says thus, Verily verily I tell you, ^^hn. 8
if any man will keep my word (by faith) he shall not taste of death
everlastingly. Look and mark well what a noble, virtuous, and right belief
is, for that overcomes and drives away all adversity, all plagues, sin,
and death it self. And a faithful person goes clean through death, to the
right life, as our Lord Christ again witnesses, John 5. ^^hn. 5
where he says thus, Verily verily I say unto you, he that hears my word,
and believes on him that has sent me, he has everlasting life, and shall not
enter into judgment, but he passes through death to life. There do you see
what is necessary for you: yea, you shall escape the judgment of God,
overcome death, and enjoy everlasting life: namely, to hear Gods word (as
Christ says) and believe the same. It requires no great cunning, wisdom,
strength, might, liueland, and preparation, to overcome death, but this
ouercomming, victory, or triumph, is in these two points, to hear and to
believe.

Surely, my thinks, this is a marvelous victory, that a poor, wretched,
weak, and sick man, that by reason of weakness, can scant move hand nor
foot, can overcome so great a giant, as death only, with a Christianlike
hearing, and a believing heart. But thus can Christ avenge him self upon such
a strong enemy death, that would gladly have eaten and swalowed up Christ,
that he has so wonderfully taken away the strength from death, that a poor
wretched man may overcome death, and besides that, may mock and laugh him to
scorn, that is (I think) death rightly to despise and contemn. But how
comes that to pass, that we ouerrun and wearied by death, shall
nevertheless abide still alive. That is (as Christ him self says) John 11.
^ohn. 11.
where he says thus, I am the resurrection and the life, who so ever believes
on me, shall live, although he seem to dye. And whosoever lives, and
believes on me, shall neuermore dye. This is the right and only cause, that
the faithful, yea, in the midst of death, embrace the right life, Christ our
Lord that gives again unto them life. For, as little now can death any more
weary or overcome our Lord, or hold him in death: so little can he either
punish or quarrel with any faithful men. For seeing that Christ, which is the
life, does still live, and can neuermore be overcome, so may the faithful
never abide prisoner in death, but he breaks out valiantly with Christ, and
sings the merry song of thanks giving, and of triumph, Death is swallowed
up in victory, for where is thy sting? Thus shall a Christian soldier look
death between the brows, and manfully wage battle with him, or else would
death eat up, and swallow the whole world. But if you will with a true faith
encounter ^ith him, then will he quietly let you ^lone. Whereunto Christ help
you, he valiant and puissaunt king over ^eath and life. Amen.

Seventhly, also well-beloved, if the di^ell the tempter would lay hand upon ^ou,
assault or make you despair, as though you did belong to his kingdom, ^r were
in his claws, thus shall you en^ounter him, stand against him, beat ^im,
overcome him, first by earnest ^rayers and calling upon God for grace, help,
and comfort, as our Lord Christ admonished his Disciples, Matthew. 26. Mat. 26.
where he says thus, Pray you, least ye fall unto temptation. As also our
loving Lord Christ him self has taught us to pray, Luke. 12. Luke. 12.
Oh Lord and father, lead us not into temptation, specially when we ^re
tempted by satan, and assaulted, that we through thy grace and holy spirit,
may withstand him, and that we may eschew his persuasions and enticementes to
doubt. Therefore thus withstand him by prayer, for satan is fallen down hither
to us swiftly and inuisibly, as Christ our savior witnesses, Luke. 10. Luke
10.
where he says thus, I saw Satan fall from heaven like a lightening. But
wherefore? Truly therefore, as Christ further teaches his Apostles. Luke. 22.
Luke. 22.
where he says thus, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired you, that he
might fifth you as wheat is sifted. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
shall not fail. Behold now how satan prouleth after every man, he spares
no man, he durst assault the best and holiest men, namely, Adam and Eve in
Paradise, though they were made to the Image of God. Also he has not spared
Gods own son, but assaulted and tempted him in the wilderness, so has he also
desired to do ye like with the dear Apostles, as you heard even now:
therefore it is to be feared, he will also not spare you. Seeing then that is
to be feared, and that we know his meaning, as Saint Paul says in his second
Epistle to the Corinthians, the second Chapter, that we should look about us,
that we be not deceived of satan. For (says he) It is not unknown unto us,
what he purposes and goes about. 2. Cor. 2.
Therefore have a good eye upon this ^armefull and perilous tempter, and
^riue him away by godly prayers.

Again, thus shall you desend and stand against satan, with a steadfast faith
on Christ our Lord, chiefly, that Christ is ^ur high Priest and King, which
has o^ercome satan, the same Lord can for our commodity destroy satan, and
ouer^ome him: therefore shall you steadfastly ^eleeue, ye Christ your mighty
King can ^unt and drive away satan from you, with ^ll fantasies, dreams,
toys, and de^eites. For, He goes (as says Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 5. 1. Pet. 5.
) about as a roaring Lion, and seeks whom he may devour, whom (says the
Apostle) resist you, being strong in faith: therefore take the shield of faith,
(As Saint Paul further warns us, Ephesians. 6.
where he (in the 6. to the Ephesians) says thus, Before all things (says he)
take the shield of faith, whereby ye may quench ^all the fiery darts of the
wicked. Therefore believe steadfastly, by this noble counsel of the holy Apostle
Saint Paul, where be speaks in the first Chapter to the Ephesians, and in
the first to the Colossians, Ephesians. 1. Coloss. 1.
in this manner, God has delivered us from the Prince of darkness, and has
established us in the kingdom of his loving son, of whom we have our
deliverance through his blood, specially the forgiveness of sins, acording
to the richnes of his grace. There do you hear, and must with your whole
heart believe, that our Lord Christ has delivered you from the power of
satan, so that the gates of hell can not prevail against you. Matthew. 16.
Matthew. 16.


Thirdly, if satan moreover will encounter with you, then take you the sword
of the holy ghost, (which is Gods word) after the counsel of the holy
Apostle, in the 6. to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.
and set upon him with Gods word, after the example of Christ, Matthew. 4.
Matthew. 4.
Therefore, if he will say unto you this or such like words, The unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 6.
the sixth Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Ite^ it is written,
1. John. 3.
Who so ever sins, is of satan, the first Epistle of Saint John, the ^hird
Chapter. Then shall you answer ^im again with Christ, and say, Away ^athan,
for it is also written, etc. And also, Ezech. 18. and 33
(...) desire not the death of a sinner, (says our Lord God) but that he amend
him self, and ^^ue. And Christ in the 9. of Matthewe, Matt. 9. Matt. 18. Luke
19
^aith thus, I am come to call sinners to re^entance. And Matthewe 18. and Luke
9. The son of man (says Christ) is come ^o seek, and to make blessed that
that was ^^st. Now look satan, though I be in^eed a wretched sinner, yet is
not Gods will that I should be for ever condem^ed, but that I should live.
Albeit then that I be a lost sheep, yet will Christ the ^igh shepherd of my
soul, seek me out, and save me, of this I doubt nothing at ^ll. Therefore
avaunt harmefull devil, thou have nothing to do here, seeing that Christ my
Lord has clothed and coue^ed me with his innocence, virtues, and holiness:
for I have put on Christ my Lord in my baptism. Galathians the ^hird
Chapter. Galat. 3
I have put on the wed^ing garment, in which I shall appear before God, and
dwell in his kingdom for ever and ever. Amen.

Behold, thus shall you drive away the wicked flend, and strive and fight
against him as a Christian Captain, to the end that ye may atteine at the
great day, unto the everlasting crown. Thus will our Lord God (which is the God
of peace,) tread down satan after a little time under your feet, Romans 16.
as Saint Paul writes, in the 16. to the Romans.

Eighthly, if well-beloved, the everlasting judgment, hell, and everlasting
damnation assault you, as though you were one that should be damned, or
forsaken and lost, and would make hell mouth gape, and open wide upon you:
thus comfort and refreshe your self ever and quickly with Gods word, relieve
and cool your self with the fresh water that springs and flows out of
the treasure of Gods mercy, against sin and filthy living, which water we have
in the Gospel, where also the holy prophet Zacharias makes mention in the 13.
Zach. 13. Esaie. 55.
Chapter, and the Prophet Esaie in 55. Cha. Thus embrace now with true ^ith ye
noble, comfortable, and pleasant say^ngs and promises of God, of everlasting
^^fe, whereof this is one, John. 3. John. 3.
where ^ur Lord Christ speaks thus, God ^^th not sent his son into the
world, that he ^^uld condemn the world, but that the world through him should
be saved. Whosoever be^eeueth on him, shall not be condemned. ^. I^em, John. 5.
John. 5.
Verily verily I say unto you, says Christ our Lord,) Whosoever hea^eth my
word, and believes in him that has sent me, shall never enter into
condemnation, ^^^t he has a through passage from death to ^^e. Item the third
of S. John, Whosoever ^eleueth on the Son, has everlasting life. John. 3.
And moreover he says, Like as Moses set up a serpent in the wilderness,
likewise ^^ust the son of man also be lifted up, to the intent, that all they
that believe in him, should not be lost and perish, but enjoy and in^erite
everlasting life. And, God has so lo^^d the world, (says ye everlasting son
^f God him self,) that he has given his (...) son, to the intent that all
that be^eeue in him, should not be destroyed, but should enjoy everlasting
life. Item, John the sixte (thus says Christ, John. 6
) Verily verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting life.
Item (our Lord Christ says further thus,) This is the will of him that sent
me, that whosoever beholds the son, and believes on him, shall have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

By this may you joyfully say, conclude, and through true faith acknowledge,
that hell (through the resurrection of Christ our deliverer) is shut up against
you, for you believe the highest article of Christian religion, where we
believe and acknowledge, that Christ our Lord is gone down into hell, not
for his own sin and unrighteousness sake, but for the cause of our
wickednesses, by which we have deserved the everlasting plagues, hell, and
damnation. There has Christ himself taken away that everlasting correction,
done penance for it, and made satisfaction, broken hell, and shut and stopped
it up, and to be short, in stead of everlasting imprisonment, dungeon, and
destruction, purchased and given us everlasting life, and brought unto us, and
given us a triumphant victory, that we with him may now merrily sing, Hell,
where is thy victory? Behold, it behooves you in such sore dangerous, and
lingering sickness and battle, to show and instruct your self that you be a
child of God, and suffer not your self to be deceived, albeit it does not as
yet appear in this world, nor can easily be perceived whether we be presently
through faith fully Gods children or not. John 1.
John the first says. It does not yet now appear what we be, but we know,
that when it shall appear, then shall we be like unto him, The first of Saint
John the third. John. 1.3.
Cap. Then shall we see him as he is, and then shall we be pertakers of his
Godly nature. The second Epistle of Saint Peter the first Chapter. 2. Pet. 1.
Albeit that yet our knowledge and appearance what we be, is imperfect, and
that we as yet behold the majesty of God, (as it were through a glass, and
in darkness) or in a cloud. Yet shall we hereafter behold him face to face.
Thus do we wait for nevertheless these things in the mean season in
blessed hope. For we behold our selves likewise, by our selves, childishlye,
and look for the deliverance of our bodies, for we shall be thoroughly blessed,
albeit in hope. This hoping nevertheless, that we see, is no hope, for how can
a man hope for that he sees? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we
look after it by patience, ^om. 13.
the 13. to the Romans Therefore does belong hereunto, yt is there to the time
of sufferinges, these two virtues, patience, and hope, for with these two
wings specially, faith and hope, you must enforce your self to flee up into
heaven. But patience must fight the battle with the dragon, which will
strengthen and hinder your way to heaven.

Ninthely, now well-beloved, seeing that your sickness somewhat lingereth, and
that God for a time does prolong his help and deliverance, and will not
soudenly, as we desire, pray, and think, deliver you, but will awhile try and
prove your faith, for your faith must be tried by adversity, and temptation,
as gold is tried and proved in the fire: Therefore you must be patient. For
albeit our Lord GOD for a time, withdraws his merciful help, yet will he
not long be absent. It should not stand with his godly nature and mercy, that
he should for ever forsake you, being his child through faith in Christ.
Wherefore, though you a little while for the time of your suffering must sing
with Christ, the lamentable song, and say, My GOD my GOD, wherefore have thou
forsaken me? yet will not God long tarry nor be absent, he suffers you to
swim a while, but not utterly so be drowned, he suffers you peradventure
one day, but he will by and by afterward raise you up again, and give you
everlasting peace and happiness. Therefore, albeit you do not for a little
time see Christ in his throne of grace, yet shall you shortly see him again,
John the.16. John. 16.
For his anger, that is to say, his fatherly correction endures but the
twinkling of an eye, and he has pleasure and delight to save. And therefore
does our Lord God him self comfort you in the Prophet Esai the.54. ^saie. 54.
Cap, saying thus. Behold I have hidden my face a little from thee, in the
short time of anger: nevertheless, I will have mercy upon thee with my
continual favor, says the Lord God our deliverer. Therefore says Saint
Paul the second Epistle the.4. Chap. to the Cor. Cor. 4.
Although our trouble, which is but transitory and easy (though we think it
very heavy, much and long) yet does it breed and bring forth an everlasting
and a meruilous weighty and unmeasurable dignity and estimation unto us,
which we cannot behold with these eyes, but with invisible eyes. For no eye
has seen, nor no ear heard, nor no man's heart can express that GOD has
prepared for them that love him. Esai. 64. Esaie. 64.
And.1. Cor. 2. ^. Cor. 2.
But in these things must Gods children a while be pacient, suffering, polished
and pressed, and fully bethink and consider these comfortable sayings, which
be spoken unto us as to children the.12. to the Hebr. Hebr. 12.
out of ^he Proverbs of Solomon in the third Chapter, as it is there written.
Proverb. 3.
Take ^ot slightly, but earnestly regard the Lords ^hastening or correction,
and despair not ^hen he punishes thee. For whom the Lord ^oueth him does he
punish, and corrects ^uery child that he takes to him self. If ^ou abide
his correction patiently, then ^oeth God show him self as to his ^hildren,
for where is a son whom ^he father does not correct. Howbeit, ^uery
chastening while it is a doing, it ^oeth not rejoice us, but makes us sad and
pensive, but afterward it brings (...) joyful fruit of righteousness, to them
that be exercised in it. And therefore ^aith Saint James in his first Chapter.
Iam. 1.
Esteem it for a perfect joy when you chance ^o fall into many temptations, and
know, that ^our faith if it be perfect works patience, ^ut patience shall
perfectly abide unto the ^^nde. To the end it may be perfect and have ^t all no
manner of imperfection.. For, He that abides to the end he shall be bles^^d,
Matthew. the.10. Matthew. 10.
Therefore a Christian may well boast him self of trouble, seeing that we
know, that Trouble brings patience, patience brings experience, experience
brings hope, hope will never be confounded. Let us not be ashamed, for the
love of GOD is powered out into our hearts through the holy ghost, which is
given unto us, the.6. Romans 6.
to the Romans

Thus shall you in patience look for the merciful help and visitation of
God, and in your heart sing the pleasant song of thanksgiving, of the holy
man Simeon, Luke 2.
Luke the second, and say thus: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, as thou have said. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou
have prepared for all people. To be a light to lighten the heathen, and to be
the praise of all thy people of Israel. For I have now (God be praised)
obtained ye knowledge of thy salvation, which is in the forgiueing of sins:
Through the tender mercy of our God whereby he has visited us, that came from
above, That he might appear to them that satte in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, and lead our feet into the way of peace, Luke. 2.
as Zacharias did sing, Luke the second.

The tenth, well-beloved, your sickness continues and does not leave off, and
you think long for help, yet must you give over these things, ye must not
shrink from God, nor be faint hearted, but in patience have a perfect and
steadfast hope, that God will not be long away, though he seem to tarry, but
or it be long will come and help you: yea, the longer God withdraws from you
his gracious help, the mightier and better hereafter will your help and
comfort be: for God stands yet a while behind the wall, as a loving and
friendly bridegroom, and looks through the window privily in upon his spouse,
and marketh whether she does so love her bridgrome, that she will wayt and
tarry for him, and that she may perceive that he at the length will reach out
his hand to her, pluck her forth, and bring her home. His love is as strong
as death, but under it is hidden very life and felicity. Therefore despair not
even in the very danger of death, and sing once again with this congregation,
and with all the holy elected Saints of GOD in your heart, in this manner.

In the midst of our life we be compassed about with death, whom shall we
seek to for help, that we may get grace? thou only, oh Lord, art high, we be
sorry for our misdeedes which have offended thee, oh holy Lord God, oh mighty
Lord God, oh holy merciful Savior everlasting God, let us not be drowned in
the bitter danger of death. Lord have mercy upon us.

In the midst of death, the gaping of hell assaulteth us, who can deliver us
from this great peril? that can thou Lord alone do, thy great mercy has
compassion on our complaint and great misery, Holy Lord GOD, oh mighty Lord
God, oh holy merciful Savior, oh everlasting God, let us not despair for the
deep pit of hell. Lord have mercy upon us.

In the midst of the sorrows of hell our sins lie hard upon us, then
whether shall we flee from hence? where may we abide in safety? to the Lord
Christ alone. Thou have shead thy blood that has satisfied for our sins, oh
holy Lord God, oh holy mighty God, oh holy merciful savior, oh thou
everlasting God, let us not fall back from the comfort of our faith, Lord have
mercy upon us.

Behold, thus shall we rejoice in our greatest danger, and withal our heart
Sing unto our Lord God a song of thanksgiving, which is the right sacrifice of
thanks. Psalm. 50. Psalm. 50.
These be the right singers to God, when the whole army of heaven singe with
us, and give unto God praise and thanks. Therefore now without all fear and
trembling, hope upon the endless mercy of God, that this your trouble and
heaviness, and dangerous gronings and sighings comes up to Gods compassion,
and comes near enough to his heart. But herein shall you stay your self and
hope, and so shall you be strengthened, Esaie 30. Esaie 30.
And thus shall you conclude in your heart, and earnestly hope, and with S.
Paul say thus, Romans 8. Romans 8.
I know certainly, that neither death nor life, neither Angel nor
principality, neither power present or to come, neither above nor beneath, nor
none other creature may remove us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. To be short, Who will accuse the elected of God, God is he
that does justify, who can condemn us? Christ is he that died, yea rather
that is risen again, which sits on Gods right hand, and forgiueth us. Now
if death, sin, devil, hell, all trouble, adversity, and plague fall upon me
in heaps, yet will I before you all abide still in my God, and still remain a
child of everlasting joy and felicity. Amen.

The eleventh, though well-beloved, that ye do persuade your self as though God
himself were against you, and were angry with you by reason of forepassed
sins, yet ye shall not be afraid nor dismaye your self. For God many times
does prove his, and appears unto them outwardly as though he were very
angry with them, as though he would lay hands on them, punish them, and
utterly condemn them. Therefore seeing God first will make you to live, he will
before humble you, and seeing he will bring you to heaven, he will first cast
you down into hell. For, 1. Sam. 2.
Our Lord sleyeth and reuiueth, God does cast us into hell, and leads us out
again. As holy Anna says, the first of Samuel the 2. Therefore in this
temptation, learn rightly and properly to know the nature and property of
God. He means not evil toward you, but by this means he tries your faith
and your hope, that ye may be found to be perfect. Surely, it is a hard fight
to wage battle with God him self, as the good Patriarch Iaacob did a whole
night long, but at ye length he had the victory and lay above: And therefore
was he called Israel. Likewise also must the spiritual Israel do, and in
spiritual fight prevail and have the ouerhand. And to be short, at length it
must come to pass with you thus, that you must now only believe upon hope
where no hope is, Romans 8. Romans 8.
For, True faith is a certain assurance to obtain those things, and not
doubt on, the which we can neither behold nor see. ^ebr. 11.
Heb. 11.

This is your case, for in outward appearance and feeling, ye see nothing but
death him self, but the eyes of your faith look further, for they see life in
the midst of death, in the midst of sin true joy and perfection: in the
midst of hell, heaven: in the midst of Gods anger and punishment, grace and
everlasting welfare. This is surely a strange and wonderful sight, and this is
also an excellent, passing, and fine knowledge, a cunning above all cunnings,
which declares unto us, how we shall find in death, perfect life, how we in
the deepest misery shall be comforted, how we in the greatest doubts shall be
instructed, to be short, when it appears unto us, that we are utterly undone,
every body has forsaken us, every body withdraws their succor from us, and
before our eyes there appears nothing but destruction, and utter undoing, we
shall make much ado, and wonderfully busy our selves, and in our reason and
opinion, know not whether to go, we seem to live, and yet we dye, we see and
feel, and yet be in the midst of death. But here we must lay aside all
feeling, seeing, understanding, wisdom, and reason, and utterly forsake them,
and with these comforts, to be merry in the midst of death, and slide
through it as through sleep, to the blessed hope, that God will through his
mercy in the promise of Christ everlastingly keep us, and make us enjoy his
blessings. What so ever Gods will be, let things appear outwardly as they will,
let things go and stand with us as God will, yet believe we steadfastly, that
Gods grace and goodness will defend us for ever, contrary to all man's reason
and imagination, for he will not ascribe our salvation, nor give the honor,
glory, and praise thereof, unto us or our works, either to our endeavor, but
unto his endless mercy, that at the last day we should and must confess, that
our salvation was not in our power, in our doings, in our will and might, but
only in the mercy and only grace of God, which we have obtained through
Christ our only Savior. For which grace and good will, we are bound to give
to God continual thanks, and only laud and praise his holy name, and ascribe
unto him all honor, power, might, and majesty: behold thus shall you fight and
strive with God, against god, and push and enforce your self as it were
through very thistles and thorns, to enter into heaven, and there again
begin in your heart to sing the comfortable song of the holy David, Psalm.
73. ^sal. 73.
where he thus sings, If I have only thee my Lord and my God, I pass of
nothing, neither in heaven, nor in earth, though my body and my soul be in
contempt, yet art thou my God always my hearts comfort, and my health. And then
will GOD comfort you, and say thus, Esaie. 41. ^aie. 41.
Be not afraid, I am with thee, be not faint hearted, for I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee, I will help thee out, I will hold thee up, through the
strength of my righteousness.

Twelfthly, if well-beloved, many assaults and temptations fall upon you, as it
were by heaps, yet let them not ^ismay or discourage you, for satan ^oth
willingly bestow all his cunning, when the matter comes to the push, ^r
extremity. If he could not overcome you in your life time, whilst ye were ^n
perfect health, then will he now more ^trongly withstand and assault you, now
in your weakness. Therefore now ^earne, and be expert in deed, what the
^ubtiltie and craft of the wicked fiende ^s, what sleightes and devises he
uses and practices against you: for his nature and condition is with great
rage and fierceness to set upon men, he comes to you very stoutly, and that
continually with many and diverse temptations, and thinks thus with so many
and sundry assaults and forces to dismay, amaze, enfeeble, match, and make
desperate a feeble, and unexperienced Christian, whereby he may drive an
unexperienced Christian at the last, to put him self at all adventures, to
give over, and yield him self to every temptation, and to be overcome, to the
intent, that at the last, he may fall into doubt, yeald him self wholly
prisoner to the wicked enemy, and to submit him self unto him, from which our
Lord defend you of his good grace, with his holy spirit. Amen.

Therefore if now at the last any such come unto you, and that satan will lay
unto you that God (after his majesty) is a great deal too high and mighty to
have any regard, or to make any reckoning of you, be gracious to you, and
show you mercy, then let such high imaginations and thoughts pass, which
touch the unsearchable majesty of God, and come from thence to Christ's
humanity, and how he took upon him our nature, and begin at his cradell
to take hold upon God that is most high, and too far above our reach, For, In
Christ dwells the whole fullness of the Godhead bodily. Colos. 2. Col. 2.
And as Christ him self says, Io. 14. John. 14.
He that sees me (says Christ to Philip) he sees the father. Do thou
not believe that I am in the father, and that the father is in me. Therefore
thus begin with Saint Thomas, John 20. John. 20.
and call thus upon Christ, and say, My God, and my Lord. Thus shall you seek
out the majesty of God, find him, and take hold on him, that is only in
Christ: there is the everlasting godhead and high majesty only to be sought
and found, and without our Lord Christ shall you never find God, nor lay hand
upon him: therefore thus cry with the woman of Chanaan, Oh thou son of David,
have mercy upon me. Matthew. 15. Matthew. 15


The thirteenth, And if beloved, temptation after this sort would prevail
against you, as though god were not nigh you, neither in heaven, nor in earth,
to succor and help you, but that he does utterly despise and forsake you, and
that satan would lay and cast before you mocking and blasphemy, and say,
Behold, where is thy God, upon whom thou have so long trusted? behold how
well he hears thee? behold what haste he makes to help thee? how wisely
have thou committed thy self to him? either what great care has he of thee?
he suffers thee to stick fast, and starve in thy greatest danger and perils.
Oh, surely this is not ye right God yt thou take for the right God, and whom
thou honor, and call upon, else would he never suffer thee now so
miserably to be destroyed and perish, etc. When any such or ye like blasphemy
of satan is laid before you, then hold your peace, and be quiet at such
blasphemy, and never dispute with satan, but by and by turn you to Christ
crucified, to Gods son him self, and call upon him with your whole heart, that
he will come and aid you with his holy spirit, and strike satan, that he may
be driven away from you, and call upon Christ your mediator only, that he
will stand between the high majesty of God and you miserable sinner, and do
like a good mediator, and will withdraw his great and mighty righteousness
and justice, take your sins upon him, and so go before you, entreat, and
reconcile you. Otherwise will the majesty of God be too much, too high, and
terrible, so that you shall before God be afraid, amazed, and out of
countenance. Therefore take this Lord and mediator by the hand, if ye will
draw nigh to God, and have any thing to do with him. For this mediator has been a long time ordained by God himself for us, that we through him might be
reconciled to God, as witnesses Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Tim. 2.
where he says thus, There is one God, and one meediatour between God and
man: namely, the man Jesus Christ, that has given him self for all for
deliverance.

The fourteenth, If well-beloved, your sin does now accuse you, for that you
not only in your youth, when your body was sound and lusty, did sin and
offend God: but also even now in your sickness, ye have displeased God by
impatience, murmuring, misbeleefe, etc. as we al be borne in sin, be sinners,
and so remain and abide, till we come to our grave: therefore let not your
sin in any case make you despair, but acknowledge and confess, and accuse
your self before your Lord God, and be sorry for them with all your heart,
ask mercy therefore before God, in Christ our Lord. For it is impossible in
this life, that in the sight of God we should be found so clear, pure, and
without fault or sin, as holy Saint John witnesses.1. John.1. where he says
thus, If we say we have no sin, John. 2
then shall we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Therefore in
the midst of sin we have this only comfort, (when we acknowledge our
sin, the unquietness of our conscience, and the trouble of our hearts
cumbereth us) that we call then upon our attorney Christ the Lord, to ye intent
that he for ever be gracious unto us, and entreat and speak for us toward his
dear father, as then Saint John (when we stick in sin) comfort us. 1.
Ioh. 2. John 2
where he says thus, If any man sin, yet have we an advocate to the father
Jesus Christ, that makes us righteous, and he is the atonement for our
sins. From hence shall you seek your refuge and succor, and in every
assault of your sins, comfort your self, that you have such a peacemaker
before God the father, whom the father does accept and allow, that can speak
well, and is elo^^ent, and can handle your cause, and plead for you best.
Surely, this is a great and a perfect comfort, that we have our flesh and blood
sitting above at Gods right hand the father, which does take upon him the
whole progeny of man, entreats for us, pleads our cause, and turns the
wrath of GOD from us, as holy S. Paul also witnesses. Romans 8. Romans 8.
where he says thus, Christ is at the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us. This is his holy office, that he delivers wretched
sinners from Gods anger, defends and keeps them, therefore flee only to
this Lord Christ, when your sin grieueth or troubles you.

The fifteenth, If now in these long lingering assaults and conflicts,
well-beloved, your heart wax cold, be unlusty, and drowsy, as you think that
there is no more faith in your heart, and that for unlust you can neither pray
nor believe, yet shall you not therefore give over, or be afraid: for the Lord
God brings his many times so deep under the cross, that they can neither
believe nor hope, and think with them selves, that their hearts be utterly
cold and frosen: yea, very stiff, that neither faith, love, prayer, nor no
good thought can any more appear in their hearts. If this great and sore
temptation shall happen also to trouble you, yet despair not therefore, but be
of good cheer, and think thus with your self: I perceive that I must
altogether be naked and unclothed, and put off all that I have, and spoil my
self of every thing that I have or may do, all that ever I have falls
clean from me, and forsakes me. My loving bridegroom our lord Christ will
cloth me anew, adorn and dress me, and trim me with all his jewels.
Therefore call now again upon him, as upon your high priest, that he will
have mercy upon you, entreat and pray for you, and will have hearty compassion
of your weakness. For, We have not an high priest that can not take
compassion of ^eb. 5.
our feebleness, but such an high priest that has been thoroughly tempted,
and is like unto us in all things (except in sin.) Therefore let us go unto
him, with joy to his mercy seat, that we may obtain mercy and find grace,
at that time when help shall be necessary for us. Heb. 5.

Here have you a very great comfort, that Christ is your high priest. Call
upon him earnestly, that he will send into your cold heart his holy spirit,
which shall call within you, father, father, loving father: Even then shall the
holy Ghost help up your weakness, and entreats for you also mightily, with
sighings not able to be expressed. Romans viij. Romans 8.
Then also does Christ himself pray for you, like the high priest before the
father, and suffers not your weakness to be laid to your charge, despises
you not, because of your untowardness, your ignorance, or faint heart: for this
high priest has great compassion with our weakness, he does not only entreat
for us, but also he shows forth before the father his innocent body, which
he has offered upon the Cross for you, a perfect sacrifice for ever. Heb. 9.
^ebr. 9.
As also S. Paul witnesses, Ephesians. 5. ^phes. 5.
where he says thus, Christ has loved us, and given himself for us for a
gift and offering unto God for a sweet savor. This is the noble gift, and
this is the available offering for you, which is richly accepted before God.

Thus have you now your high priest Christ our Lord himself, the altar
whereupon he was offered his cross, the offering his clean unspotted and
pure body. Now mark how and in what manner or fashion Christ your high
priest did hang upon the cross, for such manner of hanging is very comfortable,
if one would behold it with believing eyes.

For first, Christ hangs upon the Cross with his arms and hands stretched
out, to signify, that he is ready to give grace, accept and embrace with his
arms all poor and wretched sinners: for he hangs there for the comfort of
poor sinners, and reaches out his arms to troubled consciences.

Secondarily, his feet also be heaued up and fast nailed, in token that he
tarrieth there for all wretched sinners: for he will not start aside nor fly
from you, but will continually be found, and tarrieth for you.

Thirdly, he turns his face and not his back to you, he boweth down his
face like unto a gentle and mild Lord to the prayers of all poor and troubled
persons, will gladly with all his heart hear them, he is willing and ready,
he opens his ears wide, whereby he will certainly hear you.

Fourthly, his heart is wide open toward you, for it is pierced with a
spear, whereby he may have hearty compassion with your adversity, and will
set your trouble very near unto his own heart.

Fifthly, he wears a crown of thorn upon his head, to signify, that he will
be your king, and defend and keep you from all misfortune, from sin, from
death, from the devil, and from hell. This is a marvelous gracious and loving
beholding to all troubled sinners, for he hangs in the middle of sinners, as
a sinner, because he will receive all miserable, forsaken sinners, give them
grace, and preserve and keep them for ever.

Hereafter follow certain prayers, which may be said before the sick body,
if the sickness have any continuance, whereby sometime the sick bodies heart
may be touched, moved, and kindled, that the sickness may not prevail, and
have the ouerhand upon the sick.
First well-beloved, let us lift up our hearts to almighty God, and put him in
remembrance of his gracious promise, which he has made us at our holy
baptism: therefore say after me, though not with your mouth, yet with your
heart chiefly thus.

MY Lord and God, remember the holy covenant which thou have made with me in
my holy baptism, wherein thou have received me to grace, and to be thy child,
and promised me, that I believing and being baptized, should be saved. Mark.
16. Mark. 16.
Seeing then thou Lord have so assuredly bound thy self unto me, to be my
gracious, merciful, true, and loving father, my comfort and hope is alonely
in thee, therefore I steadfastly believe, that as surely as I am baptized in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, that thou will be
my defender, deliverer, and comforter, and help me out of all danger, lead
me and defend me from all peril, that neither sin, death, nor hell can hurt
me. Therefore I will not despair in all adversity, and even in the extremity
of death turn my heart unto thee, and steadfastly believe, that thou will never
forsake me, but give unto me everlasting blessedness, through the deserving of
Christ my Lord and Savior.

Secondarily, well-beloved, let us now again turn our selves unto almighty
God, from whom comes al help, and call upon him from the bottom of our
hearts inwardly, as our only God and father, and say thus.

OH almighty everlasting God, and father, I being full of all unrighteousness
and sin, come unto thee, and yet am I thy well-beloved child. Therefore seeing
thou art the everlasting true God, I comfort my self with thy promise, that
thou will faithfully perform all that thou have promised me. Now thou have
said, Matthew. 11. ^atth. 11.
When I am troubled in my conscience with sin, care, need, heaviness, and
am heavy laden many ways, and I repair unto thee, that then thou will help
me, and receive me in my heaviness.

For as much as thou art my well-beloved father, and I am thy child, therefore
do I look for from thee wholly, all good things, help and comfort in all
trouble, for thou art not an earthly father, which sometime can neither help
him self, nor his children, but thou Lord art the almighty and heavenly
father, that wilt willingly with all thy heart help me, and likewise art able
so to do, by reason of thy almighty power. For thou art the maker of heaven
and of earth, thou have all things in thy hand and power, all cretures of
heaven and of earth be subject unto thee, and must serve and obey thee even as
thou listest. Therefore Lord despise me not, though I be a very wretched sinner
altogether, for these causes, seeing that thou by thy word have commanded and
promised, that I shall be heard in what danger and trouble so ever I be, when I
call upon thee, and that then I shall honor thee, and ever acknowledge thee to
be the true and very God: seeing I perceive, that what so ever thou promisest,
that thou do perform effectually. Therefore believe I certainly thy word,
that thou will not deny it, but undoubtedly perform whatsoever thou have
once spoken: therefore I beseech thee, from the bottom of my heart, that thou will help me out of my trouble and sickness, and never forsake me, but
graciously send me thy fatherly help, and deliver me from my distress. For
there is no body upon who^ I can perceive any help or goodness, but only upon
thee, therefore help thou me my lord and God, but not according to my deserts,
worthiness, or goodness, but through the deserts of thy son Jesus Christ,
which has purchased unto me, from thee, all grace and fatherly favor, him
do thou love, and have great pleasure in him, and therefore thou will not
forsake me for his sake, but rather show unto me all goodness: therefore I
commit my self wholly unto thy mercy and fatherly goodness, and put my whole
cause unto thee, as to my loving father, yt thou will deliver me out of all
this trouble, grief, weakness, and pains, when it shall please thy godly will:
therefore I will not appoint unto thee neither time nor space, but earnestly
hope upon thee, that thou will hear me, and defend me, though my case appear
very strange, and as impossible as it may be: for thou art almighty, have
might and power over all things, and besides this, thou art my father, and art
willing to do it, if it were now necessary. Therefore at thy hand I look for all goodness, be it unto me according unto thy true promise. Amen.

Thirdly, moreover well-beloved, let us once again lift up our hearts and
minds unto him, from whom all help and goodness comes, chiefly unto the
father of all light, which gives every good gift, and graciously hears us.
Therefore, seeing that your pains, necessity, misery, and griefs still
continue, therefore pray unto our Lord God, with holy David, and say thus, Oh
Lord, punish me not in thine anger, and correct me not in thine me. Lord be
gracious unto me, for I am feeble: heal me Lord, for my bones be afraid.
Turn thee Lord, and deliver my soul, help me according to thy pleasure: be
not far from me, for trouble is at hand, for here is none that can help.
Remember Lord thy mercy and thy goodness, which has been since the world
began. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor mine offenses, but think
upon me after thy mercy, and according to thy goodness. Lord have mercy upon
my misdeedes, which be very great, turn thee to me, and be gracious unto me,
for I am forsaken and in misery, the heaviness of my heart is great, lead me
out of my necessity and need. Behold my misery and distress, and forgive me
all mine offenses. Lord be gracious unto me according to thy goodness, and
blot out all my sins, after thy great mercy, wash me clean from mine
offenses, and make me pure from my sins, for I acknowledge mine offenses, and
my misdeedes be ever before me. On thee alone have I sinned, and have done
evil in thy sight. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine
offenses. Make a clean heart within me, and give me a new right spirit. Cast
me not out of thy sight, and take not thine holy Ghost from me. Comfort me
again with thy help, and give in me the spirit of peace. Be unto me a strong
tower, whether I may for ever flee for succor: for thou have promised to help
me, for thou art my rock, and my hill. Oh Lord, I cry unto thee, because thou
art gracious, Lord for thy great goodness hear me with thy true help, hear
me Lord, for thy goodness is comfortable, turn thee unto me according to thy
great mercy. Lord be not far from me. My God make have to help me. Upon thee
Lord do I trust, God help me out of all my needs, and set me at liberty.
Look upon me, and hear me Lord my God. Lighten mine eyes, that I may sleep
soundly in the midst of death. I love thee with all my heart, Lord God my
strength, Lord my rock, my hill, my deliverer, my God, my castle, upon whom
I trust, my buckler and horn of my salvation, my defense. Lord in thee do I
trust, let me never be confounded. Deliver me for thy justice sake. Bow down
thine ears to me, make speed to help me. Be unto me a strong rock and an
hill, where thou may help me. For thou art my rock and my hill, and for
thy name sake lead me and bring me forth, come to my soul and deliver it,
keep my soul, and deliver me. Let me not be confounded, for I trust in thee.
Lord quicken me for thy name sake, lead my soul out of this danger, for thy
righteousness sake, for my soul faints in my body, and the fear of death
is falen upon me. Fear and trembling compasses me, and loathsomenesse is
falen upon me. I lie with my soul among the Lions, therefore, oh Lord, hear
my prayers, and let my cry come unto thee. Hide not thy face from me in my
need. Bow down thine ear unto me, when I call upon thee, then hear me
betime. Now Lord wherein shall I comfort me? I hope upon thee, leave off from
troubling me, that I may refreshe my self before I go hence, and come no more
again.

If it please any man to say all the whole Psalms, to be said to the sick, I
will not complain upon him. Therefore they that list may when he list sometime
take these Psalms hereafter following, and read the same to the sick, and
sometime make some short rehearsal of them, and with them comfort the sick
body, specially the 25. 51. 70. 71. 77. 87. 88. 103. 130. etc. And if need
require, a man may often repeat them or take some comfortable part of them,
and also like comfortable sayings out of my little book, called The spiritual
conflict, all which for shortness I leave here untouched.
Fourthly, if the sick body draw on, and is near his end, then say our
belief, that is, the xij. Articles of our holy faith thus.

J Believe in God the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only son, our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne
of the virgin Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and
buried, he descended into hell, he rose again the third day from the dead, he
ascended into heaven, he sits on the right hand of God the father Almighty,
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
holy ghost, The holy catholic Church, The communion of Saints, The
forgiveness of sins, The resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.
Amen.

Oh highest comfort in all trouble, help, that we neither fear shame nor
death, that our senses be not dismayed, when ye enemy accuses us, Lord have
pity upon us.

Fifthly, if the party lie long in a trance: For I have many times seen, that
some have lain a long time (as it were) in a trance, and afterward have
begun again to speak, and have said, that they very well heard and did
understand what has then been said unto them. Therefore they that will, may
rehearse to the sick, this short exposition of our belief.
I put all my trust, hope, and comfort, only in the mere grace and mercy of
God, that he only himself can help me, and none other creature (how holy
soever he be) in all my need and trouble. And seeing he is my father, I
believe steadfastly, that he with all his heart will gladly help me, never
forsake me neither in this world, nor in the world to come. And because he is
almighty God, I believe that he can defend me, and keep me, from all that is
against me: For he only is strong enough for mine enemy, by reason of his
almighty power. And seeing he is the creator of heaven and earth, I believe
he can command all other creatures, that none of them shall have any power
over me to my harm, without his fatherly good will.

Therefore do I look for only from this almighty God, father, and creator,
all good things and everlasting life. For all things come only from him, and
are given unto him: for he will give himself wholly and fully unto me, with all
that he is, and has with heaven and earth, with all creatures, that they must
serve me, and profit me, and further me toward everlasting life.

I believe with all my heart, that Jesus Christ the only begotten son of the
father, from the beginning, has for my sake taken upon him man's nature, and
that he was conceived of the holy Ghost, and borne of the holy virgin Marie as
a right natural mother, and that that man is very truly God as an everlasting
and undivided person of God and man. And that this son of God and Marie, our
Lord Jesus Christ, has for me wretched sinner suffered, was for me crucified,
and dead. Whereby he has delivered me from sin, from death, and from the
everlasting wrath of God, by his innocent blood: which in his own person
suffered the pangues of death, and has tasted everlasting hell, and overcome
it, to the intent that I should be reconciled with God, and be made Lord over
al mine enemies. I believe, that except the death of this son our Lord Jesus
Christ, I could never have atteined unto Gods favor, and my salvation,
neither by works, nor by any manner of desert.

I believe that Jesus Christ my brother is risen from death for my
righteousness, and has for my sake taken death and hell prisoner, that they
can never hurt me. For I confess, that I should have dyed for ever, if Jesus
Christ had not come to help me, and taken upon him, as an innocent lamb, my
sin, faults, curse, and everlasting death, and has satisfied for me by his
passion, and has taken away the curse for me. I believe, that he does daily
like a faithful and merciful Mediator, Savior, and only Priest, and Bishop
of my soul, appear and entreat for me.

I believe, that Christ with God equally rules and fulfilleth all things,
and that he is of equal power and might in heaven and in earth, Lord over all
Lords, King over al Kings, and above all cretures in heaven and in earth, and
under the earth, above death and life, above sin and righteousness. This
King and Lord shall go before me in my passion and death, shall hold battle,
and fight for me, so that I with him shall be a Lord over all mine enemies, for
ever and ever.

I believe that Christ crucified, shall come again at the last day, and shall
judge and condemn those that will not believe on him, but will defend me, and
all faithful from the terrible judgment of damnation perpetual, and say unto
us, Come ye hither, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom, which is
prepared for you from the beeginning of the world, and coet.

I believe in the holy Ghost, which with the father and the son is one very
God, and is proceeded from the father and the son everlastingly, and yet in
one and the same godly being, and nature, an undivided person. I believe that I
by him shall be adorned with faith, as with a living, everlasting, godly gift
and reward raised up from death made free from sin, and in my heart made
merry, comforted, and free, and safe in conscience. For this is my rejoicing,
that if I can find in my heart such witness of Gods holy spirit, that then
God will be my father, forgive me my sin, and reward me with everlasting life.

I believe, that the holy Ghost will help to bear mine infirmities, and
entreat for me with unspeakable sighings, strengthen me, and light my heart,
that I may know the exceeding riches, fatherly mercy that he has given me,
and rewarded me with, of mere grace, without all my deseruinges, only through
Christ his beloved son, by whom the father has rewarded me with those his
gifts. But the holy Ghost teaches me to know all these things, he kindles
my heart, and lighteneth me, that these gifts come from above, as Christ has
promised us, where he says, John. 7. ^ohn. 7.
He that believes in me (as the scripture says) from his body shall flow
streams of living waters.

I believe, that there is upon earth one Christian church, that is the
congregation or number, or assembly, and meeting of all Christians: in which
there is one God, one Lord, one holy Ghost, one faith, one baptism, of which
Church Christ only is the spouse and husband.

I believe, that this Church is the spiritual body, and that Christ only is
her head. I believe, that Christ is the savior of this his body and Church,
and has given him self for her, that he might make her holy, and has
cleansed her through the waterbath of his word, that he may have for him self
a special congregation, that neither has spot nor wrinckle, or any other
infirmity, but that she may be holy, and without fault, a pillar and
foundation of truth.

I believe, that in this Christian congregation, and where so ever it be, that
there also is forgiving of sins. There is the kingdom of grace, and right
pardon, and that there is no salvation nor forgiving of sins, without
Christendom.

I believe, that no man can be saved, except he be in this congregation and
Church, as a lively member planted in his own body.

I believe, that in this kingdom, there is not only once forgiving of sins,
but as often as we require and ask it. For Christ is such a master of the
hospital, that does nothing else then look to the sick, help them up,
strengthen them, and makes them whole, and as Esaie says, He will not break
a bruised reed, nor he will not quench the smoking flax.

I believe also the rising of the body, that my body, which the worms shall
eat, shall arise again, even as it was before. For Christ at the last day
shall raise it up, according to his promise, where he says, John. 6. ^ohn. 6.
This is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever sees the son, and
believes on him, shall have everlasting life, and I will raise him at the last
day. And, Whosoever eats of my flesh, and drinks of my blood, has
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

I believe, that after this life, there shall be an everlasting life, so that I
shall live with Christ for ever, according to his promise, John. 5. John. 5.
where he says, Verily verily I say unto you, who so ever hears my word,
and believes on him that sent me, he has everlasting life, and comes not
into judgment, but he passes clean through death to life. And, Whosoever
believes on the son, he has everlasting life. And, Verily verily I say unto
you, if any man will keep my word, he shall not see everlasting death. Item, I
am the bread of life, (says Christ, John. 6. John. 6.
) which is come from heaven, whosoever shall eat of this bread, shall live
for ever.

Now well-beloved, seeing your time draws on, stand steadfast upon the only
rock, Christ our Lord. Then can no storm, no whirlwinde: yea, hell gates
them selves can not remove nor ouerwhelme you. For whosoever believes upon our
Lord God, shall never fall, nor be ouerturned, but shall abide for ever.
Therefore call upon our Lord God with your whole heart, for he is rich over all
that call upon him, and he will be nigh to all them that pray to him, to al
them that call upon him with their hearts, and grants all things which
they that fear God do require, hears their cry, and helps them. Therefore
call upon God the most highest, in the name of Jesus Christ, that he will show
unto you his great plentiful mercy, and power out upon you in the time of
grace, richly his mercy. For seeing that our Lord is the spring it self of
Gods mercy, and Christ his only begotten son is the pipe and conduit, whereby
such plenty of grace and mercy flows, and is conveyed unto us, take yet
again fast hold, in this your extreme need, of the ouerflowing and flood of
Gods grace, specially Jesus Christ, the scrine and casket wherein Gods mercy
is locked up: for Christ is full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1. ^^hn. 1.
For the everlasting son of God has brought with him such great plenty of
grace, that he has therewith fulfilled the whole world: for heaven and earth
is full thereof. And also Christ is full of truth, so that he is not alonly
the truth it self, but also means heartily and truly with us, and will take
to him self your soul, with great verity and earnestly. Therefore be of good
comfort, that your name is written in the book of life: you are fully cleansed
with the blood of Christ, and anointed with the holy Ghost: The same holy
spirit assures your heart, that you also be one of the very children of God.
And albeit it does not as yet appear what you be, yet know you, that when it
shall appear, then ye shall be like unto him, John. Chap. 8. John. 8.
For ye shall be partaker of the godly nature. Pet. 2. Chap. 1. 2. Pet. 1.
specially when Christ our savior shall come hither from heaven, and glorify
your miserable body, and make it like unto his glorified body, after his mighty
power and working. Phil. 3. Phil. 3.
Christ Jesus is the only refuge of all poor penisent sinners, he only is
your strength, your comfort, hope, and strong tower, in all need and
adversity. Therefore go without fear into the danger of death. Christ, in
the twinkling of an eye, being your everlasting king, will pluck you out
again, bring you to light, and make you righteous and living. Wherefore give
your self over valiantly from this life unto death, and be not afraid, seeing
that death has lost all his might and strength on the faithful. Christ the
victorious conqueror has taken from death al his strength, so that from hence
forth he can no more hurt, weary, or devour any Christian. Wherefore will ye
then be dismaide or afraid, for such a shadow or visar of death? Death may
for a little while roar and whet his teeth, but he can do no more: for Christ
has taken his sting from him, and likewise is Gods everlasting judgment,
through the Savior of the world, taken from you. And Christ the only son of
God, has appeased the justice of God, and laid the same far enough out of
your way: So that from henceforth you shall never be called to appear before
the judgment seat of GOD, nor you shall not need to appear, neither answer
for your sin, because Jesus your savior has made you free from it.
Therefore chearefully appeal from the judgment seat, unto the throne of
mercy, which is Christ your deliverer, call earnestly upon the stool of grace,
whereupon gods mercy rests and dwells in Christ Jesus, the son of the
highest, therefore can no complaint come against you, nether sin, death, hell,
nor satan him self. Christ is the true Lion of the tribe of Judah, which for
your sakes has subdued utterly all your enemies, wiped and blotted out all
sin, and swallowed up death: so there remains now no more, but that the
body must suffer and abide only one little shiuering and shrinking, after that
you shall be perfectly safe and sure. Fight therefore manfully as a valiant
Rutter or Captain, against the dragon and hell gates, then will Christ with
the host and army of heaven, meet you, and receive your soul, to carry it
with him into everlasting joy and felicity. Amen.

If any be disposed, they may rehearse again to the sick, the twelve Articles
of our belief, for they be the very ancor, yea, the very foundation of our
belief, which we can never sufficiently meditate and think upon. It is
therefore very meet and necessary, seeing in our youth we be baptized in
them, that we continually be fed with them: then shall we joyfully die in
them. It were very good that we should always in time of our health remember
them, and learn perfectly to understand them. Then, when we lie on our death
bed, we shall not so much need to be put in remembrance. And if a man ready
to die in time of need (specially if death come soudenly upon him) confess no
more but the only articles of our true and ancient faith, and Christian
religion, it were sufficient, specialy if those articles were holden and
professed by him that lies dying with a faithful heart. For we hope, yea, we
earnestly believe, that our beloved ancestors, in the great darkness, though
they knew nothing of the brightness of Gods holy light and knowledge, and yet
confessed and dyed in this Christian belief, and have inioyed everlasting
life: Therefore shall we bestow our possible diligence, to bring young children
to be baptized, those that be elder to be taught, and those that be at the
point of death to be comforted, every man according to his measure and gift,
whereby (as much as lies in us,) no body shall be taken tarde, be unprovided,
or dye in his error and unbelief. But so to use our selves, that every body
may come unto the knowledge of the truth, be blessed, and saved, and so at the
last, commend in our prayer every man one with an other unto God, which can
mightily bring to pass all that we desire or require according to his power
that works in us. To him be praise in the congregation, which is in Christ
Jesus, for ever and ever. Amen.
Last of all, now when the last pang comes when the sick body begins to
scrocle and shrincke up his body, as when one biteth upon a sour apple, (as
the biting of Adams apple teaches us: seeing the same bit and sin is run
over us all, and therefore we all must ransom it with our skin and with
death,) then may a man (to conclude) say to the sick as follows: Lord into
thy hand I commend my spirit. Almighty God lead thy soul into everlasting
peace and blessedness. And our Lord Jesus Christ raise up again, at the
last day, this dead body to everlasting honor and glory. Amen.

A short exhortation to them that be present, and shall attend upon the dead
body.
Well-beloved in our Lord, you have now seen for a time the course of this
departed body, and how like a good Christian and warrior, it is departed out
of this life. Yea rather, how fatherly and graciously our Lord God has
visited it, and how at the last he has delivered it from al adversity and
trouble, whereunto the old Serpent of all man's progeny had brought us.
Therefore, seeing this dead person is so Christianly departed out of this life
full of misery, let us, to the everlasting praise and thanks of God, say
joyfully, We praise thee o God, etc. And to conclude, inwardly with all our
hearts call upon him, and pray unto him, that he will vouchsafe, when we shall
be in extremity and peril of death, graciously, defend us, and bless us,
and give unto us a blessed hour, thorough Christ his only begotten son.
Therefore weep not as the heathen and infidels, that believe not the
resurrection, and have no hope thervppon. For, If we believe (as witnesses S.
Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. These. 4.
) that Jesus died and is raised up again: likewise also shall God with him
lead all those that be departed through Jesus.

Hear may we see what it is to die well, namely the death of Christ that of
necessity died for us wretched sinners, whereby through his death he has
purchased, that we shall never die, but sleep only. Out of which sleep Christ
a mighty Lord and king shall at the last day raise us up, if we believe upon
him, and lead us with himself into everlasting bliss and peace. Therefore,
suffer this sleeping body lie and rest, and his soul in ye mean season
refresh it self, and rejoice until that day, when body and soul shall come
again together, and enjoy everlasting felicity. Whereunto our Lord Jesus now
help us all together. Amen.

Secondarily, it is not possible that man may so much bridle nature, that we
should not be heavy and complain after the death of our friends. And also
Syrach says, ^cle. 38.
the 38. chapter. My son, power forth ^eares over the dead, and begin to
mourn as if thou had suffered great harm thy self, and then cover his
body according as he has appointed, and neglect not his burial. Make a
grievous lamentation, and be earnest in mourning, and use lamentation as he is
worthy, and that a day or two, least thou be evil spoken on, and then comfort
thy self for thine heaviness. For of heaviness comes death, and the heaviness
of the heart breaks the strength. Of the afflictions of the heart comes
sorrow: and the life of him that is afflicted is according to his heart. Take
no heaviness in heart, drive it away, and remember the last end. Forget it not,
for there is no turning again, thou shall do him no good, but hurt thy self.
Remember his judgment, thine also shall be likewise. Unto me yesterday, and unto
thee to day. Seeing the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest, and comfort
thy self again for him, seeing his spirit is departed from him.

Thus we see, that also the good Patriarchs and holy people have after this
manner mourned, as Abraham, Joseph, David, etc. But at the length they have laid
mourning aside, and comforted themselves with the ioyefull resurrection: Yea,
Christ himself mourned for dead Lazarus. John. 11. John. 11.


Thirdly and last of all, you shall worshipfully bring this dead body to the
earth, and show upon it such manner of work of love, Eccle, 7.
as Syrach wills us in the vij. Chapter, saying, Show thy good will upon the
dead, specially worshipfully accompany him, convey him, and help him to his
grave, for the resurrection sake. As Syrache also says in the 38. Chapter,
Eccle. 38.
When any dies, bury him decently, and bring his body worshipfully to the
grave. As did good Tobie, David, and many more, to give us example how we ought
to behave our selves toward the dead.

Our Lord God grant us his grace, that every of us, each one for other, may be
diligent in this behalf, whereby we all, to the praise of God, and to the
profit of our neighbors, without let or offense may begin, go forward, and
happily end through Christ our Lord, in the holy Ghost. Amen.

Thus you see, well-beloved in Christ our Lord, upon this dead body, the earnest
and high judgment of GOD, and what an extreme horror our Lord God has upon
sin. For who has thus judged this dead body, taken from him his comely
countenance, given unto him such an ougly look and face? Only death. But
wherefore? Only because, Death is the wages for sin. But if this dead man
since his birth had not sinned, then had sin never had such power over him.
But from whence has death this power? Only from Gods wrath and judgment.
Therefore tremble, look up to GOD, avoid sin, for this dead body may be a
warning unto you, that ye keep your selves from sin. Christ Jesus keep and
defend us altogether. Amen.

To the Reader.
FRiendly and Christian Reader, hitherto have ye perceived in plain and simple
manner, how sick persons are to be comforted, I have also shortly showed you,
first of Repentance, then of Faith, and afterward of Good works, which I have
not done only for the sick, and for such as be ready to dye, but also for them
that be in health: to the intent that they that be whole, in the time of their
prosperity and good health, may learn how to use and behave them selves, and
learn in time to dye. For nothing is more certain then death, and nothing
more uncertain then to come unto the right knowledge to dye. Therefore ought
every man before to prepare himself, and to make ready to take this journey in
hand, and go forward, whereby he may be careful for that that will necessarily
follow. But specially ought we to remember these things beforehand, and
continually exercise our selves in the cross of war, specially now in the
sore dangerous war against the cruel enemy of Christendom ye Turk, which
if he have the victory, spares no man, but without all mercy, heweth down
the miserable Christians, strikes them, and shoots them through, where many
times ye wounded bodies a long time lie in the green meadows, before they be
brought into the slaughter house, in great danger of desperation, if he were
not before well prepared and exercised in Gods word. So that this soldier
must fight with his body against the Turk, and with his soul against the
Devil him self. Howbeit, this shall be their comfort, out of the Prophet
Daniel, the 7. ^aniel. 7.
Chapter: That these murderers of christians and bloudhoundes, do only by
this means prepare Christian souls, and do further them to everlasting life.
For he sets him self with all his might, in great force against the
Saints of God, and chiefly warreth against them. Wherefore, without all
question, when so ever a Christian man is slain and ouercom by the Turk, yet
dies he with a safe conscience, in that that he is a Christian: for he sees,
that this war is against the Saints of GOD, without cause. For the Turk
has no lawful occasion to fight against the Christians, and so miserably to
spill Christian blood. Thus therefore dye they so much the ioyfuller, seeing
they go forth in the obedience of their superiors: and do not only defend
their own country and people, but also with their own blood, help to
preserve Christian religion. Therefore good Christian, learn in time to dye,
for thou know neither time nor hour, neither place nor manner, when, how,
either what manner of death thou shall have, specially in this last and
dangerous time. Therefore defer not till the last pushe, least that you
tarry too long. Learn, learn this cunning while thou have time, memory, and
opportunity thereunto. Then shall you go the surest way, seeing the day must
needs come, yeald thy self in time, with desire and will thereunto, for it
can not be avoided. Whereunto our Lord GOD give us grace, that we may well and
happily depart. Amen.

Howbeit, no man is to be tied and bound to use every matter, as it is herein
contained, but if any other can or have better, much good do it them: for I
have here remembered certain temptations, wherein I my self like a poor,
simple, plain man, have been tempted and assaulted with, and have experienced,
(if I may boast my self of my weakness:) for I have thrice been at that
point, that every man gave me over, and despaired of my life in this world,
yet at the last, our Lord GOD by his great power revived me: wherefore I give
unto him everlasting praise and thanks in Christ our Lord. I will not say,
that in my days I have gone to many Christian people, I have comforted them,
and have been at their end, whose names be written in the book of life: where
I have experienced diverse and many temptations. GOD grant both thee and me his
godly grace, that we may also blessedly sleep at the last in Christ our
Lord, and through Gods power at the last day, may be raised up to everlasting
life. Amen.

How to advise and comfort them that lie in prison, and be by the Magistrate
iudgged to dye.
First well-beloved, Almighty God give you his grace, and true patience,
whereby you may bear and patiently suffer this your deserved cross laid upon
you, seeing the matter is come thus far with you, yt Gods judgment and the
punishment of the magistrate is fallen upon you, yeald your self willingly
thereunto, and think that this correction comes from God him self.
Therefore refuse not the correction of the Almighty, as it is written in Job
the 5. Job. 5.
Seeing then that every man's judgment comes from God our Lord, as it is in
Solomon, the 29. of his Proverbs, Prou. 29.
receive such judgment and punishment up from our Lord God as a fatherly
correction, as the Epistle to the Hebrews witnesses, Chapter 12. where the
text says thus, Hebr. 12.
My son, make not light of the correction of the Lord, and despair not when
thou art punished by him. For the Lord does correct him whom he loves, and he
beats every son which he takes to him self. And so it comes to pass,
Cant. 8.
as Solomon says in his high song, the 8. Chapter, that the love which the
Lord bears us, is as strong as death. It appears unto the world, as though
the love of God were very misfortune, death, and destruction. Howbeit, there is
under such love, great mercy, goodness, life, and blessedness hidden. For, If
we be judged, we be corrected by the Lord, to the intent that we should not be
damned with the world, as says S. Paul in the first epist. to the
Corinthians, the 10. ^ Cor. 10.
Chap. Therefore, learn here with spiritual eyes to behold, that you under
punishment may see grace, under correction peace, and under death life. Thus
shall not this cross laid upon you be very sore and fearful, but you may bear
it, and you also shall patiently suffer it. For God can soon end this cross,
that you shall be able to carry it. For as much then, as God our Lord has
appointed to every man a certain end of his life, which he shall not pass.
Job. 14. Job. 14.
think you now that your appointed time by God is now come, and this day is
by God appointed unto you, for a certain end of your life. Trouble not your
self much therefore, after what manner you have taken your life from God, and
that you shall so soon deliver it him again. But set your will to Gods will,
and say, Father thy will be done, and not mine, if it be thy pleasure that I
shall drink this cup which thou have filled for me, give me thy grace
thereunto, that I may continue in a true Christian belefe, unto mine end, and
that I may under this my cross and suffering, in perfect patience, pass
through it to everlasting life. Amen.

Secondarily, For as much as you have now heard, that this cross and
punishment comes from God him self, and is laid upon you by God, through an
ordinary magistrate, you shall understand now further, well learn to know
the great and earnest anger of God over sin: for it is no small matter before
God, when a man behaueth him self contrary to Gods law, and continually
without ceasing, offends and provoke God, with his unpenitent living. GOD
is very angry with such deeds, and is much offended against sin, not only
with temporal punishment, but also with everlasting.

Therefore, you shall understand, well know, and learn, that you by means
of your doings and sin, have wrought and deserved, not only a temporal, but
also an everlasting death. For if God would deal with you, acording to his
earnest and uttermost judgment, then should your punishment be everlasting, and
never have end. But seeing that God has forseene you from the beginning, and
has taken and received you through his fatherly correction in the time of
grace, but specially now at this time, he will turn your everlasting
punishment into temporal punishment: cut short his everlasting anger and
displeasure, to a timely and temporal anger. And yet the same before him is no
anger, but a fatherly visitation, whereby he will make you leap over the way
to everlasting damnation, and lead you out of it, and by this cross he will
bring you to the right way to heaven. Therefore, our Lord GOD of grace and
favor, by means of the innocent death of his well-beloved son our Lord
Christ, will take from you the everlasting punishment, and take the same from
your soul, and lay it upon your body, so that both your body and your soul
may at the length be made free, and delivered wholly, both from worldly and
everlasting punishment. Therefore this worldly correction is laid upon the body,
but as it were the space of the twinkling of an eye, whereby you being warned
of your unpenitent life, might leave off to sin, which otherwise will not be,
and you would still have continued in sin, and thereby at the last, have
fallen into the fearful anger of God, and everlasting torment and plague.
Howbeit, God of his great mercy, has taken mercy of your fall, and will
deliver you from his great, mighty, strong, and everlasting judgment. The
righteousness and justice of God has earnestly sought, and required, to have
her right upon you, that is to say, everlasting punishment and pain: but the
mercy of God has on your behalf stepped in the middle, and has foughten
against judgment, and mercy has obtained the victory, and driven judgment
back, so that she shall never hereafter lay any thing to your charge: how be it
so, that righteousness is partly agreed with all and satisfied, but only
temporally, as far as concerns the body, but not the soul. This is a
wonderful battle, and on your side maruellously brought about, through grace.
For what is this temporal and transitory suffering, enduring (as it were) but
the twinkling of an eye, in comparison of the everlasting torments, where you
should have abidden the everlasting death and pain. Therefore is this a
tolerable, yea rather an acceptable and pleasant exchange, seeing we, by our
sin, have deserved the everlasting wrath of God and punishment, that this
punishment now shall endure but for a time, yea rather but the twinkling of an
eye, which else should have been everlasting and fearful, if God in his
anger would have dealt with us. Therefore now well-beloved, you shall do like
one that has his house a fire, and burns all in a flame, so that it is
impossible to be quenched: Then will he throw out, and fetch from thence all
his treasure and jewels: And if he can save them from burning, he may with them
build up an other house. Thus must you likewise do. Your house, I mean your
body, is of a light flame, it so burns with sin, that there is no hope to
quench it, you must now let your old house burn, and now look about and
bethink you, how to save and deliver your treasure and jewels, that is, your
soul, through a true faith in Christ your deliverer, and then shall you well at
Doomes day, thorough that jewel, come to a new house, where you shall have a new
body in the blessed resurrection of the elected and chosen people of God:
which never dies, nor thorough fire can be consumed. But you shall then have
such a body, as shall never die, nor at any time suffer any grief, punishment,
pain, hearts sorrow, trouble or need, neuermore forsaken but enjoy everlasting
peace and blessedness. Therefore pray now, that he will rule and turn the hearts
of the magistrates, that they will lay upon you, of favor, such correction, as
shall be most seemly in this case, that you may quietly suffer and bear. For,
God rules the hearts of the magistrates, and sits amongst them in their
counsel and judgments. And seeing the great magistrate is of your side, you
have altogether, and can lack nothing.

Thirdly, mark also further (well-beloved) that Gods judgment ever begins at
his own children. For, whenever he purposes to correct the world with his
displeasure, and earnest punishment, first of all he seeks out his own, and
visits them, and corrects them first of all with his fatherly rod,
whereby he may save and deliver them from the endless and everlasting
damnation, 1. Pet. 4.
as S. Peter shows in his first Epistle and 4 Chap. out of the holy prophet
Jeremy in the 25. Chapter, Iere. 25.
The judgment of God (says he) begins at Gods house. And as David says,
Psa. 75. Psalm. 75.
The Lord has a cup in his hand, which is full of mighty wine, he skinketh,
and fills out of it. But godless people must drink all out, and make a
carrouse, and suppe up the very dregs of Gods wrath. It is hereby meant, GOD
gives every body their measure, that they shall suffer: but the grounds and
dregs remain for the ungodly, especially for the stubborn, froward, and
unpenitent world, which will needs perish in their stubbornes. But the
judgment, anger, correction, and visitation, which God of his grace lays
upon his children, is after many sorts. God corrects some of his children
with sickness, some with poverty, some with imprisonment, some with contempt,
that they be not regarded nor any account made of them, some other with
temporal death by the magistrate, as he has now purposed to correct you:
therefore it appears outwardly, that God shows himself as though he were
angry with you. But, With him there is no anger, ^saie. 54.
for his anger lasts but the twinkling of an eye, after that he takes up
his again with everlasting grace and mercy. As the prophet Esaias in his 54.
Chapter says. And as David remembers in his 89. Psalm, Psalm. 89.
If the children of grace break and forsake Gods commandementes, and keep not
Gods laws, then will God with his rod severely visit them: But he will not
turn his grace from them. The cause is, the merciful covenant which God
has, by means of his only begotten son, made and established with his
children.

Fourthly, thus you shall earnestly believe, that this your suffering, care,
shame, martyrdom, and death, is not sufficient, thereby to purchase
everlasting life. For, if you by your death and pains, might (before God) do
penance, and satisfy, then dyed our Lord Christ in vain: but seeing he dyed,
he has by that his suffering, passion, and death, done sufficient penance for
your sins, appeased Gods wrath, reconciled you to GOD his father, and
purchased for you everlasting righteousness and blessedness. Therefore by this
your suffering and death, you can not escape Gods judgment, nor make amends
to Gods justice, nor make satisfaction for everlasting punishment, but only
thereby you do make satisfaction before the world. For seeing that you have
done amiss, and offended the outward, temporal, and worldly justice, and
transgressed, and found guilty thereof, you must necessarily satisfy the same
external and outward justice, with such outward punishment, as the world and
the magistrate can do: for above that, the world nor the magistrate can not
reach, nor give correction. But for as much as the offense, which you have
committed against the Magistrate, is also against God, and his holy
commandments, specially this sin, which you at the first on the rack, or
pyning bank, and after by your own confession have acknowledged, besides
other grievous faults, wherewith in your life time, from your youth hitherto,
you have offended God your Lord, in such manner, that he might punish you for
such offenses everlastingly, and not for a time, yet will he not do so, as I
have told you before, but he will mercifully forgive you such offenses
altogether, both small and great, how so ever you have committed them, through
the deserving, misery, shame, and bitter death of his dear son our Lord
Christ Jesus, your Savior. So that Gods justice is satisfied for you by Christ
our Lord. For, GOD has made his son for our sakes, to be righteousness,
holiness, and our deliverer. 1. Cor. 1. ^ Cor. 1.
Therefore you must believe this, and not doubt, and confess it with your mouth.
Do you believe this dear beloved? Say yea.

Fifthly, lest peradventure you should imagine and say, How comes it then to
pass, that God has only laid upon me this shame, reproach, and death? How
comes it to pass, that he has spyed me out only? Am I then alone, the most
wicked, the most unhappy man upon the earth? There be yet many worse then I.
Why could he not visit and punish me after some other fashion? Mark well here
and learn, that it becomes you not to murmur and be impatient, (by your
leave) against God, nor his purposed work: for if God will thus visit you, you
ought not to weiue it, nor refuse it: for God can best skill, according to his
fatherly goodness, how to entreat and handle his children, and he will not
deal alike with one child as with an other. He has many crosses and rodds,
whereby he will chastise his. He forbeareth some long, and another he patiently
abides, he leads him thereby to repentance: the third he takes forth to
him self with this rod, but he takes up an other with an other rod, after
them our Lord God lays upon every one his cross. Therefore (by your leave)
you shall not despair nor doubt, neither wish nor desire that you were dead,
or that this or that carry you away, as some have done, of impatience, fear,
and shame of the world. What hurt is it to you, that you must (in deed) be
shamed before the world, and that every man beholds you, as upon a great
offender, seeing nevertheless that you be the child of God, through your
belief upon Christ? Which our Lord God, and the whole army and host of
heaven does now heholde, and look upon, though it does not apeare before the
world. All that you have to do, shall pass away in the twinkling of an eye:
after that the world shall behold you after an other fashion, I mean, at
doomes day, in great joy and glory, as one of Gods chosen children. What shall
it then hinder you, though you for an hour or two, must be kept to be shamed,
and openly executed or put to death? Rejoice, be frolike, that at the general
day thou shall escape condemnation, before the whole earth, and all the host
and army of heaven. It is much better, that you should suffer reproach and
shame a little while, before a small number, then that at that day, you should
be shamed and confounded before the Angels and the whole world, for ever and
ever. Therefore yeald your self thereunto willingly, and behold this shame and
death, not with your bodily eye but with your spiritual eye. Do away your
eyes, remembrance, and reason: let every man laughe, mock, look, say, and
do what they will. Look not upon man, but upon God, he is at hand with all
Angels, they behold you graciously, they have pitiful hearts with you, and our
Lord Christ, and our deliverer will take you with him into everlasting peace
and blessedness. There be also among this company, heap, and cluster of
people, many good men that fear God, that be very sorry, and take grief with
you, and do truly pray to God for you. Therefore do you not suffer alone, but
Christ our Lord and head suffers with you. Likewise, al Christian members
suffer with you: likewise all creatures behold with you, and heartily long for
your delivery, as witnesses Saint Paul, Romans 8. ^om. 8.
Therefore turn you to him that strikes you, that is, to God your true loving
father, and pray unto him, that he will mitigate, shorten, and ease your
pains and smartes, and lend unto you a strong and merry heart, manfully and
patiently to bear this cross laid upon you, and to stand upright: And then
you shall prove in the midst of your trouble, that he is mercifully on your
side, and does help you, suffer, and bears your cross; for he will be with
you in your adversity: therefore lay al your trouble only upon our Lord God, he
will first make your troubles in your heart and conscience easier, and take them
clean away. And after that your heart is once at peace with God, and that you
have obtained a quiet conscience, then will all bodily pains be very little,
and nothing in comparison of the conscience. Then, seeing that to every man
particularly, or by him self, death as a just reward of sin is appointed,
and that we all which shall remain after you, must also get us hence, and no
man remain, but that death must swallowe up the whole world: what hurt is
it to you, that you go a little before us, to the way of blessedness, and have
possessed and inioyed everlasting life before us? Though you now by the way to
blessedness, shall tread a hard, bitter, sharp, and rough way, yet have you
this advantage, that you in a whole body, and good memory, and perfect reason
slide hence: and in death, you do thrust into everlasting life, and all we
must come after. And who can tell, how we, poor, needy, and forsaken men shall
do, and what shall come of us? We be sure to be assaulted with many
misfortunes and plagues and at the last, some long time lie stretching, and
suffer many smarts and troubles upon our sick bed, all which you have escaped,
and in the mean season rest quietly, and comfort your self, and enjoy
everlasting peace and happiness.

Sixtely, Now well-beloved, while you be in the way to the kingdom of heaven,
and that you will even now go thither: it is good for you to know the way, and
diligently to learn it, and to inquire after it, least you wander, or be lead
or driven from it. Therefore learn well to lay hand and holdfast upon the
ladder to heaven, which ladder the good Patriarch Iaacob did see, Genesis 8. Genesis
8.
That is the ladder whereby the Angels clime up and down upon, which from
the earth with his top, reaches up to heaven, whereupon at the uppermost part
our Lord God stands. Christ him self is this ladder, John. 1. ^ohn. 1.
Therefore hold fast by true faith upon this ladder, for, No man can go to
heaven, but he that came from thence, that is, the son of man which is in
heaven. This Lord is the very ladder to heaven. For by his manhood he stands
upon the earth, and with his godhead he reaches to heaven, where God him
self does appear. If you will go to heaven, you must begin at Christ's
humanity to clime up, specially through his passion and death, and to seek
after his very godhead above, upon the top of the ladder, where God him self
is, and say thus. My Lord and my God, for as much as I must go to heaven, as
I am very willing, and even now have begun, be thou my ladder, leader, and
guide, for thou art the very way to heaven. John. 14. John. 14.
And no man comes to the father but through thee, and by thee, as thou thy
self do witness. John. 10. John. 10.
where thou say thus, I am the door, if any man enter in by me, he shall
be safe. Thus shall you, unto the right way to heaven, prepare and dress your
self: for Christ is the only gate into heaven. Heaven it self is very wide
and large, but it has but only one gate, through the which a man may come, but
as soon as you have gotten this gate, and gotten through it, then have you
left behind you (as it were in a heap) al misfortune at once, and then are
you assured and defended by this gate, that no adversity hereafter for ever
can hurt you. There do you lay at once at your back, death, sin, devil,
hell, and all that can be against you. There be you then sure and safe as in a
strong castle, that no man can any more stir up hurt against you. Therefore,
let no man withdraw you from this way, go unto it boldly, you shall come safe
from thence to the kingdom of heaven; thither shall the good angels be your
guides, that harm can not once touch you. Be therefore of good courage, our
Lord Christ is your king, which has dyed before you, and has made the pathe
plain, and sufficiently strengthened and made safe this journey: therefore go
straight forth, and hold right on in this way, turn of no side, for, You
shall neither go on the right hand, nor of the left, as our Lord God does
command, Deuteronomy. 12. Deuteronomy. 12.
You take the left hand, out of the right way, when you despair of Gods
mercy, where God is before you. And on the right hand you go out of the way too
wide, when you trust in your work, death, passion, and shame: therefore abide
in the middle way toward heaven, and then shall you not go out of the way.
Upon this way shall you undoubtedly find the true life, for our Lord Christ
is not only the way, but also the life, so that you shall receive in Christ
the true life, as he says, and witnesses of him self, John. 11. John. 11.
I am (says Christ) the resurrection, and the life, but not only the life for
him self, but such a life, as gives the right life, and divides it among
all them that put their trust upon Christ. For, Christ says further also,
Whosoever believes on me, he shall live, though he be dead. Such a valiant
and almighty thing is it about faith, and about all the faithful of Christ,
that they lay hand upon life in the midst of death, that they sing merrily,
In the midst of death we be in life.

Well-beloved, you must unfeignedly believe all this, that it is no sport nor
deceit that Christ says and promises: for he is the truth it self, his
words be true and certain, thereupon shall you have no manner of doubt, for
the truth it self does say, I am the way, and the truth, and the life, and
also the resurrection. Whosoever believes truly upon him, he receives in the
midst of death the resurrection, so that now you shall lie the twinkling of
an eye in death, and slide thence to life. But by this death, through Christ,
you shall enjoy everlasting resurrection, where you shall neuermore die. These be
unspeakable words, and above measure comfortable, gracious words, that a
wretched sinner only through belief in Christ, shall find life in death, in
dying resurrection, and in the midst of the dongeon of darkness shall find
the right way to heaven. Therefore be of good comfort before death, seeing
that God is such a mighty Lord, that brings unto you out of death life, and
brings you through the snares of death, to everlasting peace (...) quietness.
God grant you this. Amen

Seventhly, Well-beloved, for as much as you be now, through faith, a member of
Christ, the old serpent will now set upon you: and as he has bitten Christ
our head in the heel, so will he a little whip your heel, for that you are
kept here and must die, that is his stroke and byte, yea, the poison whereby the
old serpent has stinged and poisoned you. Howbeit, it is nothing else but a
biting by the heel, that can do you no hurt toward the right life. She biteth
the children of God after many ways, but they again tread upon the old
serpents head, through our Lord Christ, in that that they through belief, as
through the right Triacle and medicin, drive away, heal, and quench the
stripe, the biting, and the poison of the serpent. Therefore valiantly tread
down the serpents head in thy Lord Christ, through a true Christian belief, on
the gracious promise of God, that Christ is the only head of Christendom,
which first of al with his passion, death, and joyful resurrection, overcame
satan, and brake the serpents head. The dragons head is diverse, specially
sin, death, and hell. There has the old serpent opened his jaws, and would
swalow us up in sin, death, and hell. But our loving lord Christ has broken
the serpents scull, so that she is not able anymore to gape against the
faithful, that she may swalow them up, as she has purposed. Therefore
learn now, how you shall trouble, charm, conjure, and ban or curse this
serpent, so that she shall not hurt you, which you shall do, if you overcome
her through belief in Christ, and so shall you tread upon her head.

Eighthly, Although my well-beloved, your wife, children, brother, sister, and
your friends, may tempt you, that they shall now be in need, and must suffer
for your misdeedes, let go and let pass altogether all such thoughts, and
earthly temptations, and think thus: Well now, albeit that I hitherto have
been by God appointed, and set to be a purueyor to take care, and to maintain
my wife, children, etc. and I have not honestly behaved my self in that
calling, I heartily therefore desire my Lord God, in Christ Jesus my deliverer,
that he will not lay to my charge that sin, but through grace pardon me: for
I am very sorry. Therefore almighty God, seeing thou will take that my care
and office from me, and put me besides it, I commend them unto thee, as to the
chiefest magistrate, and their Lord, defender, and father, that thou will
vouchsafe that I may commend unto thee my wife, children and friends, and
not to suffer that they shall be charged with mine offenses, but to take care for
them, defend them, feed them and maintain them, as the true only father in
heaven and earth. And that thou will vouchsafe, in my steed, to send them some
other, that may lead them, and bring them up in godly fear, and Christianlike
conversation. And although that they, before the world, must be charged with
my faults, that thou will richly requite those things unto them, and lay
against that, thy gentle, gracious, and fatherly blessing, so that they may
enjoy their innocence. All these things I commend unto thee together, Oh
most mighty Lord and God, into thy gracious hand. Whereunto also I commit my
life and soul. Therefore do I yield unto thy mercy altogether, and in
perfect trust and blessed hope, that thou will graciously accept this my poor
prayer, and hear me in Jesus Christ thine only loving son. Amen.

Now well-beloved in this ouergiuing and prayer, wherein you have given over al
things unto God in your prayer, and offered them up, you shall wholly and
thoroughly persuade your self of Gods mercy. For, God is rich toward them that
call upon him. Believe this thing only, and so it will in deed come to
pass, according unto the comfortable promise of Christ our Lord, in the 11. of
Mark (where he comfort such as do pray, and promises to give them all.)
Our Lord Christ says, Whatsoever you pray for in your prayer, Mark. 11.
only believe that ye shall receive it, and you shall have it. And in Mark
the 9. Mark. 9.
Christ says thus, If you can believe, all things are possible to them that
believe. Therefore give unto our Lord God the glory, and esteem him to be a
true God. Then will he for his truth sake hear your prayer and keep you:
For, He is gracious and merciful, of great goodness and truth. God surely is
the highest, but he looks upon the lowest very gladly, and of them that be
of gentle and courteous mind and heart. Only for his love sake, that he
bears toward them that be of troubled and heavy hearts. For they be so
commended unto him, that he has special regard upon them. As our Lord God
himself acknowledges, Esaie 66. Esaie. 66.
where God says thus, I behold such as be in misery, and have a contrite
heart, and on such as fear my word. This is the right offering, that pleases
God, specially a troubled spirit. For, A sorrowful and troubled heart will not
God despise. Psalm. 51. Psalm 51.
If you then can commend all your causes to God, your very creator, and give
over all to him, then will he do like a loving and gentle father, and can well
tell how to provide for all yours. For, he is the Judge of the widows, and the
father of orphans and the fatherless. As upon him it is written in the
Psalm. 68. Psalm. 68.


Then, seeing that God by this means and cross laid upon you, will take you
away from yours, you shall not therefore sorrow, nor be dismayde, specially
seeing that within a short time, you shall find again all your friends in
everlasting life, even as you believe the joyful resurrection of all
Christians, to enjoy everlasting living. There shall you find for your earthly
friends, heavenly friends. To die you must necessarily, and prepare your
self thereunto, as all mankind must, and no man be left behind. God does
this thing unto you for the best, because this way he does shorten your griefs
and pains, helps you this way through all pain, shame, slander, and death,
very easily and fatherly. Therefore be lusty and of good courage, he that
lays this cross upon you, he will also help you to bear it, give you
patience, and make a blessed end of it.

Ninethly, Seeing then that God has laid this cross upon you, that you should
hear it a very little while, therefore you shall not excuse your self, nor
make your fault light to the world, nor smooth it, as though you were
guiltless, or as though you had not deserved this your punishment laid upon
you. Take not the fig leaf before thee, thereby to cover thine offense, as
the nature of old Adam is to do, and as Adam after his sin would thereby
have covered him self. But give God the glory, as Joshua warned the offender
Achan, when he took him with the things that were cursed, Joshua. 7. Ios. 7.
Then said Joshua there unto him, My son, give to the Lord God of Israel the
glory, and give him the praise, and tell me and confess what have thou done,
and lie not. Then also said Achan thereupon, Surely I have sinned against the
Lord the God of Israel, thus and thus have I done, etc. There did Achan before
all folk acknowledge his offense: and albeit he were by the Magistrate
condemned to dye by Gods appointment, yet is he (no doubt thereof) taken up
through Gods mercy, and much commended for his confession, he gave God the
glory, and so departed in Gods mercy. Likewise well-beloved, shall you also do,
search your heart, give God the glory, which alonly is good, wise, righteous,
and holy, but all men be evil and false. Take nothing hence with you, carry
nothing away with you, but search your heart and conscience, and what you
have don, deny it not, do not make it less: but seeing it is manifest and
known, and seeing GOD has brought your offense to light, and by the
magistrate ordained will punish you: therefore give God praise and thanks, that
he will of grace not punish you for ever. Think it is much better here,
before few folk, to be a little while shamed, then hereafter before all the
world, and the whole company of heaven: for all must come to light, and be
openly known, therefore it is much better here then there. Then seeing that
God by the Magistrate, has made it known, therefore suffer it patiently and
willingly, and blame no man, as though any man had opened it of malice, or
condemned you as your enemy. The Magistrates judgment is Gods judgment, and
the sentence has also pleased him. He is the highest Judge, therefore blame no
man, and charge no man that is vnguiltie in this case. If you have at any time
confessed any thing to charge the innocent, whereby you might clear your
self, or thereby to escape and be at liberty, then burden not your self
therewith, nor let your soul carry any such thing away, but excuse the
innocent, and pray to God for mercy, that he will pardon you, and not suffer
your heart to be bent to any ungodly way, to excuse your offense, and to defend
it. But before God confess it, ask grace, and seeing it is come to light,
confess it before the whole world, or else you strive against Gods judgment,
his will and his work, which surely is horrible, from which our Lord defend
you, of his grace, through Christ Jesus his well-beloved son in the holy Ghost.
Amen.

Tenthly, I further also charge you, my dear friend, that from the bottom of
your heart, you will reconcile, forgive, and forget all men that have done any
thing against you, either by word or deed, whether it be for this matter, or
for any other before. If you have by any man been hurted or harmed, though they
be guilty of this your judgment, suffering, and death, either if they have
espied, or laid hand upon you, all this together shall you cast out of your
heart, and lay aside all manner of swelling, snarling, malice, hatred, enimitie,
and evil will: and contrary show a gentle heart, friendly love, and gentle
speech, without all hatred, bitterness, and evil will, as a patient lamb, as
Christ our Lord, which was altogether innocent, yet upon the cross prayed for
his enemies, and said, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Thus shall you likewise do and think: Well, now well-beloved Lord and father,
though I be not guiltless and innocent, as thy well-beloved son, but have
worthily deserved all punishment, wrath, and vengeance: Likewise, seeing thou
of free grace and mercy through Jesus Christ, have for ever pardoned me, and
after my departure wilt neuermore remember my sin: therefore I require thee,
that thou will give unto me such a gentle, friendly, and Christian heart through
thy holy spirit, whereby I may forgive, and forget, and also reconcile my self
unto every man, as well friends as foes: for thou will also forgive me, yea,
thou have already clearly forgiven all my sins and misdeeds. And for better
assurance hereof, give me grace, might, and such a burning charity toward my
neighbors, that I may forgive every man, and that from the bottom of my
heart: So shall I be sure, that thou have forgotten and forgiven me, and at the
last day, this shall be the sign, that is, the Christian and brotherly love,
that we also be thy disciples, seeing that we do show Christian love one
toward an other. Keep in me also ye gracious promise of Christ my loving
Lord, that says thus, Matthew. 6. Matthew. 6.
When you forgive men their faults, then will also my heavenly father forgive
you your faults. With these Christian comforts I comfort my self, and stay my
self altogether upon thy merciful promise. Do with me after thy godly saying
and promise, for thou do require of me that I be merciful, as thou also art
merciful toward us. Therefore I do know, that in this my departure to death,
there is no better, nor more acceptable offering, then that I should show
charity, and of mercy with well unto all men, pray for all men, entreat and do
well unto al men, as much as is possible for me. For God has pleasure in
mercy, ^see 6.
and not in offering. Osee. 6.

Twelfthly, You have also well-beloved, for a comfortable example, ye thief
which also had done very wickedly, for which he also received punishment of
the magistrate, but this punishment was unto him only the cause and
furtheraunce, that he did not only know GOD, and was faithful, but was also
hanged beside Christ his salvation: whereby he conceived special comfort,
that Christ the innocent Lord would pity his misery, and would forgive him
all his sins and wickedness, whereunto otherwise he should never have
forsaken his naughty life, but would have continued in his wickedness,
stubbornness, and used his stiffnesse and arrogancy his whole life long,
without al repentance, and turning from his naughty living.

And so peradventure had it ben with you, you would have gone forward in your
unrighteousness, therein abiden, withered, and starued for ever, without al
penance, or repentance, godly knowledge, under the fearful anger of God, being
bound with Gods judgment, and condemnation. Therefore, seeing that God has
delivered you from this miserable blindness and error, he shall from
henceforth lead you by this occasion, means, and purpose, first bring you to
know your self, and bring you to true repentance, and penance, suffer godly
knowledge to light in your heart, keep you in the true faith of Christ Jesus,
and will suffer you to depart in the same at the last without all doubt.

Behold now, dearly beloved, how our Lord God, is a valiant almighty
father, that of al naughtiness can make all goodness, and will to his turn
all worst things to the best. Satan had thought that through this your fall,
and misdeede, he would for ever have kept you in his kingdom, and to have made
you a member of himself. But our lord God comes, and brings to pass by
this means and cross, that he has broken and hindered all satan's purpose.
Satan thought he had made all cock sure with you, and had brought you to
everlasting sin and shame, and intended to have kept you continually therein.
But God comes, and turns the leaf up, and makes of you that were the
child of darkness, the child of light, and of everlasting bliss. Amen.

Twelftly, Now dear friend, I warn you now (at the last) that you will
depart hence to death without all fear, nor be not dismaide of death, by
reason of your sin. But herein take heed, that thou do not alonly look upon
death under the eyes, and do wrestle with him, but take thine almighty god
with thee, which has before laid hand upon death, and has overcome him,
that is, Jesus Christ thy Lord and king, which in the garden so mightily
wrestled with sin and death, that bloody sweat dropped from him, Matthew. 26.
Matthew 26.
therefore weigh it not. And again, be not afraid of death, seeing you meet
with him, with this king and Lord, but you shall do thus to him, set all your
only comfort, hope, and assurance, upon your Christ, that has made your way
for you, broken the hedge, and keeps the field, and has for you overthrown
the mighty Goliath, and has brought the blessed victory home to your door,
as I have before this time showed you, and yet again must set before your
face. For now is the time, seeing you are come to the very push, and this your
dangerous enemy (that is very terrible unto the whole world) will stand
chiefly with you, to bring and drive you from this point, and so lay hand upon
you. Therefore take to yourselfe the true shield, which is Christ your
defense, whom you shall set against death. For death has laid hand upon this
innocent Lord, and wearied him without al right and equity, whereby death even
lost al his strength and might, so that he can do no more, when this Lord
lays hand upon him, and takes to him self those that be his. Therefore be
not afraid, for, Death is swallowed up in victory. 1. Cor. 15. ^. Corinth. 15
You have a great vordeale or advantage, for as much as you have of your side,
the most valiant, and most mighty, which shall never be able to be overcome,
yea, him that is Lord both of death and of life. If death come unto you, would
devour you, will eat you up, and swallowe you down: yet can our Lord God,
which is the right life it self, by his almighty coming, and might, make
you alive again, yea, in the midst of death, hold you by life, and make you
live for ever. For you shall not deny or refuse to make this exchange, where
you shall have an everlasting and blessed life, in stead of a transitory,
perishing, and labourious life, which is full of misery, misfortunes, and
plagues. Let death take from you such a life, as will last but the twinkling
of an eye, which flees and passes away like a shadow, and our Lord give you
an everlasting life. Amen.

Thirteen, Well now (dearly beloved) if your sin done and committed, do
tempt you again, and your sore misdeedes which you have done, and therefore
would dismay you, make you faint hearted, heavy, and pensive, as though Christ
would disdain you, because of your sins, and so not take you to him and to
his favor: then shall you set before your eyes, Christ your God and Lord, as
the holy scripture sets him forth, and not follow your own imagination,
and your reason. For in the holy Scripture you shall find here and there, how
marvelous comfortable our Lord Christ has been, at all times, to miserable
sinners, how loath he is to contemn or despise the miserable, troubled,
assaulted and sorrowful sinner, how he does not withdraw him self from them,
or with draw his help from them, which undoubtedly is a great comfort to al
troubled sinful hearts. For behold and remember the whole life of our Lord
Christ, then shall you not only perceive that he has not only taken to his
favor, one or two sinners, and has taken pity only upon them, but he has
flocked into the midst of sinners, whereby he might help them forth of their
sins. First see his generation, his great grandfather, had he not many
sinners in his petigree, as Judah by name, David, Manasses, Thamar, Rachab,
Barsaba, and such like, and very many more. Wherefore does our faithful and
good Lord not be ashamed, flee from sorrowful and penitent sinners? why does
he not? Surely even therefore, that thereby all sorrowful sinners should the more
boldly have a hearty resort and recourse unto him, specially seeing that he
upon such sinners, could take and show his truth, love, and friendship,
whereby they might thereby win and have a liuelier passage and freedom, to
behold all goodness, all truth and help, to be in this only bearer and
carrier of our sins. Behold further, and look upon the birth of our lord
Christ, in his birth. So soon as he was borne into ye world, he suffered him
self to be seen, made open, and to be known through the Angels from heaven,
to the poor people, specially to the shepherds in the field, there must to
them be showed this comfortable joy, Behold, to you this day is borne a
Savior. This joy shall all people have. There by his Angels is the innocent
child Jesus given and declared, first to the poor shepherds, and after that
to the whole world. But who be the shepherds? who be al people? surely al
poor and miserable sinners, for whose sake Christ came, and was borne, to
help them out of their sins. As also then such a name was given unto him,
namely Jesus, that is to say, a Savior that shall loose his people from their
sins. Behold also, and see uprightly, wherefore was Christ at the eight day
circumcised, and so shed his innocent blood? Surely for the cause of poor and
wretched sinners. For Saint Paul says, Gala. 4 Gal. 4.
that, Christ has yealded him self therefore under the law and circumcision,
to the intent he might deliver them that were under the law. But who were more
hardly snarled under the law, then the wretched sinner? See yet to whom did
Christ preach, and whom did he turn and convert? Any other then the poor
sinner? To whom has he friendlier spoken, helped, or counseled, made whole
both in body and soul, then even the poor, cumbred, and sorrowful sinner?
Mark also, with whom did Christ wander, and go about here through the Iewishe
land, and commanded that they should preach abroad his wholesome Gospel?
Surely with his well-beloved Apostles. But what were they? Wretched sinners, as
Matthewe, and likewise Peter: yea, did they not show them selves many times
before Christ to be weak, worthy reproach, and frail? How often has our good
Lord friendly rebuked them, taught them, taken in good part their weakness,
helped them, suffered, and borne with their faults and wants, and yet neither
condemned them, nor cast them away: but continually handled them after the best
manner, whereby at the last he might deliver them from their sins? There has
Christ not only received poor sinners, in so much as he touched the hurt of
their soul, but also the harms of their body. How many thousand men has he
many times fedd, when their hunger and need went into his heart, and he took
pity of their misery? Oh, how many amongst them were miserable sinners, yea,
infidels, and not worthy to have and receive such goodness at Gods hand? How
many has he healed in their bodies, from agues, dropsy, and leprosy? Item,
such as were lame, crooked, blind, and haunted and possessed with evil
spirits? Yea, some he did raise from death it self, and always showed him
self in all things, as the very true Savior of the whole world, by that
means to bring the Infidels to faith, and to be short, done the best to every
man, and shut out no man that had need of his help, and had called upon him,
as the holy Evangelists here and there do evidently and plainly declare. With
which loving, comfortable, and gracious examples of Christ, they show unto us
his great and vnspeakble love and mercy, and declare and show the same unto us,
with all diligence. Whereby we may learn to know aright our Lord Christ,
specially that he is therefore come to help miserable sinners, both in body
and soul, both from temporal and everlasting hurt, whereunto satan has
brought al mankind. For, Christ is therefore come, that he should destroy the
work of satan. 1. Ioh. 3. ^^hn. 3.
Whom so ever he helps in soul, him helps he also in body. And though he
do not always hourly declare the same in this world, yet at Doomes day it
will appear, where he mightily helps the body out of dust and mire, and all
manner of destruction, for evermore. For he does help in deed: yea, the longer
he seems to withdraw his help, he shows it afterward more mightily,
therefore he is the only comfort and refuge, or help, to miserable sinners.
Furthermore, Christ has walked among sinners, in the midst of them, gone to
sinners, and has run after them, and delivered them from their destruction,
blindness, and sin. Shall not all this make worthily a man's heart merry, and
to have a good conscience, yea, a perfect assurance to all troubled and
sorrowful sinners, that they may in all their needs, sin, grief, sorrow,
and death, with all their hearts run and come unto such a friendly Lord, that
wishes every man good, prays for it, and does it, that never has driven
from him any wretched sinner? Yea, they at the last, in his death, were
partakers with him on the cross, that he by the ^peciall foresight of God,
should hang between two grievous offenders, in taken that he would willingly
dye for miserable sinners, and for their cause willingly give him self to
death: yea, they had their part with him after his glorious resurrection, to
signify thereby, that he has not forgotten miserable sinners, albeit that he
has conquered sin, death, hell, and satan him self, and yet might he well
have let alone this his conquest and triumph, and have neglected us miserable
sinners. But he has now sought out miserable sinners, that he might help them
and comfort them, as namely, unbelieving Thomas, the penitent Magdalene, and
many mo, as he was going toward heaven, and now sits at the right hand of
God, in great glory and majesty: yet does he not at all forget the poor
sinners, but opened Saul's eyes, put away all his sins, and made of him a
chosen witness: yea, even in these days, from time to time, does our good
faithful Lord without ceassing, take up sinners unto him. For what does he
else at the right hand of God, then entreat, speak for, and defend the
miserable sinners, as a faithful Attorney, Mediator, peacemaker, an^ high
priest, reconciler, and continual king, as he has taken up al us, you and me,
and all sorrowful, repentant, faithful sinners? In mercy he gives us now
daily his holy Ghost, which does lighten and purify our hearts, strengthens
them, gives them power, and defends us in all our needs. Therefore be of
good comfort, seeing Christ now lives, there can no misery come unto you,
seeing that Christ sits on the right hand of God? Who can do us any harm?
Who can condemn us? If Christ him self do absolve us, and accounts us to
be quit, free, loose, and unbound, and so pronounces us? To this Lord do I
now commend you: let him not depart from your heart. For albeit I must depart
hence from you, and must suffer you to go to death, and neither I nor ye whole
world any more help you: yet will not this Lord depart from you, he is with
you, and by you in your execution. And he is also faithful unto you, and so
gracious, yt he will go with you to death and will pluck you out again from
him, by his almighty power. Hold you upon this Lord by a steadfast faith, for
I now commend you unto him with all my heart.

The fourteenth, Dearly beloved, seeing you shall eue^ now be carried hence to
the place of execution, and shall be seen of many folks, take a merry heart
unto you, and speak unto the people, like a man: and lovingly, and give them
warning before your death of these three points following. First, that they
will well think upon and remember, the earnest and strong righteousness of
God, and take you before their eyes for an example of Gods Justice, albeit his
judgment upon you in comparison of Gods righteous justice and everlasting
punishment, which ought worthily to stir and move all men to the fear of
God, but (as it were) a flap with a fox tail. Secondarily, that they freely
for Gods sake, and of his mercy, every of them all will forgive you, forget
your fault, and forgive it, wherewith you at any time have offended any man,
whether it be in this place or in any other, for Jesus sake with all their
hearts will forgive you, where and how soever you have offended any of them,
whether it be by word or deed. And that you also do forgive from the bottom
of your heart willingly, both friend and foe, wherein soever you have been
offended.

Thirdly, that they will pray to our Lord God truly for you, whereby our Lord
God, for his dear sonns sake, may give unto you a Christian, and blessed
passage out of this misery, by the joint working of the holy ghost. Amen.

If the poor prisoner, by reason of weakness, or for faint heart, cannot
speak himself, and in the place of execution cannot warn the people and
speak unto them himself, then may his appointed minister, Or (as it is in
some place) the hangman himself speak unto him, without danger, in this manner,
and warn the people thus.
Well-beloved, as you are now here present, and mind to behold this miserable
sight: First remember wherefore this poor prisoner stands here: surely not
therefore, that in Gods sight he is the greatest sinner amongst us: But to the
intent that Almighty God, through this condemned man, will set before your
eyes an example of his godly justice, whereby, by him you might be moved to a
godly fear, to amend your life, and come before Gods anger, correction, and
displeasure, repent in time, abstain from your wicked life, and go in a godly
living. Is it not thus well-beloved? say, Yea. Again, the tied prisoner desires
you all here heartily and humbly, that al you here together specially and
generally, that you will forgive him whatsoever he has spoken, done, or
committed, whether it has been privily or openly, he is heartily sorry for
them all, he desires you all humbly and Christianly. Therefore he requires
that you will bestow also upon him this mercy, that his Lord and God thorough
Christ has showed unto him, in that that he of mere grace and love, has
forgiven and forgotten all his sins, and that you have a hearty compassion
with him, not to be offended at him, but bear with his weakness, help it,
suffer it, and carry it, as the Christian rule wills, where S. Paul the 6.
Gal. 6.
to the Galathians says thus: Every one bear an others burden, and so shall
you fulfill the laws of Christ. Is it not so my well-beloved? say, Yea.

Thirdly and lastly, this bounden prisoner also requires and prays you, for
Gods mercy sake, that you now at the hour of his departure out of this
misery, for Christian duty and love sake, that you will inwardly from ye
bottom of your heart, call upon God and pray that he will increase in this
poor man the faith of Christ, strengthen him, and keep him therein for ever,
and ever, whereby he may of grace enjoy a blessed hour: and that the holy Ghost
will lead him, carry him and guide him in the right way to salvation, and that
he may obtain, at the length, everlasting peace and felicity. We now require
that this may be done. Therefore say, Our father which art in heaven, etc. Do
you require this? say, Yea.

Well, now well-beloved, say you also, Our father, etc. And yield your self
willingly to die, and say, Father thy will be done, etc. Almighty God keep
you going out of this misery from henceforth evermore. Amen.

Say: Lord into thy hands I commit my soul. Amen.

In some place while the Executioner does lead forth the poor man, and is
about the execution, some sing in the mean season. Now pray we the holy
Ghost, as in Michshen, and Sachsin, etc. And in some place the minister in ths
mean time says the belefe. Whatsoever any man thinks good and profitable,
that may he set forth and do, and let the poor condemned man sleep in the
Lord, in holy hope, that whatsoever is now sown in shame and dishonor, shall
be at the last day in greater honor and glory raised up again. Our Lord
vouchsafe to preserve us all, one with an other, graciously from sin, and
keep us from sin and shame for evermore, through Christ Jesus his only
begotten son, in the holy Ghost. Amen.

A faithful and Christian exhortation to repentance, and to lead a life in
the fear of GOD.
SYrach amongst his sayings, in the 18. Chapter, warns us yt we should in
time refrain our selves from sin, and repent our selves, whilst we can
sin, where he also says, Eccle. 18.
Do not delay your repentance until you be sick, but amend your selves
whilst you may sin, drive not off the time to be good, nor tarry not to
better thy life, til the time of thy death. In this matter he minds to set
before our face the fear of God, whereby we should not only abstain or
forbear to sin, but also for the residue of our life, keep our selves from
sin with great diligence: Specially, if we groundly and deeply consider,
the earnestness and righteousness of God, how our Lord God is an earnest
enemy to sin, but specially to such sins, as man esteems to be no sin,
or will not acknowledge for sin, but will hold and take them as virtues and
rightly done, and defend them as things well done, and so wholly go forward,
and continue in an unrepentant and stubborn life, whereby he falls from
thence without all sorrow and repentance, without ceassing grievously to sin
against God his maker, in great contempt, despite, pride, and carelessness,
whereof then God takes a great misliking, and abomination, so that he must
needs meet with such offenses, with all punishment, reuengeance, and
plagues, especially, with dearth, war, pestilence, etc. And God our Lord
bends him self also against all such sins, with all manner of power, with
all his elements, as the air, the fire, the water, and the earth, that we may
behold with our eyes such apparent anger and punishment of God, and must needs
taste of them in all places. For from whence comes such war, and
bloudshead? Who is guilty thereof? what is the very cause? Is not sin, and
our unpenitent, froward, and proud living? when man without all shame, without
all fear of God, greedily, wantonly, ragingly, and stubbornly does sin against
our Lord God and maker? Whereby it comes to pass, that many proud, wanton,
filthy livers be taken by God, and punished very straungly. Here lie in an
hours space many thousands slain, there be many times many hundreds drowned:
there many executed with the sword, fire, water, the wheel, and gallows:
There suffers GOD many times within one half year, many thousands die on the
pestilence, there many to be hungerstarued, here many thousands swallowed up
with earthquakes: there many perish in vprores and rebellions. And to be
short, no man is able to reckon or remember, how many God must take and
punish, and likewise, cause to be made an example in the world, whereby such
foolish, stubborn, and godless ways might be avoided and shunned. But who
does earnestly once think upon these things? who does turn him self, or
study to avoid these fearful plagues of God? who sets before his eyes
such examples of Gods anger, thereby to amend his life? Surely very few come
before such execution and punishment of God, and in time turn them selves
before such fearful judgment of God, avoid sin, and think to begin a
godly and virtuous life. But in these days, the proud, froward, and wicked
world, never thinks of any of these things: And thereby it comes to pass,
that so many lewd, so many false, so many stubborn, so much falsehood, so much
sin and filthiness bears such a great swinge, that at the length almighty
God will be so angry, that within a while, there will be no way to escape, no
forbearing, no forgiveness more take place, but God must in the end, without
more pity or mercy, hurl the pitcher to the ground with great violence, and
without all grace and forbearing, dash them together with thunder and
lightening, with hail, and shewers, and with grievous fear and tempestuous
storms. Therefore on the behalf of weaklings, and of such as be frail in
their living and conversation, I think good to advise and warn them, that
they do not make of their weakness and frailty, a wicked custom, least at
the length, they fall into an unpenitent and blockish life and conversation,
whereby God will be grievously offended. Therefore it behooves them in time,
beforehande, to acknowledge their weak and sinful living, be sorry for them,
and have full purpose to amend their life, after that sighe to obtain a
hearty longing toward a godly life, and at the last to fight against sin,
and to withstand it with all our power, that there do not follow of our
weakness an unpenitent and blind conversation, and least they miserably dye
in that blindness, and after that perish everlastingly, from which our Lord
graciously vouchsafe to keep us, Amen. Again, that such weakelings in their
conversation, receive the time of grace, in season, not loyteringly seeking for
it, contemning it, nor be slothful therein. For, Here is the acceptable time,
now is the day of grace, as holy Saint Paul writes, in the second to the
Corinthians, the sixth Chap. ^ Cor. 6.
Therefore, let us to our profit, and for our blessedness sake, embrace it in
time convenient, and not suffer it to pass away from us, or suffer such an
acceptable time of grace from God, ye very Jubilee year, yea, the golden
year, for ever to flee in the wind, but rather pray for grace, in the right
and in the time meet and convenient. Whereof David says in the 32. Psalm.
^^al. 32.
In which time, al holy, and such as be weak in faith, do seek for our
Lord God, and pray for our Lord God, and call for grace and forgiving of
their sins, and hope upon his mercy, which is promised unto us in Christ
Jesus. Therefore let no man drive off too long, to better his life, but let
every man remember and think upon the wrath of God, and upon his
punishment: in time prevent or come before them, drive not the time off till
your death bed: for you are not sure how it will frame and fall out with you,
whether you shall have then your reason and your wits, or whether you shall
be able to hear, or speak your self, or whether you shall dye soudenly, and
dye in the twinkling of an eye: wherefore, albeit we be all subject to death,
and that therefore we must all dye, yet does our Lord God many times shorten
many a man's life before his time, chiefly because such a man does not remember
his sinful and unpenitent living, that he may let him smart, whereby he may
win unto him a good purpose to amend and better his life. I am afraid, there
be very few that God takes away before their time, because they be virtuous,
whereby he may save and deliver them from great mischaunces, and from the
plagues at hand: and therefore God can take but small pleasure of such people,
as then only call upon God, and sue unto him in the time of their mishappes and
punishments, and by and by, as soon as God our Lord has taken his
correction from them again, they also by and by forget it, and afterward
become worse then ever they were before. Experience daily teaches this:
therefore, when so ever God helps up such a man, he helps a great offender
only up again upon his sound limbs, so that afterward he is worse then he
was before. Therefore is this the cause, that God many times has little
pleasure, lust, or will, to help such people, turn their punishment from
them, or to take it from them. It is better they ly there sick, or else buried
in their grave, then that they should more grievously offend God, or any
longer hurt good me^. Howbeit, if it so come to pass, that God lay hand upon
his own, that is to say, weaklings and straglers, and take them under his
fatherly correction, look well, whether you be one of those or not, and that
ye do not suffer such correction in vain, but rather imagine and learn, what
our Lord GOD means thereby, and what profit and good our Lord God purposes
to set forth by you.

First you shall know, that by this means, God will lead you to true
repentance, after that give you cause that you earnestly seek unto him, and
with your heart call upon him, and from him only look for help and comfort:
which be the very good and precious works of the second commandment, where
you are commanded, that you shall not take the name of the Lord your God in
vain, which is then done, when you inwardly call upon God in your necessity,
have all your refuge for succor to him, and look for all goodness at his
hands. Those be most precious good works, that do passingly please GOD.
After that, as soon as God has helpen you, that you thancke him for his
gracious help, thank and praise his holy name, which is the right offering up
of thanks of the new testament. As holy David witnesses. Psalm. 50. Psalm. 50.
That is then the right true Gods service, to which Gods service our Lord God
sometime without our mind and will, must force or drive us with great crosses
and smarts, or else we would never walk in any such good works. Also we must
lastly, with holy David in the 119. Psalm, ^salme. 119.
acknowledge and say: O Lord it is very profitable for me, that thou have
humbled and brought me low, that I might know thy laws. And hereof it comes
to pass, that our Lord God suffers Satan to trouble and to vex his, that
he does tempt them sometime with some special sin, and plagueth them
therewith, whereby they be moved or driven first to know themselves, their
weak nature and frailty: then to sigh unto God, to call upon him and fly
unto him: they be our spurs and pricks whereby we be driven to God. And
again, that is our comfort, that God is so good, and that he can show himself
so almighty, that he can turn the wickedness of his to the best. For he is
such a God, that he will suffer no evil to be done, whereof he does not work
some good. But our Lord God is so cunning, and many times does show it unto
his, to shame the devil, whereby he does very often break and hinder Satan's
purpose, and utterly destroy it. To this only God and Lord he everlasting
thanks and praise, in Christ our Lord. Amen.

Exhalt mich durch dein wort. Keep me according to thy promise. Psalm. 119.
An instruction to teach children how they ought to go to the Lords Table.
I have herein something varied from mine Author, both because he is not
named in the book: and also for that it did in the words varied something
sound contrary to our English Church. I thought it meet to be added, because
it was bound with the former Dutch books, and necessary to be read to them
that be in extremity, if time will serve for it.

FIrst, you must believe, if you will receive the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ to your commodity. After that must you try or prove your
selves, whether you do worthily eat it, or take commodity by it.

Faith.
First of all you must well embrace the words of our loving Lord God Jesus
Christ, wherein he has appointed unto you his body and blood to be a
testament, whereby you may be assured and certeined of his grace and blessed
inheritance for ever, and with Christ and al good Christians, to enjoy their
fellowship in all things, and that you do belong to the fellowship of Christ.
For Christian faith has in it these 2. parts, First, that by Gods grace we
are made free from all our sins, and miseries. Again, that we be partakers
and fellow woorkers of all the goodness of God in Christ Jesus. These two parts
be promised unto us in the Gospel, and belong to as many as believe the Gospel.

Howbeit, to the intent every man should be the more sure of his faith, and
better certified that it belongs unto him, whatsoever is contained and
promised in the Gospel, Christ our Lord has ordained two Sacraments or outward
signs: So that every man that should receive them in a fast and perfect faith,
thereby should be assured, that the two before remembered parts do belong unto
him, which he has bound and tied to no time, place or person: so yt
wheresoever it be received, it is sure that the faithful receive those parts.

Therefore, believe steadfastly, that through Baptism almighty God works
forgiving of all sins, as we pray in our belief: I believe one Baptism for
the forgiveness of sins. That is to say, I believe that through Gods mercy, by
Jesus Christ, in the holy Ghost only, my sins altogether be forgiven me,
whereby I am assured and made safe in and by that only Baptism. For albeit
that the outward Baptism is but only once done and ministered: yet does Gods
work, that he then does by it abide for ever and ever. This comfort me at
all times.

I believe also, that God by the deserving of the passion and death of Christ,
by the holy Ghost has made me all one with Christ and all good Christians, and
has made me a member of the holy universal congregation or Church: So that I
have fellowship in all things with all Gods holy children, and that whatsoever
touches me, the same also touches them: and what so ever they have, that is
mine also.

And that ye shall not doubt hereof, he has likewise given unto you the
sacrament of his body and of his blood. When you receive them, doubt not, but
truly believe, that God in the power of his word, under such true signs,
works in you the above remembered fellowship, according to the contents of
his word, where he says, Take, eat, this is my body, which shall be given
for you. Again, Take and drink all, for this is the cup of the new
Testament, which shall be shead for you, and for many, for forgiveness of
sins. Take hold of this word, and comfort your selves therewith, for here
does Christ promise you, that you through his passion, or offering of his body,
which was done upon the cross, shall be one body with him, and with all his: so
that he in you, and you in him, and all Saints, shall be in one fellowshippe.
Therefore, says he, his body is offered, or given for you. But that you
should not doubt that it is given unto you, he says thus, This is my body.
When you receive it, then doubt not at all, that God by this sacrament works
assuredly, that you shall be partaker of the abouesaid fellowship, and that you
are put in remembrance, and assured thereof, as often as you receive the
sacrament.

Likewise, when our Lord Jesus says, This is my blood, etc. believe
steadfastly, without all manner of doubting, that Christ's blood is shed for
you, and your sins thereby forgiven. But that you should be thoroughly
persuaded and safe that it is don for you, you have a pledge or a sacrament. As
often as you take it, remember your self, and think on our Lord Jesus Christ,
that even God by this sacrament works those things in you, namely, that
Christ's blood makes you clean from all your sins. O what great comfort is
in this sacrament, therefore ought we very earnestly to receive it.

Further, dear child, when you will receive this sacrament, think well upon
the abouesaid words of Christ, and steadfastly believe that God works in you
that which the words do promise, and say, Therefore do I come unto the
sacrament, because I believe, that his body was given for me, and because his
blood was shed for me, whereby I am losed from all my sins, and am one body
with him, in a full and perfect fellowship of all his goods, as a brother.

And because it is very hard to believe such high things, specially that it
shall avail and profit me, being a poor sinner and wretched caytife,
therefore do I take with Christ's word the outward pledge, for the assuring and
strengthening of my belief, that I may be sure, that it is done in deed for
me.

Proving.
But how a man shall prepare or make him self ready to this Sacrament, Saint
Paul does teach us in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 11. ^. Cor.
11.
Chapter, where he says, Let a man try him self, and then eat of this bread,
and drink of this cup, etc. that is, You shall not account nor reckon your
self to be holy, not condemn other men, not despise other men, not be
quarelling, but diligently look about, how needy and miserable you your
self be, how deep you stick in sin, how much faith and other ghostly
gifts you lack, how much you are bound and indebted unto God, for many
things, whereof you are not able to pay the least.

Think upon, and remember these and such like points, how you may have
remedy, and be helped. And seeing that Christ in this sacrament, has promised
you all these things, it behooves you with earnest desire to seek there. Here
is the best proof and preparation unto this sacrament, that a man with all
earnestnes behold his own misery, grief, sin, temptation, trouble, and
beggerie, etc. whereby he might lay down his Peacockes tail, and humble him
self, and be as hungry and greedy after the help and grace of God, as a man
is desirous to eat after sower lettice. This is the right hunger to this
meat. Oh that we knew in what danger we stand, what lack we have, how
deep we stick, then would we be desirous to this sacrament, and make as much
haste thereunto, as the thirsty Heart makes to the waters.

For what cause a man ought to go to the Sacrament.
NOt for custom sake, because at Easter every man goes unto it, not at ye
commandment of the Pope, or any other man: Not for our own worthiness, or
because we have prepared our selves: Not because we shall make a good work of
it, or make Gods service thereof: but only because that thereby, in the power
of Gods word, and pledge of Christ, I may receive ye inheritance which my Lord
Christ Jesus by his death has purchased for me, and bequethed me in his
testament, specially that I should be free from all my sins, that I might be
a brother and inheritour with Christ, and with Christ and all Christians be a
church and communaltie: wherein, I shall have fellowship with all Saints: so
that, whatsoever Christ with all Christians have, is mine. And again, to be
short, that Christ is mine, and I am his, and that I shall not depart from him,
but still abide where he is, and that I have him with me, and by me, whether
that I be in wealth or in woe: whether I be in prosperity or in adversity.
And besides this, he never forsakes me, whether I be in need, or in any other
temptation, and that I shall beside, enjoy what other fruit soever belongs to
this Sacrament.

When or how often a man ought to go to the Sacrament.
AS often as you be troubled and tempted through your sins in your conscience,
cumbred thorough the fear of death, or of hell, troubled by weakness, either
of body or of soul, or that you be faint hearted in faith, or that you be
burdened with any weakness or feeblenes whatsoever it be, wherewith the devil,
the world, or the flesh will hinder you in your inheritance or blessedness,
seek here comfort in the word and sign given in this sacrament by Christ,
which he has at his last supper left unto you, where upon he died, and have
no doubt at all, but that God in temptation works whatsoever the word and
token, or sign do promise or bring. Herein let no man's fantasy or imagination
make you forsake the right way.

What believe you of this sacrament?
J Believe, that there is, according to ye word of Christ, given unto me the
body and blood of Christ, (though in such sort as reason can not perceive:)
So that God almighty works in me, and toward me, in the receiving thereof,
all that which my Lord Jesus has there promised, as specially that his body
makes me clean, and makes my body to be in fellowshippe with Christ, and
with all Christians, and that his blood does wash away all my sins.
Therefore I doubt nothing at all, but that I do receive there the body and
blood of Christ, albeit that by reason I can not perceive how, or by what
manner, and way, neither is it necessary for me to know. It was sufficient to
Christ's Apostles, that they knew that Christ was risen from death, albeit
they could not tell nor perceive how he came unto them, the doors being shut
in.

What is Christ's Supper, or Gods board.
IT is nothing else, but the Testament of Jesus Christ our Lord, which he
made and ordained before his passion and death, for all them that believe upon
him, and for them that in their baptism through the deserving of his death and
resurrection, be made free from the power and kingdom of the devil, and
chosen to be Gods children, or inheritours of the kingdom of heaven. To them
has he promised, and gives in this sacrament truly, his body and his blood
for their comfort, whereby they be fully assured, and made certain by faith in
their consciences, that he will give unto them all the goodness of God, and
make them coheires with him, and with the whole Christian congregation, in a
perfect fellowship of all Saints. For in as much as Christ has promised and
given unto them his body and his blood, why can he not give unto them al other
good things that he has, either in heaven or in earth? Hereupon shall his body
and his blood certainly be received, to assure us, that our loving Lord Christ
will not betray us, but make us with him to be Lords and inheritours of all the
goodness of God.

Whosoever will receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, ought to
know how to answer to the five questions following.
The first Question.

1 WHerefore receive you this Sacrament?

Answer.

Therefore, because I may be a coheire with Christ, and have fellowship with
him, with all holy Saints, and with all good Christians, with them to suffer
and to dye.

Question.

2 What do you believe, or what do you confess is in this sacrament?

Answer.

When I receive the Sacrament, I believe, that under bread and wine, I receive
the body and blood of Christ: but it is not sufficient that I know, but also I
must believe, that my lord Christ has given me them for a perfect sign and
token, seal and testament.

Question.

3 What be the words of this Testament, which our Lord Jesus did use?

Answer.

Thus said the Lord to his Apostles, when he gave unto them this bread, Take
ye, and eat ye, This is my body, which shall be given for you. And when he
gave them the cup, he said, Drink you all of this, This is my blood of the
new Testament, which shall be shead for you, and for many, for the
forgiveness of sins. Do this in the remembrance of me.

Question.

4 Wherefore do you take that token or sign, seeing that faith is sufficient?

Answer.

I receive the signs and tokens therefore, because I may strengthen my faith,
not because I doubt in my belief: but because God has given me the sign,
with the word, of his tender grace and mercy. Therefore I will not despise to
use and acquaint my self with them.

Question.

5 How will you use the Sacrament?

Answer.

I will eat and drink, and believe this word, which he spoke unto his
Apostles, when he gave them this sacrament. We ought to take these comfortable
promises, with a faithful heart.

A brief declaration of the Lords Prayer, called, Our Father.
First we must consider, wherefore we pray, what is meant by wherefore, the
time, and occasion does always bring them. But because we should not be
careful, nor trouble our selves, wherefore we should pray, seeing we be now in
such extremities, that many troubles daily fall amongst us, and that from day
to day, the longer the worse, although we should very much pray. For, The devil
is a liar, and a murderer. And neither is the Pope nor the Turk, nor many
other tyrants, which be against Gods word idle. Besides this, we have
experience that every adversary is sufficient of it self, though this
general trouble were not, therefore we have every where occasion sufficient,
which may drive us to prayer.

Whosoever therefore cannot remember all our necessities, let him take in hand
and have before his eyes, the holy prayer of our Lord, called Our Father, in it
be seven petitions. In which be contained all troubles, and things necessary.

1. In the first prayer, Hallowed be thy name, we pray for the holy Gospel, for
all true preachers, against all heresy, and misbeleeuers, against ye Jews,
heathen, Turk and Pope. For all these blaspheme and slander Gods name, and
unhallow him: that God will cut them short, send good preachers, and keep his
word clean and pure against all heresy, and make us apt hearers. This is to
intend or before to mean somewhat.

2. In the second, Thy kingdom come, we pray, that the kingdom of the devil,
and of death may be destroyed. That is a great and a large petition, for in it
is contained the whole kingdom of the devil, that it would please God to make
an end of it, and set up in us and al men his own kingdom, through his word,
and the holy Ghost.

3. In the third petition, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, we
desire, that all their wills be disappointed which strive against Gods
gracious will. That is a great and insufferable prayer against the devil and all
wicked people, and meruellously puts back many perils and misfortunes,
which the devil and wicked people imagine and set abroche, if they were not
thorough this petition disappointed.

4. In the fourth petition, Give us this day our daily bread, we do pray for
the Queens majesty, for our magistrates, for our elders, for our wives and
children, for our meat and drink, for the fruit in the field, for peace, and
for such things as we lack toward the mainteyning of this present life, every
one in their vocation, that God will bless them therein, give them good
fortune, and keep them from all misfortune mercifully.

5. In the fifte petition, Forgive us our sins, as we forgive them that
trespass against us, we desire that God will be gracious to us, to turn from
us his anger, which we have deserved, and not punish us for our wickedness: and
that he will deal graciously with us, to the intent we, from day to day, may
wax better, and that we may live after his holy will, and live friendly one
with another, and that every of us may forgive an other their offenses.

6. In the sixte petition, Lead us not into temptation, we pray that GOD will
come and help all troubled hearts, not suffer them to stick in temptation,
but help them out thereof graciously through his word and holy spirit: and that
he will vouchsafe to destroy the devils purpose and might.

7. In the seventh petition, But deliver us from the evil, we pray for a
good hour, that our Lord God will take us out of this misery, with grace, and
make us blessed for ever.

Thus, in the Lords prayer, are plentifully al things contained, whatsoever by
any means shall vex or trouble us, or else whatsoever is meetest and most
necessary for us. Therefore the first i^ that we purpose or intend something,
wherefore we will pray, that will Almighty God surely give. For the
commandment is plainly there, that We must pray, and the promise is also
there, that We shall be certeinely and surely heard. And our merciful Lord
Christ himself has set forth unto us, both the words and the manner how we
shall pray: in the which all things necessary for us be contained.

FINIS.

