A PATTERN OF CHRISTIAN LOYALTY: Whereby any prudent man may clearly
perceive, in what manner the New Oath of Allegiance, and every Clause thereof,
may in a true, and Catholic sense, without danger of Perjury, be taken by
Roman CATHOLICS.

AND All the chief Objections, which are usually made against the said Oath,
either in particular, or in general, may according to the grounds of Catholic
Religion be easily answered.

Collected out of Authors, who have handled the whole matter more largely.

By WILLIAM HOWARD an English Catholic.

Fear our Lord, my son, and the King.

Proverbs 24. LONDON, Printed by R. BADGER, 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS, Lord HOWARD, Earl of Arundell and Surrey,
Primier Earl, and Earl Marshall of England, Baron HOWARD, Mowbray, Segrave,
Brus of Gower, Fitz-Alan, Clun, Oswaldestre, Maltravers, and Graystocke, Knight
of the most Noble Order of the GARTER, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
My very good LORD;
THe Titles on which this Dedication is grounded have prooved stronger then my
bashfulnesse, or fear; for your singular candor of mind, makes me hope an
acceptance of my good intentions, though joined with weak abillities, and
(besides the honor of my relation to your Lordship in blood) the experience I
have had of your Noble and gracious favor to my self in particular, gives me
assurance, that you will not be displeased, if for protection in an
undertaking exposed to much opposition, I address my self to your Lordship.
For so earnest have they been in this controversy, as now at last (even since
this little Treatise was under press) they have objected to me; that we are
bound to believe as matter of faith, the generalities delivered by the Popes
Holiness, though the wisdom (say they) of the Sea Apostolic for bearing to
irritate Christian Princes, descendes not to particulars. Thus endeavor they
to bear us in hand, that we are bound to profess what they conceal from us,
and that Catholic faith must be all one with mystery of State, and
consequently every good Christian being bound to profess his faith, with the
loss of his life and living, we must in this question be tied to no less,
for a secret in policy, thought fitting to be kept from us out of reason of
State.

The very laying down of this their last refuge, sufficiently discovers the
weakness thereof: so it only rests that I crave your Lordships pardon for
presenting it out of due place to your Lordships View; to whom as Chief, both
by nature and merit, I am obliged to profess my self,

A faithful and humble servant, WILLIAM HOWARD.

A PREMONITION to the Reader.
THere is one thing (Courteous Reader) which I wish thee first of all to
observe, to wit, what great disagreement there is among the learneder sort of
our English Catholics, by whom the less learned are for the most part guided,
in their opinions concerning the new Oath of Allegiance. For some condemn it
for altogether unlawful, nor to be taken with a safe conscience by any good
Catholic. Others approve it for lawful, and to contain nothing besides a
profession of true temporal Allegiance, and therefore not to be refused by
any good Subject. A third sort there is, who carry themselves negatively, and
in express words will neither approve it, nor condemn it, but leave every man
to his own conscience, which in very deed is to any judicious man, all
circumstances considered, a tacit approving thereof.

Those who condemn it, are of two sorts, the one extremely violent, and are
not afraid to tax those Catholics who approve it, of flat heresy, and to
account them no true Catholics, but rather heretics, falsely pretending, That
the Popes power to depose Princes, is by all learned and good Catholics a
confessed and undoubted point of Catholic faith; That his power to
Excommunicate, and to absolve from Oaths in general is denied in the Oath: And
that the King, See these objections answered, nu 7.11.17.
and Parliament do take upon them in this Oath the Churches authority to
define matters of Faith.

Others there be who are not so violent, but much misliking the former
objections, they chiefly except against the Second, and Fourth Clause, how any
man can truly swear, That the Pope has not any power to depose the King, etc.
seeing that he has at the least a probable power to depose him: and
consequently how any man can truly abjure, as damnable and heretical this
doctrine, and position, That Princes which be deprived by the Pope, See these,
and others answered, nu. 9.13.14.
may be deposed by their Subjects, or any other, seeing that it is at the least
a probable doctrine, it being approved by the Pope himself, and by many other
most learned Catholic Divines. And against the Oath in general they urge,
That our supreme spiritual Pastor has forbidden it, See these answered, nu.
26.32.39.
That to take it, is scandalous, and that to refuse it, is the safer way.

Now when I perceived the best learned Priests of our Nation to disagree so
much in their opinions concerning this great, and dangerous controversy of the
Oath betwixt the Popes Holiness, and the Kings Majesty, the one by his
constitutive precept first commanding it under the penalty of a Praemunire,
supposing it to contain nothing but true temporal Allegiance, the other by
his declarative Breves forbidding it, as containing many things plainly
repugnant to faith and salvation, and that both their commandments could not
be obeyed, being opposits one to the other: And considering with my self
first, that I must needs incur either spiritual disobedience, by not obeying
the Pope, if his commandment were just, or, if otherwise, temporal
disloyalty by disobeying the King; and that, according to the common doctrine
of Divines See beneath, number. 26.
, the constitutive precept of a lawful Superior must be obeyed, unless it be
clearly unjust, according to that which shall be said beneath number 3c.
: Secondly, that both the Pope, and the King may sometimes err in their
Judgments, and command that which is not just, for that their judgments are
not always grounded upon truth Can. A nobis de sent. Excom. cap. 28.
, which never deceives, nor is deceived, but sometimes they follow opinion,
which may oftentimes deceive, and be deceived: Thirdly, that I could not
therefore be secure in conscience, by obeying either the Popes commandment
against the Kings, or contrariwise, with blind obedience, lest blinded with
wilful ignorance I should fall into the ditch Matthew. 15.
either of spiritual, or of temporal disobedience, by not examining with
judgment of discretion, which of their commandments is just, and therefore to
be obeyed, and that my own conscience must be to me the inward judge of all
my actions, and omissions.

And lastly, that I could not secure my conscience, by giving credit only to
those, who write, and plead in favor of the Pope against the King, without
reading, and examining what they who write, and plead for the King, do answer
in his defense, or contrariwise, considering that both of them may relate each
others reasons, and answers falsely, lamely, or corruptly, and that in a
controversy, betwixt two parties he cannot be accounted an upright judge, who
will hear, read, and examine the reasons, answers, and allegations of the one
side, or of the other, only in that manner, as it shall please the adverse part
to propound them for his own advantage, and that therefore to forbid any man,
who is to be a judge in a controversy betwixt two parties (as in the Court of
Penance, every Ghostly Father is to be a judge of whatsoever his Penitent shall
confess unto him, and in the inward Court of Conscience every private man is
to be his own judge) to read, hear, and understand the reasons, and answers
of either side, but only in that manner as his Adversary shall propound them,
is in very deed no other, than to forbid him to be an upright Judge. All which
considered, to inform my conscience uprightly in this dangerous controversy
of the Oath, not betwixt two inferior parties, or betwixt the Defendant, or
party sued, and the judge, but between two supreme, and independent judges in
their degree, the one in spiritualls, the other in temporalls, contending
whether this new Oath, which the one commands, and the other forbids, be a
temporal, or a spiritual thing, contain a profession of true temporal
Allegiance, or a denial of true spiritual obedience, I thought it not secure
for me, to rely upon the bare relation, and information either of the one side
only, or of the other.

Whereupon to find out the truth herein according to the capacity of my
understanding, and to frame my conscience accordingly, I have diligently read,
and examined what books soever have been published, as well against the Oath
in favor of the Pope, as for it in the Kings defense. And I confess
ingenuously, that those which have been written in favor of the Oath, and of
Sovereign Princes not to be deposed much less to be murdered, or killed by
the Popes authority (which is the only principal thing denied therein) have
given me full satisfaction in this point, out of which I have at sundry vacant
times, to help the weakness of my memory, collected the Explications, and
Observations following, which because they do clearly convince my
understanding, and may perchance give the like satisfaction to others, and also
stir up some, who are more learned than I am, to defend their Princes right,
being assaulted by such powerful Adversaries, I thought it necessary for
diverse reasons to propound them to the public view of the world, to have them
examined by learned Divines, as well in regard of mine own good, as of the
good of others: especially seeing that but few of our English Priests among so
many, who in their conscience approve the Oath, dare for some worldly respects
make known their minds herein but only to some of their trusty friends,
because, as some of them who favor the Oath, have said to me in plain terms,
the misery of these times is such, that by taking, or publicly approving the
Oath, and maintaining the Kings sovereign right in temporalls against such
violent opposers thereof, they shall gain little or nothing, in comparison of
that, which they shall lose thereby. So that many Lay Catholics are in daily
hazard to lose their whole estates (which is a pitiful thing) for want of
being instructed by these men for worldly ends, in this controversy of the
Oath, which they in their own conscience think to be very lawful.

One reason therefore, for which I thought it necessary to publish these brief
Explications of the Oath, is the great grief I have to see some few of our
English Priests both Secular, and Religious, now lately to revive again this
scandalous controversy (which for diverse years has here through silence,
and connivence been well appeased, and to oppose themselves most vehemently
against the Oath, though not by public writings to satisfy our
understandings, yet by seeking to draw us to embrace their opinions against it
by violence, and terrors, in laboring to make a Schism among us, and to
exclude us from the holy Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical communion, only for
our opinions (as they themselves call it) of the Oath, against the known
practice of many learned, and virtuous Priests, and among the rest their last
Archpriest, Mr. Doctor Harrison, as diverse letters of his written to one of
his Assistants (which are yet extant) can give sufficient testimony. But if
these men had well observed, in what manner Saint Austin writes against the
Donatists, S. Aug. Epht. 48 ad Vincent. and de Bapt. contra Donatist.
for their breach of Ecclesiastical unity, and in commendation and excuse of
Saint Cyprian, (who although he opposed himself vehemently against Pope
Stephen in the question of Baptism administered by Heretics, yet they (till
kept Ecclesiastical communion with each other) doubtless they would have
been fearful to have proceeded against their Catholic brethren with so
little charity, but would have remembered that saying of Saint Austin, S. Aug.
l^b 3. de Bapt contra Donat. 16.
that those men have not charity, or the love of God, who love not the unity of
the Church, but fear not to make a breach thereof only for their opinions,
and which for undoubted Doctrines of faith, they will needs obtrude not only
upon the unlearned, but also upon those who are as learned as themselves.

An other reason is, the great pity I have to see some Catholics of good
account, now lately, by the bad counsel of their Instructours under a false
pretense of Catholic faith cast themselves headlong into manifest danger, not
only of a Praemunire, to the beggering of themselves, their wives, and
children, but also of their souls (if ignorance do not excuse them) by
disobeying the just commandment of their Sovereign Prince in point of their
loyalty, and due obedience, and giving thereby no small occasion to His
Majesty to be scandalized at our Religion, and to account it a nourisher of
disloyalty, and all us Roman Catholics to be disloyal Subjects, if the
contrary were not by some of us made manifest unto him. And is it not a
lamentable case, and able to move a stony heart to tears, that we Lay
Catholics, whom this Oath does chiefly concern (for Priests can loose little,
or nothing by refusing it, being subject to greater penalties, then is a
Praemunire, although by persuading others to refuse it, because the Popes power
to practice the deposition of Princes is denied therein, they may perchance
incur greater danger, as liable to suspicion of disposing the Subjects minds
to Rebellion when time shall serve, as any man of judgment may easily
perceive) that we, I say, should by any of our English priests (who should
rather be a comfort unto us, then add affliction to affliction, knowing the
severity of the laws, to which we are otherwise subject in regard of our
Religion, if His Majesty out of his great clemency were not more merciful
unto us) be compelled under pain to be deprived of Sacraments, and
Ecclesiastical communion, to loose all that we have in this world, liberty,
lands, and goods (and which being once lost by their bad counsel, they can
never be able to restore to us back again) only for that we cannot be
persuaded by them to approve as an undoubted doctrine of faith, their opinion
for the Popes power to depose Princes (the only chief thing denied in the
Oath) which in France is not permitted to be publicly taught by any of their
Priests for so much as probable. See the A^^^, of the parliament of parn 2 Ian.
1615. printed at Paris by the Kings Printers and in the French Mercury tom. 3
the year 16.5. page 327.


A Third reason is, for that His Majesty perceiving this controversy to be
kept still on foot more by faction, then by reason, and that the Pope will not
be drawn to name any one particular thing, which in the Oath is clearly
unlawful, is resolved (as I hear) to maintain his supreme temporal
authority against all opposers thereof, and that therefore his Subjects should
do well, dutifully to shun this damnable and seditious doctrine of deposing
Princes by the Pope^ pretended power which is the maine scope, and substance of
this new Oath (as both the words thereof do plainly show, and also his Father
of renowned memory, who was the maker of the law, has oftentimes declared See
beneath nu. 3.
by public writings) which opinion is indeed to be abhorred, detested, and
abjured by all loyal Subjects in this Kingdom, no less then in France, where
by many Decrees of Parlaments it is accounted false, damnable, seditious, and
books written in defense thereof forbidden under pain of Treason, See beneath
number. 7. and 47
and also by a special Censure of the Sorbon Doctors (to which sixteen
French Jesuits promised to subscribe) is expressly condemned, as new, false,
erroneous, contrary to the word of God etc.

The last reason is, that great desire I have not to err through ignorance
(for wilfully by Gods grace I will never err) in the least point which may
concern the Catholic faith, or my duty to God, and Caesar. And therefore I
would have no man to conceive, that I am so audaciously arrogant, as to take
upon me here to teach learned Priests, who ought to instruct others, their
duty, knowing the great weakness of my own learning in comparison of theirs,
but rather to be taught, and instructed by them, if perchance they shall find
me to be in an error, which as soon as any of them will vouchsafe to make
manifest unto me, I promise faithfully to retract the same forthwith. For my
only desire is to inform my conscience rightly, and to give both to the Popes
Holiness, and to the Kings Majesty, that spiritual, and temporal obedience
respectively, which according to the law of God, and the grounds of Catholic
Religion is due to either of them. But if they will be silent, and not confute
with solid reasons the ensuing Explications and Observations, and yet will
still go on with their accustomed clamours against the Oath, and the takers,
or approvers thereof, all prudent men may well presume, that they are not able
to convince me of any error and by their silence I shall be the more confirmed
in my opinion.

And if their Answer shall be no other, then by laboring (as some of them
have lately done) to procure new Breves, prohibitions, or Censures only in
general terms (as the former were) after so many humble Supplications, See
Widdringtons Theological D^sputation in the Epistle, and the Conclusion, his
Purgation, and Sapplication to Pope Paul the Fifth. And Thomas Prestone, and
Thomas Greenes Supplication to Pope Gregory the xv.
that His Holiness would be pleased to name some one particular thing of so
many as the former Breves have affirmed, to be in the Oath, and consequently
in those Books which defend it, plainly repugnant to faith, and salvation,
they may well suppose, that those Catholics, who out of a pure heart, good
conscience, and unfaigned faith, or obedience both to their spiritual Pastor,
and also to their temporal Prince, desire to be assured of the truth in
particular (for generals being subject to deceit according to that common
saying, Dolosus versatur in generalibus, can give them small satisfaction) will
not be daunted with such general prohibitions, or Censures in a matter of so
great prejudice, unless they shall clearly perceive them to be agreeable to
truth, and justice, they being not ignorant, that according to the common
Doctrine of Divines, Navar (...) Enchir. c. 27. nu. 3. Cova^^^ tom 2. Relect. 1
de fractis. paragr. 7. Suar. ^isp. 4. de Cons^r see. 7. and other who ^^at
(...) s^^^s.
prohibitions, and Censures, which are unjust, and invalid for want of a just
cause, and where there is no Mortal sin, do not bindin conscience, and will
more hurt the souls of the procurers then of those, against whom they are
unjustly procured.

Neither can these men be ignorant, what small account some Catholic Princes,
and their Subjects both in former ages, See the Protestants Apology trac a.
see 4.
and also in these our times, have made of some Popes Breves, Bulls, and
Censures, for that they have supposed them to be unjust. And besides the late
example of some the greatest of our Secular Priests, in not admitting the
Breves of this Popes Holiness being prejudicial to their pretended ends, may
be a fit President to us Lay Catholics, not to admit easily, and without due
examination such prohibitions, Breves, or Censures, which do tend to the great
prejudice of the Kings Majesty's temporal Soveraigntie, and to the temporal
ruin of all as his Catholic Subjects.

Wherefore it were far more convenient in my opinion, for the public peace
and unity of the Church, for the honor of the Sea Apostolic, for the
general, and particular safety of themselves, and of many others in their
souls, bodies, and goods, and for the avoiding of future scandals, and
contentions; which may arise betwixt the Kingdom, and the Priesthood from new
prohibitions, that these men would be a means to procure of His Holiness,
that either the former Breves, and prohibitions may be buried with honor in
silence, and oblivion, and every man left to his own conscience, or that some
particular thing in the Oath, which is plainly repugnant to faith and
salvation, be more expressly declared, that men's minds may not be troubled, nor
the unity of the Church distracted, only for opinions in things which may
concern the temporal rights of Princes, but that, according to the prayer of
the holy Church, The Thursday in Easter week.
there may be one faith of minds, and piety of actions, notwithstanding
diversity of opinions, until the Church, which is the pillar, and ground of
truth, 1 Timothy 5. S. Aug. l. 1de Bapt. contra Donatist. c. 18.
and is no party in this strife, shall decide the controversy, or, as S.
Austin speaks in the excuse of S. Cyprian, until by the sentence of a
plenarie Council the consent of the whole Church shall confirm what is to be
followed in this matter. For so long as His Holiness will permit some learned
men to write books in his behalf against our King in things belonging to his
supreme temporal rights (as does this new Oath of Allegiance) no prohibitions,
or Censures can justly hinder, but that his Catholic Subjects, both Priests
and Lay men, may also publish in print what may be answered in the Kings
defense. To conclude, I make no doubt, but that Truth will cause hatred, as
flattery does friends, but withal I am assured, that Truth is great, 3. Esdr.
4.
and will prevail at last, and that Blessed are they who in the mean time
till it prevail, do s^ffer persecution, at whose hands soever they suffer it,
for truth, and justice sake, Matthew. 5.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

ERRATA.
Page 4. l. penult. r. Also. page 15. l. 24. r. Montpillier. page 37 l ^^ r.
Soocher. page 58. l. nit. in Margent r. number. 28.

A BRIEF OF SIX PRINCIPAL HEADS HANDLED IN THIS TREATISE.
FIRST, the form of the new Oath is propounded, and every Clause thereof
briefly explained: And that the maine point denied therein, is only all true,
lawful, and valid power of the Pope to depose Princes, or to practice their
deposition: and that the Doctrine which approves this practice, being clearly
false, as approving open injustice, may be abjured for false, and consequently
as impious, damnable, indirectly, or by a necessary consequence repugnant to
the Word of God, and in this sense heretical, as both by Protestants, and by
the most part of Catholic Divines, the word [Hereticall] is usually, and
properly taken.

Secondly, that in penal Laws (as is this for taking the Oath) all doubtful
words are to be understood in the more favorable sense, and which may make the
Law to be just and reasonable, and that therefore what doubtful words, or
sentences soever are contained in the Oath, they must be taken in the more
favorable sense, and which may make the Oath to contain no falsehood, or
injustice.

Thirdly, that Perjury is defined by Divines, to be a Lie confirmed by Oath,
and that therefore whatsoever may excuse from Lying, may also excuse from
Perjury. And that albeit there be danger of Perjury to swear doubtful words
in that sense, which is doubtful, yet to swear doubtful words in a true, and
determinate sense, and which is not doubtful, but clear, and morally
certain, there is no danger of Perjury.

Fourthly, the difference betwixt Declarative, and Constitutive precepts is
declared, and that because the Popes Breves forbidding the Oath are
declarative, and grounded upon false reasons, and suppositions, therefore
English Catholics are not bound to observe them.

Fifthly, what Scandal is, and how many sorts of Scandal there be, is
declared, and that the refusing, not the taking, of the Oath is truly
scandalous.

Lastly, which is the safer way is declared, and that it is safer to take the
Oath, than to refuse it; yea, and that to refuse it, is not safe at all: and
the example of choosing the more safe, and the more probable Physic is
confuted, and showed, that it is no fit example to dissuade any man from taking
the Oath, being commanded by the constitutive precept of our Sovereign Prince.

THE FORM OF THE new Oath of Allegiance divided into eight parts or Clauses,
as they are explained in this TREATISE.
1 I. A. B. Doc truly, and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and
declare in my conscience before God, and the World; That our Sovereign Lord
King CHARLES is lawful, and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other
His Majesty's Dominions and Countries.

2 And that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church,
or see of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any power, or
authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of His Majesty's Kingdoms, or
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade, or annoy Him, or His
Countries, or to discharge any of His Subjects of their Alleagiance, or
Obedience to His Majesty, or to give license, or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence, or hurt to His Majesty's Royal
Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects within His
Majesty's Dominions.

3 And I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration, or
sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope, or His Successors, or by any Authority derived, or to be
derived from Him, or His See against the said King, His Heirs, or Successors,
or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience; I will bear
faith, and true Alleagiance to His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, and
Him, and Them will defend to the uttermost of my power against all
Conspiracies, and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His, or
their Persons, their Crown or Dignity, by reason, or color of any such
Sentence, or Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to
disclose, and make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons, and Traiterous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be
against Him, or any of them.

4 And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine, and position, That
Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

5 And I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof.

6 Which I acknowledge by good, and full authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me, and do renounce all Pardons, and dispensations to the contrary.

7 And all these things I do plainly, and sincerely acknowledge, and swear,
according to the express words by me spoken, and according to the plain, and
common sense, and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or
mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

8 And I do make this Recognition and Acknowledgement, heartily, willingly,
and truly upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God.

The first Clause explained.
1 THe First Clause, I A B, etc. all English Catholics (although otherwise
vehement impugners of the Oath, as Doctor Kellison In his Treatise of the
Prelate, and the Prince, etc. cap. 15. nu. 12.
, and Father Parsons) do willingly admit; for that every English Catholic
(says Father Parsons In his Book entitled, The Judgment of a Catholic
English man, etc. part. 1. nu. 22. page 13.16.
) will swear and acknowledge most willingly all those parts, and Clauses of
the Oath, which do any way appertain to the Civil and Temporal obedience
due to His Majesty, whom he acknowledges for his true and lawful King, and
Sovereign over all His Dominions. Neither can there be any difficulty
therein, except only to know, what is that, which in this Clause, and the
next, by virtue of the express words, and the plain, and common sense of them
(to which the Seventh Clause expressly binds the Swearer) I am bound to swear
immediately; to wit, whether by force of the words I must swear immediately,
That our Sovereign Lord, etc. And that the Pope, etc. or only my sincere
acknowledgement thereof. For although in regard of the matter, it is lawful to
swear them both, that is, both the things themselves, and also my sincere
acknowledgement of them, and therefore we need not to contend about the words:
Yet it is very probable, if not certain, that by force of the words I am bound
to swear immediately only my sincere acknowledgement. Because all the swearing
both in this Clause, and the next, consists only in those words [Before God]
which being taken away, there would be no swearing, or Oath at all, in
affirming, or denying any thing contained in these two Clauses. And the plain
meaning of these words [Before God, and the World] is this, that I A B do call
God, and the World to witness, that I do truly, that is, unfaignedly, and
sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in my conscience, That
our Sovereign Lord, etc. And that the Pope, etc. although, as I said, in
regard of the matter, it is lawful to swear them both.

The second Clause explained.
2 IN the Second Clause, And that the Pope, etc. (which is the root and ground
of all the Branches following) there is no such difficulty as some pretend, if
we duly consider the express words thereof, and the occasion, end, and
reason, for which this new Oath was devised. For, as Suarez does well observe,
Suarez lib 6. de Leg. cap. 1.
Upon the will, and intention of the Lawmakers (which is the soul of the Law)
the substance, and force of the Law does chiefly depend. Whereupon, if by any
means the will of the Lawmakers may be known, according to it especially we
must interpret the words of the Law, because that is the true interpretation of
the Law, by which we follow the will, and meaning of the Lawmakers: not his
will merely internal, but as it is expressed by words, because a Law is not
enacted by the Princes will, unless by the words of the Law it be sufficiently
expressed, seeing that the will alone is not of it self sufficient to bind,
neither also is it sufficient, that it be privately known by some other way,
but it is necessary, that it be sufficiently contained in the Law it self.
And especially we must consider the beginning, Preface, or Preamble of the Law,
and join with it the rest which follow: for to the beginning if there be no
other let, all that follows is to be applied, because in the beginning, or
Preamble of the Constitution is usually contained the final end, cause, and
reason, which chiefly moves the Lawmakers, and which morray is a sure means
to find out his will, and meaning, and by which the ambiguitie of any
doubtful word, or sentence is chiefly to be determined.

3 Now upon the occasion, and discovery of those barbarous Powder-Traytours,
who were all of them Roman Catholics, and, as it appears by their
confessions, grounded their divellish Conspiracy chiefly upon the Popes power
to deprive Princes of their Kingdoms, and Lives for the good of Religion: The
Kings Majesty knowing right well, that many other Roman Catholics did from
their hearts detest, and abhor such Traiterous and Diabolical practices, and
the wicked grounds thereof, thought it needful for the better discovering and
repressing of such bloody Assasinates, and their disciples, to devise, and
establish in the next Parliament following such an Oath, wherein true temporal
Allegiance due to all temporal Princes what Religion soever they profess,
should be acknowledged, and no true spiritual obedience due to the Popes
Holiness should be denied, and yet the wicked principles of that most damnable
Conspiracy should be detected, and abjured. Whereupon the Parliament, in the
very beginning, or Preamble of the Oath Anno 3. Iacobi cap. 4. sect. And for
the better trial, etc.
, sets down the end, and reason thereof, to wit, for the better trial how
His Majesty's subjects stand affected in point of their loyalty, and due
obedience, which (as afterward in the next Anno 7. Iacobi cap. 6.
Session they declare) every true and well affected Subject not only by the
bond of Alleagiance, but also by the commandment of Almighty GOD ought to
bear to His Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors. And moreover, the Kings
Majesty Himself has often by public writings In his premonition page 9. and
i^ h^s Apology for the O^th, page ^. and 9.
in express words declared, that in this Oath He intended to demand of His
Subjects nothing else, than a profession of that temporal Alleagiance, and
Civil obdience, which all subjects by the Law of GOD and Nature, do owe to
their lawful Prince, with a promise to resist, and disclose all contrary
uncivil violence, and to make a true distinction, not betwixt Catholics and
Protestants, but betwixt Catholics of quiet disposition, and in all other
things good Subjects, and such other Catholics as in their hearts maintained
the like violent bloody Maxims, as the Powder-traytours did. Whereupon He
caused the lower House of Parliament, who at the first would have had the Oath
to contain a denial of the Popes power to excommunicate Him, to reform that
Clause: So careful was He, that nothing should be contained in this Oath,
except the profession of natural Alleagiance, and civil, and temporal
Obedience. He said [ in this Oath] for as the Oath of Supremacy, says His
Majesty, was devised for putting a difference between Papists, and them of
our profession; so was this Oath ordained for making a difference between the
civilly obedient Papists, and the perverse disciples of the Powder treason.

4 First, therefore, in this Clause is not denied the power, authority, right,
or title, which temporal Princes, or Commonwealths have, or may pretend to
have in temporals, as to make war, invade, annoy, etc. upon just cause. For
this temporal power either of Princes, or Commonwealths, and consequently of
the Pope, as he is a temporal Prince, is not in this Clause meddled withal,
neither is there any thing concerning it affirmed, or denied therein, as the
express words do plainly show, but only concerning the power, and authority,
which the Pope formally as he is Pope, Bishop of Rome, or supreme spiritual
Pastor, or Prince, either of himself, or by any other means with any other,
has to depose the King, etc.

5 Secondly, neither in this Clause is denied that that power, or authority,
which the Pope, as Pope, has to command temporal things, as invadings,
annoyings, etc. in order to spiritual good, or, which is all one, to concur
therein with others, who have, or may pretend to have such power to invade,
annoy, etc. by way only of moral influence, or motion, as by hiring,
persuading, or commanding; neither can the words of this Clause, being taken
properly, admit this sense. For to have power or authority to do a thing, as
to invade, annoy, etc. is a far different thing, than to have power, or
authority only to command the doing thereof, or to concur by way only of
moral influence, with others who have true, and lawful power to do it. As to
have art, or skill to paint, is a far different thing, than to hire or
command a Painter who has skill, to paint, or to concur with him to the making
of a picture by way only of moral influence, or motion. Neither can a King, who
hireth, or commands a Painter to make such a picture, be truly said to make
or paint that picture, or to concur to the painting thereof, as having
himself art, or skill to paint it. And in like manner it is to be said that a
Pope, who by way only of moral influence, as by persuading, hiring, or
commanding, concurreth to the invading of a King with others, who have
perchance true and lawful power to invade him, be truly said to invade that
King, as having himself true and lawful power to invade Him, of which power
and authority to invade, annoy, etc. and not of moral influence, or of power
only to command Invasions, etc. this Clause expressly speaks. And therefore
albeit we should falsely suppose (which some do greatly, but perniciously,
indiscreetly, and to no purpose urge against this Clause) that the Civil
Commonwealth in some case has power to punish and depose her Sovereign
Prince, and that the Pope may concur with her therein by way of moral
influence, or motion (which nevertheless for practice, which is chiefly to be
regarded, is certainly false, for the same reason, for which as I will show
forthwith, it is certainly false, that the Pope has not any true, and lawful
power to depose, or practice the deposition of Princes, because so long as it
is but probable inspeculation, or, which is all one, so long as it is but an
opinion, or controversy among Philosophers, and Divines, the Prince being in
possession, cannot upon any probable, or controversed power or title, be
deprived thereof without open injustice) yet this being falsely supposed, would
no way impugn this Branch of the Oath, which speaks not of the Popes
concurring with any other to deposing, invading, annoying, etc. by way only of
moral influence, but only of his Power, or authority to depose, invade, annoy
etc. or of his concurring with any other to the doing of those actions, as
having himself true power, and authority to do them.

6 Neither thirdly can any man with any modesty, charity, or reverent respect
to the Kings Majesty conceive, that He would by Act of Parliament have all His
Subjects to swear, or sincerely to acknowledge by Oath that to be true, which
Himself, and all the Christian world know to be clearly false, to wit, that
the Pope, as Pope, has not any power to depose the King, as also other
Princes, so much as in the opinion of the Pope himself, and of many other
Divines, who are of his opinion. For His Majesty knew right well, and which
being a thing so manifest, no man of any judgment can deny, which therefore
Father Lessins, Lessins in his Singleton de Discussione decreti Lateran.
concilii part 2. number. 38.
and Docter Kellison, In his Treatise of the Prelate, and the Prince etc. cap.
11. number. 7. page 241.
do in express words acknowledge, that a power, which is not altogether
certain, but only probable, or in controversy, cannot be a sufficient
ground, whereby immediately any man may be punished, and deprived of any his
right, and Dominion, nor can be practiced without open injustice. And
consequently that a power to depose, which is only probable, is not any true,
real, lawful, sufficient, and valid power to depose, and therefore for
practice neither in law, nor conscience to be accounted any power at all:
seeing that power, and practice are correlatives, which do mutually infer,
and destroy each other, Arist. in Praedicam. cap. 3.
and where there can be no true, real, and lawful effect, or practice, there
is no true, real, and lawful power. For in vain is that power, and therefore
none, seeing that God, and Nature do nothing in vain, Arist. lib. 3. de Coelo
^ea. 32
be reduced to effect, or practice.

7 And that it is a Doctrine truly probable, it being approved by so many
learned Divines, who have seen and examined all the arguments on either side,
nor grounded upon any reason, or principle which is clearly false, that the
Pope has not power to depose Princes, it is manifest.

First by the Acts, and proceedings of the Sorbon Doctors See the French
Mercury tom. 2. ad Ann. 16^2. p. 597. and seq.
against the English controversy of Becanus, who held, that it is certain,
and out of all controversy among Catholics, that the Pope has power to
deprive Princes of their Kingdoms, yea and of their lives, falsely pretending
the High Priest in the old Law to have the same authority, and therefore the
Pope in the new.

Secondly, by the Censure of the said Theological Faculty This Censure is
printed at Paris in Latin, and may be seen in French in the French Merc tom
11. ad Ann. 1626. p. 9^. and see it beneath nu. 44.
against the Doctrine of Santarellus, which teaches, that the Pope has power
to depose Princes for heresy.

Thirdly, by the public Declaration of Sixteen the chiefest Jesuits of
France dated the sixteenth of March 1626; and exhibited to the French King, See
the French Mere. tom. 11 ad An. 1626. page 92.
wherein they renounce, and detest the Doctrine of Santarellus as wicked, in
that which concerns the Persons of Kings, their Authority, and their States
etc. Promising to subscribe to the censure, which shall be made against that
pernicious Doctrine by the Clergy, or the Sorbon.

Fourthly, by the public Declaration of three French Bishops, to wit, of
Auranches, of Charters, and of Soissons, See the Fren. Merc. tom. 11. ad Ann.
1626, page 105.
wherein also they insinuate, that the Bishops of France in their General
Assembly did agree with them in these three propositions: 1. That it is not
lawful to rebel, or take Arms against the King for any cause, or occasion
whatsoever. 2. That all Subjects are bound to obey the Kings, and that no
person can dispense with their Oath of Allegiance. 3. That the King cannot be
deposed by any power whatsoever, nor under any pretext, or occasion whatsoever,

Fifthly, by the first Article, See the Fren. Merc. tom. 3. ad. Ann. 1615. page
235.
or Oath of France (which in substance is all one with our English Oath) agreed
upon in the year 1615 by the Third Estates, or Lower House of Parliament,
wherein of two hundred Persons, or thereabout, there were but six Protestants,
and no one Protestant was present at the making thereof, or privy thereunto,
as President Miron, Speaker for the House, did publicly before them all,
Cardinal Peron being then present, confidently affirm Ibid. p. 312.


Sixthly, by the uniforme consent of all the French Prelates in the general
Assembly of all the Estates held the year 1614. 1615. who (as the Bishop of
Montxillier Ibid p. 253.
and the Lord Cardinal Peron Ibid. p. 270.
sent by the Ecclesiastical Chamber to the Third Estates about their First
Article do affirm) were willing to join with the Third Estates in this
common Article, That it is not lawful for any man to touch the person of their
Kings for any crime, or upon any cause or occasion what soever; which they
offered to sign not only with their hearts, but also with their bloods, and
to cry Anathema, eternal malediction, and damnation against all those, who
shall attempt to kill their Kings for any crime, or upon any cause whatsoever.
And nevertheless (as President Miron very well answered the said Cardinals
Oration ex tempore) the Doctrine of deposing, and of killing Kings, are Cousin
Germans, Ibid. p. 320.
for that they proceed from the same root, and offspring of the Popes power to
dispose of all temporalls, and consequently not only of Kingdoms, but also of
Lives in order to spiritual good; and also (as the Prince of Conday Ibid. p
332.
in his learned, and Religious speech to the King sitting in Council does well
observe) the Doctrine of deposing Princes, as a thread in a needle, leads to
usurpations, Rebellions, and the murdering of Sovereign Princes.

Seventhly, and lastly by the testimony of Cardinal Peron, Card. Peron in his
great Fren. Reply. cap. 91 page 633.
who expressly says, that this controversy, concerning the Popes power
indirectly in temporalls, ought not to hinder the reunion of those, who should
desire to be reconciled to the Church: To omit the Decrees of the Parliament of
Paris forbidding under pain of Treason the Treatise of Cardinal Bellarmine
See the Fren. Merc. tom. 2. ad An. 1610. p. 19.
against Doctor Barclay, the Defensio Fidei Catholicae, etc. Of Suarez: Idem
tom. 3. ad An. 1614. page 441. See also tom. 3. ad An. 1615. page 327.
the Treatise of Santarellus de Haeresi etc. Idem. tom 11 ad An 1626. page 87.
The burning of Doctor Schulckenius Apology for Cardinal Bellarmine against
Widdrington Idem. tom. 3. ad An. 1623. page 277.
by the sentence of the Provost of Paris, besides many learned Catholics both
of our own Nation, as Bishop Watson, Abot Fecknam, Doctor Cole, John
Harpsfield, Nicolas Harpsfield, John Heart, James Bosgrave, the Thirteen
Priests protestation, and also of other, related, and confirmed by Mr In his
contatation of Mr Fizherbert p. 1. per^c^^^^.
Widdrington against all the exceptions, which Doctor Schulckenius has taken
against them: All which do so clearly convince the probability of this
Doctrine, which denies the Popes power to depose Princes, that no man of any
reading can from his heart now deny the same.

8 Wherefore the plain meaning of this clause is, [That the Pope] that is,
properly, and formally as Pope [neither of himslefe] that is, as a sole, and
total Efficient cause [nor by the authority of the Church, or See of Rome]
that is, as an instrument or Minister of the Church, or See of Rome [or by any
other meanes] that is, as a Principal Agent, using some helps or means, as
his instruments [with any other] that is, as a Partial Agent concurring
partially with some other. Which Partial Agents although they have not always
complete and sufficient power to produce the effect severally, and by one of
themselves alone, yet if they be properly Partial Agents, See the Philosophers
upon 2. Phys. or 5. Metaph. where they treat of the Efficient Cause, and also
show the difference betwixt a Physical or Real Agent, and a Moral, who
sometimes is reputed a Princi^^ll Agent in gene^^ moris, (...) ^h (...) rea^h
does nothing.
they must always have in themselves the same specificall active or virtuall
power, by which they concur jointly with each other to the producing thereof:
As two men drawing a Ship, which one of them alone is not able to draw. And
therefore a Master, who only by moral influence, as by commanding, or
hyring, concurreth with his Servants to the drawing of the Ship, is not
properly a Partial Agent concurring with them, nor is said to draw partially
with them the Ship, but he is a Principal Agent of a far different kind,
and nature, to wit, Moral; and his Servants, as drawing by his appointment,
are only his Moral Instruments.

9 [Hath any power or authority] that is, not merely probable, or in the
conceit, opinion, or speculation of the Pope, and of many other learned men,
for this, as I said, is for practice to be accounted no power at all, but true,
real, lawful, sufficient, and valid power, or authority [to depose the King]
that is, by his definitive sentence to deprive him of his Regal authority, and
to make him to true, and rightful King, but a private man: [or to dispose any
of his [Kingdomes, or Dominions] that is, to take them away from him, and to
give them to an other, which supposes, that the Pope has power to depose the
King, and to deprive Him of his Royal right and Dominion: [or to discharge any
of his Subjects of their obedience] because, according to Cardinal Bellarmine,
and Suarez, every Subject by the law of God, Bell. in Tract. contra Barcla.
cap. 21. p 2^2 Suar. in Defen. etc. lib 6. cap. 3. number. 6.
and Nature, owes true obedience, and Allegiance to his lawful Prince, so
long as He remains Prince: [or to authorize] that is, to give authority to
any foreign Princes to invade, or annoy Him, or His Countries: Because all
the authority, which temporal Princes have in temporalls, to invade, or annoy
etc. they have not derived from the authority, or commandment of the Pope, as
he is Pope, but granted them by the Law of God, Nature, or Nations: [ or to
give license, or leave to any of His Subjects to bear Arms etc.] Because the
Pope, as Pope, has no such authority, license, or leave himself, and therefore
cannot give it to others. And by this is easily answered the common objection
urged against this Clause, that no man can swear a probable opinion to be
certainly false, but it is a probable opinion at the least, that the Pope has
power to depose Princes, or, which in substance is all one, no man can swear,
that the Pope has not any power to depose the King, seeing that he has a
probable power to depose him; but a probable power to depose is some power. For
it is not a probable opinion in practice, howsoever it be in mere speculation,
and abstracting from practice, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, or
to practice their deposition, supposing, which is most manifest, that it is not
altogether certain, but only probable, and in controversy among learned
Catholics that he has power to depose them, unless we will absurdly admit,
that it is a probable opinion, that the Pope may lawfully commit open
injustice. Neither is a mere probable power any true, lawful, and sufficient
power to depose, punish, or dispossess (of which power only this Clause is to
be understood) and therefore for practice neither in law, nor conscience to be
accounted any power at all.

The Third Clause explained.
10 THe Third Clause, Also I do swear etc. has in it no difficulty,
supposing the former, to which it has relation, as practice has to power. For
if it be lawful to acknowledge before God, that the Pope has not by any
means, either of Excommunication, Deprivation, Absolution, or any other
Sentence, or Declaration, any true, lawful, sufficient, and valid power, or
authority to depose the King, and to make him no King, and consequently to
discharge or absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance, it clearly follows,
that I may also promise by Oath, that notwithstanding any sentence of
Excommunication, Deprivation, Absolution, or other Declaration made, or to be
made by the Pope, or his Successors, against the King, his Heirs, or
Successors, First, I will bear faith, and true Allegiance to His Majesty, his
Heirs, and Successors: Secondly, I will defend Him, and them to the uttermost
of my power against all conspiracies etc. And thirdly, I will do my best
endeavor to disclose, and make known unto His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, all Treasons, and Traitorous Conspiracies etc. Because to perform
these three things every faithful Subject, although he neither had, nor should
make any express Oath, or promise to perform them, is bound by the absolute
law of God, and Nature to perform, so long as the King remains King, and
cannot be deprived of his Regal authority by the Pope.

11 Secondly, in this Clause is not meddled withal, but rather supposed, th^n
denied the Popes power to Excommunicate, as King James of renowned memory has
by In praefat. Monitor. page 11.12 and in Consu^at. mendaciorum Torti, mendacio
1.
public writings not only declared to all Christian Princes, but also very
well proved against Card. Bellarmine. But this only is here denied, that
Excommunication, being a spiritual Censure can work this temporal effect, as
to make a King, no King, but only of a Christian, as a Heathen, and a Publican,
and to deprive him of Ecclesiastical communion, but not of his Regal
authority. Thirdly, by Heirs, and Successors are not understood Usurpers, but
such only as shall lawfully, and by right succeed: for as according to law,
Glossa in can Faciat 22. q. 2 and leg. Vulgo f. de statu hominum lib. 1.
we can only do that, which we can lawfully, and honestly do, so in law, and
conscience they only are reputed Heirs, and Successors, who lawfully, and by
right shall succeed. Lastly, by Treasons, and Traitorous Conspiracies are not
understood improper, positive, or spiritual Treasons, and which in regard
chiefly of Religion are by the positive laws only of some Kingdoms, or
Nations, but not of all made Treasons, as are the coming in of Priests into
this Realm ordained by the Popes authority etc. But only such Treasons are
he^re understood, which are true, proper, and natural Treasons and which all
Kingdoms, and Nations account for such, as being repugnant to that Natural,
and civil See above ^am. 3.
Allegiance, which all Subjects both Heathen, and Christian by the law of God,
and Nature do owe to their lawful Sovereign, whatsoever Religion He, or they
shall profess.

The fourth Clause explained.
12 THE Fourth Clause, And I do further swear, etc. if it be rightly
understood, is as clear as the former. For therein, by force of the words, the
practice only of the Popes power to depose, or murder Princes, and the
doctrine which maintains it for lawful, to wit, That Princes, which be
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may, that is, by virtue of the Popes
sentence of Ecommunication, or Deprivation, be deposed, or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever, is abjured, I do not say, as an heresy,
but as the words of this Clause are, as heretical. For (as Petrus Aragona,
Aragona 2 a. 2 ae. q. 11. ar. 2. Suarez disp. 19. de Fide. sec. 2. nam. 8.
and Suarez, do well observe) heresy, and an heretical proposition properly,
and in rigor are not the same, but do differ as the act, or sin, and the
matter thereof; because heresy properly does signify a certain sin of
infidelity, but an heretical proposition does only signify the matter of
that sin: And therefore although pertinacie belongs to the nature of
heresy, it does not therefore follow, that it belongs to the nature of an
heretical proposition. I said (says Suarez) properly, and in rigor; for
heresy may also be distinguished into material, and formal, and so it may be
said, that an heretical proposition is a certain heresy, not formal, but
material, and so it is not necessary, that it depend upon the pertinacie of
the speaker; for this only belongs to formal heresy, which is a sinful
act, and does formally make an Heretic, as whiteness does formally make the
subject, wherein it is to be white. From whence it follows (says Aragona)
that when Doctors call an heretical proposition an Heresy, they speak not
properly, because it is not to be called an heresy, but an heretical
proposition. For according to all Divines, See S. Thom 2a 2.e q. 11. art. 2.
Cajet. Bannes, ibid. Aragona art. 1. Suarez disp. ^9. de Fide sec. 3.
to Heresy, as it is a sin against Faith, and makes a formal Heretic, is
required pertinacie against the Doctrine, Declaration, and Sense of the Church.

13 Now supposing these two principles, which are so clear and evident, as I
have showed above n^^ 6*
, that no man of any reading, and judgment can deny either of them: the one,
that it is a great controversy among learned Catholics, and a doctrine
approved by many of them, that the Pope has not power to deprive Princes of
their Kingdoms, much less of their Lives; and therefore truly probable, their
approbation being not grounded upon any principle, which is clearly false: The
other, that a power, which is not altogether certain, but only probable, and
in controversy, can be no sufficient ground to punish, depose, or deprive any
man of any his right, and dominion, or of any other thing, which he possesses;
and consequently, as Mr. Doctor Kellison well infers, cannot be practiced
without open injustice: it clearly follows, that this Doctrine, which
approves the practice of deposing, or murdering Princes by the Popes
authority, and by virtue of his sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation is
manifestly false, as teaching open injustice, to wit, Theft and Murder in a
most high degree, and may therefore be abjured for such, and consequently for
impious, damnable, indirectly, and by a necessary consequence repugnant to
faith, and divine truth revealed in the holy Scriptures, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not kill; Kill him not, etc. Render to
Caesar, etc. and in this sense heretical, as the word [Hereticall] is usually,
and properly taken both by Protestants, and also by the most part of Catholic
Divines R^^ 26 M^^^. 21. i^ S T^^^^. 2 a. 2 a q. 1 ^^rt 2. Baan. s and Atagon
ibid. Turrec^em. in Summa de Eccles. l. 4. part. 2. c. 3. Director. Inquisit.
par. 2. c^m. 27. p. 233. Canus, lib. 6. de l^ci^, c^^lt. ad. 10. Scot in 3.
did. 35. Vulpes tom. 1. ^isp. 2. art. 5. and disp. 3. art 7 Faber. q. 1.
Prologi, disp. 6. cap. 1. Cast^o lib. 1. contr. haeres* cap. 8. Vega li^. 9 in
Council. Trid. cap. 39. T^a^c. a Christo, (...) 3. se t. did. 23 q 3. de hae
es^ Co^er. l. 4 (...) ^^. Reg^at. c. 14. Molina in part. 1. q. 1. a^. 2 (...)
p. 1. Vasquez ibid. disp. 5 c. 3. Fassolm ibid q. 1. dub. 13.
, who hold, that the Church does not make any doctrine to be heretical, or of
Faith, but only declare it to be such, which before her declaration was truly
such, and that whatsoever is indirectly, secondarily, or by a necessary
consequence repugnant to faith, is truly and properly heretical, although he
that without pertinacie should maintain any such doctrine in this sense
heretical, before the Church has declared it to be such, is not to be
accounted an heretic, nor does incur Anathema, or any other penalties
ordained against Heretics.

14 I said above [ their approbation being not grounded, etc.] Because the
approbation of Doctors, though they be never so many, if it be grounded upon
any principle, reason, or supposition, which is manifestly false, cannot make
their opinion to be truly probable, to those especially (as Vasquez Vasq. 1 a.
2 ae aisp. 62 cap. 4. sect. Observandum tamen m^xime est.
well observes) who see the manifest falsehood of that principle, reason, or
supposition. As all those Popes, and Doctors, who have approved, or do approve
the lawful practice of deposing Princes by the Popes authority, either did, or
do think, and suppose, that it is most certain, and of faith, nor in
controversy among learned Catholics, that the Pope has such power to depose
them, which all the world now sees to be clearly false; or else they did not,
or do not consider the difference betwixt mere speculation, and practice, and
betwixt a probable power to favor, and to punish, depose, or dispossess;
whereas all learned Catholics, both Divines, and Lawyers do agree in this
manifest principle, that a power, right, or title, which is not certain, but
in controversy, is no sufficient ground to deprive, or put any man out of his
possession, nor can be practiced without open injustice, until an undoubted
Judge, and whose authority for the determining of that matter is not
questionable (as is the Popes authority to define undoubtedly matters of faith
without a General Council, See Beneath. number. 29.
as I will show beneath) shall decide the question.

15 I omit now two other Expositions of this Clause, and which some learned
Catholics do greatly applaud. The one of the Adverbe [as hereticall] which
being an Adverbe of similitude, does always by force of the word, signify a
similitude, and not a realitie, or identitie, but only in regard of the
matter, to which it is applied. So that considering in penal laws (as is this
law for taking the Oath) all doubtful words are ever to be taken in the more
favorable sense, and which makes the law to contain no falsehood, or
injustice, they will have the sense of this Clause to be this, I abjure this
doctrine, and position as heretical, that is, as having only a similitude,
and affinity with that doctrine and position, which is heretical. The other is
of the Conjunction disjunctive [or murthered] which according to the usual
signification of our English speech, whenever it immediately follows the
verb [may] implies a free choice to take which part of the Dis-junction we
please, and makes not an absolute, but a conditional dis-junctive
proposition, which, for as much as concerns the truth, or falsehood thereof,
follows the nature, and conditions of a copulative, and not of an absolute,
or common dis-junctive proposition. And it makes the sense of this Clause to
be equivalent to this; I abjure as heretical this doctrine, and position, That
Princes, which be excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed, and
murdered by their Subjects: Which doctrine, and position in regard of the
second part, [and murthered] being by all Catholics accounted heretical,
especially seeing that murder is always taken with us for an unjust, and
wicked killing, and not for every killing, or manslaughter, the whole entire
conditional dis-junctive proposition in regard only of this part may be truly
abjured for heretical. But because the First Explication may abundantly
suffice to make it apparent even to such Catholics, as are willing to take all
the exceptions they can against any ambiguous word, or sentence contained in
the Oath, that not only the practice of murdering, or killing, but also of
deposing Princes by the Popes authority, may be abjured for heretical in a
true, proper, and usual sense, as I have showed, without making him that
without pertinacie shall maintain it, to be properly an heretic, and also
that these two later may be seen more at large related, and confirmed by Mr.
Widdrington In the Adjoynder to the second part of his Confutation of M.
Fitzherbert, per t^tum.
against all the exceptions, which Mr. Fitzherbert has taken against them, it
may suffice for this present only to have touched them thus briefly.

The fifth Clause explained.
16 IN the Fifth Clause, And I do believe, etc. is not denied the Popes power
to absolve from all Oaths, or any part thereof, because there is not the same
reason of this Oath, as there is of many other Oaths, which do not concern a
third person, from which that the Pope has power to absolve, or to dispense in
them, no Catholic will deny. Neither is there in this Clause any other thing
immediately sworn, than that I do believe, that is, not with divine and
supernatural belief, but only with moral credulity, and humane persuasion,
and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any other person has
power to absolve me from this Oath, or any part thereof, that is, can give me
leave and license not to perform those three things, which in the Third Clause
I promised to perform. For, according to the doctrine of all See S. Thom. 2^
2^ q. 89 ar. 7. and 9 Cajec. ibid. Aragona art. 3.7. and 9. Silvester verbo
juramentum, 1. qu. 2 and juramentum 5 q 2. Sotus lib 8. de Iustitia, art. 9.
Vatentia, tom. 3. disp. 6. quest. 7. punc. 4. Sayrus lib. 5. Thesauri, cap. 2.
Divines, Absolution, and Dispensation, has not place in assertory Oaths,
wherein some thing is affirmed, or denied, which, as soon as it is spoken, is
immutably, and indispensably true, or false, but only in promissorie Oaths,
wherein something is promised to be done, or omitted. And to perform those
three things, although I had made no Oath, or promise to perform them, I am
bound by the absolute Law of GOD, and Nature See above, number. 10.
, from which neither the Pope, nor any other Person has power to absolve, or
to dispense therein.

The sixth Clause explained.
17 IN the Sixth Clause, Which I acknowledge, etc. there is no other thing
immediately sworn, than my acknowledgement, that this Oath is lawfully
ministered unto me by good, and full authority, which doubtless I may lawfully
acknowledge, and also swear, supposing it to be an Oath of true temporal
Allegiance, and no falsehood, injustice, or denial of any true, spiritual
obedience due to the Popes Holiness to be contained therein. Neither do the
King, and Parliament take upon them in this Oath (as some do ill infer) the
Churches authority to define matters of faith, as what doctrine is heretical,
and what Oath is lawfully ministered by good, and full authority: But only with
the inward judgment of their understanding, (which, to distinguish from
judgment of authority, or of a Judge doing justice, is usually called
judgment of discretion, and is nothing else than a right determining, S. Thom.
1a. 2ae. q. 93. ar. 2. and 2a. 2ae. qu. 60 art. 1. Bannes, Aragona, ec Salon,
ibid. Sotus lib. 3. de Iustitia, q. 4. ar. 1. Hurtadus did 7. de anima, sect.
2. paragr. 9.
or discerning of the understanding betwixt truth, and falsehood, good and evil
in every matter either speculative, or practical) they did determine, define,
judge, and suppose the whole Oath, and every part thereof to be lawful, and to
contain no falsehood, or injustice, but only a sincere profession of true
temporal Allegiance, and that a temporal Prince has good, and full temporal
authority to command the abjuring of any false, and heretical doctrine, if it
be repugnant to this Allegiance, and thought necessary to the public quiet of
the Kingdom, whereof the Prince has charge, and to forbid, and punish with
temporal punishments, spiritual actions, as ministering of Sacraments in a
poisoned matter, the public maintaining of Heresies; yea, of unnecessary
opinions, though they be probable in speculation, if they be occasion of
Tumults, not as they are spiritual actions, but as they disturb the public
temporal peace, and in regard of the temporal wrong done to the
Commonwealth, they become temporal injuries. And upon this their inward
judgment of discretion, and determining of their understanding, which is
agreeable to the grounds of Catholic Religion, See ^ellar. lib 5. de Romans Pont
cap. 7.1^ quinta ratione loan. Paris. de potest. Reg and Page cap. 2^ ^d 37
S^tus. ^n 4 did. 29. q. 1. ar. 4. Victoria Relict. 1. de po^est. Eccle. sec.
7. paragr. oct^^^ propositio. Pannes 2 a. 2 ae. q. 11 at. 4. q 1. in fine,
Aragon. ibid.
they thought it requisite for the public peace of the Kingdom, for
maintaining the Kings temporal Sovereignty, and to prevent the danger of future
Conspiracies like to that of the Powder Treason, to ordain this new Oath of
Allegiance, and to bind all the Subjects of the Realm under the penalty of a
Praemunire to take the same, which doubtless, as I said, the King, and State
have good, and full authority to do, supposing it to be an Oath of true
temporal Allegiance, and no falsehood, or injustice to be contained therein.
Neither do those words [ and do renounce all Pardons etc.] imply a renouncing
of all Pardons, and Dispensations in general, but only of such, which shall
dispense with me, or give me leave to do contrary to that which I promised in
the Third Clause, to bear faith, and true Allegiance to his Majesty etc.

The seventh Clause explained.
18 THe plain meaning of the Seventh Clause, And all these things etc. is,
that I must use no fraud, or guile, but plainly, and sincerely acknowledge all
the former things, and also swear them all, either immediately, or mediatly,
according as the express words of every Clause, and the plain, and common
sense, and understanding of the same words shall import, without any
equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever; that is, I
must neither equivocate, or use equivocation, which is to speak equivocall
words, or which have diverse significations, not in that sense, wherein the
hearer, or Lawmakers does, or ought in reason to understand them: nor use
mental, or secret reservation, that is to reserve in my mind some hidden, and
inward sense, which the outward words by me spoken, according to their
imposition, and the common understanding of them, all circumstances considered,
cannot signify to others. As if one being demanded, whether he ever heard
Peter speak such words, should answer. that he never heard him speak such
words, reserving in his mind, in the Tower of London, or the like: which
inward, secret, and reserved sense those outward words, cannot signify to
others. And therefore this mental reservation (howsoever the speaker in his
mind, which is unknown to others, intends to make a Chimericall mixture,
and union of the reserved sense, and the outward words) is nothing else then a
flat, and formal Lie, as to Lie is taken, and defined by Saint Austin, and
other Divines. S. Aug. lib 1. de Meadacio cap. 3 S. Them 2 a 2 e. q 110 See S.
Austine beneath* nu. ^3
So that know, whether I am bound to swear immediately every thing contained
in any clause, or only my sincere acknowledgement, declaration, belief, or
resolution of that thing, I must regard the express words of every Clause, and
in what manner they bind me, either to swear the thing immediately, or only
my sincere acknowledgement etc. thereof.

The eight Clause explained.
19 THe last Clause, And I do make etc. has in it no difficulty, supposing
the Oath to be lawful, and commanded by good and full authority: for that
every good Subject is bound to obey the constitutive precept of his lawful
Superior in that manner as I will show beneath, number. 26.
heartily, willingly, and truly, that is unfaignedly, not only for wroth, or
fear of punishment, as the wicked do, but for conscience, obedience, and
virtue See Vasquez 1 a 2 ae. disp. 51. cap 3. and disp 73. cap. 7. and disp.
86. cap. 5.
sake.

Five general observations for the better understanding, how all the chief
objections, which are usually made against the Oath in general, may be easily
answered.

20 HAving explained all the clauses of the Oath in that brief, and
perspicuous manner as you have seen, whereby any prudent man may easily
answer all the chief objections, which are commonly made against any Clause
thereof in particular, I think it not amiss to annexe hereunto five general
observations concerning doubtful words, Perjuries, the Popes Breves, Scandal,
and the safer way, whereby all the principal arguments, which are usually
urged against the Oath in general, may also according to the grounds of
Catholic Religion be clearly confuted. For against the Oath in general it is
commonly objected, First, that there are contained in the Oath diverse
ambiguous, and doubtful sentences, which may have a double signification, good
and bad, true and false, which therefore being so doubtful cannot be
absolutely sworn without danger of Perjury 2. That the Popes Holiness our
supreme spiritual Pastor; whose voice we are bound to hear, and follow, has
by his Breves forbidden the Oath, as containing many things flat contrary to
faith, and salvation. 3. That to take the Oath is no small scandal to the
weaker sort of Catholics, which our Savior in the Gospel Matthew. 18.
with a fearful curse, and woe be to that man by whom scandal comes,
commands us to avoid. Lastly, that to refuse the Oath is the more safe, and
the more probable opinion, which every man in those things, which are dangerous
to the health of the body, much more of the soul, ought in wisdom to
prefer before that, which is the less safe, and the less probable.

The first Observation.
21 FIrst therefore concerning doubtful words it is to be observed, that in
penal laws (as is this for taking the Oath commanded by Act of Parliament
under the penalty of a Praemunire) all doubtful words, which have diverse
significations not improper, nor unusual, are always to be taken in the more
favorable sense, and which may make the law to be just, and reasonable, and
not to be drawn to a false, odious, and inconvenient sense, and which makes
the law to be unjust. And this is the common Doctrine of Divines, and Lawyers,
and agreeable both to the Canonical, can. Cum tu de testibus c. 16 can. Ad
nostram de Iureiurando cap. 21 and de Regulis Iuris in Sexio. reg. 49 In.
paenis.
and Civil law. For laws are to be expounded more favorably (says the
civil law leg. Benigai^s, ff. de legibus.
) that the will, or meaning of them may be conserved. And in a doubtful, or
ambiguous word of the law, that sense is rather to be chosen, leg. In Ambigua,
ff. de legibus.
which is void of all default, especially seeing that the will also, or meaning
of the law may hereby be gathered.

22 Yea, which is more, according to Suarez, if at any time the property of the
words should induce any injustice, or like absurdity concerning the mind, or
meaning of the Lawmakers, Quarez lib. 6. de legibus cap. 1
they must be drawn to a sense also improper, wherein the law may be just, and
reasonable, for this is presumed to be the mind of the Lawmakers, as it has
been declared by many laws in ff. tit. de Legibus. Thus Suarez. Whereby it is
evident, that what words soever in this Oath may be doubtful, and have diverse
significations, especially not improper, nor unusual, as I acknowledge before
God, I believe, Successors, Treasons, as heretical, or murdered, or any
other whatsoever, we ought to expound them in the more favorable sense, and
which may make the Oath, and the meaning of the Lawmakers to be just, and
reasonable, and not to draw, much less to wrest them to a false, odious, and
inconvenient sense, and wherein we will needs make the Oath to be in our
judgment unreasonable, and wicked.

The second Observation.
23 SEcondly concerning Perjurie it is to be observed that Perjurie speaking
properly (for sometimes it is taken for every unlawful, and idle swearing,
although it want not verity, the first, and chief companion of an Oath) is
defined by Divines, Magister in 3. did. 29. S. Thom. 2 a. 2 ae. q. 98. ar. 1.
and Theologi ibid.
to be a Lie confirmed by Oath. And therefore as a Lie is divided into a
material Lie, when one speaks as he reasonably thinks, and yet in very
deed it is otherwise, and into a formal Lie, when one affirms that to be
true, which he thinks to be false, or contrary wise, for to Lie (says Saint
Austin) is to speak against the mind, S. Aug. lib. 1. de Mendacio c. 3.
or to have one thing in the mind, and to affirm an other by words, or any
other signs; So Perjury is divided into matertall, and formal Perjury, for
that Perjury is nothing else then a Lie confirmed by Oath, and only adds to
a Lie the calling of God to witness of what is spoken. Wherefore as it is
unlawful for one to affirm that to be true, which he knows to be false, or
contrariwise, for this were expressly, and formally to Lie, or to affirm that
to be true, whereof he is ignorant, or doubtful, for this were to expose
himself to danger of being forsworn, and he that loves danger shall perish
therein, Eccles. 3.
So also it is much more unlawful to confirm the same by Oath, whereby he
makes God, who is Truth it self, either the Patron of a Lie, or to be
ignorant of the truth. So that whatsoever may be affirmed, or denied without
danger of Lying, may also be sworn without danger of Perjury, And as the
falsehood, which makes a formal Lie, is not to be taken from the thing as it
is in it self, or a part rei, but as it is in the mind of the speaker, for
that to Lie is to speak against the mind, so the falsehood, which makes
formal Perjury, is not to be taken from the thing as it is in it self, or
ex part rei, but as it is against the mind, and knowledge of the swearer.

24 Wherefore in all Oaths, as well promissorie, as assertorie, to avoid the
sin of Perjury, Truth is always required. In a promissorie two fold truth
is necessary, One for the present, that the words outwardly spoken be
agreeable to the mind, and that therefore the swearer have for the present a
mind, or purpose to perform what he promises; the other for the future, that
he verily think, the thing which he promises he is able, and may lawfully
perform, and that for as much as lies in him, at the time appointed he
perform the same. But the truth, which is required to an assertorie Oath,
consists in this (says Gregorius de Valentia, and Sayrus) that the thing be
true, Valentia tom. 3. disp. 6. q. 7 pu^c. 3. Sayrus lib. 1 Thesauri cap. 4.
number. 7. Azor. tom. 1. Iustitut lib. 11. cap. 2. q. 5. Sauchiz lib. 3. in
D^calogum cap. 4. number. 10.
at least wise according to the reasonable judgment of the swearer. And to the
truth of an assertory Oath (says Azorius, and Sauchiz) it is required, and
suffices, that the swearer think it to be so prudently, and not moved by
light, or slender, but by assured, and likely or probable conjecture, and
therefore according to the swearers judgment agreeable to reason, whether the
thing be in very deed, or ex part rei, true, or false, for this (says
Sauchiz) is to be morally certain. The like has Silvester, Sotus, Arag. and
Suarez. Silv. verbo Perjurium q. 1. Sot. l. 8 de Iustitia q. 2. ar. 3. Aragona
2 a. 2 ae. q. 89. ar. 3. Suar. tom 2. de Relig. l. 3.3. c. 5.
And if moral certainty, or reasonable assurance were not sufficient to excuse
from Perjurie, no man could lawfully swear, or acknowledge by Oath, any King
whatsoever, to be a true and lawful King, or any Bishop whatsoever to be a
true, and lawful Bishop, because of these, and all such like, we can have but
moral certainty, or reasonable assurance.

25 And by this it is evident, that albeit there may be brought some probable
arguments to show, that diverse words, and sentences contained in the Oath,
being considered barely by themselves, and without due circumstances, may be
doubtful, and ambiguous, that is, not clear, and morally certain, and so for
one to swear them in that doubtful sense, were to expose himself to danger
of perjury, yet considering, as I showed above number. 21.22.
, such doubtful words are to be taken in the more favorable sense, and which
makes the Law to be just and reasonable, and to contain no falsehood, or
injustice, all danger of Perjury is avoided thereby. For albeit there be danger
of Perjury to swear doubtful words in a doubtful sense, yet to swear words
which of themselves are doubtful in a true, and determinate sense, and wherein
they are not doubtful, but clear, and morally certain, there is no danger of
Perjury.

The third Observation.
26 THirdly, Hugolin. par. 2. de Censuris, c. 6. in prins.
concerning the Popes Breves, which (as Hugolinus notes) are nothing else,
than the Popes letters made by his Secretaries, and sealed by the Pope in red
wax with the Fishers Ring, and have the same force, which have the Popes
Rescripts, or his Letters written in answer to other letters, and are therefore
called Breves, Rebussius in praxi benefic. part. 3. nu. 4. Archidiaconus, and
Geminianus in cap. Quis ^esciat. did. 11.
because they are written briefly, and in few words: when reas the Popes Bulls
are so called (as Petrus Rebaffius, and others observe) for that they are
signed with a round tablet of lead, wherein the pictures of Saint Peter, and
Saint Paul are engraven. We must observe first of all the difference betwixt a
declarative, and a constitutive Law, or precept. For a constitutive precept
does make the thing which it forbids, to be unlawful, which otherwise would
be lawful, as is the precept to abstain from flesh in time of Lent, and from
servile works upon Sundays, and commanded Holy Days: And this precept
especially Ecclesiastical, abstracting from scandal, and contempt, which are
forbidden by the Law of GOD, and Nature, does seldom, or never bind with
danger See Salas disp. 11. de leg. sect. 11.
of death, or any other great corporal, or temporal harm; and moreover it
must be obeyed so long as it is not manifestly unjust Vasq. tom 2. in Iam. 2ae
disp. 151. c. 4. in fin. Suar tom. 5. i^ 3. part. disp. 4 sect. 6. nu. 5. and
lib. 1. de leg. c. 9. nu. 9. Valentia tom. 3. punc. 2 Sayrus lib. 1. Thesauri,
c. 12. Salas disp. 10. de leg sect. 2.
, nor in prejudice of a third person See Beneath number 31.
, neither is it sufficient, that it have only a probable show of injustice.
For, as Doctor Kellison In his Treatise of the ^^^late and Priace etc cap. 15
(...). 74
well infers from Vasquez Vasqu. 1a. 2ae disp 62. nu. 3^
doctrine (although he does not well apply it to the Popes declarative Breves)
every Subject is bound to obey his lawful Superiors commandment, to wit,
constitutive, when he commands according to a probable opinion, though he
command a thing, which is against the Subjects opinion, and that also probable,
because the Subject may follow any man's probable opinion, and consequently his
Superiors, that also being probable, and if he may, he must, because his
Superior commands. And the reason is, because all the obligation of this
precept depends chiefly upon the will and authority of the Superior, who is
in possession of his authority, so long as it is not doubtful, or
questionable, and the thing commanded be not manifestly unjust, nor in
prejudice of a third person, who also is in possession of his good name, and
goods, which cannot be justly taken from him under pretense of a mere probable
authority, right, or title.

27 But a declarative precept does not make, but only declare, and suppose the
thing which it forbids, to be otherwise unlawful, as being forbidden by
some former law, as are the laws of Princes made against Theft, murder,
drunkenness, or the like, which are otherwise forbidden by the Law of GOD, and
Nature. And all the obligation of this precept, Suarez lib. 3. de leg. cap. 14.
and cap. 20. nu. 10.
as Suarez well observes, does depend upon the reason, and supposition, for
which this declarative precept is imposed, and upon the obligation of the
former Law, which this precept does suppose, and declare. So that if the
reason, and supposition, for which this declarative precept is imposed, be not
true, and that there be no such precedent law, or prohibition, which the
declarative precept does suppose, and declare, the declarative precept has no
force to bind at all. And if the precept be sometimes mixed, that is, in part
declarative, and in part constitutive, it must in part, as it is such,
participate the nature, and conditions of them both.

28 Secondly, we must observe, that the Popes Breves, forbidding English
Catholics to take the Oath, do not constitute a new law, or make the Oath to
be unlawful, but they do only suppose, and declare it to be otherwise
unlawful, and forbidden by the Law of GOD, for that it contains many things
(say the Breves) which are clearly repugnant to faith, and salvation. And
because these his declarative. Breves are grounded upon false reasons, and
suppositions, to wit, upon the Popes opinion, and of some other his Divines,
especially Cardinal Bellarmine, that either his power to excommunicate, to
bind, and loose in general, to absolve from Oaths in general, is plainly
denied in the Oath, which is manifestly false, or else that his power to depose
Princes, which is plainly denied in the Oath, is most certain, and of faith,
nor disproved by many learned Catholics, which all the World now sees to be
no less clearly untrue, it is evident, according to Suarez doctrine, and
manifest reason, that English Catholics are not bound to observe them.
Wherefore unless one at leastwise, I do not say probable argument (for this
is not sufficient to demonstrate a matter of faith, and the Oath to be plainly
repugnant to faith, and salvation) but clear, and convincing can be brought,
which no man has hitherto, nor can in my judgment produce to prove some one
thing in the Oath to be contrary to faith, or salvation, that English
Catholics are bound to obey the said declarative Breves, being grounded upon
false reasons, and suppositions, no man of any learning, or judgment can
sincerely, and from his heart affirm.

29 To say, that the Pope has by his Breves defined ex Cathedra the Oath to be
unlawful, and to contain many things flat contrary to faith, and salvation,
is not only most clearly untrue, but also to little purpose though it were
true: first, for that they want those conditions, which according to Canus,
Canus lib. 5. de locis, ca. 5. q. 4. Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 4. and 5.
and lib. 2. de Council. c. 12.
Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Divines (who hold that the Pope has authority
to define infallibly matters of faith without a General Council) are required
to a definition ex Cathedra, among which this is one, that they must be
directed to the whole Church, and not only to some particular Churches, or
Kingdoms; for which cause they are well called by Ioannes Eudeamon a learned
Jesuit, Joan. Eudaemon in Praefat. Parallelli Torti.
the Popes private Letters to the English Catholics, and besides it were a
strange definition ex Cathedra, wherein no one particular proposition among so
many is expressed: Secondly, for that although they did contain a definition
ex Cathedra, yet considering that it is a very probable doctrine, it being
approved by so many excellent Divines Patres Concilii Constantiensis, and
Basil. Had^ionus Papa in q. de confirm. Card. Camerac in Tract. de authorie
Ecclesiae. Card. Cusanus, lib. 2. deconcord. Cath. cap. ult. Card. Florent. in
cap. Significasti de elect. Card. Pa orm. ibid. Abulenisis in c. 18. Matthew q.
108 and in Defensorio, part. 2. cap. 69. Joan. Paris. Gerson, Major, Almainus,
and Doctores Parisienses communiter. Victoria in Rolect. de potest. Papae
proposi^. 3a. Navar in c. Novit de Iudiciis notab. 3. number 84. who hold this
opinion to be probable.
, and Canonists, that the Keys were given principally to the Church, and to
Saint Peter, as he represented the Church, and that the Pope cannot define any
thing to be of faith certainly, and undoubtedly without a General Council, to
which according to these Doctors he is subject, and not superior, and
consequently sequently that his definitions can be no infallible, and undoubted
ground of Catholic faith, it clearly follows, that no Catholic is bound to
give more credit to his definition in this point, that to his doctrine, and
opinion, which is not certain, but only probable. And therefore whenever the
Pope defines any doctrine to be of faith, which indeed is Catholic doctrine,
and of faith, we must not believe with Catholic faith that doctrine to be
Catholic, and of faith, because the Pope has defined it (for so we should
build our faith upon a reason and ground, which is not certain to all learned
Catholics, but uncertain, and fallible) but because the Catholic Church,
which is the pillar, and ground of truth 1 Timothy 3. Sotus de secret^ tegendo
memb. 3. q. 2. in Resp. ad 1 m.
has by express, or tacit consent approved, and accepted it for such.

30 Moreover, as Dominicus Sotus does well observe (whose doctrine in this
point is agreeable to the Canon law, and the Expositours thereof) Prelates, and
Judges are not in possession in respect of their Subjects, but so far forth as
they command things that are just, and therefore when it is doubtful, whether
they command that which is just, then if it be inprejudice of a third person,
because that third person is also in possession of his good name, and goods,
the Subject does nothing against obedience, if he require of his Prelate a
reason of his commandment, propounding humbly the reasons of his doubt.
Wherefore Pope Alexander the third in his Letters, or Breves the Archbishop of
Ravenna, gives him this lesson, In c. Si quando de Rescriptis.
that considering deligently the quality of the business, he either reverently
fulfill his commandment, or by his letters pretend a reasonable cause, why he
cannot fulfill it. Whereupon all the Expositours of the Canon Law, who expound
this Canon, do give this general rule, Glossa Ioannes Andreas, Panomitan.
Petrus Anchoranus, Felinus, and others.
that the Superiors commandment ought either to be fulfilled, or a reason
yielded, why it is not fulfilled.

13 Seeing therefore that English Catholics, as it is well known and public
to the whole world, have most humbly propounded, and yielded to His Holiness
the reasons, for which they are doubtful, or rather without any doubt are
fully persuaded, that his declarative Breves forbidding them to take the Oath,
are unjust, and grounded upon false reasons, and suppositions, and also
prejudicial to themselves, and to the Kings Majesty, it is evident, that with
such manifest danger of their own spiritual, and temporal ruin, and so
great prejudice to the Kings supreme authority in temporalls, they are not
bound to obey them against their Princes commandment, especially seeing that
his commandment to take the Oath, going before the Popes commandment to
refuse it, must, as I said above, number. 26.
be obeyed, so long as no one Clause of the Oath can be clearly convinced to
be unlawful. And although no inferior may examine, and judge his Superiors
commandment with judgment of authority, which supposes a Superiority over the
person, whose actions are examined, and judged, yet that with judgment of
discretion, which is the inward guide, and rule of every man's conscience, every
Subject may examine, and judge his Superiors commandments, and consequently
the Popes Breves whether they be just, or unjust, constitutive, or declarative,
in prejudice of a third person, or not in prejudice, and upon what reasons, and
suppositions they are grounded, no man that has any judgment can deny.

The fourth Observation.
32 FOurthly concerning Scandal it is to be observed, that there are two sorts
of Scandal, the one is called active, or given, the other, passive, taken, or
received, and they are signified in the holy Scriptures by the Verbes active,
and passive, to scandalize, Mat. 15 17, 18.
and to be scandalized. Mat. 11.15, 24.
Active scandal is defined by Divines S. Thom. 21.2. e. q. 43. ar. 1. S.
Hierom in c. 15. Matthew.
out of Saint Hierome, to be a word, or deed less right, or less good, giving
occasion to another of spiritual ruin, or falling into sin. Neither do
they take the Adverbe [lesse] comparatively, but negatively, S. Thom. above
cited. Abulensis in c. 18. Mat. 9.43.
for that which is not good, to wit, which hic and nunc in regard of some
particular circumstance of time, place, or persons wants some moral
rectitude, or goodness. Passive scandal, to wit, when one by the good, or bad
word, or deed of an other takes occasion to sin, or to be scandalized, is
also of two sorts. For if one be scandalized through malice, it is called a
Scandal of the Pharisees, and is not to be regarded, according to that of our
Savior, Matthew. 15.
Let them alone, Blind they are etc. But if one be scandalized through
infirmity, or ignorance, it is called a Scandal of the weak, or little ones,
S. Hierom in c. 15. Matthew.
for the perfect, as Saint Hierome says, are not scandalized.

33 From whence the Divines with S. Thomas do infer, first that sometimes
passive scandal may be without active, as it was in the scandal of the
Pharisees, or when one by the good word, or deed of another, especially which
is necessary, and commanded, is scandalized, and takes occasion to sin
thereby. Sometimes active scandal may be without passive, as when one by his
bad word or deed, and ill example does scandalize, and gives occasion to
others of falling into sin, and yet none is scandalized, or takes occasion
to sin thereby. And sometimes they may be both together, as when one by his
bad example gives, and another takes occasion to sin thereby. Secondly,
they infer, that no good works, which are necessary, as is the observing of
precepts, can give occasion of sinning to any man, or, which is all one, can
scandalize, or be an active scandal; neither are such good works to be
omitted to avoid the passive scandal even of the weak ones, as that most
learned, and holy Bishop Alponsus Tostatus, for his admirable memory, and
singular learning called the wonder of the world, See Bellarm. de Script.
Eccles. and Possevin. in verbo Alphons. Tostatus.
does well observe, whose express words I think it not amiss here to set
down.

34 For to omit (says he) Abulensis in cap. 18. Matthew. q. 51.
such works, which are of necessity, and commanded, were to sin mortally,
and for no cause ought any man to sin mortally. But if they be Counsels, it
is not of necessity to do them. Yet sometimes Counsels are made necessary,
either in regard of the persons as of those, who have vowed the state of
perfection, or of those, to whom by their state perfection belongs, or in
regard of time, or place are also necessary for every man, as to give alms to
him who is in extreme necessity. And so counsels are made to them precepts, to
wit, that they are not to be omitted for any Scandal, as a religions man may
not omit the observing of poverty, and chastity for any scandal. But when
Counsels remain in the nature of Counsels, that is, when the observing of them
is not necessary, then the scandal, which arises to some by this, that
others observe these Counsels, either proceeds from malice, and then it is a
scandal of the Pharisees, which is to be contemned, neither is any spiritual
good even not necessary, to be omitted for this scandal. Or it proceeds
from infirmity or ignorance, and is called a scandal of the weak ones
according to Saint Bernard, because it belongs to weak ones to be ignorant,
and moved through weakness, of which scandal it is said Matthew. 17. But that
we may not scandalize them, go to the Sea etc. And for this scandal, we must
refrain for a time from the works of Counsels, or we must do them secretly,
least the ignorant, whose mind is weak, be troubled, and this must be done
until having yielded a reason of the works of Counsels, and showed that they
are good, the scandal cease, which proceeded from ignorance. But if after a
reason be yeeled, the scandal shall not cease, it is not to be called a
scandal proceeding from ignorance, but from malice, and to be contemned,
neither ought we to refrain from any good actions to avoid this scandal. Thus
Abulensis.

35 The like has Salmeron, and Estius: but Salmeron moreover adds, Salmeron
tom. v. trac. 29.
that if the Doctrine, or action, which scandalizeth, be not necessary, but
very profitable, and commodious, we must yield something to the weakness of
the little ones. But if the great ones [such as are Priests, and Teachers] take
this scandal, and the Doctrine, or action be profitable, they are not to be
regarded, for they are incurable, because they are blind, that is, they will
not see, and understand, what God inspireth in them etc. And he that is weak
(says Estius) may be sufficiently instructed, Estius in cap. 8. ad cor. 1.
ver. 13
and taught, that his brother does well, and that he ought not to be offended
by his fact. After which sufficient, and full instruction, if he still
persevere in scandal, it will not be a scandal given, but received, because
it will not now proceed from weakness, but from malice, as was the scandal of
the Pharisees, which as our Savior in the Gospel teaches, we ought not to
regard.

36 And by this it is apparent, that to take the Oath, supposing it to be
lawful, and commanded by lawful authority under great penalties, can be no
scandal to any man, seeing that the observing of lawful precepts cannot give
either to great ones, or to little ones any occasion of spiritual ruin;
neither ought we for any scandal even of the weak ones, omit the observing of
such precepts. But rather to refuse the Oath, and to maintain the lawful
practice of the Popes power to depose Princes, which is the maine point denied
therein, is very scandalous, and gives over ample occasion both to Princes,
and Subjects of manifold offense, and ruin, as I will show beneath. number. 44.
And therefore all those who pretend the taking of the Oath to be scandalous,
do suppose, but not sufficiently prove (neither also do they agree in their
proofs) that it is altogether unlawful, nor can be taken without danger at
the least of Perjurie, if not without a flat denial of Catholic faith, which
how untrue it is, I have showed above by expounding every Clause thereof in a
true, and Catholic sense.

37 Neither is it to the purpose, that many probable arguments may be brought
to prove, the Oath to be unlawful, and consequently to have in it a probable
show, and appearance of evil, from which the Apostle for the avoiding of
scandal warns us to refrain, from all show of evil (says he 1 Thessalonians. 5.
) refrain your selves. For in like manner many probable arguments, and
answers may be brought to prove the Oath to be lawful, and to contain
nothing besides a profession of true temporal Allegiance, and so from these
words of S. Paul unless they be rightly understood, we might infer, first
that we must refrain both from taking, and also from not taking the Oath,
which is impossible, because as in taking it there is a probable show of
spiritual disobedience against the Popes Holiness, so in not taking it there
is a more probable show of temporal disloyalty against the Kings Majesty, who
has purposely commanded the taking thereof, to make a trial, how his Subjects
stand affected toward him in point of their loyalty, and due obedience etc.
See above nu. 3.
and secondly that no man may lawfully follow the more probable opinion against
the less probable, Vasquez 1a. 2ae disp. 62.
if the more probable be the less secure (which as Vasquez affirms, is
against the common Doctrine of Divines) seeing that in the more probable
opinion, if it be the less secure, there is a probable show of evil. Yea,
which is more, Vasquez. ibid. cap 4. number. 4.
it is now (says Vasquez) and has been long since the common opinion in
Schools, that it is lawful for a learned man to follow in practice against
his own opinion which he judges to be the more probable, the opinion of
others, although their opinion be the less safe, and also in his judgment the
less probable, so that it be not destitute of reason, and probability.

38 Wherefore the words of the Apostle may be well understood any one of these
three ways; First, that to avoid scandal, we must refrain from all show of
evil, if in refraining there be also no show of evil, otherwise they would
bind us to that which is impossible, for to refrain, and not to refrain from
the same thing implies a contradiction. Or secondly, that to avoid scandal we
must refrain from all show of evil, unless that thing which has in it a
show of evil, be commanded by the constitutive precept of a lawful Superior,
which as I showed above, number. ^6 30.
must be obeyed, so long as it is not manifestly unjust, nor in prejudice of a
third person, neither is it sufficient, that it has only a probable show of
evil. Or thirdly, that to avoid the scandal of the weak ones, we must
refrain from all show of evil, until they be instructed, and admonished,
that although it seem to them to be evil, and has a show of evil, yet in
very deed it is not evil, but good. After which instruction, and admonition,
if they still persist in their scandal, it is not a scandal of the little
ones, but of the Pharisees, and the great ones, neither does it proceed from
infirmity, or ignorance, but from malice, and is not to be regarded.

The fifth and last Observation.
39 Fifthly, and lastly, to know which is the safer, and the less safe way,
part, or opinion, and how it is distinguished from the more, or less probable
and in what sense that vulgar saying, The safer way is to be chosen, is to be
understood, we must observe first of all, that the safer, and the less safe,
may either be taken comparatively, as the more, and less probable are always
so taken, and so the less safe is ever safe, although not so safe, as is the
other to which it is compared, as every Nowne comparative being taken
comparatively, does always include the positive. And in this sense that vulgar
saying is not to be understood, because it is sufficient to follow that which
is safe, neither are we bound to choose always the safer, so that the less
safe be safe enough: Or else it may be taken negatively, for that which is not
safe, as the Adverbe [lesse] was taken above number. 32.
in the definition of Scandal, and in this sense the less safe way, part, or
opinion is never to be chosen, but we must always choose that, which is at
the least wise safe. But to know how the Divines do commonly take the safer,
and the less safe, and do distinguish them from the more, and less probable,
I think it not amiss, to relate here verbatim what Vasquez write^h of this
point.

40 Among opinions ( says he Vasquez 1 a. 2 ae. disp 62. c. 1 number. 1.
) the one is safer, the other less safe, it is called the more safe, not
because it is the more probable, but because he that follows it cannot sin.
As if there be two contrary opinions concerning restitution, that which says
that some thing is to be restored, is called the safer, because in restoring
there can be no sin, and the contrary is the less safe, because in not
restoring there may be sin, and so of other matters. In like manner the more
safe part (says Vasquez) is to be accounted that, Vasquez 1a. 2ae. disp. 66.
cap. 4. number. 21.
wherein there would be the lesser sin than in the contrary, when it is
necessary to choose one of those two, wherein there is sin. For when soever two
evils meet so together, that it is necessary to choose one of them, that
doubtless is to be chosen, which otherwise would be the lesser, and
consequently in choosing that there can be no sin at all. And the reason is
manifest; for seeing that in no case it must be granted, that any man of
necessity be so perplexed, but that he may choose the one part without any
sin, and that if of two evils the one of necessity must be chosen, there is
greater reason, that we should choose the lesser, it follows, that the lesser
may be chosen without sin, and so that, which absolutely considered by it self
would be evil, is then no sin, when it occurreth with a greater evil. An
example hereof Vasquez brings, and examineth at large of one, who after he is
married, doubts of some impediment, which annulleth the Marriage.

41 Moreover among opinions (says Vasquez) one is the more probable, Vasquez
disp. 62. cap 1. nu. 1.
the other is less probable. The more probable is that, which has the better
grounds, and the less probable, which although it has not better grounds, yet
the grounds thereof want not sufficient probability. It may therefore fall out,
that the less safe opinion be the more probable, that is, that part wherein
perchance there may be sin, to be the more probable, and contrariwise that
part, wherein there can be no sin, to be the less probable. As in the
example of making restitution, that part which says, that we ought not to
restore, may be the more probable, and contrariwise that part which says, that
we must restore, may have far weaker grounds, yea, and sometimes it may have
no probability, or probable grounds at all. Thus Vasquez.

42 And from hence it may be easily gathered first, that the more, or less
probable opinion (which are taken here comparatively, and suppose both opinions
to be truly probable) may be grounded either upon intrinsecall principles See
^asquez disp. 62. etc. 3. nu. 10*
, as are causes, effects, absurdities, or other like arguments, which show the
opinion to be in it self truer than the contrary, of which sort of principles,
unless they be very clear, and easy to be understood, only the learned are
able to judge, or upon extriasecall, and which the unlearned may easily
understand, to wit, the authority of learned men, who are skillful in that
opinion which they approve, and that if perchance they be mistaken in the
grounds of their opinion, and that their reasons be not true but false, their
authority, and approving of that opinion cannot make it truly probable See
Vasquez disp. 62. and cap. 4. paragr. Observandum temen maxim.
to those, who see the manifest falsehood of their principles, But how far
forth either the learned, or unlearned, who not considering the falsehood of
their reasons, and principles do approve, and follow in practice their
opinion, may be excused in conscience, I will not judge, but leave their
conscience to themselves, and to the judgment of GOD, who only searches the
secrets of all men's hearts.

43 Secondly, that when Divines affirm, The safer part is always to be
chosen: by the safer they understand that, which is without sin, or danger of
sin; for to expose ones self to danger of sinning, is always accounted a
sin, according to that, Who loves danger, shall perish therein Eccles. 3.
: and by the less safe, they understand that which is not safe, because it
cannot be chosen lawfully, and without danger of sin, for safe is accounted
that, which is without all danger. And in this sense every opinion, which is
truly probable, is a safe opinion, because it may be followed lawfully, and
therefore safely, that is, without sin, or danger of sin. Thirdly, that this
Maxim of the Canon Law Cap. Ad audientiam, etc. Significasti, 1. el 2. de
homicidio* and cap. Iuvenis de S^ onsalibit^.
In doubts the safer part is to be chosen; is not to be understood of doubts
as doubtful is taken sometimes for probable, uncertain, or questionable, but
of such doubts, which leave the understanding so perplexed, and in suspense,
that it gives no determinate, or probable assent to either part of the
question, to wit, whether the thing which is doubted of, be true, or false,
lawful, or unlawful, for this is properly to be doubtful. and nevertheless
how in these doubts the constitutive precept of a lawful Superior, and whose
authority is not questionable, if it be not in prejudice of a third person,
ought to be obeyed, and how the Subject, who so doubts, whether the thing
which is commanded be just, or unjust, may, notwithstanding this doubt, frame
his conscience rightly to obey his Superiors commandment, Vasquez 1a. 2ae.
disp. 65. and 65.
Vasquez, and other Divines, who treat of a doubtful conscience, as it is
distinguished from a probable, do at large declare.

44 Fourthly, that supposing first, that no one Clause of the Oath can be
clearly convinced to be unlawful (for to heap up together never so many
probable arguments against it were to no purpose) and consequently that the
King, and Parliament in framing, and commanding it, followed a probable
opinion: secondly, that every Subject is bound to obey the constitutive precept
of his lawful Superior, when he commands according to a probable opinion
(for, as I said above number. 26.27.
, there is not the same reason of a declarative) and thirdly, that the Popes
Breves forbidding the Oath, are declarative, and grounded upon false reasons,
and suppositions, it is not only the safer way to take the Oath, than to
refuse it, but also in refusing it there is no safety at all, if we duly
consider the manifold dangers, and scandals, which do arise by refusing it, and
by covertly approving the damnable practice of the Popes Power to depose
Princes, which is the only point denied therein, and for which it was
purposely devised, and under great penalties so strictly commanded. All which
dangers, and scandals, the most learned Sorbon Doctors in their censure of
Santarellus doctrine (which teaches, that the Pope has power to punish Kings,
and Princes with temporal punishments, depose and deprive them of their
Kingdoms for heresy, and to discharge their Subjects from their obedience,
etc.) do fully, though briefly relate, by condemning the said doctrine, and
the sequels thereof, as new, false, erroneous, contrary to the Word of GOD;
making the Pontifical Dignity to be odious, opening the way to Schism;
derogating from the supreme authority of Kings, which depends upon GOD alone;
hindering the conversion of Infidel, and heretical Princes; disturbing the
public peace, overthrowing Kingdoms, States, and Commonwealths; withdrawing
Subjects from their obedience and subjection, and stirring them up to factions,
rebellions, seditions, and murdering of Princes. Given in the Sorbon the
first, and reviewed the fourth of April, See above, number. 7.
1626.

45 Lastly, that the example of one, who being dangerously sick, ought in
wisdom to choose that Physic, which is the more safe, the more assured, and
the more probable, is no fit example to persuade any man not to take the Oath:
First, for that no man ought in wisdom for the cure of his body to seek
after the learned Physicians, and choose the most safe, and the most probable
Physic, whereby he shall consume his whole estate, and bring himself, his
wife, and children to beggary; but he ought in wisdom to content himself with
such Physicians, and Physic, which one, two, or three learned Physicians
without seeking after the learned of all, shall with mature advise, and
consultation think will cure his disease. Secondly, for that this example if
it be applied to the Oath, and to the cure of the soul, supposes first, that
whosoever takes the Oath, being commanded by the constitutive precept of his
Sovereign Prince, is in danger of his soul, although he follow therein a
probable opinion, which how untrue it is I have showed above number. 26.
. Secondly, that to follow a probable opinion against the more probable, is
dangerous to ones soul, although by not following it he shall incur a
Praemunire, which to affirm were certes rather a great folly, than wisdom,
and a far greater folly to go about to persuade any wise man to believe the
same See above, number. 37.
. And thirdly, that to refuse the Oath is the more safe, and the more probable
opinion, because it is disproved by the Popes Holiness, and the greater number
of Catholic Divines, who follow his opinion; whereas the approving, or
disproving of the Pope, or other Doctors, cannot make their opinion to be the
more probable, yea, or probable at all, and so not safe to those, who see their
approving, or disproving to be grounded upon false reasons, and suppositions
See above, number. 14.
, as are the Popes declarative Breves forbidding the Oath, as I have showed
above number. 59.
.

The Conclusion.
46 NOw to make an end, these five Observations, and the former Explications of
the Oath (which I have not invented of my self, but only abstracted them out
of those Authors, who have written of this Subject more exactly) seem to my
understanding so clear and convincing, that I have thought good to recommend
them to the serious considerations of all English Roman Catholics, those
especially who have taken upon them the charge of souls, and in that regard
are bound to instruct the unlearneder sort of people both men, and women in
their duty to God and Caesar, and to teach them truly, sincerely and without
any inordinate respect of humane fear, or favor, what spiritual obedience
they owe to the Popes Holiness, and what temporal to the Kings Majesty, and
have not perchance hitherto examined this great, and important controversy of
the Oath, betwixt the Pope, and their Prince so diligently, and uprightly, as
they might, and in regard of their Pastoral charge ought to have done; to the
end that they may clearly perceive, that those their Catholic brethren, who
out of conscience, and obedience to their Sovereign have taken the Oath,
thinking it their duty so to do, and have thereby according to his
commandment acknowledged that temporal Allegiance, which according to the
grounds of Catholic Religion is due to our supreme temporal Prince, have no
ways departed from the bond of that true spiritual obedience, which is due to
our supreme spiritual Pastor. In all which if I have any way not wittingly,
or willingly, I call God to witness, erred through ignorance, I most humbly
submit my self to the judgment, and Censure of the holy Catholic, Apostolic
Roman Church, and would also have been willing for peace, and obedience sake,
to have lead captive, and blindfold my will, contrary to my understanding, to
the observing of his Holiness Breves, if they had concerned a spiritual, and
not a temporal matter, and also in his own cause, to the great prejudice, and
against the express commandment of our Sovereign Prince, by challenging
since the time of Pope Gregory the seventh (A thing unheard of before that age
(says Onuphrius) in competent attributes (as a learned Catholic calls them
See the Protestants Apology for the Roman Church in the Preface sec. 20.
) of supreme authority, Onuphrius lib. 4 de varia creat. Romans Pont.
and principallity in temporalls over all the Christian Monarchs of the world,
to dispose of their Kingdoms, and Dominions at least wise indirectly or in
order to spiritual good, with imminen danger of the spiritual and temporal
ruin of all. English Catholics, and manifest overthrow of the temporal
Soveraigntie of the Kings Majesty, and of all other Sovereign Princes, whom
the ancient Fathers with uniforme consent, S. Ignatius in epist. ad Smyr.
Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. 24. Tertul. in Apolog c 33. and ad S^ ^pulam Clem Alex
lib 4 S^^om^^u^ (...) ^ (...) l^^^^^ 24 Did^^^ (...) in (...) G^^^ (...) Pat^^^
in (...). 50. Optatus M^levit lib. 3. contra Parmenian. G^egor, N^^. in (...)
27. (...) s^ipso. Ambros. in Apologia David, cap. 4. (...) 2 ^^^st. 7. and
(...) de ob^^^ ^^^dosii. Hieronymus epist 22. ad Eustechium, (...) 36. ad
Rusticum. Christ ^^m. 2 and 20 ad pop. Antioch. and ad Romans 13. Aug de fide and
epe. ib cap. 2. and in (...) ^8. conc. 31 and tract. 115. in Joan. Cyril. Al^x
lib 12 i^ Joan cap. 56. Greg ^^^g. lib. 2. epist. 61. Isid lib. 3. sent. cap.
^. ^e ^^rd. epist. 42. ad ^^chiep. Senon. Be^a, Euthym. Arnob. Cassiod. in
illud Psalm. 50. Tibi soli pecca^^. Theod. Theophyl. Occumen. ad Romans 13.
acknowledge to be supreme in temporals, and subject to the Temporal
punishment of none but of GOD alone; and that to deprive Princes of their
temporal Kingdoms, Dominions, or Lives, for what cause, crime, or end soever
temporal, or spiritual, directly, or indirectly they be deprived, is a
temporal punishment; I think no man that is ^^^^d with natural reason can
deny.

FINIS.

