A SHORT EXPOSITIon of the 20. and 21. verses of the third Chapter of the first
Epistle of S. John.

CONTAINING A VERY PROfitable discourse of conscience, and of all the actions,
sorts, and kinds thereof, whereby every man may easily know his estate, wherein
he stands in the sight of his God, and whether his conscience be good or
evil, with all things also belonging either to get a good conscience, or else
to releive it out of trouble, being grieved and wounded, as in the epistle to
the reader is more specially mentioned, and in the discourse itself clearly
expressed.

PROVE. 15. verse 15. A good conscience is a continual feast

EDINBVRGH. PRINTED BY ROBERT WALdegraue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. Anno
Dom. 1600.

Cum privilegio Regio.

TO THE READER.
ALbeit the dullness of this time be such, (gentle Reader in the Lord) that it
rather moves many to content themselves with other men's writings, then to
take pains, to write for the profit of any thing themselves: yet such is the
zeal of some, that they cannot suffer men to sleep in the danger of sin to
their own destruction, but will (if it be possible) awake them, and let them
know the deadly danger wherein they stand, which is a thing most needful,
although it be neither plausible to the world nor acceptable to the flesh: for
who is he that sees not the security of the world in this age, the contempt of
God and of his word, and does not sorrow at the heart for it. And seeing it is
not possible, that any can truly sorrow, and sit still and say nothing,
especially, when he perceaueth the most part of all this blind age, by the
craft of Satan, cast into a deadly sleep of damnable security. So that they
neither care for the true knowledge of God, while they are young; nor think
that they stand in need of it being old, but spend, or rather mispend all
their time in the vain cares and pleasures of this transitory world, without
heedfull care unto their callings, or giving ear unto their conscience when
the same accuses them, convicteth them, and condemns them before God, as
guilty of infinite things, whereof one day they must give an exact accounte,
and at his hands receive the wages of eternal death for their works, unless
they awake, while time is, truly repent them of their former security, and
try al their actions, thoughts, words and deeds, by every man's conscience,
the which the Lord has given him, both to be unto him witness and judge of
the same. And therefore, to the end that al men may do this the better, to
whose hearing or reading this discourse shall come. I have thought it good,
being moved in my conscience, to write this treatise thereof. Whereby eueryman
may know his own estate and his God, as he has revealed himself in his word
to the world. Both the which points (says Bernard) are above all things
necessary for all men that desire to escape hell, and come to heaven. For as of
the knowledge of thy self, comes the fear of God and of the knowledge of
God, the love of God; so of the ignorance of thy self, comes pride, and of
the ignorance of God and of his word, desperation (says he). Wherefore,
whosoever will avoyde this deadly dart of desperation in the end, must not
neglect the means which God has appointed to escape it. That is, first to
know his sins, and hear his conscience, when she accuses or excuses him
according to the rule of Gods word. And next, to know the way of deliverance
from them And that he take heed, that in seeking a salve for them, he be not
deceived therein for conscience being wounded with sin, is that thing that
neither can be healed with coulors of Retorick, with sweetness of music, with
delicacie of dainty meats, with beawtie and pleasant sights, with man's
inventions, or else with any other thing except only Christ, as he has
offered and revealed himself in the Scriptures, apprehended by faith, and
received and kept with a good conscience, without the which, if any man live
and dye, it had bin far better for him, that with Kain and Judas he had
never bin borne. Receive therefore (gentle reader) this short discourse,
wherein thou may see both what a thing conscience is, what an intolerable
thing the grief and wound thereof is when it is troubled. What are all the
actions, and offices of it in all men and women. What are the sorts and kinds
thereof: what is man's duty touching it. How to get a good conscience, and
keep it being gotten: and lastly, how to relieve and help it being troubled,
that it accuse and condemn us not before our God, whose sentence when it
accuses, shall ever stand and condemn us without reclamation before the Lord.
But if not, then shall we have boldness toward our God, to whom be glory for
ever.

1. JOHN CHAP. 3. 20 If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart,
and knows all things.

21 Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God.


THE Apostle in these Paul. 2, Cor. 1.12.


In this place John does neither speak Ephesians. 4.19. Math. 9.12.
who are past feeling, and given themselves to work uncleanness even with
greedines. Neither yet of Hypocrites, who flattering themselves, do boast them
of their own righteousness. But only of them that have their conscience drawn
forth before the judgment seat of God, by him to make them understand and
feel his anger and wrath against them, Psalm. 6.3. and 38.3. and. 51 4. 1. Sam.
2 6
In respect of some sins, whereof their conscience does accuse them, that
they should speedely turn unto him, that he may heal them who has wounded
them.

Romans 5.1, Ephe. 3.12
and assure our selves that he will be favorable and merciful unto us for his
Christ's sake, by whom we have both boldness and entrance with confidence by
faith, through whom also we have that peace with him (says the Apostle) in
our Conscience, that passes all Treasures, yea all understanding.

Not that any man's conscience bears Psalm. 130.3. and. 143. 2 Ezch. 18, 21
Zach, 1.3. Math 11.28.
But because he does acknowledge his sins, confesses them to his God,
repents him thereof, believes in Christ, and submits himself and his will
wholly to the will of his God, desiring above all things, ever to be ruled and
governed thereby only.

Of all this, I mark only here, 1. Tim, 48 The fruit both of godliness and of
sin what
what is the gain of godliness, that is, of faith, and of a good conscience,
even a promise to have al things necessary for this life, and likewise to
enjoy life everlasting, made by God himself in the scriptures, wherein also,
and in this place especially, we find the cruelty of sin to be so huge and
weighty, that by no means that man can find in himself, he shall ever be able
to shake of the intollerabl burden thereof, that thereby at one time or
another, his conscience shall not be fearfully wakened, grieved, and above all
things burdened therewith, and not acknowledge that the wages thereof, is
death everlasting, both of body and soul. And therefore, they are far
deceived, who flattering themselves in their sins, go about to shift
themselves from the sense and feeling of Gods wrath, and the testimony of
their own conscience, to accuse convict, and to condemn them before his
tribunal seat for the same: of which sort, notwithstanding there has bin in
all ages an infinite number, who as the Prophet says: Has made a covenant
with death, Esa. 28.15.
and are at agreement with Hell. That albeit a scourge come, it shall not touch
them, and that by reason of their shifts, their refuges, and their cloaks of
falsehood and vanity, wherewith they suppose to cover their sin from God. But
all in vain (says the Lord) for the scourge of wrath shall come, tredde them
down, and utterly consume them. And yet of this kind of people (says the
Lord) the world shall be full in the latter days, 1. These. 5.3.6.
who when they shall look for nothing but peace and safety, then shall come
up on them undoubtedly death and endless destruction, the which should learn us
not any longer to sleep in sin, and to contemn wholesome admonitions, as
does the most part of all the world at this day, to their own loss and
perpetual destruction, Ephesians. 4.16.
but haistilie and with diligence to awake (as says the Apostle) who hitherto
have without remorse of conscience and true repentance, slept in sin, and
filthy lusts of our flesh. The which at length, brings forth death both of
body and soul, and therefore, he commands us to rise from the same by
faith, repentance, and newnes of life. That by Christ we may receive the light
of life everlasting and the purging of our consciences, Heb. 9.4. The division
of this discourse is foure-folde.
from dead works to serve the living God. The which as they are, either good or
bad in all men and women. So am I minded, first to express and set down the
true definition of conscience. The which hear the Apostle calls the Heart of
man, and what a grief it is to have the same hurt, and wounded with sin.
Secondly, to show what are the proper duties and actions thereof in all
persons. Thirdly, what are the kinds and diversity of consciences. And last,
what be the duties of al men and women touching their own consciences: how
to prevent the troubles thereof, and also how to relieve the same being troubled.

Concerning the first, I find this word heart in the Scriptures, 1 The heart
of man what.
to have diverse significations, and therefore placed sometimes for the
affections of the heart, as Where your treasure is, Mat. 6.21.
there will your heart be also. Some times for the whole soul of man: as,
Let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt. 1. Pet. 3, 4,
Some times for the will of man: Act. 4, 31,
as, they were all of one heart, that is, they were all of one mind, will or
affection: and sometimes for man's conscience: as in that prayer which Paull
makes for the Thessalonians, 1. These. 3.
praying, that the Lord should make their hearts stable and unblameable, in
holiness before God, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. That is,
their conscience, as now in the words and text above specified. The Apostle
Saint John, understands by the word Heart, the only conscience of man.

For as he consists of two parts principally, 2 The division of the parts
of man in body and soul.
that is, of body and soul. So does the soul consist of understanding and
will, albeit the soul has no parts properly, but only by analogy, and in
respect of the diverse objects and actions thereof: By reason whereof, the same
is said to be divided into diverse parts, that is, into diverse powers or
faculties.

The understanding, 3 understanding what
is called that power or faculty of the soul, whereby we use reason, which is
the more principal part, serving to rule and to order the whole man. And
therefore it is placed in the soul, to guide and govern the whole person.

The Will, 4 Will what
is that faculty and power of the soul, whereby we do will or nill any
thing. That is, choose or refuse it.

With the Will are joined certain affections, as Joy, Sorrow, Love, Hatred, 5
Affections are joined with the will.
and sick-like, whereby we do either embrace or eschew that which is good or
evil.

Now, 6 Conscience not placed i^ the willing faculty of the soul,
because the works and actions of conscience do stand in the use of reason,
it is evident, that therefore it is not placed in the affections or willing
part of the soul, but in the understanding, which has also two parts.

The first whereof is, 7 Two parts of understanding.
that which stands in the view and contemplation of the truth or falsehood of
any thing, and goes no further. Theoricall and Practical wherein conscience
is placed.
The second, is that which stands in the view of every particular action, to
search and seek whether the same be good or evil. The first is called
Theoricall, and the second Practical. Under the which conscience is
comprehended: because her property is to judge of the goodness or badnes of
things or turns done.

8 The definition of Conscience Tho. aqui part, 1. que 79. artic. 13
So that of these premises we have to understand, that conscience is a part of
the mind or understanding in all reasonable creatures: determining, iudgeing,
decerning, and giving sentence of all their particular actions, thoughts, words
or deeds, either with them or against them.

This definision of conscience does show, 9 Conscience is not a bare knowledge
with out works of accusing and excusing, etc
that it is not a bare knowledge or judgment of the understanding only, but a
natural power, faculty, or created quality: from whence judgment and
knowledge do proceed as effects. This the scriptures do confirm, ascribing
sundry works and actions to conscience, as accusing, excusing, comforting,
terrifiing which could not proceed from thence, if it were no more then an
naked and bare action or act of the mind.

Wherefore, 10 As conscience is in all men and Angels so does it apply al
principles and conclusions of the mind, either to accuse or excuse them.
it is that power of the soul whose property is to take the principal
conclusions of the mind, and apply them either to accuse or excuse. So that
this is the ground of all, that Conscience is a thing which can never be
lost, albeit the same may loose the use for a time, as reason in a drunken man,
for it is in all reasonable creatures both man and Angel, as in the proper
subjects. Therefore all consciences that now do sleep, shall once be wakened,
either in mercy, or in judgment, here or in hell: for the torment of an evil
conscience in the wicked, Esa. 66.24
is a worm (says the Prophet) which shall never die, and a fire that shall
never be quenched.

The end of conscience is to determine of things done, 11 The end of
Conscience and wherein it differs from other gifts and faculties of the mind.
whereby it differs from all other gifts of the mind, as are intelligence,
opinion, science, faith, prudence, etc. For as to intelligence, it simply
conceaueth a thing to be, or not be, opinion judges a thing to be probable or
contuigent. Science judges it to be sure and certain: faith is a persuasion,
whereby we believe things that are not, but are hid from us as yet, prudence
discerns what is meet to be done, or what to be left undone. But Conscience
goes further then all these, for it gives sentence of things done by saying
unto us and showing us, this was done, this was not done. This may be done.
This may not be done. This was well done. This was evil done.

12 3. things to be marked
Of Conscience thus described, there do arise three things to be marked.





and pronounce decree, either with us or against us to God. For sometimes it
consents and speaks with God, against persons in whom it is placed: and other
times again, it co^sents with them, and speaks for them before the Lord.
Examples hereof, there be many in the Scriptures, as of the first sort, Kain
and Judas, and in the latter, Peter and the Thief, who albeit their sins
were greevous, because they repented, their Conscience assured them of mercy.

And this is the cause why we call this effect of our mind Conscience. 13 Why
the Practical part of the understanding is called conscience.
For as Scire, to know, is of one man only by himself. So is Conscire, when
at the least two know some secret thing. The which they do both know
together. Wherefore, the name Conscientia, or conscience is that thing that
makes two together partakers or partners of the knowledge of things which are
secret in the mind of men or Angels.

Now it is certain, 14 God and man are partners only in the knowledge of
conscience
that in this knowledge with man of his secret deeds and thoughts, no
creatures can be partners with him (because neither men nor Angels do know
man's thoughts and secrets, unless the same be revealed unto them) and
therefore it remains, that in the knowledge thereof, conscience has God only
to be partner with man in all his thoughts, words, and deeds, how secret soever
they be: and man again, by the gift of God, does know the same of himself,
together with God in his Conscience. And thus far concerning the word
Conscience, and the difinition thereof, The which here Saint John calls the
heart of man.

2 What a grief is a troubled conscience Prouer. 18.14.
It follows, to speak next of the grief of a troubled Conscience, which of
all others is most intolerable. For the spirit of man (says Solomon) will
sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit, who can bear it? That is, a
troubled and a wounded conscience, is of al grief the greatest, and the
greeuousest punishment that God at any time lays upon either man or Angel.
So that men to be rid out of this torment, do choose oftentimes rather death,
then to live under the misserable and intolerable grief thereof, albeit in
all other troubles, they be able to endure even unto the end thereof, yet this
only is that grief which they can no ways sustain. As examples, both of
profane and divine histories do bear record. For whether we consider this
grief in them who are mere natural men, and never knew God in Christ, or in
them that are renewed by the holy Ghost, and spirit of regeneration, we shall
find it to be in either of them, the greatest grief and torment of all
others.

As to the first sort, whether the same

For the hethen Philosophers, the wisest Cato and others, who did bear all
troubles most patiently, to the great admiration of all the world, did yet
notwithstanding, where their consciences became troubled, and when some great
distress of mind wounded their heart and spirit, make an end of their lives
with their own hands. Some by drinking deadly poison. Some by running
themselves voluntarily, upon the weapons of their enemis. Some by casting
themselves from hie places unto the deep of the sea, or over high rocks, to
beat and strike themselves all to pieces. And some not sticking to stogge
themselves through the hearts with swords, knyues, or other such weapons, for
grief of this wound of conscience, and trouble of heart, all the which
persons, so long as other ways their consciences were not surcharged, and
ouermaistered, were in all bodily troubles invincible, etc. As Cato, Iasson the
husband of Medea, Lucretia, and others. As Alexander the great and Nero, who
would have put hand to themselves for grief of conscience.

and sets before them their sins committed, and the punishmente due unto
them. Then may we see in many of them, how grievously they are tormented, and
what sorrowful ends they do make, while some of them do hang themselves.
Some drown themselves. Some cut their own throtes, and some of them do
stogge themselves to the hearts, with knives, daggers, or swords: And all to
rid themselves out of the intolerable and fearful grief of conscience, as
they do falsely suppose, unto whom Judas and Kain, are fearful patrons and
teachers. As to that wicked Spaniyard Alphonsus who when he could not by any
means dissuade his brother Diasius by fair means from the profession of the
gospel, to embrace Papistrie, anno. 1551
he cruelly murdered him. And therefore grieved in Conscience, there after
did hang himself at the council of Trent. The like also did Robert Long, a man
at arms in Calice, a false witness against William Smyth preacher, anno, 15^^
who grieved in conscience therefore, did immediately thereafter run to the
water and drowned himself. So heavy lay that sin of false witness bearing
upon his conscience. And what shall we say of George Brodway, suborned by the
council of Calice, about the same time to bear also false witness against
Thomas Brook; Who therefore went about to cut his own throat for grief of
conscience, and when he was stayed to do the same, and the knyfe taken from
him, wherewith he had wounded himself, he became stark mad and so dyed. Sir
James Halles also Knight, and justice of the common place for grief of
conscience that he had denied the known truth, and embraced papistrie, at
Queen Mary's command, drowned himself. Gregory the seventh (as witnesses
Benno) dyed desperately at Salernum of the only grief of conscience: unto
whom we may add Latimus, Eckins and Thomas Blaverus Scotus, who all
miserably and in desperation ended this life for onley grief of conscience,
and who list to read more of this number, and of all sorts both of men and
women, he shall find many that miserably for grief of conscience in
desperation have ended their lives in that book which is entitled Historia
Tragica. Therefore of all burdens, the grief of conscience is the greatest.

But here the question may be demanded, 5 Question.
why some of all these sorts of people do dispatch the^selus of this life by
so violent death, and some others again do dye so quiet, or rather sencelesly
with out grief?

Answer, Answer.
that the cause is in respect that some feeling no sin in this life, do
depart like drunken and brutish swine and waken not out of their hellish
sleep until they be in hell, and the torments thereof fully sease upon them.
Some are surcharged with the deadly sleep of sin unto the end of their life
and vthers overburthened with sin are wakened in this life through the weight
thereof.
And the others being surcharged, and ouerburthened with sin in this life,
do dye like barking mad dogs in desperation, without Christ and true
repentance with Kain, Judas, Julian the Apostate and others. Of these two
sorts there be most of the first in this last age, wherein Christ shall find
no faith at his coming but all persons for the most part, sleeping in that
deadly security, wherein they shall assure themselves of peace, when as nothing
is neearer hand unto them then fearful and endless torment of conscience,
the worm whereof shall never die, etc. Wherefore the Lord (as says the
Apostle) commands all such to waken and rise up from the sleep of sin by
faith, repentance, and holy conversation, that while they have time, Christ
may give them light.

Thus much touching the grief of conscience, both in the heathen and also in
the profane and superstitious professors of Religion.

Secondly, we find that the tormente of Conscience, 1 Examples of Gods
children. Conscience is a wound which no Physician can heal
even in Gods children, and in such as are renewed with his spirit, is a grief
intolerable, and so great, both in all Christ's members, upon whom it is
laid, and also in their head Christ him self, that it is heavier then a
thousand deaths, and yet no ways to be relieved with any comfort, or solace
under the heaven, as all other griefs may be, be they never so great: for
example, let us take Job, Job. 3.
who for the loss of all his substance, authority, children, and health of
body, never shrunk nor quailed, until his unhappy friends wounded his
Conscience, and then he affirmed and complaned, that God had fastened in him
sharp arrows, set him as a butte to shute at, and made him to possess the
sins of his youth. So heavy a burden was this wounded heart and Conscience
unto him, who under all other troubles, was a pattern of al vprightnes and
patience, never being moved therewith any thing at all (as it were) until
this grief did prick him.

The like may we also behold in many others of the peculiar servants of God,
as in David, Ezechias, and Jeremy, 2
who never did faint under any grief, (notwithstanding of all their infinite
troubles) but only under the burden of a wounded Conscience, wherewith when
they felt themselves surcharged, they then were like Cranes chattering,
Sparrows mourning, and Pellicants casting out fearful cries. So that with
mourning like Doves, their hearts did cleave to the duste, and their tounges to
the roof of their mouths.

Yea, even the Lord our Master and Savior Christ, 3
the true Image of his Father, God and man, when in his manhood he felt this
wound (his Godhead, lurking for the time) albeit under all his other troubles,
which he sustained for our sakes he was courageous: yet herein feeling his
fathers wrath for our iniquities, the which for them he was to sustain, he
complained, that his soul was heavy unto the death, and earnestly prayed,
that if it were possible, that that cup should pass away from him, which was
so bitter, that while he prayed, he sweat blood, and before he departed this
life, pitefully cried three several times, that God had forsaken him.

What a ^^^efe is a ^^oubled ^^nscie^ce.
Of these premises, al men may understand, that are not a sleep unto
everlasting condemnation, what a thing it is to possess a grieved condemning
heart, or troubled Conscience. For there is no sickness, which is not unto
death, but Physic is provided, or may be had for it: no sore, but Chirurgerie
will aforde a salve for it. Friendship helps poverty, hope of liberty
imprisonment, suit and favor recover men from banishment, and time and
authority wears away reproach: But none of all these or any other thing in all
the earth, can help a troubled condemning heart, or a wounded Conscience.

4
Where by the contrary, the comfort of a safe Conscience and quiet heart or
mind, does help, heal, and cure, all the sorrows, griefs, and troubles,
that can befall either men or women. Pro. 15.15
For it is says Solomon, a continual feast, and a perpetual solace in all the
greatest troubles and griefs in the world: yea, this same being in health and
in good case, will valiantly sustain and easily bear all other troubls
whatsoever: but if it be troubled nothing is able to sustain that grief.
Study therefore above all things, Proverb. 18.14.
to avoyde the testimony of an evil Conscience, and to get, keep, and
entertain the precious jewel of a good Conscience, which will never suffer
them who possess the same to be afraid of evil tidings, (says the Prophet)
for if we acknowledge and confess our sins, 1. John. 7.8. Psalm. 51.1.
he is faithful and just, who has promised to forgive us them, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness in the blood of his Christ Let us therefore judge
and condemn our selves, confess our wickedness, and repent us of our sins,
that our own hearts condemn us not before the Lord our God, for he will
never, but both accuse us and condemn us, where our Consciences does the same.

5 Conscience in hell what a grief.
We have here to mark, that if the grief of Conscience be so grievous a
thing to sustain in this life, how much more grievous is it to be suffered in
hell, where there is no redemption, neither shall the torments thereof have any
end, where the worm thereof shall not dye, nor yet the fire that shall torment
it ever be quenched. Take heed to this, all Epicures and Athiests, and who say
that hell is made, and ordained to fear but children and young folks withal,
who yet might see if they were not blind, the beginning of hell in the troubled
Conscience of the wicked even in this life, to to be a thing intolerable, and
yet much more shall it be so in the life to come, in respect both that the
torments thereof shall be infinite degrees augmented, and likewise continue
and endure for ever and without end. 6 Esa. 28.15. Question.
But some there be (says the Prophet) yt do ever put from the^ the evil day of
the Lord, and have made a covenant with death, and a league with hell, that
albeit a scourge run over and pass through, it shall not come at them, in
respect of falsehood and vanity, wherewith they have cloaked and hid themselves.

Answer, that such, Answer.
albeit they have no outward cross nor trouble in this life, yet shall they
never escape a wounded Conscience, either in this life or in that to come, for all the wicked the more they flee from it (although Gods children by faith and
repentance do often escape it the more it perseweth them, and once fearfully
shall overtake them, and accuse them of all their sins, convict them, condemn
them, and execute Gods terrible judgment of unspeakable torments against
them, whereof there shall never be an end. For this is that worm that never
shall dye, and the fire of hell which burns with it, 7 Ephesians. 5.14 The
conclusion of the first part.
that never shall be quenched. Let us therefore Watch and pray, awake and stand up
from the dead while we have time, who hitherto have sleped and snored in all
kind of sin and security, that we fall not into this gulf of torment of a
condemning heart and troubled spirit of evil Conscience, with the most part
of this unhappy age, that never will awake and repent before they be wakened
with the torments of hels fire, in the miserable and endless life to come. For
it is above all things, the duty of all such as are careful of their
salvation, earnestly, and continually, without seasing, to pray and call unto
the Lord, that he in his Christ may give us light through faith, repentance
and amendment of our evil spent lives, that we perrish not with the wicked
world, which sleeps securely in all kind of mischief, without remorse or
grief of Conscience, and will so do unto the end, to their intolerable
punishment and misery, that never shall have end.

The Second part.
1
Having declared in the first part of our division, the sense and meaning of the
Apostle, what is the definition of conscience, as also what an intolerable
burden is the grief of a wounded conscience.

Two duties of conscience.
It rests to speak of the proper duties and actions of Conscience, which are
of two sorts: to wit, either to bear witness and give testimony, or else to
pronounce sentence and give judgment, either with us or against us.

It bears witness or gives testimony, 2
when it tells us that a thing was done or not done of us. For the Apostle
says, that the Gentiles did show the effect of the law, written in their
hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, Romans 2.15.
and their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing.

And again he says, 2. Cor. 1.12.
that his rejoicing is the testimony of his Conscience, that in simplicity and
godly pureness, he had his conversation in the world, etc Where we have to
consider, first of what things is it that conscience bears witness: secondly
in what manner: 3 Three things to be considered.
and thirdly how long.

As to the first, it bears witness and record of all our thoughts, affections,
and actions. For we use to protest sometimes in our consciences, that we never
thought something, let be to have done it. It bears also witness, what our
wills and affections be in all matters, Romans 9.1.
as I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me witness
by the holy Ghost. Thirdly, ( Solomon says) that often our heart or
conscience knows, that we have cursed others, Eccle. 7.24
that is spoken evil of them.

How conscience bears witness.
2 The manner that Conscience uses in giving testimony or bearing witness
stands in two things. To wit, first, it observes and takes knowledge of all
things which we do. 2. It does tell us inwardly and secreetely within our
hearts of them all, and so it is like unto a noater, who has ever a pen in his
hand to write and put into his protocoll, whatsoever is said or done by us so
long as we live.

4 Conscience bears witness for ever.
Thirdly, It bears us witness not for any short space of time, but for ever,
both in this life, and in the life to come. So that when man dies, his
Conscience dies not: yea, when we shall rise again, our Conscience shall come
with us to the bar of Gods judgments, either to accuse us, or excuse us
before God: for the Apostle sayteh, Romans 2.15.16.
Their Consciences bearing them witness, at the day when GOD shall judge the
secreits of men by Jesus Christ.

5 Three things to be learned
Of this duty of conscience we learn three things: first, that there is a God;
for seeing it bears witness of all our thoghts, unto the which neither man
nor Angel is privy. It must needs therefore be that it is to God alone, (who
sees and knows all things) to whom our Conscience bears witness and
record. And therefore, let Athiests and godles persons bark against this as
long as they list, yet have they that within them, to wit, their conscience
(the which will convince and convict them of the truth of the Godhead, will
they, or nill they, either in life or in death, and that he has store of
torments, and of infernal spirits to punnish them in the end. For many
Examples hereof, one shall serve. A certain Skoffer and filthy gester, who
this way gate for the most part, all his living, was in a Tavern, where
many were drinking, and there to play thee sporter, did mock the immortality
of the soul, and offered to sell his soul (if any he had) to them that would
give him an kanne of wine for it. The which, when one of them that were
drinking there had bought from him, and given to him the said Kan of wine:
Satan in man's likeness, adjoining himself to the Table, with them that were in
the Tavern, and desired to have the soul of this gester, of the same price of
him that had bought it. The party who first bought it, granted thereunto, and
delivered it unto him as he had it for another Kanne of wine. The which when
he had delivered, he took him from the Table both body and soul. See more
of this history, and of the like in Historia tragica.

The providence of God over all men: whose consience will not suffer them to
hide any thing from them.
2 We learn heerby, that God does watch over all men by a special providence,
in that he gives to every man a particular Conscience to be his watchman and
keeper, who in this point is like unto a master of prison, who gives to his
prisoners keepers to watch the^, and to bring them home again into the prison
if at any time they purchase his license to go abroad for their particular
turns: Even so have all men and women Consciences to follow them always as at
the heels and to dog them, and to try all their thoughts, words, works, and
affections, and to bear record, and true witness thereof to God, and unto
their own hearts. In such sort, that although we may hide our turns from
men, yet is it certain that our Conscience will show them all before God.

Therefore, we ought to stand above al things to do uprightly, and to follow
the word of God in all that we do, or leave undone (which is the only square
and rule of our Conscience) that the same may excuse us, and not accuse us
before our God, for if our heart accuse us to our God, God is far greater
then our hearts to condemn us, but if not, then we may have bouldnes toward
him.

Thirdly, The goodness of god in setting our conscience to tell us what to do,
and under wha^ pains. 1 Cor. 12.13.
we observe here the goodness and love of God toward us, who sets our
Conscience to tell us secretly when we do amiss, to the end that we should
presently repent us thereof and amend, that he may forgive us, but if not that
then oppenly it should accuse us thereof before God, and at the bar of his
judgment seat, before al his Angels and saints in heaven. Wherefore we
should accuse and condemn our selves here, that we be not accused and
condemned there, if we desire to be saved in that great day of the Lord. For if
we accuse and convict our selves when we do amiss, with repentance and
amendeme^t, neither shall our conscience accuse us to our God, nor he condemn
us for the evil which we have committed. And thus much touching the first
duty of Conscience, which stands in witnes-bearing to God in accusing or
excusing us.

6 The judgment of Conscience what.
As to the second action or work of Conscience, it is to give judgment of
things which we have done, and so it is like a judge, causing malefactors to
be arraigned at the bar of his judgment seat, and there to suffer for their
demerites: yea, rather it is like a little God, sitting in the middle of man's
heart, araigning and judging him in this life, as he shall be arraigned and
judged for his offenses at the tribunal seat of the Lord God in the day of
judgment. So that that judgment given in this life by conscience, is nothing
else but a certain and sure forerunner of the last judgment to come.

7 We are admonished of two things. 1. Job* 3.20
We are admonished hereby to take heed, that nothing past lie upon us, and
that we charge not our Consciences in time coming with any matter whereof they
may accuse us. For if our conscience shall accuse us, much more shall God
condemn us. Because he both sees all our doings more clearly then do our
Consciences, and judges more sincerely and secretly then they can do unto us.
Therefore we ought to endeavor our selves with Paull, to say always, 2. Cor.
4.4.18.
that we know nothing by our selves in our life, that we may ever stand in
our Conscience without blame before him.

Here we must consider two things. 8 Two things to be considered.
First, the cause that makes Conscience to give judgment, and secondly, the
manner how it gives i^. The cause is the only binder of Conscience, which is
either proper or improper.

The proper binder of Conscience is Gods law, 9 Acts. 4. Romans 13.
and the improper the laws of Princes, having their authority of God to make
such laws for the good of their subjects, as ar agreeable with his law, or
otherways, they cannot bind Conscience. Where we learn that gods word is ever
to be obeyed, 10 Gods word ever to be obeyed.
albeit thereby we should offend all men, and also loose our own lives.
Because we are bound and oblished thereto in Conscience.

Secondly, we must take heed, 11 What we ought to take heed unto.
that that which we take in hand to do, have a warrant in our Conscience out
of the word to do it: and such like that which we leave undone, if we may
leave it undone without the wound of conscience or not. As for example. The
knowledge of God and his word binds us to learn it in Conscience, albeit
the knowledge of human science does not the like, etc. For all persons are
bound in Conscience to know God aright, We are bound chiefly in conscience to
know two things. 12
and as he has revealed himself to the world in his word, and especially
these two things. First, that all perfect righteousness and life everlasting is
to be obtained in Christ. And secondly, that the instruments to obtain the
same righteousness and life in Christ, is only faith.

It follows, to show how Conscience gives judgment of all our doings: to
wit, by a kind of reasoning, called a Practical syllogysme, wherein Conscience
uses two instruments in making of this reason, which are mind and memory.
For the mind tells Conscience, what the Law of God is, and memory brings
to her mind all the particular actions that men or women have done or not
done, that Conscience may determine and give judgment thereof. So that from
these two, the Conscience reasons after this manner, as for example. The
Conscience of a whoremonger reasons thus with himself, saying. All
whoremoungers shall be without in the fiery lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. But I am a whoremounger. Therefore, I
shall be there.

So that hereby we see that the sins, 13
and conpunctions of the heart, are sore and grievous pricks unto the mind
and Conscience of man, yea, greater then any grief that can befall him.
Although Satan for a time does extenuate the same, as also corrupt affections
do oftentimes so ouercast this judgment, Genesis 42.21.
that it perceaueth nothing for the space of a long time: as Joseph's brethren,
who were blinded this way for the space of two and and twenty years or
thereby. 2. Sam. 24.10.
David after his murder and adultery, slept without remorse, until he was
wakened by the Prophet Nathan, Act. 2.37.
and the Jews, who put Christ to death, until they were pricked with Peter's
sermon.

The effects of an accusing Conscience are especially five, 1. Grief, 2.
Sadness, 14 Isa. 17.20 Pro. 28.1, 2. Cor. 1.12. Pro. 15.15. Pro. 1^.18.
3. Fear, 4. Perturbation of the whole man, and 5. Desperation.

This much of the accusing and condemning Conscience. Now have we to speak of
the Conscience excusing and absoluing, which has all things contrary to the
accusing and condemning, as Bouldnes, Pro. 15.15
joy in the Holie-Ghoste, Confidence with assurance of mercy. For the righteous
(says Solomon) are boulde as a Lion.

15
Learn here reader, that what is done of a doubting, or of an erroneous
Conscience, To doubt, err, or do any thing against conscience is sin. To.
14.23. and. 14.14.
or against Conscience is sin. Because, whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
and to the unclean all things are vneleane. Some did judge fornication in the
Primitive Church not to be sin, wherein notwithstanding they sinned, in
respect that their Conscience did err in her judgment: For evil remains
evil, albeit Conscience says the contrary a thousand times. Most men and
women are sick of this disease at this day, who think sin not to be sin in
their Consciences, etc. What is done also against Conscience, is sin in the
doer, albeit it err and be deceived. 16 What should be our warrant in all our
turns


Of all this, let us learn to observe for a warrant to our Consciences, the
only command or contremand of Gods word in all our proceedings, and so shall
we walk surely when, we make his word the only rule to our Conscience, and
eschew man's inventions, or good intentions: and likewise, when we understand
that it is a most dangerous and deadly thing, to be ignorant of the knowledge
of Gods word, which makes the life of man to abound: yea, to flow with the sea
of al offenses against God. And there fore, we should ever pray him of his great
mercy, to grant us above al things, the true knowledge of him and of his
son Jesus Christ, with the testimony of an excusing and upright Conscience,
ruled ever by the square of his word, in the which, righteousness and eternal
life is only to be found through faith in Christ.

The Third part.
Two parts of our division being spoken of. It follows, 1 the division
touching the kinds and sorts of Consciences.
thirdly to entreat of the kinds and sorts of Consciences, and in special,
first of the Conscience of the regenerate, and of all Gods children: and
secondly of that of the wicked.

For as to Conscience generally, 2
it is either good or bad, and a good Conscience is that which rightly and
according to Gods word excuses and comfort. Conscience is either good or
bap and the excel^e^cie thereof consists in excuwng.
So that the excellency of Conscience stands in excusing and not in
accusing, by reason that when we commit any sin, we give then occasion
immediately thereafter, to our Conscience to accuse and condemn us, whereby we
do wound and hurt the same: as testifies the Apostle, saying, 1. Cor. 8.9.12,
that the Corinthians did wound the Consciences of their weak brethren, when
they used their liberty as an occasion of offense to them. And again, he
calls a good Conscience, a conscience without offense, or accusing of them
that have it. Act. 24.16.


Again, a good Conscience is of two sorts: 3 Good conscience of two sorts by
creation and regeneration.
to wit, either good by creation, or else by regeneration. The conscience of
our first parents before their fall, was good only by creation, and therefore
could not but excuse them before God in all that they did in the estate of
their innocence

A good Conscience regenerat, is that which being corrupt by nature, is renewed
and purged by faith in the blood of Christ, 4
in all such there is a conversion or change needful by grace, because by
nature all men's consciences through sin are evil, and therefore become good
only by grace in Christ.

The isntrumental cause serving to make this change is faith, 5 Two cause of a
good conscience
which purifieth the hearts, and the meritorious cause, is the blood of Christ,
which does purge consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

A regenerat conscience has two properties and stays. To wit, 6 Two
properties or stays of a regenerat conscience
Christian liberty, and certainty of salvation at all times, when she
excuses. Because that these two propertis have not their place in the outward
man, but in the heart, spirit or conscience.

I call Christian liberty, 7 Christian liberty what Gal 5.1.
the holy and spiritual freedom purchased unto us by Christ, wherein the
Apostle commands us to Standfast, and not to be entangled again with the
yoke of bondage, etc.

It has three parts. 8 Christian liberty has three parts.
As freedom from the justification of the morrall law, and the fulfilling
thereof. For he who is a member of Christ, is not bound in Conscience, to
bring the perfect righteousness of the law in his own person, for his
justification before God, but Chritss.

9
He also who is a Christian, is free from the curse and condemnation of the law,
for to such as are in Christ, There is no condemnation, Gal. 3 13.
because he has redeemed them from the curse of the Law.

10
The second, is the freedom and liberty that we have by Christ from the
rigor of the law, which craves perfect obedience, and condemns all
imperfection, But sin has no more dominion over them that are in Christ, To.
6.14. Gal 3.13. 1. Ioh. 5.3.
because they are not under the Law, or rigor thereof but under grace, and in
Christ.

11
And therefore it is, that God accepts our imperfite obedience, if it be
sincere: yea, and as the Prophet says, Will for work, Mal. 3.16. 12
and Desire for Deed.

The third is, freedom from the ceremonial law. For after that the truth of
all those shadows is come we are no more under the shadows to keep and
observe the same, which served to the Jews as a schoole-maister, Gal. 3.25.
Ephe. 2.15 Gal. 3.14.
to lead them to Christ, who was to come: but we having the truth, to wit,
Christ, who is already come, and has suffered for us in the flesh, have no
need now of those types and shadows of the ceremonial law. Thus much
concerning the first stay and property of a regenerate Conscience. 13 The
second property or stay of a regenerat Conscience Rom 8.15. Ephesians. 4.13 Math.
14, 31. and. 21.21. James 1.6 To. 8.20.


The second property or stay of a regenerate Conscience (especially when this
same excuses) is an infalliable certainty of our sins to be pardoned, and
of life everlasting, by faith in Christ, wrought in our hearts by his spirit,
whereof all the scriptures of God bear witness, that are here under written,
against that desperate doctrine of the Bishop of Rome, and Council of Trent.
As Romans 8.15. Ephesians. 4.13. Math. 14.31. Math. 21.21. James. 1.6. Romans 4.20.
Therefore it is, that Basilius demands this question: What is the property of
faith? To the which demand he answers, that it is to be one assured
persuasion void of doubting and disputation.

Of these places of Scripture above mentioned, 14
let every christian make this reason to wit: Every one that believes is the
child of God: but I believe: I therefore am the child of God, and Gods children
must needs be saved. Wherefore I cannot perish: against the doctrine of the
papists, who will have us to doubt of our Salvation, against the Scriptures of
God, and Articles of our belief, which do command every man and woman both to
say, I believe in God. In Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who is God also
equal with his father. In the holy Ghost, who is likewise God, and the third
person of the Godhead. 1. Ioh 3.2.
And finally, both to believe remission of our sins and life everlasting. But
to doubt and to believe, are words which importe contradiction. God commands
us to believe the remission of our sins, and life everlasting, through the
merits and death of Christ, in the Articles of our belief: and the Pope and
Council of Trent, do accurse al such for presu^ptuous persons, as do not
continually doubt of the remission of their sins, certainty of Salvation,
and life eternal. And therefore, the conclusion is true, that the Pope is
adversary to Christ, and consequently, that same Antichrist, the mystery of
whose iniquity began, even in the days of the Apostles, and which has so
increased sensine, that in all the heads of Christian religion, his doctrine is
repugnant unto Christ's: And in this point, directly to the very Articles of
our Christian belief.

It may be demanded here by way of question, 15 Question. Answer. A good
conscience may both accuse and excuse at one time, but not in one respect.
if one and the same conscience may not both accuse and excuse Gods children at
any one time.

Answer, that it may: For else if our Conscience should not still accuse us
when we do amiss, then should many great sins assault us at once, and
make hauock of our souls. And therefore we affirm, that it may both accuse
us, and excuse us at one time, but not in one respect. For it excuses us, in
that it assures us that our persons do stand righteous before God, as
clothed and covered with the righteousness of Christ. And in respect that we
have our desire, and do endeavor ourselves in the general course of our
whole life, to walk vprightlie and to please God. And yet nevertheless, of
this it must needs accuse us perpetually for our particular slippes, and for
the manifold wants and imperfections that be in all our good and best
actions, by reason whereof it tells us, perpetually in our care, Luek, 17.
that we are unprofitable servants.

Thus much of a good Conscience.

16 Evil conscience what and why it is so called.
Now follows an evil Conscience, which is so called, partly, because it is
corrupted by original sin, and partly by reason it is evil, that is,
troublesome and painful to our sense and feeling, as are unto us all other
sorrows, calamities or miseries whatsoever, which for this same cause are
called likewise evils.

17 The property of an evil conscience is ever to accuse. Luke. 5.8.
The propirtie of it is ever to accuse and condemn, and thereby to make them
that have it, affrayde of the presence of God, and to flee from him as from
their enemy. Example in our first parents and in Peter, who falling down at
Christ's knees besought him to go from him, in respect his Conscience toulde
him, and accused him that he was a sinful man.

18 Evil conscience is either dead or waking.
Evil Conscience is either dead or waking and stirring, the dead Conscience is
that which (albeit it can but accuse) lies commonly quiet, accusing little or
nothing at all, and that for diverse causes: to wit, want of reason, strength
and force of wicked and fleshly affections, and ignorance of Gods word and
revealed will.

A dead Conscience has two properties: the first is, to be benu^med, 19 A dead
conscience has two properties. Genesis 44.16.
unfeeling or dosened, as that of Joseph's brethren, for the space of two and
twenty years, or thereby. This reigns in drowsy Protestants, lukewarm
Gospellers, and civil honest persons, who live without common slander to the
gospel. Of this kind of Conscience let us take heed. For it is like to a
wild beast, who so long as it lies a sleep troubles nothing, but when it
awaks, flies into men's faces and deuoureth them. This is it that the Poets did
call the Furies, because it pursues them that have it, unto death and
desperation.

The second property of a dead Conscience is, 20
to be feared or burnt (as the Apostle says) with an hot iron: that is, the
Conscience which is past all feeling in this life, and is never moved with the
remorse of sin thoroughly, or to any purpose. And this is in the only obstinate
wicked, and such as are given up into a reprobate mind. Romans 2.15.
This shall be wakened at the day of death and last judgment by God, to accuse
and condemn them that have it, when the books of the dead, both of the great
and small shall be opened.

21 A stirring conscience has four degrees. 1 Accuses for evil doing.
Lastly, a stirring evil Conscience does either accuse or excuse, and it has
four several degrees or differences. The first that accuses a man for doing
evil, is an evil conscience, albeit by occasion or accident, it serves to
be a preparation to grace by the goodness of God: As the needle that draws
the thread through the cloth, by making a hole in the cloth, serves to sow
it also. For to accuse, is ever a defect, and was not in man by creation. And
therefore is one of the four degrees of an evil conscience.

22 2. accuses for well doing. 23 3. Excuses evil doing
The second, is that which accuses for well doing, and is in Idolaters, as not
to say or go to Mass, accuses a Papist.

The third, is that which excuses evil and doing, is found likewise in
Idolaters, who when they slay and burn the Godly, their eroneous conscience
excuses them.

24 4 Excuses well doing in unregenerate persons.
The fourth and last, excuses well doing in carnal and unregenerate persons,
Example in Abimeleck, not committing adultery with Abraham's wife, which was a
thing morallie good in it self, but not in the unregenerate person, whose
civil good works are nothing else but glistering sins, and this Conscience
is but Carnal and not regenerate. To, 14, 14,
For as to the clean, by faith al things are clean. So to the unclean that
want faith nothing is clean nor acceptable in Gods sight, how good soever
otherways the same be morally, because the person who lacks faith in Christ,
is unclean and therefore cannot please God.

Let us therefore draw near unto our God, with true and penitent hearts, 25
in assurance of faith (as says the Apostle) being void of an evil
conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water. For it is by faith that
the just do live, Heb 10, 22 Act. 15.9, Heb, 10, 38, 39,
the which we must follow unto the conservation of our soul, that all our
works may be acceptable to our God through Christ our Lord.

The Fourth part.
FOr as much as hitherto we have showed both what conscience is, 1
what the troubles thereof are? As likewise, what are both the actions and the
kinds thereof. It remains fourthly, and lastly, to show what is man's duty
concerning Conscience, how he may prevent the troubles thereof, and being
troubled in his heart and spirit, how he may relieve his conscience, and exoner
the same of all the troubles and wounds wherewith it may be grieved in this
life.

2 Man's duty is two fould concerning conscience
Man's first duty is in this behalf, to purchase and get a good conscience,
for by nature (seeing we are all the children of wrath) we have it not. And his
second duty is to keep it well when he has gotten it.

3 three thing are needful
For the getting of a good conscience, three things are needful: to wit, a
preparation to it. Secondly, the application of the remedy, and thirdly,
prepared the reformation of it.

6 Gal. 3.10, Preparation what.
The preparation to it requires the knowledge of the law, that thereby we may
understand what is good or evil. 2. The judicial sentence thereof, which
tells us, that the curse of God is deue to all men for every sin: 3. An
earnest examination of our Conscience by the law, that thereby we may perceive
and understand what is our estate before God, and upon this duty, the Prophets
do stand very much. For hereby it is, that we come to the knowledge of our
wretchedness and miserable estate before our God. Wherefore, Lamen. 3.40.
( Jeremy says) Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the
lord: and Zephaniah, Zepha, 2, 1
Gather your selves even gather you, O nation, not worthy to be loved, before
the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe which passes in a day, and before
the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, etc. For the law is a yoke (says
the Apostle) That neither we nor our fathers, we are able to bear. Act. 15.10


Hereby all men and women may easily see, 5
that by nature we are most miserable, because we are unable in our own
defaulte to do the works of the Law, and fulfill that obedience, which we owe
of duty to our God, and that therefore we abid naturally accursed. This our
miserable estate, when we know it by the law, it brings forth in us a sorrow
and grief, in respect of the knowledge of the punishment for sin, arysing of
the knowledge of our duties toward God, contained in the law, and of our
inability to perform the same. And thus much concerning our preparation to
obtain and get a good Conscience.

6 The application of the remedy.
2 The application or applying of the remedy whereby to heal our sorrow and
grief conceived of our wretched estate, by the knowledge of the law (which is
only the blood and merits of Christ, who for us in his Conscience felt Gods
wrath, and the punishments of all our sins) requires two things, that is,
the preaching of the gospel and faith. For the gospel is the hand of God the
father, offering unto us grace and mercy in christ. Rom, 3.20 Rom, 10, 4 1,
Cor, 1, 3, Gal. 3.24,
And faith is our hand, whereby we lay hold on him, and receive him with all
his benefits. For as by the law comes the knowledge of sin, so is the
righteousness of God, by faith in Jesus Christ, made manifest without the law,
unto al, and upon all that believe. For he is the end of the Law, for
righteousness to every one that believes: and the end of the law is, to
justify them that observe it Wherefore, Christ having fulfilled it for us, is
made our righteousness, wisdom, sanctification and redemption. This much of
the application of the remedy against the sorrow, and desperation arysing of
the knowledge of our miserable estate by nature, when we do behold the same
in the and mirror of the law.

Where we have to learn, 7 two things needful to apprehende and keep
Christ.
that two things are most needful for us who desire truly to enjoy and
possess this remedy. The first is seriously to humble our selves before God
for all our wants, and especially for such as lie open in our Conscience,
accusing and condemning of our selves before his holy majesty. For so shall
we put Conscience out of office, and perform that work our selves in this life
which Conscience would perform to our eternal damnation in the life to come
For if we judge our selves (says the Apostle) we shall not be judged. 2. We
must often with groans and earnest prayers, humbly beseech the Lord for
Christ's sake, to forgive us our sins, that so we may be sure of his favor,
and forgiveness of them all. And because that this humiliation standing in these
two points, there are excellent and sure promises made by God unto us of
grace, and life everlasting in his word (for Solomon says) He that hides
his sins shall not prosper: Pro. 28, 13,
but he that confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. and if we
acknowledge and confess our sins (says John) God is faithful and just to
forgive us them, 1. Ioh. 1.9.
and wash them al away from us, with the blood of his christ. For Gabriell the
Angel said unto the virgin Mary, (that her son) Christ's name, should be
called Jesus. Math. 1.21
Because he should save his people from their sins. Wherefore it follows,
that there is no condemnation to them that are and believe in him, if they
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. To all which persons, aryseth
a certainty of Salvation. And consequently, a reformation of conscience, which
is wrought in all such persons by the holy ghost, when the same cease to
accuse and terrify them, and begins to excuse them, and to testify unto
them, that they are the children of God. The which thing never fails to any
that do seriously humble themselves, and by earnest prayer crave mercy and
pardon of their sins at Gods hands for Christ's sake.

8 The riches and pleasurs of the faithful, and which they should ever seek
for, is a good conscience.
This is the treasure that far passes all worldly pleasures, I would to God
therefore, that the greatest part of this unhappy age, would be as careful to
suit and seek for the same, as they are to hunte after the transitory
pleasures of this corruptible flesh: as honors, riches, and other pleasures
worldly, which will quickly depart, but this shall ever abide as a continual
and pleasant feast, both here and in the world to come. Pro. 15.15.
And thus much concerning man's first duty, against the getting of a good
conscience.

As touching man's second duty concerning Conscience, 9 Man's second duty
concerning conscience.
it is to keep it good when he has so gotten it, and to preuente the troubles
thereof by all means possible. For it is no less virtue to keep a good
Conscience then to get it.

In keeping of a good Conscience, 10 Three things to be avoided 1. ig-norance.
Pro. 29 2. 2, Kings 17, 26,
above all things, three things are to be avoided. To wit, ignorance,
unmortified affections, and worldly lusts. As to the first, Solomon affirms,
that the mind cannot be good, that is the Conscience of him that is without
knowledge: yea it is said, cap 17.2. Kings, that the people that dwelt in
Samaria, were devoured of Lions and wild beasts, because they knew not the
manner of the God of the Land. And again, Psalm. 95.10,
the Prophet David says, that such as do not know the voice of the Lord,
and his will and ways, do err in heart and soul, never enter into the Lords
rest. Likewise Christ himself tells us, that they that know not the
scriptures, do but err and go astray. And again, that this is the
co^demnatio^ of the world, that the light of Gods will declared in Christ being
come into the world: men notwihstanding love rather darkness, Math, 22, 29, Romans
1, 28
and to perish therein, then the light, and to be saved thereby. And therefore
says the Apostle, as they regarded not to know GOD, even so GOD delivered
them up into a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient,
and whereby they become full of unrighteousness. Yea, ignorance (says
Chrysostom) is the work of the diuils inspiration, Chrysostom.
who would not have us to see the treasure, least we should possess the
riches. And that this is the cause of all evil, that the scriptures has not
known.

Of these premises we see how needful it is above all things, for all that will
keep a good Conscience, to learn the knowledge of Gods word, the ignorance
whereof begets and breeds in man and woman, a loathsome sea of all evils,
whereby their miserable Consciences are drowned in a loathsome sink of all
wretched misery unto the day of their Death, when the Lord shall fearfully in
his justice wake^ them, to their perpetual shame and confusion.

Secondly, it is needful to be utterly Let us be displeased with sin and
the lusts of the flesh.
envy, malice, wandering lusts, and such like other unhappy fruits of our
wretched and corrupt nature. And therefore continually to cry with the
Apostle. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death, or from this fleshly lump of sin and death, which by nature every
one of us do carry about with us. So that this way in our mind at the least, we
may ever serve the law of god, Rom, 7, 25
and so crop and snedde sin in us, that it come never to seed, maturity, and
full perfection, to reign in us and rule over us above the Spirit.

Thirdly, as to worldly pleasures and honors of this life, let us ever
respect them all as dunge in respect of Christ, the benefits which we
receive by him and the preservation of a good Conscience. The which we ought
perpetually to esteem and think off, as of of our Paradise, and of the
lusts of our flesh, and pleasures of the world, as of the forbidden fruit,
if we desire to live for ever with perpetual joy in our soul and conscience,
both in this life and in that to come through Christ. And thus much touching
the keeping of a good conscience when it is gotten.

The remedies of a troubled conscience.
which of al others, when it rages is the greatest, we say that the same must
be sought for out of the word, and exampels of the faithful as of Job, Jeremy,
Ezekiah, David, and also of Christ himself, who felt the extremest anguish
that ever either was, is, or yet shallbe, and notwithstanding perished not
there through, because they dispayred not therein, but trusted still in God, and
therefore were delivered.

2 Such must understand as are troubled in Conscience, that the way to heaven,
is even to go thither by hell.

They that go to heaven, must sail by hell.
3 Let all such as are in this trouble, have recourse to godly pastors, who may
and will give them comfort out of the word.

4 Let them confer with such as have felt the like trouble, who will show them
how they got comfort therein: and that first of all, it is necessary for the^
to learn and understand five things 1. To know and confess their sins. 2. To
feel them forgiven in Christ. 3. To look for power of him to crucify the
same. 4. To lay hold upon justification by his resurrection. 5. To look for
strength of him only to proceed to further sanctification and holiness of life
eue^ to the end: all the which things they shall find promised by God in his
word, and believed and put in practice by the faithful, preached and set down
by the Prophets, as at what time soever a sinner does repent from the bottom
of his heart, the Lord will put away all his iniquities, etc.

And last of all, let them that be thus troubled, say with the Prophet.
Lord, because there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, I will
wait upon thee, as the eye of the servant wayteth upon the hand of his Master,
and I will condemn my self of folly, and say, o my soul, why art thou so
heavy? why art thou cast down within me? still trust in the Lord for he is thy
health, and thy salvation, and therefore thou will trust in him, albeit he
should slay thee.

They that suit and seek for these means in the trouble of there conscience,
with earnest prayer, and fervent supplications unto his holy majesty in the
name of his Christ, shall never but find comfort to their wearied souls, and
a full remedy to their wounded Consciences in the end.

Question.
Last of all, (before I conclude) this question may be moved. That if the
troubles of conscience be so fearful a thing, and a quiet conscience so
excellent a treasure, why then is it that so many are so careful to prevent
the troubles of the body, and so few careful for the troubles of their souls
and consciences. For to provid remedies for poverty, and Physic for sickness,
we do perceive few to be slack or slothful, and yet to provide any remedy in
time for a sick and wounded Conscience, we see few so careful as will loose an
hours sleep. Example hereof we may perceive in Joseph's brethren, who sleeped
with wounded and guilty consciences securely, for the space of many years,
albeit they were very careful so soon as they were punished with famine, to
provide a hasty remedy therefore, but regarded not the sin committed against
Joseph, and guiltines of their consciences, until the Lord wakened them to
their grief. So did David forget his murder and adultery for a years space,
and ay and while the Lord wakened him up to repentance by his Prophet Nathan
For answer to this question, I say, Answer.
that it is because we desire to color our sins and hyde the same, as did
our first parents until God himself did reveal them, and this chiefly do
all Adams children that are not renewed by Christ, and so shall all such do, as
have a sleeping and careless Conscience (as have most men at this day) until
they be either wakend up by gods Prophets, and his word to try their
consciences, or else by God himself, by some inward grief or outward trouble
before their death, or in death to their endless grief, or then after death to
their everlasting damnation.

Let us therefore know, what thing Conscience is in time. What are the
torments of an evil Conscience, what are the exercises or works of
Conscience. What are the kinds and sorts of Consciences: and lastly, what are
men's duties concerning conscience, and how he may get a good Conscience,
preserve the same when it is gotten, and prevent the troubles thereof, and
being troubled, after what manner he may be releiued out of the troubles of it.
All the which things are expressly to be found in Gods word: and therefore, let
us endeavor our selves seriously with earnest prayer, to seek them and search
them out of the same. That we may through patience and Comfort thereof,
conceive an assured hope (with the testimony of an excusing conscience, Rom,
15, 4
squared rightly with the rule of the word, of everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, To whom be all honor, praise and glory, for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
M. John Howesoun.


