A DIVINE ENTHYMEME OF TRVE OBEDIENCE: OR, A Task for a Christian.

Preached at Paul's Cross the tenth of September, 1615. by ANTHONY HVGGET
Master of Arts, and Parson of the Cliffe near Lewis in Sussex.

Viuendo morimur, and monendo viuimus.

The Text. Seeing we have these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up to full
holiness in the fear of God. 2. Cor. 7.1.

London, Printed by Richard Field for Francis Faulkner, and are to be sold at
his shop in new Fish-street, under Saint Margarets Church. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MY VERY GOOD LORD, WILLIAM, Lord Howard, Baron of
Effingham, increase of all true honor and happiness, etc.
RIght Honorable, the importunity of some good Christians that heard this
Sermon at the Cross, having overcome me to publish it to the world; I have
presumed (unworthy though it be) to present your Lordship with it: as being the
best means I had to manifest my duty, and how much I honor your Lordship:
your zeal to true religion, your honorable respect and love showed to
scholars, and to me in particular, your unworthy Chaplain, makes me hope it
shall find a favorable acceptance. The which if it shall please your Lordship
to grant, I have a condign counterpoise of all my labor. Thus in all
humbleness craving pardon for my boldness, with my daily supplications, that
God would multiply upon you all temporal blessings in this life, and eternal
in the life to come, I rest

Your Honors most dutiful and devoted Chaplain ANTHONY HVGGET.

A DIVINE ENTHYMEME OF TRVE OBEDIENCE.
2. COR. 7.1. Seeing we have these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full
holiness in the fear of God.

THE proeme of Morality, holds good in Divinity, (...), etc. Aristot. Eth. l.
1. c. 1.
omne appetit bonum, and it is a sure axiom: Finis and bonum conuertuntur,
that vaste Universal, like that confused Chaos in the beginning, Genesis 1.2.
out of whose womb were first drawn all things which were made; each
particular, with the whole it self, ((...)) do endeavor their end, as the
smoke flies upward; which truth is well seen in the great body of nature,
(...)
and the little body of man, which is a compendium of all this All. And has
not mortal man his supernatural end, where his soul, a stranger here, may
stay it self for ever? Yes sure he has, and the end is the accomplishment of
Gods promises; for by faith we stand, and receive in hope: 1. Ioh. 3.2.
Now are we the sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be, etc.
The Apostle therefore in the precedent Chapter having earnestly warned his
Corinthians to flee the society and pollutions of Idolaters, as being
themselves temples of the holy Ghost; in the two last verses, he sets down
the scope and sum of man's blissful end, the full period of all their
desites, even the sweet and comfortable promises of God in Christ Jesus, as
namely ver. 16. I will dwell in them, Leuit. ^^.12.
and walk in them: and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
again ver. 17, and 18. I will receive you, Isa 32.1. Ier. 31.1.
and will be a father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says
the Lord Almighty. Now upon the consideration of these premised promises
promises, he infers and inforceth that sanctity whereof my text does
treat: Seeing we have these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse, etc.
Which words contain in them an exhortation, not barely and simply propounded,
but syllogistically and perswasiuely enforced, and may very well be called A
divine Enthymeme of true obedience. The Antecedent part whereof is the
Foundation, and the consequence is the Building; or if you will, the root and
growth of godliness. The Apostle thus lays the case: Seeing we have these
promises, dearly beloved; and makes the issue this, Let us cleanse our selves
from, etc. Let us begin as he does, that we may end as he did. He begins his
suite upon a sure ground, Seeing we have these promises; and follows the cause
for our welfare, Let us cleanse our selves from, etc.] Thus who so begins and
ends his days, shall die the death of the righteous, and his last end shall be
like unto his.

Turn back your eyes once more upon the words, and you shall find in them a
grounded motive to holiness: in which observe the matter, the manner, and both
are Euangelical. 1. Modus compellendi (dearly beloved) vox vere apostolica,
issuing from no other lips but such as had bin touched from the Altar of the
high God with the hot burning coals of zeal and love, Isa. 6.6.
and well beseeming the scholar of such a Lord, who both in life and death did
show himself to be the Lord of love. 2. Causa vel fundamentum competendi, viz.
promissiones. In which maine ground of his inforcement, he makes us joint
purchasers with himself, viz. Nos habemus: and that of an inheritance which
shall stand for ever, viz. has promissiones. Promissiones: that is the maine
thing. Obiectum, Obiectum.
the ground point of this exhortation: and that we may build upon this ground,
he shows our interest and just claim, and that is Subiectum. Subiectum.
Nos habemus: We have these promises: and that is the Antecedent, the ground,
the reason, the root of that which follows; and that which follows is an
exhortation to sincerity and sound obedience, to integrity and perfect
holiness. To the perfection whereof there are two maine labors, 1. Remotio
mali: Remotio mali.
Let us cleanse our selves. 2. Substitutio boni: Substitutio boni.
and grow up, etc. For the former, that we may take our work with us, let us
remember the passages: Let us cleanse, that is the property of the work. Our
selves, that is the propriety of the person. From filthiness, that is the
matter to be wrought upon. All filthiness, there is the generality of the
task. Of the flesh and spirit, there is the specialitie of the parts and
powers infected.

Hitherto my text has brought us downward, the way and path of the death of
the righteous; Mortificatio.
wherein we must crucify the old man, not leave one hoof behind, not one
sin unsearched. Mortify therefore your earthly members, etc. Colos. 3.5. The
Apostle tells us, that he which ascended, is he which descended first; Ephesians.
4.9.
and as I have descended with you to the similitude of his death, so must you
be ingrafted to the similitude of his resurrection. Romans 6.5.
For you must rise again the hill of holiness; when we are rooted in
humility, we must rise and spring: Substitutio boni.
so the text faith, Let us grow up: yea and flourish in the courts of our God,
to full holiness: and that we may stand fast in this estate, we must take the
staff of Gods fear to prop us up, in the fear of God. Reu. 20.6.
And this is rising to life, vivification: and blessed are they which have part
in this first resurrection.

And thus having seen a short view of all, the words contain in them two
general parts: 1. The antecedent or reason premised: 2. The consequent or
conclusion inferred.

The antecedent in these words, Seeing we have these promises, dearly beloved.
The conclusion in these, Let us cleanse our selves from all filt hinesse of the
flesh, etc.

And first of the former, and then of the latter; where with transposition of
the words, without alteration of the sense, give me leave to salute your
patience in the Apostles order, Dearly beloved.

Dearly beloved:] Modus compellendi.
Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur: in nature and in Scripture you know it to be
true, and here example and experience makes it good in both: the Apostle, such
is the abundance of his love, that his tongue cannot contain, but express the
fervent desire of his heart, in that he calls his people, Dearly beloved. If
you turn but your thoughts to that which he faith to his Philippia^s, 1.8. you
shall find him like the Spouse, even sick of love toward them: God is my
record (faith he) how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Christ
Jesus, etc. Had the Apostle either received or expected benefit for his love,
it had been lex talionis; Ioh. 6.26.
as the multitude loved Christ for the loaves; and hypocrites do even the same;
but for Paul to love his Masters flock for their good, on his part gratis,
and that in the absence of his Master, this love is great, Act. 9.15.
and worthy of Paul, whom Christ loved, and chose him to be the Apostle of the
Gentiles. This Paul, this pattern of love must not be put under a bushel, bur
set on a candlestick, to give light to all: for, this fatherly affection is
one chief point of the Pastoral office. Saint Peter for the example of all
others, Doct. 1.
is bound upon the allegiance of his love to feed the flock, Ioh. 21.
to seed them (I say) as a good shepherd with a watchful and fatherly care
and affection. Saint John, if you read his writings, you shall find them
dulcicora melliceta, full as the Moon, and nothing but full and plentiful
drops of love, sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, calling them
children, 1. Ioh. 2.
little children, babes, little babes, beloved, and dearly beloved. Moses
complains of the yoke and burden which love laid upon him by consequence of
his place: for so you shall read Numb. 11.11. Wherefore haft thou afflicted thy
servant, and wherefore have I not found favor in thy sight, that thou layest
the burden of all this people upon me? have I conceived all this people? have I
begotten them, that thou should say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a
nurse bears her sucking child. By which we may see, that teachers are
pascendo pastores, sed diligendo patres; pastors for instruction, but fathers
for affection. For howsoever we must sometime come like the watchmen in the
Canticles, qui non vult duci, debet trahi; yet this severity must be paterna,
non tyrannica; Dum das verbera, ostende vbera, faith Bernard: Bern.
this gall must be mingled with honey, this bitter water must come out of a
sweet fountain; this sharp reprehension from a loving affection, it must be
in spiritu mansuetudinis, Galat. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be fallen by occasion
of infirmity, ye that are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness. And in a word, as our voices must be the voice of John Baptist, to
cry unto them: so our hearts must be the hearts of Paul the Apostle to love
them, for you are unto us dearly beloved. And are you so to us, our dearly
beloved? Use.
Then so ought we to be unto you your dearly beloved, for if our hearts must
be lively fountains running full streams of love toward you, yours must not
be dry cisternes of lead to wards us again: for Amor amoris magnes, and durus
est qui amorem nonrependit: Love is the loadstone of love; and for the children
not to love their fathers, it is the highest pitch of ingratitude, a finne
against nature, and such as is not to be named. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. 1. Cor. 16.11.
Gal 6.6.
It is the Apostles rule, that you should know, and that after a special
manner, those which labor amongst you in the Lord, and have them in singular
respect for their works sake. Surely (brethren) I must speak a little what I
both hear and see to your just commendation. It would be a notable incitement
and provocation to all Gods messengers abroad in the land, to labor diligently
and conscionably in their callings, if their pains were but requited with such
love and respect as is in this City; if the wels of charity which should
water the Eden of God, were unstopped, and made to flow toward them in other
places abroad, as they do here amongst you. That which Saba said of Solomon's 1.
King. 10.8.
servants, may well be applied to the Ministry of this City: Happy are the
men, and happy are those thy servants which stand ever before thee, and hear
thy wisdom: so happy are those Ministers, happy are those servants of God,
which stand and speak in your presence, which wait and minister at your
altars. But alas, we that are criers in the wilderness, find other measure
far vnsuting our labor of love. If we did rain down every day golden
Angels into their laps, they would cry with him, Ille mihi semper erit Deus,
illius Aram: hug us, nay adore us, make gods of us, bring bulls dressed with
garlands to sacrifice unto us: but showring down that which is more precious
then gold, and whose price is far above pearls, the precious comforts of the
Gospel, the means of their eternal salvation; they are senseless of the good
we do them. O what good blood would it breed in us, if as some other of your
sweet ointments, good examples, I mean; so this of love and kindness to them
that teach you the way to heaven, might run from the head to the skirts of
the garment, the utmost coasts and corners of the land. To conclude this point,
you that are called and entered into the place of nursing fathers, and you that
receive the sincere milk of the word, that your souls may grow thereby, let
me exhort you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, to lend all your helping hands and
consenting hearts, that as you have begun, so you may make perfect this holy
combination of Paul and his dearly beloved. Concordia crescunt minutissima,
discordia vel maxima dilabuntur. Surely brethren, the Pastor and the people are
an holy temple, wherein the Lord has a delight to dwell, whose delight has
ever been amongst the sons of men: if then we will be living stones of that
holy building, it behooves that we be loving stones, joined together in the
unity of the Spirit. Our life is but as a journey to a far more excellent.
state of glory in the kingdom of heaven, and the way thereto is but one for
both, and Saint James calls it, the Kings high way of charity, the royal
law of love. Via regia. lam. 2.8.
If therefore the Pastor and people be Antipodes in their ways, if they walk
in opposition, and harbor an antipathie of affections, and thus think to come
to Christ, they may walk from pole to pole, but shall never attain their end.
The good shepherd therefore is said to go before his sheep, and the good
sheep are said to follow him, Ioh. 10.3. And let us follow the counsel of a
good Pastor to this purpose, Vbicertus es de via perge mecum, vbi haeres quaere
mecum: if we be both in the old and good way, Ier. 6.16.
let us accompany and cheer one another; but if we be wrong, let us enquire,
and guide each other. Let us help to bear one another burdens, and supply
each others wants. Let the one minister spiritual, the other carnal things.
You must give panem promptuary, and we sanctuary. We must receive bread and
sufficiency for our lives, otherwise can we not give the bread of life. The
one must be helpful with the sweat of the brows, and the other with the
sweat and travel of the brains. These things do, and the God of peace shall
be with us, God even our God shall give us his blessing: God shall bless us,
Psalm. 67.6.
and all the ends of the earth shall fear him. And so from the manner, pass we
to the matter.

The matter in the whole and sum, is an exhortation to holiness; but
considered in parts and due order, Fundamentu competendi.
we observed the antecedent reason, and consequent issue. The antecedent comes
now in hand, and offers it self under these words, Seeing we have these
promises. Let me propound it unto you as a proposition, wherein observe, 1.
Subiectum, viz. nos [We]. 2. Praedicatum, viz. promissiones [promises]: and
[has habemus,] is the copula which ioynes them together.

Subiectum does challenge the first place, for it is the first word. 1.
Subiectum


We] And the parties here aimed at, are apparent, Paul and his people, the
Apostle and the Corinthians; the one a chosen vessel, Act. 9.
of a persecuter made a Preacher of the name of Christ; the other were members
of the Church of God in Corinth, 2. Cor. 1.1. 2. Cor. 1.2.
and of the Saints that dwelt in Achaia, those that could call God their
Father, and Christ Jesus their Lord; Paul and the Corinthians, believers, these
are that (We) the subject of this present purpose.

All the comfortable promises in Christ Jesus belong only to the faithful.
Doctr.
So my text tells you in effect. [We] viz. the faithful have these promises.
Saint Paul elsewhere makes the point more plain, 1. Corin. 3.22. Whether ye be
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, (or what teacher soever may more properly
challenge you) or life, or death, whether things present, or things to come,
all are yours, (but not for them, nor yet for your selves, but rather for this)
ye are Christ's, Heb. 11.
and Christ is Gods. Abraham believed God above hope, and is therefore called
the father of the faithful; and God makes his covenant with him, and with his
seed for ever, Genes. 17.7,8. For to the faithful he is rich in mercy: Exodus
20.6. he shows mercy unto thousands in them that believe in him, and love
him, etc. God made his covenant with Israel by name, but it was only with the
Israel that is of God, Romans 9.6.
viz. the faithful. For they are not all Israel which are of Israel; but this
know, that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham, Gal.
3.7. And if you be Christ's, Gal. 3.29.
then are ye of faith, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
promise. So then, they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham;
these have the promises. Gal. 3.9.

The promises of Christ belong to the faithful only. Reasons.


Abba, Father, viz. the inward testimony of the Spirit fealing to their
spirits the ocrtaintie and assurance of their adoption and salvation in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.16.

Rejoice in this therefore, that your names are written in heaven. Luke 10.19.

Romans 9.4.
by the confirmation, viz. the Sacraments and the oath of assurance; these
only belong to the faithful, I mean in their virtue and comfortable ends.
For the word, it is to them only the sweet savor of life unto life, and to
others it is otherwise, 2. Cor. 2.16. In the Sacrament, Impy edunt corpus
Domini, sed non corpus Dominum; in the faithful it has his comfortable
fruit, but in unbelievers it is a step to their condemnation, 1. Cor. 11.29.
And for the oath of assurance, the Apostle precisely names the heirs of
promise: For God willing more abundant to show unto the beires of promise, the
stablenesse of his covenant, has bound himself by an oath, etc. Hebr. 6.17.

Ephesians. 5. Romans 8.31. Romans 5.8. Romans 8.1.
and of enemies are made heirs, Romans 3.24. And our Sanctification also, in
whom all the comfortable promises are sanctified to us, and through whom all
our endeavors are sanctified and accepted of God.

that they shall not be condemned with the world, Romans 8.1. For Now (says the
Apostle, as speaking of the virtue of these sweet promises) there is no
comdemnation to the^ which live godly in Christ Jesus, etc. for Christ has set
the^ free, from sin. Reu 21.4.
Satan, death, hell, and condemnation: but as for the wicked, it is otherwise,
for in them sin reigns in their mortal bodies, the law condemns, the
conscience gnaweth, and accuses, death executes, the devil rages, and hell
tormenteth, Luke 11.26.
and their latter end is worse then their beginning.

Numb. 33.8. Exodus 15.23. 2. Cor. 4.17. Augustine.
even the promised eternal and far more excellent weight of glory, where
(as Augustine speaks) we shall have laetitiane sine tristitia, sine dolor
locum, sine labor vitam, viz. mirth without moan, place without pain, life
without labor, light without darkness, where shall be no howling heard, nor
sorrow known, but possession of everlasting joys, summam and certam
tranquilitatem, great tranquillity, tranquil felicity, happy eternity,
eternal blessedness in the presence of the God of glory, with whom is
stabilitie and sacietie of cuerlasting life and happiness, without danger of
failing or falling, deceasing or decreasing for evermore.

Godliness is profit able unto all things, which has the promise of the life
present, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4.8. So that whatsoever we do
(if we be within the covenant of promise) either concerning our bodies or
souls, our life present or our life to come, Gods blessing shall be with us.
And therefore, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If thou shall obey
diligently the voice of the Lord thy God, and observe and do all his
commandments, blessed shall thou be in the city, and blessed in the field,
blessed shall thou be in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy
ground, the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of
thy sheep: blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou
be when thou go out: the Lord shall bless thee in (all) that thou set
thy hand to do, the labors of thy hands, the works of thy calling, yea and
the meditations of thy heart. For, faith David, Psalm. 1.4.
Look (whatsoever) he does, it shall prosper. So that we may with boldness
send forth our prayers, the messengers of our wants, unto the high Court of
heaven, yea and be assured that they shall be sent back again like the
brethren of Joseph, laden with the blessings of God. And why? we have Gods
promise, that he will give to them that ask, and open the gate to them that
knock: this our Savior affirms, Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever
ye shall ask the Father in my name, it shall be given unto you: ask and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be full. So that of all other comforts that
can befall us in this life, this is the greatest, which cannot be taken from
us, that he will hear our prayers: and though our souls and consciences be
troubled with cares, and the burden of our sins, yet he has promised to
case them. For so says our Savior, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden with the burden of your sins, and I will ease you. And though
our mouths should be stopped, yet well may we lift up our souls to the Lord,
from whence comes our help. Labor therefore to be in Christ, and he shall
set thee as the seal upon his hand, and the signet on his right arm: For the
eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, Psalm. 33.18.19
and his ears are open unto their cry.

Hagar and her son were cast out of the house of Abraham, Gal. 4.30. Put out
the servant and her son, for the son of the servant shall not be heir with
the free woman. Yea, and they shall not only be deprived of the promise both
of this life and of a better, but shall suffer the curse of God both of this
life and of that which is to come. The wicked Shall be turned into hell, and
all those that for get God: and, God shall destroy the wicked for ever. And for
this life, Job speaks, Their portion shall be accursed on earth. Job 24. 18
And God speaks, Deuteronomy. 28.16. If thou shall not obey and keep all these my
commandments, all these curses shall come upon thee: cursed shall thou be in
the town, and cursed shall thou be in the field, cursed shall be thy basket
and thy dough, the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep: cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed shall thou
be when thou go out. Dcut. 28, 20.
The Lordshall send cursing, trouble and shame in (all) that thou set thy
hand to do. So that if thou be not in this covenant or promise of blessing,
nothing shall be sanctified from God, or accepted to God; he will send cursing,
trouble and shame in (all) thou set thy hand to do. Suppose thou perform
the work of charity, and give alms; although it may be good to them that
receive it, yet it is a sin in himself: For whatsoever is done without
faith, is sin. Yea all thy goods gotten, though gotten by the sweat of thy
brows and the labor of thy calling, yet Gods curse remaining upon them, they
are put in a bottomless bag. For to the pure, all things are pure, but to the
impure, is nothing pure. This then is the estate of a wicked man: cursed in
life, cursed in death, but most cursed after death, when the curse of God shall
torture and torment body and soul for ever.

Alexander be not the son of Jupiter, his silver is but dross, his
confession shall be to his own confusion: Iam video me esse mortalem; but a
true Christian is the most honorable calling: of the household of faith, Gal.
4.26. Gal. 4.5. Ephesians. 2.19. 1 Cor. 6.3.
of the stock and lineage of Jerusalem above, by adoption they are sons,
Saints by calling, kings by deputation, for the Saints shall judge the Angels,
yea and reign in the heavenly state of glory for ever. Who so saw it might see
great difference twixt Dives and Lazarus while they lived; and who so has not
seen it shall see greater distance twixt them now, Luke 16.19.20
the one being in Abraham's bosom, the other in hell torments: where he which
formerly knew not his God nor himself. nor would daigne to know poor Lazarus,
this man which once had a world at will, would now give a world if he had it,
for one drop of cold water to cool his tongue, to teach us that there is great
difference twixt the rich man's non mouebor, etc. and their downfall, imply
descendunt in infernum. Psalm. 30.6. Job. 21.13.
O how suddenly do they vanish, perish, and come to a fearful end! but as for
Gods Saints be they despicable in the eyes of men, yet their prayers and tears
are written in the book of Gods remembrance, Esa. 38.5.
and right dear and precious in the sight of God, is the death of all his
Saints. Psalm. 116.15.


Pater omnipotens, both able and willing for to do us good. Art thou then in
affliction? know that there is no darkness but flies from the Sun, no
poison but yields to medicine, no winter but is removed by Summer; for if God
does suffer calamity to befall us for his glory and our good, he will take it
away again. Psalm. 34.19.
For many are the troubles of the righteous; but here is the Lords promise
which is our comfort, he will deliver out of all: we have this promise, which
is as the faithful witness in heaven for our comfort.

of our redemption, the fruit of the Spirit, the clothing of our souls, the
joy of the godly, the perfection of the Church, the evidence by which we hold
both our Being, Mark. 9.24.
and well being; Lord we believe, help our unbelief.

For he that offers me thanks and praise, hehonoureth me, Psalm. 50.23.
Surely (brethren) there is not the least of his mercies but deserves a Quid
retribuam. Psalm. 116.12. Psalm. 8.4.
And What is man that thou, art so mindful of him, or the son of man that
thou sor egardest him? etc. What is to be found in man which might move the
Lord to be so gracious, or to be expected from man which may add unto his
honor, to whose complete and all-sufficient fullness, nothing can be added?
Surely this is some and all; Thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.14. to sing and
say, Cord, and cordis fide, and fidibus; Glory be to God on high, on earth
peace, goodwill toward men. Luke 2.14.
Our hearts shall be glad when our lips speak his glory, and our tongues,
shall sing of his righteousness, while we live will we praise the Lord, and
give thanks unto him for a remembrance of his holiness; for to us has he
given these promises, and therefore Regi saeculorum. 1. Tim. 1. 17. Now, says
the Apostle; Now is a time to lift up your hearts and say as he says: To the
King eternal, immortal, invisible, and God only wise, be honor and glory
for ever and ever, Amen. And of the subiectum thus far, and now the Praedicatum
comes in place, viz. these promises.

Promises,] Promissiones 1. Politicae.
Promises I find to be generally of two sorts; political or civil, and
religious or divine: under the former are ranked all contracts, compacts,
bargains, and other cases of commutatiue justice in the Commonwealth betwixt
man and man. 2. Religiosae. Legales. Euangelicae.
Religious promises I name such as wherein God does more properly challenge a
share, as being either the inlargeme^ts of the bounty from God to man, or the
engagement of obedience from man to God: and these I find to be double, Legal
or Evangelical,

1. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
Legal, ex pacto simpliciter; hoc fac and viues, and again, Cursed is he that
continues not in all things that are written in the Law.

2. Evangelical, ex pacto secundum quid; being the free donations of Gods
sovereign bounty which works all good in all: Come unto me all ye that
travel and are heavy, Haba. 2.4. Mat. 11.28. Ioh. 3.16. Isa. 43.25.
etc. So God loved the world that he, etc. I am he, behold I am he that puts
away thy unrighteousness even for my names sake, Isa. 43.25. These are called
the promises of Gods grace, because freely given, and so performed gratis: the
promises of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 10.8.
because the Spirit is both the author and applier of them: the words of faith,
because they are made with the condition of faith to apprehend and apply them:
they are also the promises of hope, because that our harvest is in hope only:
Heb. 6.17.
The hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie has promised, Tit. 1.2.

God has made a covenant with his people, and it is called the covenant of
promise, Ephesians. 2.12. the Arc of which testimony is the sure words of the
Gospel; the keepers and interpreters whereof are his holy ones, upon whom he
has put his Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28.30.
to cause Israel to hear and know and do his covenant. The franchised
liberties thereof are his promises: the hedges or walls of defense are his
judgments: the feales of assurance are his counsel, his word, his oath, his
Sacraments: the earnest penny is the spirit of sanctification: the stipulators
are the Maker and his creature, God and man; God of his free bounty promising
all good things for this and a better life, in Christ, for the glory of his
goodness; and man protesting faith and perfect obedience to his heavenly
Maker. So that Subiectum huiusfaederis, are the sons of God only, (as I have
showed before) the sons of promise, Gal. 4.28.
Romans 9.8. such as through faith in a pure conscience keep his commandment
always. This covenant by faith, we apply it, we hold it in hope, and show forth
the fruits thereof in a godly life and holy conversation. Thus far we have
walked at large, but now return I pray you with me from whence we have
digressed, for the bounds of my text do bound me within the liberties of this
holy covenant; for so my text tells us: Has promissiones.

Sin is a bad Mistress which makes men serve long for little, and in the end
paieth with bad wages; For the wages of sin is death: Romans 6.23.
but our God is liberal as an Emperor, who has bestowed a great gift upon us
in our creation; and that being lost, has given us a greater, and promised
greatest of all. As a good Physician he heals us, and as a good merchant
hireth us, non vt duram seruiamus seruitutem, but that we should be made
coheires with Christ. Has promissiones, these promises also.

God has promised salvation to his people which have been since the world
began, from Adam to Abraham, Genesis 3.15. from Abraham to Moses, Genesis 17.4. from
Moses to Christ, Luke 18.5. Luke 20,27. Gal. 4.4.
Exodus 14.10. Heb. 9.15. And in the fullness of time God sent our Savior
according to his promise, Luke 1. 54. Act. 3.12. and our Savior Christ did
mightily show himself to be the Son of God, and the Redeemer of his people
Israel, Luke 24 19. in who^ all the prophecies, promises and figures did meet,
as many lines in the center. These promises also. The Apostle does allege
only two texts of these promises, which are like the grapes and fruits of
Eschol, which the spies brought from the land of Canaan; (as if he should say)
By these few you may taste and see how sweet the Lord is; and if I should
labor to go through them all, I suppose they are more in number then the hairs
of my head, and the plenty of them would beget want of strength in me to
deliver them. Moses the man of God does give us to wit, 1. Promissiones rarae.
that these promises are first, Rarae and inauditae, worthy his performance
only, who in all things with his holy arm does get himself the victory.
Psalm. 98.2.
Who would have thought that a womb of ninety years barrenness, should be a
joyful mother of children? God promised it, Genesis 17.17. and he performed it,
Genesis 21.6. Who would imagine that God would bring Israel out of Egypt, thus as
it is said, and after so strange a manner, by tentations, by signs, and by
wonders, by war, by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great
terrors? according to all that the Lord did for them in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 4.34. Who
could have thought that the Red sea should be divided, or Jordan driven back?
Exodus 14.21. Josh. 10.12. Exodus 16.13. Number. 20.8.
or the Moon should stay her course, and the Sun forget his going down? that
Manna should be rained from heaven? that living waters should flow from the
flintie rock? These things God promised, Exodus 3.19. and these, and greater
then these the Lord has done in their due season: for he is the God who made
all things of nothing, which quickneth the dead, and calls those things which
are not, as though they were, Romans 4.17.

2. 2. Promissiones certissime Mal. 3.6.
Most sure and certain, as proceeding from the eternity and immutabilitie of
his will, and verity, with whom is no change, nor shadow of changing. God says
concerning him that promises by vow or oath, Implebit omne quod promisit,
Numb. 30.3. He shall not break his promise; but do according to all that he
has promised. And shall the Lord say, and not do it? promise, and not perform
it? Surely God shall as soon not be himself, as his proceedings not be the
truth: he were not omnipotent, but impotent, if it were otherwise. Therefore the
Apostle does thus style him, God that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. The faithful God,
Deuteronomy. 7.8. with whom is no change, his promises are therefore Yea and Amen, 2.
Cor. 1.20. certissimae.

3. 3. Promissiones gratuitae.
Gratuitae, the effects of his mercy and goodness, without any merit or
desert of ours. Deuteronomy. 7.7. He set not his love upon you (says Moses to Israel)
nor chose you because you were more in number then other people, for you were
the fewest of all people: but because the Lord loved you, etc. And in the
riches of his mercy God chose this people first, and his first promise he made
to them, Leuit. 26.12. I will walk with you, I will be your God, and you shall
be my people: yea and enlarges the same, Ier. 31.1. I will be the God of all
the families of Israel, and they shall be my people, etc. When Adam sinned
against God, God had compassion toward him; yea when he makes Gods
liberality the patron of his iniquity, saying, The woman which thou gave
me, etc. then did he promise, The seed of the woman should break the Serpents
head. Genes. 3.12.
These and the like are gratuitae promissiones, without any precedent merit of
man as a motive to move him thereunto, the free donations and enlargements of
his goodness and bounty.

4. 4. Promissiones magnae and pretiosae.
Magnae and pretiosae: so Saint Peter teaches us to esteem them, 2. Pet. 1.3.
For these, that our God will be with us wheresoever we go, ruling and assisting
us in whatsoever we do, these are magnae and pretiosae. Oh how sweet are thy
promises! Exodus 5.18.
Psalm. 119. He rules us according to his promise, not as Pharaoh ruled Israel,
with a rod of iron, toyling them in their taskes of brick, allowing no straw;
but he commands us weldoing, and helps us to do it; and when our service is
done of duty, herein his bountiful dealing passes our conceiving, when for a
broken service on earth, he makes a promise of heaven, not as they are now,
subject to corruption: 2. Pet. 3.10.
For the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall be
consumed with heat; but as they shall be then refined, most glorious and
stable, for the comfort and crowning of his Saints; Magnae and pretiosae. So
that as a Father says, The children of God having tasted hereof in the life to
come, do mourn and grieve in the heavens, that their repentance was no sooner,
their thankfulness no more, and their obedience no greater to glorify God on
earth: so that as it is said of the glorious Church, Quam mirabilia de te
narrantur, o Ciuitas Dei: Oh how great and wonderful things are spoken of
thee, O thou City of God! such are his promises according to the excellency
of his wisdom and power, Magnae and pretiosae.

And in the fifth place, that we may inherit the promises, 5. Promissiones
futurae.
I must inform you, that they are futurae, viz. of things to come, the promises
of hope. Our life (says Paul) is hid with Christ: and it appears not what we
shall be. Peradventure, some will say, better to have something certain. But
to them I say, our hope is not a dead but a lively hope: 1. Pet. 1.3. 2. Pet
3.8.
not depending upon man, whose breath is in his nostrils, but upon our God,
with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
The Apostle says, God is faithful: and, We know whom we have believed. If our
life therefore be a warfare, our hope is an helmet. Ephesians. 6. if a seafaring,
hope is our anchor, to stay our ships in danger, Act. 27.33.
till the day appear, Act. 28. And in a word, in all things this is our stay,
God is faithful; he has promised, and will perform it, but all in his due
time; his (I say) and not ours, Psalm. 40.1.
that we should keep our souls still waiting on the Lord; therefore they are
futurae.

6. 6. Promissiones augustissimae.
To comprise many in one, and not to total all in just account: in brief, the
promises of God are general, particular, real, personal, conditional, free,
temporal, eternal, who can go through them all? The Apostle says, that the
Angels look with amazement at the mystery of our redemption, to behold the
infinite odds betwixt Gods greatness and our vileness: so to let pass the
great and precious promises of his word and Spirit, the care and ministry of
his Angels and creatures; and to consider that our very corrections shall do us
good, Psalm. 94.12. that he will turn our beds in our sickness, Psalm. 41. take
care of the hairs of our heads, Matthew. 10. Matthew. 10.30.
it will drive us to astonishment to consider; for there is no end of his
goodness. The heathen Captain which had care to wash his soldiers wounds,
they could not sufficiently honor him with praises: surely if the God of
glory and Captain of his Church, should do such and so great things for us,
let us say with Saint Paul, (...): Romans 11.33.
O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and love of God, and his
ways that are past finding out!

Thus far we have dealt in these promises at rouers (as I may say) and now to
bring them home to our hearts, which are the true mark.

rarae and inauditae? Let us hence learn to joy in the same; Oh how sweet are
thy words unto my throat, yea sweeter then honey unto my mouth! Psalm. 119.103.
And again, Thy testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever, for they
are the very joy of my heart, Psalm. 119.111. Thus Sara rejoiced, and called
others to rejoice with her, Genesis 21.6. God has caused me to rejoice, all that
hear will rejoice with me. Luke 1.46.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior:
this is the song of that blessed ever Virgin mother, who rejoiced in these
promises.

certissimae? Then let us believe and trust in them, by the example of our
father Abraham, who believed above hope. So though they are above, beside,
contrary to reason, yet knowing that God is powerful and able, faithful, and
so ready to make his promise good, let us be strengthened in faith, and give
glory to God, Romans 4.17. Yea and in the second place, trust and rely on his
promised mercies: for hereby we have access to challenge God both for safety
and salvation. Thus Moses is bold to charge God with his promise, on the
behalf of Israel, Exodus 32.13. Remember Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to whom thou
swarest, etc. and it follows, ver 14. Then the Lord changed his mind from the
evil, etc. An instance of like nature we have in Deuteronomy. 9.27. David had the
like refuge in extremity, Lord, where are thy former mercies which thou
swarest to David in thy truth? Psalm. 89.49. Calling to mind therefore the
certainty of these promises, let us by the example of Jacob commit our selves
to Gods tuition and defense, Genesis 32.9. for they are certissimae.

Gratuitae, the free donations of his goodness and mercy? Then where are the
blind merits of Monks and Friars, and the works of supererogation of insolent
Jesuits? their pretended merits either of condignitie or congruity, are
altogether repugnant to the freedom of these promises: a debt of desert as
hire to a labourer, or of duty as of thankfulness to a benefactour, far be
it that we should claim any such due from God to us; for to us belongs shame
and confusion, Genesis 32.10.
being less then the least of Gods mercies: It is his great mercy that we are
not consumed, and therefore in all these promises, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory.

magnae and pretiosae? Hence then let us learn to be thankful. When one told
David Saul's intendment to make him his son in law, he answered, For what?
Seems it a small thing unto you to be son in law to a King? Sam. 18.18.
what am I? or what is my life, or the family of my father in Israel, that I
should be son in law to a King? His case fits with ours, but in some respects
it does not; for what comparison betwixt David and us, or analogy twixt God and
Saul? David had deserved well of his country; and again, though he were son
in law, yet should not be heir to the Crown: but for our selves, I say not,
what am I? but what are we, or our fathers house? was not our father an
Amorite, and our mother an Hittite, drowned in superstition, sold unto sin,
and full of ignorance? I say of the best, which can best express his mind and
meaning, that he cannot express his own unworthiness. And betwixt God and
Saul, what should I say? who is the Saul of Saul's, in whose respect all the
Princes of the earth are but washpots, unto whom the Angels are ministers,
accounting it their greatest honor to do him service, yea and the heavens and
the earth do bow down unto him:and yet us tantillos and tales, so weak, and
so unworthy, has he crowned with his honors, to make us sons and daughters
to himself, to reign and rule for ever in his glory. Praise ye the Lord
therefore all ye his Saints, for it becomes the Saints right well to be
thankful.

Futurae, of good things to come? Then it behooves us, expectare impletionem,
to wait on his mercies until he hear us, help us, heal us, and crown us:
Patientia vobis opus est, Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience, that when you
have done the will of God you might inherit the promise: therefore must we
become followers of them which through faith and patience, Heb. 12.1.
obtained the promises.

tam augustissimae, so glorious, and in extent so large and liberal? Let us
then make the same use of them which the Apostle here makes in this place;
viz. Let us obey them, Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit.

Where in the transition of the point from the Antecedent, (Seeing we have
these promises) to the Consequent: let us cleanse our selves, etc. Doct.
observe,

The promises of God in Christ are the ground of obedience: the Apostle
therefore to this purpose makes the same connection, Tit. 2.11. The grace of
God which brings salvation to all men has appeared, and teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live godlily and righteously
and soberly in this present world: the grace of God teaches us not to do
ungodliness but to deny it, to cleanse our selves from all the outrages and
ungodliness of the hand and tongue, yea and all sinful lusts of the heart: and
that we should live toward God pie, toward others just, and to our selves
sobrie. The grace of God teaches us to do eue^ so as I have said. The promises
of God are the ground of obedience, I beseech you by the mercies of God, says
Saint Paul, Romans 12.1. that you give up your bodies and souls a living
sacrifice unto God. etc. Where he makes Gods mercies the only motive to
obedience; for howsoever some do his will of compulsion, because they dare do
no other, yet, plures colligit amor; and good men love God for himself, even
of zeal to his glory. The Lord has two ordinary Heralds of obedience, viz.
his promises, and his threats: Aut sequeris aut traheris, either his mercies to
allure us, or his judgments to terrify us; and therefore we say on behalf of
his mercies, that the liberty of a Christian does necessarily imply (not
lasinesse) but holiness: and when we say that the promises of God are
gratuitae, our meaning is ex part antecedente non consequente; free on Gods
part to us, for no inducement in us to move him to compassion; but not so on
our part toward him, for they are done upon condition of our obedience. It is
in his promises as in his threatenings, they all run (not absolutely but) with
a prouiso, expressed or at least wise understood. Si nisi non esset, perfectum
quidlibet esset, Were it not for conditions and exceptions, our end was present
destruction, Except you repent you shall all perish: but the Nisi comes in like
a Repriueall betwixt the sentence and the execution day: and as it is in the
case of threatening, so likewise of promise; for there is a twofold nisi, of
repentance, and of obedience, so that except we perform the conditions, we
have no part nor claim in the promises. The charge of Joshua makes it plain,
Joshua 23. as that chapter does dilate at large; neither need I stand to clear
this point, that all the promises run with the condition of holiness, for all
the Sermons of the Prophets and Apostles, give witness to this purpose: And
this is the will of God, even your sanctification: God has purchased you to be
a people, Tit. 2.14.
holy and peculiar to himself, that you should be zealous of good works: and
therefore Gods love and our obedience, which God has joined together, let no
man put asunder.

no license for subsequent sins. It is not our hope, but the profession of
our hope that shall save us. Saint Paul therefore says, 1. Cor. 5.7. Purge
out the old leaven, that you may be a new lump, for Christ our passover is
sacrificed for us. Because he was crucified for us, let us not crucify him
again, but rather because he was sacrificed for us, let us sacrifice our
selves for him, in obedience and sanctity. For Gods mercy and our obedience
must be joined together, and they that turn away obedience and faith from
their hearts, turn away Christ's merits and mercies from their souls; and they
that will not weep over him whom their sins have wounded, he shall never
bleed over them that their sins my be pardoned: and therefore,

2. See the calumniation of our quarrelling adversaries, the adversaries of the
grace of God, the Church of Rome, which charge us with that we never taught,
God he knows our innocence, viz. that we teach promise without obedience,
faith without works; and therefore that we are solifidians, and teach a
doctrine of licenciousnesse to all impiety. But to these I say, that we have
not so taught, Ephesians.4.20.
neither have we so learned Christ; for we teach, faith without works to be a
dead faith, and the promises of God without our obedience shall do us no good;
for howsoever they are sufficient in themselves, yet are they not effectual in
us. But to bring home their sin to their own doors, to pay them with their
own coin, or rather to strike the^ with the rod which they have prepared: may
I not say, and experience bear me witness, that I speak the truth in Christ
and lie not? Is not their doctrine a doctrine of liberty, 1 Timothy.4.1.
or rather of devils? which make merchandise of sin, as of flesh in the
shambles, making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience; and having clad
themselves with the fig leaves of a blind dispensation from a Popish broker,
they blush not at most direful proiects, but walk secure in the machinations
and executions of all villainy. What shall I name that which is not to be named
amongst Christians, the tolleration of stews, and the like (which yet is not
paralelled among the nations?) Alas, paruaqueror, these be but trifles. Seneca.
Audent aliquid breuibus gyaris and carcere dignum: To kill a King, or poison a
Prince, to blow up a Senate, to defy God, deface religion, plot treasons,
spoil a nation; these and the like are patronized among those Satanicall
spirits, and the actors canonized for worthies, and their acts for works of
supererogation. I might instance in their intended desolations in the days of
our famous Deborah, the memorial of whose name shall be blessed for ever: and
their hellish treasons now in the days of our happy Joshua (whose years the
Lord make as many ages, and fill all his days with peace) a Monarch for his
power, and a man after Gods own heart, so famous for his learning, so learned
in religion, and religious in profession, innocent from wrong, peaceable in his
ways, and merciful to all, if not too merciful to them; and yet did not
these infernal spirits, Antichristian pioners and Romish Mold warpes, seek to
extinguish this glorious light, and the life of the whole land, vno tactu, vno
ictu, vno nictu, with one blow, sulphurious blast, in the twinkling of an eye,
to have dismembered and crushed together the government, counsel, wisdom,
learning, justice and religion of God in the whole land? Oh inauditum nefas, oh
nefandum scelus! Oh unspeakable villainy, especially to be countenanced or
canonized but in the Rolls of hell, or by a Pope a devil incarnate: and does
not the Pope give liberty and dispensations for the committing of the same? is
not this a doctrine of liberty, which does give liberty to make themselves
(as it were) drunk with the blood of so many worthies? I dare be bold to say,
that all the Masses, Dirges, Trentals, smoakie fumes and polluted lip-seruice,
and (as the Apostle speaks) beggarly rudiments, Gal.4.9.
or (if you will) cosening shifts of all the idolatrous Jesuits, Monks and
Friars, and add to them all the English calves, begotten by the bulls of Rome,
cannot wash this one bloody sin from the Popes bloud-guiltie soul.

I will dwell among you: I will walk with you: I will be your God: I will be
your Father, etc. these are Gods promises, and the Apostle reads them in fear
and feeling, Seeing we have these promises, let us cleanse our selves; but the
world reads them in licentiousnes, Seeing we have these promises, let us
defile our selves. Psalm.130.4.
There is mercy with God, therefore shall he be feared, says David; therefore
we need not fear him, says the world. The time of our abiding here is short,
therefore let us use the world as though we used it not, 1. Cor. 7.29.
says the Apostle; but let us use it while we have it, 1. Cor. 15.32.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die, says the libertine. These
things being thus, I do the less wonder to read what is written: Know ye not,
my brethren, that the wisdom of the world is foolishness? and, the love of
the world is enmity with God, Iam. 4. By which opposition you may perceive
that there are two sorts of men here aimed at; the former, such as are not
named, nor worthy the naming, which promise themselves liberty, and yet are
themselves the servants of corruption, 2. Pet. 2.19. Who turn the grace of God
into wantonness, beasts without reason, men without humanity, as bad as the
horse and mule which have no understanding, their consciences are feared with
an hot iron, and are settled on the lees of their iniquities, which make a
mock of Gods promises, and say Where is the promise of his coming? 2. Pet.
3.3. beasts led in sensuality, which have given themselves to work
uncleanness, even with greediness, Ephesians 4. a generation of vipers, and
vicious brood, Math. 23.33.
more degenerate then Nebuchadnezzar from a King to a beast, for whom is
reserved the damnation of hell; Be not therefore companions with them, for you
were once darkness, but now are you light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.7. and therefore
labor to be of them which are the children of light, the sons of God, and
heirs with Christ according to these promises, in whom rests the spirit of
fear and feeling. Prou. 28.14.


Populus me sibilat, mihi plaudo ipse domi, so bless himself in his wretched
gettings, and know Christ pierced to the heart for getting of them? Or can we
hear of his bleeding and suffering, and yet continue in sinning? Can we love
that, which God at all times and in all places has so protested that he hates?
He could not endure it in heaven; Angeli detruduntur, the Angels were thrown
down headlong for it; he could not endure it on earth, Christus crucifigitur,
his own Son died for it: nor yet in hell, Inferni cruciantur, whole legions
are tormented for it. Let us therefore deal with sin for his sake, as he was
dealt withal for ours. The Jews pursued him in his life, crucified him in his
death, Math. 27.60. Augustine.
and when he was dead, rolled a stone upon him: so let us (as Augustine
counsels) upon the cross of repentance between these two grand thieves,
the world and the flesh, crucify sin, pursue it in the rising, resist it in
the growing, rest not until we have killed it, and then (as never safe enough)
let us roll a stone upon it, never to revive the same or the like again. And
in conclusion, Seeing we have these promises, merits and mercies for the
remission of sins, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, an grow up to full holiness in the fear of God. My text,
you see, has brought us now from the antecedent promises to the consequent
inferred, Let us cleanse, etc.

Which conclusion is a sure persuasion to a regenerate life; wherein is
contained the two parts of sanctification:

Remotio mali, Let us cleanse our selves from, etc. Substitutio boni, And grow
up to full holiness, etc.
Furthermore, in the conclusion observe the two general parts of a proposition.

Subiectum, Us: Let us cleanse, etc. Praedicatum, in the two parts forenamed,
Remotione mali, Let us cleanse, etc. Substitutione boni, And grow up to, etc.

To take them then in order as they are propounded. And first of the Subiectum,
Us. Subiectum.


Vs] If we enquire who are here meant, we shall find them the same with the
former (We) viz. Paul and the Corinthians believers; these are they that must
cleanse themselves. From whence observe,

There is dross in the best, Doctr.
even the most regenerate, and that in all the parts and powers of the flesh
and spirit. All flesh is as grass, Iam. 1.10.
and full of frailties; there is no come but may be blasted, and no soul but
may be corrupted. In the fairest rose, a man may find a canker; even so the
holiest man has his gifts, with sundry imperfections. The stoutest man may
have a fall; and the just man falls seven times a day. Whosoever then is
without sin, let him cast the first stone at his fellow. in many things
(says the Apostle) we sin all. And therefore says Job, though a just man,
If I shall justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me: if I will put
forth my self for a perfect man, he will prove me a wicked doer, Job 9.20. And
David to like purpose (though a man after Gods own heart) cries out, Heal my
soul, O Lord, for I have sinned against thee. 1. Ioh. 1.10.
And who so faith that he is without sin, is a lier, and the truth is not in
him, 1. Ioh. 1.10. There is sin therefore in the godly as well as the ungodly,
but with difference; the one sins of infirmity, the other with consent and
approbation: in the one sin dwells, peccatum inhabitans, in the other it
reigns, Peccatum inhabitans and regnans.
peccatum regnans. It is in the godly as a fire which he labors to quench:
but in the wicked a consuming fire, which he takes pleasure to kindle. Of the
godly Saint John says, they commit not sin, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. Howsoever they
offend, yet it is with reluctation of spirit, they are prevented and overtaken
unawares, Gal. 6.1. But the wicked commit sin, and continue therein; but
their commtitimus will seal them a mittimus, and send them to hell body and
soul. This then is the difference: The godly say with David, Wash me thoroughly
from mine iniquity and cleanse me from my sin, for I acknowledge my
transgressions and my sin is before me; against thee, thee only have I
sinned and done evil in thy sight, etc. Psalm. 51.2.3. He humbles himself with
the prodigo, Luke 15.
I have sinned against heaven and against thee o Father of my flesh and spirit.
Knockes his breast as the arc of all iniquity, and sighing says: Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a sinner. But the wicked Jeremy describes them thus,
They blush at nothing, they have an harlots forehead; Ier.
it is meat and drink to them to commit wickedness: and Peter says: They
wonder at the children of God, Pet.
because they run not riot as they do: and in one word, in the one sin
reigns, but in the other sin only remains.

Nemo naescitur sanctus; and therefore in that we are heirs in hope, Non tam
generatio quam regeneratio spectanda est; every Natus must be renatus: for it
is written, Except you be borne again, etc. Ioh. 3.5. Yea and regeneration is
not presently perfected but by degrees: as a wild olive tree growing out of a
stone-wall, the boughs and branches thereof may be cut and corrected, but the
root remaining, by the sent of water will be ready to sproute anew, till the
wall be broken and the root pulled up; so old Adam who remaining in the walls
of this earthly tabernacle, may be curbed and suppressed that sin reign not
in our mortal bodies, yet will he be prompt and ready to bring forth fruits
of unrighteousness, upon occasion, till the walls of this earthly house be
destroyed by death, to be raised again more gloriously.

Paul does dispute the point, Romans 7.22. For I delight in the law of God after
the inward man, but I see another law in my members rebelling against the law
of my mind.

Paul for our example was filled with the Spirit, and had abundance of
revelations, taken up into the third heaven, and heard such mysteries, as is
not possible for the tongue of man to utter: but lest he should be exalted out
of measure, there is given him, stimulus concupiscentiae, and the messenger of
Satan was sent to buffet him, 2. Cor. 12.7. For as the devil brings evil out
of good, so God brings good out of evil, causing the wants of his Saints and
their infirmities, yea their sins which the devil works as poison to kill
them, to be for their welfare in his providence, and potions to cure them; for
by these he humbles them; so that all things work for their good.

Romans 8.28.
Is there dross in the best? Then can we expect no justification by our
works, for sin cannot justify sin, and in our best actions are manifold
imperfections, Gal. 2.16. Know that a man is not justified by the deeds of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, etc.

that text, Whosoever is borne of God sins not. 1 Ioh. 3.9.
But I answer, that their Simile holds not: and I put this question whether
they make Christ or the man to be the stock so grafted; for we know that the
fruit is good by virtue of the impe and not of the stock: if then we are the
impes in Christ, by their reason he should be made fruitful and good by us:
but if they make man the stock, and Christ the impe or grafts, I say the new
man Christ sins not; and so says Saint Ioh. 3.9. But yet they must remember
the old stock, and to look to the root which will not be presently changed,
but will yield still wild branches bearing fruits of unrighteousness.

Lots wife which was turned into a pillar of salt, and set up as examples to
season others; Genesis 19.26.
and to give us warning, upon whom the ends of the world are come, that whereas
for them there was a cure behind, the sacrifice of the Lamb, which was not yet
slain, but for such as shall now sin Christ dies no more, Reu. 22.7.
for his next coming shall be in iudgemen.

Mat. 7.1.
We are taught to beware of rash judgment to condemn a man for some few
infirmities, as because one professor is discovered for an hypocrite, therefore
to censure all, as if all the Apostles were to be condemned for Judas. Should a
son despise his father because he is poor? or the blind disdain to be
directed by the lame, because he cannot walk with him? Surely we are not to
contemn the meanest gifts; for in the building of the Temple all have not the
chiefest place, but some square the stones, some fit the mortar, some carry,
and some place the work. Ex quouis ligno non sit Mercurius: so to the building
of the Temple of Christ, 1 Cor. 3.13. 1 Cor. 12.
some bring stubble, some straw, some mortar, every man according to the
measure of faith which he has received, and in the end every man's work shall
be tried by the fire; and till the end let all this be used to edification. If
none should study physic but those that could cure all diseases, we should
have no Physicians; and if none should serve God but those that could serve God
perfectly, we should have none to serve God. Which of you casts away a cracked
piece of gold, or a broken silver cup? No more are we to despise the graces of
God in a mean person though imperfect; for he which has received most has
many wants, and a wise man's judgment begins at his own house.

Psalm. 143. 2.
that Lord, if thoushouldest mark what is done amiss, who shall be able to
abide it. In conclusion therefore let him have the glory in all things, who
gives seed unto the sower and bread to him that needs, 1. Cor. 9.10.
who works in us both to will and to do: and we let us cleanse our selves; for
when we have done all, we are still unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10.
And of the (Subiectum) thus far; now to the praedicate, wherein is set down
Remotio mali, Remotio mali in 5.
viz. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit.

Wherein observe the five forenamed passages.

Cleanse.] [our selues] [filthinesse] 4. The generality of the task [all
filthinesse] 5. The speciality of the parts and powers infected [flesh and
spirit.]
For the first, etc.

Cleanse] which is a metaphorical speech taken from outward washing: for as
filth is done away by water, so by the help of Gods Spirit, must we cleanse
our selves from sin.

You shall read to this purpose, diverse laws and statutes in Israel: of
cleansing the Altar, Exodus, 29. of cleansing the Leaper, Leuit. 13. of cleansing
the house of the Lord, 2. Chron. 29. of cleansing Judah and Jerusalem, 2.
Chron. 34. of cleansing the people, with the gates and entrances of their
cities and houses, Nehem. 11. And these laws, we know, were typical, having
resemblance of things to come: and the same God being our God, requires the
same of us in substance, which was prefigured in these ceremonies and shadows.
For the Altar is our heart, Cor mundum, Psalm. 51. a clean heart: the leprosy
is our sin, which stings like a scorpion, and infects like a leprosy: the
house of the Lord, are our bodies and souls, which are the temples of the holy
Ghost: Judah and Jerusalem, are the Israel of God, which must be holy even as
he is holy: and the people and their gates, are we here assembled, whom of no
people, he has made a people, that we should sanctify our gates, viz. our
affections and actions, through which the Spirit of grace shall go in and out.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye ever lasting doors: purge
the altar of your hearts, Psalm. 24.7.
cleanse the leprosy of your sin, sanctify your bodies and souls; and
though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin, but make clean and
prepare the doors of your tabernacles, Psalm. 118.19.
that the King of glory may come in.

Again. I find by observation generally, that we are said two ways to be
cleansed: which I may call the former and the after labor, viz. the inchoation
and progression of repentance. Man in the former is merely a patient, dead unto
sin, Romans 7.18. 2. Cor. 3.5.
in whom dwells no good thing; having no power to raise himself; but even the
disposition of the will, which is otherwise blindly led, and captive unto sin,
it does proceed of him which works all good in all. 1. Cor. 12.6.
But in the other we are in some sort agents, cooperary Dei, lively instruments
to work out our own salvation. For the former, it is no more possible for a
man to cleanse himself, then to change the spots of a Leopard, or to wash
white the skin of a Morian. The heart of natural man is so hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin, that except a more powerful spirit does incline,
and soften, and dispose it inwardly to good, a man with as good success may
plow on the rock, or sow on the shore, as by words think to win a man to
repentance: for this cleansing, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.4. and the
first act thereof is his immediate hand; such as all the natural eloquence and
force of man cannot effect. For, as the wise man speaks, Who can say, I have
made my own heart clean? Prou. 20, 19. And as that cripple which eight and
thirty years waited at the poole of Bethesda, if he had not been helped by
our Savior, had lived and died a cripple, because he was not able to move
himself into the waters, Ioh. 5.5. so except a more powerfully spirit does
move, yea and compel us into the maine of Mary's weeping water of life, we
should live and die, and be damned for want of penitencie. David therefore for
the example of all others, thus teaches us to turn to the God of our
salvation: Have mercy upon me, O God, according to, etc. Psalm. 51.1. And
again, ver. 1. Wash (thou) me thoroughly from mine iniquity. And again, ver.
7. Purge (thou) me with bysope, etc. And again, ver. 10. Create in me a clane
heart, O God, and. And so the Prophet Jeremy teaches, See Ez. 36.25
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted, for thou art the Lord my God, Ier.
31.18. And yet not this, but the after labor of renouation, is the proper and
most genuine interpretation of my text.

Wherein through the grace of God, we are become isntrumental agents to
cleanse our selves. And to this purpose run all the precepts and
commandments, which call for our obedience and amendments, Ezech. 18.30 Romans
12.2. Isa. 1.16.
Turn you, turn you, etc. Wash you, make you clean, etc. Fashion not your
selves like unto this world, but be yerenewed. etc. And the like. These
precepts we call Evangelical, which do always presuppose Gods merciful hand
to help, whose grace is pressed and ready to all that call upon him, more
willing to give then we to ask, and gives more then we can desire, yea and is
not wanting to any, except they be wanting to themselves. And to what end does
God lend us eyes and ears, and hands and feet, but to see and hear, and
work and walk? So his grace which is given unto us, must not be idle but
operative to all good works, to add to our faith virtue, to virtue knowledge,
to knowledge temperance, etc. 2. Pet. 1.5.6. --

A man therefore in his renouation is not ficulnus inutile lignum, like the
image of Baal, or the stumpe of Dagon, 1. Kin. 18.17. 1. Sam. 5.4. Psalm. 13
5.15.
or the idols of the Gentiles, which have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, mouths and speak not, hands, etc. But as the sick which was healed,
must take up his bed and walk; Mar. 2.11.
and as the dumb, the blind, the lame, and the dead, which were restored to
speech, and sight, and strength, and life, they spoke, and saw, and leaped, and
gave glory to God: and as Paul, after his conversion, Act. 9.20.
must presently preach the Gospel; so must we not suffer the grace of God and
his good means to sleep or be idle in us, but we must set our hands to his
plow, labor in his vineyard, work the salvation of our selves and others,
work (I say) and that for life, even with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.


The carter driving by the way (let me crave your honorable patience for a
familiar and homely comparison) suddenly his wheel chopped into a dangerous
pit, and the poor man well perceiving the difficulty and streights to escape,
presently fell down on his knees, and besought his god jupiter to come and
help; but a voice was returned unto him, saying. Set thy shoulder to the
wheel, and lash on thy horses, and then I will help thee: even so the help
of Gods saving health, is proper to the generation of Seekers, which are not
slack, no nor weary of well doing, but seek him with the whole heart, Psalm.
24 6.
viz. with all the force and power of the parts and powers both of body and
mind: so that as it is true in common experience, Fortes Deus adiuuat, God does
help and bless the endeavors of a diligent hand; so is it most true in our
purgation, Up, and be doing, Neh. 2.
and God will be with you; for seeing God does enable us, we must stir and
bestirre to cleanse our selves.

Job 25.5.
Because our God is most pure and holy, which has found folly in his Angels,
yea and the heavens are not clear in his sight, Job 15.15. how much more is
man abominable and filthy, which drinks iniquity like water? yea our God is
jealous and just God, Haba. 1.13.
whose eyes cannot see and spare offenders. Slow to anger, but great in power,
and cannot justify the wicked, Nahum 1.3. He spared not the world which
sinned, but overwhelmed all with a flood of water. He spared not his Church,
Genesis 7.
the Quintessence of the world: no nor his Saints, Psalm. 106. jude 6. ver.
the Quintessence of his Church: not the Angels, which were in his presence,
but threw them down from heaven like lightning: no nor his only Son
standing in our place, Math. 27.46.
but he bare the full vial of his wrath. Magna amaritudo peccati, quae tantam
amaritudinem peperit. Surely it is time that we cleanse our selves, for our God
is a jealous God, to visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, Exodus
20. Heb. 12.29.
to the third and fourth generation of them that hate him.

As obedient children (says Saint Peter) not fashioning your selves to the
former lusts of your ignorance, but as he which has called you is holy, so be
ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is written, Be ye holy, for I
am holy. Deuteronomy. 10.17.
And if you call him Father, which without respect of person judges every man
according to his work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear, I. Pet.
1.15, 16.

Leuit. 11.
in birds, and beasts, and men also, to teach that no unclean or sinful
person shall stand in his presence: 1 Cor. 15.
neither does corruption in herite incorruption. For if the question be, Who
shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy
place? The answer is, Even he that has innocent hands, and a pure heart, Psalm.
24. 3. 4. And Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Math. 5.


Unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled;
they profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, and are
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.15.

And for a better life. God is light (says Saint John) and in him dwells no
darkness, if we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie and do not truly; but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Christ his Son cleanses
us from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1. 6.7.

and help of divine grace is impossible. This is that which our Savior
speaks of, Ioh. 15.5. Without me you can do nothing. For can we promise any
thing more to our selves then David in the 119. Psalm. I will run O Lord (says
he) the way of thy commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty? Can
we run with our feet, before our hearts be prepared, or can we run with our
heart, before God has enlarged it? Can we run the way without the way? which
is Christ Jesus, away which we cannot see, till our eyes be enlightened? Not so:
but when God shall have opened the eyes of our understandings, then with David
may we see the wonderful things of Gods law. For there is gratia praeueniens,
before we can do any good, and there must be gratia cooperans, to assist us in
well doing, and gratiaperficiens vel subsequens, to continue unto the end; so
that we cannot perfect the work of renouation, Nisi gratia praeueniat, gratia
cooperetur, gratiaperficiat vel subsequatur.

The propriety of the person


2. Our selues] It is a work worth the labor, to bring the work of cleansing
to our own house. Saint Paul says, Let a man examine himself, 1. Cor. 11.
Prou. 18.
And the Wiseman witnesses: iustus primus est accusator sui. The just man's
judgment begins at his own heart. Nullibi clarius agnosci potest vera
iustitia quam cum de peccatis aliorum agitur; vero enim iustitia ( vt ait
Gregorius) compassionem habet, falsa vero indignationem. A righteous man is not
sooner seen in any thing then in this, when comparison is made twixt him and
others: Truth and honesty herein are full of compassion, but falsehood and
hypocrisy hatch malice and indignation. The eye which sees all things sees
not it self, viz. Per lineamrectam, but by reflection: so the infirmities of
others we see per radios directos, and they are ever in our sight, but our own
sins we see per ambages and circumloquia, neither will we see them till
judgment does force them home to the conscience. A wonder it is to see how the
world is in love with lying vanity: Maxima pars hominum stultitiae vitio
laborat: who is he amongst us which does not think himself wise, and clean,
and holy, and better then other men? Aurum and opes and vasa frequens donabit
amicos, Qui velie ingenio cedere, nullus erit. That other men are richer then
themselves some will cunningly grant for advantage, to lay the greatest load
on the weakest horse; but that men are better or more holy, is the last thing
that will be heard of. A strange thing, that sinful man who is of all
creatures most miserable, should be of all creatures most proud. Saint Paul
turns his eyes into his own heart for the example of all others, where taking
a strict view, he calls himself the chief of sinners: and David speaking of
his own sins faith, that they are ever in his sight, Psalm. 51.3. But I know
not how men are sick of selfeloue, and the deepenesse of folly does possess
their hearts: when in the infirmities of others, they are more then Lynceous
eyes, but in their own offenses they are oculis capti, and more blind then
Bats and Moles: In other men's sins, Polyphemus mutatur in Argum, they have
more cies then the Leopard has spots, and not a more shall escape their
censure; but in their own, Argus mutatur in Polyphemum, and they are more
blind then Bartimaeus which knew not men from trees, neither can they see
beams at home. But who so thus rashly wadeth into the infirmities of others,
Volodie fratris vel cupidine laudis ducitur: either hatred or pride has
evermore an hand in such dealing. Et qui sibi malus, cui bonus? and how should
we expect good from him to others, which knows not to be good unto himself?
For charity first purges her own heart, and then in compassion passes to the
infirmities of others.

Because that every one shall give an account for his own soul, Reason.
and for the measure of grace which he has received; other men's talents shall
not come in our reckonings, but in particular, so shall the Summons be: Luke 16.
Read rationem, Give thou an account of thine own Stewardship. And What art
thou then that iudgest another man's servant, seeing in that thou iudgest
another thou do condemn thy self, Romans 2. 1. And again, that every
servant stands or falls to his own Lord, Romans 144. And in this case it may
well be said, Who made thee a judge or aruler over him? Peter therefore when he
will be smattering in John's affairs, our Savior answers, Quid est hoc tibi?
What is that to thee? look thou to thy self, follow thoume. Ioh. 21.


Math.23.
but they themselves will not touch them with the least of their fingers:
Serpents, a generation of Vipers, painted Sepulchers, who although the poison
of Aspes be under their lips, and their feet do tread the steps of darkness,
yet these for a pretense of zeal and holiness will throw the first stone, and
pursue the infirmities of their brethren with deadly hatred.

Clodius accusat Moechos, Catilina Cethegum.

They which are most in fault, for the most part will soonest find fault: but
thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Romans 2. Thou that
preachest to another, Thou shall not steal, do thou steal? Or thou which
say to another, Thou shall not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? Hypocrite, primum ecce trabem, Matthew.7.3. first cast the beam out
of thine own eye, that thou may more clearly see the more that is in thy
brothers eye.

Judas gushed out; crying out against disorders abroad, but never reforming
their own consciences at home; whereof one speaks very well, Conuenimus ad
reformandam Ecclesiam, sed praepostero ordine, quisque enim alium emendare
vult, seipso neglecto: A preposterous kind of zeal, as of those whose meetings
are not for the better but for the worse, which censure in severity the slips
of others, but labor not at all to cleanse themselves. The Pharisees, the
fathers and predecessors of these Sectaries, they condemned our Savior propter
peccatricem, Luke 7.39. they taxed his disciples for unwashed hands, Mat. 15.
yea and censured them for the ears of corn, Math. 12. so these supercilious
and blind guides, in other men's infirmities they strain at a gnat, but in
their own they swallow a camel. Qui non suis bonis, sed alienis malis
sanctimoniae laudem venantur: whose (...) is (...): their madness (I say) and
folly is manifest, because not for good things (which themselves do not,) but
from evils, which they spy out it others (as best acquainted therewith in
secret) hence would they gain the name of zeal and purity; and hereby they
suck no small advantage. But let me use once more what our Savior uses
often: Quid vides festucam? Hypocrite, why see thou the mote? Matthew. 7. Et vt
dicam aliquid mirabile: surely a wonder it seems to me; Qui habet trabem,
videt: and qui non habet trabem, non videt. he that has a beam in his eye,
sees: and he that has none, sees not. But the reason is, 1. Cor. 13.
Charitas non cogitat malum, A pure heart thinks no hurt. As when our first
parents were innocent, they saw not their nakedness; Genesis 3.
but when they had sinned, they saw, and were ashamed: so a wonder it is, that
their sins which are as beams in the eyes, should so clear their sight,
that they can see motes in others.

God be merciful to me a sinner.

Moses when his face did shine so gloriously, that the people could not bear
the splendour thereof, Exodus 34.
only himself knew it nor. And the most dangerous sickness which does befall
the soul (the bottomless gulf of despair only excepted) is, that any
should think himself pure, and holy, and clean, and better then other men:
for they which know themselves sick, do seek for help; but they which think
themselves clean, do live and die in their sins for want of cleansing. But
we, my brethren, knowing our manifold and foul offenses, let my text bring us
back, whence we are digressed, to cleanse and purge our own hearts first,
every one to cleanse one, that so all may be cleansed; cleansed, I say (from
filthiness:) and that is the third passage of the point, viz. the matter to be
wrought upon.

Filthiness) The matter to be wrought upon, is filthiness: 3. The matter to
be wroughtvpo^.
where by a Synecdochicall procession, is put the part for the whole, as one
figure is put for a thousand: so under this word filthiness, is comprehended
sin in general: and from the very name, behold the nature of sin, it is
called filthiness, whence observe,

Sin is odious, as it may appear elsewhere by the names in the Scripture; it
is called pollution, a leprosy, Leuit. 20. 2. Pet. 2. 23. Josh. 7.
a contagion, the vomit of a dog, and wallowing of a swine in the mire. Again,
it is called uncleanness, the execrable thing; and every where it is said to
be abomination, more loathsome then the boiles of Job, or the sores of
Lazarus: A menstruous cloth, as Isaiah speaks; The stool of wickedness: Lam. 1.
as we use the name in the basest manner. David calls it, rottenness and
putrefaction, psalm. 38.
My wounds stink, and are corrupt, etc. And speaking more generally of all
sinners, he says, Corrupt they are, and become abominable. Psalm 14.
The Prophet Isaiah does thus decypher the nature and estate of sin and
sinners, whether we speak of one sinner, or of a sinful nation: The whole head
is sick, and the whole heart is heavy: from the sole of the foot to the head,
there is nothing whole therein, but wounds, and swelling, and sores full of
corruption: they have not been wrapped, nor bound up, nor mollified with oil,
Isa. 1.5, 6. And the Prophet Ezechiel sets down the ingendring of such a
spurious and beastly progeny, like evil and darkness, and those (...)
animalia, which come not under the view of Gods creation: Ezekiel. 16.
Thine habitation and thy kindred (says he) is of the idolatrous Canaaniets,
thy father an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite: and in thy nativity thy
navel was not cut, thou wast not washed in water to soften thee, thou wast not
salted with salt, nor swadled in clouts, but thou wast naked, and in thy blood.
By all which may appear the nature of the matter now in hand, viz. the
filthiness and beastiall pollution and uncleanness of sin and sinners.

Hosea, the filthiness of a sinful nation, where was no truth, nor mercy,
nor knowledge of God in the land, Hose.4. These were not to be found there, and
I would to God that we had found what they lost: but the heathen man's poesy is
become a true prophecy, Terras Astraea reliquit, In cuius subiere locum
fraudesque dolique. The world it is worse and worse, old, cold and stiff; old
in iniquity, cold in charity, and stiff in wickedness; our grandfathers
were wicked, our fathers worse then they, and we claim the sins of both by
inheritance: Isa. 1.
Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity! The filthiness of our age
is such, that, (not peragrare vestigia Satanae, who compasses the whole earth,
and walking through the same, leaves the spawne of uncleanness in all places;
nor yet to pursue the filthiness of this whole land, Plautus.
which were onus humeris impar, a burden far too heavy for my shoulders) if
I should but enter ionahs one days journey into this City and Suburbs, and
take notice of the filthy sins which here are done, it were much, and too
much for my stammering tongue to explane, or my troubled soul to sustain:
witness with me your selves which sit on the seat of judgment, whether
through swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, men break
not out, and blood touches blood. These were the foul offenses of Israel, as
the Prophet witnesses, and I would to God they had been borne and buried in
Israel, that we had never known them; for this famous City which is as the
crown of this land, Isa. 5.
the compass of whose walls are as the vineyard of God, now through the riot
of sin, are in many places become Mara and Amara, Ruth 1.
a root of bitterness, a sink of sin, a welspring of pollution, a stage of
ungodliness, a bait of deceitfulness, and a debarring from happiness. When
Gods people hearkened to his voice, and walked in his ways, then were they
blessed, and called the Israel of God: but when they for sooke him, and defiled
themselves with the abominations of the heathen, God as though their sins
had blotted their names out of the book of his remembrance, he calls them
Sodom and Gomorrah. Esa. 1. Surely (brethren) Samaria by her fornications did
justify Sodom, and we by our heinous sins do justify Samaria; for the
sins of Sodom were these: Ezech. 16.49.
Pride, fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and contempt of the poor.
Ezekiel. 16. But consider the filthiness of such a nation, where gluttony has
eaten til it hungered, and drunkenness has vomited till it thirsted, where
pride is accounted the best fashion, and whoredom is called a trick of youth;
where men drink iniquity like water, and bind sins together as it were with
cart-ropes; Esa. 5.18. 1. King. 21,
where as Ahab sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, so
men as beasts have given themselves over to work all uncleanness even with
greednesse; Ephesians. 4.19.
some like the proud Angels feathering their wings in presumptuous pride,
soaring aloft til their plumes like Daedalus his wings, melted with the fire of
Gods wrath, drive them down to the pit of destruction: some like the covetous
Caterpillar devouring the fruit of the poor man's vineyard; some like the
insatiable maltworme dead drunke^ in the streets; yea, here may you see murder
and malice run headlong to destruction, monstrous Anakims men of might, Genesis
11.
building a Babel their own confusion, Ester 3.
envious Hamans macerating themselves for their brethrens welfare, Genesis 29. 1.
Sam. 25. 2. Sam 16. Esa. 37. Judith. 13.
snudging Nabals and churlish Labans, withholding the wages of the hireling and
grinding the face of the poor; cursing Shemeies, and blackmouthed Rabsakeis,
unnatural Sodomites and painted Iezabels, drunken Olifernes Iose head and
soul and all; and which has brought your sins to the height, that an
adulterous and an idolatrous religion has still footing in your City and
dwellings.

Surely (brethren) if I should total all in just account, Dies me deficeret,
this day, yea and the days of my mortal pilgrimage would sooner have an end
then my labor, and therefore I must be forced to use a piece of civil policy.
Meet but with Agag and the fatlings, the foul and crying sins, 1. Sam. 15.
and the dependants may more easily be reformed: And as a man that aims at a
multitude can at one shoot would only some few; so give me leave shooting at
all filthiness, to crush in pieces these two that follow, viz. drunkenness
and whoredom: which go hand in hand and have kissed each other, and are not
more heinous then common in this City and Suburbs.

And for the hateful sin of drunkenness, howsoever it be but a fiction that
Cyrces charms turned me^ to swine; yet sure I am, and woeful experience makes
known too often, that Bacchus charms, viz. strong drink it turns men to
beasts; the soul of man miraculously created by Gods infusion, and infused by
creation, lies drowned in the drunkards body: his body which should be the
temple of the holy Ghost, distempered by excessive riot, is such that his soul
might loath to dwell therein; and his goods or possessions (be they more or
less) lent for the maintenance of himself and his, are all hoorded in the
pot, and put in a bottomless bag. The Lacedaemonians a people which knew not
God, by the light of nature did so abhor this brutish sin, that their
Helots, slaves which they bought for villanage, they would make drunken, and
bring them into the market place and expose them as malefactors on a gibbet,
that their children seeing their uncleanness and filthiness, might thereby
detest and abhor that swinish sin. But we need not buy Helots to set up as
scarecrowes to the world, for eueu before your doors and in your houses may
you daily see these beastly Epicures: and were there not a remnant of the house
of Israel amongst you to stand in the gap like Moses and Aaron twixt the living
and the dead, inwardly mourning and lamenting, and as much as in them lies,
laboring and reforming forming these foul offenses, the end of this City
would be sudden as the fire of Sodom. But it is written, Woe to you drunkards
of Ephraim, etc. Esa. 28. 1. Woe to them that rise up early to follow drunk
ennesse, and sit till the wine inflame, Esa. 5.11. Woe to them that are mighty
to drink wine, and strong to pour in strong drink, Esa, 5.22. Awake ye
drunkards, faith Joel, 1.4. and howleye that are strong to drink. And think
you that all these woes are written in vain? Then is our preaching vain, and
your faith also vain, and this book of truth has no truth in it. Hearken
therefore ye men of understanding, and you shall hear the drunkards doom; woe
upon woe shall light upon them, their posterity shall be beggars, their estate
consumed, their name shall rot and perish, their bodies odious even to them:
and which is heavier then all, their souls repulsed from the grace of God,
shall dwell with the foul and infernal spirits. who as their desire was to
enter and dwell in the heard of swine, Math. 8.
so shall these swine remain with them in chains of darkness for evermore:
And such is the end of this filthiness.

To which I may add whoredom, like Sodom and Samria sisters in impurity; for
gluttony and drunkenness are the gallery and way of whoredom: Venture been
pastus cito dispumat ad libidinem; Genesis 19.
drunken Lot and incestuous Lot both in one person, at one time; and they are
seldom sundred; for it is no thing new or strange, for a person which shall
first become a beast, to do after like a beast. It is a sin against nature,
for whereas other men sow for an harvest, foul fornicators and wicked
adulterers, which plow with other men's heisers, they sow that which they dare
not reap. But they shall be punished both here and hereafter. Here first with
beggary. He that feeds harlots wastes his substance, Prou. 29.3. Yea he or
his posterity shall be glad to beg a piece of bread, Prou. 6.26.

2. With infamy, for his name and credit shall take such a deep and
incurable wound, that his reproach shall never be done away, Prou. 6.33.



Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, etc. the wrath of God
remains on such, Col. 3. 6. And again Whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge, Heb. 13.4.

The holy Ghost joins a whore and a dog together, Deuteronomy. 23.18. Thou shall not
bring the hire of a whore nor the price of a dog into the house of God; and
Jeremy compares adulterous beasts to neighing horses. Ier. 5.8. And the
wiseman likens them to an ox going to the slaughter, Prou. 7.22. and calls
the whore a deep ditch and a narrow pit, Prou. 23.27. And they that enter in
to her, hardly return again to take hold of the way of life, Prou. 2.19. And
in the latter end when judgment shall bring his sin to the door of his
conscience, he shall wonder at himself and say, O now was I deceived! Prou.
5.12.

I conclude the point with that of S. Hierome, O ignis infernalis luxuria,
cuius materia gula, etc. Hier.
Where he compares whoredom to the infernal fire, whose matter or
nourishment are gluttony and drunkenness, the flame is feruor co^cupiscentiae:
Hos. 7.4.
as an oven heated by the baker, so is an adulterer; the sparks are corrupt
speeches and filthy communication, the smoke infamy and disgrace, the acts
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, and the end hell torments.

Drunkenness and whoredom, with other the odious sins of these latter and
dangerous times, these are they which have kissed each other, which go hand in
hand, and have made a couenanc with destruction, and sworn a league with hell,
for the subversion both of Church and Commonwealth. O that I had the voice of
men and angels, to cry against them: if my tongue were dipped in gal, yet
could I not sufficiently not bitterly enough inuey against them. If there be
any thing in death or hell more miserable, their tongues shall taste thereof,
and their bowels shall be filled with the dregs thereof: woe upon woe shall
light upon them; and though the Sun and Moon have an end, yet their plagues
and torments shall never have end. hearken, and stand in awe, and tremble
before the Lord your God, yemen of Israel: how long and how loud have we cried
against these foul offenses, and yet who has believed our report? or to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed? Surely if our words take no deeper
impression, it rests that you second our words with the sword of justice. And
to the Honorable and Worshipful of this assembly be it spoken, to whom God
has imparted his own Name, (for ye are called Gods) that you join your
helping hands to pull down these shops of iniquity, and to stop and dam up
these stinking wels of filthiness: for if you spare, and bear the sword in
vain, the people shall die in their sins, but God shall require their blood
at your hands. Neither may I forget to give some of the worthiest and most
honorable in this assembly their due, for the good and godly zeal they have
showed for the lord our God on this behalf, the fame whereof has spread it
self into all corners of the land, and it does make glad the City of God. I
mean in punishing and purging these two forenamed vices, to wit, drunkenness
and whoredom, together with the profanation of the Sab both: may you go on
like good Nehemiahs, to do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlem, and
the Lord strengthen your hearts: and as you labor the peace of Jerusalem, so
let your days be multiplied in peace, and bind up their souls, O Lord, in the
bundle of life. All that I have further to say to you the Magistracy of this
honorable Assembly, touching this point, is the charge of God himself to his
servant Joshua; Only be strong, and of a valiant courage, to fight the Lords
battles, to cut down sin, to root it out: and as you have begun in the
Lord, so let your zeal abound, and be not faint hearted in so good a cause,
and behold God shall neither leave you nor forsake you, till you have in some
measure purged and cleansed this City from filthiness.

And for you, my brethren, let my conclusion of this point turn to you all
here present, and you to turn to the Lord your God: o turn you, turn you,
for why will you die ye men of Israeli consider your sins are great and
grievous, they are the provocation of heaven, and strike at the majesty of
God; say therefore with S. Peter, It is enough for me that I have spent the
times past in surfeiting and drunkenness, in covetousness and idleness; other
things, nay better things are now required of me, namely that I live, not after
the Iusts of the flesh, but after the will of God. Thus cleanse, yea and your
selves, yea and cleanse your selves from filthiness, yea and that from all
filthiness, and that is the fourth part and passage of my text, viz. the
generality and difficulty of the task. The generality or difficulty of the
task.


All filthinesse] The Apostle dehorring from sin, dehorteth from all sin;
not only from filthiness indefinite, lest sin should have a starting hole,
but all filthiness vniuersaliter, that no sin should escape: whence note,

None must content themselves with the beginnings of mortification. For as
Moses once spoke in the case of their departure out of Egypt, With our young
and with our old will we go, we will not leave one hoof behind: Exodus 10 9.
so is it ever most true in our departure out of the captivity of sin, we must
not leave one sin unsearched, not an evil thought must be spared; for
whosoever shall fail in one point of the law, is guilty of all, Iam. 2. 10.
And again, Whosoever breaks the least of these commandments, the same shall
be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. Act. 26.28.
King Agrippa therefore in religion was like a meteor in the air, betwixt
heaven and earth; and so are all that have a divided heart, like the picture of
Ianus, which looked forward and backward; even so are they half, and almost,
and halting Christians. But as no defective person was to serve at Gods altar,
no more shall any halting professor come in his presence. The point is, All
filthiness must be cleansed. Which was mystically signified in the law, where
Moses was commanded to cut the hair of the Leaper, supercilia and cilia, not
an hair of sin must be left. The Holocausts, whether they were boues, oues,
or aues, were wholly consumed; to teach us, that whatsoever we do in Gods
service, must be done wholly. So Saint Paul bids us Put on (...), the whole
armor of God: for we must leave no part unarmed. Ephesians. 6.
And Christ faith, Take my yoke upon you: Mat. 12.29.
one would think that the yoke was only for the neck; but his yoke must we
take on every part. God would have us power out our hearts like water; now
water leaves no savor, nor color, nor dross behind, as other licours do: so
must we cleanse our selves, even from all appearance of finne. If we cleanse
the Temple, let us not leave the Altar behind; kill both Amalek and all his
cattle; spare not one corrupt affection, not the least sin, no not in the
egg. The Prophet speaks of a cake baked on the harth, Hos. 7.
panis subcineritius, baked on the one side, but dough on the other; lukewarm
Christians, which halt twixt God and Belial: a little warm, that they may
serve God, and a little warm to serve the world. But the Wise man sets down
the wish of God, Fili mi, etc. My son, give me thy heart: non per
commutationem, nec per venditionem, sed per donationem. Prou. 23.
Some lend their heart to God, until they see a greater advantage; some sell
their heart to God for a reward, and God must serve them first. But we must
give our heart freely, and with a willing mind; our whole heart must we give,
and that continually, Deuteronomy 6.5. Vae duplici cordi, says Saint Austen. They
dissemble with a double heart, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 12.
But this I say, Cor diuisum moritur, A divided heart is a dead heart. Et qui
diuidunt partem diabolo, and partem Deo, iratus Deus a sua part discedit, and
diabolus totum possidet: and therefore give God all, or thou give him nothing
at all, yea and do it continually: non Deo in iuuentute, and diabolo in
senectute, like the foolish Galathians, which began in the spirit, Gal. 3.
but would end in the flesh. In a word, we may give our knowledge to the
ignorant, our goods to the poor, our taxes to Ceesar, but our hearts only to
God, freely and wholly.

Because that as one fly corrupts the whole box of ointment, Reason.
so one sin makes us liable to condemnation. The Apostle therefore speaks of
sin in singular, Romans 6.23.
Stipendium peccati, The wages of sin, not of many, but of any sin is death.
And if we should suffer so many deaths as we have committed sins, yet were
Gods judgments just and right. A ship is endangered by one leake in the side,
and a city surprised by one breach in the wall; and a fowler catches the bird
as well by one part as the whole body. So sin is like leaven, and a little
leaven leaueneth the whole lump: Gal. 5.9. 2. King. 2.
one Coloquintida brought death into the pot, and one dead work of darkness
destroys the soul.

1. Sam. 1 5.9.
but keep others: as Saul spared Agag and the fatlings; and as Herod spared
his lust and unlawful marriage. Mat. 6.12.
Ananias and Saphira were willing to bring a part to the Apostles, but they
were loath to bring all. The young man in the Gospel would follow Christ, but he
was loath to sell all; so that this word (all) marres all. Every man would go to
heaven with his darling. The covetous would go with his gold; the vicious with
his harlots; the ambitious with his brave attire, etc. But touch the world in
these their profitable, pleasant, darling and bosom sins, and you shall
hear men speak as in the house of Rimmon, like Naaman the Assyrian, God be
merciful to me in this. 2. King. 5.
Preach to the usurer or oppressor, That he which does not provide for his
own family is worse then an infidel, or against prodigality or suretiship,
and your word shall be as the first and latter rain, and sink deep into his
romembrance; but turn him to Psalm. 15. where no usurer shall rest in Gods holy
hill. or 1. Cor 6. where no extortioner shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; or to Saint Matthew concerning works of mercy, or to Saint Luke
against covetousness: and you shall find him eared like the deaf adder, and
his heart harder then the nether millstone, But it is written, If thy right eye
offend thee, that is, Math. 5.
if thy sin be as dear unto thee as the apple of thine eye, yet pull it out,
and let not thine eye spare it; or if thy right hand offend thee, that is, if
thy sin be as profitable and commodious as thy hand whereby thou gettest thy
living, yet cut it off and cast it from thee: or if thy foot offend thee to
cause thee to sin, that is, if thy sin be so necessary as thy foot wherewith
thou bear thy self, yet spare it not: For it is better to enter into the
kingdom of God, blind, and lame, and maimed, then otherwise to be cast into
hellfire. For one sin in the soul is like a serpent in the bosom, cast it
from you, or it will sting you to death: and as Dalila never left fawning and
flattering Sampson till she made him a mill horse to the Philistimes; so your
sin if you trust it, will betray you to the devil, and he will send you with
such a grist to grind, that you shall pay your soul for the tole. As
therefore it is said of Job. 1. that he was integer and rectus, and so must we
be, integri, sound and not hollow, and recti, straight and not crooked; and so
are all good men, and every good work both within and without. And to this
purpose ought we to set God always before our eyes: 1. 2. 3. 4. Ephesians. 6.6.
and to think upon judgment and our account: and to consider that eye service
is nothing pleasing to God: and to remember that as Christ gave his heart blood
for us, so as (Saint Bernard says) Just cor nostrum vendicat quisuum pro
nobis dedit; He (I say) has redeemed us, and therefore ought we to cleanse our
hearts from all sin, and give all to his service. This is the point which I
aim at, viz. the trial of out integrity, when a man can say with good
conscience, as Psalm. 139. Try me O God, and know my heart, prove me and knew my
thoughts, and consider if there be any way of wickedness in me; or at the
least as it is Psalm. 7.3. if there be any wickedness in my hands. Surely
(brethren) I say to you that are the elect of God, Let us thus examine our own
hearts upon our beds, Psalm. 4.
and in our chambers secretly, and cleanse our selves from all filthiness: All
filthiness (I say) both of the flesh and spirit, which is the last passage of
this point, viz. The speciality of the parts and powers infected.

5. 5. The speciality of the parts and powers infected.
Of the flesh and spirit] There was a law in Rome, De purgandis fontibus, and
it holds good in Scripture, where we must purge our hearts, which is fons
vitoa, tam naturalis quam spiritualis; and in purging of our heart we must
cleanse our bodies, yea and our souls also from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit: whence note,

I beseech you (brethren) by the mercies God that you give up your bodies and
souls a living sacrifice, etc. In stead of the bodies of dead beasts, we must
give our bodies a living sacrifice, and in stead of the blood of beasts which
was a shadow, and pleased not God of it self, we must give up the acceptable
sacrifice of the soul; and this is judge sacrificium, viz. a perpetual
mortifying of the will, reason, affections and members: Atque haec obedientia
non potest plus dare, dedit enim se. And therefore must we mortify both, that
we may sanctify him both in body and soul; not only saying in the outward
organe of speech: My soul praise thou the Lord, Psalm, 103.1. but body and
soul, flesh and spirit, must join their forces as well tuned Cymbals, Praise
thou the Lord o my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy name.

He has made us and not we our selves, Psalm. 100. And therefore are we due
unto his service. Totum fecit (says Augustine) and totum exigit: August.
He made all, and therefore will he have all, not a piece of thy heart, nor a
room in the heart, but thy whole heart; not a member of thy body or some parts
of thy body, but the whole man: Read Caesari qua Caesaris sunt; Math. 22, 21.
give him I say the whole, for it is due unto him. The whole body mortified
from sin, and thy whole heart purged by faith bathed in the blood of the
Lamb, and cleansed by the fire of the spirit: Not an old heart, nor a corrupt
heart, but a new heart and a new spirit, for which the Prophet David begged:
Create in me a new heart O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm.
51.10.

For out of the heart proceed thefts, adulteries, murders, etc. Out of the
abundance of the heart the tongue speaks, Math. 15 19. Math. 12.34.
the hand work^th, the foot walks; and therefore says Jeremy. 4. Wash thine
heart (o Jerusalem) from all wickedness. The Prophet finds not fault so much
that evil thoughts came in, but that they stayed there: A foolish heart
therefore is compared to the axle tree in the wheel, which continually
turns, and yet staieth in the wheel: so the thoughts of an evil heart are
not expelled but turned over; therefore the only means to cleanse our bodies
is to cleanse our hearts; and the only means to cleanse our hearts, is to let
the fear of God keep the door of our hearts. Let us therefore consider, Quid
amisimus, viz. our own freedom. Cui offendimus, God our maker; Et quo
tendimus,to hell and damnation. Let us cleanse therefore our flesh and spirit,
frequentieiectione of evil thoughts received, diligenti euitatione of all
enticements, and sedula repressione of all carnal concupiscence. And we must
do it speedily; for if a garment be stained it will easily be cleansed, if it
be washed presently, a coal will not burn if thou hold it not too long:
therefore we should learn wisdom of the worldly, who in their generation are
wiser then the children of light; who if any floods or inundations are likely
to endanger their lands or houses, they use all means to turn the current of
the streams another way: and so should we turn the current of our flesh and
spirit moving us to evil, orando, meditando, laborando, semper aliquid bone
operando, it a vt diabolus cum veniat, iuuentat nos semper occupatos: Either by
thinking upon the passion of Christ, or of the joys of heaven, or of the
pains of hell, or in the performance of the duties of our callings, or in
pouring out our prayers unto God, always laboring good, and these will turn
the current of our hearts another way.

For bodily exercise profits nothing. 1. Tim. 4.8.

3 3. Esa. 29.13.
With these may I rank the hypocrites of our times which serve the Lord in show
and not in truth, which draw near to God with their mouths, but their hearts
are far from him: such are the knee-praiers and lip-labours of our
time-seruing hearers, which outwardly profess Christ, but inwardly Belial;
Christians only in name, Saints only in show: of which Saint Bernard speaks.
Multi sunt oues habitu, vulpes actu, crudelitate lupi. Bernard.
Sheep in show, foxes in deed, and wolves in cruelty: for an hypocrite has,
vulpem in cerebro, miluum in manu, and lupum in cord; a fox in his brain, a
kite in his hand, and a wolf in his heart. A fox in his brain, subtle and
crafty to ensnare, and then he has miluum in manu, a kite in his fist to hold
fast; and when he has caught hold, he has lupum in cord, a wolf in his
heart to devour. And therefore our Savior Christ says, Beware of false
Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves: Math. 7.16.17
which in painted boxes hide deadly poisons, in beautiful Sepulchers rotten
bones, and under Iezabels painted face a whores behavior; and therefore our
Savior calls them serpents, and viperous serpents, O ye viperous serpents,
ye generation of vipers, how shall you escape the damnation to come? Math.
23.33. And to show the certainty of their damnation, beside the manifold woes
which Christ denounces against them, it is said, that wicked men shall have
their portion with hypocrites; Math. 24.51.
to show that the condemnation of hypocrites is most surely sealed. Let me
therefore use that counsel of Chrysostom, Hypocrita, aut esto quod appares,
aut appare quodes, Either be as thou seem, or appear as thou art: for
simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, Counterfeit piety is double impiety;
first because it is impiety. and then because it is counterfeit, making truth
falsehood, and God a liar. But as it is said, Romans 2.
Non auditores sed factores legis; not the hearers of the law, but the doers of
the law shall be justified. So of religion, Non eandem profitentes, sed eidem
obedientes: not professors, but performers shall be glorified. Let us not
therefore be like the fig tree which our Savior cursed, that had leaves in
abundance, Math. 21.
but no fruit at all: for it is not the lifting up of our eyes, nor the
knocking of our breasts, nor the holding up of our hands which shall stand us
in stead in the latter day; but the wounded soul, the sincerity of the heart,
Psalm. 5 1.17.
the contrite spirit joined with our outward observance and obedience which
shall administer true joy in the latter end. And therefore let us, as the elect
of God, holy and beloved, let us (I say) profess with our mouths, and
practice with our lives; let us sing in voice and with the spirit also, let us
repent in life and sow in tears; let us cleanse the flesh that we may be
mortified, and cleanse our spirit, so shall we be glorified. And of the former
general part of my text, viz. the work of mortification, thus far. Now
follows the other, viz. vivification. And grow up, etc. Where before we
further pass, consider with me a little this copulative particle (And.)

And] I his word stands as a bridge in the passages of my text, may it please
you to stand upon it a little, and look both ways, you shall observe the
Apostles order; whose order is, first dehorting from sin, and then exhorting
to holiness: first killing the old man with the fill thy works of darkness,
and then raising the new man, which according to God is created in holiness
and righteousness. First Cleanse your selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit; and then grow up to full holiness in the fear of God; whence
observe.

Sin must be rooted out before holiness can be planted in. Doctr.
For Sarah can have no contented peace so long as there is an Hagar in the
house or family; and therefore says the Scripture, Cast out the bond woman,
viz. sin, and let not thine eye spare her, though she has had favor of the
flesh and spirit, yet make a clean riddance, and leave not a brat or rag of
her behind. Psalm. 34. 14. Isa. 1.
First cease to do evil (says David) then learn to do well. Eschew evil
(says Isaiah) and then do good. First we must die unto sin and then live
unto righteousness; for viuendo morimur, and moriendo viuimus, in living we
must die, and dying we shall for ever hue. Ambrose.
And therefore Saint Ambrose inuerteth that saying of the preacher, Eccles. 2.
There is a time to line, and a time to die: nay rather (says he) there is time
to die, and a time to live. Leo.
Et melius est mori Christo (says Leo) qui mortuos erigit, qram viuere diabolo
quistantes deprimit: Better to die to Christ which raises the dead, then to
live in sin which destroys the living.

1. Reason 1. Math. 9.17.
Ab incommodo; because no man puts new wine into old vessels, for the
vessels break, and the wine is lost, but new wine must be put into new
vessels, that both may be preserved; no more can the word of Gods grace take
effect, or newness of life be begun in the old vessels of sin. Luk 8.14.
For as the thornie cares of the world do choke the word; so to the wicked Jew
and Grecian, and man of sin, the grace of God is a stumbling block,
blindness and foolishness; and to offer his promised graces and favors unto
such, is but to cast pearls before swine, or to give holy things unto dogs.

2. 2. 2. Cor. 6.15.
Ab impossibili: because two contraries cannot at once agree in one subject:
and What fellowship has light with darkness, or Christ with Belial? The altar
of the heart therefore must first be cleansed, before the sacrifice of
righteousness be offered; the unfruitful works of darkness must be purged
out, before that holiness can be planted in. Use.


This serves for the condemnation of those which think to attain grace
sufficient, yea and glory also, although they cleanse not themselves from
sin: but these are those foolish builders which would build the house of
holiness without a foundation, and join the same together with the untempered
mortar of iniquity; but the grace of God pertaines not to such, neither have
they part in the promises: yea in this state of sin, they are altogether
excluded from the kingdom; for it is written even of the best, which does
otherwise best approve himself, Luke 13.3.
Except you repent, you shall all perish. So that sin so long as it reigns
or remains in a man not repented of, it is the bar of Gods grace and our
own salvation. We read of him which came to offer his gift, Mat. 5.23.
that he was sent back first to purge the altar of his heart from the leaven
of malice and strife. And it is most true of any person, so long as he
continues in any sin not repented of and cast out, his service is not
acceptable, but his prayers are abominable. Nay suppose further, that he has
done many good works (as the wicked shall one day p^eade, In thy name have we
prophesied, and through thy name cast out devils,) yet if he commit iniquity,
all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned, Ezech. 18.24.
but in his transgression that he has committed, and in the sin that he has
sinned he shall die. In the transition of the points of my text therefore, let
me exhort you in the name of Christ, and the words of the holy Ghost, as it is
written, Ezech. 18.30. Return therefore, and cause others to turn from all
your transgressions, and so iniquity shall not be your destruction: cast away
all your transgressions whereby you have transgressed, and make you a new heart
and a new spirit, that holiness may be planted in: for why will you die, O
house of Israel? It follows,

Grow up to full holiness in the fear of God.] Which part of the conclusion,
I have formerly viewed under three heads.

(Growvp) (to fall holiness.) (in the fear of God.)
1. Grow up.] After mortification, having once cleansed our selves, we must not
stay there, as Israel at the foot of the hill, Exodus 19.
but with Moses ascend into the mount of God, and increase in holiness: whence
note,

Psalm. 1.
So Saint Peter wills to grow up, 2. Pet. 3.18. But grow in grace and knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. The poesy of Apelles, was, Nulla dies sine linea:
and I subscribe, Nullalinea sine linea: No day without a line, and no line
seen or read, without some fruit. Titus the Emperor was wont to say of a day
that passed him without some good, Perdidi diem; to teach us, that all time is
not time to us, which is not lent to this service. In the old law, the servant
which after seven years service would abide with his master, Exodus 21.6.
he was to bore a hole through his ear, and nail him to the post of his
door. As the master dealt with his servant, so must we deal with our selves,
viz. bore an hole through (not our ear, but) our heart, and nail that to the
house of holiness. God in the beginning says, The evening and the morning was
the first day, Genesis 1.
and so of the rest; but of the Sabbath there is no mention made either of
morning or evening; to teach that our service to God must be without evening,
viz. without ending; and so must be our growth in godliness. The kingdom of
God is compared to a grain of mustard seed, Math. 13. which is first an herb,
then the greatest of herbs, then a tree, and lastly has boughs and branches,
wherein the fowls of heaven make their neasts. And so the kingdom of heaven
is often compared to things increasing, to teach our growth and progress in
weldoing, if we have faith to confirm it, (Lord I believe, help my
unbelief;) Mar. 9.24. Luke 7.47. Psalm. 129.139.
if love to increase it, (Many sins are forgiven her for she loved much:) if
zeal to enkindle it (The zeal of thy house has even eaten me up.) And as God
has begun and continued a chain of his high favors toward us, in
predestinating, calling, Romans 8.30.
justifying, sanctifying, and glorifying his Church: so let us encounter his
love with all diligence, joining to our virtue faith. to faith knowledge, to
knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to patience godliness, to
godliness brotherly kindness, to brotherly kindness love. 2 Pet. 1.5.6.
And thus by joining together the linkes of this golden chain of his graces,
we must grow up from grace to grace.

As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow
thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Now as babes which are not fed do perish, and as a
building begun and not followed, comes to nothing; it is even so in the nursing
and building of the inward man.

we crucify the Lord anew unto our selves, and make a mock of his favors.
Heb. 6.6.

the wages of sin is death, and omission of duty is commission of iniquity.
This I say, that he which endeavors an harmless life, to deal uprightly
and justly, and not to defraud or wrong his brother, this man is in the way to
the king dome of heaven; but if thou will be perfect, Hoc vnum restat; do well,
and endeavor thy self to every good work: and thus we must grow in grace that
we may attain to full holiness: and that is the perfection of our work, and
the part that now ensues.

To full holinesse] The Apostle would have us like the wise builder in the
Gospel, who gave not over his work till he brought it to perfection: we must
grow, to [full holinesse] from whence observe.

Ezechiel, grew up by degrees, first to the ankles, then to the knees, then to
the loins, and lastly to the head; and as the wheat our Savior spoke of,
grew up by degrees, first there was the blade, the^ came the stalk, after that
the full corn, but lastly came the harvest: even so like that water we must
grow higher and higher til we come to our head Christ, and like that corn
riper and riper until the end of the world when the Lord shall winnow the
chafe from the wheat, the wheat he shall receive into his garner, but the
chafe to be burnt up with unquenchable fire. Thus we must grow unto full
holiness. Mat. 2.9.
For as the star which directed the wise men in their search, ceased not
till it came to the place where Christ was, and there it stayed; so must we not
stay in the course of holiness till we come to heaven where God is. And as the
kine of the Philistims which drew the Ark of God, 1. Sam. 6. though they were
milch and had calves at home, the one to weaken them, the other to withdraw
them, yet without turning to the right hand or left, they kept on their way
till they came to Bethshemesh: so having once joined our selves to the yoke of
Christ, and bearing the arc of his law upon our shoulders in the way of a
virtuous life, though we have many hindrances, wordly allurements, the devils
temptations, and our own sinful prouocations, yet must we keep on the way of
holiness to perfection: and so the apostle exhorts, Phil. 3. Let us as many
as be perfect be thus mindid; Luke 1.
like Zachary and Elizabeth, of whom Saint Luke reports that they were both
righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and iustifications of the
Lord without rebuke: that is, without just exception to be taken against them.
yet to dream of an absolute and Angelical perfection in a mortal man, was
the error of the Pelagian heretics: but our perfection is in part, not
wholly, in respect, not absolute: or perfect we may be said toward men, but
not in relation to God. There is also a perfection by way of comparison with
others; and so, optimus ille est qui minimis vrgetur; he is the most perfect
man which has the fewest faults. Yea and further there is a perfection of
holiness, secundum huius vitae modum, according to the measure and proportion
of this life; and this perfection every good man must have. Saint Paul
describes it thus, Phil. 3.3. I account not my self that I have attained
perfection, but one thing I do, I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my
self to that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: So that this is the point. We must
resolve, endeavor, contend, and strive for perfection as for a prize, ever be
adding grace, till we are in some sort according to the capacity of our humane
nature perfect men in Christ Ie sus: and to this our Savior exhorts. Beye
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. Math. 5.48. neither must we desist
till we come to full holiness.

non progreds est regredi: and our life is like the tumbling of a bowl up an
high hill, which if it be thrown part of the way, or half or more, it
returns again; but if it be thrown to the top, there it rests: so the
haven of holiness it is Olympus an high hill, which we must climb to the top;
for to stick or stay in the midst is but lost labor. Again our life is as a
Boat rowed against the stream, where if the rowers stay, it goes backward
of it self: so in the work of holiness we strive against the stream of our
affections, and if we desist or be slack in weldoing, they draw us back to
cuill.

Peter and end with Judas, having entered the covenant of grace they fall away
like untimely fruits, trees that are twice dead and plucked up by the roots,
Jude v.12.
whose end is to be burned; which turn to their old bias of iniquity as the
dog to his vomit, and as the sow that is washed to her wallowing in the mire.
Genesis 19.29.
Lots wife for this we know was turned into a pillar of salt, and set up in
example to season others; and that we forget not, our Savior sets a memento
before her name: Remember Lots wife. Luke 17. 31. for as it was with her,
Vbirespexit ibiremansit, where she looked back there she stood: so no man
putting his hand to the plough of holiness and looks back, is fit for the
kingdom of God. Saint Paul gives the reason, which who so considers in
heart, it will cause the heart strings to ache, and the bones to quake for
fear. It is impossible (says he) that they which were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,
and have tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,
if they fall away, that they should be renewed again by repentance. Heb.
6.4.5. For they after they have escaped the fill. thinesse of the world (says
Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 2.20.) through the knowledge of the Lord lesus Christ, and
are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse then the
beginning: for it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them.

Reu 2.4.
that (as the Church of Ephesus was charged, so) you are become changelings,
and have forsaken your first love? And what should I name in particular, that
steadfastness in faith, modesty in words, that uprightness in actions, mercy
in works, that discipline in manners, love and unity among brethren, which in
the primitive Church was the glory of the first Christians? Yea and brethren,
I must tell you, that you did run well, and what should turn you out of the
way of holiness, that you should have an evil heart to depart from the living
God? This you know of a surety, that to him that strives and contendeth, to
him is the kingdom given. The kingdom of God suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. To him that ouercometh, to him will I give the crown
of life, Math. 11.12. Reu. 2.17. Math. 24 13.
Revel 2.17. And again, He that endures to the end, he (and he only) shall
be saved. And of full holiness we have thus far heard and spoken. And now
follows the measure thereof, viz. in the fear of God.

in the fear of God.] This last part of my text and labor, sets down, 1. the
measure of our holiness, viz. (in fear,) and 2. the object of this fear,
viz. God.

For the former, I find by observation generally three kinds of fear, a
natural fear, a foolish fear, and a fear of God: the two former I find not
in my text, neither will the time give me leave to seek them out. But for the
last, I find it generally to be of two forts: the fear of God, it is either
servile or filial: the object of the former, is Gods judgment; but the ground
of the latter, are the effects of his love and mercy: and both these in a
different manner, are the measure and foundation of holiness. And look what
difference is betwixt a servant and a son, they fear to offend, the one for
punishment, the other for love: so howsoever good men love God, even of zeal
unto his glory, yet it is not amiss to be restrained from sin even for
fear of judgment. It is best (says Augustine) to be a son, yet better to
be a servant then an enemy. Si non potes propter amorem iustitiae, fac propter
timorem poenae. The affection of an enemy is hatred, of a servant, is the rod
of punishment; but of a son, is love and reverence. And accordingly I find
three sorts of fear: the first of which is merely slavish, lumpish,
unprofitable and dogged kind of fear, full of hatred and devilish despite,
and indeed the fear of devils and reprobate spirits, which finds no mercy
because it seeks no mercy. And the devils do thus beiecue and tremble.

But there is a fear of Gods righteous judgments, which even in good men has
a good effect; for it restrains from impiety. Et maxima est poena timorem
amisisse poenae. Bernard. I considered my ways, Psalm. 119.59.
(says David) and so I turned my feet unto thy testimonies. For who so
considers his ways, shall find his wants; and withal remembering the terror
of Gods judgments, and the necessity of his justice to punish, yea and to
punish according to the nature of offense, it will daunt and terrify the heart
of any from offending, if it be not past feeling. And this is that which
Augustine has to like purpose: Atimore tenera conscientia, a tenera
conscientia bona vita, hinc decrescit timor seruitutis, atque inde dulcescit
Deus peccanti: and thus the fear of Gods righteous judgments is to good
purpose; for it is a bridle to restrain from finne, and a step to beget the
third, which is the filial fear of love.

But Saint John says, Perfect love casts out fear, 1. Ioh. 4.18. viz. this
servile fear, and begets another, borne of the free Spirit, Psalm. 51. viz.
this filial fear, the fear and reverence of a son to a loving father. Of
this the Prophet speaks, There is mercy with thee, O Lord, therefore shall
thou be feared. And this is that of which Saint Luke speaks, We must serve
God without fear, Luke 1. Luke 1.74.
And Saint Paul makes it more plain, Romans 8. not in the spirit of bondage for
fear of punishment, but in the spirit of adoption and freedom, even of zeal
unto his glory. And this is the best and most excellent way of fear, which I
do take to be the principal aim and intendment of my text. And so to bring
this fear back to my text, and my text home to your selves. First because we
must grow to full holiness in fear, observe,

Paul will therefore have us to workeout our own salvation in fear and
trembling: Phil. 2.
and Saint Peter, to Pass the time of our mortal pilgrimage in fear. Our
estate is never secure of danger; for the Angels, though in heaven, yet thence
did they fall. Jude. Genesis 3. Math. 4.
Adam and Eve, though in Paradise, yet there tempted and overcome. Our Savior
in the vaste and wild desert, yet there the devil finds him. And the Saints
of God, though in the bosom of the Church, Psalm. 105.
yet they have had many foul slips and falls; and therefore our holiness must
be perfected in fear.

Secondly, seeing that the fear of love, and not of punishment, is the truest
measure of our perfection, observe,

oderunt peccare mali for midine poenae: To do well for fear of punishment, is
but an asses virtue. And herein is the trial of a perfect heart, if a man can
joy in holiness conscionably, though it come alone, yea though accompanied
with many miseries. Singular is the example of David to this purpose, Psalm. 119
126.
Psalm. 119. It is time for thee (O Lord) to lay to thine hand, for men have
destroyed thy law: therefore (says he, even for the love and zeal that I have
to holiness and Gods glory, therefore I say) love I thy command: ments above
gold: and all false ways do I utterly abhor. This is the point; our
perfection consists in this, if we can be content to embrace holiness, even
for it self, and for reverence to our heavenly Father. By which it may
appear, that fear, and the fear of love, is the measure and perfection of
our holiness.

Luke 11.24.
ready to take adnantage upon every occasion; and if he find the house swept
and garnished, and no resistance be made, he enters in and dwells there, and
the end of that man is worse then the beginning: and therefore we ought at all
times and in all things to walk circumspectly and in fear. Ephesians. 5.15.


Praeceptamonent, exempla mouent: yea know, that examples in sin do draw
multitudes to offend; and therefore we ought to fear our selves, even for the
good of others.



Blessed is the man that fears always. Surely (brethren) it is a good thing
through godly fear ever to get victory of out infirmities, before they come
to be joined with the sins of the world, to the grief of the godly, the
reproach of the wicked, the trouble of our own consciences, or the hazard of
Gods glory. Thus the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, Prou.1. yea
and the perfection of holiness is the fear of the Lord. hear the end of all:
Fear God, and keep his commandments. It is the Alpha and Omega of our
holiness, the measure and foundation of the same: and Blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, Psalm. 112.

Of God] My text has at last brought me to the end of our journey, even to God
the Lord, who alone is to be feared. And seeing it is now high time to leave
you, here I will leave you, for I cannot leave you better then with God.
Consider therefore a little the height of his Majesty, the brightness of his
glory, the perfection of his goodness, the strength of his power, the
excellency of his wisdom, the eternity of his being, the holiness of his
truth, the sweetness of his mercy, the blessedness of his presence, in whose
sight there is length of days, and in his presence is fullness of joy for
evermore. Let his name be had in honor, from the rising of the Sun to the
going down thereof. Again, Oh Lord of hoasts, how excellent is thy name in
all the world!

Again, God is the fear of his Saints. For the strength of Israel, is a
dreadful God, clothed with unspeakable majesty as with a garment; and the
splendour of his glory is ten thousand times more bright then the Sun in his
greatest beauty: yea the beholding of his face is present death to a mortal
man. The Angels tremble, the heavens melt away, the mountains smoke, the sea
is dried up, and Jordan driven back, and the earth does totter upon the
foundations at the sight thereof. The voice of the Lord is a glorious voice,
and has the pre-eminence, The voice of the Lord brings mighty things to
pass. Hear, and fear, and tremble before the Lord your God, ye men of Israel.

In conclusion therefore, seeing we know that one and only God, ever to be
worshipped and feared, whose authority does command, and power execute, and
providence govern us and all things; let us (as Henoch walked with God) so
pass the time of our mortal pilgrimage in fear and holiness, as if we
walked in his presence, whose eye sees all, and whose ear hears all;
always remembering that his all-seeing eye, and all-hearing ear shall bring
you and me, and us all to judgment. In the fear of God therefore let us begin
and so end all endeavors, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, and grow up to full holiness, that at the appearance of the
Son of God to judge the ends of the earth, we may be found faithful
servants: and as we have dealt truly in a little, so he may then make us rulers
over much, through the riches of his grace, who has freely and formerly
beloved us, not for our own sake, but because himself is love, and takes
delight in his own goodness. To which God be ascribed all goodness, and
glory, and mercy, and power, both now and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

