St. PAVLS EXERCISE, OR, A SERMON OF Conscience.

Describing the nature of it; and declaring the manner and means how to
obtain, and retain, a good CONSCIENCE.

Preached by JOHN HVGHES, Doctor in Divinity.

2 COR. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience. LONDON:
Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of
the Greene-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. Anno Dom. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop
of LINCOLN, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council; Grace and peace in this life, and glory in the
life to come.
PReaching, and Printing (Right Honorable) are excellent means to beget
Faith, and to increase Knowledge. The one (like a shower of rain) waters for
the present; the other (like Snow) lies longer on the ground, and may speak
when the Author cannot: Having therefore preached diverse Sermons, I have
presumed to print this one, and to present the same unto your Honor, as a
testimony of my service and duty. My labor in this kind, if it may do good
to any, and be accepted of your Lordship, it is the height of my desire. The
matter has been handled by many: And, many more zealous and learned men I
pray God to raise up daily to preach, and to write more of the same argument:
for, beside the method and manner of handling (which I also attribute to the
grace of God, exciting and assisting nie) I challenge nothing to my self but
the faults, Mala mea sunt pure mala, August.
and mea;
Bona mea nec pure bona, nec mea.
Your Lordship may claim a special interest in these lines, not only in
regard of the Author, obliged unto your Honor in many respects; but also of
the matter, which is mere Chancery, and has need of your patronage. For it is
a common complaint that Conscience (for the most part of these latter years)
has line bedridden and speechless: But blessed be God, that has raised up your
Honor to be a Patron to his Church, a Pattern of equity and Justice in the
Commonwealth, and a principal agent in these unconscionable days, to restore
and recover conscience again, where it was much decayed.

The same God that was the Author of your preferment, continue his mercies,
and multiply his blessings upon your Lordship, that as the hearts of all good
men (specially of us Churchmen) do rejoice in your advancement; So I pray God
we may long enjoy your Honor, to the comfort both of Church and
Commonwealth. Thus, craving pardon for my boldness, and favorable acceptance
of these my endeauours, in most humble manner I recommend your Honor to the
protection of the Almighty, ever resting.

Your Honors most bounden and dutiful Chaplain, IO: HVGHES.

St. PAVLS EXERCISE, OR, A SERMON OF Conscience.
ACTS 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience,
void of offense toward God and toward men.
The Preface.
THe very reading and hearing of this Text may put us in mind of our duties;
do but apply it unto your souls, and practice it in your lives, and you shall
find much comfort.

The maine matter of it is Conscience; a doctrine much neglected in ourage, and
yet never more needful. I will not trouble you with any long discourse of the
Context, for the words are plain, and they contain part of S. Paul's Apology
before Faelix, when Tertullus the Orator accused him for a pestilent and a
turbulent fellow. The coherence
This Apology consists of two parts Negatio facti. Confessio fidei.



1. A negation, or denial of the fact, Verse^^.
They neither found me in the Temple, disputing with any man, nor in the
Synagogues, or City, raising up the people.

2. A confession of his faith, Goran.
Non negat sed narrat; non dissimulat sed plane profitetur quam religionem
coluit, says an Ancient upon this Text; he does not deny nor dissemble his
religion, as many do, but professes plainly, that after that way which they
call Heresy, so worshipped he the God of his Fathers. Verse 14.


To this he adds the ground of his faith, believing all things written in the
Law and the Prophets.

And then the fruit of this ground, Verse 15.
Having hope toward God that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both
of the just and unjust.

And lastly, in the words of my Text he sets down his practice and
exercise: And herein I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of
offense, etc.

As if he had thus spoken (...), Herein, The sense of the Words.
and for this respect, because I am a Christian, believing the doctrine of the
Law and the Prophets, and having hope in the Resurrection, (...), I my self
do study (as the Rhemists render it, or labor and endeavor, as Tremelius
reads it, or exercise my self, as the vulgar English has it.

Where, by the way we may observe, that the groundwork and foundation of a
good conscience is Christian Religion, and a right belief concerning things
divine, specially the doctrine of the Ressurection, without the which the
conscience cannot be good nor clear.

For in this respect S. Paul says, I labor and endeavor to have and to hold
a conscience, (...) clear and void of offense in all duties toward God and
men, and that always. This I take to be the sense of the words, and their
coherence with the precedent Scripture. The sum and substance whereof may be
reduced to these three general heads, whereof I will speak briefly.

The Division.
1. Of Conscience, and the nature thereof, Quid sit? What it is? because many
talk of it that know it not; And this is Subiectum adaequatum, the maine
subject, and as it were the Center of this Text.

2. Quotuplex: The kinds and qualities of Conscience, which are as lines drawn
from the Center, to demonstrate and deliniate the several climates and regions
of conscience; which are either offensive, or without offense, as the word
(...) does import.

3. The extent and latitude of this Text, call it what you will, the manner or
means to obtain and maintain a good conscience; or the matters wherein, in
all duty humane and divine, toward God and men; and the time how long, (...)
at all times. These are the lists and limits of this Text, and my intended
Discourse; And of these in order; but first of Conscience, and the nature
thereof.

The first part.
There are two things wherein man does excel all mortal Creatures, Ratio, and
Oration. Reason, and Speech.
Now Conscience does belong unto Reason, and is thus defined by Aquinas; Aquin.
pars 1. Q. 79. Art. 13.
Actus rationis applicans scientiam ad opus: An act of reason, applying our
knowledge to our works, and judging of the lawfulness and unlawfulness
thereof. Medina says, that it is, Dictamen rationis applicatum ad opus; which
is the same in effect. Some call it a Hebite, others a Faculty: But I decline
the Casuists and Schoolmen of purpose, that I may speak to the people, and to
their consciences: And therefore (according to plainness of speech, and
soundness of truth) Conscience may thus be defined.

Conscience defined.
Conscience is a noble and a notable faculty in the soul of man, working upon
it self, and determining of all our particular thoughts, words, and works,
either with us, or against us.

The parts of the definition expounded.
1. I call it a Faculty, because it produces acts, and is inseparable from its
subject; Exui sed non deponipotest, It may be left off for a time in respect of
the use of it, as reason in a drunken man, but it cannot be cast off for ever,
or removed from the soul. Which made St. Bernard to say, Meditations.
Quocunque vado conscientia mea wecum; Wheresoever I go my conscience is with
me, it dogs and follows me; Adest vin^, seqitur mort^um, It is present with
me while I live, and when I die it dies not; for when my body is rotting in
the grave, my conscience shall live: And when I rise again, my conscience will
come with me before God and his judgment seat, either to excuse, or accuse me.

2. I call it noble and notable, in respect of the reciprocal working thereof,
which is strange and admirable, and it is on this manner: First the mind
thinks a thought either good, or bad; and then the conscience by doubling and
reflecting the same, does think again of that thought, and judges whether it
be good, or bad. We have a good resemblance thereof in the eye, for the eye
that sees all things that may be seen, sees not it self but by way of
reflection, and the help of a looking-glass; So it may be said of the mind,
it minds and understands all things that may be understood, yet it understands
not it self, nor its own nature, but by recoiling, reflecting, and
recollecting the beams and rays of that divine light in and upon it self;
which made some to say that Conscience is nothing else but anima reflexa, the
soul of man recoiling, and reflecting upon it self.

3. I place it in the Soul of man, not as part of a part, for anima est
indiuisa, Aristot.
the soul is impartible; but tota in tota, whollyin the whole soul, and all
the faculties thereof, where it keeps a complete Court, the Court of
Conscience. In the understanding where it principally resideth; Bonorum
malorumque facinorum est Index and Index; Sen^ca.
It sits as a Judge determining and prescribing de iure, this may, or may
not be done, and this is well or ill done. In the memory it is a Register, a
Recorder, and a Witness, Qui nec fallit, nec fallitur, which can neither
deceive, nor be deceived, testifying, de facto, this was done, and that was not
done, whereof the Poet speaks, Nocte dieque tuum gestas in pectore testem.
I^^enal.


In the will and affections it is a layler, or executioner, easing or
tormenting us: For what are the approofes and reproves, the joys and checkes
of the conscience, but actions of the will and affections, recoiling upon the
Soul, either comforting, or tormenting us for deeds past, or else terrifying
us for evil deeds to come? Which made one to compare it to a bridle and a
whip, Lips. Pol.
Frenum ante peccatum, flagrum post peccatum; A bridle to curb us before we
sin, and a scourge to whip us after we have sinned.

4. The fourth and last thing in the definition, is the Subject or Object
whereupon Conscience does work, or the matters wherewith it intermedleth. It
medleth not with universalities, as Arts and Sciences, nor with other men's
matters, as busybodies do; but it deals wholly and solely in our own
proper and particular actions. And of these it gives judgment by a kind of
reasoning and disputing in and with it self, called by the Schoolmen a
practical Syllogism, whose mayor is some maxim in Reason or Religion, which
cannot be denied; and whose minor is some act, fact, or duty of ours, ill or
well done, omitted or committed: And then follows the conclusion, of it self
either with us, or against us, as conscince bears witness. Sometime it
speaks for God against us; and sometime for us unto God, being as it were a
middle (...)ng, M. Perkins.
and an indifferent arbitrator between God and man. And it is called,
Conscientia, quasi cordis scientia, says S. Bernard, or rather, Scientia cum
alia, a knowledge joined with our knowledge, whereby it knows that of us,
which God only knows with us. It is a co witness with God, for no man knows
what is in man but God only, and the spirit of man, which is his conscience;
and this is instar mill testium, worth a thousand witnesses: Which made the
Philosopher to say, Seneca lib. 1.
O te miserum si contemnis hunc testem! Epist. 43.
O wretched man if thou despisest the judgment and testimony of thine own
conscience! The nature of Conscience illustrated.


The Fathers have many sayings and similies to express the nature of
Conscience. S Bernard compares it to a Book, De interiori domo.
Conscientia est liber ad quem emendandum omnes scripti sunt libri; Conscience
is a living book, annexed to the soul of man, indeed a power or faculty of
the soul like unto a Book, for the informing and reforming whereof, all other
books are written and printed; for what are all the Diuinity-bookes, and all
the Law-bookes, but glosses and Commentaries upon this Text? Et maledicta
glossa quae corrumpit textum; Cursed is that law-booke, or gloss, that goes
against Conscience.

This book consists of two parts, M. Cade.
or volumes; The one is a Law-booke, wherein are set down the grounds and
principles of truth, and equity, called by the Ancients (...) sieve relicta
rationis Scintilla, the relics and remains, or the records of the Law, and
light of Nature. The other part is a Chronicle, or a Registrie, wherein all our
works are written; which made S. Chrysostom use the same comparison which S.
Bernard long before: Conscientia est codex in quo quotidiana peccata
conscribuntur; A book wherein all our daily sins are written.

Now Conscience when it gives judgment, it first reads over the Law-booke,
and examineth what is written there, what is bidden or forbidden by the law of
God, and nature: And then it turns over the records, and sees what is done
or left undone, and accordingly it gives judgment either with us or against
us.

S. Origin compares Conscience to a Schoolmaster, Pedagogus animae sociatus,
and affectuum corrector, A Master or Monitor, to direct our ways, and to
correct our errors.

S. Austin to a looking-glass, Speculo similis, even a clear Crystal
glass, wherein we may see our own virtues and vices, and behold the image of
the inner man.

Tertullian calls it praeiudicium extremi iudicij, A forerunner of Gods last
judgment, even the best Almanacke in our own breasts and bosoms, to foretell
us what shall become of us at the last day.

A brief Application.
These things I pray you to apply, for I cannot stand to amplify: These things
if ye know, happy are you if you do them. John 13. 17.
In this learned age (amongst the innumerable books that are extant) I
recommend unto you the book of Conscience, Hunc lege, relege, and perlege, O
read, read often, and read over this book, and do nothing against the
Dictates thereof. It is not the want of knowledge, but of Conscience which the
world complains of: many have knowledge that want Conscience; And I wish from
my heart that many had less Science, upon condition they had more conscience.
And so I come to the second part, the kinds and qualities of Conscience.

Conscience two fold.
Conscience (according to my Text) is either (...) clear, guiltless, and
without offense; or else, guilty, troubled, and offensive. The one is a
Cordial, the other a Corrosiue; the one a heaven; the other a very hell, even
in this life: Of the one Solomon speaks, Prou. 15. 15.
A good conscience is a continual feast, Judge conuiuium, a continual
Christmas, and a perpetual Iubilee; whereof S. Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Our rejoicing is the testimony of our Conscience; But the other is anima
Carnificina, the rack and torture of the Soul, a very worm gnawing the heart
at the root, and compared to a very fiend or fury of hell, pursuing men with
firebrands.

Conscience fourfold.
S. Bernard has a witty distribution of conscience into four kinds, 1. Good,
but not quiet. 2 Quiet, but not good. 3 Both good, and quiet. 4 Neither good,
nor quiet.


The two good belong properly to the godly; and the two bad to the wicked,
whose conscience is either too quiet, or too unquiet.

Good, but not quiet.
1. The first kind of Conscience is good, but not quiet. I call it good, not
simply, but in respect of the tenderness of it, and fearefulnes to offend; yet
unquiet for want of true light and information. Such is the conscience of those
that are erroneous in judgment, or ignorantly dubious and scrupulous, making
many quaeries and questions for conscience sake, where God and his word makes
none. They may be compared to a wild and a wall-eyed horse, which stirs and
starts at every shadow, without cause or occasion.

Such are many of my Brethren, both on my right, and left hand, I mean the
Recusants in both kinds, Catholics and Catharists, Papists and Puritans, who
are no less offended, the one with an egg on a fasting day; the other with a
Cap, Cross, or Surplesse, then with some heinous offense. I commend their
zeal, but not their judgment; their affection, not their discretion; they
have indeed a kind of tenderness of Conscience, but they want the right rule
thereof, both which are required in a good Conscience. Their judgment is weak
and crazie, unable to digest any hard matter, or difficult question: They
mistake the grounds of Conscience, building upon unstable foundations, and
burdening themselves and others with things in their own nature indifferent.

Three degrees of Conscience, that is quiet, but not good.
The second kind of Conscience is quiet, but not good; and of this kind there
are three degrees, Caeca. The blind. Secura, and The secure, and Obdurata. The
seared.


Caeca.
1. The blind and ignorant Conscience is quiet, because it knows not how to
stir; the blind man swallows many a fly, and the ignorant many a sin; he
sees and M. Wards Balm from Gilead.
discernes sins as we do stars in a dark night, only the great ones,
primae magnitudinis, of the larger size. Concupiscence, the root of all evil,
S. Paul thought to be no sin, while the scales of ignorance were upon his
eyes. And so do many ignorant men in their blind Conscience think many a
sin to be no sin: They think that a few heartlesse prayers, and Lord have
mercy upon us, at the last gasp, will serve their turn: They dare not look
into the glass of Gods holy Word, least the number of their sins, and the
foulness of their souls, should affright them. But if God once open their
eyes, as he did the Prophets servant, they shall see whole armies, and legions
of evils, and Devils, in them, and against them.

2. Secura.
The second degree is the secure and careless, the sleepie, and drawsie
Conscience, that can and will not see, with whom sin and Satan are in league
for a time, Sed ista tranquilit as tempestas erit, Ad Heliodor.
that calm in the end will prove a storm, as S. Ierom notes. The flesh, the
world, and the Devil has so lulled them a sleep, that they never dream of
Heaven, nor Hell, death, nor judgment, they never think of their sins, nor
of the evil day; the noise of carnal pleasures, and the voice of worldly
profits does drown the voice of Conscience in them, as the Drums in the
sacrifice of Moloch did the cry of the infants: Their Conscience is quiet, not
because they be at peace, but because they are not at leisure. O think upon
this you that swim in worldly wealth and pleasures! O remember this you
Polyphragmaticall men, that have whole Mines and Mints of business in your
pates, making so much haste to be rich, that you are not at leisure once in a
week, in a month, in a year, nay scarce in your whole life time to confer
with your poor Conscience, which is a very dangerous thing. For if ever this
sleepy and drousie Conscience do awake, as many times it does in the time of
adversity, as in Joseph's brethren, or at the hour of death, as in many others;
like a wild beast robbed of her whelps, and rowsed from sleep, Iugulum
petit, it will fly (as it were) to the throat of thy soul, accusing thee to
the uttermost, and laying all thy sins to thy charge.

3 Obdurata.
The third degree is, the seared and cauterized Conscience, which (by adding
sin to sin) is so hardened, that it has no sense nor feeling of sin. The
habit and custom of sinning has taken away all shame of face and remorse of
Conscience in many, that they are given over to a reprobate sense, to work
uncleanness with greediness. At the first every man's Conscience will speak
unto him, as Peter did to our Savior, Master, save thy self; her
pricke-arrowes are like the shafts of Jonathan, to forewarne David of the great
Kings displeasure; but if we neglect her cry and calling, this good Cassandra
will speak no more. That body is in great danger where the pulse does not
beat; that Army is soon surprised, where the watch and alarm are not kept;
So it is with that Soul, where the Conscience is not waking and stirring:
Grauissime aegrotat qui se non sentit agrotare, That man is desperately sick
that does not feel his sickness; So is that soul that does not feel his
sins: Tunc maxim oppugnaris cum te nescis oppugnari, says S. Jerome to
Heliodor, Then art thou most tempted, when thou do not feel thy
temptations. And S. Austin asks the question, Quid miserius, misero non
miserante seipsum? What more miserable, then a wretch that sees not his own
misery? O hearken unto this you that harden your hearts, and sear your
Consciences, by quenching the motions thereof, and sinning the rather when your
Conscience is against it.

Good and quiet
3. The third kind of Conscience is that which is both good and quiet, which
is very tender and sensible of sin, and yet is never troubled nor perplexed,
which is full of hope and love, full of faith and knowledge, and which brings
good tidings, and that upon good grounds. This kind of Conscience ever
excuses, and never accuses, ever comfort, and never condemns; and if it
hap to prick and ache with sorrow for some sin past, that sorrow brings
repentance never to be repented of. Some there are that have such Consciences,
but very few in these our evil days, and they that have them are happy and
blessed both here and hereafter.

Neither good nor quiet.
4. The fourth kind of Conscience is that which is neither good nor quiet, and
this is the worst of all, for as the godly have the first fruit of the spirit,
and certain tastes of heavenly joys, even in this life by the goodness of their
Conscience: So the wicked on the contrary do feel certain flames and flashes
of hellfire, by reason of their guilty conscience; which made S. Bernard to
say, Nulla poena est grauior mala Conscientia quae proprijs agitatur stimulis:
No plague, nor punishment more grievous then a guilty Conscience, which is
tormented with a sting in it self, a worm; And a worm that ever gnaweth, and
never dies. Such is the Conscience of wilful and wicked murderers and
malefactors, which despair of Gods mercy, and oftentimes lay violent hands
upon themselves. Polydor Virgil writes, that Richard the third had a most
terrible dream the night before Bosworth-field, in which he was slain: He
thought that all the Devils in hell haled and pulled him in most hideous and
ugly shapes; It credo non fuit somnium, sed Conscientia scelerum, That was no
fained dream (says Polydor) but a true torture of his Conscience, presaging a
bloody day to himself and to his followers. And we see by daily experience a
great many that are driven by the terror of a guilty Conscience to hang,
drown, and murder themselves; And of these it may be said that, Iudas-like,
they are both Jury and Judge, accusers and executioners of themselves.

Thus you see the different kinds and qualities of Conscience, with the
degrees and gradations thereof; Some too quiet, as the blind, the secure, and
the seared; and some too unquiet, as the erroneous, dubious, and desperate, or
guilty: The mean is the best; not lulled asleep with a habit of sinning, nor
yet affrighted with the terrors of guilt and despair, but well-seasoned with
fear and faith, hope and love, which is the best temperature of a Christian
soul. And so I come to the third and last part.

Part 3.
The extent, latitude, or circumference of this Text, (call it what you will)
the manner and means to obtain and retain a good Conscience, or the matters
wherein, in all duties toward God and men; and the time how long a good
Conscience is to be kept, (...), always, and at all times.

It is an Aphorism in Physic, that lisdem nutrimur quibus constamus,
Hippocrat.
we are fed by the same whereof we are bred, whether we understand it of blood
the immediate, or the earth the remote means of nutriment. And it is true in
Divinity, that the means to have, and to hold, a good Conscience are alike,
and the same. And these are principally four, Universality of obedience.
Sincerity of heart and affection. Constancy in well-doing. Diligence in
practice, and exercise.
All which are closely included in the words of my Text.

Obedience.
1. First, to have a good Conscience, there is required an universal and
Catholic obedience in all duties humane and Divine, toward God and men, the
works of Piety and Charity, in the first and second Table: For the
conscionable man has respect unto all the Commandments of God, he intends not
to break any, although he may fail in many; Lumbard.
Bona Conscientia non stat cum proposito peccandi; A good Conscience stands not
with a purpose to sin. He is no true penitent that mournes for sin past, and
at the same time means to commit the same sin again. He is no good man that
makes conscience of one sin, and not of another; so he that breaks one
Commandment, Iam. 2. 10.
hates the rest, and is guilty of all. Herod, Naaman, and Ananias, made
conscience of many sins, they went a great way toward Heaven, but for their
Pride, Incest, Idolatry, and Sacrilege, they were cast down to Hell. Many
there are that hate Pride and Covetousness, but they love Whoredom and
Drunkenness. And some there are that make a conscience of the duties of the
first Table, specially those that cross not their will and affections, that
are no way against their profit and pleasure, and that are glorious before men;
they will not miss a Sermon, swear an oath, nor do the least work on the
Sabbath day, which are very good things in them, for part of our endeavor,
though it be not mere righteousness, yet is it less sin. But as for the
duties of the second Table, which are the best Touchstone of the Conscience, if
we look to their doings and dealings with men, you shall find many of them
full of fraud and falsehood, full of malice and mischief, as if their holiness
were a discharge unto them from righteousness. And others there are that live
orderly with their neighbors, and pay every man his due, but they rob God of
his due; they have no care of the duties of the first Table, neither make they
any Conscience of Religion. The first are like the Pharisees, who were very
holy, but unjust; the others like the Saduces, good liners, but very bad
belieuers, for they believed that there was neither Spirit, Angel, nor
Resurrection: And of both these I may say, that they do their duties by
halfes, and Agrippa-like, they are but semi Christiani, almost, or rather
halfe-Christians; whereas the conscionable man makes conscience of all the
Commandments of God, even from the greatest to the least, generally, though
not equally; for most of all he strains and strives against the great and
gross sins, yet swallows not the least, he abhorres adultery, and hates
dalliance; He is so far from pride, covetousness, and other capital sins,
that he abstaines from all occasions and appearance of evil, Iud. 23.
hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. In a word, he is a perfect
Christian, quoad parts (as the Schoolmen speak) though not quoad gradus; as
a Child is said to have all the parts of a perfect man, although he want age
and stature; so the conscionable man has all the parts and properties of a
perfect Christian, which may be had here in via, in the way, although he
attain not those high degrees of perfection, which they have in patria, in
their Country.

Sincerity.
2. Secondly, in a good Conscience there is required Sincerity, integrity, and
uprightness of heart and affections, which the Greek word (...) in my Text
does well import, if you change but the Case, and read it thus, before God and
men. All things are before God, and nothing is hid from him; yet properly that
is said to be before God, which is hid from men, and which is before none but
God only, as the heart and the conscience. God is (...) the searcher of the
heart, and tryer of the reins. And therefore he says, Prou. 23. 26.
My Son give me thy heart. And S. Paul says, Col. 3. 23.
Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto God, and not unto men: For God is
a spirit, and he will be served in spirit and truth. John 4. 14.
We cannot complement before God with faces and phrases, as we do with men. A
little done in sincerity and truth from the heart, is more worth then all the
works of hypocrites; yea, without this integrity of the heart all our labor
is but lost. And therefore the Hypocrite, Math. 6. 2.
that sounds a Trumpet when he gives alms, that prays in the corners of the
street, and does all his works to be seen of men, can never please God, nor
have a good Conscience, for a good Conscience cannot stand with hypocrites.

Constancy.
3. Thirdly, to have, and to hold, a good Conscience, there is required
Constancy, Continuance, and Perseverance in well-doing: Not Demas-like for a
spurt, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Gal. 5. 7.
nor as the Galathians for a time, Ye ran well, who hindered you? But always,
and in the whole course of our life.

In the life of man there are many windings and turnings; but the conscionable
man, turn him loose, he is not bonus cum bonis, malus cum malis, godly in one
company, profane in another; sober to day, deboyst to morrow; but like a
square Cube, he is semper idem, ever the same, which way soever you turn him.
There is not any, but at times have fits and flashes of a good conscience: They
are affected for the time present with some good Sermon, or upon some great
deliverance they grow a little holy; but that little is little worth, for they
are soon out of breath, and quickly weary. And therefore my Text says (...)
always, and at all times. It is true, that the best do sometimes fail, the
most faithful have their faults and frailties: Who can say, My heart is
clean? In many things we sin all of us; But the godly, though they fall,
yet shall they rise again, and be renewed by repentance; they fall not finally,
neither do they finne pleno consensu, with full consent, and bent of the will:
Their will and desire is, yea, they are steadfastly purposed with David, to
keep all the Commandments of God; And though they fail in many particulars,
yet God accepts their will for the deed, their good endeavor, as if it were
perfect obedience: And therefore to have a good Conscience, we must be
constant in well-doing at all times, effectu, or affectu, in deed or desire, in
action or affection. And that this may be effected, we must begin betimes, put
not off from day to day to turn unto the Lord, for delay is dangerous.

And continue unto the end, Reuci. 2.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of glory. He
that endures unto the end shall be saved. Incipere multorum finire paucorum;
Chrysos^.
Many begin well, but few do continue unto the end: Ierom.
Incassuam curritur si caeptum iter ante terminu^ deseratur; It is in vain to
begin a journey and not to go forward: And therefore S. Bernard says, Sola
persevere antia coronatur, Beru^
of all other virtues, only perseverance wears the Garland.

4. To (...), the last word in my Text, importing Constancy, and Continuance,
if we add (...) the first word, which implies diligence and exercise, then
is the Circle round, or Circumference complete. Conscience, like a vessel, may
easily be kept pure and clean, if rinsed every day; but if it go longer, it
gathers soil and corruption, and requires more then ordinary repentance to
purge and cleanse it. We sin daily, and therefore we must daily wash our
consciences with the tears of inward sorrow and contrition, which brings
repentance not to be repented of. This was S. Paul's exercise, to keep his
Conscience unspotted, and without offense; and this must be the daily practice
of every good Christian: Now the only Bath or Lauacre to wash our Consciences
in, is the blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses us from all our sins, I say
the blood of Christ applied by faith. In which respect Faith is said to purify
the Conscience from dead works: And S. Paul joins them together, Keep faith
and a good Conscience; 1 Timothy 1. 19.
as if the one could not well be without the other.

Out of the flesh of man, when the body is dead, are bred those worms which
consume the flesh. Even so from the corruption of the Conscience there breeds a
worm a thousand times more terrible, even the worm of Conscience, which ever
gnaweth, and never dies.

To prevent this, we must purge the Conscience from such corruptions.

The corruptions of Conscience. Ignorance.
The corruptions of the Conscience are diverse, and different.

As first, Ignorance and Superstition; against the which we must seek for
sound and sanctified knowledge to direct us in our general and particular
callings.

Pride.
Secondly, Pride. and Singularity; against the which apply meekness and
humility, for, Vbi humilitas, ibi sapientia, Where humility is, there is
wisdom; Austin.
Et inter sapientes sapiensior qui humilior, Amongst the wise, he is wisest
that is most humble, for God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the
humble.

Uncharitableness.
Thirdly, Uncharitableness, and Unrighteousness, are great peruerters of the
Conscience; for the uncharitable and unjust man can never be conscionable.
Against these apply those precepts of our Savior, Love thy neighbor as thy
self; Luke 10. 27.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto them,
for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Unruly passions of the mind.
Fourthly, We may add to these, all the unruly passions and affections of the
mind; for as wild horses ouerturne the Chariot with men and all: So the
passions of the mind, if they be not tamed, ouerwhelme all judgment and
Conscience; for Perit omne iudicum cum res transit in affectum: Austin.
There is no place for Justice, Judgment, or Conscience, where passion bears
the sway. The best remedy against these is mortification and alteration of
their course, by turning their edge, as our anger against others: The stream
is turned when we begin to be angry with our selves, and our own sins. Our
love to the world, the edge is turned when we begin to love God and
godliness, and seek those things that are above, where Christ sits on the
right hand of God. Col. 3. 5.
Much might be spoken of these things, but I draw toward an end, and will
conclude with a word, or two by way of application.

Application.
It is a witty Parable which one of the Fathers has of a man that had three
friends, two whereof he loved entirely, Gregory in his Morals.
the third but indifferently. This man being called in question for his life,
sought help of his friends: The first would bear him company some part of his
way: The second would lend him money, and afford him some means for his
journey; and that was all that they would or could do for him: But the third,
whom he least respected, and from whom he least expected; this would go all
the way, and abide all the while with him, yea, he would appear with him,
speak, and plead for him.

My brethren, this man is every one of us, and our three friends are the Flesh,
the World, and our Conscience.

Now when death shall summon us to judgment, what can our friends after the
flesh do for us? They will bring us some part of the way. Our Wives and
Children, and our dearest friends, they will bring us to the grave, and further
they cannot go. And of all the worldly goods which we possess, what shall we
have? what will they afford us? only a shrowde, and a Coffin, or a Tomb at
the most.

(...) a good Conscience, this will live and (...) or rather live when we are
dead; and (...) ^ine, it will appear with us (...) ^^dgement seat. And when
(...) purse can do us good; (...) a good (...) will speak and plead for us,
yea, excuse and (...).

O then (my (...)) let us labor above all things to have, and to hold, a good
Conscience, keep it as the apple of thine eye, and do nothing to offend it.
Aures omnium pulso, Conscientias si^^ gulorum con^enio. Austin.
I speak to the ears of all in general, I convent the Conscience of every
one in particular; yea, I appeal to all that hear me this day, what little
regard there is made of Conscience in our age, and how few there are that
follow the dictates thereof.

An Apostrophe to Conscience.
And therefore (O Conscience) I turn my speech unto thee, thou art a judge of
Judges, and one day thou shall judge us all, and testify either with us or
against us: In the mean time, it is thy office to preach over my Sermon again
and again, and to apply it to the hearts of all that hear me this day, or
else my labor is but lost. Go to all estates of persons, tell them of their
duties, and put them in mind of God and thy self.

Speak unto those Honorable persons that sit at the Stern of Government
(either in Church, or Commonwealth) that they consult with thee in all their
counsels and courses, that they prefer thee before policy, that they
execute true justice and judgment without partiality, or respect of parsons,
and that they cause others that are subordinate unto them to do the like.

Speak to those that are toward the Law, and other Officers in Courts of
Justice and equity, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, specially in those
Courts that are of thy Jurisdiction, and have their Denomination from thee,
that they entertain, nor maintain bad Causes against the innocent; that they
wrest nor the law to terrify their poor neighbors, and to entangle the
simple; that they spinne not our honest suites to such length of time and
costlinesse, that it may be said (and that truly) Causa torque^ noce^tem,
Comsidicus innocentem, The Medicine is more grievous then the malady.

Speak to my Reverend Brethren of the Clergy, that they preach Vi^a voce (that
is) Vita and voce, both by life and by doctrine, that they teach after a plain
and a profitable manner, not affecting craggy, curious, Scholasticall
speculations, fitter for the chair then the Pulpit; nor such Roman English and
sublimity of (...) that a plain Englishman cannot understand them; for our
Language is now grown so learned, that a man may clerum in English.

Speak to the poor, that they bear their poverty with patience; and as for
those that are rich, O charge them that they be not high minded, that they
trust not in vucertaine riches, but in the living God, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, laying up for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come. 1 Timothy 6.


In a word, to conclude; speak to all men and women, that they fear God and
serve him in vprightnes and (...) truth, Iosuah 24. Like 1. Tit. 2. 12.
that they serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the da^^s
(...) that denying ungodliness and (...) losts, they live soberly,
righteously, and godly in (...) present world, looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: To
whom with the Holy Ghost, three persons, and one immortal and eternal God,
be all honor, praise and glory, forever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

