AN EXPOsition of certain words of S. Paul, to the Romans, entiteled by an
old writer Hugo.

A TREATISE OF the Works of three days.

Also an other Work of the truth of Christ's natural body.

By Richard Coortesse Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Chichester.

()

Imprinted by Wylliam Brom. 1577.

To the Christian Reader.
HAVING INTELlygence of a certain work done out of laten into English, by the
learned Father, the lord Bishop of Chich^ster, at the request of a learned and
virtuous Lady. And also understanding of an other treatise touching the truth
of Christ his natural body, made by him, both of them secretly going among
some good men, who were greatly delighted with the reading of the same: We
labored by almeanes possible to obtain the copy of the said ^o^ke, as well
for the sing^^^^r commendation that went of the excelie^cie of the matter as
also for the worthiness of the person, who had travailed therein, whose
judgment we know, to be such, as could make best choysy of arguments, and
learning so profound, as might most clearckly beautify the same.

And perusing the said work exactly, as we found it both in substance and
also in handling, aunswerable to the reports given abroad thereof: so we
thought it very meet, that the same should be published to the commodity of
many, which now being shut up in certain men's keeping, did profit but a few.

In the said work there is notably set forth, the majesty, the power and
might of the eternal and everlasting GOD, the whole discourse whereof seems
to be grounded upon the words of S. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, the
first Chapter.

That the invisible things of God are from the beginning of the world, known
by the visible things made of God. his everlasting power also and divinity. So
it contains very delightful and also much profitable matter to the Christian
and Godly reader, in these days.

The other treatise, entreating of the true presence of the most sacred,
blessed and natural body of our savior Christ, is a Jewel so precieus, of so
great estimation and value, with each true Christian, that we think al men
will more desire to read the work, then to hear the commendation thereof.

Now touching the person, the fruits of whose study and pains, we have
oftentimes heretofore, and do now also reap to our great comfort, we thought
good both for truth sake, which every man is bound in conscience to mayntein,
and also for confutation of such bad and slanderous speeches, as by some lewd
and euel disposed people are spread at tables, Alehouses, and such other odd
places, against so grave, wise, learned, and virtuous a pastor, and also to
set down such good virtues to the view of the world, as we of our assured and
proper knoweledge have experienced to be in him.

And for that the glory of God is chiefly and principally to be set forth, by
extirpation of strange and irronious opynyons, and by planting of true
religion, through dillige^t preaching, and teaching of the word of god:
F(...)st over and besides his ordinary preaching upon Sondayes and Holidayes, he
has gone three times through this whole Diocese of Ch^chester (which is
almost fourscore miles in length) preaching himself at the greatest towns,
and many learned Preachers with him in other places: And this last Summer was
accepted of the substance, both of gentlemen preachers and people of the whole
shire exceeding well, and in such sort as the like has not been seen in the
memory of man, to any of the calling in this country: Notwithstanding, that
there wa^ted not some, though not many, which privily both by fair means and
foul, labored the contrary.

And whereas it was a rare thing before his time, to hear a learned Sermon in
Sussex, now the pulpittes in most places sound contynually with ye voice of
learned and Godly Preachers, he him self as Duxgregis, giving good example
unto the rest in so grave and learned manner, that the people with ardent zeal
wonderful rejoicing, and in great number take far and long iorneyes, to be
pertakers of his good and godly lessons.

We are assured, and the most irreligious and backwarde persons that are
acquaynted with his proceedinges, cannot but confess (except they will
willingly speak against their own Consetences) that the ^ooting out of bad
and unlearned Curattes, and the planting of zealous and learned Preachers, has
been occasion to him of great expenses and charge: And so within these six
years, he has brought into this Diocese, and preferred, or ben the means of
the preferring of twenty Preachers, which be well able to preach in any
learned Audience in this realm: And by the dilligent preaching and other
excercisyng of himself, and these in the scriptures, has trained up a. xl.
more, in such sort, that they be sufficient enough to preach to any ordinary
Audyence: and almost every minister by hearing of these and such travail in
the Scriptures, as they have been by the said pastor, and other his officers
put unto, be grown so ripe in the Scriptures, that they can and do, so
painfully, diligently* and competently instruct the simple sort in the
principles of Religion, that even children can now give a better an accoumpt of
the true faith, the^ in times past such as were reputed great clearks could
have done.

But because it is not enough to deliver unto the people of GOD wholesome and
godly doctrine, but also to confirm the same by example of good and virtuous
life, how well he has trauayled in both the suppressinge of Macheuils,
Papists, Libertines, Atheists, and such other erroneous persons, the
maynteyning of pore fatherless children against the oppressor, y^ pro^ecting
of widows from the vyolent, the releasing of strangers for the Gospels sake,
the punishing of Fornicators and adulterers, the withstanding of robbers and
Pirates, the restrayning of such as unnaturally carry away grain, victuals,
and other the commodities of the Realm, to foster such as be known enemies to
GOD, and doubted to this government, and the meeting with s^moniacall practices
are a sufficient testimony.

For the which good deeds (such is the malice of Satan and ^is ^^^s) most
bitter and bad speeches are thrown out against him: yea, and certain hired
and suborned to go from Noble man, to Noble man, from Justiciaris, to
Justiciaris, from common table, to common table, and to be brief, from place
and person, to place and person, to carrye such tales and surmises as the
enformer knows to be false, and the reporter is mere ignorant of.

But the scholar is not above his master, and the world is such that
dissembling Pharisees, godless Saduces, Epicures, and such other offenders and
favorers of offenders in the premises, will ever hate those that serve God
and their prince dutifully.

And surely we for our parts, have oftentimes wondered at his constancy and
patience, that whereas we see others so overcome with importunity of slau^derous
and infamous reports, and great enemies, when he hears any loud and
opprobrious speeches spread of him, he is no whitt^ moved, but only
answers, it is for doing my duty: My master Christ escaped not evil
tongues, and saint Paul counsels us to go on by good reports, and evil
reports, (...)malis vituperari lauda^i est, And Benedi^it michi Deus propter
mal^^ictiones is^as. God will bless me for these curses, and never thinks
more of the matter.

It is also apparent to the eyes of me^, what co^^^ he ^a^h and does from time
to time bestow, in repayring of his houses, and hospitalytie to men of all
d^gr(...)s, a^^ especially upon the pore, whom he does often and in great
numbers seed in his Hall, after his Sermons. Neither can we but earnestlye
charge l^che, wheresoever they be, as long have heard with their ears, and
saw with their eyes, his learning and good conversation, and now so easily
either credit or give ear to such reports as known and iudicially co^uicted
bad persons carry up and down* repining at his bold and free preaching of the
Gospel, and suppressing of vice.

And here we most earnestly beseech almighty god, so to increase in him these
good gifts which he has already bestowed upon him, that neither he ^lake in
furthering his Gospel, nor be discouraged with the strange attemptes of bad
persons, from suppressing of sin and wickedness.

For Goliath may vaunte himself in his helmet, his Armor, and his spear,
forty days, the wicked may glory in their fine devises, and prating practices,
in their slanders and ratings for a season, but yet let not David, let not the
beloved of the Lord faint or fear: For the eyes of the Lord, are upon such as
put their trust in him, and they shall be safe under the wings of his Majesty.

And the God of all comfort and consolation, grant unto us all the assistance
of his holy spirit, that we may fear God, be dutiful to our most gracious
Prince Queen Elizabeth, love Godly and learned men, embrace virtue, and hate
and tread down vice without respect of persons to the glory of God, and the
comfort of his people.

In Sussex. 16. December. 1576.
Your beloved in the Lord, the Preachers of the Dyocesse of Chichester. Henry
Blaxton Master of Art, of Clare hall in Cambridge and preacher. Thomas
Gillingham Master of Art of Corpus Christ. College in Dr. forde and
Preacher. Danyell Gardner Master of Art, of Clare hall in Cambridge, and
preacher. Will. Coell Master of Art, of Saint John his College in Cambridge.
Ric. Fletcher sacrae theologiae Bacchalaureus, nuper socius et praeses Coll.
Cor. Christi in Accad. Ca^t. nunc Minister. Ecclae Dei, quae est Reiae. Willyam
Hoskinson Master of Art of S. John's in Cambridge, and Preacher. Thomas
Kickebye Graduat of brasennose in Oxforde, and preacher. John Motley Master of
Art, of Trinity college in Cambridge, and Preacher. Thomas Mawdisley Graduat
of Lincoln College in Oxford, and preacher. Stephen Bathurst Graduat and
preacher. Richard Burnoppe Preacher, and Uicar of Gast Greenested. Johannes
Beeching, in Artibus Maiister. Thomas Large, Person of Mesteene Preacher.
Edward Rogers Preacher. Willyam Ridley, Graduat in the Queens college in
Oxford and preacher. Thomas Frenchham Preacher. Henry Oliver, Parson of the
church at Dalington Preacher. John Miles Pastor of the Church at Heithfeld
Preacher. John Wharton, Pastor of the Church at Tishurst, and Preacher. John
Dodde Preacher of the word of God. Thomas Smith Preacher, and Pastor of the
Church of Henfeld. Denis Hurst, Preacher and Minister of Alfri^^on. John
Coortesse, Preacher and Minister of the church of Yapton. William Smith
Preacher, Parson of Foord. Edward Tickridge, Preacher and minister, in the
Church at Nitimber. Thomas Willyamson Graduat in the university of Diforde in
the College of Brasenn^se Preacher. Richard Whealakar, Preacher, Minister of
the Church of Auberly. Richard Strong, Minister of the church of climping and
Preacher. Anthony Hobson Preacher, Minister of the Church of Lymistar. By me
Christofer Wraye, Parson of ^stwith^ring, and Preacher. Thomas Godlyf Preacher,
Minister of the Church of Garneley. Henry Wis^man, Curate of B^sham and
Preacher. Richard Hickes, Batcheler of Art of Trinity College in Cambridge
Preacher. John Goodman, Minister of Ferring and precher. Matthaeus Allen
minister, and concionator Horshamiae. Phillip Mustian minister, Preacher of
Slindfolde. John L^^kyn Preacher, and Pastor of the Church of I chingf^lde.
Samuel Norden, master of Art of Peterhouse in Cambridge and Preacher. George
Sympson, Uicar of Syndon and Preacher. Thomas Michell, Parson of Hurst; and
Preacher. John Hudson, master of Art, of Brodegates in Oxforde, and Uicar of
Patcham. Anthony Douglas, Parson of Sowthwike, and Preacher.

The invisible things of Romans 1. (...)
GOD, that is, his eternal power and Godheade, be seen by the Creation of the
world, being considered in his works.

The `Preface.
THE INVISIBLE or not to be seen graces in GOD, be plainly known by the
things, which have been made, and done since the making of the world.

The said graces be three, Power, Wisdom and Mercy. From these three do all
things spring, in these three do all things stand, by these three be al things
guyded.

Power makes, Wisdom guydeth, Mercy preserves.

Which three as they be in God after a manner, which cannot be uttered, so in
working they cannot be sundered.

The power by the mercy does wifely make*

The wisdom by the power, does mercifully guide.

The mercy by the wisdom, does mightily preserve.

The infiniteness of creatures does show the power.

The bewty does show the wisdom, and the profitablenesse the mercy.

The infiniteness of the Creatures, re^^eth in the number and greatness, the
number consists in like things, unlike things and mirte.

The greatness is in the bigness and space, the bigness is in the lump, and
weight, the space stands in the length, breadth, depth, and height.

The beauty of the creatures, lies in the sight, moving, shape, and quality:
the sight in the framing and order: the order in the propernesse, the time and
the place.

Moving is of four sorts. The first of place, the second of nature, the
third of life, the fourth of reason.

The moving of place is forewarde and backwarde, to the right hand, and to the
left hand, upward, downward, and round about.

The moving of nature is in growing and decaying.

The moving of lyf^ is in sense, and appetite.

The moving of reason is in deeds and counsel.

The shape is in the seen form, which the eye beholds, as colors and
shapes of bodies. The quality is in the inner propernesse, which is perceived
by other senses, as pleasantness in the sownde, by the hearing of the care:
sweetness in sauorie, by the tasting of the mouth: delightfulness in smelles,
by the smelling of the nose: Softness in the body by the touching of the hand.

The profitablenesse of the creatures does stand in that, that is delight
some, fit, commodious, and necessary.

Delightsome is that which pleases.

Fit, is that which agrees.

Commodious is that which profyteth.

Necessary, is that without the which a thing cannot be.

Now let us run over again from the beginning, the foresaid branches, and
let us search in every one, how either the power of the maker is plainly
knewne by the number of things made, or his wisdom by the beauty, or his
mercy by the profitablenesse. And because the number was the first in parting,
it ought to be the first in searching. Therefore mark well what I shall say.

The first branche.
WHen there was nothing, to make something, how great power was it? yea, what
sense can perceive, what power it is, so of nothing to make something, yea some
one thing, although very little? if then it be such power of nothing, to make
some very little thing, that it cannot be taken by any sense, what power is
it to be thought to be, to make so many things?

How many? Number the stars of the sky, the sand of the sea, the dust of
the earth, the drops of water, the feathers of birds, the seals of fyshes,
the heirs of beasts, the grasses of fields, the leaves or fruits of trees,
and thousands thousands more, that cannot be reckened.

Things that cannot be numbered, be like things, unlike things, or both
together, which be like things. Things of one kind: As man and man, Lion and
Lion, Egle and Egle, Babion and Babion, every of these, and other such in
their kind be like.

Which be unlike things? such as be endued with diverse qualities, as a man, and
a Lion, a Lion and an Egle, an Egle and a Babian: these be one unlike to
another.

Which be of both sorts? All things vewed together.

Now mark how there be innumerable in things like, things unlike, and things
of both sorts.

Man is one kind, but there is not one only man. for who can set down the
just number of men? Lion is one kind, but there is not one only Lion, for who
can set down the just number of Lions? And so there be infynite kinds of things
in other things without number, and in every kind, infynite like things. And
altogether infynite and without number.

But peradventure some will say, that he yt made so many things, made them
little things, but could not make many and great together. Let him consider,
what it is to measure the hugenes of the mountains, the courses of the waters,
the spaces of the feyldes, the heyght of heaven, the depth of the sea. Thou
marueylest that thou can not do it. But thou shalt do better to espy that
occasion is ministered unto thee, to praise GOD in that thou can not do it. To
those that consider of the number of the creatures, we have given a kind of
taste. Now will we go about to set forth the beauty of the same.

Although the beauty of the creatures rests in many and diverse points, yet
there be some chiefly, in the which all the beauty of the same does stand.
Sight, moving, shape, and quality. The which if a man were able fully to search
out, he should find with all them, the meruaylous light of God his wisdom.
And would God, I could as plainly spy them, and as fully set them down, as
I do earnestly love them, for it delights me greatly, because it is
exceeding sweet and pleasant, often to deal about those things: for both the
sense is taught by reason, and the mind delighted with sweetenes, and the
affection stirred up with further desire, insomuch that amazed and meruayling,
we cry out with good King David: How maruaylous are thy works, O Lord, in
thy wisdom have thou made all things, thou have delyghted me with thy handye
works of thy hands, and in the works of thy hands will I rejoice. An unwise
man does not know this, and a fool does not consider of it.

For the whole world which is known by sense, is as it were a book written
with the finger of God: That is to say, made by the power of God: And every y^
creatures be, as it were certain letters found out not by the skill of man,
but ordained by the judgment of God, to make known, and as it were after a
certain manner to signify the inuysible wisdom of God. And as an unlearned man
see a book open, he looks upon the letters, but knows not what they mean:
So a foolish man and carnal, does not understand the things that be of God,
but in these seen creatures, he beholds the outward shape, but does not
perceive the wisdom of God in them. But he that is of the spirit, and can
give true judgment of all things, in that, that is outward does behold the
beauty of the work, and inwardlye spyeth how marvelously the wisdom of the
maker is. And therefore there is none but he meruayleth at GOD his works. For
the foolish and unwise man does wonder at only the outward shape: but the wise
man by that which he sees outwardlye, does pick out the deep knowledge of
God his wisdom, as if in one and the self same writing, one man praise the
color and proportion of the letters, and an other the sense and meaning.

Therefore it is very good continually, to behold and look upon the works of
God, but so him which cannot turn the beauty of bodily things to an
heavenly use, for therefore the word of God does so often move us to think
upon the wonderful works of God, that by the outward things which we see, we
may come to the knowledge of inward truth. Whereupon King David does tell it
often, as a great matter, that he has so done, and promyseth still so to do,
saying: I have remembered thy days of old, and have mused upon the works of
thy hands, and will be exercised in thy wisdoms. Hereupon also the Prophet
Esaias does say to certain, which not knowing their Creator, do give unto the
creatures the honor due to God. Who has measured the waters in his fyst, and
compassed the Heavens with his spanne? and comprehended the dust of the earth
with his fyngers? or has weighed the Mountains in his skayles, and the hills
in balances? He that sits upon the circle of the earth, and before whom the
inhabitants thereof be as Grasshoppers, he that stretches out the heavens as a
Curtain, and spreads the^ out as a Tent to dwell in. And again, King David
says in another place, reproouing the worshipping of Images: All the Gods of
the gentyls be Devils, but the Lord has made the heavens.

Why then do you think, that the works of God be so plainly aduouched to
maintain the true goohead, and that it is said, the Lord made the heavens:
but because the creature well considered, does teach a man to know his Creator.

Let us also therefore note the wonderful works of God, and by the
bewtyfulnesse of the things made, let us seek out that bewtiful, most bewtiful
of al bewtifull things, which is so merueylous, and unspeakable, that al bewty
in respect of it is nothing. And if it were any thing in deed, yet in no point
to be compared to it.

And because we have said before, that all beauty of things seen, does
consist in four points. Let us now run over every one of them in order,
and learn how by them the hid wisdom of God does appear.

I know truly, that I can speak nothing worthy enough: yet notwithstanding it
is not meet, that we should be altogether dumb in that point, of the which
we are most bound to speak most,

The second branch.
I Made mention of four: Sight, moving, shape, and quality.

Let us first discuss the first.

Sight is in compownding and order, that is to say, in setting things together,
and placing them in order.

Compownding ought to have two points, fitness and fyrmnesse, that things to
be compownded or put together, may fittely, and meetely agree, and being
compownded or put together, may fyrmely stick together. Such compownding is
very commendable.

Fitness is reputed to be in the quantity and quality, In quantity, less
things very thin and small be joined to things thick and corpulent. In
quality least things very moist, be mirt to things dry, very hot to cold,
very light to heavy, and so forth without discreation.

Mark if any of these four be wanting in the beautifulness of GOD his works,
and if thou find nothing wanting, now have thou something, whereupon thou may
in this behalf glorify God.

And first truly, if you note the frame of this whole world, you shall see
how maruaylously, and wisely the compownding of all things is perfected. How
fyttely, agreeingly and fyrmely, and in all points absolutely. In the which
not only like things do agree: but also those which the power has made diverse
and differing, the wisdom has tied and lincked as it were in one friendshyp
and true.

What can be more contrary then fire and water? which yet in the nature of
things, the wisdom of God has so tempered together, that not only they do
break the common band of friendship, but also yield lively nourishment to all
things newly born, y^ they may continue.

What should I speak of the frame of man his body, in the which each part
joined together, do so agree among themselves, that no member at all can be
found, which does not help an other. So every nature, loves the self, and
y^ agreeing of many, and diverse things merueylously pacte together in one,
makes one harmony in all.

I grant say you, that the compounding of things is fit and agreeing: but
how is the same fyrme and strong, who does not wonder at it? Behold the Heavens
which imbrase all things, how firm and strong they be, and as it were spread
and powered down round about of molten brass. The earth balanced with her
weight in the midst, does ever continue immovable, that on the one side the
fyrmenesse of the Heaven, and on the other side, the stablenesse of the earth,
may keep together, and as it were, bind together all other things flowing in
the midst, least they running out of their bowndes, break the concord of the
world.

Behold, how the veins of water inwardly spread through the bowels of the
earth, and outwardly brought forth by Channels or streams into diverse places,
do inwardly give together the earth thinking, least it should be severed, and
outwardly water it being dry, least it should ^hinke or choppe.

Behold how in the frame of man's body, the bonds of the sinews, do bind
together the joints of the bones, and the Marowe being inwardly dispersed by
the pipes of the bones, the Conduites of the veins, do carry lively blood,
through the whole body, and then wrappeth the tender flesh within the skin,
that both the strength of the bones may inwardly bear up the body, and the
fence of the skin may outwardly defend and keep harmless the same.

Who can express the hardness of the stones? or the fyrmnesse of Metals? the
strength of Oaks? the holding fast of Glue? and infinite such others: whereby
it appears how fyrme the bonds of things be, and how all things very
strongly coupled together do maintain their nature and being. Neither can they
ever be severed at once, from the concord of their fellowship.

Now that we have spoken of the compounding and putting together of things:
Let us speak of the disposing and setting of them in order, for this must
needs breed great admiration, if any will dilligently mark, that the
wisdom of GOD has appointed to every place, to every time, to every thing
their course, so that the order of things in no point is broken.

Behold, the Firmament is above, and the earth beneath, God has set the Sun
and the Moon, and the Stars in the Firmament, that they may give light to
all things below: God has made paths in the air, for the winds, and the
clouds, that they being dispersed through their moving might pour rain
downward.

God has commanded the heaps of waters to be kept in the bosom of the
Earth, that at his beck they might run any whether.

God has appointed the air for the Birds, the water for the Fishes, the
earth for the Beasts and Serpents, and infinite things that creep, and
Worms.

God has inryched some Countries with Corn, some with Vines, some with
Roots, some with Cattle, some with Herbs of great virtue, some with precious
Stones, some with monstrous Beasts, some with diverse colors, some with the
knowledge of diverse Arts, some with Mettalles, some with diverse kinds of
Spices and perfumes, in so much, that there is no Country in the world, that
has not some rare, and special thing, that the other have not. And yet may
each Country receive some other rare and spectall thing from another.

What need I tell how the providence of God has laid those things open,
which be necessary for man's use, but those things which nature does not desire
for necessity, but appetite for pleasure, it has hid in the secret bowels of
the earth, that whom the love of virtue cannot restrain, the tediousness of
labor might bridle.

The third branch.
THus much of the disposing of the places. Now to the disposing of times.

Who can sufficiently commend and set forth the providence of God? that has so
ex^elently distinguished times.

Behold, after the night comes the day, that labor may exercise such as
have been sluggish, after day follows night, that rest may comfort and
refresh the weary. Neither the day is ever, or the night ever, nor the day and
the night ever equal. Least either to much labor should ^il the weakened, or
to much case breed diseases, or the same continuing (...)ll, should grow
tedious, and yrkesome to the mind.

Also, even as the mutual rechange of day and night, does refreshe all living
things: So the four seasons of the year, following one an other in course,
dee alter the (...)te of the whole year.

First, by warmness of the Spring, the world is after a sort, borne again.

Then by the heat of Summer, it grows as it were, into strong youth.

Afterward in the fall, it wareth ripe.

Last of all in Winter, it does as it were dye.

Therefore it does ever decay, that after the decay, it may be amended again.
For except the old should first wyther, the new could not spring, y^ old
keeping the place.

Also, this disposing passes all praise, that the times so chaungeable do
keep their course, and seasons so vnchaungeably, y^ not at any time, they
leave their offices undone, or break the order of their course or appointment.

The fourth branch.
AND thus much shall suffice for the discourse of times. Now will I set down
that order, which is in every thing according to a meet disposing of y^ parts,
one inwardly, mo outwardly, according to the time and place. And in this point
appears the most excellent force of the wisdom of god, which has placed
every thing in this world so fit^y, y^ the ioining together of parts does not
at any time breed any disagreeing of qualities. As of many, for examples sake
to set down few. In the joining together of the parts of man's body, how
clearly does y^ wisdom of the maker show the self. Upward man is of one
sort: Downward of two. For the ground of the mind, that is reason, is of one
sort, and respects Heavenly things. But the soul has two qualities,
anger, and desire, which look downward to carthly things.

Moreover the frame of man's body, is streatched out in breadth by the arms,
and pitched downwarde by the legs, for both the exercise of working does
stretch out the mind, and the affections of desires does pitch it.

Also the same body of man is streatched forth, and bownded according to the
breadth one way, by the fingers of the hands, and downwardes another way by the
toes of the feet into five. Because that whether the mind does covet to work
abroad by intention of the work, or desire to look downward by affection,
there be five senses by the which it may work the purpose.

Also the fingers, and the toes have each one their joints severed in space,
which in the hands grow out of one palm, and in the feet out of one sole.
Because that out of one Fountain of sense, do five senses spring, in y^ which
by three steps, ^^rst the force of feeling, next the action of feeling, thirdly
the thing to be felt is ^ound. Last of all the head or end of every ^ird joint,
either of finger or toe, has ^nayle as it were an Helmet, that either the hand
being reached out, or the foot set forward should hit against any thing, i^
might keep the self whole, and defend the self with the own helmet.

So also these earthly things which cl^aue to the senses outwardly, according
to the resemblaunce of the nails, do as it were necessarily help us in some
par^e. But further and above the necessary use, they ought to be pared away,
as grown above the flesh, and without sense.

Note also in man his face, behold how plamely the instrument of the senses be
placed. The sight in the eyes is highest, next the hearing in the care, then
smelling in the nose, and after that tasting in the mouth. And we know that
all other scnces work by receiving outward things in ward. Dnely the sight
works outwardly, and being set a far of does much more quickly then any of
the rest perceive and see. And therefore like a good watchman, upon good
considera^ion, is set in higher place, that it might forsee the danger, which
may happen to the other senses.

The hearing is second, both in place and quickness, then the smelling, but
the taste which can feel nothing, but that it touches, as slower then the
other senses, is justly set beneath them all in the bottom.

Touching has no special seat or place, and is made universal, because it
works with all the senses, and therefore the Thumb, which represents
touching, whereas the fingers be all rooted together, answers them all,
because none of the senses can be without touching.

Note also in man's body, how ye bones be placed within, because the strength of
them, does bear the weight of the body, then the flesh does cloth the bones,
that the hardness of them, should not hinder touching. Last of all, the skin
does cover the flesh, that after a sort with the fyrmenesse it might defend the
body from things that would outwardly hurt it. And mark well this, that that
which is soft and weak, is placed in the midst, as in a safe place, least
either inwardly it wanting stay should fall, or out wardly not having defense,
should decay.

And that y^ I have set down in one, is true in all kind of things, for the
bark defends the trees, and the feathers and beakes, the Byrds, and scales
the fishes, and God has appointed to every thing a defense, according to the
propriety of the nature.

The fifte branch.
THus far of the sight. Now let us come to the moving: Moving is of ^ower
sorts. Place, Nature, Life, and Reason.

Of the which severally I cannot speak much, but briefly I will run over each
one. Weygh how the wisdom of the maker does appear in the moving from place
to place. Consider how the waters run still from y^ spring. Consider from
whence y^ motion of the winds does come.

Who can measure the perpetual course of the stars?

Who does command the Sun to go down by the Winter signs? and to go up
again by the summer signs and stars.

Who brings the Sun from the East to the West, and from the West to the
East again? only God can do these me^ucyleus things.

What shall I speak of the moving of nature? Who does n^urish all things
growing, and bring them Ludding as it were out of a certain secret womb of
nature, in ^ight again?

And again when they wither, does cause them return from whence they came:
He that pondreth these things well, shall find them to too wonderful.

Now the moving of life, which consists in feeling and desyring. Think with
your self, how mighty he must needs be, which gives sense to every living
thing, and ordreth what every one shall desire.

In brief, the moving of reasen in deeds, and counsayles passes al praise,
if a man will mark how notable that wisdom is, which does frame all the
deeds of men, and temper all the wills and thoughts of hearts so to the own
purpose that (...) can be done in the whole world, wherewith Wisdom does
beautify her works, either by commanding or suffering.

The sixte branch.
NOw followrth the shape, which is the seen form, containing fygures and
colloures.

The figures of things be merueylous, sometime for the greatness, sometimes
for the littlenes, sometimes for the rareness, sometimes for the be
wilfulness, sometime because they be ill s^uoured, sometimes be in one is
many, sometime because many be in one.

Let us speak of each one of these in order. And first the greatness is, when
any one thing is bigger then any other thing of that kind, as a Cyau^^ among
men, a Whale among Fishes a Griffin among Birds, a Elephaunte among Beasts, a
Dragon among serpents.

Littleness is when a thing is less then all other of that kind, as the When
and the Moth, the Fly and the Gnat, and such like which live as other things
do, and yet be the least of all other.

Tell me which is more strange, the teeth of the Bore, or of the Moath, the
wings of the Griffin, or of the Gnat: The head of the Horse, or of the
Grassehopper: The thigh of an Elephaunt, or of a Fly: The snowte of a Sow, or
the beak of a Wrenne: An Eagle, or an Ante: A Lion, or a Gnat: A Tiger or of a
Snayle: You muse at the bigness of the one, and the littleness of the other.

A little body made with great wisdom. Great wisdom in the which there is no
oversight, but has given them eyes, which the eye can scantely spy, and in so
little bodies, all the parts be so fitly, and fully fynished, that there
wants nothing in the least of all the same things, wherewith nature has
bewtifyed the greatest.

The seventh branch.
NExt follows things rare, which therefore breed marvel. For there be
four things, y^ therefore men y^ rather wonder at, because they see them
seldom, either because there be few of yt kind, or else because they be far
of, or hid in the secret places of nature, which the wisdom of the maker
sets alone: that the followship of man, should not be hurt, with those
that be noisome: that the desire of man, should be tried with the bewty of such
as be precious: that the slownes of man should be quickened with ye nouelty of
such as be strange to consider the wisdom of God. Last of all, that these
both good and evil set together, as it were a far of, might after a sort
speak unto man, and council him earnestly to fly eternal evil, and desire
eternal God, since that he takes so great pains to get fading goods, and fly
the evils that last not long.

Now follow such as be reckned of, for ^he bewtifulnesse. Of certain things
the proportion is liked greatly, because that they be so seemly, and properly
framed, that the very proportion does show a special care in the maker.

Again, some things we like, because they be monstrous or ridiculous, the
making whereof, the more strange if is to man's understanding, the less force
it has to cause man to praise God: As that the Codrill eating, does not move
the lower iawe, nor the Salamander burn the fire.

Who gave the Hedghogge pricks, and taught it to wallow it self in apples
shaken down with the wind, with the which being laden, and going, it makes a
noise like a carte.

And the Ante which sore seeing winter to come, fylleth her barnes with corn:
And how the Spyder weaueth her web out of her bowels to take her pray in.
These be witnesses of GOD his wisdom.

There is yet an other true and plain argument of God his wisdom, that every
like breeds the like, and that one likeness dispearsed into so many does
keep still the fourm of the first original.

An Ewe does not bring forth a Calfe, nor a Cow a Lamb, nor a Do a Hare, nor a
Lion a Fore, but each thing does extend the propagation into the like.

This order keeps nature that wants sense. The Ash is of one kind, the
Beech of another, and the Oak of the thire, and every one of them has their
several kind, and every one keeps y^ likeness of the kind.

Mark the leaf, how it is round about, as it were iegged like the teeth of a
saw, how within it is wouen with certain r^es or lines. Tell the one, tell the
other, every one that is of the same kind is a like, so many teeth in the one
as in the other, such form in the one as in the other, such color in the one
as in the other.

Behold the Mulberies, and the Strawberies, how being knit together, they are
distinguished by certain heads, such as the one is, such is the other, and
each nature, as though it followed the commandment of some inwardly directing,
at no time goes about to break their bonds.

This also is merueylous, that in one body, there be so many parts, and so
many shapes, places, and offices of the parts: As in man's body, the ear, the
tongue, the eye, the nose, the foot, the hand, and each one of those, has a
several shape, place, and office. And though they be so diverse one from
another, yet they together make all things.

The eight branch.
AFter the figure, follows y^ color. It is not needful to speak much of
the color of things, seeing that sight proves what nature gets, when she
is bewtifyed with sundry colloures.

What is goodlier then light? which though it have no color in it, yet after
a sort by lighting, it does colloure the color of all things.

What is more pleasant to behold then the sky? when it is fair, which
shines as the Saphyre, and does much delight the eye with the most pleasant
cleerenesse.

The Sun glistreth like Gold, the Moon shyneth like Amber, the stars some
of them look as red as fire, and some of them be as bright as the Rose, and
some of them seem sometimes red, sometimes green, and sometime white.

What should I speak of precious stones, whose virtue is profitable, and
color goodly?

The earth be set with flowers, how pleasant is it to the sight? how sweet to
y^ smell? how does it comfort the spirits, to see the Rose red, the Lilly
white, the Uyolet purple, in all the which, not only the bewty, but also the
springing is wonderful, how the wisdom of God shall fetch so good a thing
out of the dust of the earth. Finally, above all the rest, greenesse delights
the mind of such as look upon the earth, when as in y^ new spring, buddes come
forth, as it were in a new life, and rearing them selves upward in spyndal^es,
and afterward trodden down, as it were by death, show an Image of the
resurrection to come. But what should we speak so much of God his works? since
that we do wonder at the subtilties of man: when by a counterfeyte show, he
does deceive the sight.

The ninth branch.
Next to the shape, I am to speak of the quallity. For this cause has the
providence of GOD given so many diverse qualities to things, that each sense of
man might find some thing to delight it.

The sight perceaueth one thing, the hearing an other, the smelling the third,
the taste the fourth, and the feeling the fyfte.

The bewty of colloures does feed y^ eye.

The pleasantness of Music delights the ear.

The excelency of savors the smeling.

The sweetness of that that is sauory the taste.

Softness the feeling. And now who can reckon up all the delights of the
senses, which be so many in each one, that if a man do consider every one by it
self, he shall find every one by it self very rich, for we find so many
delights, in diversities of sounds for the ear, as we find diversities of
colors for the eye.

Among the which the chief is y^ sweet conference of speeches, by the which
me^ breaking together their minds, declare things past, show things present,
foretell things to come, open things hid, in so much, that if man's life
wanted these, it were no better the^ the beasts.

that should I speak of the singing of Birds? of the sweetness of man's
voice? of the pleasant tunes of all sowndes? for the sorts of the harmonies
be so many, y^ neither the tongue can express them, nor the thoughts conceive
them, which all feed the hearing, and are devised to delight the same.

And so in smelling, Perfumes have their peculyer pleasantness, Ointments
another, and so borders of Roses, and likewise briars, Mountes, Meadows,
Woods, flowers, and fruits, and all things which breed a pleasant smell,
and make the air sweet, do feed the smelling, and are created for the same.

In like manner the taste and touching have their delights, which may easilye
be conceived by the likeness of the first.

The tenth branch.
I Have spoken of the infiniteness of creatures and bewty, as I could, but not
as I would.

Now must I entreat of the profytablenesse of the same.

The profytablenesse looks to four^ things.

Needefulnesse, Commodiousnesse, Con^^^ientnesse, and Delightsomnesse.

That is necessary to every thing, without the which the same cannot well be. As
in the diet of man, bread and water, in his apparel, cloth or leather, or some
such Garments.

That is commodious, which although it carry with it sometimes a further
delight, yet without that a man may live: As in the diet of man, wine and
Flesh, in his apparel, Silk and fine Linen, and such other soft apparel.

That is meet and convenient, which though it be not profitable to the users,
yet it is seemly to the use, as colloures, and precious stones, and such like.

That is delightsome, which is not to any great use, and yet is pleasant to
the show, as herbs, and flowers, certain beasts, and fyshes, and such like.

It is worthy searching out, why God would make those things, which he foresaw
would not be necessary for the use of man, for who^ he made all things. But
this will soon appear, if we consider of the cause and manner of man's estate.

God made man for himself, and al other things for man.

God made man for him self, not because he needed man, but to give himself to
be inioye^ of man, because he could give no better thing.

Each other creature is so made, that both it is subject to man by the state,
and liable to his profit. So man being set as it were in the midst, has God
above him, and the world underneath him. And by body is joined downward to the
world, but by the spirit he is lifted upward to God. And therefore it was
necessary that the state of things seen should be so appointed, that man
might by them outwardly see, which a thing the unseen good were, which he
ought outwardly to desire, that is to say, that he might see in the world
below, what he should desire in heaven above.

Therefore it were not conueniente, that there should be any want of things
seen, to this end and purpose, that the plentifulnesse of the same, might
shew^ the inestimable abundaunce of everlasting good things. This is the
cause, why as I have said, God would also make things, which he foresaw,
should not be necessary for the use of man.

For if GOD had given man one^^ things necessary, he should have showed
himself good, but not rich. But now that he gives over and above necessary
things, also commodious, he shows the riches of his goodness. But when ^e
puts to things necessary, and commodious, also things convenient, he
shows the aboundaunt riches of his goodness. And finally when to those
three, he adds things delight some, what does he else but make known the
above abundant riches of his goodness.

The eleventh branch.
AND thus much briefly shall suffice for the profytablenesse of the creatures.

But for the better setting forth of the praise of God: Let us mark well, how
merueilously god does still keep together those three things in his work,
which we shall so more easily see, how merueylous it is, if afterward we view,
^^w the same cannot be together in man's work.

Truly, as man does desire to do many things, so he cannot do great things,
for so much the less he does prevail or prosper in every one, as the things
be more in number, upon the which he does employ the force of his endeavor.

Again when he coueteth the greatness, he is hindered by the number, for he is
not able to bestow strength upon many, which he has spente upon one. Likewise
he may afoard the less labor to the bewtifying of the work, ye more he
beats his mind upon the dispatche either of the number, or of ye greatness.
We find by common experyence, that the Scriuener does more readily write little
letters, and is more payned with the greater, and the faster the Pen runs,
the worse the letters be, that be written.

Also in making of Garments, such as seek to have them to fine, often loose
the profit, and they that seek profit* often want hansomnesse.

But in the works of God, neither the number does hinder the greatness,
neither the greatness the number neither the number and the greatness, the
bewtifulnesse. But they all be made so fully, as though, that but one were
made, that when man does look upon all, he may wonder at every one of the^.

But it may be that some will think this to much of seen things: it may
please them to consider, that so large a matter cannot be easily comprysed in
few words.

For whereas the Apostle does say, yt by things seen in the world, the
invisible, and the not to be seen graces in God be plainly known: It is
necessary, that whosoever would come to the knowledge of the not seen by the
seen, should first know the seen.

And therefore I, according to my small ability, thought also this the best way,
to find out the not three seen things, set down in the beginning by the
three things seen, apposed against them, that first, I should somewhat make
known the things seen, and afterward when the door of contemplation were
as it were opened, then to go on to find out the things not seen.

And now for that I have made an end of that I had to say of the things seen,
it remains to see, how by these we may go up to the knowledge of the
things not seen.

The twelfe branch.
THE graces in God not seen, I said were Power, Wisdom, and Mercy. Therefore
it is to be sought, which of these is first to be known in contemplation, and
I think, that that not seen grace, will first appear in contemplation, which
is most lively and plainly resembled, or expressed in the seen Image. And the
seen things be called the Images of the not seen, as the number of creatures,
is the Image of the not seen power: The bewty of ye creatures is the Image of
the not seen Wisdom: The profytablenesse of the creatures is the Image of ye
not seen mercy. And every creature ye nearer it comes to the likeness of the
creator, so much more plainly does it resemble and express the creator.

So that, the seen Image ought first to show the not seen pattern, which
holds in himself, the Image of the Godhead more lively set out.

The number of the creatures does rather express the substance or matter. The
bewty of the creatures does rather express the form and the substance, or
matter immagined without form, is formeles. And that that is formlesse in
respect of the substance, is like unto God. But that, that has form is more
like unto God, the^ that, yt wa^teth form.

Whereupon it is plain, that the bewty of creatures, which resembles form
is a more euidente Image, then these the number of creatures, which resembles
substance.

Also the bewty of creatures, through the natural form, belongs to the
habit, the profitablenesse to the action, for in that his creatures be
profitable, that they be liable to the use and commodity of man.

But that, that belongs to the habit is more proper, that is more certain,
then that that belongs to the action. Because nature has ingraffed the
habit, but excercyse has bred the action. Therefore ye Image of bewty does
excel in knowledge both the number, and the profytablenes. And therefore as
first in knowledge, because it is more euydent in representation, or
resemblaunce.

First therefore in this Image, ye foundation of contemplation is to be laid,
that when we have laid the foundation of searching through the direction thereof,
we may more strongly, and readily buyld the rest of the work.

And now in searching out wisdom, the beginning of the searching is
excellently well taken from the very Image of wisdom, because the father is
made manifest through his wisdom, not only, when he sent his wisdom to take
flesh upon him, but then also, when by his wisdom he made the world.

The bewty of creatures, which we have eftsoons said to be the Image of God,
his wisdom, does consist in four things.

Sight, Moving, Shape, and Quality. But in these four things, it is
manifest, that Moving has the prehemine^ce, for that, things that can move,
are nearer unto life, then things that cannot move.

Moving is of four sorts, Place, Life, Nature, and Reason.

But moving of Nature, is better the^ moving of place, because that in moving
of nature, not only y^ Image of life is expressed, but life it self after a
sort is begone.

Again moving of lyfs, does so far out go moving of nature, as that, that
ca^ foele, does pass that that cannot feel.

Last of al, moving of reason does surmount all, because in that, not only the
senses be moved to quicken, and give life, but also reason to understand. Among
all creatures, there is no Image more evident then this, because that, which
sauoureth of wisdom, does most plainly show the not seen wisdom. Therefore
the first and principal Image of wisdom unmade, is wisdom made, that is the
creature indewed with reason, which because it is in some respect seen, and
in some respect not seen, it is both the gate of contemplation, and the way.

The gate in that, that it is seeue, the way in that, that it is not seen.

The Gate because it does show the entry to the mind, that enters into
contemplation.

The way, because it brings tho mind running in contemplation to the end.

The Gate, because after a sort, it does show things invisible; visibly.

The way, because it does bring man going by the visible to the invisible, to
see the maker of both visible; a invisible.

This man may see in himself. For first none can be reckned to have any wit,
that does not* see that he is, and yet if a man will wrigh with himself, that
that he is, he shall find that he is nothing of the things, which either be
seen, or can be seen in him. For that which in us is partaker of reason, and
as I might say poured into us and mixed with the flesh, does yet of it
selfeseuer the self from the substance of the flesh, and judge the self to be
diverse from ^f. Why then should man doubt of the things not seen? which sees
that, that is not seen, which in deed man is, of the being of y^ which he
does not doubt.

Therefore a Gate of contemplation is opened to man, when he begins to enter
to know himself by direction of his own reason. And when he is entered in the
way, to run to the end, does remain that every one may come by the knowledge
of his maker.

For that in us, which has not the substance of flesh, has no matter from
the flesh, but as it is parted from y^ flesh. And yet it does most certainly
know, that it has a beginning in that that it does know that it is, and does
not remember that it has been ever, where as the knowing understanding cannot
be certain.

Therefore if the understanding can not be, except it does understand, it
follows that those things, which we know, have not ever understood, we
should belee^^ have not ever been, that is to say, at sometimes have had a
beginning.

But eue^ as I said before, that which has a spiritual substance, cannot have
a bodily beginning. For whatsoever is brought from the former matter, is
approved to be bodily. Therefore if that which is not seen in us have a
beginning, it must needs fall out, that it was not made of a former matter, but
of nothing.

And that which is nothing, cannot give substance to the self, and therefore,
whatsoever has had a beginning, certainly has received substance from
another. And that which is not of it self, cannot give being to an other: And
therefore whosoever he is, that has given being to other things, has not
received his being of an other thing. Which may be evidently proved thus, if
that we believe that every thing that is, is a creature, there will never be
end found.

Therefore our nature does teach us, that our Maker is everlasting, which has
his own and proper: that is to say, he is of himself. For if he had taken his
being from an other thing, he could not be called truly the first original
of things: For if at any time he were not, he had not beginning of himself,
neither can be called first, if he took his beginning of an other. Therefore if
he be the first maker, he was ever.

Also that, which is of the less, must needs be. For whosoever is of the
self, to that it is one thing to be, and that that it is. This is plain,
because nothing can be parted or severed from the self: That therefore, to the
which it is the same, the being, and that that it is, must needs be ever,
because nothing can be severed from the self. If therefore whatsoever be of the
self, to the same the being, and that that it is be all one, he that has not
received his being from an other, must consequently of necessity be ever.
Neither can be taken away from another, that was not given of another.

So that it must needs follow, that the things, which we believe the maker to
be, that we confess the same, can neither have beginning or ending: for that
has no beginning which was ever, and that has no ending, which ends never.
Then neither is there eternal besides the maker, neither can the maker be but
eternal.

This knowledge have we found in the moving of reason, which we have according
to the eternal maker, which lacks beginning, because it was ever. The other
mouings do confyrme this knowledge, I mean the moving of life, nature, and
place. For in the moving of life, be feeling and desire, and each natural
desire may be satisfied, neither is there any ordinary desire, but it may
compass the desire. For example sake: Living things hunger, and they find
things which ^lake their hunger, they thirst, and find things which quench
their thirste, they be cold, and find things to warm them. Therefore this is
plain, that the providence of God is gone before, by whose advise this is
decreede, that no necessary relief should be wanting.

For he that made the desire, has prepared nourishment for the desires,
neither could it in any wise be, if things went by chance, that the
coutentations should so justly and fully satisfy the desires

The moving of nature proves the same, for as it is impossible, that anyething
by the self should be made of nothing, so is it altogether impossible, that
any thing should take increase of the self, I mean yt, that, which cannot
give it self beginning, cannot give it self increase, for whatsoever does
increase a thing growing, must needs be an other from that, which by it self
before only was without increase. Then if nothing can grow, except there be
put to it something, which it had not before, it is apparent, that nothing
growing takes increase of it self* Therefore he that gives increase of
things growing, gave the increase of things being.

The moving of place does prove this also, for we see, that certain creatures
move continually, and some by times, and some after one sort, and some after
another. And although things move in so diverse manners, yet the order of thing
is never broken. Whereupon it is evident, that there is inwardly some direction
of the Governor, which does moderate all the things by a certain law.

How then can we deny the prouydence? if that every natural desire find
food prepared for it naturally. Neither falls it out, at any time, that
nature desires that in one thing, but it may have it in an other.

Likewise sithe that moving and increase, grow outwardly by sundry and diverse
ways, do never yet break the general order, how can we deny that there is
in them some direction: Therefore it cannot be doubted, but the invisible
Governor does rule within, which both by his providence does foresee the
sequels of all things, and by his wisdom does order the same.

The thirteen branch.
ONe Governor I say. For this nature also teaches, that there is in
substance one workman of al things, and one ruler. For if there were diverse
determinations of the inward rulers, the effects, or sequels of things would
sometimes also differ among themselves. But now all things do so agreeingly
run to one end, that they plainly show that there is one spring, and original
from whence they come.

But because one is taken diverse ways, it is to be declared, how the maker of
all things is one.

There is one by gathering together, and one by compounding, and one by
likeness, and one by substance, and one by identitie or samenesse.

One by gathering together is, as we call that one stock in the which be many
sheep.

One by compounding is, as we call it one body, in the which be many parts.

One by likeness, as we call it, one voice, which is uttered of many. But of
all those things, none is truly one: but they be called one after a sort,
because after a manner they resemble unity or oneness.

It is not tolerable, that we should think the maker of things to be one,
either by gathering together of diverse, or compounding of parts, or likeness
of many, seeing that, that, which in us is pertaker of reason, can find none of
the four it self. For that in us which is made of diverse parts, is proved by
reason not to be pertaker of reason, but joined to that, which is pertaker of
reason.

If therefore that in us, that is pertaker of reason be one truly, how much
more ought we to believe, that the maker of the same is truly one. And that is
truly one, which is one in substance, to the which it is all one, to be one,
and to be simply, that it is.

Therefore whatsoever is truly one, is simple, and cannot be in any respect
cut into parts. It cannot be cut into parts, because it was never made by
joining of parts together. Therefore it is true, that the maker of things is
truly, that which is, because his being is all one, and simple.

The fourteenth branch.
AND yet we are to mark, that some things there be, that be one truly, yet
not one absolutely, and altogether. For the lives or souls, which be one
substauntially, are not one interchaunably, but that, which is truly and fully
one, is substauntially, and interchaungeably one. Therefore it remains that
since we believe God to be truly one, we learn whether also he may be called
absolutely one, which we shall plainly show, if we prove him to be altogether
interchaungeable.

But because, we cannot know how God is interchaungeable, except we first
know, how many ways things may be changed, we are first to set down all
the kinds of changeableness, and then to declare how that not one of them does
agree unto God.

The fifteenth branch.
CHaungeablenesse is in three points. Place, Form, and Time.

Each thing is changed in Place, when it is removed from one place to another,
that is to say, when it leaves to be in the place, in the which it was, and
begins to be in the place, in the which it was not. And this changing is
outward, and does not alter any whit of the substance, or being of the thing.
For although it leave to be where it was, it leaves not to be that which it
was. And although it begin to be where it was not, yet it does not begin to
be that which it was not.

In form each thing is changed, when as a thing continues in the same place
according to the substance, and yet either to the increase gets some thing,
which it had not before, or to ye decrease loses something, which it had
before, or else according to the altering begins to have something, that it
had before, otherwise then it had it before.

I will not speak of changing in time, because that is bredde of the two
first. For nothing can be changed in time, but it must be changed either in
form or place. If therefore it shall appear, that God can be changed neither
in form nor place. Then it will be most certain, that GOD is altogether
unchangeable.

We shall easily prove, that God is not changed, according to the changing of
place, if we prove yt he is every where. For that which is every where, is in
every place. And that which is in every place, cannot go from place to place.
There be many profes that God is every where: And first our own soul, the
which both reason does plainly find, that it is a simple substance, and
sense does prove, that it is dispearsed through all that which does quicken
the body. For whatsoever part of the quick body is hurt, it is one spirit,
to the which feeling of each pain is carried, the which could not be, if the
one and the same spirit where not dispearsed through the whole.

If therefore the reasonable spirit of man being simple, is dispearsed through
the whole body which it guydeth, it is not convenient, that that creating
spirit, which guydeth and possessetth all things, should be tied, and bound
to some one place, but rather should be thought to fill all places.

For the very mouinges of all things which do run every where, with so
certain and reasonable moderation does show life quick within. Yet may not we
in any case believe, that as the spirit of man is personally joined to the
body, which it quickneth, that so each creating spirit to be coupled personaly
to the body of this sensible world. For God fills the world one way, and the
soul the body an other.

The soul fylleth the body and is contained in it, because it may be
compassed about.

God fylleth the world, but is not contained, because being present every
where, he cannot beholden any where.

The sixteenth branch.
FUrthermore, sythence we see the effect of God his power to be wanting no
where, why should we not think, that the same power of GOD is in all things.
And if Gods power be every where, and if also God his power, and God be all
one, it is most plain that God is every where, for God does not need any
others aid to do any thing, as a man does, for man often times does that
by the help of another, which he cannot do by his own power. Whereupon after a
certain manner of speech, man is oftentimes said to do a thing, in that
place, where it is manifest, that he is absent bodily.

As the king oftentimes making his aboade in his own city is reported, to
fight in another place with his enemies, and to overcome, or be ouercommed:
because the kings soldiers upon his pleasure or commandment, do fight, and
do overcome, or be ouercommed.

Likewise, when a man hitteth with his staff, or with a stone, a thing far
from him, the man is said to hit that, which his staff or stone did hit. There
be many of this sort, but none of these be spoken properly: because, that
which the one does is ascribed to the other.

But God which through his own virtue, by his own self does all things,
wheresoever he is present in work, must needs be there also present in
Godhead.

Now if any man would ask, how God being a simple substance, can be every
where? He is to understand that the spirit is called simple one way, and the
body simple another way.

For the body is called simple for ye littleness, but the spirit is called
simple, not for the littleness, but in respect of the unity or oneness.
Therefore the maker both is simple because he is one, and every where, because
he is God. And being in every place, can be holden of no place, for fylling all
things, he does co^t^me, and is not contained. Therefore because he is in
every place, he cannot be moved from place to place, and because he is holden
in no place, he is not local.

But the changing that is according to form, is either meresed, or deciesed,
or altered. But none of these can be found in the nature of God, which the
several discourse of each will make plain.

Whatsoever grows or increases, takes some thing besides it self. And
whatsoever takes any thing more, the^ that which is in it self, must needs
take it from another. For nothing can give to it self that which it has not.

And of whom can the maker of all things take any thing that it has not,
seeing that every thing that is, comes from him. Then he cannot increase,
because he cannot take any thing more then himself. Neither can he decrease or
be dominished. For whatsoever can be made less then it self, is not truly
one. For that which deuideth it self in seuering, was never the same in
commiction.

Therefore God to whom it is all one to be that which he is, can by no means
be made less the^ it self. Neither therefore ye perfectness of God can be
increased, nor the unity deminished, nor the immensity comprehended, nor he,
that is present in every place, can be changed from place to place.

Now I am to teach, how God cannot be altered, and because the altering of
bodies is one, and the altering of spirits another, and because also it is
plain by that, which is said before, that God is no body, but a spirit, si^^
we entreat of God, it is needelesse to speak much of the alteration of bodies,
and yet I will much the same briefly, because I may more commodiously come to
the alteration of the spirits.

The alteration of the bodies does consist in the compounding of the parts, and
mutual change of the qualities. The alteration of spirit is by knowledge and
affection.

The spirits be changed according to affection, in becoming sometimes merry,
sometimes sad, according to knowledge, to be sometimes more, and sometimes
less wise.

There be two things chiefly, which alter the affection of the worker, either
if he has done any thing heretofore to be repented of, or do appoint to do
any thing hereafter out of order. But that God does nothing to repent of, does
this unchangeable course of things plainly prove, which do so keep by a
perpetual law, the order of their first appointment. And that God does purpose
or covet to do nothing out of order. Does the reasonable sequel prove, which
in the whole body of nature does in no point disagree unto it self.

Therefore God his will is immovable, because he does never change either his
council of that, which is past, or his purpose of that which is to come and so
we ought to believe that God is unchangeable in knowledge.

The seuententh branch.
Man's knowledge does change three ways: By increase, decrease, and each after
other.

By increase, when we learn that we know not.

By decrease, when we forget that we know.

Each after other happens iiij. ways.

Substance, Form, Place and Time.

In substance when we think now this, now that, because man's sense cannot
comprehend all things at once.

In form, when we learn first one quality of a thing, and then an other
because we cannot learn both at once.

In place, when our mind is now fixed upon one place, and afterward upon an
other, because it cannot be upon all places at once.

In time, when we at one time view things past, and at an other time things
to come, because we cannot do all together.

Then also our knowledge is changed in time, when we do leave of for a while
our study, and afterward begin the same again, because we be not able to
study ever.

But none of these is found in God his knowledge.

The eighteenth branch.
GOD his knowledge is not increased because it is full. For neither can he be
ignorant of any thing, which makes, which guides, which sees through which
bears all things, and being present to al by virtue of his Godhead: must
needs see and behold all.

It cannot be diminished, because it is not of other, whatsoever it is, but the
whole same, what soever it is, it is of the self from one, and one all that it
is.

What should I speak of mutual change. How can that wisdom be subject to
mutual change, which does comprehend all things together, and at once under
one beam of sight, I say together, because it comprehends each substance,
each form, each, place, and each time. I say at once, because it does neither see
again, that it has left to see, nor leave to see that which it sees. But
that which it is once, that it is ever, and that it is ever, that it is whole.
It sees all things, and sees all things in all things, and in every time,
and in every place. There is nothing new unto it, there is nothing strange,
there is nothing departs unknown. It does foresee all that is to come, when
it is present, it beholds it, when it is past, it holds it, and to it al is
one, to foresee, to behold, and hold still.

That, that falls out in time was in prouydence, and that that is past in
time remains in knowledge.

Even as if your whole body were an eye, and your being and seeing were al one,
whether soever you should turn you, you must needs see your self, and with
one twinkling of the eye never moving you should see round about, whatsoever
could be seen. Nay rather you should see still before your self, whatsoever
were any way, the thing might pass away, but the sight should stand still,
and whether soever the thing should tnrne the self, you should be present to
your self standing.

But now because you see in part, ye see chaungeably, and when the thing goes
out of sight, either it leaves to be seen, or it is sometimes seen, and
sometimes not seen. But if you were all an eye, ye should not so see, and not
see.

Therefore what soever is in part, is chaungeable, and whatsoever is not in
part, cannot be changed. But God to whom it is the same to be, to live, and
understand, sith neither he can be in part by substance, neither in part by
wisdom, but even as he is unchangeable in substance, so he is unchangeable
in wisdom. And thus much for the knowledge of God.

The ninetenth branch.
BUt we are to understand, that this knowledge is called sometimes Vision,
sometimes wisdom, sometimes foreknowledge, and sometimes prouydence.

Vision because it sees.

Wisdom, because it understands.

Foreknowledge, because it preue^teth

Prouydence, because it orders. Of the which there arise to to hard, and ^o
to doubtful questions, the which I am afearde to set down in this treatise,
and therefore will go to that, which remains.

And now that I have entered by the eye of knowledge, and gone from things
seen, to things not seen, thus far this method has led us, that we are sure
that the maker of all things is one, without beginning, without end, and
without change, and these things we have found, not without our selves, but
within our selves.

The.xx. branch.
LEt us therefore now yet see whether this the same our nature, does teach us
any further thing of our maker. For it may be that it does not only show him
one: But also eternal.

Truly the reasonable mind is one, and being one, ingendreth of the self one
understanding. Which oftentimes, whiles it does behold, how subtle, how true,
how agreeing, how pleasant it is, by and by, it loves it, and pleases the
self in the self, it sees together and wondereth, and does marueyle, that it
has found out any such thing.

The whole joy is ever to delight in it, ever to have it, ever to enjoy it.

It pleases for the self, it pleases by the self, neither is there any
thing, that is desired besides it: because it is wholly loved in the self.

In that the sight of truth is pleasant to behold, sweet to have, and most
delightful to enjoy: the mind rests, and ioyeth in it, and with it, as the
self, neither ever is weary of the own secret, which delights in one only,
and yet no solitary company.

Weight therefore these together, the mind, the understanding, the love.

Of the mind comes the understanding, of the mind together and understanding,
springs love.

Of the only mind comes understanding, because the mind has begotten of
it self understanding. But of both, the mind is first, and the mind and
understanding, and thirdly the mind, understanding, and love. And this is thus
in us.

But in the maker, reason is of another nature, for because we believe, that he
has been ever. We must needs confess that he had ever wisdom: For if he
has been at any time without wisdom, who made him wise afterward? or of whom
he received wisdom cannot be found. And as this is most absurd, and
contrary to all reason, to believe that he that is the fountain, and and
original of all wisdom was sometimes without wisdom: So must it needs be,
that wisdom was ever in him, wisdom ever came from him, and was ever with
him.

Wisdom was ever with him, for he had wisdom ever, which was wise ever,
wisdom ever came from him, because he begat the wisdom, which he has.
Wisdom was ever with him* because the begotten never leaves the begetter.
Wisdom is ever begotten, and is ever in begetting, and yet neither beginning,
when it is begetting, nor ending when it is begotten.

It is ever in begetting, because it is eternal, it is ever begotten because
it is perfect: so there is one that begets, and one that is begotten. The
Father begets, the son is begotten, and because he that did beget, did
beget from eternal, the Father is eternal. And because, he that is begotten,
is begotten from eternal, the son is coeternall with the father eternal.

He that had wisdom, ever loved wisdom ever, and that which loved ever, had
love ever. Therefore love is coeternall with the eternal father and son. For
the father is of none, the son is of the father alone: But love proceeds
from the father and the son together.

Because we have avouched before, that the maker of all things is absolutely
and truly one, we must therefore confess, that these three be one
substantially. Therefore because he that is begotten, cannot be the same of
whom he was begotten, neither he that proceeds from the begetter and the
begotten can be, either the begetter or the begotten, the inexpugnable ground
of truth does compel us to acknowledge in the Godhead both the trinity of the
person, and the unity of the substance. Therefore to three in one Godhead is
common both equal eternity, and eternal equallity. For that cannot be diverse
in every one, which one Godhead makes common to every one.

Then threee be one, because in three persons there is one substance, but the
three persons be not one person.

For even as the distinction of each person does not divide the unity of ye
Godhead: so the unity of the Godhead does not confound the distinction of the
persons.

The. xxj. branch.
BUt I think good a little more dilligently, to weigh this former speech: That
the father loves his wisdom.

For men be wont to love their knowledge for the profit, not the profit for
the knowledge. As the knowledge of husbandry, of weauing, of paynting, etc.
where the knowledge is reckued, altogether unprofitable, except the profit
follows of it.

If it were so about the wisdom of God, then should the work be better, then
the workman. Therefore we must bold that wisdom is ever to be loved for the
self.

Now if it sometimes falls out that the work is preferred before wisdom, it
grows not of the judgment of the truth, but of the error of man, for
wisdom is life, and the lous of wisdom is the blessedness of life.

Wherefore when it is said, that the father of wisdom, delights himself
in wisdom, God forbid, that it should be thought that we believe, that God
loves his wisdom for the works sake which he made by it: Nay rather he
loved none of his works, but for his wisdoms sake. And therefore he said this
is my beloved son, in whom I have set my delight, and not in the earth or in
the heaven, or the Sun, or the Moon, or the Stars, or the Aunpeis, or in
any of the most excellent creatures. For although these things he after their
manner delightful, yet they cannot delight but in him and for him. For so much
more do I love them, as they come ^^rer to his likeness. Not therefore God
loves his wisdom for his works, but his works for his wisdom. For in that
is every thing bewtifull, and true, and is wholly his desire. ^ight unvisible
and life immortal, whose ^ight is so much desired, that it may delight the
eyes of God. Simple, and perfect, not redundant, and yet full: Sole, but not
solitary: One, ^ containing al things.

The. xxij. branch.
BEcause we believe three persons in one Godhead* it is to be ^ought out.
whether that, which agrees to any of these agrees to the other.

It was said, that the father loves the son. Let us now consider, whether
it may likewise be said, that the love of the father, and the son, loves
the son: That the son loves himself, that the father loves himself,
that the son loves the father, that the love of the father, and the son
loves the father, that the love of the father, and the son loves it self,
yt the father loves his love, and his sons, that the son loves his love
and the fathers. And to make an end, whether it be one, and the same love,
with the which every one loves himself, and that, with the which every one
loves another.

But this will be more easy, if we call to rememberaunce the things, that be
spoken of before. For in ye former treatise it is proved that GOD is the first
cause, and original of all good things, neither can there be any Nobler good,
then that, which is the Fountain and beginning of all. So that it follows,
that God is the chief good. Therefore God is blessed alone, and properly, and
principally. And how can he be blessed, which loves not the same, which he is.
Whosoever therefore is blessed, both loves the self and the substance. If
then the father and the Son be one, and be one God, sithence, that true
blessedness is in God alone: It is impossible, but ye both each one should love
the self, and each one should love another.

For it were no true blessedness, nay rather it were the chief unhappiness,
if they should part themselves by contrary will, and could not be parted one
from another for the same substance.

As therefore the father and the son, and the love of the father and the
son, by nature, and substance be one: so also by will and love, they must
needs be one. Each one loves the self with one love, because they be one.
Neither is it any other thing, yt each one loves in an other, but that, which
each one loves in the self: because it is no other thing, that each one is,
but the same, that the other is.

That which the Father loves in the son, the same the son loves in him
self, and that which the love of the father and the son loves in the son,
the very same the son loves in himself.

Again, that which the son loves in the father, the very same loves the
father in himself. And that which the love of the father, and the son, love
in the father, that the father loves in himself. Also that which the father,
and the son love in their love that the love of the father, and the son
loves in the self.

Last of all, that, that she father loves in himself, the very same does he
love in the same, and in his love. And y^ which the son loves in himself,
the very same does he love in the father, and in his love. And that which the
love of the father, and of the son loves in it self, the very same does it
love in the son, and in the father.

The. xxiij. branch.
Mark whether the voice of the Father does confyrme this? This is (says he)
my beloved son, in whom I have together delighted my self. He did not say,
alone, I have together delighted my self, neither did he say alene he has
together delighted me, neither did he say both, I together have delighted my
self, and he together has delighted me. But he said, I together have
delighted my self in him. That is to say, that which lyketh me in my seife, is
in him, and without him no jot of it, for that, that I am, he is, and because
I am nothing, but that which he is, I cannot like my self without him. Then
this is my beloved son, in whom I have together liked my self. Whatsoever
pleseth me, the same in him, and for him pleases me. He is the wisdom, by
the which I made all things, and in him did I dispose eternally, that, which I
made temporally. And so much the more do I love every my work the liker I see
it to the first course.

Think not that he is only a mediatoure for the reco^ciling of men, because
through him the condition of each creature is made commendable, and pleasant
to my sight, in him do I eramine all my works which I do. And I cannot but
love that, which I see like unto him, which I love. Only he misliketh me,
which is unlike unto him.

If therefore you will please me, hear him. And if you become unlike unto him
thorough your evil deeds, return by following him. In him is given the
commandment, and in him council. The commandment that you should go on.
Council that you should return: I would you had kept the commandment. But
because ye have broken the commandment, follow the council, hear him.

He is sent unto us, as the Angel of the great council, that as he was given
unto us fyrs^ made to glory, so should he be unto us lost, a medicine: Hear
him.

He is your maker, he is your redeemer, he y^ said God made you with me, which
with you man alone comes unto you: hear him.

He is the form, he is the salve, he is the example, he is the remedy: hear
him.

It had been better to have kept still his likeness: But now it will be no less
glorieus to return to the incitation of him: heat him.

O man why do theu blame thy ignorance, behold thy nature does reprove
thee, the same does confound theee, thou know which a one thou art, whence
thou come, what maker thou haste, what Mediator thou need, and do
thou cry against the Lord impudent^y defending thy self?

Thou know thou art naught, and waste made good, of a good workman, and
do thou cease and not cry to him that made thee, to come and repair thee,
which made thee, to redeem thee, doubt not of his power: See his works how
great they be. Doubt not of his wisdom: See his works how fair they be. Doubt
not of his mercy: See his works how profitable they be. So God does she we his
works, how mighty he is in thy redemption. He does also show thee, how
dreadful a Judge thou art to look for, if thou refuse him for thy redeemer.

None can withstand him, for he is almighty.

None ca^ deceue him, for he is most wise.

None can corrupt him, for he is best.

None can fly from him, because he is every where.

None can take him away, because he is eiernall.

None can bow him, because he is unchangeable.

If therefore we like not to have such a Judge, let us seek and imbrase him as
our redeemer.

The.xxiiij. branch.
WHen of late I begone to learn things not seen, by things seen, I went
from the creature having body, to the creature that had no body, I mean the
creature pertaker of reason. And then from the creature pertaker of reason, I
came to the wisdom of God. But now going back again, I mean to proceed,
first from the wisdom of God, to the creature, pertaker of reason and next
from the creature pertaker of reason, to the creature having body.

The one is the order of knowledge, the other of condition. For the bodilye
creature, which is seen, is first known, then by the bodily creature, we learn
to know that without body. Finally this way of knowledge opened, leads us to
the Creator and maker of both.

But touching condition and state, for the first step. The creature pertaker
of reason was made after the Image of God, afterward was made the bodily
creature, that the creature pertaker of reason should acknowledge within it,
outwardly that, which inwardly it had received of the maker.

In the wisdom of God is truth, in the creature pertaker of reason, is the
Image of truth. In the creature having body, is the shadow of the Image.

The creature pertaker of reason was made after the wisdom of God. The
creature having body was made after the creature pertaker of reason. And
therefore all moving and tourning of the bodily creature is after the beck of
the reasonable creature. And every moving and tourning of ye bodily creature,
should be after the beck of the wisdom of God. That whilst each one does still
obey the superioure, they should never leave the order of the first condition,
nor the similitude of the first example.

So that whosoever will follow the method of knowledge from things seen, to
things not seen, must go by knowledge of the bo^ily creature, to the
reasonable creature: And by the knowledge of the reasonable creature, to the
knowledge of the maker.

But he that retourneth from the not seen, to the seen, must first go down
from the Creator, to the reasonable creature, next from the reasonable
creature, to the bodily creature.

The course of knowledge in man's mind, does go before the order of condition.
For we that are without, cannot return from the things within, except first
we Pearce the things within with the eye of our mind.

The order of condition, does follow the course of knowledge, for although man's
weakness does sometimes a little enter in, to consider of inward things, yet
his infyrmity is such, that he cannot long continue in the same.

The.xxv. branch.
AFter that I have made known the things not seen, by the things seen, so
far forth as GOD has given me grace. Now let the mind return to the
self and see, what pr^sy^e it may reap by this knowledge. For what does it
prevail, if we know the highness of God his majesty, and take no profit
thereby.

And therefore behold, whiles we return from that (...) deep secret of the
contemplation of God* what bring we thence with us, (...)hat b(...) (...)t,
coming out of the region of light(...), this is both convenient and
necessary, that coming out of the region of light, we should carry light
with us, to drive away our darkness, and who can know, that we have been
there, except we return lightened?

Let it therefore appear, that we have been there, let it therefore appear what
we have seen there.

If we have seen power, let us carry away the light of the fear of God.

If we have seen wisdom, let us carry away the light of truth.

If we have seen mercy, let us carry away the light of love.

Power does stir up sluggish to love.

Wisdom does lighten these that were blinded with darkness of ignorance.

Mercy does kindle the cold, with the heat of love.

Now consider I pray you, whether light be any thing else, but day, and
darkness but night: And even as the eye of the body has the day, and the
night, so the eye of the mind has the day and the night.

The. xxvj. branch.
THere be three days of the not seen light, by the which, the course of the
spiritual life is inwardly distinguished.

The first day is fear, the second truth, the third love. The sun of the
first day is power, of the second day wisdom, of the third day mercy.

Power belongs unto the father.

Wisdom to the son.

And mercy to the holy ghost.

Our outward days, and our inward days differ much.

Our outewarde days pass away against our will.

Our inward days may return for ever, if we will.

Of the fear of God it is written, that it abides for ever, and ever. Also
there is no doubt, but truth may continewe for cuer: For albeit, it begin in
this life, yet then it shall be full, and perf^^^^ in us, when after the end of
the world he, which is truth shall more manifestly appear. Likewise of love,
it is written that love never dies.

These be good days, that never have end, the other days be naught, which
not only, not abide ever, but cannot stay a little.

Of these the Prophet speaks, the days of man be as grass. The first
days be the desert and reward of sin, the second be the gift of mercy. Of
the second speaks the Prophet. In my days will I call upon God. For if he
meant of the other, why does he not say, I will call upon him in the night,
seeing that he says in an other place. At midnight did I rise to praise thee.
But he calls these his days, because he does not love the other.

According to the saying of Jeremy. Lord thou know that I never cared for
the day of man. Those be the days of the which Jobe was full. Of whom it is
written that he dyed old, and full of days, for he could not be full of the
other days which were not yet past.

Only evil men know the days that be outward, and good me^ the days that be
inward.

Good men do not only not love the outward days, but curse them. Cursed be
that day, says blessed Jobe, in the which I was borne, and the night in the
which it was said, a man child is conceived, let that day be turned to
darcknesse, and be had no more in remembrance, nor see light.

Then we ought rather to love the inward days where light and darcknesse go
not together where the beams of the eternal son do lighten ye inward eyes
of the heart of the world.

The. xxvij. branch.
KIng David spoke of those days saying, declare his savior from day to day*
What is his savior but his Jesus, for Jesus is expounded Sauyoure. And he is
called sauyoure, because he does save men from sin and death, to life. For
of him so says Saint John, the law was given by Moses. But mercy and truth
came by Jesus Christ. Likewise Paul calls Christ Jesus the power of God, and
the wisdom of God.

If therefore Jesus Christ be the wisdom of God, and truth came by Jesus
Christ, it is evident, that truth came by the wisdom of God. So truth is ye
day of wisdom.

Wisdom it self speaks to the Jews thus of this day: Your Father Abraham
did desire to see my day, he saw it and was glad of it, for the truth of God
is the redemption of mankind, which he first promised, which seeing he
afterward performed, what did he else, but show himself true.

Then truth was fulfilled by this wisdom, from the which all truth does
spring, neither was any other sent to fulfill truth, but he in whom the
fullness of al truth was. Therefore did Abraham well rejoice at the day of
truth, because he desired truth to be fulfilled, which day then he saw by the
holy ghost, when he did believe that the son of GOD should be incarnate to
redeem man.

Let it be said: Declare his salvation from day to day, the second day from
the first day to the third, the day of truth, from the day of fear, to the
days of love.

First there was but one day, the day of fear. Then came the second day, the
day of truth. It came I say, it did not succeed, for the first did not
depart, so have you two days. The third sprang out, the day of love. But when
that third day came, it did not drive away the two first. Blessed are these
days, in the which men may grow to perfection, where things to come do
come, and present do not depart, where the number is increaste, and the
brightness multiplied.

First men being under sin, were reproved by the law, and began to fear
GOD as the Judge, because they saw their own guiltiness. Then (...) fear
him, is to know him, for truly they cannot fear him, except they know him.

Now this knowledge was some light. Now was it day, but not bright day, for
they were yet dim through the darkness of sin.

Then came the day of truth, the day of salvation, to destroy sin, to lighten
the brightness of the first day, and to engender fear, and not to take it
away, but to turn it into better.

Neither was the brightness yet full, till love was joined to it. For the
truth it self says. I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot yet
bear them, but when that spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you all
truth. So all truth is to this end, to take away the evil, and to rectify the
good.

Behold there be three days, the day of fear, which makes the evil know
the day of truth, which takes away the evil, and the day of love, which
restores the good.

The day of truth does make bright the day of fear. The day of love does
make bright both the day of fear, and the day of truth, until love shall be
perfected, and all truth known manifestly, and the fear of pain be turned
into the fear of reverence. Declare therefore his salvation from day to day.

The. xxviij. branch.
THe Prophet Osea spoke of these days: He shall quicken us after two days,
and in the third day he shall raise us up. For even as our Lord Jesus Christ
rising the third day from the dead, did himself quicken us, and raise us up:
So we hearing and being glad of this, it is convenient that we should be
thankful unto him for this great benefit. And like as we have risen again,
with him rising again the third day, so we rising again this third day for
him, and through him should cause him to rise again in us.

Neither may we think, but that he would have that paid again, which he
first lent us. Therefore even as he would have three days to work in him
self, and by himself our salvation. Even so he has given us three days to
work in our selves by faith in his mercy our salvation.

But because that which he did, was not only a medicine, but also an example,
and a sacrament, it was to be done outwardly, to teach us what we should do
inwardly. So his days were outwardly, but ours are to be ^oughte inwardly.

The.xxix. branch.
WEhaue three days inwardly, in the which our soul may be lightened: Death
does appertain to the first day, Buryall to the second, and rising again to
the third.

The first day is fear, the second is truth, and the third love.

The day of fear is the day of power, and the day of the father.

The day of wisdom, is the day of truth, and the day of the son.

The day of love, is the day of mercy, and the day of the holy ghost.

Surely the day of the father, and the day of the son, and the day of the
holy ghost is all one in brightness of the Godhead, but in lightening our
minds, the father has one day, the son an other, and the holy ghost the
third. Not that in any respect we ought to believe, that the trinity which in
substance cannot be severed, in working may be severed, but that the
distinction of the persons may be understood, by the difference of the works.

When the consyderation of the Almighty power of God does stir our hearts to
praise God, it is the day of the father. But when the wisdom of God, does
light our hearts with ye seen knowledge of the truth, it is the day of the son.
And when the mercy of God considered does fire our hearts with love, it is the
day of the holy ghos^.

Power does terrify, Wisdom does lighten, Mercy does glad.

In the day of power, we die by fear.

In the day of wisdom, we be buried from the noise of this world, by the
contemplation of truth.

In the day of mercy we rise again, by the love and desire of eternal joy.

For therefore Christ died the sixth day, lay in the grave the seventh day,
and rose again the eight day, that in semblable manner, first power in that
day by fear, should outwardly kill us from carnal desires, and then wisdom
the next day should inwardly bury us in the grave of contemplation: And last
of all mercy in that day, should cause us quickened to arise again by Faith,
and by the desire of ye love of God. For that the sixth day is the day of
labor, the seventh day, the day of rest, and the eight day, the day of
rising again.

A Prayer.
Shine we beseech thee, O almighty and merciful God, of our Lord Jesus Christ
that father of glory, upon our minds, and hearts, with the beams of thy
heavenly grace, and give us the spirit of wisdom and understanding, thorough
the knowledge of thee, that the eyes of our hearts being lighted, we may know
what is the hope of the calling, and how rich is the glory of the heritage of
thy saints, and that excellent greatness of thy power toward us, which
believe according to the might of ye force of thy strength, which thou showed
in Christ, when thou did raise him from the dead, and did set him at
thy right hand in heaven, far above all Empire, power, aucthoryty, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
the world to come. Grant this most merciful father, for thy best beloved
sons sake our only advocate and savior Christ Jesus. So be it.

Whether the natural and glorified body of Christ, is in all or many places,
at one, and the same time.
NIc^pherus does write yt Vtiches and Dioschorus the great enemies of the
council of Calcedon, went to Alamordaru^ a King of the Saracenes, a little
before converted to the faith, and babtized, to infect him with their herisyes.
But the good King well instructed, and strongly propt up, with the grace of
God, continued a zealous and constant professor of Christ. At the last when by
no means he could rid himself of the crafty, and importune souldyours of
Satan, he feigned, that he must needs go speak with certain strangers, and
soon after retourning to Vtiches and Dioschorus, told them that he had
received strange news, that Michaell the Archaungell was dead: Vtiches and
Dioschorus cried out, and said they were lies: For it was impossible yt an
Angel should dye. Then said the King what mad men be ye, that confess that
Christ was crucified, and dead, and yet deny that he was a man.

The same in deed, though not in every respect falls out with them, which
grant that Christ has a natural body, but deny that the same body is
comprised in one place.

Vtiches denied that Christ was a man, but he does not deny that he was
crucified and dead: These do deny that Christ's body is bounded, or in one
place, but they do not deny that it is a natural body: I do not therefore
see how they can shifte their selves of the ^utikian heresy, or the confounding
of the two natures in Christ, which take away place and circumscription from
the natural body of Christ: In word they say, that the two natures in Christ
be distinct, and that the several properties of each of the natures be
distinct, but in deed they confound them all in tra^sferring the whole force
of ye Godhead into the body.

Truth it is that the glorified body is moresubtill and nimble, then the not
glorified body, as S. Augustine does well say. But yet a body, and a body
bou^ded with the bounds of place.

Aristotle does say, and very truly, August* ad Dardanum.
that euerybody must needs be as it were hedged about with a place, and the
same S. Austen writes to Dardanus, take away spaces of places from bodies, and
they shall be no where, and because they shall be no where, they shall not be at
all.

But if the nature of the body of Christ be weighed by it self, it is so as
you say. Notwithstanding if you look to the power of God, by that and from
that, it may have force to be every where. For who can set any bound to the
power of God, which made the heavens, ye earths, the seas of nothing: The
answer is easy, no man calls in question the strength and power of God,
but we inquire what his will is, our question is not, whether God could have
the natural body of Christ to be in every place at one time, but whether God
would have it so. Wherefore, that I may be free from al quarrels and
slanders, even at the door of my speech, I do openly and plainly protest,
that we do not thrust or bind the body of Christ into any straight prison of
the Firmament, but that we believe and confess, that the same is in the most
large and noble Country of the living, far above all the heavens, subject to
the senses. Also that we do not part the manhood from the Godheade, or the
Godheade from the Manhood, but that we do most certainly believe that these
two natures be ever knitte and lincked together, in one parson of Christ,
perfyte God and perfyte man. Thirdly, that we do not in any respect diminishe
that great and infinite power of the great and mighty God, but that we do
honor him as god almighty and eternal. And yet we are loath to be reckned in
ye number of those which the Poet Horase does speak. Whilst Fools does
avoid one fault, they fall into another, I mean, that I would neither speak
more narrowly, nor more nobly of the most noble and blessed body of Christ,
there the word of god does teach me. For our may^^er Christ gives the same for
a rule. Search the scriptures: For they bear witness of me.

And truly the aunciente Fathers do plainly teach, that arguments drawn
from the power of God, be both very weak and to to dangerous, first
Tertullianus adu^rgus Prax^am.
Tertullian against Praxias the Heretic said, it is not hard for God to make
him self both Father and son contrary to the course of nature, as it was not
hard for GOD to cause the barren to bring forth a child, and the virgin an
other. Certainly there is nothing hard unto God, but and if we shall use these
presumptions and gesses so abruptly and has^ely. We may surmise any thing of
god that God has done it, because he could do it: But not because God can
do all things, therefore are we bound to believe, that God has done that,
which he has not done, but it is our duty to Hi^ron* tomo. 1. epist. ad
Eustoch.
search out by Gods word, whether he have done it or no: Secondly S. Jerome,
writing to Eustochius of the keeping of virginity, does say (I speak boldly)
although God can do all things, yet can he not raise up a Virgin after her
fall.

Thirdly saint Austen against Faustus, Aug. lib. 26. cap. 5.
whosoever says, if God be almighity, he can cause, that those things which be
done, be not done, he does not see, that he says thus much in effect, if God
be almighty, he can cause, that the same things which be true, in that, that
they be true be also false. Last of all Theodorete Theodor. in. 3. dial.
in his third Dialogue, which is called Impatibilis: does say, that we ought
not to say definitely and absolutely, that all things be possible unto God. By
the which it appears that we may avouch without impechmente of Gods almighty
power* that God has not done all things which he could have done, neither
does the word teach yt, but this, God has done whatsoever he would, yt is to
say, whatsoever it seemed good to his wisdom to have done: The^ we are to
seek out, whether it be Gods will and pleasure that the humayne and natural
body of Christ should be in every place, at one time. For if Gods will be so,
it is without all doubt, but if Gods will be not so, it is great sin to
teach or think the contrary. If Gods will be to have the natural body of
Christ, a made body, an humayne body, and a natural body, a body distinguished
with parts, then Gods will is not that Christ's natural body should be in
many places at one time: For then it should break the bounds, marckes, and
limmittes, and should leave to be an humayne and natural body. Now nothing
can at the saw time be a humayne body, and a not humayne body, a natural
body, and a not natural body. But you will say, you may not leave to reason in
matters of religion: Truth it is, if the book of God teach otherwise: But the
body of Christ has this peculier and private grace, to be in many places at
once, not locally: it is as much to say, as it has this peculier grace, to be
a body and not bodily: Wherefore I will go on thus: It can by no means be,
that a thing made should be every where, but the body of Christ is a thing
made, then it can by no means be, that the body of Christ should be every
where.

Basillus the great does prove the proposition Basillius lib. de ^^. 5.
in his book of the holy Ghost: The Angel that stood by Cornelius, was not
the same time with Phillip, neither he that spoke to Zachary at the Altar, was
the same time in heaven.

But the holy ghost did work in ye same moment in Abacuck and in Danyel, and
was at the same time with Jeremy in the dungen and with Ezechiell in Choua^:
For the spirit of the Lord has filled ye whole world. But he that is in all
places, ^ p^esst with God, of what nature or condition ought he to be believed
to be, of that, which contains all things, or of that which is contained in
some particular place.

Vigillius does prove the same, speaking Vigilius in d^all.
in the person of Athanasius in his Dialogue, in the which, the speakers be
S^b^llius, Photinus, Arius, and Athanasius: Thereby it is plain, that the holy
ghost is God, because it is every where, and is contained in no place, as the
Prophet speaks to God the Father: Whether shall I gee from the spirit? For
to be every where, and in one and the same momente to fill the heavens, the
earthes, the Seas, and low places belongs not to any creature, but only to
God: And a little afterward, it cannot be in one nature to lie in the bosom of
the M^nger, and to be showed by the stars, to be subject to men, and to be
served by the Angels, to fly from place to place, and to be present in every
place, to dwell in Earth, and not to leave (...)auen. To conclude Cirillus
proves it thus, Cirillus lib. (...) cap. 1.
if God fill all places, and that by the holy ghost, the holy ghost is God, and
not a creature.

These may be briefly knit up thus, according to Basil, the body of Christ or
there is of that nature and condition, which contains all things, that is to
say, divine, or God, or of that nature and condition, which is contained in
some particular place: But it is not the divine nature or God, therefore it is
contained in some particular place. According to Vigill, if it be every where,
and contained in no place, it is God, but it is not god, therefore it is
contained in some place: According to Cirillus, if it fill all places, it is
not a creature, but it is a creature, therefore it does not fill all places. I
grant say you, that a creature should be God, if by the own power it could be
ever where, but the body of Christ, has not that of the self, but by the
majesty of the Godhead adjoined to it. The heretic granted the same of the
holy ghost, and therefore the aucthority of these ancient Fathers does press
you as much as them. No save you, I do not speak of the body of Christ, as of
a simple and common creature, but as of a creature coupled to the godhead by
union or oning of person, and ye same also being glorified by resurrection and
ascension, which I say has by force of the godhead this grace given to it,
that it should be in every place present with the Godhead, and never parted
from it, and so cannot be comprised in any one place. Then hear what
Theodorete Theodo. dial. 2.
does say in his second Dialogue. The body of our Lord is risen again, free
from corruption and destruction, and is impatible and immortal, and glorified
and worshipped of the heavenly powers, and yet it is a body and has the same
circumscription which it had before. Here Cirillus in his second book of the
Trinity, Cirillus lib. 2. and tom ^. de Trinitate
if the Trinity could be parted, it should be a body, and if it were a body,
it should be absolutely in place, and it should be great, and have quantity,
and if it had quantt^y, it could not avoid circumscription.

Here Austen in his thirteth Treatise August in Johan. tract. 30.
upon saint John, the Lord Jesus is above, but here is also the truth, ye
Lord. For the body of the Lord, in the which he rose again, must needs be
in one place, but the truth is dispersed.

I reason thus out of Theodorete, the Theodoretus.
incorruptible, the impatible, the immortal, the glorified, the worshipped
body of the Lord is circumscribed as it was being upon earth: Therefore
whatsoever body of Christ you mean, it is comprehended in one place: Out of
Cirill thus: If the Trinity be a body, it is Cirillus.
in place, it has quantity, it has circumscription. But the human nature
August.
of Christ joined with the Godhead, and being glorified and made immortal is a
body. Therefore it is in place, it has quantity, it has circumscription.

Out of Austen the body of the Lord in the which he rose again, must be in
one place: Ergo the immortal and glorified body of Christ, is contained in
one place. Neither is this to part the natures of the manhood and Godhead of
Christ, but to set down the several properties of each nature: For I do not
mean, that the humane nature is in place severed from the divine nature, but
is ever joined to it. But yet the humanity does not fill all places, which the
Deity does fill. This may well appear by this similitude, although it be not
like in all points, for you be to understand, that a symilitude needs not
to be like in all points, but only in those properties, the which is used to
make plain.

The body of the sun abides ever in the globe or circle in the Firmament,
but the beams of the sun do walk through the whole world, the virtue of
the sun does comfort, feed, and nourishe every living creature upon the
face of the whole earth, and yet neither the beams nor the virtue of the sun
be parted from the body of the sun. Even so the body of Christ is placed in
heaven, as in a most bewtifull and gorgee^s Throne, but ye godhead of Christ
does not only fill the heavens, the air, the sea, the earth, and the places
under the earth, but also does comfort and nourishe all and every creature,
in all and every the said places, and yet the godhead is not parted from the
body, although the body fill not so many places as the godhead does. That
famous and learned prince Justinian spied this, that two things might be
joined together, and yet the one not to fill so many or the same places, as
the other. And thereupon in his most excellent book: Called the Institutions of
Justinian, does most wisely and discreetely order, that when Iustinianus. lib.
institut.
the bodies and bows of the tree hang over one man's close, and the root of
the tree hangs in an other: That the tree should be his in whose close the
root grows. For this purpose then the body and bows of the tree be in
M^uius his close, ye root of the tree grows in Titius his close, and yet the
body and the bows be not severed from the root, but joined to the root,
although the root does not fill any place in Me^^^s his close, as the body and
bows do: Even so then the body of Christ rests in Heaven, but the godhead
does fill al other closes and places, and they be not severed, but remayn
joined together. For although the Godhead being of much more excell^^y and
efficacy than the beams of the sun, and more fruitful then the roots of
trees, do pour the force upon all places and things, notwithstanding the
body is not present, neither does ^il all the same place. This is a more
familier resemblaunce. The body of the Candle is set in the Candle stick, but
the light of the Candle fylleth the whole house. The body of Christ abides in
heaven, the light of the Godhead fylleth the whole world: The light of the
Candell is not parted from the body of the candle, neither is the Godhead of
Christ parted from the body of Christ, but as the light shines over all the
house, and is not severed from the Candle, being only in the Candlestick, for
the godhead shines over the whole world, and yet is not severed from the
body, being only in Heaven.

Neither be these my devises, but that great Clearke S. Augustine does plainly
distinguish the two natures of Christ Aug. ad Dard.
in the self same manner, writing to Dardanus. We do not think that it was
said according to the humayne nature, which God the word took of the Virgin
Mary. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, for Christ as man was not
that day in Paradise, but in Hell according to his soul, in the grave
according to his flesh. Now if by S. Augustine. Christ according to his
Godhead were in Paradise or heaven, according to his flesh in the grave, and
yet his Godhead and flesh not parted, what partition should this breed of the
Godhead and Manhood, to say that the natural body of Christ is now only in
heaven, and his Godhead both in heaven, and all other places. Also it is right
to believe, and without any partitio^ of ye two natures, that when his natural
body was here upon earth only, and not in Heaven: (For according to that
Christ said, I have not yet gone up to your God, and my god, your Father, and
my Father.) His Godhead was then both in Earth, and in Heaven. And why does it
not as well stand with right faith, and without any particio^ of ye two
natures: Now to believe that his body is only in Heaven, according to the
saying of the Angel, in the Acts of the Apostles: Whom the Heavens must
hold, etc. and yet his Godhead to be both in Heaven and in Earth, and in every
place. For the same S. Augustine says a little afterward to the same effect:
Doubt not that man Christ, that is christ according to his humayn nature is
now there, from whence he shall come, by the testimony of the Angel in the
same sort, as he was seen to go, that is in the same form and substance
of flesh. According to this form we may not believe ye Christ is every where.
For we must take great heed, that we maynteyne not the deity of the man so,
that we take away the truth of the body. Neither does it follow, that every
thing that is in* GOD should be every where, where as God is: For the Scripture
speaks most Act. 17.
truly of us, that we live, move, and be in God, and yet be we not every
where, as God is. Albeit, that man is an other way in God, for God is an other
way in that man after a certain proper and peculier manner. For god and man is
one person, and both be one Christ, one every where according to his godhead,
in Heaven according to his Manhood. And in the end of ye Epistle, assure your
self that Christ is every where as god, and in some place of Heaven for the
Aug. in Ioh. tract. 56.
truth of his body. And upon S. John, according to the presence of majesty we
have Christ ever, according to the presence of his flesh it was well said to
his Disciples: Ye shall not have me ever with you.

In his book entitled of the substance Aug. liber de essente divinity.
of Godheade, which is also ascribed to S. Augustine, we ought to believe and
confess that the son of God according to the substance of his godhead is
invisible without body, without circumseription, but according to his manhood,
we ought to believe and confess that he is visible having body, having place,
and all the part of man truly. Likewise Cirill. tract. 59.
Cirillus writing upon saint John, does distinguish the same two natures in the
same sort, saying: Christ is not here by the presence of the flesh, which
notwithstanding is euerywhere by the presence Gregorius.
of majesty. And Beda in a certain Homely at Easter. The same God and man was
taken up in body, which he took from Beda.
the earth, but remains with the saints upon earth by his godhead, by the
which he fylleth both the heaven and earth. And Fulgentius to Thrasimundus.
Christ one Fulgenti. ad trac. in.
and the same man local of man, which is God infynite of the father, one and
the same, according to his humayne nature, absent in heaven when he was in
earth, and leaving the earth when he went up into heaven, but according to his
divine and immeasurable nature neither leaving heaven when he came down from
heaven, nor leaving earth when he went up into heaven. And Vigilius Vigilius.
against Vtiches, it differs very much to be circumscribed with place, and to
be every where, and because the word is every where, but the flesh is not
every where, it is manifest that one, and the same. Christ is partaker of both
Natures, and that he is euerywhere according to the nature of his godheade, and
contained in place according to the nature of his manhod Saint Austen does name
the manner of Christ's true body, and does call Christ local. Cirillus
affirms that he took away the presence of his body. Gregory denies that he
is in this world by the presence of his flesh. Beda does auouche that he was
taken up according to his manhood. Fulgentius does affirm him to be a man
local, and to have a humane nature local. Vigilius does most evidently say,
that his flesh is not every where.

But you will say, all these things be understood visibly, and of a visyble
presence. Truly, that is more absurd, then the other, which does plainly
appear by viewing the Antithesis, or setting of the sentences one against
another. Vigilius does say the word is every where, the flesh is not every
where. Put to visible, and the sense will be most absurd, for you must say the
word is every where, the flesh is not every where visybly, neither yet the
word is every where visibly, and so Vigillius has set down no difference of
the two natures: For his sense must be, the word is every where inuisybly, the
flesh is every where inuisybly: Weigh that of saint Gregory, Christ is not
here by the presence of his humayne nature, you expound it by the visyble
presence, for you make this the Antithesis, Christ is not here in visible
presence of his flesh, which is every where by the inuisyble presence of his
godheade: For the not visyble presence, and the inuysible presence be al one:
So there should be no Antithesis, no fight nor repugnauncie of these sentences,
but that the ancient fathers meant a manifest Antithesis, and a great
repugnancie, who is so dull, that he does not understand, or so blind that he
does not see, sythence by the same they avouch and establish two diverse
natures in Christ. The one of perfyte God, the other of perfyte man. Whereby it
is evident, that the judgment of the ancient fathers is, that Christ his body
is not at al in earth, but sittteth on the right hand of God the father in
heaven, not in an Ju^ri^ or golden throne, or in kingly or costly apparel, as
the simple fancy: but in great glory and power, as the faithful believe.
This is proved by that of Christ, in the twenteth of saint Mathewe, I leave the
world, and I go to my Father, John. 16.
and again, ye shall have the poor ever with you, but ye shall not have me
ever. Also I go to my father, and your father, to my GOD, and your God.
Likewise saint Mark writes, that the Lord Jesus is taken up into heaven, and
sytteth at the right hand of the Father. And S. Paul Coloss. 3.
exhorts all men to seek Heaven, where Christ sits at the right hand of
GOD the Father. Even so the author to the Hebrews. 10. does say. we have
such a high priest, which sits in Heaven at the right hand of ye throne of
majesty: And a little after he had offered one Sacrifyce for sin, he sits
for ever at the right hand of God, from henceforth looking, that his enemies be
Acts. 2.
made his footescoole, whom the heavens must hold, until the time of
restoring of all things, as it is in the second of the Acts of the Apostles.

All this is spoken to set down the diverse properties of the two natures in
Christ, his divine nature and his human nature, and to show that a man may
well express the several properties of each nature, and yet in no case part
the one from the other. But I pray you, is there no supernatural property in
the body of Christ, has it no prerogatives? Did the wonderful union of the
most holy godhead, pour no virtue: no force into it? Very many, but yet not
such, as cannot agree with the human nature, as saint Austen does
excellently say, he gave to it immortality, but took not away the nature of
it. And again, we must take great heed, that we do not affirm the deitee of
the man so, that we take away the truth of the body. Therefore the natural
body of Christ is made immortal, gloryfied, sanctified, quickened, but it is
not made eternal, unmeasurable, increat, or infynite, for these overthrow the
human nature.

And that certain things be so peculiar to the godheade, that at all they do
not agree to the manhood, but be applied only in phrase or speech, and
contrary, that certain things be peculiar to the manhood, and do not at all
agree to the godhead, but be applied to it only by phrase or speech, is
manifest: In ye first of John. He it is which coming after me, was before me.
Neither to be before John, does agree to the manhood of Christ in deed,
neither to be after John to the godhead.

This is also manifest by these sayings, before Abraham was, I am, and the
father is greater then I, neither does it agree to the manhood in deed to be
before Abraham, nor to the godhead to be less then the Father.

Of this point be the Fathers, Irencus, Ambrosius, Ierononius, Vigilius,
Augustinus, Irenens.
and almost all the rest, most sufficient witnesses. As says Irenens, the
soul is present to the flesh dying, and suffers nothing, so ye godhead of
Christ is present with the manhood suffering, and suffering nothing, only
rested. Ambr^s.
Ambrose of that upon S. John. Hereafter you shall see the son of man sitting
on the right hand of the virtue: This sitting does so appertain to the man,
says he, that in no case it is applied to the Godhead which is infinite, for
God that is ever every where, cannot go from place to place: Ier^me, I^^eron.
Vigilius.
Christ did die according to that he could die: Vigilius against Vtiches, he
one, and the same son of God the Lord Jesus Christ both died according to
the form of a servant, and died not according to the form of God. Austen
Aug.
upon that of S. John. None went up into heaven, but he that came down from
heaven, the son of man, which is in heaven* he was here, says S. Austen, by
flesh, in heaven, by Godhead, yea every where by Godhead, and a little after,
shall not man (Christ) be called the son of God, which his fieshe alone
deserved to be called in the grave: For what else do we confess when we say
that we believe in the only begotten son of God, which was crucified, and
suffered under Pontius Pilate, died, and was buried, what was buried of him,
but his flesh without his soul. And more plainly afterward, who is he, by
whom the world was made? Christ Jesus, but in the form of God, who was
nailed to the cross, under Pontius Pilate, Christ Jesus: but in the form of
a servant. Who was net left in Hell? Christ Jesus: but in soul alone. Who
lay three days dead in the grave, and rose again? the same Christ Jesus, but
in flesh alone. Christ is said in each one of these, but all these be not two or
three, but one Christ. Whereby it is plain, ye certain properties, or
peculier graces of the one nature, may be ascribed to the other, in word
thorough the union of the person, but cannot agree in deed through the
difference of the two natures.

The which Vigilius does most plainly express against Vtiches: Then according
Vigillus lib. 2. contra E^ty.
to the property of nature, only the flesh died, only the flesh was buried,
but according to the union of the person God dyed, and was buried: For the
person of the word is in the flesh, which died. Also, according to the
property of the nature, the word came down from heaven, not the flesh: And
according to the property of the nature, the flesh died and not the word, but
according to the union of the person, both the flesh came down from heaven,
and the word dyed and was buried. Then when we say, that God died and suffered:
Let not Nestoreus be afraid: For we speak according to the union of the
person.

Again, when we say, that God neither died, nor suffered. Let not Vtiches
dread, for we speak according to the propriety of the nature. To this
purpose writes Theodorete: you are to understand, Theodoretus.
that the union of the two natures does make the names and proprieties common:
you will not say (I suppose) that the flesh of God came down from heaven: For
it was made in the Virgins womb. How then, does the Lord say, if you shall
see the son of man go up the there, where he was before? And again, none
goes up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the son of man
which is in heaven, this he means not of the flesh, but of the godhead. And
the godhead is of God the father, how then does he call him the son of man?
They be reckned common to the person, through the union, which be peculier to
the several natures. So we are to expound the rest in this sort as the
Fathers do. The word Johan. pr^^.
became flesh. What is the mind? what is the meaning of this speech: was the
divine nature made the humayne nature? God forbid. Nay, it did take and
unite to the self the human nature. God did purge his church by his blood.
What means this? has the divine nature blood? God forbid, that any body
should so think, but God did purge his church by the blood of that nature,
which he did appropriate by in^arnation, or taking our flesh upon him. They
nailed to the cross the GOD of glory, what is the the sense of these words?
was the godheade pierced, or nailed to the wood? God forbid. Nay, that
nature was so affected, which the godhead did take to the self of ye virgins
womb.

Wherefore through the union of the person, such things may be spoken in
word, but they cannot agree in deed. Neither does that of saint Basil of the
birth of Christ disagree with these. How is the godheade in the flesh, as the
fire is in the iron, not transitiuely, but distributiuely. For the fire does
not run into the iron, but abiding in the place, does imparte and bestow the
peculier faculty upon it. How then was not God the word filled with bodily
weakness? as the fire does not get to it self the proprieties of the iron.
Iro^ is black and cold, and yet fyred, it becomes bright and hot. So the
humayne nature of the Lord, was made partaker of the denine nature, but did
not pour into the de^^e nature the own weakness. And so I see certain
proprieties dispersed, but I do not understand all, for after the uniting of
the godhead, the body of Christ was hungry, could, thirsty, weary, and
grieved, and this is Math 26.
true of Christ the voice. My Soul is heavier, even unto death. And nailed
upon the cross he says: I am dry. He suffered truly, he dyed truly, he was
compassed about with place truly. I would therefore gladly learn, why the two
natures should be said to be divided, because the several proprieties of each
nature be set down after his rising again, rather then they were, when the
several proprieties of each nature were set down before his death. For I
reason thus, the body of Christ living upon earth was in one certain and
peculier place, but the Godhead was in every place. And yet none will say that
the person of Christ was then divided, why then may we not likewise say, that
the body of christ being in heaven, is in one certain and peculier place, and
yet not divide the person of Christ: For in Christ's person being upon earth,
perfect God, and perfect man, were coupled together: As S. Paul does
excele^tly say to the Colossians. In him does dwell all the fullness of the
Gohhead bodily. Coloss. 1.
The true, full, and absolute Godhead did dwell in the true, full, and absolute
Coloss. 2.
body comprised in one certain and peculier place, and yet was there no
renting of the person of Christ.

What ground then have these lamentable and bitter outeryes that the person of
Christ is denided, that his godhead and manhood be plucked asunder? because we
avouch that the natural body of Christ is in heaven, at the right hand of God
the Father and yet his godhead to be every where, did not his godhead then fill
heaven and earth? when his natural body was in a corner of the earth, when it
lay in the grave. And may not now the Godhead fill the whole world? and his
natural body be only in heaven, and the two natures not severed. Away then,
away with quarrels and let truth prevail and tryumphe, by the which the two
natures of christ tied together with the merueylous bond of the union be
distinguished, but not separated.

And truly to continue in the same resemblance of saint Basil, the fire does
not change all the properties of the Iron, for the Iron fyred and hot is
heavy, falls downward, is a solidde and thick body.

This is S. Basils meaning, that these Simile Basil.
forces of the fire be transferred into the Iron, of the which the nature of
the yro^ is capable, not those, which over throw the nature of the iron. And
in like manner that those forces and proprieties of the godhead be transferred
into the body of Christ, of the which the nature of the body is capable, not
those, which overthrow the nature of the body: For we must ^uer have recourse
to that worthy shying of S. Austen, he gave immortallity to his body, but he
took not away the nature of the body, neither is the godhead of the man so to
be maintained, that the truth of the body be destroyed.

But why do I stand upon this point, why does my speech so long wa^der? why do
I not open the spring of this controversy? For all this conte^tion flows from
the question about the presence of the natural body of Christ, being in the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. For if that matter be once ordered
and adjudged, the other will soon be ended.

But that is a matter of great importance, of the greatest in the world, it
ought not to be handled but warely, and reverently, most warely, and most
reverently. Your good name shall be rent with the bad speeches not only of the
enemies, but of the envious. I refer that to God. The matter is very hard: The
questyon to too dark, discoursed in Sermons: Jossed in disputations, varyed of
through all Christendom, and as it should seem of passing great difficulty.
God will help out with that, whose both help we most humbly pray, and business
most faithfully do, out of whose most blessed, and most certain, and most true
words, all the rest of our speech shall grow.

It is written in the.26. Chapter of Math. 26.
the Gospel after S. Mathewe, in this wise, when Jesus had taken bread, and
blessed, he did break and gave to the Disciples, and said, take ye, eat ye,
this is my body: And taking the Cup, after he had given thanks, he gave to them
saying, drink all ye of this: For this is my blood of the new Testament, which
is shed for many, for the forgiveness of sins.

And in the.14. after S. Mark, when Marck. 14.
Jesus had taken the bread, and given thanks, he did break and gave to them
and said. Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, and when he had taken the Cup
and given thanks, he gave to them and said. Drink ye all of this, and he said
to them, this is my blood of the new testament which is shead for many.

And in the.22. after S. Luke, when he Luke. 22.
had taken bread, and given thanks, he brake, and gave to them saying: This is
my body, which is given for you, do you this in remembrance of me. Likewise
also the cup, after he had supped, saying. This cup is the new testament in
my blood, which is shed for many.

Lastly saint Paul to the Corinthians 1. Cor. 11.
the.xj. Chapter, and the first Epistle. The Lord took bread, and when he
had given thanks, he brake, and said. Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, which
is broken for you, do ye this in remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup after
he had supped, saying: this cup is the new testament in my blood: Do ye
this, as often as you shall drink in remembrance of me. For as often as you
shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, you shall show the Lords death
until his coming.

I have set down the whole words of the holy ghost, done out of greek into
English, word by word: That so good a foundation being laid, the rest that
follows, might be the more fyrmly builded thereupon. Let us now view and weigh
all these things. Christ took the same bread in his hand, which was upon the
table: Christ gave to his Disciples the same bread, and whiles he was giving
the bread to his disciples, he speaks as before: whiles his Disciples eat
this bread, whiles they did broose it with their teeth, and swallowed it into
their stomaks, where was christ? was be not at the table? did he not speak to
the^? did he not both eat and drink with them? was he not seen, heard, and
touched. In which place was the body of Christ: In the mouth and stomach of
his disciples, or at the table, where they both saw Christ, and heard Christ?
if you say in both places: Then this follows: That either Christ had two
bodies, or else that there was two christ's, both which aunsweres be very
ungodly and absurd.

But you will say the words be plain, for Christ said plainly and distinctly.
This is my body: This is my blood. Neither is it like, that Christ would
speak doubtfully, in the last talk, that he had with his disciples. I grant
the words be plain after the manner of mysteries, in the which things subject
to the sense, do represent and show things, which be taken only of a godly
mind, and by a religious faith. I grant that Christ gave his body and that
his Disciples took it, and eat it, not after a natural and gross manner, but
after a supernatural, that is he heavenly and spiritual. What then do you
deny, that the bread is the body of Christ: That the wine is the blood of
Christ? not I truly. But I say, that they be so in truth of religion,
sacrament, and mystery, and not by changing of nature, element, or substance.
For Christ does call the bread his body, but he does not say that it is
changed into his body.

Then you call it bread, and the holy writer of this holy Story does
himself call it bread, the words be these. He took bread: he gave thanks:
he brake: he gave: does he not mean by this circumstance of words, to make
the matter plain: I pray you, what took he? bread. What brake he? the same
bread. What gave he the same bread? For that that he took, that he brake: and
that that he brake, that he gave to his Disciples: and that that he gave to his
disciples, that did his disciples eat. But because it is a mystery, which is
in hand. Therefore it represents the great and heavenly things, which the holy
words of the high priest of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus do declare.
This is my body says he: which is broken for you, do this in rememberance of
me. Again, of the Cup of wine: This Cup is the new Testament in my blood,
which is shed for you. What mean these words? what sense have they? what
signifye they? some prodigious thing, or new thing, or light thing, or thing
of small value? No. But the most certain testifycation and assurance of the
forgiveness of our sins, salvation, and life everlasting, which we obtain
by the death of Christ, and which is exhibited by the outward elements of
bread and wine, but received only by y^ inward hand of faith, and seen only
by the inward eye of Faith.

Christ gave to his disciples bread and wine, ye, he gave also unto the^ his
body and blood, that they by faith being fed, with this heae^nly bread and this
heavenly drink, might have life everlasting, which to printe more surely in
their hearts, he plainly tells the^, of his blessed body y^ was to be rent for
them, and his precious blood that was to be shed for them, and for many
other, that God the Father being pacified with this rich sacrifice, might
forgive the^ there sins. Therefore he called this a new league, and a new
testament often promised by the holy Prophets, which was to be confirmed not by
the blood of beasts, but by the sheadding of his holy and precious blood:
wherefore his will and pleasure was that this mystery of so great things should
be celebrated ever in public assemblies, both that the remembrance of him
might ever be fresh with his, and that often thanks might be given to God the
father, and that his lovers and professo^^ might be stirred to mutual love, by
so godly a president, and also signed with the holy seal of eternal bliss.

But thus much at large, the rest more briefly, that truth may be sooner picked
out and more plainly appear: For as Marcus Tullius says of Philosophers. So
I think Deuines bound to brief arguments. That which christ took, he brake:
that which he brake, he gave to his Disciples: that which he gave to his
disciples, he called his body: Therefore he called bread his body. For he
took bread, brake bread, and gave it to his Disciples.

But that which is bread by nature, is not the substance of Christ's body.
Except we will prodigiously confound the substance of things, and so by
consequente the natural body of Christ, is not really, and bodily, in the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. But here is made a stop: that
Christ blessed the bread after he had taken it, as S. Matthew and S. Marck
says, by virtue whereof there followed such a change, that although he took
bread, yet he neither brake bread, nor gave bread: This sophistication is
called of the Logitians: Petitio Principij: For first S. Marcke does not say,
that Christ blessed ye bread but that when he had taken, he blessed.

Secondly, the greek word (...), does as well sygnify to give thanks, as to
bless, and that it sygnifyeth there to give thanks, because the holy ghost is
the best expounder of it self: Both S. Luke and S. Paul, declare, which both
for that word (...), use this word (...), which signifies so give thanks, and
not to bless. Thirdly, as it was me^t touching ye bread. So was it mente
touching the Cup and Wine: But both Matthew and Marcke themselves, speaking of
the Cup or wine, use not this word (...), but the said word (...) Therefore
it is manifest, that both they meant, he gave thanks, after that he had taken
the bread, and he gave thanckes after he had taken the Cup. Briefly thus:
that that is true about the bread, is true also about the Cup of wine, but
the cup or the wine have joined unto them, no words of consecration, or
transubstantiation, or changing of one substance into another, as it appears
by S. Luke and S. Paul. Therefore the first principle is God, that bread was
taken, ye bread was broken, and that bread was given to the Disciples.

Add to these that S. Paul in the xx. Chapter, and first Epistle to the
Corinthians, advisedly and purposely speaking of the Lords supper, says, is
not the bread which we break the partaking of body of Christ. And Luke in the
second of the Acts. They did continue together in the doctrine of the
Apostles, and in pertaking and breaking of bread, and a little after he says,
that the Disciples came together to break bread, by the which it is
necessarily concluded, that the same was broken which was taken and that that
was broken was given (...) and of that that was given did Christ say this is my
body. Therefore christ did say of bread, this is my body. For as Christ meant
of the bread, so he meant of ye wine, but he meant of wine to be drawn and
drunk, as it appears by Marcke and Matthew, where he said, I will drink no
more of the fruit of this wine, etc. Therefore he meant also that bread, that
was eaten.

Again if the substance of the bread be changed into the substance of the
body. Then the substance of the wine should be changed to the substance of
the blood, but in the second place, not the substance of wine, but the
substance of the cup should be changed into the new Testamente, by the
words of consecration, as their term is: For whereas Matthew and Marck briefly
say: This is my blood, Luke and Paul do set down at large, this cup is
the new testament in my blood. But you will say that the cup does signify the
wine in the cup, by a figure called Metonomia: Then you grant that the holy
Ghost does speak fyguratiuely in the matter of the Sacrament, but let that
go, and let it be, this wine is the new testament in my blood, if the wine
should be changed, it must be changed into the new Testamente of Christ's
blood, but that speech cannot stand, except it be understood fyguratiuely and
spiritually thus.

This Wine is a visible sign of mine new invisible league, covenant, will,
grace, and mercy, which shall be confirmed and sealed with the sheadding of my
blood.

Then neither the first words touching the bread, implye any change of
substance, but have a spiritual and figurative meaning: For whether you say
the cup or the wine, the speech must needs be fyguratiue. For neither the
cup or the wine either is or can be properly called a testamente. Now if the
second speech of the wine do necessarily imply two figures at the least, why
should it seem so strange to say, yt the first speech of the bread death also
imply a figure.

Do you then, say you think, that Christ spoke doubtfully? and would in his
last departure leave his Church doubtfully? Not I truly. Why then do you
talk of figures and troops? and figurative speeches, and spiritual senses*
Not every figurative speech is doubtful, and it is as great a fault to
refuse a figure, when the place gives it, as to force a figure when there is
none. And it is most manifest by Saint Luke and saint Paul, that the second
speech of the Cup or wine is figurative, and has a spiritual sense. For both
they expounding the brief words set down by saint Matthew, and S. Mark
expressly say, that Christ said, this Cup is the new Testamente in my
blood. And what sense or meaning can these words have? but this, that in this
sacrament there is delivered unto Christians a visible and most certain sign
or seal, of that new invisible, truse, will, grace, and mercy, which God has
made and assured his church of, in these more mylde and gracyous days, and
would seal and ratify with the blood of his son. For the words in S. Luke
do prove this sense, which he adds of Christ, saying: Do this in
rememberance of me, and also of saint Paul. Ye shall thewe the Lords death
until he come. Neither here do I doubt that the true, godly and learned will
think that I have not spoken reverently of this most holy and blessed
mystery. For I give more honor and reverence to it by a great deal, then any
that does fansye a gross and carnal presence. But some will say that I
overthrow all, and bring all to naught, and make the holy sacrament nothing
else but a piece of bread, and a little wine: that is a most false and
malicious slander. For I most certainly believe it to be one of the most
precious Jewels that Christ left to his church, and that both the body and
blood of Christ is truly and effectually exhibited by the power and grace of
God, and truly and effectually received by the faith of the christian
receyuer. But such men deal with me, as they and such other deal with good
preachers, which to pull down the pride of man's heart, tells him, that he is
nothing but dust, earth, ashes, and smoke and grass, and then a worldling will
say, that, that preacher makes a man no better then a beast. Whereas the
preacher mente this only of the one part of man, that is, his body, wisdom,
beauty glory, pomp, and port, which in deed be nothing else but dust, and
grass and smoke, that fade and perish away, and not of the second part of man, that is his soul, which is immortal and eternal, and certainly as man
has two parts, the first the bodies which is visible and fading, the second
his soul which is invisible and eternal, even so this holy and blessed
sacrament has two parts. The first of the element of bread and wine, which
is visible and fading, the second, the grace, and fruits, and benefits, of
the bod of Christ rent, and his blood shed for the ransom of man. And as he,
that says the body of man is mere flesh, and fading flesh, and nothing but
flesh, deeth not deny the immortality of ^^e so de thereby, nor make whole man
nothing the but body and flesh, for he means only of the first and fading
part of man, which is sensible, and not of the second part of man, which is
insensible, even so he, that says that the elemente of bread and wine, be
n(...)re bread and wine, fading bread and wine, and nothing but bread and wine,
does not thereby deny or take away the grace and benefyte of the body and blood
of Christ, nor make that blessed sacrament nothing else but bread and wine. For
he means only the first and fading part of that sacrament, which is
sensible, and not of the second which is insensible. And let any indifferent
man judge, whether he speaks more honorably, or does more set forth the
majesty of that sacrament, which says that free forgiveness of all our sins
and a sure possession of eternal life, springing from the free mercy of God is
derived and poured into christian hearts by that sacrament, and as a Conduite
thorough the force of a true and lively faith, in the death and merittes of our
only Sauyoure Christ Jesus, or he which by fancying of a real, carnal, or
corporal presence, does bind and tie all the grace and power to creatures.

I confess with all my heart, ^ Christ has left unto his church nothing,
either if a man consider profit more fruitful, or if sweetness more
pleasant, or if honor more glorious, then the most holy and blessed sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, by the which the most aboundaunt grace and
mercy of God, is dropped into holy and faithful souls, but to speak
otherwise of creatures, then can be justified by the word of god, is wicked and
damnable.

And such as would have al things literally understood, let them view the
words well, and neither this word Cup, nor Is, can be literally
understood, Thomas Aquinas.
which also Thomas Aquinas there Archscholeman does confess, saying. By that
that is contained in this Cup, is remembered the new Testamente confyrmed by
the bleed of Christ: For this word cup he says, that, that is contained in
the Cup: For this word Is, he says, is remembered, is represented or is
sygnifyed. And although in others they condemn necessary and plain figures,
yet they themselves be forced to immagine unnecessary and to to strange
fygures, first where the Tert says: Hoc, meaning this bread, they will not
have it so, but theyexpound it to be indiuidium vagu^, which is not any
certain determined thing, but only one certain thing at large in generality:
where y^ text does say, Est is, they say transubstantiatur, transelementatur,
is changed into the substance, the nature of the element is changed.

These words take ye, eat ye, this is my body, they turn thus, this is my
body, take ye, eat ye, by a figure called Husteron Proteron, which sets
that behind that should go before. He blessed says the text, he
transubstantiated, he changed the substance say they, he brake says the
text, the accidents, the forms or sheaues of bread say they. Do ye, says the
text, sacrifyce ye, say they. This word (bread) has a Quatermon of fygures.
First, because it was bread. Secondly, because the Infydell takes it only to
be bread. Thirdly, because the form and show of bread remains still.
Fourthly, because the form or show of bread, does nortish as perfectly, as
though it were bread: Frangitur is broken says the Text, frangebatur it was
broken, or videtur frangi, seems to be broken say they. Now seems to be
broken, is as much as is not broken. Then the word of the Text, Is, is broken,
their word or exposition, Is, is not broken, and this is a to too strange
kind of figure. For, Is broken, and is not broken imply a plain and full
contradiction. Much like as the gloss expounds the Text, statuimus, etc. we
do decree, enact, or determine. When the gloss has made many expositions of
this law, and none of the^ to the meaning of the law, well says it, Statuimus.
We do decree or determine, is as much to say, as ab^^gamu^, we do abrogate or
disa^^ll, which apposition unplyeth a plain and full contrariety. So they
obscure and divine the plain words of this blessed sacrament, the heavenly
food of our souls, and dasill our eyes with Indiuidium vagum,
transubstantiacon, transelementacon,* Concomitontia, pendula in aere, accidents
without subjects. Quantum sine modo qua^ti, and such other chafe of their own.

Stories do tell, that Lisander picked out a great sum of Gold out of the
bottom of a bag, and sowed it up again cunningly. But Lisander his doings
were spyed by a Billet, that was left in the Bag. And the Billet that Christ
has left unto his church, that is his holy word, does show the subtle
seames of these crafty sophisters, which so subtly have picked christ his
bag, that is the institution of his most blessed sacrament. And as the
sacrament of the old law, had a spiritual and heavenly meaning, and not a
litterall, even so have ours: For they differ only in respects and not in
substance.

And to this purpose says S. Augustine right well: Tune Christus venturus,
Augustinus.
modo Christus venit, venturus et venit diuersa verba sunt. Sed idem Christus.
Then was Christ to come, now Christ is come. To be to come, and to be come, be
Verbes of diverse times, but the same Christ. The Jewish sacrifices or
sacraments, did represent and signifye to them the blood of Christ that should
be shed for the forgiveness of our sins. And our sacrifices or sacraments
do represent and signify unto us the blood of Christ that has been shed for
the forgiveness of our sins. And eue^ as we be saved, and the gates of
heaven opened unto us for that we certainly do believe that Christ dyed for us,
even so were they saved, and the gates of Heaven opened unto them, for that
they certainly believed that Christ should dye for them. So that the same
faith carried them up into heaven, which now carries us, as the same Aucthour
does plainly declare writing upon S. John. Videte side mauente signa variata.
Mark how the same faith continuing the signs or sacraments be varied or
become diverse.

In diverse signs or Sacraments the same faith is, but most plainly in the 2,
Tractat upon S. John, S. Augustine sets forth this difference, showing that
our ^acramentes be fewer, easyer, more signifying, and of more majesty, then
the Israeletica^, sed quod significata paria, but equal as touching things
signified. Chrysostom does set out the matter by this simillitude. A Paynter
says he, that is to paynt the story of some famous victory does first draw
the Line amentes of men, Horse, Cities, and Castles in obseure lines, and then
he that would discern them must both know them perfectly, and view them
earnestly. Secondly, he adds to the colloures and due proportion to each,
and then any that knew them, shall discearne them at the first sight. GOD is
this Paynter that paynteth the Story of the famous victory of his dear son,
which he had over the Devil, Death, Hell, and sin. The Sacrament of the
Israelites be like unto the first draught. The Sacrament of the Christians, be
like unto the second draught. The same Aucthour compares their sacraments to
the light of a Candle, and ours to the brightness of the sun. Saint Paul
compares them to a child, and us to a full perfect man. So that Christ that is
seen, or signified is al one, the seers or the thing signifying be diverse. For
the Jews saw Christ in the law, we in the gospel. The law is a dark
shadow: the gospel is a perfect Image. The Jews saw Christ in the sea, in
the cloud, in the rock, in Manna, in the blood of Eoates and Calfes. We see
Christ in the sacrament of baptism, in the sacrament of his body and blood by
himself ordained. The difference is this, they saw him somewhat darkly, we see
him very plainly. They saw the same light that we do, but not in like
quantity, they saw the same Image that we do, but not with like colors and
furniture. And if he would also then infer, that the sacramental bread by
this reason were no better then common bread, I utterly deny that too. For
they differ as much as heaven and earth, as the spirit and the body. For the
common bread is earthly food: the sacramental bread heavenly food: the
common bread has force only to food the body: the sacramental bread has
force to feed both body and soul: and to unite and make them parts of
Christ's mystical body. For by the faithful recepte of it, our bodies and
souls be made clean by his body and soul, and there to spiritually joined.
But yet even as old bread when it is set upon the table, is in substance the
self same that it was, when it was taken hot out of the Oven, but in
quality much differing, as the one time cold, stale, and dry, at the other
time, hot, new, and moys^e. Even so the sacramental bread in substance is
the self same, when it is eaten of the faithful, that it was when the
minister took it first into his hands, but yet in quality exceeding much
differing, as at the one time earthly, and bodily, at the other time heavenly
and spiritual.

So yt this matter does consist chiefly in faith as our master does tell in the
^^xt of S. John the Evangelist, to who^ when the people had said, what shall we
do, that we may work the works of God, Jesus answered, and said unto them,
this is the work of god, that ye believe in him whom he has sent, and it is
thus substantially concluded out of the words of our said master, out of the
said sixte chapter, whosoever has life everlasting, eats the flesh of the
son of man, and drinks his blood, but he that believes in Christ has life
everlasting, therefore he that believes in Christ eats the flesh of the
son of man, and drinks his blood, but then you will say, to what purpose is
the sacrament? to very great.

For man needs not only to be taught by the ear, but also by the eye, and the
teaching by the eye is more effectual the^ by the ear, as the Poet well
says. Horatio.
Signius irritant animos dimossa per aures, quam que sunt oculis subiecta
fidelibus.

Such things do move the mind less which do enter in at the ear, then
those which be laid down before the eye, as for example when Marcus Anthonius
moved the people of Room to revenge the murder of Caius ^u^ius Caesar: He did
set forth the valiantness, wisdom, learning, liberallity, and other good
gifts of ^u^ius Caesar to the uttermost that he could, both in words and
iesture, he stirred the people somewhat, but had not his purpose, then he
plucked forth the shirt of Iu^ius Caesar all to be sprinkled with blood, and
said ye forth before the eyes of the people, which as soon as the people
behealde with their eyes, they were inflamed by and by as it were with the
se^sible old love of their good Sovereign, and ran fourthwith and fyred the
houses of the traitors, and killed them.

Even so when the Preacher sets forth the graces and mercies of God obtained
to man, by renting of ye blessed body, and shedding of the precious blood of
the unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus, it moves man much, but when the said
Preacher does pluck forth the shirte of Christ be sprinkled with blood, that
is by breaking of bread shows to ye eye, how his body was broken, and by
drinking of the Wine, how his blood was shed, it inflameth man as it were with
the sensible old love of his grand Sovereign Christ Jesus. The like example is
drawn out of the holy writ, when the Levites wife was killed by the
wickedness of the Sabionittes, he the said Leuite cut his wife into twelve
pieces, and sent one piece to each Tribe of Israel with this message, that one
might upon necessity be lodged in the City of Gabia, where his wife was not
only most ungodly abused, but also cruelly murdered, which moved the^
somewhat, but when the messenger plucked forth the parts of the woman, and
showed the head to one, the arm to an other, and so forth, all the people by
and by were moved, as one to revenge that fact, even so, when the preacher
tells the people of the whipping and scourging of Christ, of the nailing to
the Cross, of the pearsing of his heart, of the sweating and dropping of water
and blood, it moves man much, but when he shows unto the eye in the wine as
it were the drops of Christ's blood, it moves man a thousand times more to
the remembrance of his death and thanckfulnesse: So that the Sacraments be
both most necessary for instruction and also for use. For he that contemns to
be renewed by water and the holy ghost, contemns eternal salvation, and he
that contemns to eat of the sacramental bread, and drink of the
sacramental wine, contemns to be pertaker of the death and passion of
Christ. For albeit ye grace of God is not tied to these ordinances, yet because
they were ordained of our savior for the comfort and instruction of his
people, and to move them to be thankful for the great benefits, which they
have received from God in christ, to despise the same, is to despise God, and
to run and to get eternal damnation, and yet to bind God to the outward
elements and rytes, is mere superstition.

And that this is not my doctrine, but the ancient fathers. I shall show
briefelye and plainly, by the most famous of them.

Origin which lived above xij. hundred years ago, writing upon the.xv.
chapter of saint Matthew, says thus: it is not the material substance of
bread, but the word which is spoken over it, that is profitable to the man
that eats it worthily. And this I mean of the Tupical and simb^^icall body
of Christ. Origin ascribes all grace to the force of the word, the worthiness
of the Receauer, names the material substance of bread, and calls it the
Tupical, that is figurative, and simbolical, that is sacramental body.

Before the bread says Chrysostom Chrisost.
to Cesarius the Monk, be hallowed, we call it bread, but after the grace of
God has sanctified it by the means of the Minister, it is delivered new from
the name of bread, and esteemed worth to be called the body of Christ, although
the nature of bread remains still.

Theodoreto in his first dyalogue writing Theodoretus.
against Vtiches says thus, he that calls his natural body Corn and bread
and names himself a vine tree, even he the same has honored the sacramental
signs, with the names of his body and blood, not changing in deed the nature
it self, but adding grace unto the nature.

Theodorete does say, that Christ did Theodoretus.
not in deed change the nature of bread and wine, but added grace unto the
nature, by virtue whereof they received force to feed the souls of the
faithful receyuers, which natural bread and wine cannot do.

Augustine upon the 89. Psalm, speaking August.
in the name of our Lord and Savior to his Disciples, and recyting and
expounding the words of the institution of this blessed sacrament, says thus.
It is not this body that you do see, that ye shall eat, nor the blood that
the soldiers shall shed, that shall crucify me, that ye shall drink, but I
do commend unto you a mystery, which spirituallye understood, shall give you
life. Saint Augustine does say that they did not eat of his natural body, for
that was seen August.
of them, nor drink his natural blood, for that was shed of the soldiers.
And he adds further, to refute the bald gloses of the Scholemen, that that is
a mystery, and is to be understood spirituallye, not really or corporally. And
although he take away the litterall sense, and corporal pertaking, yet does he
not take away the heavenly blessing and grace. For he adds, which
spiritually understood gives life.

So that, that is ^plaine slander, that many do urge against those, that
deny the real and corporal presence, and make an heavenly spiritual food,
that they make nothing of this blessed sacrament. For saint Augustine teaches
to understand the words spiritually, and yet affirms that spirituallye
understood, they give life. The fire simply and naturally is adustine, that
is, has force to burn, to the stone called Amanthos, to the Vermin called
Salamandra, it is not adustie, nor does burn them. Even so the sacramental
bread and drink be simply and properly spiritual, but after a sort, and by
accident, that is unto the unworthy receyuer, it is not spiritual, nor the body
and blood of Christ. And ye S. Augustine does teach us, saying: August.
That Judas did eat spiritual bread, and he did eat the Lord his bread, but
it was not to him spiritual, it was not to him the Lord. Some also say, we do
make nothing of this most blessed sacrament. Let any indifferent person
consider who does more. They ascribe and bind all the graces of the sacrifice,
to the intencion of the sacrificer. For Gabriell Biell does say, that it
belongs to the Iabriel Biel.
priest to determine and limit the force, virtue and grace of this sacrifice,
that it may be bestowed upon such, and such needing it, as a reward to be
given. And Summa Angelica in the Mass. The Mass, says he, is available
unto them unto whom it pleases ye Priest in his intencion to apply it. We
know, teach, believe and confess in and by the faithful recept of this
blessed sacrament, that Christ his body is rent for our sins, and that by his
wounds we were all made whole, that Christ in his body carried our sins upon
the tree, and by the oblation thereof once made upon the Cross, has
sanctified us for ever, and has purchased for us everlasting redemption, and
that there is none other name or sacrifice under heaven, whereby we can be
saved, but only by the name of Jesus christ. That these things ought to make
the heart to tremble. For that therein is laid forth the mystery that was hid
from worlds and generations, the horror of sin, the death of the son of
God, that he took our heaviness, and bare our sorrows, and was wounded for
our offenses, and was rent and tormented for our wickedness, that he was
carried like an innocente Lamb unto the flaughter, that he cried unto his
Father: O God, my God, why haste thou for saken me? There we call to
remembrance the shame of the Cross, the darckning of the air, the shaking of
the earth, the renting of the vale, the cleaning of the rocks, the opening of
the graves, how Christ came to his passion, how he was wounded in the side,
how blood and water issued and streamed from his wound. They think it enough
to bow the knees of the body, to stretche forth the hands of the body, to
lift up the eyes of the body, and to look upon the sacramental bread, and
the sacramental Cup, and that they think might serve once a year. We teach
quarterly, monthly, weekly, daily, to bow the knees of the body, and the knees
of the seule, to stretch forth the hands of the body, and the hands of the
soul, to lift up the eyes of the body, and the eyes of the soul, and by farth
the mouth of the soul to feed of the blessed and glorious body of our Lord
and savior christ Jesus.

They teach that in it, they do eat the natural body of Christ, and drink
the natural blood of Christ naturally and se^sibly. But by this spiritual,
faithful and heavenly receipt of the blessed sacrament we say, teach and
believe, that we receive though not naturally and corporally, yet spiritually,
truly and effectually our Lord and savior Christ Jesus the true and natural
son of God, consubstantiall and coequall with the Father in all points, and
that he is made unto us the fullness of all grace and truth. The Lamb of God
that takes away our sins, the ladder and gate of heaven, the advanced
Serpent that heals our poisoned souls, the son of God that reconsileth us
to the father, the bread of life, the light of the world, the door, the way,
the truth, the life, and to be brief a full and perfect health, wisdom,
rightcousnesse, redemption, satisfaction, and salvation.

They think they do much advance she omnipotent power of God, and greatly
exercise their faith, for that they teach and believe that the substance of the
bread is changed into the substance of the body of Christ, and the substance
of wine into the substance of the blood of Christ naturally, corporally, and
really. We know that we do a great deal more advance the omnipotent power
of God, and more mightily exercise our faith, and further carry our selves
from sense and reason in believing the inuistble, but most marvelous graces
and blessings that God has granted and appointed to this most blessed
sacrament: For we believe, that we spiritually, heavenly, truly and effectually
eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood: Dwell in Christ, and Christ
in us, be one with Christ, and Christ with us, that our sinful bodies be made
clean by his body, and our souls washed through his most precious blood,
that we be assured of the forgiveness of our sins, and all other benefits of
the death and passion of Jesus Christ, that we be filled with heavenly grace,
and benediction, that we be assured of God his favor, and goodness toward us,
that we be lively members incorporated in the mystical body of Christ Jesus,
and be beyres through hope of his everlasting kingdom.

The Lord Jesus for his mercy sake grant unto us his heavenly grace, that
we may abandon sense, reason, and our own fancies, and so by faith build upon
the rock of his word and institution, that we may be partakers of the fruits
and joys purchased by his death, and given, granted, sealed, delivered, and
possessed of the Christian heart, by the true and faithful recept of that most
holy and blessed Sacrament.

FINIS.

