A TREATISE CONCERNING THE GROUND OF FAITH WRITTEN In Latin, by the Reverend
Father James Gordon Huntley of Scotland, Doctor of Divinity, of the Society of
JESUS. And translated into English, by I. L. of the same Society. The second
Part of the second Controversy

Permissu Superiorum, M. DC. XIV

THE FIRST CHAPTER. Whether the Church be the foundation and ground of our
faith? And of the true state of this Question.
IF the pertinacy of our Adversaries were not so great, it were an easy matter
to define this question out of those few words of the Apostle, affirming, that
the Church is the Pillar and ground of truth: for seeing that our faith relyeth
upon truth (that is to say, upon the most true word of God) and that 1. ad Tim.
3. v. 15.
the Church is the Pillar and ground of this truth, it must needs follow that
the Church is the Pillar and ground of our faith, as afterward we will declare
more at large. But because our Adversaries go about to ob^ure this great and
renowned praise of our Church, we will treat of this matter more exactly:
especially Cap. 13. seq.. 16.
because this is a question of great importance, seeing that thereon depends
our whole faith. For every thing relyeth and depends of his foundation.
Moreover, hereby is declared the great excellency and authority of the Church.
Hence also other opinions of our faith are to be proved which our Adversaries
deny, their errors confuted, and they themselves very easily convinced: but
that the true state of this Controversy may the better be understood, three
things are to noted.

2. The first is, that every science and doctrine has her grounds and
principles, out of which all other things are deduced, proved, and depend:
wherefore we must here diligently examine and search out the true principles
of our faith, least otherwise our faith become doubtful and uncertain.

3. The second is, that there are two principles of our faith, the one, that
God is true, and the Author of truth, the other that these things which we
believe are spoken and revealed unto us by God. There is less difficulty of
the former principle. For all who confess that there is a God, may easily know
even by natural reason, that he is true, or rather the very Truth it self. And
seeing that he is the chiefest good, he can deceive no body, and seeing that he
is Wisdom it self, he Ad Hebr^ 6. v. 18.
cannot be deceived. Hereupon the Apostle takes this as a principle manifestly
known by it self, It is impossible for God to lie.

4. But the doubts and difficulties which we co^ceyue concerning matters of
faith do especially arise of the second principle, to wit, because we know not
certainly that such things as we believe, are revealed by God: for hence
arises the whole co^trouersy with Jews, Turks, and Heretics. For all do
confess that God is true, but the Turks say that their Alcora^ was revealed
unto the^ by God, the Jews their Talmud, the Anabaptists their bible,
corrupted and maimed by them; the Antitrinitarians their blasphemies uttered
against the Blessed Trinity; the Lutherans their opinions, the Caluinists
theirs, and the Catholics theirs. And hence it is that we need greatly some
sure foundation, principle, rule, and means, whereby we may know certainly
which is the doctrine indeed revealed by God, and which is not, otherwise our
faith will always remain doubtful and uncertain.

5. The third is, that God is accustomed three ways to assure his Church of
this his revelation. The first way is, when God himself appears from heaven
and speaks to his Church, for so in times past he spoke unto all the children
of Israel, when he gave them the tables of Exodus 20. v. 22.
his Law in the mount Sinay.

6. The second is, when God speaks to one alone from heaven, and he sends
him to the Church, that he may reveal unto the whole Church such things as God
has spoken unto him. So in times past in the old Testament God spoke by
himself to Moses, and Moses revealed Exodus 24. v. 2. 3. Ad Gal. ^. v. 12.
the same things to the people. And in the new Testament Christ in this manner
revealed his Gospel to S. Paul, which he afterward revealed unto others. But
these two ways are extraordinary, and are ceased, as all doco^fesse, excepting
only a few Anabaptists, and Swenkeldiani, whose madness and folly all men
disprove.

7. The third way is ordinary, which always remains in the Church, and
whereof the whole controversy is. For almost all Lutherans and the purer sort
of Caluinists will have the sole Scripture to be the foundation and rule,
whereby we may certainly know the true revelation of Calu. l. 1* Inst. cap. 7.
sect. 1. and 2.
God from the false. But Calvin himself at the first blush seems to
attribute this to the sole Scripture, and very co^tumeliously inueygheth
against Catholics who deny it, whom therefore he calls brauling and
sacrilegious persons: yet a little after he reduces the principal Calu. eod^
c. 7. sect. 4. in fine. and sect. 5.
and chiefest certaynty of Scriptures, and of our whole faith to the particular
and private spirit of every belecuer. The late Caluinists do put two grounds
and rules of faith, to wit the Scripture, and this private spirit: But
Catholics do teach that neither the Scripture alone is sufficient, nor this
private spirit together with the Scripture: but moreover the spirit, and
authority of the whole and visible Church is necessary. And this is the true
state of of this question.

8. We will therefore explicate four things, that this whole controversy may
more clearly be defined. First what are the properties and conditions of the
ground of faith, for by these the ground it self will easily be known. For
even as by the properties of a man it may be known who is a true man, and by
the properties of any other thing, the thing it self may be known. So by the
properties of the ground of faith, the ground it self will be known. Secondly
it shall be proved that the Scripture alone is not a sufficient ground or rule of
faith. Thirdly, that neither any private spirit will suffice. Fourthly that the
authority of the Catholic Church, is the most true ground and rule of faith.

CHAP. II. The properties of the ground and rule of our faith are alleged.
THERE are ten properties of the ground or rule of faith, and they are so
manifest and certain, that none can doubt thereof. The first is the
continual, and never interrupted duration thereof to the end of the world. For
even as faith and the Church do always endure and continue; so must also the
ground of faith, seeing that nothing can consist without his foundation and
ground.

2. The second property is the most certain and undoubted truth thereof, in
so much, that it neither can deceive any, nor be deceived in any thing
appertayning necessarily to salvation, for otherwise it should be uncertain
and doubtful, yea also the faith it self should be false and hurtful unto us.

3. The third property is the certaynty thereof on our part. For it is
necessary that the true faith be not only certain in it self, but also to us.
Because error and uncertainty is engendered in us, if the thing be ambiguously
and obscurely proposed, how certain soever it be in it self.

4. The fourth property is, the strength and immutability thereof, so that this
ground can by no means be depraved, changed, or corrupted. For otherwise truth
will sometime perish, and there will arise some error against faith.

5. The fifth property is the fulness and sufficiency of those things which
are to be believed, that is to say, it must contain all things appertayning to
the Catholic faith, seeing that nothing can consist without his ground or
foundation.

6, The sixth property, is the necessity thereof, that is to say, it must
necessarily be received of all, who have the true faith, and because without
it, true faith cannot consist, even as the building cannot continue without the
foundation.

7. The seventh property is, that it is a manifest sign and token, whereby
Christians are distinguished from Infidells. For he which wants the ground
and rule of faith is an infidel, but he who retayneth it, is a true believer.

8. The eight property is* that in every article and conclusion of faith, this
principle and ground is virtually contained, seeing that out of it all things
are to be deduced, and they receive the certaynty from it.

9. The ninth property is, that it not only move Christians to believe, but
that it also convince the infidells. For otherwise the way to faith and
eternal salvation, should not be known, or open to Infidells.

10. The tenth property is, that it be contained expressly in the Apostles
Creed, wherein all the first grounds of our faith are contained: for the
Apostles after they had received the holy Ghost, were not so forgetful that in
the Creed or Summary of faith which they set down to be believed of all, they
would let pass the first and chiefest ground of faith. And thus much of the
properties of the ground of faith.

CHAP. III. That the Scripture alone is not the ground or rule of faith.
THAT the Scripture alone is not the ground of our faith, we have already
declared by the properties of the ground of faith, before alleged. For of
those ten properties the Scripture has only one, to wit, Truth; but all the
other properties are wanting unto it. The which we clearly demo^strate in this
sort. First of all, a perpetual duration, and continuance is wanting. For the
holy Scripture begun first under the old law in Moses time, whereas two
thousand years before, there were both true believers and a Church. In like
manner in the new law the Apostles began to write some years after they had
received the holy Ghost.

2. Secondly, the certaynty on our part Supra co^tro. 1. c. 5. and infra hac
co^tr. 6. cap. 15.
is wanting, seeing that we know not which is the Canonical Scripture by the
Scripture it self, but by the authority of the Church, as we have proved
before, and will also more at large declare hereafter.

3. Thirdly, the foresaid strength and immutability is wanting; for every part
of the holy Scripture considered in it own nature, is subject to many
alterations and falsifications. For it may be destroyed, Supra. Controu. 1.
cap. 4.
it may be corrupted, it may be wrested to contrary senses, whereof we have
spoken before.

4. Fourthly, that fullness and sufficiency is wanting, because all things
necessary to salvation are not expressly contained Supra Co^trouers. 1. c. 26.
and sequent.
in holy Scriptures, as we have also declared before.

5. Fifthly, the foresaid necessity is wanting. For without the holy Scripture
there were in the law of Nature for the space of two thousand years many true
belieuers. And also long after Christ, yea even till the time of S. Irenaeus,
that is to say, almost two hundred years, there were many Nations who
sincerely believed in Christ, without any holy Scripture, S. Irenaeus l. 3.
cap. 4.
as S. Irenaeus himself testifies. Lastly, albeit Infidels should burn all
the Bibles, yet the faith of Christians should not therefore perish, or be wholly
overthrown. Therefore our faith does not necessarily depend of the Scripture.

6. Sixthly, the seventh property is also wanting: for by the holy Scriptures
the true Christians are not distinguished from Infidels, because almost all
Heretics do both now receive the holy Scriptures, and in times past also
received them.

7. Seauenthly, the eight property is wanting, for there are many points of
faith which rely upon the Traditions of Supra Contr. 1. c. 26. and 27.
the Church only, without any express Scripture at all, as we have declared
before.

8. Eighthly, the ninth property is wanting. For Turks and other Gentills who
are only lead by natural reason, are very seldom or never converted by
Scriptures only: but we add also some other natural reasons and persuasions
that they may be converted. For there are many things in holy Scriptures which
some opposite to natural reason, as the mysteryes of the Blessed Trinity,
Incarnation, and Resurrection of the dead etc.

9. Ninthly, there wants last of all the tenth property, for there is nothing
extant of the Scripture in the Apostles Creed.

10. The holy Scripture indeed is the ground and reason, why we believe many
points of faith, but not the ground why we believe all. Moreover neither is it
the first ground of all that we believe by it. For the Scripture it self is
proved by some other more general ground, to wit, by the authority of the
Church. Wherefore the Scripture is only a particular ground and not a general:
a mediate, and not immediate: a secondary, and not the first, and chiefest rule
of faith.

CHAP. IIII. That the private or particular spirit of every one, is not the
ground or rule of faith.
THAT no private spirit of any can be the ground of our Faith, is far more
evident by the same properties now alleged. For none of these ten properties
does agree with the private spirit of every one that belieueth, the which we
declare in these arguments.

1. First there wants the foresaid continuance. For there is no private or
particular person, who has continued from the beginning of the world, or shall
endure till the end thereof, as faith has continued.

2* Secondly, there wants truth, because there is no private man to be found
which cannot err and be deceived, for as witnesses the Apostle, Every man is
Ad Romans 3. v. 4.
a liar.

3. Thirdly, there wants certainty in proposing matters of faith unto us,
because none can be certain that any private person can have such a spirit,
yea eue^ in our Adversaries judgments. For the predestinate only in their
opinion have this spirit, even as they only in their judgments have the true
faith: but the predestinate are known to none but only to God, according to
that of the Apostle God knows who are his. The which Calvin 2. ad Tim. 2. v.
19. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 2.
expressly teaches.

4. Fourthly, the foresaid strength and immutability is wanting, for that a
private man has not that strength and immutability of his doctrine. Our
Adversaries themselves confess, and experience teaches us, that they often
times change their interpretations of Scriptures, and at diverse times they
teach plain contraries; yea they confess, that this their private spirit is
not permane^t with them, but often times leaves and forsakes them; the which
they prove out of that place of the 29. or 30. Psalm, the eight verse* Thou
have turned thy face from me* and I became troubled. For thus they affirmed in
that Vide disp* Paris an. 1566. in disp. 1. diei sub finem.
famous disputation had at Paris* Anno 1566.

5. Fifthly, there wants that fullness and sufficiency, because no private man
can define all points of faith: seeing that many were defined before he was
borne against the ancient heretics, and there will be many things defined in the
Church after his death, as soon as there shall arise any new heresies.

6, Sixthly, there wants necessity* For before there was any private man which
now lives, there was true faith, and the same faith will continue after he is
dead.

7. Seauently, there wants the seventh property of the rule of faith, seeing
that by this private spirit a Christian cannot be distinguished from an
Infidel* But in truth all heretics do brag, and boast that they have this
private spirit* whereas notwithstanding one condemns or rather damneth another*

8. Eighthly, there wants the eight property. For no point of faith can be
certainly deduced out of this private spirit only, seeing that it is oftentimes
uncertain and deceitful.

9. Ninthly, there wants the ninth property* For it is a ridiculous thing for
one to endeavor to convert an infidel to the faith by bragging only, that he
has this private spirit, the which none can either see or understand.

10. Tenthly, there wants the tenth and last property, because there is no
mention made of this private and particular spirit in the Apostles Creed.

11. And the true spirit of faith which is in every faithful soul* whereof the
Apostle speaks when he says, that we have the spirit of faith, is not the 2.
ad Cor- inth. 4. v. 13.
ground or reason of faith we here speak of, but it is the help of God, or
the supernatural gift of faith, whereby our understanding is helped to
believe, and it is in regard of our understanding, as it were the efficie^t
cause of the acts of faith. But we speak in this place of the formal cause or
reason of faith, as it appertains to the object of faith which is the word of
God, and by which we know what is the true revealed word of God, and what is
not. For albeit the holy Ghost and the gift of faith move us to believe, yet
they do not rashly move us without any reason or ground. Eccles. 19. v. 4.
For he, as the wise man says, who belieueth quickly is light of heart, but
with a solid and sure ground according to those words of 1. Joan. 4. v. 1.
S. John: do not (dearly beloved) believe every spirit, but prove the spirits
whether they be of God. But this proof, and trial necessarily requires some
good reason and sure ground, whereof we will speak in the next Chapter.

12. Lastly it is to be considered, that we do here dispute of the Catholic
faith as it is necessary to al to attain their eternal salvation, and not of
the special faith of one or other, ^he which we know very well may arise or
proceed from some particular or extraordinary revelation of God: but this is
not the Catholic faith, nor an ordinary, but an extraordinary faith, not to be
admitted generally of all, till it be approved and received by the Church, as
presently we will declare more at large.

CHAP. V. That the Catholic Church is the ground or rule of our Faith.
THAT the Catholic and visible Church is the most solid and true ground of
our faith is manifestly proved by the former properties of the Ground of faith.
For all those ten properties do very well agree to the Church, and to nothing
else besides. The Church has the first property, to wit, a continual and
neuer-interrupted duration. For the Church has always Supra cap. 3. huius
Controu.
continued as we have already proved even by the testimony of our Adversaries.

2. The Church also has the second property, that is to say, a most certain
and undoubted truth, because she can never Supra cap. 7. huius Controu.
err in faith, as we have proved before.

3. She has also the third property, that is to say, the infallible certainty
on our parts, because in the doctrine of the Church, we may have the greatest
certainty, perspicuity, and euidency that possibly we can desire. Seeing that
the Church is always present, who explicateth always her mind unto us in
plain and manifest words. And if at any time there arise any doubt or
Controversy in her decrees, she presently declares it no otherwise, then if
the Prophets and other writers of the old and new Testament were yet alive,
and would clearly explicate their mynds unto us in their own proper words. For
it is the same holy Ghost who in times past spoke by the mouth of the Prophets
and Apostles, and who speaks now by the mouth of Matthew. 10. v. 20.
the Church: for it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that
speaks in you.

4. The Church has the fourth property. For there is exceeding great strength
and immutability in the doctrine of the Church. For this truly can never be
corrupted, falsified, or changed, because the Church is always present, who
always gives most clear and evident testimony of her own doctrine. This
doctrine also of the Church remains always constant and immovable, because
the holy Ghost is always present who will not permit the Church to err,
according to those words of Christ: I will Joan. 14. v. 1^.
ask my Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may remain
everlastingly with you.

5. The Church has the fifth property, that is to say, the fullness and
sufficiency of doctrine. For the Church teaches all things necessary to
salvation, according to that promise of Christ: When the spirit of truth shall
come, he will teach you all truth. So that the Joan. 16. v. 13.
Church has hitherto condemned all heresies, and hereafter also will condemn
all errors arising and oppugning the Catholic faith. In like manner she
always answers to all doubts and difficulties proposed unto her, because
she is always present and always lives.

6. The Church has also the sixth property, that is to say, necessity. For no
doctrine must be recevued as a point of faith, unless it be received and
approved by the Church, as we have declared Supra c. 8. huius Controu. Gal. 1.
v. 12.
before by the example of S. Paul, who although he received his Gospel
immediately from God by the revelation of Christ, yet he was commanded by
revelation to go to the visible Church, and to confer the Gospel which he
preached with those who were in the visible Church, least perhaps in vain he
should run, or had run.

7. Yea and others could not safely believe him unless his doctrine had been
approved by the Church, as Tertullian, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine well note.
The Apostle S. Paul (says S. Augustine) called from heaven, if he had not
found the Apostles with whom by conferring his Gospel he might appear to be
of the same Society, the Church would not at all believe him. Thus S.
Augustine. And much more the Ghospells of S. Mark and S. Luke, who were not
Apostles, but only their disciples, stood in need of this approbation of the
Church. Here upon says Tertullian, If he from whom S. Luke received Tertul. l.
4 contra Marci. c. 2. S. Hier. Ep. 11. S. Aug. Tom c. contra Paustum Manich. l.
28. c. 4. Te^t. loco citato. Gal. 2. v. 2
his light, desired to have his faith and preaching authorized by his
predecessors; how much more reason have I to desire the like for the Gospel
of S. Luke, seeing the same was so necessary for the Gospel of his Master?
Thus far Tertullian.

8. And hence it is, that the revelations of S. Brigit, and S. Catherine of
Siena, albeit they were truly revealed unto them by God, yet they do not
appertain to the Catholic faith, because they are not approved by the Church,
as the undoubted and certain word of God.

9. Even as also in the Apostles time many before S. Luke wrote the acts of
Christ, as S. Luke himself testifyeth, and Luc 1. v. 1.
yet notwithstanding the Ghospells only of two of them, to wit S. Matthew, and
S. Marks are authentical, for it is well known that S. John wrote his
Gospel long after S. Luke: but the Ghospells of the rest who wrote before S.
Luke do not appertain unto faith, because they were never approved by the
Church. Whereby it sufficiently appears, how necessary the approbatio^ and
authority of the Church is.

10. The Church has the seventh property of the ground of faith, for by the
Church and her conjunction and communion, a true belieuer may be distinguished
from an Infidel: for he who belieueth the Church and hears her, is a true
belieuer, but he who does not hear her, is an Infidel: if he will not hear
the Church, says our Lord, let him be unto thee as Matt. 18. v. 17. 1. Joan 4.
v. 6.
an heathen or publica^. And S. John says: he which knows God hears us, he
which is not of God, does not hear us.

11. The Church has the eight property. For whatsoever we believe with our
Catholic faith, we believe it, because it is revealed unto us from God by
Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 9. sect. 1. and Bezac. 4. suae confess. sect. 27.
the Church. But God now reuealeth nothing to every member of the Church
immediately by himself. Yea even our Adversaries do well admonish us to labor
most of all, that no way, or leave be granted to such fantastical revelations.

12. The Church has the ninth property. For the Church conuinceth also Turks
and Infidels by natural reasons, of which sort there are many extant in S. S.
Thom. (...) 4. libro contra Gent. Infra cap. 19. huius Controu.
Thom. We prove also the Church by the very signs and marks of the Church,
which are manifest unto all, even Turks and Infidels, whereof we will spoke
more hereafter.

13. The Church has also the tenth property, because in the Apostles Creed
there is expressed an article of the Church: For presently after the faith of
the true God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, first of al is set down
this article, I believe the holy Catholic Church.

14. Moreover that the Church and her preaching is the ground of faith,
evidently appears by the words of holy Scripture. For when S. Paul disputes
of that faith whereby all are to be saved, he reduces this whole faith to the
preaching Ad Romans ^0. v. 14. and seq.
of the Church, and unto her sending and calling of others to her
Ecclesiastical offices.

15. So this Apostle in another place declares, that God always appointed
some Pastors and Doctors in his Church, that we be not children, wavering in
faith, and carried about with every wynd of doctrine, but that we may be stable
and constant always in one and the same faith, and confession of the Son of
God.

16. Lastly those words of S. Paul are most evident, wherein he affirms, that
the Church is the pillar and ground of 1. ad Tim. 3, v. 15.
truth. Where we are to consider, that every foundation of any building has
two offices, that is to say, to vphould the house, and to strengthen it. The
Apostle here attributes the^ both to the Church, the one, when he calls her
the pillar of truth, the other when he calls her the ground of the same
truth. For the pillar Io^. 9. v. 6. Psalm. 74. vel* iuxta Hebr^s 7^. v. 4.
also of the earth according to the Hebrew phrase, does signify the lowest
fou^dations of the earth. So God is said to shake the pillars of the earth, and
elsewhere to strengthen the pillars of the earth, that is to say, the very
foundations thereof.

17. These so manifest and perspicuous words of the Apostle do compel Calvin
Calu. in 1. ad Tim. 3. v. 15.
at the last to be of our opinion; albeit after his accustomed manner at the
first, he wrongfully slaundereth us, affirming that Catholics hold, or to use
his own words, do blab out, this horible blsaphemy, that is to say, that the
truth of God is not strong enough, unless it be vphoulden by the shoulders of
men, and that the word of God is uncertain till by humble prayers, as it
were, it borrows some certaynety from men. And afterward he affirms that
the Apostle in this place would nothing else, but that the truth of God is
supported by the pure preaching of the Gospel. But that which he said first
is a mere slander, for we do not say, that the truth or the word of God
absolutely, and considered precisely in it self, receives it certainty and
strength from the Church, for in this sense it receives a most perfect
strength and large authority from God himself, but in regard of men and in
consideration of our knowledge, it receives it certainty from the Church,
Infra hac Controu. cap. 16. in fine.
as afterward* we will declare more at large: the which also Calvin in the
words immediately following, acknowledges to be most true, when he writes in
this sort: S. Paul simply understands (says Calu. loco citato. Ad Romans 10.
v. 17.
Calvin) that which in other words he says in the tenth Chapter to the Romans,
because faith is by hearing, there will be no says, unless there be some that
preach. Therefore in regard of men, the Church supporteth the truth, because it
makes it famous by her praise and commendation, because the retayneth it in
sincerity and purity, and because she delivers and sends it to her
posterity. Thus Calvin.

18. But that which secondly he adds that the truth of God, is supported and
vpholden by the pure preaching of the Church is indeed most true: but he should
have considered that this pure preaching of the Gospel cannot be found but
only in the Church, and that, no others but men can preach the pure Gospel.
Wherefore if the truth of God be sustained by the pure preaching of the
Gospel, it necessarily follows also that the Church must be sustained by
men, and consequently that the Church of Christ is the gound of truth, albeit
not absolutely, yet in regard of us and our knowledge. So as Beza also is forced
to Beza in 1. ad T^. 3. v. 1^.
confess the same, explicating those words of the Apostle, the pillar and
ground of truth: Understand this, says Beza, not simply in it self but in
regard of us. Thus he.

19. It is therefore manifest as well out of Calvin, as Beza, that the Church in
regard of us is the ground of truth, or of the word of God, and consequently of
our faith which relyeth thereon. But that which in regard of men is the ground
of our faith, that is the true ground thereof, because our faith cannot well,
nor must not be considered but in regard of men, seeing that our faith cannot
be found but in men only: if therefore in regard of men the Church is the gound
of truth, it is also most truly and necessarily the ground of our faith.

20. Furthermore, that the ancient Church of the holy Fathers did constantly
hold the preaching and authority of the Catholic Church to be the ground of
our faith, those excellent words of S. Augustine do manifestly declare, when he
S. Aug. Tom. 6. co^tra Epist. Manichaei cap. 5. Calu. l. 1. Instit. sect. 3^
writes thus, disputing against the Manichees. I* says he, would not believe
the Gospel, but that the authority of the Catholic Church moved me thereunto:
this se^te^ce of S. Augustine vexes our Adversaries very much. Calvin goes
about to persuade the ignorant people, that S. Augustine speaks of himself as
yet remaining a Manichean heretic, and not of himself as being converted and
made a Catholic. But this is a ridiculous evasion, for the words which follow
a little after do show, that this is a false interpretation of Calvin, If thou
do hold thy self to the Gospel (S. Augustine soeaketh unto a Manichean
heretic) I would hold my self to those, by whose commandment I believed the
Gospel. He speaks therefore of himself, as now being a Catholic: and after
a few words. Whose authority, says he, being infringed and weakened, I could
not now even believe the Ghospel it self. Where he shows plainly that our
faith does so depend of the authority of the Church, that it being weakened or
taken away, it could not remain or continue by any faith of the Gospel.
Whereby it is manifest, that it is false which Iunius writes, that S. Augustine
did only speak of the accidentary and not of the necessary cause.

21. Others say, that S. Augustine did speak of this, or that book of the
Gospel, and not of the whole Gospel in general. But the very words of S.
Augustine do teach the contrary, because he speaks every where of the
Gospel it self in general. Moreover one and the same reason is of one book
of the Gospel, and of all the rest, as concerning faith.

22. Others lastly do answer, that S. Augustine did not speak of the Church
of his time, but of the primitive Church, wherein were the Apostles who approved
the Ghospells. But this solution is also easily refuted out of the words next
following: to whom, faith S. Augustine, I have obeyed, saying, Believe the
Gospel; why should I not obey them then, saying unto me, Do not believe
Manicheus. But it is manifest that the primitive Church spoke nothing of
Manicheus, but that Church only which was in S. Augustines time said unto him,
do not believe Manicheus. For Manicheus lived many years S. August. Tom. 6.
co^tra Faustu^ l. 13. c. 4.
after the primitive Church, yea even after S. Cyprian, that is to say, almost
three hundred years after Christ, as the same S. Augustine testifyeth, and it
is otherwise sufficiently well known that the Manichean heresy was unknown in
the world before the year 277. See Baronius in his 2. Tom. in the year 277.
in the 2. number and others following.

CHAP. VI. The arguments of our Adversaries are confuted.
Now it remains we answer to the arguments of our Adversaries, for by our
answers the difficulty of this whole controversy, will be more perspicuously
resolved. Their first argument is, if the authority of the Church were the
ground of faith, then it would follow, that our faith relied upon men and not
upon God, for the Church consists of men. Our Adversaries do often repeat
and inculcat this argument unto us. I answer, that the same argument, if it
were any thing worth* would also prove that we should not believe Scriptures,
because al those who wrote the books of the Bibles were also men; but as we do
believe their writings not because they were men, but because they had a
certain peculiar assi^a^ce of the holy Ghost who did so govern and direct the
that they could not err: so in like manner we believe the Church, and make it
the ground of our faith, not as it consists of men, but as it has a special
and continual assistance of the holy Ghost, by whom she is continually
governed and directed: whereby it comes to pass that she can never err as we
have proved Cap. 7. praecedent.
a little before.

2. Wherefore to make the Church the ground of our faith is nothing else then to
make the holy Ghost and Christ himself the ground thereof. For it is he who
speaks unto us by the mouth of the Church according to that saying of S.
Paul: Seek you an experiment of him that speaks in me, Christ? And in
another place speaking of his own 2. ad Corinth. 1^, v. 3: 1. ad These. 4. v. ^.
doctrine he says: therefore he that despises these things, despises not man
but God, who also has given his holy spirit in us. But our Adversaries do
think and speak too basely of the Church, as though it consisted of men only*
as the Churches of Insidells and Heretics, seeing that the chief part of the
true Church of Christ is the holy Ghost, who is as it were the soul and spirit
of the Church.

3. But neither is this to make the Scripture or the holy* Ghost subject and
inferito our men (as our Aduersarise are wo^r to cauil) but only to show* that
the holy Ghost is every where conformable to himself, and that in all things
he never differs or disgreeth from himself. Whether he speak unto us by the
holy Scripture, or by the mouth of the Church, as Calvin acknowledges Calu. l.
1. Just. c. 9. sect. 2.
disputing against the Anabaptists and Libertines, who by such an argument went
about to reject the holy Scriptures, to wit, least the holy Ghost might be made
subject, and inferior unto them.

4. The second argument is, that Christians may and ought to judge and examine
all things, as the Apostle says, therefore the spirit of every Christian ought
to be the ground of al things. I answer, that by the 1. ad Cor^nt. 2. v. 15.
same argument the Anabaptists and Libertines rejected all the Scriptures, that
they might only retain the spirit, as witnesses Calvin, but badly: for even
as Christians must discern and judge all things, so must Calu. c. 9. citat.
sect. ^.
they also observe the rule and method in judging which the Scripture does
prescribe unto them, and which himself appointed; but this rule is not every
ones private spirit, but the spirit of the whole Church. For it is altogether
necessary that the rule of faith be most certain and free from all errors, as
the spirit of the whole Church is, and not that of every 1. Joan. 4. v. 6.
private man. Hereupon says S. John, He which knows God hears us, he who
is not of God, does not hear us: in this we know the spirit of truth and the
spirit of error. We must therefore judge of every man, by that they either hear
or do not hear the Church, etc because they either agree or disagree from the
spirit of the Catholic Church.

5. The third argument is, that Catholics prove the Church and the authority
thereof by the Scripture, therefore Scripture is rather the ground of faith then
the Church. I answer first, that the proof of the Church which is taken out
of Scriptures, when we dispute against heretics, is an argument called by
Philosophers ad hominem, and it is deduced out of the premises already
granted, in which manner also the first principles or grounds of every science
may be proved, and out of those things also which of themselves are not very
strong and certain. So out of the old Testament against the Jews* we prove
the new testament, albeit this also is the ground of our faith: because the
Jews do admit and receive the old Testament but not the new, yea also even out
of the Jewish Talmud we prove many things against the Jews, because they admit
and approve it as the word of God, but yet their Talmud is not the ground of
our faith, because this only is, as ^ said, an argument deduced out of such
things as they grant unto us. So in like manner because almost al heretics
admit the Scripture, and reject the authority of the Church, therefore when we
dispute against them, we prove the authority of the Church by the Scriptures,
as premises already granted by them. But if we were to deal with Infidells
or others who do not admit the Scriptures, then the said Scriptures were to be
proved by the authority of the Church and not contrariwise. For it is a thing
far better and more commonly known, that there Infra. c. 18. huius co^ir. ^.
10.
is a Church, then that there are the holy Scriptures, as afterward we will
show more clearly.

6. Secondly I answer, that there is so great connection betwixt the Scripture
and the Church, that the Scripture may very well be proved by the authority of
the Church, and again the church by the authority of the Scripture. Neither
should this seem strange to our Adversaries. For Logicians also know very well
that, that which by it own nature is more certain and better known, may be
proved by that which is more certain and better known unto us, by a
demonstration, called by them a posteriori. And contrary wise that which is
better known unto us, may be proved by that which is better known and more
certain in his own nature, by a demonstration called a priori. So the cause
is proved by the effect and the effect by the cause; as fyte is proved by heat
a posteriori, and heat by the nature of fire a priori. So in like manner by
the authority of the Church, the which in regard of us, is more certain and
better known, we prove the Scripture, as it were a posteriorl, and by the
authority of the Scripture which in it own nature is more certain, we prove
the true Church of Christ as it were a priori.

7. The fourth argument. S. Paul testifyeth, that the Church is supported by
the ground and foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, that is tosay, by their
Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine, but if the foresaid doctrine be the
ground of the Church, it necessarily follows that this doctrine appeared to
be certain in it self, before the Church began to be. The Church therefore
must* be that which gives certainty to the doctrine or writings of the
Apostles, but rather their doctrine and writings do affoard sufficient
certainty to the Church. So Calvin. Calu. lib. 1 Just. c. 7. sect. 2. Beza in
2. c. ad Ephesians. v. 20.
I answer first, if we will follow the inte^rpretatio^ of this place alleged
by Beza, Caluins argument will be nothing worth. For Beza will have this to be
the sense of those words, that the Church is built upon Christ who is the
ground and foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and he will have only
Christ to be the groundworke, and the Apostles and Prophets, he says, were
only as the Architects and builders of this Church, as also all faithful
Ministers of Christ are at this day, but not the ground it self. Beza also
adds, that he is truly Antichrist who attributes that unto himself which
belongs only to Christ, that is to say, to be the ground and foundation of
the Church.

8. Out of which doctrine of Beza it follows manifestly, that Calvin is truly
Antichrist. For he attributes unto all Ministers Calu. loco citato.
of the Church, and to their doctrine, and consequently unto himself and his
own doctrine, that they are the foundations of the Church, but according to
Beza whosoever attributes this unto himself is plainly Antichrist, because he
attributes that unto himself which only belongs unto Christ.

9. Secondly I answer, that yet whatsoever Beza says, Caluins exposition is
the S. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in c. 2. ad Ephesians. S. August. Tom. 8. in. Psalm. 86. ad
v. ^. Theophil. and alij in c. 2 ad Ephesians.
trewer, agreeing therein with S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, Theophilact and
other ancient Fathers, that is to say, that S. Paul in this place calls the
Apostles and Prophets, the ground and foundation of faith, or that which is al
one, their doctrine: for in the same place he compares Christ to the chief
coner stone, and the foundation of this spiritual building does consist of
many stones* but there is one lowest and chiefest, to wit, Christ Jesus, who
supporteth all, and who is that cornerstone which unites Ad Ephesians. 2. v. 14.
the Jews and Gentills together, as S. Paul says in the same Chapter.

10. Hence it is that S. John in the Apocal. 21* v. 14.
Apocalypse affirms that this heavenly City has twelve foundations and not
only one, and Christ notwithstanding is the chiefest of all the foundations,
and the foundation of foundations, as S. Augustine S. August^ Tom. 8 in. Psalm.
86. in initio.
says that is to say, of all those twelve foundations he is the foundation.

11. And here the Apostle uses the Hebrew phrase in which it is all one to
say, Upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets and to say, Upon the
Apostolical and Prophetical foundation. For the Hebrews often use the
genitive case of the substantive, Psalm. 5. v. 7.
for the adjective, as a man of blood and deceit, in the fifth Psalm
signifies, a bloody and deceitful man.

12. Furthermore, that which Calvin says that the Apostolical and
Prophetical doctrine has it certainty of it self before the approbation of
the Church, that indeed is true, but this is the certainty which it has of it
own nature from God himself, but in regard of us it receives Cap. 13.
praecedent.. 17. and 19.
it certainty from the Church, as Calvin and Beza witness, and as we have
already declared.

13. But Calvin erreth in this, that he thinks S. Paul to treat in this
place of the Scripture only of the Apostles and Prophets. For not only the
Apostolical Scripture is the ground of our faith, but all the doctrine of the
Apostles. And few of the twelve Apostles, to wit, only five, have written any
thing, but of the other seven, there are no writings extant, but yet they all
taught; the Apostle therefore speaks of the Apostolical doctrine and not only
of the Scripture.

14. But neither do we deny that faith depends of the Apostles doctrine yea
more then that we say that our faith depends of the doctrine of the present
Church. For when we affirm that the Ad Romans 10. v. 17.
Church is the ground of our faith, we do not understand by the Church, the
shoulders or bodies of them who are in her, but their authority doctrine, and
preaching; for by these things faith is engendered, and as the Apostle
witnesses, faith is by hearing.

15. But whenever we treat of the true Church of Christ we do not speak of
that which wants true faith, which is deaf, dumme, or foolish, and which
also either neglects, or not understands the Word of God or Scriptures, for
such a Church is not the true Church of Christ. But we speak of that which
belieueth, which speaks, which preached the pure word of God, which keeps
and expounds the Scriptures most faithfully, and which fittly applies them
in Sermons and Exhortations. Among us therefore all these words have one and
the same signification, the Church, the faith of the Church, the preaching and
doctrine of the Church, the word of God preached by the Church, and the truth
of God proposed unto us by the Church. And we understand all these things by
the name of the Church, when we say, that she is the ground of our faith. For
all these things are either properties, actions, or offices of the Church
which cannot be separated from her.

16. Wherefore our Adversaries do err exceedingly when they separate every
one of these from the Church, and oppose or object it against her* as though it
were a quite distinct thing from her, nay of the true Church of Christ they
make her the Sinagogue of Satan. Therefore the Apostolical and Prophetical
doctrine must not be separated and made opposite unto the Church, as Calvin
does, seeing that it is an essential part of the visible Church. Calvin
therefore disputes as if one should make this argument. A man without his
soul neither sees, speaks, nor understands; therefore a man neither
sees, speaks, nor understands.

17. But peradventure some will say* We have said a little before, that faith
is the ground of the Church, and now we Supra c. 7.
say, that the Church is the ground of faith, whereof the one seems to be
contrary unto the other. I answer, that here there is no contrariety. For
there are two kinds of faith, the one is the particular faith of every
Christian, whereby together with hope and charity, every one is justified, the
other is the general and common faith of the whole Church. The particular
faith of each one relyeth upon the Church, to wit, upon the faith* preaching,
and authority of the whole Church. But she her self relyeth upon the general
faith and profession* and preaching* thereof in the whole Church* which is an
essential part of the visible Church. When therefore we say that the Church is
the ground of faith, we speak of the particular faith of every Christian. But
when we say, that faith is the ground of the Church, we speak of the general
faith of the whole Church.

18. There are other arguments of our Adversaries, but we may easily answer
Canus l. 2. de locis Theol. c. 8. Bellarm. l. 3 de verbo Dei c. vl^.
thereunto by that which has been already said, the which Melchior Canus and
Bellarmine does prosecute and handle more at large, unto whom we refer the
Reader. For they are borrowed of the Anabaptists and Libertines, whereby the
authority of the holy Scriptures themselves is no less diminished and
infringed then that of the Church.

CHAP. VII. That the Church does not only give a bare testimony, but also
authority to the Scripture.
THIS matter is here briefly to be examined, that it may more clearly be
understood how necessary the Churches approbation is to the establishing of the
authority of the holy Scriptures. But to the end that it may more clearly
appear whereof we dispute in this place, it is to be considered, that seeing
that our Adversaries cannot deny, but that the Church affoardeth some testimony
to the holy Scriptures, they affirm, that this testimony of the Church is only
a bare testimony, and not a testimony of authority.

2. For there are two kinds of testimonies. The one is called a testimony of
authority, because upon it, the truth of the things testified depends. Yt is
called also a necessary testimony, because without it the thing in question is
not sufficiently testified. The other is called a bare testimony and not
necessary, that is to say, when such a testimony is not so necessary, because
the matter is otherwise Joan 1. v. 7
sufficiently testified. Such a testimony was that, which S. John Baptist gave
of Christ. For Christ had sufficient testimonies besides.

3. Of the former testimony of authority Christ says. But I do not receive my
Joan 5. v. 34. Eodem. c. 5. v. 36.
testimony from men, to wit, the testimony of authority and necessary. For of
the bare testimony he had spoken a little before: You sent unto John, and he
has given testimony to truth. But this was a bare testimony: wherefore Eodem c.
5. v. 36. Cap. 5.
Christ a little after said, I have a greater testimony then John, for the
works which the Father has given me to profit them: the very works which I
do, give testimony of me, that the Father has sent me. And the Father that
sent me, himself has guien testimony of me. All which says Christ of the
testimony of authority. Our Adversaries therefore say, that the Church gives
only a bare testimony to the Scriptures, as S. John gave to Christ, but she
gives not a necessary testimony or that of authority.

4. But that the testimony of the Church, is altogether necessary, as that
Matthew. 3. v. vlt. Matthew. 17. v. 5.
whereof the authority of the Scriptures depends, is very manifest by that
which is said in the former Chapter. And by that also which we alleged in the
first disputation, where we show that there is now no firm testimony whereby we
may know certainly, which book is canonical and which not, besides the
testimony of the Catholic Church. For now neither are the miracles wrought
which God did in times past, neither does God speak immediately by himself, as
he spoke in the baptism and transfiguration of Christ. Wherefore there
remains only the third ordinary manner, whereby God speaks by the mouth of
the Church. The Church therefore does not give a bare testimony only to the holy
Scripturs, but the testimony of authority, to wit, that whereof the authority of
the Scriptures depends, as concerning us and our knowledge.

5. Moreover if the doctine of S. Paul stood need of the Churches approbation,
as we have already proved out of Suprac. 8. and 13. huius Controu.
the Scriptures, much more S. Lukes Gospel who was only S. Paul's scholar
stood need thereof, as Tertullian witnesses, especially because S. Luke
received not those things Tertul. l. 4 contra Marci. c. 2. Luc. 1. v. 2.
which he wrote by revelation from God, as S. Paul did, but by tradition from
others, as he himself writes. And the same also may be said of S. Mark,
whose Gospel, as S. Hierome writes, the Apostle S. Peter approved, and by
his authority he commanded it should be read in the Church.

6. But neither is it true that some say, that the authority of approving the
Canonical books was only resident in the Apostles and the primitive Church;
but the ensuing Church has is not. For the Apostles did not approve all the
Canonical books of the new testament. For if they had done so, there had
remained no doubt of many of them for many ages after the death of the
Apostles, even among Catholic good men as we have noted before: But many
years after the Apostles time by the general Counsels and Decrees of the
Church, some Supra cap. 5. Contr. 1.
books were approved, whereof there was before some doubt.

7. Yea more then six hundred years after Christ, there were many Catholics
who did not receive the authority of the Toletanu^ Council. c. 16.
Apocalypse, as appears out of the fourth Toletane Council.

8. And that which is more before the Council of Trent, the were many
Catholics who thought that it was lawful for them to doubt of all the books
of the new Testament, the which in times past: S, Hierome seemed to judge as
doubtful; as are the Epistles of S. James, the second of S. Peter, the second
and third of S. John, the Epistles of S. Jude, the Epistles to the Hebrews,
and the Apocalypse. And if it had not been for the Council of Tre^t, or some
other new Decree of the Church, none would as yet condemn them as Heretics,
who called those books in question.

9. By that which has been said it appears manifestly, that the Canonical
Scriptures receive their strength and authority, not from the approbation of
the primitive Church, but rather from the approbation of the Church succeeding;
yea even of this present Church, to wit, of the Council of Trent.

10. Lastly albeit the present Church should not have the authority of
approving Scriptures, as these men say, yet notwithstanding for three other
reasons the authority and testimony of this present Church is necessary. First,
because we know not certainly what books the primitive Church has either
written, or not written, approved or rejected, but by the testimony of the
present Church. Secondly, neither do we know whether those books came
uncorrupted unto us or not, but by the same testimony. Thirdly, because we
cannot otherwise know which is the true sense of those books.

CHAP. VIII. The Argument of our Adversaries are confuted.
THE first argument of our Adversaries is: The Church is grounded upon the word
of God; and by the word also of God it is engendered, nourished, and governed,
and it is subject to the word of God as to the words of her spouse. I answer,
our Adversaries do in a manner confound the written word of God, with the word
of God in general, the which they should not do: for there are three sorts of
the word of God to wit, that which is believed, preached, and written. The
believed word is in the heart of the Church, that which is preached is in her
mouth, and that which is* written is in her books. Of the believed and
preached word, the Apostle says: the word is in thy mouth, and in thy heart,
this is the word of faith which we preach. We Romans 20. v. 8.
confess, that in the believed and preached word the Church is founded,
because by the same it is engendered, nourished, Ad Ro^* ^0. v. 10. Ibid. v. 14 ^
and governed, and that unto this word it is subject and obedient, as unto the
Words of her spouse. For indeed this kind of word is necessary for the Church.
For with our heart (says the Apostle) we believe unto Justice, but with the
mouth confession is made to salvation. And again, How shall they hear without
a preacher?

2. But the nature of the written word is far different; for this is neither
altogether necessary for the Church, seeing that the Church was without it
more then two thousand years; neither can the written word be profitable to
the Church, unless it be also rightly preached, and believed. For what does it
profit a man to have the Bible, unless he rightly believe and understand it?

3. But the Scripture whereof we now dispute, does only conteyne written word,
but the believed and preached word are contained in the visibe Church, as the
necessary and essential parts thereof: seeing the one is as it were the life in
the heart of the Church, the other as it were the speech in her mouth: neither
can they ever be separated from her, according to that saying and promise of
God: The words which I have put in thy month shall not Isaiae 59. v. v^.
depart from thy mouth nor from the mouth of thy seed; nor from the mouth of
thy seeds seed from hence forth for evermore.

4. Wherefore this argument does prove the quite contrary, for seeing that the
written word receives it pro^ and authority from the rightly believed and
preached word, which are the parts of the Church; it is necessary that the
written word receive that authority and ^ity from the Church, as that, wherein
only the word rightly preached and believed is to be found.

5. The second argument. If the Church should teach any thing contrary to the
Scriptures we were not to believe the Church. Therefore the Scripture does not
rece^ue that authority from the Church, but rather the Church from the
Scripture. I answer, that in the same manner it may be said, that if the
Scripture should contain any thing against truth, we should not also believe
it; if the holy Ghost should utter and speak any ly, we should not believe
him. But these conditions are indeed impossible, and blasphemous against God;
wherefore they are not only, to be admitted but not even to be proposed of
Christians. For it is impossible that the Church should teach any thing
contrary to the Scriptures, for then the holy Ghost should lie, because he
should teach one thing by the Church* and the contrary by the Scriptures.

6. The third argument, if the Scripture receive that authority from the
Church, then the Church should be above the Scripture* which seems to be very
absurd* (...). That the Church is above the Scripture, may be understood two
ways. First, because the Church exceeds the Scripture in dignity and
excellency, and in this sense, without all doubt, the Church is above the
Scripture, for the Scripture is made for the Church, and 1. ad Cor. 4. v. 15.
not contrariwise. All things (says the Apostles) are done for you. Christ
dyed for the Church, and not for the Scriptures: the Church belieueth, hops,
loves and praised God, but the Scripture does none of these: The Church shall
reign and live everlastingly with Christ in heaven: the Scripture shall perish
after the day of Judgment. Lastly the Church contains in it the word of God
rightly believed, preached, and the holy Ghost it self, all which do far
exceed the written word in excellency and dignity*

7. Secondly it may be understood that the Church is above the Scripture, (...)
(...) she may change the Scripture, or of Scripture make no Scripture, or
lastly she may teach somewhat contrary to Scri^* or depart from the true sense
of Scripture: In which sense the Sectaries of this time say, that we affirm
the Church to be above the Scripture. And thus it is falso that the Church is
above the Scripture: but neither is there any Catholic which in this sense
will affirm that the Beilarm l. 3. de verbo Dei c* vlt. in resp. ad 14 argum.
Church is above the Scripture, as Bellarmine truly affirms. For if the
Church were in this sense above the Scripture, the Church should err, and be
opposite unto her self, because in that, the Church has once approved the
Scripture she cannot any more reject and disprove it unless she contradict her
self, which is impossible.

8. The fourth argument. The holy Scripture receives her authority immediately
from God himself because he is the Author of the Scripture, therefore it does
not receive it authority from the Church. I answer, that there two kinds of
certaynties; the one of the thing in it own Nature; the other in respect of
us: so also there are two kinds of authorityes; the one of the thing considered
in it* self, and this has the Scripture from her principal Author, to wit,
God himself: the other is in respect or us* and this it has from the Church;
as we have Cap. 13. praecedent.. 17. and 1^
proved before out of Calvin and Beza^ For we know not otherwise that God is
the Author of the Scripture with any certainty of faith, but by the testimony
of the Church.

9. And that which we have said of the Scripture, may also be evidently seen
in Christ our Lord, who is above the Scripture. For Christ was forced to prove
his authority by miracles, that it might the better be known and allowed of
men* For otherwise the Jews had not been Joan. ^5. v. 24. S. August^ Tom. 9.
Tract. 91. in Joan.
bound to have admitted his authority. Hereupon, says Christ, speaking unto
his disciples of the Jews, If I had not done among them works, that no other
man has done, they should not have sinned, that is to say, of Infidelity, not
believing in Christ, as S. Augustine very well expounds. And in another place
speaking unto the Jews, he says, If I do not the works of my Eather,
believe me not. Joan. 10. v. ^7.


10. But if the authority of Christ which was most excellent in it self and
immediately from God, stood in need of those means whereby it might become
known unto us, to the end it might oblige us to believe it; much more* the
authority of the Scripture will stand in need of it, albeit it be immediately
from God, to the end it be made manifest unto us. For otherwise we should not
be obliged by the authority thereof. But this is not done now by miracles, nor
by the immediate or extraordinary revelation of God: Therefore it rests that
we say it is done by the ordinary and mediate revelation of God, that is to
say, by the Church, or rather by the holy Ghost, which speaks unto us by the
Church.

CHAP. IX. That the Church is the Judge of all Controuersus in matters of Faith.
SEEING that there arise daily so many disputations and Controuersyes of matters
of faith, none can deny, but that there must necessarily be some Judge
appointed, who must define, end, and determine such Controuersyes, for
otherwise there will never be an end of such matters But it is a great
difficulty who must be this Judge. The Sectaries of this time almost all refuse
the Judgment of the Church. For they see very well, that if they admit her as
judge all their errors will be quit overthrown. Wherefore some of them affirm
that the sole Scripture must be the Judge of all Controversies, and this was
the first doctrine of our Adversaries, to wit, Luther and Zuinglius.

2. But our later Adversaries when they consider, that it is an absurd thing
Cap. 18. Contr^. ^.
to make the Scripture (being a thing without life) the Judge, as we have
declared before, they fly unto their private spirit, the which they will have
the judge of all Controversies. But least they may seem to attribute too much
unto themselves, they endeavor to color their private spirit with the famous
title or name of the holy Ghost, affirming the holy Ghost to be the only judge
of all Controuersyes.

3. Wherefore there are three things here to be proved. First, that the
Scripture cannot be judge. Secondly, that neither the private spirit can be it.
Thirdly, that the Catholic Church is the only, and most true Judge of all
Controversies.

4. As concerning the first, whereas our Adversaries every where teach, that
nothing is to be believed which is not expressly to be found in holy
Scriptures, it is a strange thing, that they would persuade men that the
Scripture is the Judge of all Controversies: whereas we read no such thing in
any place of holy Scripture.

5. Yea even in these, testimony is only attributed to the Scriptures, and not
Judgment. Search the Scriptures (says Christ) Joan. 5. v. ^.
and the same are they that give testimony of me. And hence it is, that the law
of God is often called in Scripture in the Hebrew phrase Eda, or Eduth, or
Teuda, that is to say, Psalm. 1^*
a testimony; yea even in one Psalm it is called above twenty times by that
name.

6. Moreover in the Prophet Isay in the same place falsely cited by our
Adversaries, that they may prove thereby the Scripture to be the judge of
Controversies, it is called a witness, or a testimony, and not a Judge, nay
rather to the Isaiae 8. v. 20.
Law, says the Prophet, and to the testimony.

7. Furthermore, nothing is more absurd then in matters of such moment to
appoint such a deaf and dumme judge, and who may also be corrupted for both
parties, and whose sentence either party uses indifferently. But it is
manifest, that the Scripture is such a judge, for it can neither speak nor
hear: and so in like manner do all Heretics ancient and modern also use the
Scriptures. Lastly almost all our Adversaries do see, how absurd these things
are, and therefore they fly unto their own private spirit, the which they call
the holy Ghost. Wherfore-let us come now to the second point.

8. As concerning therefore this private spirit, first there is none who
doubts but that the holy Ghost is the chief Judge of all Controuersyes. But
the question is, where this holy spirit is to be found, and in whom it
remains.

9. Moreover it is certain, that the holy Ghost does not remain, or is to be
found in any book (least peradventure our Adversaries should send us to their
Bibles) but in the hearts of the belieuers. Now we ask whether this holy Ghost
which is the Judge of all be in the heart of every belieuer, or rather in the
heart of the whole Catholic Church. If they say in the heart of the Catholic
Church, we have our desire: if they say in the heart of every private man, it
will follow that no private person can err in his own judgment, seeing that
the holy Ghost cannot err in his judgment. Here truly we seek for that
Judge which cannot err.

10. Furthermore every private man shallbe come the Judge of the whole Church,
if every such private person have this spirit, which is the Judge of the whole
Church: whereupon there will ensue a great confusion in the Church of God.

11. Besides that, if every belieuer be the Judge, the^ our Adversaries must
needs admit the ancient Fathers as Judges of all Coutrouersies, the which they
will never do, for they dare not deny, but that the ancient Fathers were true
belieuers: why therefore do they attribute unto themselves that which they so
vehemently deny to all the ancient Fathers?

12. Moreover, if every belieuer cannor err in his judgment, much less can a
great many such err, and least of all can the Church of all belieuers err.
Wherefore whatsoever our Adversaries say, they will be forced to confess and
grant, that the holy Ghost is the Judge as he remains in the whole Church,
speaking and judging by the mouth thereof, and in this manner even out of our
Adversaries doctrine we gather by a necessary consequence our opinion.

13. Lastly, that which they affirm that the private spirit of every
particular person is Judge, is thereby declared to be false, that they
themselves acknowledge that there is no private man which at some times cannot
err in his judgment: but here we inquire for a Judge which cannot err. For
otherwise in matters of such moment, and of which our eternal salvation
depends, we should dangerously be forced to have recourse to an erroneous
Judge, whose judgment is variable, uncertain, deceitful, and often times
manifestly false.

14. But now as concerning the third point, that the Church is the judge of all
Controversies, we prove by these arguments. First, the Church has all the
properties of a fit judge, for first she has an exact knowledge, the holy
Ghost Ioa^ 16. v. 13.
shall teach you, says Christ, all truth.

15. Secondly, the Church cannot be corrupted by any gifts or prayers. For she
is as the Apostle witnesses, the 1. ad Tim. 3. v. 15.
pillar and ground of truth.

16. Thirdly, the Church hears, speaks, gives her judgment, and examineth
the testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers, as experience it self teaeheth us.

17. Fourthly, we are bound to stand to the judgment of the Church, Who will
not hear the Church, says our Lord, let Matt. 18. v. 17.
him be unto thee as an heathen and publican.

18. Fifthly, the Church has power and authority to punish. What, will you, 1.
ad Cor. 4. v. vlt. 2. Cor. vlt. v. 2. 2. Cor. vlt. v. 10.
says the Apostle, that I come unto you with a rod, or in charity, and with
the spirit of mildness? And in another place, If I come again I will not
spare. And again, that being present, I may not deal hardly according to the
power which our Lord has given me unto edification, and not unto destruction.

19. Sixthly, the Church absolueth, byndeth, and retayneth sins,
excommunicateth, Matthew. 18. v. 19. Joan 20. v. 23.
as the holy Scriptures do expressly testify, and our Adversaries do also
confess, all which acts belong unto Judges, but the Scripture does none of
them.

20. The second argument. The holy Scripture expressly affirms, that the
Church does sometimes judge. 1. Cor. 5. v. 34. and. 5.
I indeed absent in body, but present in spirit have already judged, at present
him that has so done, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered
together, and my spirit, with the virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver
such an one to Satan. And a little after, Do not you judge 1. Cor. ^ v. (...).
of them that are within: where the Apostle plainly says, that the Pastors of
the Church judge those which are in the Church.

21. The third argument is taken from their common practice of the Church,
as well in the old as in the new Number. 11. v. 16. 17. and 25. Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. and
seq. 2. Par. 19. v. 10. and 11.
Testament. For in the old Testament the chief judgment of all causes was
ordained by God himself: first in the book of Numbers, and afterward it was
confirmed in Deuteronomy, in which Judgment the priests did sit as Judges, and
the chief Judge who did give his sentence, for in all things which were
doubtful by the express commandment of God, the common people were sent to
this Judgment of the Church, and not only to the holy Scriptures or to the
private spirit of any.

22. Moreover till the coming of Christ, this manner of judging continued in
the old Law. For of it Christ himself said, Upon the chair of Moses have
sitten the Scribes and the Pharifies. All things therefore whatsoever they
shall say to you, observe ye and do ye: this Council or Judgment, in the
years following, by corrupting the Greek word, the Jews called Sanhedrin,
Mat.. 2 v. ^. and 3.
as it were (...), that is to say, an assembly or Council.

23. In like manner in the new Testament when there arose that controversy
about the observation of the legal ceremonies or customs, the Apostles did
not Act. 15. v. 28.
send their disciples to the holy Scriptures only, or to the private spirit of
any, but they assembled themselves together, and defined what was to be
believed. It seemed good (say they) to the holy Ghost and us. For Act. 15. v.
vlt. and. Act. 16. v. 4.
the holy Ghost is as it were the soul of the Church. And this Decree of the
Apostles S. Paul and S. Barnabas did diuusge and promulgate every where, as
appears by the same Chapter, and the next following, where these
determinations of the Apostles, are called Decrees or according Act. 21. v. 25.
to the Greek Phrase (...), that is to say things already judged: whereupon Act.
21. verse. 25. the Apostles do say, that judging and decreeing they had written
this.

24. In the same manner in the next ages, the Arians the Macedonia^s, the
Nestorians, Eutichians, and other old Heretics were judged and condemned by
the Catholic Church in the general Counsels holden at Nice, Constantinople,
Calcedon, and others.

25. Lastly, our Adversaries in their consistories and assemblies do vsurp^
unto themselves, the authority of judges, neither do they refer the judgment
to the Scriptures alone, or to the private spirit of any.

26. Yea Calvin convinced by these reasons confesleth, that the writings of
every private person must be submitted to the judgment of the Church. Where he
also concludes thus: Neither therefore, says Calu. in Antid. co^tra Council.
Trid. sess. 1. in fine.
he, do we condemn, or aiminith the authority of the Church, neither do we
give liberty to every froward fellow to do what ^sieth. I would to God, they
would show us such a Church, as the holy Scripture does paint or describernto
us, we would easily agree about the honor thereof. Thus he. But we will show
in the ensuing Chapters such a Church as the Scripture describes: I wish also
we may agree concerning the honor and authority thereof.

27. There are two principal arguments of our Adversaries: the first is, that
the holy Ghost is not tied unto men, but judges freely in whatsoever it
pleases him, therefore he is not tied unto the Church. But the same argument
would prove, that there is no certainty in the holy Scriptures. For they who
wrote the Scriptures were men, unto whom, according to our Adversaries
opinion, the holy Ghost was not tied. I answer therefore that the holy Ghost is
not absolutely bound or tied unto men, but he is tied to his own, Promise, as
also to the words and promises of Christ. For neither the holy Ghost, nor
Christ himself can deceive us in not performing their promises, because as the
Apostle Ad Titum 1. v. 2.
says God cannot lie. But God has promised that he will be with his Church, not
only one or two days, or one year, but even till the end of the world. Math.
vit. v. vit.
He promised, that he would give the holy Ghost to remain and stay with us,
not for one on two years only, but everlastingly. It is needful therefore that
he perform and stand to his promises.

28. The second argument. If those things which we have said of the Church as
Judge, were true, it would also follow that the Church is Judge of the holy
Scripture, and consequently of the word of God in general. I answer that the
word of God in general cannot be called in question or doubted of by any which
professes Christ. For the divine faith cannot be without some word of God, but
where there is noe controversy, there is no need of any Judge. But if of any
one part of the word of God, whether it be written or not written, there arise
any controversy, as for John 14. v. 16.
example, of the true sense of the written word, without doubt we must recurre
unto the judgment of the Church: for it belongs unto her to judge of the
true sense of the holy Scripture, and of the exposition thereof (which is the
chiefer part of the written word) as also of any doubtful letter of the holy
Scripture: for seeing that in times: past, there have been many controuersyes
of diverse books of holy Scripture, and of the particular Chapters and parts
thereof, as also of the true sense of the letter, and other written points of
says, it is manifest, that noe other Judge but the Catholic Church has ended
or defined all these controuersyes.

29. But in this judgment of the Church there are two things to be
considered; the one, that the Church does not judge of any part of the word of
God out of her own proper sense and judgment, Council Trident. sess. 4. Calu. l
4. Instit. c. 8. sect. 13.
or at her own pleasure without the word of God, as her Adversaries, and
namely Calvin does wrongfully slander her, but by one part of the word of God
which is better known, she judges of that which is less known, and manifest
unto us: as for example by the word of God delivered by Traditions, she judges
of the written word of God, and of the true sense thereof.

30. The other thing to be confidered, is, that when the Church does Act. 15.
v. 28.
judge of these things they are not men only which judge as our Adversaries
pretend, but the holy Ghost also himself who judges and speaks unto us by
the Church. It seemed good, say the Apostles, to the holy Ghost and us. For
even as the actions of a man's body, are not so properly the actions of the
body, as of the soul which quickneth and moves the body: so the actions of
the whole Catholic Church, are not so much to be attributed unto men, who are
as it were the body of the visible Church, as unto the holy Ghost, who is as it
were the soul which gives life and motion to the body of the Church. They
therefore who deny this judgment of the Church, are not only injurious to the
Church, but also to the holy Ghost. Hitherto of the properties, offices, and
power of the true Church of Christ. It remains now we show such a Calu. in
Antid. co^tra 4. sess. Concilij. Trid. in (...).
Church, as the Scripture declares, and describes unto us, the which Calvin,
as we have said before, earnestly desired of us.

FINIS.

