A REIOYNDER TO DOCTOR HILL CONCERNING THE DESCENSE OF CHRIST INTO HELL. WHEREIN
THE ANSWER TO HIS SERmon is justly defended, and the roust of his reply
scraped from those arguments as cleanly, as if they had never been touched
with that canker. By Alexander Hume, Master of Arts.

HERE, BESIDES THE REIOYNDER, thou have his Paralogismes: that is, his
fallacies and deceits in reason pointed out, and numbered in the margin:
amounting to the number of 600. and above; and yet not half reckoned.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX AND EWE, VICOVNT Hereford and
Bourchier, Lord Ferreis of Chartlie, Lord Bourchier and Lovane, Master of her
Majesty's horses, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter: LONG LIFE
WITH INCREASE OF Honor, and after this life life everlasting.
BEing drawn (Right honorable) into this controversy by the accidents
expressed in the Epistle to the Reader: I levelled all my labors, to rake up
the coals, and stiflle the flames of contention. Being private, I endeavored
to keep my self within the bounds of my condition. I wrote in secret,
acquainting few with my counsel. I tempered my style with the modestest words
that I could devise I submitted my self to be led by better reasons. I
abstained from offenses, and occasions of choler. I wrote in latin, that it
might not come into the hands of the multitude: hoping that if any blows
fell harder, then I meant them, they might be the better taken, the fewer saw
them. But all this seed bred no corn: for M. Doct. hunting after praeferment
(if I mistake not his plot) and setting the foundation of his praise on this
conquest, has now published in print, that I wrote in a corner, and cried at
the cross, that I sent under seal. If the worste were my disgrace, it might
be borne with: or if all readers had learning, this reply might be contemned.
But seeing this cause is Christ's, and slips amongst the simple may go for six
pence: I will not betray him, that has done so much for me, nor see them
deceived, whom he has bought so dearly. The question is of an article of our
faith, and pertains to all, that care what they believe. The doubt is not,
whether the article be true, but in what sense it is true. For, seeing these
articles are not scripture, but grounded on the Scripture: the question is, in
what sense Christ is said according to the Scriptures, to descend into Hell.
And now seeing he is no more a Christian, that is ignorant of his faith, then
he a Carpenter, that cannot handle his axe: this must needs be a question as
necessary, as it is needful for a Christian to understand, what he believes.
For that, which many say, it suffices to know that Christ descended into
Hell, though they know not, in what sort he was there; is as if a farmer
should content himself, that he has a lease of his fa^me, and never enquire
how long it lasts, nor on what condition he holds. By the same reason, it
is sufficient to know that Christ was born, and that he suffered: and needless
to seek how he was borne, and what he suffered. Wherefore, I have resolved to
stand at my defense, and to bear the brunt of these blows. For, my weapons
are sound Syllogismes, my armor Scripture, and truth my shield. I doubt not of
the proof, and fear not the muscate. I was brief before as the mediocritie of
a private letter required. My brevity bred obscurity, and gave more
probability to his inversions* and euasions: to his insinuations and
collections, to his making and marring my arguments in wrong mouldes. But now
I have made them my self, and shaped them on such blocks, as will not (I hope)
be easily wrung out of fashion. I have turned his ordinance some against
himself, and all from us, so far, as I hope he will despair himself, to hit
this mark with that shot. Yet because many minds are swayed with affection
of the man, or with conceit of the matter: and my name came never near so
many ears, as this book is like to come in mouths: I have resolved to
commend it to your honor. Hoping, that if your name win minds to read* the
weight of my reasons, shall turn the scales, and win hearts to believe. I
have many reasons of my choice. Your Zeal of Gods house. Your love of Gods
glory, Your knowledge in Gods word. And your aestimation, in Gods Church,
amongst such, as love his name sincearly and her Majesty (for his sake)
unfeignedly. Add, that M. D. Reynoldes, (the load star of Oxenford) whom
your honor has maintained there, to confute the Friar Bellarmine, having laid
open all the plaites, and ripped the seames of this controversy: I presume the
more to use your name in this cause, which has been maintained under your
countenance. If there were any hope, that that work would come out shortly, I
would bury my papers in the duste. But seeing that time is like to be long*
and many in the mean time are deceaved with these bold bragges. I have
thought expedient (to amaze the adversaries of this doctrine with the light of
that sun, when it shall please God to give it to his Church) to set out my
little candle, wherein (I hope) there is light enough, to disperse the mistes,
and pearce the clouds of these Sophismes. Thus, beseeching God (the author of
all honor) to augment your honor, to your comfort, and his glory, I commit
you to him, whose cause I commend to you.

Your Honors humble Orator, ALEXANDER HVME.

TO THE READER.
I Am forced (gentle Reader) though I hate contention, to contend with a
contentious man: or else, having the better end of the staff, to forsake a
good cause. It is not possible that the Lords field should want tares, his
net bad fish, or his Church offenses: but woe to them, by whom they rise. This
woe in controversies pertaines to the one side. It is hard, (and almost
impossible, that both be guilty. Wherefore, as I am clear before the Lord,
so, to purge my self before thee, I will set down how this dissension first
began. The Bishop of Salisburie that last was, before his remooving to York,
took order, that certain preachers should keep lecture on the market days,
in the chief market towns of his Diocese. There is a great market every
Satterday at a town called Chippenhame, in North Wilshire. Within 4. miles of
which, dwells one M. Wisdom, a man for integrity of life, and exceeding
pains in his calling loved of all the godly, hated of the wicked and admired
of both. This man was one of the prechers appointed to that place, and preached
there once in a fourtnight, or a month, I know not which. Wherefore on Satterday
the 14. day of February or thereabout Anno 1589. expounding in that place the
articles of the belief, he delivered this opinion, which I defend, concerning
the descense of Christ into hell. When he had done, one Chalfont Vicar of that
town stood up, and protested to the people, that he had taught false
doctrine: and promised, that if they would come that day seven night, they
should hear him confuted by a learned man.. That day seuennight commes. The
people flocks to the Church in great multituds, exspecting some famous man,
with some new matter. At length, in came this. M. Chalfont himself. He climbes
into the pulpit, and pyles up a heap of books, as high as his head. Then after
a psalm, and a formal prayer, he begins like an Orator at his own person
and his adversaries, that he was M. Wisdoms senior, that he was a Bachelor
when M. Wisdom was a Scholar: and a Master of Art. before he was a
Bachelour. That he had read more, and knew more, then he. That he had learned
arithmetic, and could reckon the articles of the creed, better then he. That
there was 12. of them, made by the 12. Apostles. That his memory served him to
remember, which Apostle made which article. That M. Wisdom did reckon them
wrong, and made but 11. of them. That al learned Fathers were on his
conspiracy. That M. Wisdom did falsefie Calvine, and other learned writers:
That Christ might be the day when he su^^ered, as well both in Paradise and
Hell: as M. Wisdom was that morning at Gritleton (that is the place where he
dwells) and then there under the pulpit. That he did contradict the
convocation, and therefore had deprived himself of the Ministry, ipso facto.
And so was no more Parson of G^^tleton, then he was Bishop of London. He
looks down many times on M. Wisdom, where he sat under the pulpite, amazed
at his impudency, like a meek sheep, (as he is indeed) and calls him by
his name. This says Augustine, this says Jerome, this says Cyprian, and
you say that. Where was your learning? Where was your reading? Where was your
simplicity and plain dealing, which you make show of? And turning to the
people he warned them to be ware of false Prophets that going in sheep
clothing, were inwardly ravening wolves, meaning M. Wisdom because of his
plainness, and simplicity. This exclamation, (for sermon I cannot call it)
being ended, the people departed some saying this, and some saying that: and
all, (saving such as love, or malice did carry more then truth or matter)
condemning Chalfonts impudency. That day seuen-night, the people meets again,
hoping to hear M. Wisdom reply, for that was his day by the Bishops order.
But M. Hill being then at a town called Leycocke, within 2. miles of this
Chippenhame by accident, or of set purpose, I know not, came thither that
morning, and took the place. The same man not many years before, had dipped
in the same controversy almost after the same manner at Sarum, against one M.
Connam, a man both learned, and Chaplane to my L. of Pembroke. But to let that
pass, at this sermon 28. Feb. Anno 1589. I was my self, upon the occasions
expressed in the beginning of my letter to M. Hill, (for as yet he was not
Doctor) which he has printed. In it with painted words, and great names of
Doctors he so varnished the matter, that at the first hearing it seemed not
improbable. Toward his adversaries he behaved himself modestly, giving them
the praise both of learning and godliness, namely Calvine and Beza. To blaze
their error in this point, he rubbed the Hebrew words Sheol and nepheshe, and
the greek hades, psyche and pneuma, as white, as a whetstone. Then after a
solemn challenge to all the learned men in the world, that did dissent from
him, he offered his notes to any that would have them: he promised fair play,
if any man would answer him: he protested love to him, that could confute
him: and vowed a recantation in the same place, if his forces could not bide
the battle. I hearing this brave challenge, and mistrusting his cards for all
his facing: wrought a friend that had acquaintance with him, to help me to his
notes. After two months or there-abouts, he sent them to me under his own
hand. Perusing them, I found them out of their coullours, nothing answerable to
the show that they made in the pulpite. Wherefore, hearing of no man, that did
reply: saving M. Wisdom in a sermon that M. Hill was not at: and hoping that
his protestations had been as far in his heart, as they were fair in his
mouth: I resolved to answer him for the truths sake, though my leisure was
not much, promising my self as much thank for my labor, as his great offers
led me to believe. To keep it secret, I wrote in latin. I seasoned my
words, with all moderation, that might be in a contrary style. I offered to
confess, if it could be showed, that my answers turned not the edge of his
arguments. To be short, I promised to yield to any truth, that he could
prove. I was in hope that this conference should have been private, amongst
us, and such friends only, as he or I, might have acquainted with it.
Indeed, he offered me to have talked of the matter at a friends house. But I
considering, that in such disputations, storms of words rising out of hearts,
heated with contradiction, does hinder reason, and stop judgment, refused any
conference, but with the pen. The second consideration is better than the first.
This reply I finished within few days: But mistrusting mine own infirmities,
and knowing that (...), I kept it in my hand till the next May following. Then
going home to visit my natural friends, I left it with a friend or two to be
delivered him. They being doubtful of my return, though it not best to
stir a coal, that they knew no man in my absence to put out. At my return
understanding that they had not delivered it: I took it into my hands again,
I added and altered diverse things. I wrote it new: and sent it him enclosed in
a letter. In time of my absence, (which was half a year and more) he had
received by some secret means, an english copy of the first draught, which I
my self had translated at the request of a friend, not above five days before
my journey. It I delivered him with condition to bring it me again He brought
it not, and I forgot it. In time of my absence, he lent it to another, and the
other gave a coppie of it to one, that put it in M. Hills hands. To that before
my return, he had fumbled up this answer, that now he has printed. I not
knowing it, sent him (as I have said) the latin. Upon receipt whereof he sent
the other amongst his friends. It went amongst them from one to another, from
November (for in November I sent mine,) till the September following and then
he sent it me. In this mean time speeches were given out, that I had answered
his sermon, that he had replied, and I recanted. These speeches grew daily,
and lifted his heart as high as his name. Whereon he resolved to dispute in
Oxenford for a scarlet hood. He promised his friends to make that one of his
questions. He gave out, that al Oxford was on his side. But when it came to
proof, he was feign to promise to his friends, and they to others, that he
would confer with learned men: that he would yield to any truth, The
admitting of a man to a degree of school in Oxford is called a grace.
that could be proved out of the word: that he would not deall in that
question, but as he should be led by such conference, or else he had gone as
graceles out of Oxford, as he came thither. Notwithstanding, when he was sure
of his grace, to maintain his credit amongst his friends in the cuntrie: he
took that question to maintain in Oxfoord on the Viper day of the Act. how
manfully he defended it, I report me to them that heard him. A filius terrae
at the lower end of the school (a thing never seen before in that place at
that time) got a placet of the Doctor of the chyre, to brush his skarlet gown:
who trimmed it so neatly, that if his cheeks would have taken the stains of
shame, he had worn as much skarlet in his face, as he did on his back. In this
story (thou may see good Reader) that my adversary did thrust his hook in
an other man's harvest at Chippinhame: that he took not my reply so well as he
promised in the pulpit. That he made that public which I wrote in private.
That he went farther abroad, and hunted for contention in Oxfoord. That he
played at the same bale before, in Sarum. That he bare the simple in hand, that
all the learned of the University were of his mind. That he fed an untrue
rumor, that I had recanted. That he printed my private letter without my
consent or knowledge. And that to trouble the simple with it, he published that
in english, which I wrote in latin. For my part I hope I did nothing but that
which the duty of a Christian required. hearing the truth impugned I did
defend it: fearing that he had been deceived on simplicity, I labored to
reform him. I wrote in fair terms to avoid offenses. I wrote in a strange
tongue to keep it secret. And I hunted not for this contention: but was drawn
into it with fair promises of great thanks: wherefore I hope if thou have but
one dram of indifferency, that thou wiltest wipe this bleamish from my face.
If I fall now into rougher terms impute the fault to him, that kept not
himself within the same bounds as I began. Moreover, it is impossible to
answer this book, wherein are so many errors in all kinds of learning without
terms of offense. The humor also of this adversary is such, and his
estimation amongst the simple, that if I spare him, I shall feed it, and
hinder the truth. Add that it is impossible for me to pass over such
unmannerly disgraces of lies, impudent lies, shameless lies in matters
political, damnable lies in matters theological: disagreing with Matthew, Mark,
Luke, John, Paul, Peter, Christ himself, and all the scriptures, and never turn
the bale coming so fair to the other end of the tennise. In some places he
gives my words a meaning, that I never meant: In some places he gives my
arguments a shape, that I never made. In some places he bends his proofs to
things not denied: In many places he slipps the point in controversy, and
passes by arguments, as if he never saw them. And in no place answers one
argument like a scholar, much less a Doctor. If I rippe up these things in
their places freely: I hope good Reader, that thou wiltest rather lay the fault
on him, that made them such; than me, that call them as they are. Thus
beseeching thee to weigh the cause thoroughly* and to give every color his own
name: I leave thee to the Lord.

Thine and all theirs that love the Lord Jesus. Alexander Hume.

THE COPY OF MASTER DOCTORS LETTER SENT to me with his book.
GRace and peace. There was brought to me in August last an answer made to my
sermon preached at Chippenhame the 28. of February by your self, which for
that I was then riding to London, I laid up in my study till my return. At
which time examining it: I found that you had indeauored to answer some part
of my sermon: and some things you left unanswered. Hereupon I had thought to
make no reply. But ^he: I understood, that speeches were blazed abroad that
neither I could, nor durst answer it: I entered into a resolution either to
defend my self or else to recant, to stay the sp^eches of the multitude. And
therefore to satisfy your request have made a reply, wherein I have proved my
former reasons to be firm and v^controleable, and your answer to be weak and
insufficient: for that you disagree with David, Esaias, Ezechiel* Matthew, Peter,
Paul, yea Christ himself, as it shall appear in the conference. It is an easy
matter to set your self against M. Hill. But it is not so easy (...) matter to
set your self against the Prophets, and Apostles, and Christ himself. He
will say to you as he said to Paul, (...). Wherefore I pray you, if you will
proceed in this conference to lay down the whole as I do: and consider what,
when, and where you write. You write of an article of our faith, which must
be confirmed by Gods word. If therefore it shall appear, that you have gainsaid
the Apostles words and meanings: who will believe you for an orthodoxall
teacher? you write in the most perrillous times. When therefore, the Papists
shall see your deceiptfull handling of Gods word, they will rejoice at it.
Lastly, you write against an opinion embraced in the Church of England
always, and confirmed by our learned synod, and convocation in the Parliament.
Therefore you must assure your self, that you cannot carry this cause away
without weighty, and irrefragable reasons. I received also the last of
November, an answer in Latin. I will at successiue hours frame by Gods
grace, an answer to that. In the mean season, you may peruse this, and see by
this reply, what good success you may promise your self, and your friends
in the other. Thus desiring God to direct this conference, and al other our
labors to his glory, I end.

West bury at my house, the last of December. 1590. Yours in the Lord, Adam
Hill.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP-FVL, ADAM HILL DOCTOR OF DIVINITY, Vicar of Westburie,
person of Goosage, Prebend and subchanter of the Cathedral Church of our
Lady, in the City of nevve Sarum.
IN May before the Month of August, you speak of going home to visit my
natural friends, I left my reply to your sermon to be delivered you. But it
was kept back upon the considerations, which I have said in my Epistle to
the Reader. What other Copy you received in August, I cannot tell: But well I am
assured I sent you none. Howsoever you came by that copy, plain dealing would
have answered that which I sent you my self* you tell me, that going up to
London, you receued an answer to your Sermon, and pervsing it at your return,
you found it an endeavoure to answer some piece of it: and within few lines
you will me to set down al as you do. Your simile is unfit, for you set not
down all, that you had of me. Neither could I set down all your Sermon: for I
had but the notes of it: and them also written with your own hand so
confusedly, that it would have troubled your self, to tell which was the
beginning* middle, or end. Therefore this quarrel, that I did not set down
all, seeing I had not all, is very unreasonable. As for your notes I answered
them all, saving two arguments, which being forced to seek hee^e one, and there
an other, I missed in that confused Chaos of non been i^^ctarum discordia
semina verum. If you had been disposed to speak properly, they were too small
a qui^let, to make all the rest be called, but a piece of your Sermon. Bu^ your
wariness here is notable. Least some might think too well of my reply: you
will not vouchsafe it the name of an answer: but an indeavoure to answer some
piece of your Sermon. Such it ^eavours as this, may well blind the simple: but
amongst the wise will never purchase much credit to your cause. But you would
have let all alone you say, if the speeches of the people disgracing your
ability had not set you a work: my desire was either to win you to us, or
reasons from you to draw me to you. But now it appears that your own
estimation was more precious in your eyes, than the defense of the truth, or
winning men from errors. This will be a foull blot in the face of a Doctor:
except you wash it with a bale of truth and plain dealing, confessing that I
was in no error at all. But then you say you resolved to defend your self, or
else to recant. I thought you had been resolute in Chippinhames pulpit six
months before, if you were not as resolute then as now, I will not take your
word for shoe-buckles: for I had then more witnesses to your word, than I have
now to your hand. But me thinks it is strange, that I oppugning David, Esaias,
Ezechiell, Peter, Paul, and Christ himself, could have escaped the check of
your pen, if it had not been to maintain your own credit amongst the people.
It is without doubt, that you loved that most, that moved you most. If you were
not as jelous of their maintenance as your own estimation you were not so sure
a friend, as many supposed. But it is hard for me you say, to kick against the
prick. It were so if I did so. but look you M. Doctor to your own heels: for
my part I have the testimony of a good conscience. No other cause, than the
simple love of the truth set me on work. I levelled not at preferment. I
commended not my work to great persons. I published not my book till you
opened the gate: and I could do no less than follow. As for Christ and his
Apostles I hope to make it clear in all indifferent ears, that I have not
opposed one syllable against them: And that you pull my words, as Cacus did
Hercules his Kein into what stinking dens, it pleseth your wrangling brain
to devise. I know both what, when, and where I write. I write of an Article of
our faith, in which I am so much more earnest, as the Children of God should be
more diligent to understand their faith aright. As for these dangerous times it
is you that neglect them. It is you, that devide the coat of Christ: it is you
that handle the Scriptures guilefully: it is you, that publish private things
to make the Papists sport, and trouble the Church. That which diverse learned
Papists affirm the Scriptures, never said you put them to the rack to make
them confess. Scotus says, that the discense of Christ into hell cannot be
proved by Scriptures. And radius one of the learnest that was in the counsel
of Trent, says it, and proves it. Hesselius another of the same counsel
construeth the place of Peter against you. To him accords Th^mas Aquinas. and
Dionysius Carthusianus agrees with Andradius. It were easy to quote many: If
the seeking of them were not more laborious, than their testimonies will be
effectual in this cause. I bring only these to set their ingenuitie against
your partiality. As for the Church of England, it has not always fostered
your opinion, as you untruly avouch. The times of popery, we yield you:
because you agree in the name, and the places be but several rooms of one
dungeon. Neither can we deny you the times of King Edward, which creeping but
out of the shelles of Popery, had not shaken of the buddes of your error,
about that time the greatest part of your favorities lived: and in that time
your opinion (for want of better) was confirmed by convocation. But anno 1564.
in the beginning of her Majesty's reign, in a convocation assembled to
reestablish the Acts of King Edward, which Queen Mary had taken away, that
article only was reformed, and your opinion defaced, no more being left, but
the naked article of the belief in words equivalent. whereupon I build this
reason. No counsel nor convocation censuring a former takes that away, Synod.
Ed.
which it self allows. But this convocation censuring the convocation of
King Edward, Quemadmodum Christus pro nobis mortuus est, and sepultus: ita est
etiam credendus ad inferos descendisse. Nam corpus vsque ad resurrectione^ in
sepulchro iacuit: spiritus ab illo emissus cum spiritibus, qui in carcere, sieve
in inferno detinebantur fuit, illisque predicauit queadmodum testatur Petri
locus.
has taken your opinion away. Ergo, this convocation allowed not your opinion.
But contrariwise, the same Church of England has made our opinion her own, by
publishing by her authority, Thomas Rogers exposition of these Articles,
wherein he agrees with us: and countenansing it with her own name, in titeling
it the English Creed. She has also printed and allowed by her authority many
books against you. The Geneva Bible, I know not how many times: The new
Testament with Beza and Villerius his notes: Fulkes answer to the Remishe
Testament: Baro his Lectures upon Jonas: Synod. Eliz. principium tantum
retinuit. Quemadmodum Christus pro nobis mortuus est, and sepultus: ita est
etiam credendus ad inferos descendisse.
Calvin's Institutions at large, and abridged: Northbrooks Confession: Fulk
against Gregory Martine, and the Rhemists: Whitaker against Campion and
Duraeus: Vrsinus his Catechism: Bastingius his Catechism: Andrewe Willets
vewe of Popery, with many others: Some dedicated to the Queen her self, Some
to my Lord Treasurer, some to my lord of Huntington, some to my lord of
Leister, some to my lord of Bedford, some to my lord of Warwick, some to one,
some to another, all allowed, and all against you, Lastly our opinion has been
taught in the Pulpits, defended in Schools, allowed in the Universities, so
that one Doctor Husse, his grace was denied in Cambridge above 20. years ago
for your opinion: and y^^r own had been denied you within this three years in
Oxford, if you had not promised more than you meant to perform. Whatsoever
other men has done, or spoken for their own: you are the first that ever I
heard of, that oppugned ours in the Church of England: saving D. Husse in
Leister. Against whom the Bishop of that Diocese did oppose himself,
procuring from Cambridge their Reader, countenanced with the authority of
their convocation, to confute that opinion, which the english name of hell did
make more popular, and probable to the ignorant, by the countenance of that
famous, and worthy University. Thus men may see how truly you challenge the
Church of England, to have allowed your opinion always* your always comes
short of all that time, which you desired most to take your part: for men of
your livery, if you may get authority on your side, count your self otherways
sufficiently armed. As for me, If I handle the scriptures deceitfully: let not
only the Papists laugh at me: but let al Christians spit at me. if I reform
it not, when I am convicted. How strong my reasons are, to carry this cause
clear through the midst of the adversaries of it: I hope the sequel will
prove: and I refer it to the advised judgment of the indifferent Reader: I
cannot tell how to frame irrefragable reasons to you. There was a Prophecy (as
Curtius records) that he who could undo the knottes of Gordius his chariot,
should be Emperor of Asia. Alexander intending that conquest, came to the
temple where those knottes were kept, to see, if he could open them. But they
being insoluble by man's reason, he tore all assunder with his sword. So you
serve my arguments, be they never so irrefragable: when you cannot open them
with reason: you tear them all assunder with violence. As for my latin
answer, which I indeed did send you, and you in truth should have answered
me, and not this wandering vagabound: you have had it these three years and
more, wherein were successiue hours enough to answer two sheets of Paper: if
you have not bin more busy about greater matters, than you would have the
world to know. In the mean time I have perused this, and put my friends in
hope of good success in the other: when your long leisure will serve you to
answer it. Thus beseeching God to give us all one heart and one mind, I end.

Yours in the Lord, Alexander Hume.

THE STATE OF THIS QVESTION briefly set down, for the capacity of such as are
not able to carry the drift of all this discourse before them.
THe hebrevve word SHEOL, which the Greeks call hades, the latins infernus,
and we hell, has three significations in the scriptures.

First and properly it signifies the grave, or common condition of all the
dead, expressed in the greek hades by the privation of light or life.

Secondly, the place of torments, appointed for the punishment of the
wicked: for this the hebrevve word is least, and our inglish word most
usual, or rather as it is commonly taken, hardly signifies any thing else.

Thirdly, the torments of hell, which by a Metonymicall hyperbole for
amplifications sake, is many times attributed to the sorrovves of this life.
These things are known to all the learned. And this D. confesses them sect. 4.
See also sect. 8. sect. 9. and sect. 14.

Now, where our belief has that Christ descended into hell: the question
is which of these three significations does best fit that article of our
faith: We say, that seeing every article of our faith must have an undoubted
sense confirmed by the Scriptures, it must needs signify the hellish torments
that he suffered for our redemption, or the darkness of death, which
svvallovved him the three days that he was in the grave. That these thingt
are true, and may be the true sense of that article, our adversaries cannot
deny. Yet not contented heerevvith, they vvil sink deeper, and send Christ's
soul to the damned pit of hell, neither to suffer himself, nor to help (...)
that suffered there. Now, because this is a thing that no man can avouch upon
his own knowledge, but God himself: We refuse to take their words without
his vvarrant. Wherefore to mend this crook, they lay three te^ ^s of Scripture
in the press. The first is out of the 16. Psalm: the second is out of the 3.
chap. of the 1. Pet. the last and weakest, out of the 4. to the Ephesians. But
these proofs being doubtful, that is, implying other plainer senses We deny
them to be sufficient to make this doubtful assertion, an undoubted article of
our faith. Our reason is, no doubtful proofs can make a doubtful assertion
an undoubted article of our faith: But these proofs be doubtful. Ergo, these
proofs cannot make this doubtful assertion, an undoubted article of our
faith. That these profes be doubtful, the words, drifts, and circumstances,
offering other senses both plainer, and better fitting the places, and
agreeable to the rest of the Scriptures, will drive any reasonable head to
confess. Neither does diverse learned Papists deny it. But this adversary
more impudent then they, blusheth not like a vvyer dravver, to pull these
Scriptures through narrovve holes, to make them small enough, to tie our faith
to his fantasy. Moreover, with like violence, he is forced to break down
two other vvalls that stands in his way. The one is in the 23 of Luke, ver.
46. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit* and the other in the 43. ver of
the same cap. spoken to the thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
By which two places it is clear, that Christ's soul was then in heaven, and
not in Hell. Upon the true sense of these places rises this disputation, to
which I refer the discreet and indifferent Reader, beseeching them to read
with a single eye, and judge with an upright heart. Only I will lance an
impostume of absurdities, which breeding in the bowels of this opinion, like
the worm that breeds in the nut, has putrified all the probability of it,
and made all men of indifferent judgment in this age to cast it under the
board amongst the shreddes.

First, that Christ went down to Hell to triumph, contrary to the nature of
Hell, which yields nothing but horror and torments. And contrary to the
nature of a triumph, which was usually solemnized amongst them, to whom the
joy of the victory did appertain

Secondly, that Christ's soul did preach in Hell, contrary to the nature of a
soul, that cannot preach: and the condition of those hearers, who could reap
no profit of his sermon having their jugement already.

Thirdly, that he did preach neither to convert the hearers, nor to condemn
them for the contempt of his word: but to aggrauate their sorrows. Contrary
to the office of Christ, which was to offer mercy to all his hearers.

Fourthlie, that Christ's soul did preach in Hell reallie, not vocallie: that is,
did preach in Hell and say nothing: contrary to the nature of the word preach,
which never man did, without voice and words.

Fiftlie, that Christ meaning to go to Hell, (as they say) did notwithstanding
commend his soul into the hands of God. Contrary to the true and common use
of these words used by Stephan, Act. 7. and all other godly men, that crave to
be i^ heaven.

Sixtlie, that his soul was in Hell with^^t torments, contrary to the name
and nature of Hell, which presents to the care and heart, nothing but heinous
and hideous torments.

Seventhlie, that in these words (Thou shall be with me in Paradise) Christ
spoke only of his Godhead. Contrary to the nature of the pronoune ( me)
which does always note the whole person that speaks.

Eightlie, that having conquered Hell upon the cross: It was needful for him
notwithstanding to go to hell. Contrary to the sufficiency of Christ's
sacrifice, who had paid a full ransom for our sins before, and left nothing
behind to be done in Hell. These 8. cankers are festered in the marrowe of
this absurd opinion, for all which, all the Scriptures has not one syllable,
and therefore it must be a monster, that has bred so many monsters.

I Had answered Master Doctors Sermon (as he calls it) but to avoid
prolixitie, and because this is but a repetition of his reasons there, I have
left it out, and have sent him a brief sum thereof, to show him that there
is nothing there, better then here: only in the end of it, he calls al his
adversaries Boys, schismatics, fantastical spirits, rash without study,
and presumptuous without fear of God. If Calvin be a boy, if Beza be a boy, if
Marlarot be a boy, if Vrsinus be a boy, if Bastingius be a boy, if Ramus be a
boy, if Olevian be a boy, if Iunius be a boy, if Tremelius be a boy, if Baro be
a boy, if Brensius be a boy, if Heresbathius be a boy, if Sohnius be a boy, if
Bullinger be a boy, if Bucer be a boy, if Danaeus be a boy, if Sadel be a boy,
if Viret be a boy, if Sarcerius be a boy, if Suinglius be a boy, if Dering be a
boy, if Perkins be a boy, if Rogers be a boy, if Fulk be a boy, if Willet be a
boy, if Reynolds be a boy, if Whitaker be a boy if Hoper bishop of Gloucester be
a boy, if Reynald Peacock, Bishop of Chester in the time of Henry the sixth be
a boy: I will stand to it, that this D. is not worthy to wait on many boys,
and bear their books to the School, of their diligence, of their learning, of
their discretion, of their integrity, of their consta^cie, of their humility,
though his mouth run over in general, I hope he will blush to touch any of
them in particular. This I have set down to show thee gentle Reader, that his
cause wants not more and greater adversaries, then he supposes it to have
f^vourers.

THE FIRST SECTION OF HVME his Letter.
IT fell out upon some occasions, that I was with a friend not far from
Chippenham, the day before you preached there. As I was preparing to depart,
word came to my friend that you had certified M. Chalfont of your intent the
day following, to defend that which he had spoken against M. Wisdom, that
day sennight before, concerning the descension of Christ into hell: where fore
my friend wrought me to stay, to hear what could be said for a matter, that
both he and I did think to have no great probability. I did so, and it
repents me not, for there I heard something, which otherwise perhaps would
never have entered in my barren brain. and I was strengthened in the truth,
proving that which is commonly said, that with and eloquence is not able to
shake it. Wherefore, I have thought it not amiss to write these few lines unto
you, either to win you to us, or to win some better reason from you, to bring
me to you. I am not married to mine own opinion, but if any man can bring me
better proofe^, I am content to yield. I hope the same of you, for you told me
so in the pulpit, where the tongue should wait upon the heart, and speak his
affections: and it is the duty of all men, especially of ministers, to employ
their labors to know the truth, and not contentiously to defend their own
conceits, which many times deceiues even the wisest. As yet your reasous have
confirmed rather then converted me.

HILL his reply.
IN the entrance of your answer, you have told two untruths upon untrue
reports. The on, that I certified M. Chalfont of mine intent, which is not so:
for neither by messenger nor letter, did I ever send to M. Chalfont. The other
is, where you avouch that I would make an apology of. M. Chalfonlts sayings
against M. Wisdom, which God knows was never my meaning: for first, I never
knew what he had fayd in that controversy, til the morning I preached.
Secondly, I did always love and honor M. Wisdom, but M. Chalfont, til that
morning I was not acquainted with all. Thirdly, hearing a strife revived of that
matter, which was not long before quieted in Sarum by the last Bishop, now
Archbishop of York, and being requested to deliver my judgment in the matter,
not by M. Chalfont, but by one Richard Woodlands, to set unity betwixt my
brethren, and not to war against M. Wisdom: In the fear of God, and not
to please you or your friend, or any other man, I laid down my judgment, and
gave up my Sermon in writing to M. Wisdom, craving an answer to the whole,
and not to some part of it. Now, you have made an answer to some, how truly it
shall appear: and other things you have left unanswered, for what cause, let
the reader judge. In the end, you charge me with wit, which is small, with
eloquence, which is none, and with my promise, which I will keep most
willingly, hoping that you will keep youres.

THese heinous accusations of untruths might have been left; saving that you
would have the world to think that I am a common liar. To this end you cry
out almost in every sect. impudent and monstrous lies. It is in deed, a point
of Rhethorike, but you never learned it in Christ's school, to build the
credit of your cause (if it be evil) on the discredit of your adversary.
But they which are acquainted with my life, I hope will justify me of this
crime: and they that know me not, need no better argument of my innocence,
then your accusations, and the small occasions, that you take against me. For,
if the report that came to my friend, was not true; I hope it was no great
fault of mine: nor greater fault in you, to have certified M. Chalfont of your
purpose, then to have performed it. If I would sit down to audite, and take
counters in hand to lay your slippes, but half so diligently; as you are
busy upon every corner of occasions, to pull my words into suspicion of
untruths: I could note in this praeface four scapes, not mistaken upon
untrue reports (as you charge me) but misreported by your self, that would
scarce abide a just trial of honest dealing. First, that hearing over night of
that controversy so much in men's mouths; you knew not M. Chalfonts part till
the morning, you preached there; may be true, but is not very likely.
Secondly, that you meant not to defend M. Chalfonts opinion, will hardly be
believed, except you can persuade the audience, that you meant one thing, and
did an other. Thirdly, that you gave up your sermon to M. Wisdom in wriring.
M. Wisdom can tell that it is not true. He had nothing of you, but a few
scribled and disordered notes. The last is cunninger, that I answered not the
whole, but some part of your sermon. That which escaped without answer, was so
small a part, that the rest might well have been called the whole, if you had
not been disposed to abuse the simplicity of your reader. That the matter then
in controversy was stayed before in Sarum by the Bishop, was true: but in such
sort, that if you had not been more busy, then your commission: it might have
stand more with your credit, to have let Chippenham alone. For you were there
injoined by the Bish. and two Justices of the peace, to confess that M. Connam
his opinion (who was then your adversary) was pia and vera sente^tia. Whether
you came to make peace amongst your brethren, A true and godly opinion.
and not to war against M. Wisdom, I refer it to the audience:
peacemakers use not to take parts. Your peace did so little please M. Wisdom
(for as much as you honor him) that being denied the pulpit at Chippenham, by
Chalfont, contrary to the order, he was driven to take Cosham church, not far
distant, to defend the truth against you, and your mate; which thing he
performed with great meekness and humility after his manner, to the comfort
of all that heard him, and the aedifying of them, that were desirous to know
the truth. These things, if I were disposed to go to Tennis with you, would
sound more lie like, then all the lies, you have flung at me. But you are a
Doctor, and that were vn-manerlie. Yet (saving your worship) you keep not so
good a watch through this work, as it becums such a lie-catcher. Wherefore to
conclude: where you say, that I accuse you of wit, and eloquence: only deny
the action, and I will let fall my su^e. But as for your promise, I will never
let go my hold, because I hope you will prove a man of your word.

HVME his 2. Sect.
Now to come to the matter, I see no cause why you should think better of
Augnstine and Jerome, then of Calvin and Beza, for they were all but men, and
they which now are old, were sometimes new. They had no better warrant of Gods
spirit then these: and errors in those days were so thick sown, that there
grew darnell in the best fields, even of them whom now we most admire. I
speak not this to descredit the Fathers, but to prove that they were no Gods.
They were no dout, his good instruments, to maintain his truth against his
enemies, but they were but me^: you can not deny, but the best of them had his
steynes. This no doubt, was the forepurposed work of gods infinite wisdom,
that seeing these infirmities, our fond age might not set their writings in the
place of his eternal word, whereof one jot shall not pass, though heaven and
earth perish.

HILL his reply. The Paralogismes in the D. reply.

My arguments betwise two, if you rekon right.
TWo arguments you make But not one against Aug. nor Jerome.
against Augustine and Jerome. The one is, they had errors, These co^clusions
you never found in my papers.
and therefore their interpretation not to be admitted. The other is, the time
wherein they lived was corrupt, and for These co^clusions you never found in
my papers.
that cause they are not to be alleged in a controversy of Divinity. The same
make what you will, my argument is not against new nor old.
argument, I make against all new writers. This argument is not like mine.
All new writers have errors, and they live in a most corrupt time, wherein (as
Christ says) shall be many falls prophets, and many falls Christ's, to deceive
the very elect if it were posible, Math. 24. 24. This conclusion will no^ foll^w
in my form.
Therefore, because men are vain, and the time corrupt, we must believe no man.
The fallacy of your argument is not ab accidente, but a non causa pro causa.
You argue ab accidente ad subiectu^ This is wrong collected the reason is not
from error to Augustine and Jerome.
For Augustine and Jerome to err, it is an accident, To be a Father, is an
accident it^self, and has no substance
but the substance of all Fathers is, This is not the substance, but the proper
fact of Fathers
to beget men in the word of truth, 1. Cor. 4. 15. And for this cause,
Augustine himself wills us not to believe him, unless he bring the word of
God. Truly (says Augustine) That is it that I would have.
I do desire not only a godly reader, but a free corrector in all my
writings, especially, in those things where there is great doubt: these places
would help me well if need required. If my cause had wa^ted proof, I would
have bestowed a see on you.
but as I will not have him to be given unto me, so, I will not have him to be
given to himself: let him not love me more then the Catholic faith. As I say
to him, believe not my sayings as Canonical scriptures, but believe steadfastly,
when thou have found that which thou beleuedst not, but believe not firmly, that
which thou have not seen out of Gods word. So I say to him, do not correct my
writings by thine own opinion, or of contention, but by the word of God, and
by the reason thereof uncontrollable. these places would help me well if need
required. If my cause had wa^ted proof, I would have bestowed a see on you.
And against Cresconius the Grammarian he thus writes, lib. 2. cap. 32. I am
not moved with the authority of this Epistle. but I consider the^ out of the
Canonical books, and if they agree with the word of God, I receive them with
praise, if they disagre, I refuse them with peace. The like he has Epist. 3.
and Epist. 112. these places would help me well if need required. If my cause
had wa^ted proof, I would have bestowed a see on you.
And Jerome ad Theoph. is of the same judgment. I know that I esteem otherwise
the Apostles, and otherwise other interpreters: these men speak truth always,
these men in some things do err sometime. Then this makes for me, that they
were* but men.
These Fathers themselves, confess themselves to be but me^, and will us to
believe the^ no farther the^ they agree with Gods word. I see no reason in that.
Therefore, they building upon Christ, as well as your new, ought to be believed
rather in this point then they: In these three places you beg the question.
For what they wrote in this controversy, the same did all other godly
Interpreters both Greek and Latin, having a good warrant from Gods word. In
these three places you beg the question.
But those of your side, write contrary to Gods word, to the ancient Fathers,
yea and contrary to the new Fathers, namly, Luther, Selueccer, Chytraeus,
Pomeran, Aepinus, Lucas, Lossius, Alesius, Aretius, Peter Martyr, M. Fox, and
M. Nowel. In these three places you beg the question.
Therefore, because Augustine and Jerome agree both with the old and new
writers, and especially, with the word of God, I like better of them; teaching
the affirmative, then of any other We hold the affirmative, that he descended
in to hell, as well as you.
laboring to prove the negative. To end This end is impertinet to this body.
If it were not to show the reader, how finely you can distinguish the voice of
the Fathers. But seeing in their voice, is so much dross: bring me I pray you,
no voice but Gods, wherein is nothing but pure metal.
therefore, you must note this, that all sayings of the Fathers, either they
are demonstratiue out of the scriptures, and then they are the voice of God: or
else probable, and these are the voice of man, or else false, and then they are
the voice of the Serpent.

HVME his reioynder to the 2. sect.
YOu make my arg^ments as pleases you. If we had no better then you would
affoorde us, we were unworthy of credit, and worthy of your reproaches.
First, you alter the conclusion. I never thought, said, or wrote, that their
interpretations are not to be admitted, nor their sayings alleged in a
controversy of Divinity. Neither write I against the^, except it be a
discredit to them, that other men be thought off, as well as they. My
conclusion was, that their names brought no more credit to your cause, then
Calvine and Beza did bring ours. My arguments were twice so many, as you make
them. 1. That they were all but men. 2. That they who now are old, were
sometimes new. 3. That they had no better warrant of Gods Spirit. 4. That
errors grew as thick in their times as in ours. Seeing then all men are
frail, and old errors are as bad as new, and new truths as good as old:
seeing the spirit of truth was then no stronger, nor the spirit of error
weaker: all things in this comparison you see are aequall, and my argument
holds for any thing that you have said. You take the bit in your teeth, and
run out of the way with an argument ab accidente. Therefore, fare-you-well;
that is not my way. You cite Augustine and Jerome only, to make up number.
Their confession of their own frailty, is against you. If my arguments had
not been so true before, that no witnesses can make them truer, this would
have helped me well. Men may see, that you have either a marvelous ill cause,
or great stoare of small judgment, that can take so much pains to bring
witness into the court, to condemn your self. And here now, seeing your
own men do counsel me to trust no man without the word: I conjure you to
trouble me no more with your great musters, of Luther, Selneccer, Chytreus,
Pomeranus, etc. If I would run that course, we should set all the learned of the
world together by the ears, You will bear me down (I confess) with number.
For all the Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Abbotts, Bishops, Cardinals and Popes,
would swaie to your side. If I were not sure of God and his truth, I would
never draw sword, nor give stroke in the cause.

HVME sect. 3.
THeir weakness is no where more apparent, then in this matter that we have now
in hand: Ier. 4. Ephesians.
for ^erom ioineth his opinion herein, with a palpable error, that Christ
descended to deliver the Fathers, which to that day had bin in prison.
Augustine is not far behind him, August ad Clodium.
who though he confesses that the Fathers were in joy with Abraham and
Lazarus, yet after some long disputation, whether he did deliver all or some,
and why these more then those; at length he concludes, that he did deliver
whom he him self thought good. For, after that they had once conceaved that
his soul descended into a local hell. There followed (which could not choose)
many inconveniences. There was non of them dreamed that which you avouch, that
he descended into hell, there to triumph or bind the devils, or to augment
their sorrows; by showing them from what grace they had fallen.

HILL his reply.
You write, The paralogismes of this sect
that Jerome and Augustine did hold a palpable error, that is, that Christ
descended to deliver the Fathers. I hope you will not deny, But I will deny,
and so will you, that he went to hell to deliver the^
but the fathers have their deliverance by Christ from hell This is nor the
question.
Therefore by the merits and works of Christ, who I am sure conquered both death
and hell. Therefore where you prove that Augustine and Jerome do err, I will
leave them as I said before, but where in they spoke the truth, I will praise
God for them. (...). This is shufled on here, as Tailers used hair in old
time to stuff hoses.
But let us see how many ways the scripture may be corrupted, that is, by
adding, altering, and diminishing. Eve in the third Chap. of Genesis taught all
her children so to do: for in the 3. verse thus she says, But of the fruit
of the tree, which is in the midst of the garden, God has said, ye shall not
eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, least ye dye. First she changes the word
of God, for God faith. Genesis 2. 17. of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
thou shall not eat. Those words (of the tree of knowledge of good and evil)
she changes, and puts in for them (in the miust of the garden.) Farther God
said, they should not eat of it, she added (that they might not touch it.) God
said they should surely dye, Eve said (least we dye) here she diminished the
scriptures. If then the Fathers have added to the scriptures, that the Fathers
were fet out of hell, there I leave them, We may as well say, that you change
grave into hell Do not you confess in the next sect. that the original does
signify the one, as well as the other? is this changing? Fie D. deal
honestly.
and if you change hell in to grave, as you do in the 16. psalm, and Act. 2. I
will leave you also: hold there M. D. remember that hereafter I shall find time
to put you in mind of this again
for I stand not upon men's sayings, but upon the word of God. You mistake me
blindlie, read again.
But where you boldly affirm, that not I spoke only of Aug. and Ier. read
again
one of the Fathers have deemed that Though I might stand to this, because they
send Christ to hell, wherein the Fathers were detained, and you to the place of
the damned, yet this is not the thing that I said. I only said neither
August. nor Jerome, did send Christ to hell on your erand, to triumph there and
cut-face those miserable wretches.
which I say, you show your self, either to be This malice and your hear
grew both in one ground.
malicious in hiding the truth, or else so ignorant, that you have not read the
Fathers: for diverse, both old and new are of my judgment. Here Ambrose faith
not that which I deny.
Ambrose on the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians, thus writes. Christ therefore
coming down from heaven into the earth, was borne a man, afterward he died,
and descended into Let hell be here taken for the condition of death, and this
place may have a favorable construction.
Hell, from whence rising the third day, he showed death vanquished to every
creature. This place of Augustine says it not.
Augustine de tempore, In his 137. sermon, and in his third sermon of the
resurrection thus says: Hell did restore him as a conqueror, and the heavens
did receive him as a triumpher. And in his second sermon, he says thus:
Behold, you have hard what our defender, the God of vengeance is said to have
done freely. For after he was exalted, that is, was hanged of the Jews on the
cross, that I may touch these things briefly, as soon as he had given up
the ghost, the soul united to the Divinity, descended into the bottom of hell:
and when he had touched the band of darkness, as a fearful and glorious
spoyler, the wicked and hellish Legions were affrayde, and trembling, began to
enquire, saying, Who is this dreadful and glorious man? Eusebius writing of the
resurrection of our savior, has the like: We must know, that in the self
same hour wherein our Savior bowing his head gave up the ghost, his body
being left in the grave, his foul with the Divinity went down to triumph over
Hell. This place of Fulgentius says it not.
Fulgentius writing to King Thtasymund, in his third book and eight Chapter,
not dreaming, but well advised, thus writes: The true humanity of the son of
God, neither was wholye in the grave, nor wholly in hell, but in the Sepulcher,
he lay dead, according to his true flesh, but in his Soul descended into
Hell. In his soul he returned to the flesh which lay in the Sepulcher, but in
respect of the Divinity, which neither is holden in place, nor limited by
bond, he was wholly in the grave with his flesh, and wholly with his Soul in
Hell, and by this means was fully enery where Christ, because God was not
separated from the humanity which he had assumpted, which was both with his
Soul in Hell; that from Hell, his Soul might return a Conqueresse, and was
with his flesh, that by reason of his speedy resurrection, it might not be
corrupted. I have here alleged the old, which disprove your assertion, for
all these accord with me. Now, to these will I add also the judgments of
some new Writers. If you have no more in Mollerus for you then this he is
neither for your hell, nor your triumph.
Mollerus a very learned Minister of Germany on the 16. Psalm thus teaches:
Christ would show his victory in a certain sort over the Devils, to strike
perpetual terrors in to them, and to take away from us the fear of their
tyra^nie. To this agrees Musculus on the sixty and eight Psalm. This GOD,
which was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, first descended into
the Before you hew this block to fit your hand, you must first persuade us,
that the lowermost parts of the earth, can be nothing else but hell.
lowest parts of the earth, then heeled captivity captive; and not only we
are delivered from the captivity of Satan, sin, and damnation, but al so
triumphing over them as Tyrants, he has ascended above all heavens, to fulfill
all things. The same learned Fathers, interpreting the second Chapter of the
Colossians, thus has: There are some that be persuaded it is an absurdity,
if it be said, that Christ did triumph over the principalities and powers, but
if all chese things be attributed to God the Father, that he did them with
Christ, and in Christ, we may truly read here, triumphing over them What
will you gain, and that begra^ted
in his own person. In like sort, does Hemingius expound this place in the
second Chapter of the Colossians: As by his death he conflicted with the Devil
on the Cross, so by his glorious descending into Hell, Resurrection, and
Ascension, he triumphed, as it is Ephesians. 4. leaving his Cross lift up as a
monument of his victory. So does M. Fox M. Fox has nothing in all that work
to help you: but only the same picture in the beginning of his book, which
your printer has set before yours: Therefore you should quote the printer,
you do M. Fox wrong.
understand this place, in a book which he has written, entitled, Christus
triumphans. Therefore in this behalf, you have told a manifest You charg me
untruely with untruths therefore take ye the pig that bred the pig.
untruth; wherefore, I shall think you will scarce have care to set forth the
truth of God, when you will presumptuously utter such an untruth, which may be
reproved, by so many and honorable witnesses. Farther, here you leave out at
your pleasure, two other ends of Christ desce^ding into Hell, which I taught in
my Sermon: the one is, (...) the descending into Hell, cannot manifest his
death. Obscurius non illustrat obscurum.
the manifestation of his death, the other is, our That he did by his death,
not by his descending into hell.
deliverance from Hell. Plain dealing ought to be in this case, and therefore,
I exspect it at your hands.

HVME his reyoinder.
If I will let you alone, you will never afforde me a good argument, I see, I
must needs frame them my self. Augustine and Jerome erring, are not to be
praeferred to Calvine and Beza teaching a truth. But Augustine and Jerome do
err in this controversy: Ergo, in this controversy, they are not to be
praeferred to Calvine and Beza. That Calvine and Beza does teach in this point
the truth, you can not deny. You will say (perhapps) that it is not the true
meaning of the article. That is the question. But I hope you will not deny, but
the thing it self is true. Now Augustine and Jerome, do err in the very thing
it self. Here you fumble about an excuse, and would feign say something. But
you had better say nothing, then so little to the purpose. You think that no
man will deny, but that the fathers had their delivery from Hell by Christ,
so think I too. But what helps that, these men's error? The one held, that
Christ went to Hell to deliver the Fathers: the other, to deliver whom he
himself thought good. Will your rotten Vernish, hyde this blemish? You tell me
in the next sect. that it does little or nothing pertain to this question.
The question is about the descending of Christ into hell: and this they make
the final end of that action. Now, if you can prove, that the final end has
no pertina^ce to the thing destinated to it, though it be but a question of
art, I will acknowledge you to be a better D. then you proved your self in
Oxon. and a better artist, then ever I suspected you to be: though I was
reasonably well persuaded of your skill, before you shamed your self. And yet
I would have you to mark (if you can spare so much time, as to mark any
thing against your self) that this is a very material point in this question.
For this final end, does separate these men's opinion, and yours. They send
Christ to hell to deliver the Fathers, Epist. ad Aglasiam quest. 1. tom. 3.
Epist. It is a wicked thing to say, that Christ descended into hell, or place
of the damned.
and you send him to the hell of the damned, where the Fathers never were. They
are so far from you, that Jerome says, it is impium dicere Christum
descendisse ad inferos, and locum damnatorum. You spend the most of this
section, to prove me a liar: If you could, you might discredit me, but not
the cause. But I will crack this nut on yonr own crown. Frst, I said not,
that none of the Fathers denied that which you say. I only said, that neither
Augustine nor Jerome, did send Christ to hell to triumph. Secondly, if I had
said so, I had said truly. For you send Christ to the hell of the damned, and
that, none of them ever deemed. Therefore in this behalf, (to use your own
words) you have told a manifest untruth of me. You father that on me, which
I never said: and accuse me for saying that, which I might well avouche. And
here I must put you in mind, that if you will join with all, or the most of
them that you call forth, to take your part in this quarrel: you must hyre
workmen to repair the ruinous walls of Limbus patrum, that you have shaken
so sore, and shiuered your self heer-to-fore; with the mighty shot of Gods
aeternall word.

HVME sect. 4.
Who so will see how uncertain Augustine was in this point, let him read
his 99. Epistle to Evodius. There shall he find many doubts, and almost
nothing affirmed for certainty: but only, that he doubted not that Christ
went to hell: building on the words of David, cited by Peter. Act. 2. Thou will
not leave my soul in hell, etc. Where I cannot choose, but muse, what should
move so worthy a wit, and such followers of him: seeing it is apparent in the
scripture, that the original word does signify as well the panges, as the place
of hell: to pass by that signification, which the whole church of Christ
confesses to be true: and fall upon that, which having so weak proof, had so
great straites, as Augustines deep wit could not unfold. Who so will see the
name of hell used in the Scriptures, for the sorrows of Hell, let him read
that of 1. Samuel, 2. 6. The Lord kills and makes alive, he casts down to
hell and brings up again: or that of David, Psalm. 30. 3. Thou have brought
my soul out of Hell. Or that of Jonas, 2. 2. I have called to thee out of the
bottom of Hell. And many such like places, where that word cannot signify the
pit of Hell, whence there is no redemption: but the hellish sorrows, which
those Saints of God did suffer in this life. Now seeing this is so, I would fain
know of you good M. Hill, why we may not more safely, take the name of Hell
in that sense, which you cannot deny, then you in that, which the better part
of Christians take to be false. For that Christ descended into the pit of the
damned, the best proof it has is builded on a word of double signification,
which stands at the courtesy of the reader, to take it, as to him shall
seem most probable.

HILL his reply.
Here you confess that Augustine doubts, The Paralogismes in the D. reply.
and yet I say that your tale and his are not one He means a place where the
Fathers were detained till Christ's coming. You mean the place of the damned,
where the fathers never were.
you say, that in the matter in controversy between you and me, he doubts
not: but proves it by the Apostolical and Prophetical testimonies: His own
not yours.
For he wills us to hold it firmissima fide, with a most firm faith, and
says that none but an Infidel will deny it. He doubts whether the fathers
were in Hell, or whether they were converted in hell by Christ's preaching, as
some did affirm untruly, and many such like things, little or Does the final
end pertain nothing, to that which works for it? this is new logic.
nothing appertaining to the question we have in hand. Doubts he not, but
that the Fathers were in hell.
but ad Dardanum he doubts not. Fol. 3. col. 272. Fol. 10. col. 14. 10. Fol.
3. col. 213. and 702. Fol. 788. Fol. 10. 899. 989. In all these places and in
many other, he tells without doubting, No more does he in the place cited by
me.
that he descended into Hell, and the end why. To strilie a terror into the
Devils, and to triumph over them. You dream of mirth: when saw ye me laugh at
that sport.
It pleases you, to make your self merry with S. Augustines infirmity, I pray
God you will with Saint Augustine acknowledge your own, When you have laid
that before me: You shall see how honestly I will demaine my self.
which by and by shall be laid before you. You wonder at S. Augustine, but we
wonder at your In your written copy, it is M. Calvin and me: why you have
turned it, I remit to the reader.
teachers and you: for you confess S. Augustiue to As he that builded a wall of
sand, on a sure rock.
build upon David and Peter, and yet you labor to overthrow this building, how
deceatfullie, it shall now appear. You say, that Hell signifies the sorrows
of Hell, sometime I grant it does. Heerevpon you make this argument: This was
not my argument.
Sometime it signifies the sorrows of Hell, therefore it does so in the 16.
Psalm. I cannot blame you.
I deny your argument, and that you have spoken an untruth, the holy Ghost by
Peter's mouth, shall be a witness against you. Peter and I speak not of one thing,
se the answer.
For you say, it is spoken of the sorrows which Christ suffered upon the
Cross, Peter says, Petersaith not, that the hell wherein he was is spoken of
the resurrection.
it is spoken of the resurrection: and in the resurrection, I am sure Christ
suffered no torments or sorrows. Peter's interpretation is thus. Act. 2. 32.
He knowing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul
That his soul was not left in hell (says Peter) is spoken of his
resurrection.
should not be left in Hell, neither his flesh to see corruption. Foolish D.
how often must I tell you: that his being in hell, is not spoken of his
resurrection.
Now then, here is an answer to your demand: these words are spoken of the
resurrection, a matter of joy and not of torments, for David says in the
person of Christ, Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad: and
moreover also, my flesh shall rest in hope. It Christ He was glad of his
resurrection, not of his discending into hell.
at this time did rejoice, how was he sorrowful? if we were glad, how was he
tormented? if he did rest in hope, how was it true also that he was afflicted
with torments? and here you utter another untruth, that Christ did suffer his
Read again, I said not so. I said that he suffered the whole torments of
hell on the cross. Of all his torments I spoke not.
whole torments on the Cross, which is It is inded as you tak the name of the
cross, and you made it.
most untrue: for he suffered You fight with your own shadow.
some in the Garden, when he said, Math. 26. 38. My soul is heavy unto
death. And some in Caiphas house, and some under Pilat: but all his torments
and sorrows were ended on the Cross I said what I said, and not what you
thought.
which I think, you would have said. Last of al, the words of the text that
comes after, as well as the words going before do prove, that it cannot be
spoken of Christ's sorrows, for they are these. Thou shall show me the path of
life, in thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures
for evermore. Since then David both before and after makes mention of joy and
pleasures for evermore, and as Peter says, these words prove the resurrection
of Christ: Now lay on lode* you have got the victory.
I marvel how you dare to contradict the meaning of the holy ghost. You
speak not now contrary to Augustine, or Ambrose, or Hill, but contrary to
David and Peter themselves: you Or else you do feign, look on my latin D. and
blush for shame.
boast your selves to be the best Christians, but I can hardly beeleue you are
better Christians then was david a Christian?
David and Peter. In the conclusion you utter Can you say no worse.
blasphemy, for SHEOL being taken sometime for the sorrows of hell, and sometime
for the place of hell; you say it stands at the courtesy of the reader, to
take it as to him shall seem probable. Are Gods words to be interpreted
after our Said I so? Is it all one to take a text, as it seems most probable,
and to tak it after our pleasure. when will you deal plainly.
pleasure? This place might have been spared, for any thing that I have said.
Hillary was of a better mind: he said, as God was the author of the
Scriptures, so God must be the I am of the same mind. Herein Hillaries mind
is no better then mine.
interpreter: he opened the wits of the Desciples going to Emaus, so let us
pray, that he may open our wits that we may perfectlye understand the
Scriptures.

HVME his reioynder to the 4. sect.
I said and say again, that Augustines saying in some sort, that which you
say, did run into so many doubts, that he could not tell what to say. But
that he doubted not in the matter between you and me, you take it before it is
granted. For if I take him right (and it will pass your skill to prove that I
take him wrong) he and you, are two. For Augustine holds that he went to a
Hell, whence he was to redeem some: and you hold that he went to the Hell of
the damned, whence he was to redeem none. If this his opinion, be to be hold
firmissima fide: or that none but infidels will doubt of it: Adame Hill, will
either prove another man, then men do think him, or as very an in^^^ell, as
they that deny it. Whether the things that he doubts of, does pertain to
this question, I have showed in the former section. You wonder, seeing Augustine
does build on David and Peter: that my Masters (that is Calvine and Beza in
your written copy) and I do labor to overthrow that building: The Papists
do build their real presence upon Christ's words, This is my body: And must
all men wonder, that has heard the Vicar of Westburie, confute it? Men may set
straw and stubble on a good foundation, which by fire may be consumed, and the
rock not the worse, that it stood upon. After these velitations, you come to
the matter, and grant me that which I crave, and you cannot deny: that the
name of Hell is used in the scriptures for the pains and pangs of Hell.
Whereupon you form my argument, without form, and deny it when you have
done. I will never blame your wit, for denying your own arguments. But deny
this argument, and I will say, that no wall of reason is able to stand against
the violence of your negatiues. If the name of SHEOL, (that is Hell) does
signify in the scriptures, as well the pangs, as the place of Hell: the words
of the 16. Psalm yields you no better warrant, for applying the one to
Christ, then us for applying the other. But you grant that SHEOL does signify
in the Scripture, as well the pangs, as the place of hell. Ergo that place is as
pregnant and strong for us as for you. Hold fast, set to your shoulder M.
Doctor. Your cart will walter, if that spoake break. Now here beholding the
mayor, and the minor, two brazen and vnbreakable walls: you set all your teeth
on the poor conclusion to pull it from them. To take this place of this Psalm
quite from us, you allege the holy Ghost, and Peter: two sufficient
witnesses: because they refer this place to the resurrection, and we to the
passion. Allace (good Doctor) vbiacumen tuum? Do not you see man that though
the negative, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, pertains to the
resurrection? yet the affirmative, that his soul was in hell, may pertain to
his passion? Peter alleges the negative in the Psalm. to prove his
resurrection: and our question is not whether he rose again, or not? but
whether the thing wherein he was, is to be taken for the place, or the panges
of hell. And here I must needs confess, that this consideration has driven
me quite from Calvine, whom in this place I first followed. As for the place
of the belief, I am persuaded, that his sense is most agreeable: being
godly, consonant to the Scriptures, necessary for the perfection of the
creed, not repugnant to the circumstances thereof, and most comfortable to a
Christian conscience. But in this place of this Psalm* now I see that Olevians
opinion is truer, more consonant to the rest of the text, and more plain,
against your drousie dream. Wherefore, now I am persuaded, that SHEOL is here
set for the state of the dead, and my soul for me, as it is Psalm. 3. 2. Many
say to my soul, that is, to me. And Psalm. 7. 2. Least he devour my sonle
like a Lion, that is me. And Psalm. 6. 3. My soul is sore troubled, that is, I
am sore troubled. So the sense must be, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell:
that is, me amongst the dead. That this must needs be the true sense
hereof, I have two reasons. First, that this was the SHEOL wherein Christ's
soul was not left, whence he rose again, as may appear by this allegation
of Peter. But he rose again from the grave and condition of the dead, not
from hell, and condition of the damned. Ergo the SHEOL wherein Christ's soul
was not left, is the condition of the dead, and not the place of the damned.
The answer here, that he rose in soul, and body: the one from hell, and the
other from the grave, will not hold: for the name of resurrection, belongs
only to the body: because nothing ryseth again, but that which death laid
down. So has our belief the resurrection of the body, not the resurrection
of the soul. This was M. Fields argument, which did choke you in the act at
Oxonford: and hang so fast in your teeth, that he could not get it out of
your mouth, much less an answer to it. The other, is builded upon the words
of Peter. Act. 2. 19. Men and brethren, I may boldly speak to you of the
patriarch David, that he is dead and buried, and his sepulcher is amongst us
to this day. In which words, expounding this place of the Psalm: Thou will
not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption: he
labors to prove that David spoke not this of himself, but of the Messiah
that was to come of his loins. His reason is, because David is dead and
buried, and his sepulcher remained amongst them: as if he had said, because
David's soul was left in Hell, and saw corruption. For where the negative is
not true, there the affirmative must be true, by the rule of contradiction.
Whereupon thus I reason. David's soul (that is David himself as I have said
before) was left in the SHEOL wherein Christ's soul should not be left. But
David's soul was left in the state and condition of death: Ergo, it was the
state and condition of death, wherein Christ's soul was not left, by this
place. The same argument may be formed negatiuelie: to take away your
exposition of this place. David's soul was left in the SHEOL whereof it is said
in the Psalm, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, nor suffer thy holy one
to see corruption. But David's soul was not left in the place of the damned:
Ergo, it is not the place of the damned, whereof it is said in the Psalm, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption.
Whereas some allege against this interpretation, that it does violate the
text: taking the soul first for the whole man, and the whole again for the
body. Let them consider, that the condition of the dead, expressed here in
the name of SHEOL, pertains not to the body only, but to the whole man.
Neither were it injury to the text, if it be so taken. For the cup is set for
wine, and wine for the blood of Christ by Paull himself, who uses not to
violate words. These reasons therefore have led me from Calvine, whom though
I reverence (as he is well worthy) as much as any man: yet I am not so married
to him, (howsoever M. Doct. is persuaded otherwise) to follo^e him the breadth
of a hair, beyond truth and reason. He may be deceived, as well as others,
though he has plunged through many deepes, that have devoured many. Now to
return again, and to follow upon your walk: you charge me here (as every
where) with an untruth. To fasten it upon me, you turn my words out of their
figured coat, into their bare skin. For whereas I say, that Christ suffered
the whole torments of hell upon the cross, taking the dross by a Synecdoche
for the whole passion, as he did before me, which said, God forbid, that I
delight in any thing, 1. Cor. 1. 18. Heb. 12. 2. Ephesians. 2. 16.
but in the cross of Christ. The preaching of the cross, is to many
foolishnes. Christ reconciled us to God by his Cross. You tell me, that it is
most untrue: because he did not suffer his whole torments on the wodden Cross,
which Simon the Cyrenian did bear on his back. And to make my words more
odious, you do them more injury. For whereas I say, he suffered the whole
torments of Hell on the Cross, a thing defend-able: you charge me, as saying
he suffered all his torments upon the Cross, (meaning the Cross of wood) a
thing without show of truth. In the end, to fasten another little fault on
me, (it is but blasphemy,) you wring my last words in the fame press. For,
whereas I say, that a word of double signification, stands at the courtesy
of the reader, to be taken as shall seem most probable: meaning that there is
nothing in the word it self, to lead the mind to one signification more then
another: but depends upon the probable circumstances, and drift of the text:
you charge me, as making the Scriptures like a nose of wax, to be set which
way men's fantasy will bend it: a thing as far out of my pen, as out of my
heart: and as far out of my heart as it is out of your heart, to take my words
as I speak them.

HVM^ his 5. Sect.
But that he never was there, he is too curious that will not stand content
with Christ's own testimonies. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.
And in another place, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And here
it is a world to see, how men on your side labor to put out this candel.
First, you say, that this place, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, is
borrowed of David, and must be taken in the same sense, as David used it
before. But you must consider, when we use other men's words, either we cite
them as testimonies, or usurp them by imitation. If we bring them in as
witnesses, we may not alter their testimony; but if we imitate them, we may
without impeachme^t, apply them to what sense best may beseem our purpose. In
this place Christ cites not David's words, to testify of his passion: but
imitateth David, in commending his soul into the hands of God. Where you see,
that no necessity inforceth the same sense. But, be it so, and I think it is
so, and that it makes much against you. For seeing David's soul commended into
the hands of God was never in Hell: it will follow, that Christ's soul
commended to the same protector, was likewise never there: except you will
ascribe less virtue to Christ's prayers, then to David's. But David's soul, say
you, went not straight way into heaven; because he lived many years after.
That he lived any long time after, if it were denied, you will hardly prove
it. But that makes not to the question, when David's soul, came into heaven.
But whether he that commends his soul into the hands of God, does purpose
that it shall descend into hell: prove that, and you shall have the goall. As
for David, he having devoured heaven in hope, doubted not (if he lived any
long time after) to speak that in the praesent time, which he was well assured
would come to pas. And seeing David was a figure of Christ, and spoke many
things in his own person, which aggree better with the person figured, then
with the figure: these words may be understood, Psalm. 22. 16. 18
as the casting of lottes on his garment, and the digging of his hands and
feet. Wherefore, if you will answer this place, to the satisfaction of them
that dissent from you: you must bring proof, that he that means to go to
Hell, does commend his soul into the hands of God: or else you shall never be
able to darken the light of this Sun, with any cloud of Sophistry.

HILL his reply.
INdeed if these words were spoken in the present time, The Paral^gismes in
the D. reply.
some No more but some show I warrant you.
show of truth were in your words, but in the Greek they are in that future
time, is in voice, not in sense.
the future-tence, (...): Father into thy hands I will commit my spirit. That is
not my argument.
Now your argument is this: Christ commended his soul unto his Father, ergo,
We say, he went not to hell at all.
immediately he went not down to hell. When you make the argument, you may put
what you will in the conclusion.
Here is more in your conclusion then is in your premises. You may co^clud,
his soul went to heaven: But not immediately: You beg the question.
for it went to hell as I have proved before, for hell in the 16 Psalm, does
not signify the sorrows of hell, but the place, as I have confirmed already.
Wherefore M. Doctor? Bring this therefore into mood and figure.
Therefore, it is better to translate, I will commend, then I do commend, as
Stephanus o^ this place notes. Paul says, Ephesians. 4. and 10. verse, This text
is handled in the 8 section of purpose: and is therefore here an untimely
fruit.
Now, in that he ascended, what is it, but that he first descended into the
lowest parts of the earth. He that descended, is even the same that ascended
farte above all heavens, to fulfill all things. He is the same per (...).
Now, if the same Christ did first desce^d which did ascend, then This is new
divinity that Christ descended from heaven in soul and body*
he descended in soul and body, as he ascended in soul and body. A fallacy
ab accidente. These must be effected after a wonderful manner. Ergo in soul
and body.
For both these must be effected in a wonderful manner, for they are reckoned
by Solomon amongst the most stupendous works of the Solomon speaks not there
of the son of god, see the text.
Son of God. Pro^. 30. 4. Who has ascended up to heaven, and descended; who
has gathered the wind together in his fyst? who has established all the ends
of the world? By this scripture A wrong inference.
I iuferre, that to ascend and descend, are A fond comparison, without warrant
of the text.
as miraculous works, as to create and govern the world. But if the (...) For
this is understood of his desce^ding into his human state, being the son of
God: a thing as wonderful, as his descending into hell.
soul of Christ did got to heaven immediately, as you affirms contrary to this
text, then the descending of Christ had not been so marvelous as his ascending*
Besides* This thing is true, but where allege I it.
as you after allege, there is but one ascending, but if Christ's It follows
not, see the answer.
soul first went to heaven, and then his body, then were there two ascensions.
But What makes this to the expounding of this place, Father into thy hands etc.
or answering anything that I have said here?
even as Christ was but once borne, and once dyed, and once buried, and once
rose from the dead, and but once comes into judgment: so (as Cyprian says in
his Sermon of the ascending of Christ) Christ did once descend into hell, they
shall see God no more on the cross, nor they that are damned in hell. What
makes this to the expounding of this place, Father into thy hands etc. or
answering anything that I have said here?
Wherefore may it please you to accept the judgment of Athanasius a Greek
Father, and a man persecuted for the truths sake by the Arrians, he in his
Creed says thus, who suffered for our salvation, and descended He says not
the hell of the damned. He speaks of his burial.
into hell. And interpreting the 1. Cor. 3. writes, Satan was envious against
our savior, for he killed him, not knowing that it would make against himself,
for Christ after his cross going down he mean^^h the condition of death. He
vanquished not death in hell.
into hell, has vanquished death. And because he knew no sin be could not be
hold of death. Thus you see, that not only Hill, Augustine and Jerome do say,
that Christ after he had uttered these words (into thy hands I will commend my
spirit) but This conclusion follows not on the cited place.
Athanasius a Greek father, who better then you understood the meaning of these
words. You conclude as stout lie, as if all things were without dout.
Therefore, it is a wonder to see how those of your side labor to extinguish
this everlasting light of Gods truth, and set up a cousuming candle of your
own making. Where you teach, that Christ's Soul did no more descend into hell
then David's did, therein you are deceived, Not by descending to the hell of the
damned. He performed that on the Cross.
For Christ was to deliver us from hell and David also: wherefore if Christ's
soul had not gone to hell* David's must, and mine and yours. I know not whereof
you speak^ if you mean these words whereon we stand, Father into thy, etc. If
they be not true in the figure: the^ err you that give them the same sense in
Christ's mouth
And for this cause as you say, they are true in Christ figured, but not in,
David the figure, and hereupon Peter thus reasons, that they could not be
true in David. For Christ soul was in hell* Who does now piece the text? quo^
the words if you ca^.
and yet not tormented, and his body in the grave, but not corrupted; whereas
David's body saw corruption, and if his soul had gone to hell it had found no
redemption. Therefore, to be in grave, and return without corruption, and to
be in hell and return with He conquered the Devils on the cross, not in H^ll.
conquest of the devil, were two peculiar things to the Son of God, and not
to any other of the sons of men. And here you utter an other No les then
blasphemy.
blasphemy, that Christ's soul had no other where say I so.
prerogative then David's soul, for by the same reasone you may argue, that
Christ's what if I did? excepting innocence it had no other prerogative, that I
know.
body had no greater prerogative then David's body, for as this is false, so is
the other. For as Athanasius says in his book of the incarnation of the word,
Death Could not prevail on the huma^e soul of Christ to tie him there,
neither corruption in^ading his body, by ^iranny could show her force on him
to putrefaction, as things not well seen unto, for to think so of him, were a
wicked thing: for even as Adam had a double punishment inflicted on him for
his disobedience, the on was on his body, earth thou art, and to earth thou
shall return, and so by this decree, the body of the Lord departed unto the
earth: but to the soul he said, Thou shall dye the death. Hereof it comes
to pass, that man is divided into 2. parts, and is condemned to depart to 2.
places, and therefore it was necessary, that the self same Judge, which had
made this decree, that he by himself being under the color of a condemned
man, should free from that sentence all beleuers. To the local hell I see not:
but I see that you quote him to prove that Christ's body has greater
praerogatiue then David's, which thing he says not.
Here you see by this learned Father, that Christ's soul went to Hell So did he
on the cross.
to deliver our souls from hell, and his body to the grave, to deliver us from
death, and by this means both body and soul personally, and not potentially
Where M. Doctor? sclaunder? fie for shame.
(as you teach) working our deliverance from death and hell, have those
prerogatives, which This is contrary to the scriptures Heb. 2. 17* and 4 14.
David's soul and body had not. And for this consideration, though why then did
he not likewise commend his body into the hands of God
the one was in the grave, and the other in hell, yet both were in the hands
of the Lord. Here then we must learn what the hands of the Lord do signify.
Sometime the hand of god does signify the Son of God, It is not in that
place set for the son of God, see the place.
Psalm. 144. 7. Send thy hand from above. Sometime it signifies the power of
God, Psalm. 136. 12. With a mighty hand, and outstretched arm. Thirdly, the
bountifulnes of God, Psalm. 145. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest every liuiug
thing with thy blessing. Fo^rthly, it signifies consolation, Ezec. 3. 22. The
hand of the Lord was with me comforting me. Fifthly grace, Psalm. 118. 16. The
right hand of the Lord ^ath done valiantly Sixthly, it signifies the gift of
prophecy, Ezec. 8. The hand of the Lord fell there upon me. Seventhly, mercy.
Psalm. 37. 24. Though he fall he shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts
under his hand. Eighthly the protection Here is a heap of notable ignorance.
Has the hand as many significations, as it can be applied to uses? If not,
here is od stuff: if yea, he ere is not half a handful of hands.
of the Lord, Psalm. 31. 15. My times are in thy hand. Ninthly, the aid of the
Lord, Psalm. 74. 11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand. Tenthly, the punishment of
the Lord, Job. 19. 21. Have pity on me (o ye my frinds) for the hand of the
Lord has touched me. If this be last, at which of all these hands sits Christ?
but that is a right hand, and perhaps these be left hands.
Lastly, it signifies the Government of the Lord, Psalm. 95. 4. In his hand at
all the corners of the earth. This place therefore, If so, then tell me why he
kept that prayer, to his last gasp, which might have had mor use in the
troblesome days of his life.
must needs have this construction: into thy consolation, mercy, protection
and government, I will commend my soul. I hope That I do and my body to but
the case is not like.
you your self commend your soul into the hands of God every day, but yet
you mind not to go to heaven immediately. So said David. Psalm. 30. 5. Into
thy hands I commend my spirit, but he went Are you sure of that: then let us
hear your proofs.
not to heaven in many years after, neither did Christ ascend into heaven in
many days after, Petitio principij, plus quam crambe odiosa.
but went down to hell, where it was in the protection and gouerement of the
Godhead, Where man I have said that the deity presented the triumph of Christ's
victory to heaven earth and hell at once. That the Deity descended into Hell*
to my knowledge, I never said.
which as you confess descended into hell. For as we being in the damned
world, are in the protection and hand of the highest, so Petitio principij
again.
Christ being in the place of the damned, after a wonderful manner, was also
in the Lords aid and protection, by means whereof, he has wrought our
deliverance from hell. Therefore, prove you that Chirst went straitway to
heaven, and you shall effect that which many of your side have attempted, but
What say you to Christ then? He said, that he would be that day as he
suffered, in Paradise: is he no body with you?
never yet any could bring to pass. If ever Procustes had a prentise, you
served your years in his occupation, who made Peter say, that Christ was in
Hell, and not tormented, etc.
It is written of Procustes, that if any were too short for his b^^, he would
not stretch the^ out, and make them fit for his lodging: I never sowed that
patch to the text, see the answer.
so you, this place being too short to fit your wast, will enlarge it with a
word (immediately) which is not the place primitive or derivatiue, expressly,
or by way of implication. Moreover, where you say, if I will answer this place
I must prove that he that minds to go to hell, does use these words. I wonder
that you dar use such Blasphemous speches and yet nothing but misbegotten
insinuations. This gear hangs well together.
blasphemons speeches, for hereby you insinuate, that Christ was For all your
cunning my words are clear.
but a mere man, and that other men have a part in the work of our redemption
as well as Christ. For as he is our only Savior, so as Luth. says on Gen 21.
Chapter. This was singular in Christ, (Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell,
nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption) for this Petitio principij ^is hic,
millies a libi repetita.
soul could not be detained in hell, nor his body in grave. For as this was
singular in Christ, that he did give up his ghost, Petitio principij ^is hic,
millies a libi repetita.
so was it singular in him, to go to hell and return again. Two imperpent
allegations.
Ambrose says, Tradidit spiritum suum quia non inuitus amisit, quod enim
emittitur volunt arium est, quod amittitur necessarium. He gave up the ghost
because he lost not his soul against his will: for that which is emited is
voluntary, but that which is amitted is necessary. Two imperpent allegations.
Theophilact says, he cried out with a loud voice and gave up the ghost, for
he had power to lay down his life, and take it up again. Now when you can
prove that you or any of your side The^ there goes a bargan If you will not
prove the one I promise you I will never prove the other. But til then, let
this Syllogism stand for good. You ca^ not prove that he that comme^ds hi^
soul into the hands of god means to go to hell: but Christ commended his
soul into the hands of God Ergo, you cannot prove that Christ meant to go to
Hell.
have this power in you to dye when he will, and live again when he will,
then will I prove that he that speaks these words (Into thy hands I
commend my spirit) has an intent to go to Hell. But as Christ his birth was
a singular Yet again: Deus bone quoties.
thing in him, so was his death, burial, descending in to hell, resurrection,
and assension into heaven. Eccle. 8. 8. Man is not Lord over the spirit, to
retain the spirit. Two impertinent allegations.
And John 10. 18. Christ says, No man takes my life from me, but I lay it
down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and power to take it up
again. By these What makes that to the question here in hand
two places it is evident, that no man can lay down his own spirit, but the
only son of God had that prerogative, and therefore as the laying down of
his spirit, and the taking up of his spirit again was wonderful: so was Speak
to the purpose, man.
the state of the soul and body, during the time of the separation of the
parts of the humanity, singular and wonderful.

Absurdities admitted in this sect. by the D.
First, that Christ did descend in soul and body, take it how he will, is
absurd. If he mean into Hell, taking Hell as he would have it, that is in
soul only. If into the grave, it was in body only. If into the womb of
the Virgin. It was in Divinity only (...).

Second. If Christ's soul had not gone to the local Hell, David's must, and
his and mine: contrary to the suffiencie of Christ's sacrifice.

Third. That Christ's soul and body, besides innocence, had other
prerogatives then David's had. Contrary to the Scriptures, that he was like us
in all things, sin only excepted.

HVME his reioynder.
Indeed say you, if these words were spoken in the present time, some show of
truth were in our assertion. Then, if I can prove these words to be spoken in
the praese^^ time: you will grant us some show of truth, which is more then
commonly, you use to yield. First, you know, that by a Hebraisme, the future
time, may be set for the present, especially when continuance is signified.
Now, that it must be so here, I hope this Syllogism will persuade you. That
verb which signifies an action presently done when it is spoken, is of the
present time. But this verb (...) does signify an action then presently
done, when Christ used these words: Ergo, this verb is of the present time.
The mayor is a rule of Grammar, from the definition of the present time of a
verb. The minor is clear of it self* because Christ did then commend his soul
into the hands of God, when he used these words. But if this will not satisfy
you, take this to prove, that it cannot be the future time. That action which
can be referred to no time to come, cannot be the future time: But this action
cannot be referred to any time to come: because he presently gave up the
ghost, and men after death commend not their souls into the hands of God.
Ergo, this action cannot be of the future time. And now, having taken all this
pains, to gain nothing in your eyes, but a show of truth: I must put you in
mind, that though this verb did pertain to the future time: yet your knot is
in the wrong rushe. For it is not the time when he did commend, but when his
soul came into the hands of his Father, that must help you, if you could be
helped. And therefore, you may whissel presently for any future help, that
the future time of this verb can yield you; to show my judgment of this place,
all things both in heaven, earth, and hell; be in the hands of God, that is, in
his power: to dispose of them as it seems meetest to his own glory. But
that cannot be the sense here: because his soul was in that sense in the
hands of God, even then, when he did commend it. The hand is the instrument of
receiving, in which we rake those things that we bring into our own
peculiaritie, and proper possession. In that sort Anthropopathetcially, those
souls and spirits which stand in the presence of God, are said to be in his
hand. Of which it is said in the Psalm, In thy presence is the fullness of
joy: and at thy right hand, pleasures for evermore. And so Christ being in the
agonies of death, and hell; does commend his soul into the hands of God to
possess a fullness of joy, and aeternitie of pleasures. Like to this is
Stephans prayer, Act. 7. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Here, after your wonted
guise, you form my argument as pleases you, and then you tell me it is
false. If it be false, you made it such. If the fault had not been more in
your skill, or your will, or both; then in the matter: you might have made it
inferi^. No man that commends his soul into the hands of God, means to go
to hell: But Christ, as man, did commend his soul into the hands of God: Ergo,
he meant not to go to Hell. And if he meant not, I am persuaded, he went not. If
you had framed it thus, there had been no need of Procustes with his rack,
nor of any patche to make it fit our waste. To the mayor of this argument, for
lack of better matter, you cry out, blasphemy. And then finding no blasphemy
in the words themselves: you tell me that they insinuate, that Christ is but a
mere man, and that others have part in the work of our redemption. Your
insinuations are very deep. But here M. Doctor, I will offer you a good
bargain. Hook me this insinuation on my proposition in mood and figure, and I
will never write more against you on this question. And now I must needs note
an especial grace in your writing. When the argument pincheth you, you wring
it with a crooked wrest, and straining out some filthy licour, that you your
self had powered upon it, you call witnesses to show the world, what filthy
gear it is. And so with many testimonies, in things that no man that has
one dram of sense will deny, you make up a shamfull, and importable book.
Here, to prove that Christ is our only Savior, (a thing not denied) you
bring in Luther, Ambrose and Theophilact. Neither apply you them to the
purpose, though the purpose be easier to prove; then the things you apply them
to. But your wandering hand, cannot beat on one Anvil. And whereas I taking the
vantage of your constructio^ of these words whereon we stand, Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit: thus prove, that Christ's soul went no more to
Hell, then David's. If these words have the same sense in Christ's mouth, as
they had in David's, Christ soul went no more to Hell, then David's did. But you
say, they have the same sense, Ergo. you let go the mayor and the minor: and
take up your usual hubub against the conclusion, exclayming and crying out,
blasphemy. Then running about, and seeking Athanasius in every corner, to
chide me: because I give Christ's soul and body no greater prerogative then
David's, you bring him in, not saying one word to the purpose. For he (good man)
knew right well that Christ was like to David, and us all; in all things sin
only excepted: and therefore would not speak against his conscience. As for
the praerogatiue that you would have him to have, to go to hell, it is so
base a one (if it was any) that if Bishoppricks were no better, Doctors would
not shoulder for them, like beggars at a doall. Whereas you argue, that if
Christ's soul had not gone to Hell, David's must, and yours and mine: if you
mean the hell of the damned (as you must if you speak to the purpose) it is
absurd. For Christ redeemed us on the Cross, where he did bear the hellishe
burden of our s^^nes: and not in hell, where he paid not one dram of our
debt. To set a wrong sense on this place, you bring forth a heap of hands,
enough almost to remove Cheviot hill to Charing Cross. Whereupon you
conclude, that the sense must needs be: Into thy consolation, mercy,
protection and government, I will commend my soul* If that was his meaning,
why did he not commend his body also in the hands of his Father? And why
delaied he this prayer till the storm of his miseries was blown over. If this
conclusion, did follow upon the premises, it were a fault to confute it. But
now I hope upon a pardon, though I wipe it away with a Syllogism. Consolation
pertayneth to the distressed, mercy to the guilty, protection to the weak,
and government to them, that either cannot, or will not keep order. But
Christ's soul, after this prayer, was neither distressed, guilty, weak, nor
disorderly: Ergo, he commended not his soul into Gods consolation, mercy,
protection, and government. This is all, that in all this section, you have
spoken to the purpose. You have (I must needs confess) a great deal of other
stuff, as much as all this. In one place you ignorantly charge us, that we
give Christ not a personal, but a potentiall discending into Hell. For we say,
that Christ descended personally into Hell, That is called potentiall which
being is not impossible, never was indeed
both body and soul, and suffered actuallie all the torments thereof, for our
redemption. Otherwise, were he but a potentiall Savior, and all we actuallie
condemned. You quote also here out of place, and to small purpose, the 10. and
11. verses of the 4. to the Ephesians. which might have been deferred more
convenientlie, to the 8. 9. and 10. section, where it is handled of purpose.
Out of it you gather first an absurdity. That, if the same Christ did ascend,
and descended: he descended in soul and body, or else he could not have
been the same. Did you never hear, that the same Christ was from all
aeternitie: that the same Christ was slain from the beginning of the world:
that the same Christ lay three days in the grave, as Jonas was three days and
three nights, in the whales belly. And yet I trust, you will not say, that his
soul and body was from all aeternitie: that his soul and body was slain from
the beginning: and sure I am, that you that stand so much, that the soul can
not be buried, will not say, that he lay three days soul and body in the
grave. Your wonderful manner, in which you say these things were effected, is
a wonderful Sophisme. You seem to think, that there were no wonder in
Christ's descending, except this place be understood of his descending into
hell: as if it were not as great a wonder, that the son of God descended into
the womb of a Virgin, and there did cloth himself in man's nature. But all
this wonderful discourse of wonders, is beside the text. After all these
by-blowes, you gather upon this text a reason, against the main conclusion.
That Christ's soul was not in heaven, while his body lay in the grave:
because then he should have ascended, before he descended, contrary to the
place of the Ephesians. There be two errors in the levelling of this piece, that
bears it quite beside the mark. First, you give the name of ascending to the
soul, without the body, contrary to the Scriptures Act. 2. 34. David is not
yet ascended. And this takes away your next reason, of two ascensions.
Secondly, you give the name of descending, to the descending of his humanity
into hell, which is spoken by the Apostle of the Descending of his Deity in
his humane state. Thus a man may see your wit, how cleanelie and closely, you
can lap two fallacies into one proposition.

HVME sect. 6.
FOr the other place, you bring a reddier sense out of Augustine of that which
is God, and not of that which is man, his sense, (how ready soever it pleases
him to tea^me it) can no wise stand with these words of our Savior: For this
day shall thou be with me in Paradise, does sound in all latin ears (I mean
to all that understand the latin tongue) as if he had said. This day thou and
I shall be in Paradise: which no man that has one drop of brain in his head,
dare advisedly attribute to the Deity, which being there from all aeternitie,
could not go thither in the future time. But, me thinks, I hear you say,
that the future verb is given to the thief only: and ( with me) which
agrees to the speaker, is limited with no bounds of time. Against this, I have
the consent of the best Grammarians, and the thief also: For, Remember me
(said he) when thou come in thy kingdom. By whose verdict, it is clear,
that he was not yet in his kingdom, to whom he made this supplication.
Neither do I think, that Christ himself did mislike with his judgment. For
if he had erred of ignorance, no doubt, he would have set him right. But he
was so far from correcting him, he rather confirmed him, answering in the same
tense or time, Thou shall be with me, etc. Moreover, the Pronoun me, is
referred to the person that spoke, which I hope you will not say, was Christ God
alone, but Christ both God and man. Thus, you see, that these two places are
too strong for your ordinance. If you have no better shot then these, Great is
the truth and invincible.
we will spread our banners with magna est, and iuvicta veritas.

HILL his reply.
HEre you condemn S. Augustins answer. Well, because S. The Paralogismes in
the D. reply.
Augustine is dead; and in your margin you say; that it is M. Hills answer,
by Gods grace and his word, M. Hill will defend it, You scla^der, I falsefie
not the text.
First I note a falsification of the text, by you alleged: for where as it
Not the original.
is in the text: Luke 23. 42. Remember me Lord when thou come into thy
kingdom. You for Not so: but I translate a word Master, that signisieth
master rather then Lord.
(Lord) say (Master) I told you in the beginning, Eve did change the words of
the Scripture, to her overthrow. If a man may leave a thing, that he never
began, I will grant your fute.
Therefore, I pray you leave it, for otherwise I must tell you of it: if a boy
in the Grammar school construe (...) Master, He is him self worthy to be
beaten, that can beat a boy for that fault.
he is worthy to be beaten: and if a schoolemaister teach so, Such a
controuller were scarce worthy to bear office in a hen-hous
he is worthy to be controlled: for this word (...) written by Stephanus A
doughty argument* then was I be holden to your printer that wrote the word
which I used for it with a capital M.
with a capital letter, will cashire your banner of It is a weak boaste, that
will be so beat with a capital K.
boasting, and bring your glory to shame. I preached in my sermon at
Chippenham, that to day, did signify for ever, and (with me) did signify the
Godhead. I will not only affirm it, but How well you confirm it, see the
answer.
confirm it, that to day does signify for ever in this place: first I prove
it by this philosophical reason out of Aristotle, which says: In aeternis non
est tempus, In eternal things there is no time. You promise to prove your
purpose by Aristotle, and leave your purpose to prove that you bring out of
Aristotle
For time, is the measure of motion: therefore, if there be time, then is there
motion. Now, as in Hell all men do suffer torments, and in earth all labor: So
in Heaven all do rest. Apoc. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord, so says the spirit, This proves not that they move not. They rest from
their labors: that is, their moving is not laborious. It will be hard for you
to prove, that the Angels and blessed souls move no more, then the marvelous
stones upon the plain of Salisburie.
for they rest from their labors. This therefore depends not upon the
premisles.
Therefore, where there is no mutation from day to night, nor from summer to
winter, there is no day natural or artificial, If I did so suppose, I were as
far from sense, as you from honesty, in charging me with a senseless
assertion, which you never heard from my mouth, nor read after my pen.
as you suppose. And this is proved Apoc. 10: 6. And the Angel swear by him
that lives for evermore, which created heaven and the things that are therein,
This allegation is impertinent: time was not ended, when Christ said to the
thief, This day, etc.
that time shall be no more. And this word (...) to day, is used for (ever) All
these many scriptures, are but the repetitio^s of one prophecy out of the 2.
Psalm.
in many Scriptures. Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son, this Here, this day, does not
signify aeternity, see the answer.
day have I begotten thee. Act. 13. 33. and we declare unto you touching the
promises made unto the Fathers, god has fulfilled it unto you their Children,
in that he has raised up Jesus, even as it is written in the second Psalm:
Thou art my Son Here, this day, does not signify aeternity, see the answer.
to day have I begotten thee. Here, this day, does not signify aeternity, see
the answer.
And in the epistle to the Hebr. 1. 5. And, to which of the Angels said he,
Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. And again, Hebr. 5. 6. He
proving Christ to be a priest for ever, thus says. Christ took not to
himself this honor, to be made an high priest: but he that said to him, Thou
art my Son, Here, this day, does not signify aeternity, see the answer.
to day have I begotten thee, as he also in another place speaks. Thou art a
priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. Untruth they take it not so.
Here David and the Apost. do take this word (to day) to signify (for ever).
And so does The place would be quoted.
S. Augustine and M. Hill against all the gainsaiers of it in the world: For the
circumstances of the place, do Not very strongly.
strongly convince it. For what does the thief ask? implicit, not explicit.
forgiveness of his sins: who This circumstance is farfet.
can forgive sins? God only. He asks implicit, not explicit.
for grace, who is the giver of all Grace? This circumstance is far fet.
God only? he desires implicit.
glory, who gives glory and life everlasting? God This circumstance is far fet.
only. That God only This is not denied.
forgiueth sins, it is proved Mar. 2. 7. That he is the This needed no proof.
giver of al grace, it is manifest 1. Pet, 5. 10. That God This proof is super
fluous.
only gives glory and life everlasting, it is evident 2. Tim. 48. Romans 6. and
last verse. This circumstanceis far fet.
Secondly, where shall he receive this glory? in Paradise. For as much Frame one
good syllogism out of al these circumstances, to prove, that (to day) does
here signify aeternity, and take the bucklers.
then, as the thing that is given is eternal, the person that gives it is
perpetual, the place where it is given is everlasting: But not that the day
when it was given, does signify aeternity.
it must of necessity follow, that the time also, be world without end. And
that (with me) signifies as I do teach, the Godhead: it is constantlye
avouched Have all the Fathers written upon this place? you range wide.
by all the Fathers. This place has not that (with me,) does signify the deity
Jerome on this place notes. Christ brought the thief from the cross to
Paradise, least any man should think conversion to be too late at any time: he
made the punishment of homicide Martyrdom: the truth being counted among the
wicked, he left the one on the left hand, and took the other on the right
hand, as he will do in the day of judgment. It Will not Jerome speak
plainly? this collectio^ has in it three paralogismes. 1. Ieromes simile of
the fact, you refer to the person. Secondly you seem to think that we hold
that Christ's only soul did judge the thief on the cross: and lastly, that
his only soul was in heaven with the thief.
were an absurd thing to say, the soul of Christ only shall give judgment in
the last day. Nor this place has it not.
Augustine has the like on this place, The cross, if you mark it is the
judgment seat, the Judge was set in the middle, the one thief which believed
was delivered, the other which blasphemed was condemned. To save and condemn
is the office of the And of the son of man. Mar. 2. 10.
Deity: and therefore I deny the argument.
(with me) signifies the Godhead, as the other thief no doubt was with the
Diuill. He says not, that (with me) does signify the Deity.
Ambrose in his Sermon of the holy thief writes thus: He saw him hanging on
the cross, and prays to him as though he were fitting in heaven: he sees
them condemned, and yet he prays unto him as to a king. To this accords
Damascene handling this place. In respect of his body he was in grave, in
respect of his soul in Hell: and as. Damascen comes nearest you, and yet he
says not, that (with me,) does signify the deity: his soul was not
separated from his Deity.
God, he was both in Paradise with the thief and in the throne with the Father
and the holy Ghost. Therefore Ferus a writer not to be contemned, interprets
these words thus. Mecum eris qui sum vbique omnia in omnibus. Thou shall be
with me which am every where all in all. In Exodus 34, 6. 7. verses, be set
down the 13. They be Epithets, not names, saving the first, neither be they 13.
names of God, and Lord is one of the first of them. Therefore, when the thief
calls Christ Lord, he A fallacy ab accidente.
acknowledges him to be God, and desires to dwell with the If so, that
proves not that with me signifies the godhead.
Godhead, in whose presence is the fulness of joy: where you ask me how the I
ask you how it ca^ go to heaven in the future time.
Godhead can go to heaven, the word is (...): Even as Not so: He is said to
come down: when he shows his presence amongst men by effects. he can not be
said so to ascend.
God came down from This is contrary to your reason at Chippenham, and in the
11. fol, page b. of your printed sermon. There you reason that the word (...)
can not belong to the godhead, because it signifies motion. And here you give
God contrary motions both up and down.
heaven, so is he said to go up to heaven. August speaks of the ascending of
the humanity
If you will read Augustine in this book of the essence of the Divinity, he
will teach you. Psa. 68. 24. They have seen o God, the goings of my God and
king, which art in thy sanctuary, from heaven he came into the virgins womb,
after his birth he was laid in the cratch after that he had fulfiled al for
the which he was sent of his father, he was fastened to the cross he was taken
down from the Cross, he was buried in respect of his flesh, but in soul he
descended into hell: the third day by the power of the Divinity, he raised
his flesh out of the grave, and after the days of his resurrection, the
fortieth day, his Apostles seeing it, he ascended into heaven, and sits at
the right hand of the Father, that is, in his glory. The This gloss on the
thieves prayer, is (...).
thief then prays to Christ, that as he should sit at the right hand of the
Father in glory, so he might be partaker of that glory, and that he might have
his perfect consummation and bliss in heaven as Christ should have after his
ascension: and that his vile body which was partaker of the sufferings of
Christ, might also be partaker of his glory, and made like to the glorious
body of Christ Jesus. Twice you have told me that (thou shall be with me) is as
much as (I and you) 176 but you bring neither scripture nor father to confirm
it in that sense that you mean it. But if you mean thus, I and thou shall be
together, that is, thou shall be I never meant such a gloss
pertaker of the glory of the Deity as thou have ben partaker of the sufferings
with the humanity, it is true. For, what need had the thief to pray for the
That was not his prayer see the text.
presence of Christ's soul, when he This reason would well confute the thefes
prayer, (if it were co^futable,) Remember me when thou come in thy kingdom
had the presence both of body and soul. But it is the presence and fellowship
of the And had he not the presence of that, as well as of the soul and body?
divine nature that he prays for, This is a gross reason, In the presence of
the Deity, is fullness of joy, Ergo, the thief prays for the presence and
fellowship of the Deity
wherein as David says, is the fulness of joy and pleasure for evermore. Psa.
16. 11. In Luke. 13. 26. The Jews say, we have eaten and drunken in thy
presence, and thou taught in our streets. Christ thus answers in the 27. and
28. verses. I tell you I know you not, depart from me all ye workers of
iniquite, there shall be weping and gnashing of teeth: when you shall see
Abraham Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of God, and your selves cast out of
doors. Therefore it is clear, they are not all blessed This is another new
conclusion.
which were present with Christ's humanity, but they of whom Saint Peter says,
2. Pet. 1. 4. Whereby most great and precious promises are given unto us, that
by them we should be partakers of the nature of God. For therefore did Christ
take upon him our nature, How proves this that (with me) in this text, does
signify only the Godhead.
that we might be pertakers of the nature of God, and be on with Christ, as
he is on with his Father. Christ prayer is to this end, This allegation is also
impertinent.
John. 17. 21. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe in me through their word, that they all be one, as thou O Father art
in me, and I in thee, even that they also may be on in us.

Two absurdities by implication, in the D. reply.
That to save and condemn, is the office of the Godhead only, and not of the
humanity, contrary to Mark. 2. 10. Act. 10. 42. and Ioh. 5. 27. Or else the
collection out of Augustine will not hold, that (with me) does signify the
Godhead only.

That the thief prayed not for the presence of the body and soul which he
had: but for the presence of the divine nature: as if the divine nature had
ever been absent from the soul and body, contrary to the Hypostasis, and
uniting of the persons.

HVME his reioynder to the 4. sect.
Our reason is, if Christ went that same day as he suffered to Paradise, he
went not to Hell amongst the damned. But he went that same day to Paradise.
Ergo, he went not to hell, amongst the damned. For the minor we have Christ
himself witness. Luke 23. 43. You replied at Chippenha^ out of Aug. that this
promis to the thief ( Thou shall be with me) is meant only of the Godhead of
Christ, and not of his soul. To that answer I rejoyned (saving Augustines
reverence) whom I honor as far, as it is meet to honor a man, what ever
you bear your reader in hand to the contrary: that this being spoken in the
future time, and implying an absence, at that present, from his kingdom, could
not pertain to the Godhead, being at all times in all places. That here is
employed an absence, it is clear by the theefes suit, Remember me when thou
come into thy kingdom. And that this is spoken in the future time, it is
manifest by Christ's answer, Then shall be with me in Paradise: which by a
rule of Grammar is, as if he had said, I and thou shall be in Paradise, which
is a plain future tense. Now, here in this your reply, you pass by this
testimony of this holy thief, and him in whom was never found theft nor
guile, as if you looked for better witnesses. If these be not sufficient, I
have no better: but I hope the reader will esteem better of their words, and
count mumme, but a mean answer. Yet if you were half so worthy your scarlet
hood, as many do hope, and you do think: there was left you more show of a
probable reply. That these things be spoken of the Deity per (...). Wherefore
to prevent your hope, if you chance to find it hereafter, I will now tear
the bosse from that bukler. This figure is never applied to any text, but when
some inconvenience in the letter, will take no salve, but such a corrasiue. But
this text (if it be well handled) needs no such hard plaster. Ergo, this
figure is not to be applied to this text. Here, neglecting the answer that
had any show of probability, and replying nothing to my argument, to make
show of some thing, you pick two quarrels to me in your written copy, of
which you scrape out one (for shame) in your print, for falsefiing the text.
The first is, that I translate (...) Master, and not Lord. The second, that I
translate (...) not to day, but this day. Where I pray thee mark gentle
Reader, that though I were guilty of both these faults: yet my argument drawn
from the future time, stands between both these blows, without tip or tap.
But because it is a heinous matter to pervert the Scriptures, I will not
confess a crime so odious, being innocent. And now M. Doctor, if you were a
Schoolmaister, as you were some time, and would seem yet; and did beat your
Scholar for construing (...) Master: men might say, that you were more
worthy of the rod, then he. (...) and (...) be relatiues in greek as seruus
and Dominus in latin: and Master and servant in English: Servants obey your
masters.
so are they used Ephesians. 5. 6. Col. 3. 22. and 4. 1. (...) Now then, if the
english of (...) be a servant, the English of (...); must be a Master. Neither
is it denied, but that in some case, it may be Englished, Lord. Some servants
have Lords: and all Lords exercise a magisteriall power over their vassals. As
for this place, it seems to express the Hebrew RABBI, which was to them a
common style of dignity, as Master is in English. And therefore in my simple
understanding, so far is it from heresy, that this seems the fittest
English, to meet that greek in this place. But you beat me with two sore
arguments: the one that Stephanus does write (...) with a capital letter: the
other, that in the 34 of Exodus be set down the 13. names of God, and (...) is
the first of them. You were much beholden to Stephanus. If he had chanced to
write (...) with a sorting letter, you had lost the best argument that ever was
bred with your mothers milk, and a weapon to cashire our banners. But they be
not Babilonian, as you imagine: they are as I said, and you see the banners of
truth that will not be cashired with a capital K. As for the 13. names of God,
I never observed only so many: neither can I find just that number in that
place, whither you send me. The first name in that place, and the only name
for any thing that I can see, is JEHOVAH, the very essential name of God. The
rest be Epithets, not names. But tell in good sadness M. Doctor, is (...) the
same in greek, that JEHOVAH is in Hebrew? I ever took JEHOVAH, to come from
HAIAH: a verb of being, to declare, that God the cause of all beeings, has
no cause of his own being. And (...) I took to express the rule and
commandment which he does exercise over his creatures. But say you, the
thief when he called him (...) did call him God. If that be of necessity:
then servants obey your masters, will sound servants obey your Gods. You will
not (I hope) stand to this Divinity. As for the translating of (...) (this
day,) if I was deceived, the greek and latin deceived me. For seeing (...) is
as (...) that is, (...): and hodie compounded of hoc die, did meet the same: I
thought I wanted not reason to translat it (this day.) But if this be haeresie,
how will you cover the same wart on your own nose, fol. 20. page 1 of your
printed sermon, and here in this same sect. also. Your reason why it may not be
translated (this day,) is; that to day is an indefinite, and this day, a
particular. But this was so subtle, in your printed copy, that you are
ashamed of it: and good cause had you. For (...) is so particular of it self,
that it is no more capable of more particularitie, if it be translated (this
day;) then Adame Hill Vicar of Westburie, and Parson of Goosage, can be made
more particular by saying, this Adame Hill Vicar, etc. This Logic reaches far
beyond the praecepts that you learned in the University: and yet I see, that
it comes much short of that which is in you. For, you will not only affirm
it, but confirm it also, that hodie eris mecum, Thou shall be this day with
me, is as much as thou shall be with me for ever. Psalm. 90. 4.
is as much, as eris mecum in aeternum. If you will make that good, you may go
whether you will; no hedge can hold you. The Scripture has by way of
comparison, that 1000. years are as one day in the sight of the Lord. If all
aeternitie be in your sight, but as one day: you must be some magnus Apollo,
so much greater then God, as aeternitie is more then 1000. years. But, what
can you make of 1000. years, that can make so much of one day. One day I am
sure, is not the proper name of aeternitie. And therefore I would feign know of
a man of your skill, seeing when one word usurps the place of another (except
it be like the Popes statuimus for abrogamus) it must be either effectum pro
causa, subiectum pro adiunct^ simile pro simile pars pro toto, aut contra: to
which of these heads you will refer hodie pro aeterno. If you think it pars
pro toto, then in your conceit, the parts of a thing infinite, must be finite,
contrary to an axiom esteemed for truth amongst other men: that an infinite
thing, is not deuide-able. Hereof comes the maxim, that you after allege
out of Aristotle, that in things aeternall, there is no time. You by it,
(entiteling it the Philosophical reason of Aristotle) undertake to prove, that
one day, does signify aeternitie: but straight way, by nimble convoiance of
legerdemaine, you slip the thing you promise, and turn your hand to prove
Aristotle's philosophical reason. For, if there be time (say you) in
aeternitie, then is there motion. Thus, like a merchaunt that fraughting his
ships with corn to go to Deep, when she is lanched forth into the sea,
turns his saill, and points to Spain: You pretending to prove, that one
day, must needs here signify aeternitie: fall to prove that in aeternitie
there is no time, a thing never denied. But reason would have hewed an other
piece of work, out of Aristotle's block; In aeternitie there is no time: In one
day, there is time: Ergo, one day is not aeternitie. But to prove this, you
allege four texts of scripture, which are all but the repetitions of one, out
of the 2. Psalm, wherein you are deceived your self, and labor to deceive
others. For (to day) in that place does not signify ^eternity, as Iunius
proves finely in his Parallels. The words be, Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee. Wherein (says he) is noted, first the aeternall
begetting of his Deity, in these words, Thou art my son: and the temporal
begetting of his humanity in these words, to day have I begotten thee. His
reason is drawn from the place of Paul, which here you quote, Act. 13. For,
he alleging this place to the Jews in their Synagogue, as a plain argument
of Christ's Divinity, could never have hoped to effect that amongst such a
froward company, if he had put such a violent face on the text, as to take one
day for all aeternitie. To this most excellent reason, I add another out of the
same text. This place of the psalm does prove, that God raised up Jesus to
fulfill that promise to the Children, which he before had made to their
Fathers. But that promise was then performed, when Jesus was given to them in
the flesh. Ergo, this place of the Psalm, must have relation to that day, when
the son of God, which was before all aeternitie, was given to the Jews in
the flesh. Notwithstanding these reasons, if it were granted you, (which you
can never prove) that (to day) in this place of the Psalm does signify
aeternitie, yet it will not follow, that it must needs have the same
signification in these words of Christ likewise. Wherefore to fill this ditch,
you fall to work upon the text. In it you make along harvest of little corn,
telling in many words, that grace, glory, and aeternall life, the things
given, are aeternall. But, what makes the aeternitie of the gift, or of the
giver, to prove that the time wherein it was given, is aeternall? Of things
aeternall, only God (who is aeternitie it self) is without beginning, and
ending. Grace, glory, and aeternall life, imparted to his creatures of the
fullness of his aeternitie, have a beginning then when they are given, though
their continuance be aeternall. Now* in these words, This day thou shall be
with me, (this day) notes the time, when this aeternall gift should begin,
and not the continuance and durance thereof. This may suffice to crush all the
small bones of your shrimpish arguments. As for your Fathers and Doctors, whom
you allege not directly, but by such consequentes, as you pin to the tails
of their gowns, I will pass them over, for breuities sake: and because you
have promised in the 3. sect. not to rely on men in this question.

HVME Sect. 7.
But now to come to your reasons. First, you muster all your forces, about the
Hebrew and Greek, against the most learned of this age. The greatest
Hebricians of name in our time both Protestants and Papists, Mercerus,
Cevalerius, Bertramus Vatablus Pagninus, Arius Montanus, Andradius, with I know
not how many more.
It will coast you a great deal of eloquence, to persuade the world, that
Tremelius and Iunius, Calvine and Beza, and the translaters of the Geneva
Bible, with many more excellent men, that spent their age in that study, did
not know these words as well as you, and had as great care to sift out the
truth. For my part, neither is my skill so great, neither am I now minded to
stand with you upon that point. I see no inconvenience to hurt us, nor vantage
given you: if I grant that SHEOL must be englished, Hell, in the place of the
Psalm, which you cite. Only this I stand upon, which I have said, that this
word is many times used in the Scriptures for the torments of hell, and must
needs be so taken here. The very order of the words, will overthrow your
conceit. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see
corruption. For, seeing the Hell, that his soul should not be left in, comes
before the grave, wherein his body should not see corruption: what hell went
before his burial, but only that of hi^ passion: wherein he paid the whole
ransom of our redemption, and nailed the handwrite that was against us, to his
Cross.

HILL his reply.
The paralogismes of this sect
Two No untruth in my words.
untruths are in these few words. First, you make much ado about SHEOL
against My words are contra doctissimos huius aetatis, therefore turn this lie
to your own secretary
almost all the learned men of this age Al these be not on your side.
There are on my side Luther holds that Christ suffered in Hell, so do not you.
Luther; Aepinus, Felinus is against you
Felinus, So is Pomeranus.
Pomeranus, Lucas Lossius, Selueccer, Vrbanus Rhegius, The authors of the
Centuries, Erasmus, Chytreus Molerus is your adversary.
Molerus, Peter Martyr, holds that his soul presented it self to both the
blessed and the damned.
Peter Martyr He makes nothing for you.
Lauaterus, Proverb. 27. In England Nor Lambert.
Lambert, Nor Robert Sammell.
Robert Samuel, Latimer holds with Luther, not with you.
Latimer, Becon Hutchinson, Fox has nothing for you, but the Printers picture
in the beginning of his book.
Fox, and Nowell holds not with you.
Nowell. Here Many of these understood not the Hebrew, and therefore stood not
for you upon the word SHEOL.
are 20. most learned men of these latter times, as I can show you in my poor
Library besides that most learned and reverend Father M. M. Allet I think you
would say. He wrote the poor man's Library, for the poor, not for Doctors.
Allen, and besides the advised judgment of the learned Conuocations of
England, not only in King Edwards reign, Anno Domini. 1552. but also since the
reign of her That convocation allowed Nowels Catechism, not your opinion.
Majesty. 1571. In the which Canuocations I am persuaded, were as learned men,
as any were, either in England or Europe. Therefore, the learned reader must
either think you a man If he think so, his thought is too true. But yet a man
may have read more then you, that never saw these books.
of little reading, and that you never saw these learned men's works, or else
of great malice, I disabled none of them: except you will believe your
Secretary better then my self.
that you will disable al these for learning, who left a better testimony
behind them then ever you will, unless you have mor then you have showed in
this answer. The other This was my conclusion. Men use not to call the
conclusion a lie, before they answer the antecedent.
untruth is, that SHEOL in the 16. Psalm, does signyfie the torments of hell,
which Christ suffered in his passion on y^ cross. That this is untrue it is
manifest not by conceit, but by Pet. Sermon, Act. 2. 31. He knowing this
before spoke of the resurrection, that his soul was not left in hell, nor his
flesh saw corruption: You say it is spoken of the passion, Peter says it is
spoken of the resurrection: You labor in vain, this is not denied.
and good cause has he so to say, for the words going before, and coming
after do prove it. The words going before are these, Psalm. 16, 9. Wherefore
my heart was glad, my A sensles translation likes you best.
glory reioyseth, my flesh also shall rest in hope. The words following in the
11. verse are these: Thou shall show me the path of life, in thy presence is
the fulness of joy, and at thy right are pleasures for ever more. You would have
said, how can ye find, to point where, and ask where I can find it, is like
him that said, I paid 18. d. for my shoes, read what they, cost me.
Where can you find your torments, in the word He reioiced, because he should
not be left in torments, will that answer serve your turn?
(glad) or in the word (reioiseth) or in the word (rest) or in these words
(fullness of joy) or in these (pleasures for evermore.) Who said so? You fight
with your own shadow
Was Christ glad of his torments? Did he reioise or weep in them? Who would
make conclusions and father the^ on his adversary, but he that wants both
science to answer, or conscience to acknowledge the truth.
Who would deliver this doctrine but he that wants either science or
conscience, or both. Al these lies does blister on the lips of the blab that
bred them.
To lie once is a fault, but affirm it twice is a greater fault. To speak a
lie is hurtful, but to write a lie advisedly is more hurtful. To lie in a
matter political is dangerous, but to lie in divine matters without speedy
repentance is damnable. If that be not true, why confute ye it not?
You say noe vantage is given to me nor inconvenience to you, if you grant
SHEOL to be Hell: Let your frinds judge You allege my words to play upon the
vantage
what vantage you have given to the truth, and shame to your self I gain say
him not.
by gainsaying Saint Peter, and by Nor say not that.
affi^ming, that in the resurrection are torments, where David and Peter say,
are fulness of joy and pleasures for enermore. Therefore, it is the saying of
Peter, The question is, what the manner thereof should be. This is petitio
principij.
that Christ's soul was not left in hell, and not my conceit, and it is deceit
in you to And falsehood in you to charge me with that I never spoke.
affirm the contrary. Further, where you say that Tremelius and Iunius, are
better learned in the Hebrew language then my self, I confess it, That is but
your conceit. I see no reason for it.
so are the Jews them selves then Tremelius and Iunius. Why not? if they
teach the truth.
shall I therefore believe the Jews? no more will I believe the Translation of
The byasle of this bowll did run on Tremelius and Iunius, and with the jutte of
an ilfavored rub: did break upon others It is well that you fear to say that
they disagree from David and Pet. Your heart feign would, if your pen durst
venture.
any other learned man. if he disagree with David and Sauite Peter. Finially,
to answer You call my question curious, and by your answer prove it to want
curiosity. Such in consequencie follow your pen as close, as your shadow your
body.
your curious question, you ask me in what hell was Christ soul before his
burial? To this I answer, in that hell whither all And did it return thence
also, as the words of the Psalm. does proport, before his burial.
Infidels go for their unbelief. I read but of one Hell, if you Know not you
that it has 3. significations as well as I.
know any more let me see your proof, and the^ will I tell you into what hell*
Christ descended. Who but you did ever say, that a soul could descend into
Hell, and not being left there, return again before the burial of the body.
But who but you does think it an impossible thing for Here you hold that
Christ's soul did descend before his burial: and in the order of the articles
of the creed, you make it an argument for you that it comes after. Thus you
can turn your nose to every wind.
a soul to desce^d into hell, before the body be buried? The soul in an
instant passes to heaven or hell, but the body I am sure must have time to be
buried: for bodies Lo, you will prove a thing that no man denies.
are in places circumscriptiuely: Angels and souls definitiuely, and God is in
all places universally. And the soul came out of hell into the body, before
the body could come out of the grave: This (therefore) follows not on the
premises.
therefore most aptly it is said, Acts 12. 31. Thou shall not leave my soul in
hell, nor suffer my flesh to see corruption. Two unfit allegations. The
question is whether He^ going before his burial is to be taken for the pains
or place of Hell, which thing Augustine here touches not.
For as August. says in his 57. epistile ad Dardanum, That was spoken of his
soul, which came from hell so quickly, this of his body which could not corrupt
by reason of his speedy resurrection: and writing on the 85. Psalm, he says,
wherefore this is his voice in the psalm, not by any man's coniecturs, but by
the exposition of the Apost. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer
thy holy one to see corruption.

HVME his Reioynder.
IN this section, I followed Calvine: from whose judgment I am now departed
on this place of the Psalm, as said is before sect. 4. Yet that the reader may
see how near the truth Calvine creepes: I will defend him from all this wide
shot, and clear my self of these heinous accusations. First, you begin with
untruths: there is nothing so much in your mouth. It should seem that the
moulde is not unfit for such matter, that casts so much shot of that sise.
But if you had not believed your secretary, better then my own copy: the
first of these untruths had never found the way from your own lips. My
words are, Tu multa de nominibus inferni contra doctissimos huius atatis
disputas. As for your favorits in the end of my Epistle, I granted, that you
wanted not the countenance of sundry great writers: who rather said as you
say, then confirm their saying by Scripture, or reason. My words were, multos
habet, fateor, and magn^s patronos causa vestra, qui ita potius censuerunt,
quam ratione sententiam suam confirmarunt. Notwithstanding all this, you run
such a treble on me with untruths: that if I would run the counter-tenor,
you would blushe to hear the discord of your own descant. As for your 20.
authors, first they were not all Hebricians, nor understood the word wherein
you say, they took your part. Secondly, though some of them drew near your
opinion: yet they never wrote of SHEOL to be taken, as you will have it.
Thridlie, Peter Martyr held that the soul of Christ did present it self to all
the dead, as well the blessed, as the damned. Fourthlie, Luther and Latimer
hold, that Christ suffered in Hell. Fiftlie, Lossius and Hemingsus hold, that
the whole Christ, as he was borne of the Virgin Marie, descended into Hell.
Sixtlie, Mollerus affirms that your opinion cannot be proved by this place of
this Psalm. Seuinthly, M. Nowell holds that Christ by the virtue of his
death did pearse to the dead, and the damned Hell. Eightlie, Lambert says
nothing for you, but only quoteth a place out of Augustine, to another
purpose, wherein August. seems to say, as you say. But Lambert neither lyketh
nor dislyketh it. Nynthlie, Robert Samuel, says no more for you, then the
very words of the belief. Tenthlie, in M. Foxes book of Christ triumphing,
there is not any thing for you, but the Printers picture, which you have also
set before your own book. Lastly, Felinus and Pomeranus are with us, and
against you. Such is your skill to bleare the blind, and make him think, that
your foes are your friends. Thus if a man could intend to trace you, he might
find you quatt in many bushes, where you want cover to hide your bunne. If
any writer name but Hell, it is enough to make you brag, that he is youres.
As for the other untruth wherewith you charge me, it is answered sect. 4. Yet
because you think here to winn the spurs, and have bragged amongst your
friends, that in this place you have driven me so near the hedge, that I can
never escape you, without the foil; it may be, that that conceit may contem my
answer. Prejudice is a strong baye, and will bear a maine strength before it
break. Wherefore here I will only turn the cock, and make it spout the same
water in your own face* to make you feign to flee to my cloak, to keep your
shoulders from the shoure. You hold that SHEOL in the 16. Psalm does signify
the local Hell, wherein the damned are tormented. That this is untrue, it is
manifest, not by conceit, but by Peter's sermon. Act. 2. 31. He knowing this
before, spoke of the resurrection, that his soul was not left in Hell, nor his
flesh saw corruption. You say, it is spoken of the local Hell, wherein the
damned are punished, Peter says it is spoken of the resurrection: and good
cause has he, so to say. For the words going before, and coming after, do
prove it. The words going before are these. Psa. 16. 9. Wherefore my heart was
glad, my glory (to use your own translation, lest you say, I alter your words)
rejoiceth, my flesh also, shall rest in hope. The words following in the 11.
verse, are these. Thou shall show me the path of life, in thy presence is the
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand, are pleasures for evermore. Where can
you find your local Hell, wherein is weeping and gnashing of teeth, in the
word (glad,) or in the word (rejoiceth,) or in the word (rest,) or in the
words (fullness of joy,) or in these words (pleasure for evermore.) Was
Christ glad of that doole-full and dread-ful place? Who would deliver this
doctrine, but he, that wants either science, or conscience, or both. To lie
once is a fault, but to affirm twice, is a greater fault: To speak a lie is
hurtful, but to write a lie advisedlie, is more hurtful. To lie in a matter
Political, is dangerous: but to lie in divine matters, without speedy
repentance, is damnable. Thus far you. This is your own manerlie tale, filed
on your own vice, and taken out of your printed book. Wherein you give your
self roundly and handsomely the single-lie, the double-lie the hurtfull-lie,
the advised-lie, the dangerous-lie, and the damnable-lie. If I had blown this
wind in your face, you would have said, that I had been bred in an Oxe-stall.
As for your opinion on this place of the Psalm, I have two sore shot against
it. That SHEOL here can no ways be the local hell. First it is in the
Hebrew SHEOL, and in the 70. (...): Thou will not leave my soul to hell: and
this place of the Acts, (...) is not true greek, except you understand (...)
or (...) as you note your self out of Clenard. sect. 14. Now, thou will not
leave my soul to Hell, cannot be understood of a praesentiall being in the
place of hell: Ergo, this place cannot be understood of Christ that he was in
the local Hell. If you be so good a Grecian, as you would be taken, you
should not be ignorant, that to make your sense, it should be (...) as it is
in Math. 12. 40. (...) and (...). The other is this. No man reioiceth that he
is delivered from a place wherein he suffered no ill; but Christ here
rejoices verse. 26. and 27. that he should not be left in SHEOL: Ergo, SHEOL
is not here the place of the damned, wherein you say, he triumphed, and joyed,
and suffered no kind of ill. As for my science and conscience, which here you
strike at, you praise them your self (such is your constancy) in the
beginning of your 12. section. I know mine own infirmities, and dare not
accept your praises. As for my knowledge, I am content that men count of it, as
they find it. As for my life, I dare not bragg neither will I speak any
thing absolute: but comparate, this much I will say, (seeing you put me to it)
that where we are both known, I can find more mouths to speak my
purgation, (if I hold but up my finger) then your self can procure by friends
and means. You confess, (which many men would think though you confessed it
not) that Tremelius and Iunius, are better Hebricians, then your self: and
affirm that the Jews are better then they. For my part, it is beyond my
skill to make comparisons: and my blind eyes can see no reason for that odds.
But as you will not believe the Jews, (you say) no more will you Tremelius and
Iunius, against David and Peter. You have reason for you. Yet til you prove it,
other men will suspect, that Tremelius and Iunius had both as much care, and as
great judgment, to keep in with David and Peter, as you. And for any thing
we see, it is credible enough, that David, Peter, and they do draw all one
way. If you will believe the Jews in nothing, you do them wrong. If all men
had been as hard laced as you, no man had ever gotten Hebrew of them. You
answer the antecedent of my argument, which you call a curious question,
without curious meditation. It should seem that the question was more curious
in your tongue, then your eyes, that you can answer so readily. You trifle
and tell me, that you read but of one Hell. And I answer you, that he who in
serious matters of faith can find a cavil a rebus ad voces, will hardly find
credit of sincere dealing. Did not you see, that I spoke of the three things
signified in that name, and not of the damneds Hell only, which has almost
gotten the English name to it self, from the other two. For my part I never
thought it a thing impossible, for a soul to descend into Hell, before the
burial of the body: but that Christ's soul should descend into hell and return
again, (for so the words of the Psalm does sound, ( Thou will not leave my
soul in Hell) before the burial of the body, as the words do lie in order, I
ever held it, and hold it yet a thing, that you never saw, and impossible for
you to prove with witnesses. But in one thing you seem far here to
ouer-shoot your self. Your mates reason against us, that the pangs of Hell,
which went before the burial, cannot be meant by these words following it.
You open your own side to that blow, and put the discending into the local
Hell, before his burial also, and make that argument stronger against your
self, then you find it against us. Thus you see, all this great wind is
ouerblowne, and shakes no corn.

HVME his 8. Sect.
Here to let this pass, your next reason is from that place of Paul: But that
he ascended: what is it else, but that he first descended into the lowermost
parts of the earth. Where you hold, that the lowermost parts of the earth,
must needs signify the pit of Hell. Which thing if it were so sure, as you
bear in hand; I wonder that no Divines, (I speak of the modester sort) did
yet gather hereupon, that the place of Hell, were the very center of the
earth. But whereas you avouche so confidentlie, that ERETS TACHTITH, does
signify Hell as properly in Hebrew, as hell does in English, (though I mean
not to stand with you for the tongue) yet pardon me to dissent from you in
this. For in the places which you quote, it can not in my simple understanding
carry that sense. Your first place is, They which seek my soul, shall go down
into the lowermost parts of the earth, which cannot be meant of Hell: except
these reasons deceive me. First, it might seem a presumption to enter so
far into Gods secrets, as to judge his own private enemies. Next, it should
seem not to stand with the affections of a godly heart, to ascribe that place
to his enemies, out of the horror whereof, there is no redemption. For the
children of God, do rather pray for their enemies, and desire their amendment.
This place may be well construed of the grave. For it is an argument used by the
Prophet, to lay the pride of them that sought his soul, and to solace
himself: recording that their hatred should have an end, when the grave should
swallow them. The words ^ollowing confirm this sense: That they shall fall
upon the edge of the sword, which cannot be understood, but of temporal death.

HILL his reply.
INdeed, The paralogismes of this sect
I brought this place Ephesians. 4. 9. to prove that Christ descended into Hell. I
charged you not with immodestie, read again.
And whereas you charge me with immodesty, for so alleging of it: I must
needs charge you with These two untruths will prove not one.
two untruths in answering this allegatio^. The one is, y^ I called it Is it an
untruth to tell your own tale in your own words.
the pit of Hell, Yet and you be remembered transla^ing Lauater in the next sect.
you call it a pit.
which phraise I never used. The other is, You do impude^tly or arrogantly
take which you will, misuse my words: read again.
you have impudently a^ouched, that none of the modester sort of divines, have
ever alleged this place to prove the descending of Christ into ^el. 233.
Here ye settle your self to your old trade, to prove a thing, not denied.
Your work could not rise otherwise.
223 For many, and those both learned and modest have alleged this place to
this purpose. This witness needed not.
Athanasius interpreting this Epistle and text, thus writes. Into what place
did he desce^d? Hel^ may here (...) the gra^e.
Into hell truly, which he calls according to the common opinion of men, the
lowest parts of the earth. This witness is superfluous.
Ambrose on this place says thus* This Christ therefore, coming down from
heaven into the earth, was borne a man, afterward he dyed and He says not the
thing he is brought to say, that the lowermost parts of the earth is Hell* and
hell may also be here taken for the grave.
descended into hell, from whence rising the third day, he went up to heaven
before all mortal men, that he might show death to be vanquished to every
creature. This witness might have been spared.
Chrysostom on this place says. He went to He says not, that the lowermost
parts of the earth are hell.
those parts of the earth, then the which nothing is lower, and from thence
lies ascended into heaven, then the which nothing is higher. The like has This
testimony needed not.
Augustine li. de Trin. chap. 19. Nor ^his needed not.
Ierom^ on this text thus notes. That Hell here may be taken for the grave: and
so it is liklie seeing it may be doubted of the place of the damned whether it
be under the earth, or no:
Hell is under the earth noe man doubts, for he that descended in soul into
hell ascended both body and soul into heaven. Nor this witness needed no^.
Mollerus a learned Minister of Germany, on the sixtene Psalm says: that the
descending into hell, is plainly proved out of the Ephesians the fourth chapter.
nor this.
Musculus on the 68. Psalm. thus writes. This God which was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself; first descended into the lowest But says
not that the lowermoste parts of the earth ar Hell.
parts of the earth, then he lead captuitie captive, and not only we are
delivered from the captuity of Satan, sin, death and damnation: but also
Christ triumphing over them a^tirants, has ascended above all heavens, to
fulfill all things: This testimony needed not, but on this same place 4. Ephesians.
he denies that it proves the descending into the place of the damned.
Hemingius on the 2. Chapter to the Colossians thus also teaches. As by his
death he conflicted with the enemy one the cross, so by his glorious In all
this he speaks not the thing he is alleged for.
descending into hell, res^^^^ection and Ascension, he triumphed as it is Ephe
4. Leaving his cross lift up as a monument of his victory, To conclud This
needed not.
Alesius a very learned preacher of Scotland, on the 19. chapter of John,
affirms, that the 1. Pet. 3. and Ephesians. 4. do manifestly prove the descending
of Christ into hell, if Athanasius, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine and Jerome
of the old fathers, and Mollerus, Musculus, Hemingius and Alesius of the new
writers be all This is astrange (if) I never said so.
immodest divines, then have you truly said: but if in the judgment of the
learned, all these were most reverend men, then most Then what are you if I
accuse them not, as indeed I do not.
shameless are you to accuse them of the want of modesty. More over, where you
say no divine dare to dispute where hell is: If it be true in any sort, how
dare you say above, that Hell no doubt is under the earth.
it is true in some sort, for no divine can 242. An inco^sequence. It follows
not because men cannot circu^scribe ^el, Ergo, they cannot know where it is.
Navigators cannot circumscribe the la^d of P^piniayes and yet^ they know that
it is between the straites and the South pole.
252 circumscribe the place of hell which is If hell be infinite, then is it no
where, and all that you have said confuted. infinitum nusqua^ est, mul^ to minus
incentro terrae.
infinite, nor yet of If heaven: and hell be both infinite: then be there
three infinites heaven, hell, and God.
heaven: only the word of God affirms, that heaven is above Gal. 4. 26. And
hell is beneath, Proverbs 15. 24. I deny the argument.
Therefore, the lowest parts of the earth That is not the question.
may well be taken for hell: Then you go further and say, that ERETS TAGHTITH
does not signify hell, Psalm. 63. and for this you bring two reasons: the one
is, y^ it were a presumption in the Prophet to judge, his enemies: 2. that it
stands not with the affections of a godly mind to assign hell to his
enemies, but to pray for them to your first reason this I answer* In the Psalm.
9. 18. David uses the Not the like. There he speaks of the wicked, here of
his enemies.
like speech: The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the people that
forget God: which text* Calvin thus Calvine is alled* ged to prove a thing not
denied.
expounds, the Hebrewe word SHEOL^^ which was doubtful. I have not doubted
to translate hell* for though it does not displease me, that others (...) it
(Sepulcher) yet it is sure, here is some thing noted besides common death*
otherwise he should speak nothing of the reprobate* but that which did
generally* happen to al beleuers. In the hundred and ^inth Psalm also, David
thus prays; This is spoken of the Messiah, and his enemies*
Let Satan stand at his right hand, let, his prayer be turned into sin* let
the wickedness of his Father, be had in remembrance in the sight of the Lord,
and let not the sin of his mother be done away***** Do you think this to be
spoken When and where said I so?
pres^^tuously? Many such texts could (...) allege, to prove that David
inspired with the spirit of prophecye, did foretell* not only of the tragical
destruction of the bodies of his Not of his own enemies I believe.
enemies, but also of the extreme da^natio^ of their souls. This the^ is my
reply ^o your second reason: these enemies were not This would be proved. And
if it ca^ be proved, I will forgo this argument: and yet I will hold still my
conclusion: The conclusion may stand true, though my argument prove a jade.
private enemies, but public, and did hate* David for his religion sake: David
therefore by the gift of prophecy does foretell, that their souls should go
to hell to be tormented, and their bodies should be the portion of soxes, that
is, should never come to the grave, for what need 163 David tell us they should
by, 263. This was answered, if you will be answered
which we know is common to al, or how can that be true, which you say, that
they should be By a Metonymia.
in grave, when David himself says, they were not in any grave, but were the
protion of Foxes. And so M. Calvin (whom I hope you will believe) teaches you,
writing upon this psalm and verse. To be the portion of Foxes, is as much as
to be devoured and torn of wicked beasts for God (says Call.) does threaten his
punishment to the reprobate, that they shall be a pray to Wolves and dogs,
because he would deprive them of the honor of their grave. Here you see But
hee^ Calvine says not that they came into the Sheol.
M. Calvin says, they came not into their grave, you say they did. How M.
Calvin and you may be reconciled The you know not Metonymia
I know not: for Calvin adds this reason. It happens some time that we know
the same temporal punishments to be common to the good and the bad, but this
is the difference, the bones of the godly are gathered together and kept in
safty, that none of them shall perish; but the scattering of the bones of the
reprobate, is a sign of eternal destruction. Calvin is not of this mind,
read his commen^
Therefore how can the lower parts of the earth signify the grave, as you
say, since (as M. Calvine tru^ie says) they were in no grave. Answer me this
(good M. Hume) plainly: Psalm. 63. 9.

The lower parts of the earth I deny the mayor.
signify, (not the grave) but hell, Christ descended into the lower parts of
the earth, Ephesians. 4. 9. ^rgo, Christ descended into hell.

Two impossibilities in the D. reply:
That Hell is infinite, and that Hell is in the center of the earth: Finitum,
non est capax inffniti.

That Hell and Heaven, be both infinite. Non sunt duo infinita.

HVME his Reioynder.
Whereas I charge you with immodesty, you say, you will charge me with
untruths: you are marvelous chollericke. Good sir be content, you mistake
my words. I have misvsed neither you nor your friends: I only said, speaking
of the modester sort, that no divines allege these words, to prove, that Hell
is in the center of the earth, which they might well do, if ERETS TACHTITH did
signify Hell properly. You have not done well to trouble your friends to prove
a thing not denied. Here you call forth nine writers, and cry shame on me for
misvsing them. If I were as chollericke as you, I might take Pepper in the
Nose, and call you bra^^lesse, for mistaking my words? The meanest Carter in
the plain, would never so have ouerlasht himself: by such shifts as this, you
have made your book importable. If a man would peake out all such ware as
this, he would leave you small store of stuff to show amongst your customers.
If you will run this course, you can never want words, howsoever you shift
for matter: but if you mend not, impertinent traish will make men despair, that
ever you will be able to yarne a Bishopprick with your pen. After all these
outcries, you confess that which I said, and ad a reason because Hell is
infinite. Though your reason be not good, yet your confession will purge me,
and stain your own face with your own box. That the lower-most parts of the
earth, must needs signify Hell, thus you argue. Heaven is above and Hell is
below: Ergo, the lower-most parts of the earth may be Hell. This reason was
taynted before it came at Whately-bridge, and never came into Oxenforde amongst
so many Noses able to smell such ware, as far as Bullington-greene, without a
peall of S. Clements Belles: First, you conclude not the question. This
question is not, whether the lower-most parts of the earth may be Hell: but
whether ERETS TACHTITH be the proper name of Hell. Secondly, the place that you
allege out of the Proverbs, all interpreters agree not upon that sense of the
words. Lastly, This is a miraculous hole on the edge of Mendipp.
if a man should reason, Heaven is above, and and Hell is be low: Ergo, Owkie
hole is Hell: you will laugh your self, though partiallitie will not let you
see the same stupiditie in your own reason. The first place that you allege,
to Prove that ERETS TACHTITH, must needs signify Hell, is out of the 63.
psalm. They that seek my soul, shall go down into the lowermost parts of the
earth. Which place is so far from proving your conclusion necessarily: that
where one interpretour that ever I saw, does interpret it of Hell, three does
construe it of the grave: which sense being agreeable to the rest of the
Scriptures: I viewing the whole body of the psalm, and finding David to
speak only of his own private enemies, and no inducementes to lead me to
think, that he speaks here, either in the person of Messiah, or of his body
the Church: I gathered three reasons to disprooue your sense. First, that it
were a presumption: Secondly, contrary to the mind of the godly, to judge their
own private enemies: And lastly, that the words following, they shall fall upon
the edge of the sword, can reach no further then to temporal death. To the last
of these you say nothing, which of it self is strong enough to carry this
conclusion from you. To the other two, you oppose the 9. Psalm, 18. where the
Prophet speaks of the wicked: and the 109. psalm which contains a prophecy
of Christ, uttered in the person of David, Act. 1. 20. which places point
besides the mark, and prove not, that David does Judge his own private
enemies, but the wicked and enemies of the Messiah. Wherefore, though I scars^
trust these two last reasons: yet till I here them taken away by reason, I
stand at my first mark still, that David speaking here of his own private
enemies, is of Jobs mind, not rejoicing at the destruction of them that hate
him. Job. 31. 29. 30. And here M. D. I would have you mark, that though I had
not on argument, yet my sense being agreeable to the words of the Psalm. and
consonant to the scriptures, is enough of it self, to prove that youres is not
the proper meaning of these words. But say you, this cannot be the grave,
because it follows they shall be the portion of Foxes; that is, they shall
want the honor of the grave, and there you set Calvine against me, saying,
that you see not how we may be reconciled together. For my part, I care no more
for Caluines favor, then Augustines and other godly men's, that have labored
fruitefully in the Lords harvest, whatsoever it pleases you to bear your
reader in hand otherwais of me. But if you had been half so learned as you think
your self: or half so indifferent as men do wish, that wish you well, you might
have seen that the grave is used by a Metonymi^ for all the dead, whether laid
up in the bowels of the earth, or floting in the sea, or devoured of ravenous
beasts. For the Hebrew SHEOL does not so much signify the grave (which for
want an other word we are forced to set for it by a Metonymia) as that which
the greek (...), does better express by the privation of light or life,
separating all the dead, which in Latin be called inferi, and manes, from the
living, which they call superstites. And not comprysing only them which are
buried in a grave as you do ignorantly suppose here, nor the damned as you do
as wisely hold in another place. Thus the very heathens did use this word,
(...) says Homer: that is, he sent many worthy souls (not to the hell of
torments, that had been a bad reward for their worthiness) but to the dead,
or to the grave. So is the same word used by Nonnus, a Christian Poet of great
antiquity, in his Paraphrase upon John, cap 11. speaking of Lazarus, who you
will not say, (I hope) was in Hell. (...): that is, and hearing amongst them
that were dead and rotten, the fugitive corpse returned again out of hell. The
same author in the same place uses (...) in the same signification, whence
the Latins have borrowed their Barathrum. (...). That is, who raised up the
dead Lazarus, skipping out of the smokie gulf, and returning from the dead. So
the Latins used their Orcus and Tartarus, not dividing the damned and the
saved: but the dead and the living, by the privation and habit of light and
seeing. Where you ask me why David should speak of their temporal death,
which is common to all, I told you (if you will be told it) to solace himself
by the rememberance of their malice, that it was not everlasting, but should
cease with their short lives. You conclude this section with a new syllogism,
with protestation to good M. Hum^ (so you call him) to answer it plainly.
The lower parts of the earth, signify not the grave, but hell. Christ
descended into the lower parts of the earth. Ergo, Christ descended into Hell.
Now, M. Hume to deserve your good name, first, denies the mayor: secondly, he
replies to the minor, that in his judgment, the lowermost parts of the earth
that Christ descended into, may well be taken for the base and mean estate that
the son of God descended into upon the earth. The son of a Carpentar, borne
in a stable, cradled in a cratch, and living in a base estate, without a hole
to hide his head in, was even the lowest and basest parts of the earth. He
could not well go lower. Thus Hume bids you go your way, and take this for an
answer.

HVME Sect. 9.
YOur other places be, I will pearce through all the lowermost parts of the
earth, and look on them that be a sleep. Eccles. 24. And they shall be cast
down into the lowermost parts of the earth, and sleep in the midst of the
uncircumcised. Ezech. 31. 18. which two places, by your leave, cannot be well
meant of Hell. Except that you can persuade us, that there is sleep, that is,
rest and quietness in Hell, but of the grave and state of the dead, whereof we
have as commonly almost, as stones in the street, he did sleep with his
Fathers. The same words ERETS TACHTITH, which you say, does signify properly
Hell, be so used by the Prophet David, Psalm. 139. 14. That they can no wise be
taken in that signification, except it can be proved, that David was fashioned
and made in Hell. His words be these: My bones are not hid from thee, though
I was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath in the earth. Here Beza
does well observe, that the place of the Apostle which you allege, may fitly
be applied to the sense of this place: and note unto us the discense of
Christ, into the womb of the Virgin.

HILL his Reply.
FIrst you say, The Paral^gismes in the D. reply.
the place quoted by me Syrac. 24. 37 makes not for the proof of my
assertion. If you had red Chytreus, a man (as you alledg on your own side) you
culd never have hoped that any thing in this cap* would have changed my mind
If you had considered what It will not follow because he speaks of the bottom
of the depth in the 8. verse: therefore the lowermost parts of the earth must
needs be hell in the 24. verse.
went before, and what follows, you would have bin of another mind. For before
in the 8. verse is said, I alone have This may be understood of wisdom, which
discoursing by reason of all the works of nature, does after a sort walk about
the heavens, and under the bottomes of the sea.
gone round about all the compass of heaven, and have walked in the bottom of the
depth. Which depth When alis done, Pellic* must hew this chip for this chi^ke.
Pellicanus alearned writer does interpret abyssum mortis and inferorum, the
When Pelican has done with it, M.D. must turn inferi to his byasse, or else
this labor is lost inferi may be taken for the dead, as said is in the former
sect.
depth of death and hell. Yea, the That is doubted.
whole Chapter speaks of the Son of God, and of his That is not true.
wondrous works in saving mankind: of the which this is on, That is false.
that he was not only alive among the living, but after death That wants
probability.
his body was among the dead bodies, And that all show of truth: There is not
one word in all this cap. of any of these things.
and his soul among the souls in hell. This is petitio principij.
which he calls the lower parts. The like scripture to this is in Job. 38.
16, 17. In this place, God opens to Job the imperfection of man's knowledge.
How can you make that liable to your question, to pr^oue that in the 21. of
Eccl. the lowermost parts of the earth is hell.
Have thou entered into the bottom of the sea? or have thou walked to seek out
the depth; have the gates of death bin opened unto thee? or have thou seen the
gates of the shadow of death. Some body must help you.
These words are thus opened by Martin Borrhauius in his learned Commentaries
upon Job. How helps that you.
I have dwelled in the highest places, and my throne is in the pillar of the
clouds: I have gone round about the compass of heaven above, and have
wallted in the floods of y^ sea. I pearce through all the lower parts of the
earth. Have those in hell or the dead bin searched out of thee? and do thou
know their estate and condition, and what shall happen to their bodies
hereafter? and what does happen to their souls now? The force of death and of
hell he makes maniefest by the names of gates, as it is manifest in that
scripture: and the gates of hell shall not prevail against thee. How so: he
speaks not here of that place.
By these words it is evident, that the nethermoste parts of the earth, Syrac.
24, 37. and Zalmaueth the Hebrew word, Job. 38, 17. do signify hell, and that
none Neither of these places signifies the son of God.
but the Son of God above, has personaly showed himself in all these places.
For the place in Ezechiel, that it makes most significantly for my purpose,
Indeed Esaias and Ezech were learned in a strange kind of knowledge.
I will prove it by Esaias, Ezech, and diverse other, both learned and modest
writers. Esaias 14, 9. handling the same matter, says The word in Esaias, is
SHEOL. not hell.
Hell beneth is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming. And in Ezech* also:
and therefore this is a plain
And Ezechiel in the 15. and 16. verses calls it hell plainly. Since the word
in both the prophets is Sheol: and it is confessed that Sheol does signify the
grave as well as hell, I wonder that you blush not to find this fault with me.
Since then both the prophets call it hell, how dare you to interpret the grave:
that the nethermost parts of the earth do signify hell, You promise proof by
Ezech, and flee to Mu^ster.
I prove it out of the 12. ver. of Ezechiel. And the strangers have destroyed
him even the terrible nations, and they have left him up on the montaines, and
in all the valleys his branches are broken. You promise it by Munster, and sle
to your own gloss on him: and so you fl^e from bush to bush.
Munster on this place says, that by the branches are understood the
carcasses of his host, which the veasts of the field did devour. Lauaterus the
Minister of Tigurin agrees with him. But he will not help you with ^ut a gloss.
All the beasts of the field shall dwell upon his ruin: the kings carkas shall
not be laid up into the sepulcher of his elders, but shall be a pray to
crows, griphins, and other carni^orous birds. So does Pelican a learned
Linguist interpret this place, at the last, there is ane auersion or
Apostrophe, to Pharao himself, or to the Assyrian King. To whom art thou
li^ened, O thou noble and high among the trees of pleasure, thou have passed
all other in power, and yet with other kings that were in thy company It should
seem to be (thou wast brought) by the words before and after,
they were brought to the lowest parts of the earth, I can not find Pelican,
but if I could I believe I should find this pare^thesis of your own making:
and if it be his, if you take hell for the state of the dead, he has not cut
his cloak for your shoulders
(that is) to hell, among the abominable heathen shall thou sleep, and lie as
a wretched and miserable man. Now because you tak hold of the word sleep, I
must know before I can remember it: and you must prove it if you can
you must remember that these words ar spoken ironically, There is noted a
Sarcasmus, and not ironia
as it is noted in the contents of Esaias 14. The derision of the king of
Babylon. Moreover, Lauaterus on this place of Ezech. says: These things may be
better understood out of the 14. of Es. which prophesying of the destruction of
y^ king of Babylon Baltassar, describes with what bitter scoffs he is
entertained He means amongst the dead,
in hell. To end. Lauaterus on this place, proves these four things: first,
that there is ane hell: secondly, that hell in this chapter is called by three
names, that is, 1. SHEOL 2. ERETS TACHTITH, 3. BOR. Hell, the lowest parts of
the earth, Here tra^slating Lauater, you make him giu^ Hell a name, which in
the former sect* you scorned as not be seeming your own learned lips,
and a pit: thirdly, that this Hell is beneath us: and lastly, that the
tyrants and wicked of the world do descend into it, and this he proves out of
Numb. 16. 33. Psalm. 55. 15. And adds also, that Tertullian and Jerome do
prove hell to be beneath in the earth. The conclusion then is thus, for as much
then as the Assyrians dyed with the sword, and were devoured of the beasts and
birds of the fiel^, By a metonymia, is that so strange to you,
I pray tell me, how that can be true that you affirm, that the lowest
parts of the earth does signifye the grave: A tautologie.
for how were they in the grave y^ were never buried? An other tautologie, yet
not proved,
therefore, they were in hell, as both Esaias and Ezechiel do affirm, and as
Pelican, Munster, and Lauater, three notable learned men in the holy tongue do
interpret it. My friends I hope will be better advised
I think your own friends when they read this, will confess you, either to
be ignorant of the word of God, or else to wrest it contrary to the meaning of
the holy ghost. Moreover, where you mislike with me because I said, that ERETS
TACHTITH, that is, the lowermost parts of the earth, does signifye hell
generally in the Hebrew tongue, and you bring an instance out of the 139. Psalm.
and 14. verse, where you prove, that the lower parts of the earth does signify
the mothers womb, and therefore it does not signify hell always: this is a
childish reason. In a metaphorical signification it signifies the mothers
womb: You alter the question,
therefore in his proper signification, it can not signify hell. Some
arguments a metaphora may be better then any you have made in all this book,
Argumentum a metaphora ductum non valet, an argument drawn from a metaphore
is of no force. And that here is a metaphor, M. Calvin shall be the judge. He
compares (says Calvin) the mothers womb to the Then not to hell,
lowest and inward dens of the earth: and a little after, for no doubt David
would expres metaphoricaly, that inestimable cunning which appears in the
figure of man's body. This is patched in amongst Call. words, to deceive the
simple
The mothers womb is compared to hell for the darkness of it: for as Calvin
says, that artificer which makes a cunning piece of work in a dark place,
is more to be commended then he which does the like in the light. David also
is here said to be made in the nethermost parts of the earth, 306, This wod
if it were brought to the Logicians frame will warp, and will never come within
the mould of mood and figur
336 because he was by nature the child of wrath and of hell, if he had not bin
delivered therehence by Jesus Christ. Breefely, where you say, that he
descended in to the Virgins womb, and that it is the true meaning of the place
Ephesians. 4. 9. both you and your M. Beza are deceived. For Paul reproves you Ep,
4. 10. He that descended is even the same A paralogisme in the word the same
that ascended. Now the body and soul of Christ ascended into heaven, therefore
the It follows not se the answer.
body and soul of Christ descended into the virgins womb, if the body did
descend into the virgins womb, then Christ took not flesh of the virgin.
Untruth,
Thus that you may contradi^t me, you are not afraid ignorantly or wittinglye,
to deny the incarnation of our Savior: A super^^ous allegation to prove a
thing not denied: that is our old skill.
Theophilact says well of these words, when you read, that the Son of man
came down from heaven, you may not think that his flesh came down from heaven,
for this is y^ opinion of Heretics, which did teach that Christ brought his
body from heaven, and did pass through the virgin, I hope you hold not this
opinion, They of whom I lear, ned this interpretation, looked as well about
them to miss such myres as ever you did or ca^.
but if you hold this interpretation you must needs fall into it, For he that
descended is even the same that ascended. Ephesians. 4. 10.

Violence in this section done to the text, by the Doctor.
First, that the whole 24. chap. of Eccles. speaks of the Son of God, and
of his wonderful works in saving mankind: of the which this was one, that he
was not only alive amongst the living: but after death his body was amongst
the dead bodies, and his soul amongst the souls in Hell, etc.

That Esaias in 14. 9. and Ezech. in the 15. verse of his 31. cap. calls that
Hell plainly, which Ezech. in the 18. verse of the same chapter, calls the
lowermost parts of the earth.

That in the 31. 18. verse. of Ezech. Thou shall be cast down in the lowermost
parts of the earth, and sleep in the midst of the uncircumcised: the word
(sleep) is taken ironicallie.

That in Ephesians. 4. it is meant, that Christ descended in soul and body, as he
ascended in soul and body.

A new rule in Logic, that argumentum a Metaphora sumptum, non valet.

HVME his reioynder to the 9. sect.
FIrst mark, that by a general axiom, whatsoever a man alleges to prove a
thing, either doutfull or unknown: the same must be better known, and enforce
such a necessity of consequence, as cannot be denied. The thing that you have
here in hand to prove, is, that (the lowermost parts of the earth) is as
proper and peculiar a name for the place of the damned, as Hell is in English.
To prove this, your testimonies should be without controulment. But are in
deed so far short of that mark, that they are, (if not harder) altogether
as hard and obscure, as the place, that they are alleged to illustrate. The
first of them I have dispatched in the former section. The next is out of the
24. of Eccles. a book not Canonical, nor written in the tongue, whereon we
stand. In which respect, I might have rejected it. But because one answer
served it, and your third place out of 31. 18. of Ezech. I joined them
together. The first was, I will pearce through the lowermost parts of the
earth, and look on them that he a sleep. The second, Thou shall be cast
down into the lowermost parts of the earth, and sleep in the midst of the
uncircumcised. To them thus I answered. There is sleep, that is rest and
quietness, in the place called here the lower-moste parts of the earth: But
there is no rest nor quietness in Hell, the place of the damned: Ergo, the
place called here the lowermost parts of the earth, is not Hell, the place of
the damned. For the first of your places, you say nothing to this argument. For
the second, you say, that the word (sleep) is used Ironicallie, that is, in a
scornful and mocking manner, and a contrary sense For proof, (for want of
text) you take up the conte^ts of the 14. of Esaias: and Lauater, who says, that
Baltasar was received amongst the dead: (for so is the true sense) with
bitter scoffs. First, consider that the figure in the 14. of Esaias, is a
sarcasmus, not an Ironia, consisting of bitter words used in their usual
significations. Secondly, that your authors are but me^. Thirdly, that they
say nothing of the word (sleep) which Ezech. Genesis 47. 30.
uses. Lastly, that you have (sleep) many hundredth times, Math. 9. 24.
attributed in the Scriptures to the dead: Mark. 5. 39.
but never to the state of the damned, neither in jest nor earnest. 1. King.
11. 43.
Whereupon thus I reason. We must not wring words out of jointe by an Ironia,
1. King. 2. 10.
except some necessary inducement in the text, Luke 8. 52.
or absurdity in the letter lead us thereto. 1. King. 15. 8.
But here is neither inducement in the text, 1. King. 14. 20.
nor absurdity in the letter: 1. Cor. 7. 39.
Ergo, here we must not wring this word out of jointe in this text, 1. King.
21. 51.
and take it from the usual significations, in other places of the Scripture.
This argument is so strong, and prevailed so much with other writers, that you
cannot find one to take your part in this mock. If you could, we should have
his name, with the highest styles of antiquity, learning, and aestimation,
that any show could yield him. Whereas you can with no color hyde this
blot, in the 24. of Eccles. there you run another course, persuading me, that
if I had read that that goes before, and comes after, I would have been of
another mind. And affirming, that the whole chapter speaks of the Son of
God, and his wonderful works in saving, etc. You are somewhat deceived of
me. For I have read the whole chapter, and more then that, have considered the
matter in it. The whole Chapter seems to me a Prosopopoia of the Wisdom,
which God in his word, and the light of nature has left unto man: praising
her self in the congregation. That the author speaks only of that
Wisdom, (except you will make him leave his ground, and wander from his
subject) it is plain, by the 11. and 12. verses: where she says of her self,
that he that made and created her, appointed her an habitation in Sion. Which
cannot be understood of the aeternall Wisdom of God, which was neither made,
nor created, but begotten. Whereas she says in the sixth verse, that she
causes the light that fails not to rise in the heavens, and covered the
earth as a cloud. If you take light, for the knowledge of god the heavens for
his church, and the earth for the reprobate, as they are in diverse places of
the Scriptures, there is nothing in all this chapter, dis-agreing with this
subject. That she proceeds from the mouth of the most highest: that she is
the first^ borne of all creatures: that she was created from the beginning, and
made before the world: and that she shall never fail, may be well understood
of the word of God, which came from his own mouth, and shall not perish one
jot of it, though heaven and earth does pass. As for the 8. verse, which you
say would have changed my mind, that she alone has gone about the compass
of the heavens, and walked in the bottom of the depth: I should sooner take it
for natural wisdom, proceeding also from God; which taking view of all his
creatures from the highest heavens, to the lowest center of the earth, does
after a sort walk about them, and under them: then for the aeternall wisdom
of God, with whom diverse things in this chapter, will in no wise agree. Thus I
see, that there is no thing in this chap. to persuade me, that the wisdom
here spoken of, is the Son of God. But suppose there were, yet here is
nothing to help your cause. You know that the general question between you
and me, is not of the son of God: but of the son of man, that is, of
Christ's humanity, whether it did descend into the local Hell. Of him, I will
stand to it to your face, that there is not one syllable in all this chapter,
neither of his body, nor of his soul, neither amongst the living, nor
amongst the dead, in the grave, nor in Hell. Wherefore, (howsoever I have read
this chap.) you have read it more then well, that have found matter in it, that
no man (but you) ever saw in it. The particular question in this part of the
section, is whether the lower-moste parts of the earth, in the 37. verse of
this Chap. does signify the Hell of the damned: to which this allegation, and
the other out of Job is so impertinent, that I wonder you could hope, that they
would hold way. For, what makes it to this question, that the wisdom of God
does compass the heavens, and walk in the bottom of the depth: that it
enters into the bottom of the sea, or has seen the gates of death. You are
near be-stead, that are driven so far for reasons. Thus much (though it be
Apocryphal) for the place of Ecclesiastes. As for the other place of
Ezechiell, before you came to the answer, which I have set down before for
orders sake: you endeavored to prove by Esaias and Ezech* that it makes for you,
after your own manner, which is, rather to trouble your adversary with new
reasons, then to answer them that are in hand. For your proof, you quote the
14. 9. of Esaias, and the 15. and 16. verses of the same chapter of Ezechiell.
Where you say, both the Prophets call the place, into the which these Kings
are cast, most plainly, Hell. And wondering at me, that I dare interpret it
grave, you note in your margent, Hume disagreeth with Esaias. Ezech, Munster,
Lavater, and Pelilcan. But here M. D. I pray you let me ask a question. In
what language wrote those Prophets? Was the very word they used, hell? If not
that, (as I think you will grant) but the hebrew word SHEOL, which does
signify the grave, rather then Hell, why may I not take the one signification,
as well as you the other. Thus with your bold daring, you dare the simple, as
men do larkes. But here, now know, (if you know it not) that I have such
reasons, not to take your signification of SHEOL here, as should carry you as
well as me, if your wit were not married to your will. First, though the
Assyrians and Babilonians, of whom the Prophets speak in these places, were
heathens, and damnable miscreants: yet it was not their purpose to speak here
of their aeternall damnation: but of the dishonorable destruction of their
temporal kingdoms. Secondly, that which Esaias in the 9. verse. calls Hell: he
calls four times the grave, and twice the pit, in the same chap. Thirdly, in
the same ver. which you quote, he says, that hell raising up the dead, even
all the Princes of the earth, did meet the king of Babell. But all the dead,
even the Princes of the earth, were not in the Hell of the damned. Fourthlie,
in the 11. ver. he calls the place into the which the King of Babell was
brought, the grave: with worms under, and over him. But that cannot be the
place of the damned: Ergo, the place, of which he speaks here, cannot be the
place of the damned. Fiftlie, in the 15. and 16. verses he says, When he
was brought down to the grave, to the sides of the pit, they that saw him
should say, is this he that made the earth to tremble? But men could not see
and look into his falling into the place of the damned: Ergo, the place
whereof he there speaks, is not the place of the damned. Thus much for Esaias.
For Ezechiel. First, in the 14. verse, he joyneth the lowermoste parts of the
earth, with them that go down into the pit: and in the 16. verse, he joineth
the going to hell, with the same. But to descend into the pit is to go down
into the grave, not into hell: Ergo, both the lower-most parts of the earth,
and SHEOL, here is taken for the grave. Secondly, in the same 14. verse, the
nether parts of the earth, is the pit and place of death, common to all the
children of men: But the pit and place of death, common to all men, is not the
place of the damned: Ergo, the low er-most parts of the earth, is not here
the place of the damned. Thirdly, in the 16. verse, The Lord did make the
nations of the earth to shake, at the sound of his fall, when he did cast him
down into Hell. But the nations of the earth, heard not, nor felt not his fall
into the Hell of the damned: Ergo, this is not understood of the Hell of the
damned. All these reasons had I, and they made me dare to translate SHEOL,
(not the place of the damned) but grave. And therefore (M. Doctor) you may cease
to wonder at me, if you will. And now I must wonder also at your manner of
reasoning. That the lower-moste parts of the earth, does signify Hell, (say
you) I will prove it by the 12. verse of the same Chap. of Ezech. And the
strangers have destroyed him, even the terrible nations, etc. Then, not finding
your purpose there, you run to Munster, Lavater and Pellicane, that the King
of Asshur was the prey of carnivorous byrds: and yet not finding to satisfy
you, you wring out a consequence, that if he was devoured of beasts, then he
was not buried: if he was not buried, then he was not in the grave: If he was
not in the grave, then the lowermost parts of the earth wherein he was, must
needs be Hell. Where I tell you, I must needs wonder, how you could leap so
many ditches without a staff, to find Hell in this verse. For all the load
you lay upon me here of ignorance, and misvsing the text: I did not take one
such leap in all my Letter. As for my instance out of the 139. psalm, that
SHEOL, does not always signify Hell, but may signify the mothers womb, you
say it is childish reason, and prove it with a Catholic rule, that Argumentum
ductum a Metaphora non valet. I know not what you mean by an argument, a
metaphora. This is the first time that ever I hard metaphora suspected to be a
topic place: yet I have heard good arguments in metaphorical words. Christ
himself, the best logician that ever I knew, had wont to make many such. As for
example. The servant that puts not his Lords talent to the vantage, shall be
cast into utter darkness, where shall be weping and gnashing of teeth. But al
ministers, that labor not faithfully in their charges are such: Ergo, all
ministers that labor not faithfully in their charge, shall be cast into utter
darkness, etc. I believe at the latter day, when arguments will be as well
sifted, as ever they were in the school-streats at Oxen. this will be found a
good argument, for all the metaphora that is in it. As for my argument, I see
not how it is a metaphora. Though the signification of the word be metaphorical
(as Calvin well notes:) yet it serves my turn to prove, that it is not
always Hell. And now you put me in mind of it, I will pick another argument
out of the same place, that perhapps will trouble you worse: That is, the
natural signification of every word, whence the metaphorical is taken. But
this signification of these words (the lowermost parts of the earth) is taken
from the dens and cauernes of the earth, as you note me out of Calvin. Ergo,
the proper^ signification of this word, is the dens and cauernes of the
earth and not Hell of the damned. Of this judgment is Mercerus, Cevalerus, and
Cornelius Bertramus, in their additions to Pagnines Lexicon. You confute Beza
and me, for applying these words to the place of the Ephesians. thus, He that
descended, is even the same that ascended: But he ascended in soul and body.
Ergo, he descended in soul and body, which is not true of his descending into
the virgins womb. And here you charge us with ignorance, or wilful denying
the Incarnation of Christ. Good M. D. use me as you will, but be good to Beza:
he has been well thought of as yet. I wonder, that seeing so much against him
and me, you could not see the same against your self. You hold that this is
meant of his descending into the local Hell: against which, thus I use your own
reason: He that descended, is even the same that ascended: But he ascended
body and soul: Ergo, he descended into Hell body and soul: a thing that you
have not yet granted. How you will answer for your self, I leave it to
yourself. I have answered sect. 5. for Beza and me: see there. We deny not the
incarnation of Christ, you purge us your self within five lines. Wherefore you
might have let Theoph. alone, if you had no more skill to prove things not
denied, then the things in question and controuerted.

HVME Sect. 10.
But to let you alone with your Hebrewe, these words of the Apostle, can no
ways be taken for Hell, as you bear us in hand: But does purport the same
that John told us in other words. John. 16. 28.
I came from my Father into the world, and again. I leave the world, and go to
my Father. For, seeing the Apostle in this place brings his ascension, as an
argument of his descending, which John also did before him: John 3. 13.
No man can asscend up into heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the
son of man which is in heaven. It must follow by necessary consequence, that
he descended thither whence he ascended. Now I trust you will say, that he
ascended into heaven, not from Hell, but from Bethanie in the sight of his
Disciples. Secondly, if the place where he descended, was heaven, Hell cannot
be the place, whither he descended. For if ever he was there, he went not
thither in 30. years, after his descension and above. If you will say, that he
first descended into the earth, and then into Hell: then that descending could
not be one motion, being so many years intermitted: but must needs be two;
first from heaven into the earth, and then from the earth into Hell.

HILL his Reply.
Where you say, The Paralogismes in the D. reply.
you will let me alone with my Hebrew words, and yet deny they signify hell, I
hope You might rather have dispared if the ignorance, or wilfulnes against
conscience which you speak of, had not nestled in your own hat.
because I have proved, that they signify not the grave (as you have
ignora^tly or against your conscience affirmed) at your next answering; You
must hedge me in harder, before you make me take that mire
you will say they signify hell, and confess your disagreement with David,
Esaias, and Ezechiel. Now you conclude with certain pregnant reasons as And you
might find if you know a good reason from an ill, when you meet it in the way.
you imagine: It is neither first, last, nor any reason at all, see the
answer.
your first is this: These words do purporte unto us, that which John told us
in other words, I came from my father into the world, and again, I leave the
world and go to my Father. Ioh. 16. 18. A fig is not more like a fig, then
this place is Iyke the place, we have in hand.
This is nothing pertaning to the matter we have in hand My argument? that
fools bolt came never out of my quiver.
unless this be your argument. Christ came into the world, ergo, he went not
into Hell. Heerof I thus argue. It is no wonder to see as ill shapen reasons as
these, come off your blocks.
Christ descended into the virgins womb (as your self say) ergo he came not
into the world. Or thus. Christ descended into the world, ergo he descended not
into the grave. Christ was borne of the virgin, and came into the world to
reconcile us to his Father by his death, taking away our sins, and triumphing
in his own person over death and hell.319 Therefore not only Christ came down
into the world, but as our body for sin lies in the grave, so his body went
into the grave: and because our soul was mancipate unto hell, his soul went
into hell, that by his discending our souls How is this gear proved.
might be freed from hell. In your next reason you say, that Christ descended
thither, whence he ascended: now that is merely false, as appears The figure
of Iona^ makes nothing against me, see the answer.
Math. 12. 40. For as Jonas was in the whales belly 3 days and 3. nights, so
shall the Son of man be 3. days and 3. nights in the heart of the earth. Now
Christ ascended from the superficies of the earth, but he descended into the
heart of the earth. Therefore as this is no good argument, Christ ascended from
the mount, I did never spit such arguments: they dropped from your own lips.
ergo he ascended not from the grave, so this is also a weak argument. Christ
ascended from the world, ergo he went not into hell: A sharp srump: if you
knew any ill by Hume, I se you would bark with open mouth,
M. Hume lies in his bed, and early arises, afterward many seeing him he
rides toward Bromham, ergo M. Hume came from Bath and not from his bed. Then
you add this reason, if Christ descended into hell, then it was 30. years
after his birth, and so it was not one motion: you charge me with clouds of
sophistry, It is a weak eye, that cannot see the sun through this mist: you
are like him that could not see the wood for trees.
but here is a thick mist of sophistications: what you mean by this motion, I
know not (...)
but all the actions of our Savior are aptly divided into humility and glory:
of his humility there are 4. degrees. First he came into the virgins womb, By
this distinction, he was not in the world, when he was in the Virgin^ womb,
nor when he was in the grave, nor when he was in hell.
secondly into the world: thirdly to the grave: fourthly, to hell. Of his glory
and exaltation likewise there are four degrees. First he came out That must
be one, whosoever be the other.
of hell and the grave: secondly he A degree is an ascense from one step to
another. His conversing on the earth was no ascense and therefore no degree at
all.
conuersed in the earth: This degree in the air was not a step of his glory,
for he neither fastened his seete, nor made any abode there
thirdly he was carried in the air in a cloud, and then entered the heavens
with glory. Also where you say, that if hell were the place whyther he
descended, it must needs be the place from whence he ascended. You say much,
and prove little.
This as I have said before is utterly false, if you mean One ascension has
but one beginning calaed terminus a quo.
the immediate place from whence he ascended, for it is known to all beleuers,
that Christ did That pertains to his burial, not the descending that Paul
speaks of in this place.
descend into the grave, but he did not ascend immediatlye from the grave, Not,
but such eyes as yours.
therefore your reason is against the Scripture. where you make a distinction
between the resurrection and the ascension: you may understand if it please
you, that Ephesians. 4. 9. The Patitio principij. that is the place we stand upon. It
makes nothing for you, except we will grant you your will without reason.
word (ascend) contains in it al y^ degrees of Christ's exaltation, and
therefore the resurrection also: as the word descend does comprehe^d all the
degrees of Christ's humility.

HVME his Reioynder.
IT is as easy to hold an Eele by the tail, as you to the question. The
place whereon we stand, is in the 4. 9. to the Ephesians. But that he ascended,
what is it, but that he first descended into the lower-moste parts of the
earth. Which words, most of the learned, and many of your own favorites,
takes to be, as if he had said, that the Son of God clothed in man's nature
is ascended up to heaven, what is it, but that the same Son of God, first
came down into the lower-most parts of the earth, and took on him man's
nature: so that he which descended, is even the self same that is ascended to
fulfill all things, and gives now these gifts to men, to be some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelistes, etc. And so they take the lower-most parts
of the earth not to be the center of the earth, in respect of his highest and
extreme superficies: but the whole earth in respect of the heuens. Or, if you
like not that (which notwithstanding is most received amongst the learned) the
base estate that he descended into, in respect of the high estate that he
descended from. To overthrow this interpretation, you allege that the Hebrew
words ERETSTACHTITH, is in that language the proper name of Hell. To prove it,
you allege the places which I have confuted in the former 2. sectio^s. After
which labor, One motion has but one beginning and one ending. Of contrary
motions (if the mouer be one) the beginning of the one, is the end of the
other: and contrariwise the end of the one, is the beginning of the other.
I gathered some reasons from the infallible rules of nature, to prove, that
this place cannot carry your sense. My grounds were, Vnius motus vnum est
principium, vnus finis. And contrariorum motuum, vnius res moventis, principium
vnius est finis alterius, and contra. For example, East and West: South, and
North: up and down, are contraries. If any thing run west-warde, and return
eastward: the furthest point that it runs toward the west, is the
beginning of the motion toward the east: or, if a man come down a high hill,
and return up again: The lowest step that he came down, is the first step
of his going up. Whereupon thus I resoned. The beginning of Christ's ascending,
was the end of his descending. But his ascending was from this earth, whereon
we converse, Ergo, the end of this descending was only to this earth, whereon
we converse, and not into hell, as you gather out of this place. My mayor is
proved by the second rule, because the mouer is one, Christ, and the motions
contrary, ascending and descending: The minor is proved Mark. 16. 19. Luke.
26. 51. Act. 1, 9. and by all the Symbols, or sums of our faith by the common
consent of all Divines, and the usual speech of all Christians, that ever was,
or is. To this you answer, that the mayor is utterly false, because Christ
says, Mat, 12. 40. At Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales
belly: so the son of man must be three days and three nights in the heart
of the earth. Indeed, if the rule of nature were contrary to this saying of
Christ, I should sooner yield, that nature might err, then the Lord of
nature lie. But Christ came neither to destroy the law given to his church,
nor to the rest of his creatures, called the law of nature. Wherefore, this
answer was not Doctor-like. If you had looked well about you, you might have
seen, that his being three days, and three nights in the heart of the earth,
pertains to his burial, and not to his descending, more then his rising
again out of the heart of the earth, pertains to his ascension. For these are
four distinct things. His descending from heaven into his humane state: his
burial, and laying up in the heart of the earth after his death: his
resurrection, and returning again from the heart of the earth into the state
he was separated from by death. his ascending from the earth up into heaven. I
drew also another reason from the first principle, to preve^t an answer, that
his descending might have been first from heaven into his humane state, and
then out of his humane state into hell. It was this: if Christ's descending from
heaven did end in Hell, then it culd not be one motion, being so many years
intermitted. But it was but one motion: Ergo, it ended not in Hell. To this you
answer, that I, who charge you with clouds of Sophistry, do raise such
mistes of Sophistications, that you cannot see in them, what I mean by this one
motion. But there is not the cause. That the Owl cannot see in the light, the
fault is not in the light, but in the eye of the owl. There is not a gnerall
in Oxenford, that had spent a month in reading Aristotle's 5. and 6. books de
natura, that would not have known this argument. One descending, is but one
motion. Paul speaks here but of one descension: Ergo, but of one motion.
Your degrees of humiliation, are here impertinent. How properly they are
distinguished, I refer it to the margent. You tell me in the beginning, that
my first reason was from the place of John, I came from my Father into the
world, etc. Now silly man, I pity your simplicity. That is no reason at
all. But seeing I was to apply natural reason to this text: I brought that
place to prove, that I made no private sens of these words, Which course, if
you would follow, your wrangling would soon wear to an end. But you say, that
that place does little or nothing pertain to this place, that here we have
in hand. A fig is not liker a fig then that is like this. That he descended,
and that he came from the Father: that he ascended, and that he went to his
Father are so like, that though you put on your spectacles, you will not find
a hair between them. The argument that you frame here for me, and the two
absurd similies framed on the same block, let them be buried in the brain,
that bred them. That is the fittest coffen, I know, for such rotten stuff.
Wherefore, to conclude this disputation about these words, seeing neither your
examples in the former section, will fit your hand, nor this place tolerate your
absurd sense: I must put you in mind, of Chippenhames pulpite. There be
many godly souls, that would be glad to see you so honest, as to perform
the word, that you passed there before them.

HVME his 11. Sect.
YOur next argument is taken from the words of our Savior to Marie Magdalene,
forbidding her to touch him, because he had not yet been with his Father.
Whereupon you gather, seeing the whole man is said to be where the soul is, that
Christ's soul had not been in heaven, because he himself had not been there.
It is a wonder, if a man of your learning sees not so manifest a fallacy.
For, though by a figure a man may well say, that the whole is, where there is
but a part: yet it follows not where the whole is not, that there is no
part. An argument you know, a tot^ divise ad negationem omnium partium, was
never current amongst the learned. For example. The whole race of mankind is
not in England: Ergo, there is no men there: O^ Edmond Campion hangs not over
Newgate: Ergo, no part of him hangs there. Like to this is your reason. The
whole man Christ was not in heaven, Ergo, his soul was not there. That these
words of Christ were meant of the whole, it is apparent by the text. For, that
which had not yet been with his Father, was the same that Marie was forbid to
touch. That I believe you will not say, was his soul, which is not subject to
feeling, but the whole man consisting of soul and body. Wherefore it was the
whole man that Christ told Marie was not with his Father.

HILL his Reply.
MY next place was not this, The paralogis^nes of this sect
but a text out of Syrac. 17. 21. At the last shall he arise and reward them,
and shall repay their reward upon their heads, and shall turn them into the
lower parts of the earth. That note is against your self, read and see.
If the margin is noted Math. 25. 35. That note shows this place to be spoken
of them that gives bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, etc.
So that this place shows that after judgment, The verse you refer us to
in Math. speaks of the merciful, not of the wicked.
the wicked shall be turned into the lower parts of the earth, that is hell. You
are much deceived.
This place, because you nor your What synod is that: I was never of any
synod, nor worthy to rule a synod.
Sinod can answer, you have passed it over and said nothing to it, but are
now com to your scholepoints, the which when I use Untruth see the answer.
you call sophistry: and so it were indeed if I did use them* Words.
as you do. You say an argument drawn negatiuely from the whole to the parts
does not hold. True it is if by (parts) you mean integral parts, It is true of
all parts y^ can consiste after separation
but not essential parts. My instance was thus, Math. 8, 11. Many shall come
from the East and the West, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
kingdom of heaven. Out of this place I prove that where the soul of man is
after death, But if you will prove the thing you undertake to prove; you must
prove, that where the soul is not, the man is not.
there is the man said to be, as we usually say that these Patriarks and all
the saints are in heaven, though their bodies be in the earth and are dust and
ashes. If then the soul of Christ were in heaven until his resurrection, That
follows not.
then could not these words of Christ be true, John. 20. 17. Touch me not, for
Here M. D. will correct magnificat It is in the English Bibles, I am not yet
ascended, and that he thinks not to be of the praeter-perfect tense, and
therefore he mends it, I have not, etc. This had been well found of a boy in his
accidents: but a D. should have known that amatus sum is the preter-perfect
time as well as amatus fui.
I have not yet ascended unto my father, for it is the preter-perfect tense
(...). Therefore as this is untrue, to say that Abraham is not in heaven, I
know no man says so.
because his body was not in heaven: so this is false to say, Nor that, and
(therefore) these two are (...).
Christ was not in heaven, because his body was not in heaven. (...).
Our body is governed by the soul, and man takes his appellation of a
reasonable creature not of the body but of the soul: You had need of a cable
to bind this therefore to the premis^es.
and therefore if Christ's soul went up to heaven as you say, this cannot be
true (I have not yet ascended to my father) Besides if Christ's soul went first
to heaven, and afterward his soul and body together, It will not follow, see
the answer.
then were there 2. ascensions: prove this, and I will give you the goal. I
brought examples of my own general maxims: I dallied not with your argument.
You dally also with my argument in this manner, The whole race of mankind is
not in England: ergo, there is no men in England. I never thought, it see the
answer.
Do you think there is no more union betwixt Christ and his soul, then between
all the men of the world? It will never follow by this reason,
then by this reason the body and the soul of Christ were never united
together. Your next resemblance is this. Edmund Campions whole body is not over
Newgate, Ergo, no part of him. That is a foul name.
Here is a foul error to think Christ's soul to be As good Logicians as D.
Hill, Ramus and al his followers think the soul to be an integrall part.
Parts integrisunt parts integrales, anima and corpus sunt parts integri
scili cet hominis: Er go anima and corpus sunt par ^es integrales hominis.
an integral I know nor what you mean by a divisible part. If a part, that may
consist being divided from the whole, I hope you will confess the soul to be
such.
or diuisible part, which is ane essential or This is a new term of art.
indivisible: for by your reason, Not so, see the answer.
Christ's soul is mortal, and may perish, as the integral parts of Campio^
does. No error at all, see the answer.
You utter also an other error in these words (the whole man Christ) The man
alone, you would say.
for the whole man does not make Christ, but God, and man as you may see in
Athanasius Creed: This proof needed not.
As the reasonable soul, and flesh is one man, So god and man is one Christ. I
will end therefore, with this saying of Irynaeus who lived under Marcus
Antonius in the year of our Lord god 125, which If you could follow the
question, all the proofs in this section should bend to make your assertion
good, that this saying of Christ to Marie, Ioh. 20. does prove that his soul
had not been in heaven, when he was risen again.
thus proves the descending of Christ into hell. For the writing against
Heretics, that said, hell, was in this world (as many do now a days) thus
reproves them in his fifth book and last chapter, Parergon.
As Jonas tarried in the whales belly three days and three nights, so shall the
Son of man be in the heart of the earth. And the Apostle says, what is it
that he ascended, but that he first descended into the lowest parts of the
earth; and David prophesying of this, said: Thou have delivered my soul from
the nethermost hell: and rising again the third day, he said to Mary, which he
saw first, and worshipped him: Touch me not, for I have not yet asscended to
my Father, but go to my Disciples and tell them, I will go to my Father and to
your Father. If then the Lord keep the law By this it appears that Irenaeus
speakerh not of the hell of the damned, but of the state of the dead.
of the dead, that he might be the first begotten of the dead, how are they
ashamed that say, hell is in this world. Thus you see it is no strange thing to
see this scripture alleged to prove that Christ's soul was not in heaven,
until his visible and glorious ascension. Irenaeus a man of more learning and
judgment then I am of, alleged it to the same end above 1300. years ago, and
then it was accounted a current argument among the learned.

HVME his reioynder to the 11. sect
Here before you will buckle with this section, you thrust for-ward your
invincible Goliath, (as you suppose) and will have him make an end of this
battle. You say, that neither I, nor any of my friends dare meet him. You
thought so, because amongst all his fellows, I mist him only. But you are
deceived of his valor. He hid himself amongst the slain heaps of his
fellows. If I had seen his creast, I had seven stones in a scrip, the least
whereof was big in^^gh, to beat his brain through his helmet. The place is in
the 17. of Eccles. I need not repeat the words. First, I could have told
you, that the book is not Canonical. Secondly, that it was not written in
the tongue, on the property whereof you build your argument. Thirdly, that
these words (the lowermost parts of the earth) be not in the original, wherein
this book was first written: and therefore have gotten Tom Drums intertainment
by the Geneua translatours, lunius, Vatablus and diverse others. Fourthlie, that
though it had pleased Jesus the son of Syrach, to call Hell by that name: it
will not follow, that all other men did use the word so. Fifthly, that you
could find those words in that sense in some place of the Canonical
Scriptures (which indeed you cannot) it will not follow, that whersoeuer we
meet with them, they must have the same signification: except the necessary
circumstances do approve, or enforce it. Sixtlie, that seeing that place is
spoken of the merciful, and them whose good deeds the Lord does keep, as the
aple of his eye: it were a bad reward for men, whose good deeds are so
precious in the Lords eyes, to be casten into the dungeon of Hell. Seventhlie
and lastly, that seeing the common translator, who foisteth in those words
does make it the reward of every man, to be cast into the lowermost parts of
the earth: it will pass your skill to prove, that every man shall be cast into
hell. The note in the margent of the 25. 35. of Math. helps not you: but
proves the contrary, that this place pertains to them, that give meat to
the hungry, drink to the thirsty, and clothes to the naked etc. Thus you may
see, that this champion, is not so strong as you take him, and that the note in
the margent, whosoever made it, helps you like ale in your shoes. You tell
me, that now I am come to my schoole-points, which in you I called
Sophistry. The true maxims and rules of art, sucked out of the marrowes of
nature, I never called Sophistry in you nor no man else. Your shrimpish
reasons, set out in the painted coats of blased words, and confidentlie
commended to the beholders, without al bounds of modesty: I have called them,
what I have called them, and not so ill, as they deserve. My rule which you say
were sophistry, if you used it, as I do, you confess it to be true in
integrall parts. Now say I, the soul and the body be integrall parts of a
man: Here I follow Ramus.
Ergo, by your own confession, my rule is true of the soul and the body. But
if you had taken my maxim right, you should have found it hold in all parts
whatsoever. For I meant that a particular negative of the whole, is not good to
bring in a negative of any particular part. All Campion hangs, not over
Newgate, imports that some part of him, ha^geth there. And all men be not
in England, imports that there be some men there: which be particular
negatiues, expressed in general terms, as non omris and nonnullns be in
Latin. Thus much for the answer, that you deal with. You left another
answer which I will here set against your argument in his best livery. If the
man is said to be (say you) where the soul is, then where the man is not, the
soul is not: But the man is said to be, where the soul is: Ergo, where the
man is not, the soul is not. First, (say I) the mayor is not true. For though
the man may be said to be where the soul is, by a Synecdoche: yet it will
not follow, that where the man is not, the soul is not. Because this speech is
simple, and that is figurative. In a good argument, the words must carry one
face, not here one, and there another. To examplifie this with your own
examples out of Math 8. Many shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of heaven. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are said to be in heaven by a
figure, because their souls are there. But if you will take the words simply,
and conclude; because Abraham (that is the whole man) is not in heaven:
therefore his soul is not there: every carter will find the absurdity of
your fallacy. This for my first reply. Now I add that you flee from the words
of the text. For Christ said not to Marie, I have not been with my Father, but
I am not yet ascended to my Father: which words will admit no form to carry
your conclusion, turn them, and wind them as you list. For the Scripture
denies in plain words, that the name of ascension can be given to the soul.
I hope you will grant that David's soul is in heaven: and yet of him it is
said, Act. 2. 34. David is not ascended. This wypeth also away, your other
objection of two ascensions. For, that name was never yet given to a man, in
respect of the soul. And therefore, I will have the goal, though you stand in
it. You wring out of my examples of the whole race of mankind, and Campions
body, two absurdities. The one, that I hold no greater union between Christ's
soul, and his body, then all the men in the world. The other, that I hold the
soul of Christ, to be mortal: because I compare it to an integral part of
Campions body. Why M. Doctor, have you (now you are Doctored) forgot the old
speech of the Schools, when you were a general? Quae comparantur in vno, non
comparantur in omnibus? Things compared in one thing, are not like in all
things. You may be like your Father, and yet perhaps your Father could not
wrangle in this matter, like your self. And the Cuckoo sings only in the
spring, like the Nightingall, though in melody and variety of notes, there be
no likelie-hood at all. An argument taken indefinitly from the manhood of
Christ to his soul and his body, parts thereof: is no better then from the
race of mankind, to every particular man, or from the body of the traitor
Campion, to the parts thereof. And yet if you regard the union of the soul
and body, or the immortality of the soul: there is no more comparison, then
between your spirit and your Fathers, if it was righter, or the Cuckowes song
and the Nightingals being far sweeter. Lastly, you tell me, that I utter a
great error in these words: the whole man Christ. Indeed, if I had said man
the whole Christ, I had perchance opened my head to this venew. But now I am
faster locked, then that you can fasten any blows upon me, with the best
weapons in your armorie. For seeing the word of truth, does call Christ a man
so many times: I am persuaded, it will not prove so foul an error to call the
whole man Christ, except you can prove that some part of him was Christ, and
not the whole. The testimony of Athanasius to confute this error, touches
not me. The conclusion out of Irenaeus (though it might have a favorable
construction) I leave it amongst the judgments of men, which you have promised
not to trust, sect. 3.

HVME Sect. 12.
Now let us come to the great bulwark of your defense, which you made choice
of to raze the whole work upon, I mean to be the text of your sermon. It is
written in the first of Pet, 3. That Christ was put to death in the flesh, and
was quickened in the spirit, By the which spirit, he went and preached to the
spirits that are in prison, and were disobedients in the days of Noah, etc
Here Beza whom we follow (because he comes nearest to the true sense of the
Apostle) by this word Spirit, does give us to understand the Deity of Christ
following John who called God a Spirit: and by this word (flesh) his ma^hood:
containing both his body and soul, as he finds it used of Paul: God was
made manifest in the flesh. Which Antithesis of the divine and humane nature,
Paul does also express in the same words, which was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh: and declared mightelie to be the son of God,
according to the Spirit. Where you see, that he uses the words no otherwise
then he finds them used in the Scriptures. Now, that this cannot be the sense
of them you reason thus First, say you this Participle (...), does signify
some motion from some place, and can by no means agree with the divine
essence, which being at one time in all places, cannot at any time leave any
place To this I answer: that it is spoken of the same spirit in the 18. of
Genesis I will go down and see, whether the Sodomites have done according to the
cry that is come unto me. And in Exodus 3. I am come to deliver them out of
the hands of the Egyptians. You can not be ignorant M. Hill: that the spirit
of God speaks so many times of the Deity by a figure, called Anthropopatheia,
when God does declare his presence in one place more the^ in another, by some
notable effect. Which in this place was most necessary, to note unto us the
continual presence of Christ in his church, departing (as it were) from all
other places (which indeed he cannot) and sitting in it, as it were a
continual ruler and moderator thereof. Next, you allege the other participle,
(...) (that is, quickened) that because it is a passive, it can not stand with
the Deity, which cannot suffer at al. This we deny not. For we attribute not
this participle to the Deity, but to the whole Christ, God and man. Neither
does the text say, that the spirit was quickened, but that Christ was quickened
in the Spirit. Thirdly, you tell me that mortified and quickened are
contraries, and both attributed to Christ at once, to note unto us, that he was
both dead and alive at one instant. Here we confess, that they be attributed
to one Christ: but why they should be referred to one time, we see no reason to
induce us to think it. To this end you ad, that the Apostle does show us how
he was dead, and how he was alive, by adding dead flesh, and quickened spirit.
The very text (as I take it) will deny you this: for it has not, that the
spirit was quickened, and the flesh killed: but that Christ was killed in the
flesh, and quickened in the spirit: which is all one, as if he had said, that
the suffered death as he was man, and overcame death as he was God. And this
Paull does speak in other words, that he was crucified in his infirmities:
yet lives he through the power of God. Fourthlie, you say that the Scripture
does join this his going and preaching, close to his passion: As if it had
said: As soon as he had suffered, he went and preached. This (as if) includes
no necessary matter. We expect demonstration, and will not be carried with (as)
and (if) Fiftlie, you argue out of the 6. of Genesis, that the preaching of
Noah, is attributed to the third person of the Deity, and not to the second.
The words be these, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is
but flesh. Which words few (or rather) no interpreters, that ever I saw,
expound as you do of the third person of the Deity. Tremelius and Iunins,
whose great panies, learning, and judgment, all sinceare hearts do reverence,
expound them thus. I will not long dispute with my self (says the Lord) what
to do with these men: for my sentence shall stand, that except they speedily
repent, I will destroy them. Neither makes it much against us, though it were
as you would have it. For, seeing the actions of the Deity are common to all
the three persons, he erreth not that gives the^ to any of the three. So does
the scripturs in many places attribute the resurrection of Christ, sometimes to
the Father, sometimes to the son, and sometimes to the Spirit of
sanctification. And Christ himself tells us, that whatsoever the Father
does, the same he does also. After this you object that (...) and (...), that
is, disobedient, and some-time, does separate the time of their disobedience,
and his preaching. But here I must put you in mind, that (...) and (...),
that is, went disobedient and preached, be all of one tense in the Greek, and
must needs be referred to one time, so that he went, and preached to them
even then, when they were disobedient. And this the word (disobedient) does
confirm. For, to whom I pray you, were they disobedient? but to the spirit
that preached to them. As for the adverbe (sometime) it is not set here to
separate words of one time: but to distinguish the time of their inprisonment,
which was present, from the days of their rebellion, which was past in the
days of Noah, when the long patience of the Lord, exspected their amendment.
Whereas you argue, that this cannot be spoken of Noah his preaching, because
he preached to men, and not to Spirits: I am persuaded that no man can preach
to men, and not to their Spirits: because he that teaches a man, instructs
his Spirit, which is his reasonable soul. And yet here you may mark (if it
please you) that there be two things here spoken of, preching and prison: the
on pertaining to these spirits when they were men with spirits: the other now,
that they are only spirits: and that therefore the Apostle did discreetlie
choose the name spirit, which is common to both these times. Lastly, you
charge this construction with violence: for that we take the word (spirit) in
one place, for the Deity of Christ, and straight way again, for the spirits
of men in prison. I hope you will not deny, but that the word is usual in
both significations, and that it is no wrong, to give words their own
significations, when the drifts and circumstances of the place does require
them. Hitherto, I have dealt with your objections against Beza. Now I will
prove with infallible reasons, that your sense, cannot stand with this text.
You take the word (flesh) only for the body of Christ, which died and was
buried: and the word (spirit) for his humane soul, which you bear us in hand,
did descend into hell, and did preach there to the souls that had been
disobedient, and rebellious in the days of Noab. If this your conceit shall go
for current: that which the Apostle speaks here of Christ, may be verified
as well of any other man. For when we die, our souls die no more then his
did. But let us look a little nearer the matter. The spirit here, (as it
appears by the text) does signify that which gave life to that that was
dead. That (I trust) was not his humane soul, but his divine and heavenly
spirit. Thirdly, in this Participle (mortified) is comprised death, which
given to Christ, is never taken in all the Scriptures, for the temporal death of
his body only: but whatsoever Christ suffered, either in soul or body, for
the redemption of our souls and our bodies, and does compryse his whole
passion. Which, (if it be true) then the word (flesh) must be the whole
subject of all this passion: that is, both his soul and body, or the whole man
Christ. For he suffered as well in soul for our souls, as in body for our
bodies, or else he had been but half a Redeemer. Fourthlie, seeing his body
was quickened, that is, restored from the grave, as well as his soul from hell:
If you take (spirit) here for his humane soul: then shall you confound those
things, that the Apostle does distinguish attributing that to the soul alone,
which is common both to the soul and the body. Fiftlie, seeing (quikned) is to
receive life, either which it never had, or else had lost: the soul cannot be
said to be quickened because, it never lost life, after that it once lived with
the body. Here you tell us, that quickened is to be delivered from miseries
and sorrows. How the English word may be taken, I leave it to the discretion
of the discreet and indifferent reader: But sure I am, it will prove a hard
thing to find that signification, either in the Latin word viuificari, or the
greek word Zoopoteisthas, which be so mixed with life, that if they signify
delivery from miseries, then life it self must signify miseries and sorrows,
which, (though they follow on it) are never signified by it. If this devise may
stand, you will overthrow the Antithesis between dead and quickened. For, if
quickened does not signify a restitution to life, what contrariety has it with
mortefied or dead, which signifies the extinguishing of life. Sixtlie,
(spirit) does here signify that, which was free from death, and the violence
of his enemies: This (I hope) you will not say, was his humane soul, wherein
he suffered the death of the soul: that is, the torments of Hell, as well as
in body, the death of the body. Seuinthlie, the soul of Christ could not
preach, being destitute of a tongue, mouth, and other organes of necessity
required in that action. Eightlie, to what end should Christ preach to those
damned souls, who were past the fruit of his preaching? that which you say,
that he went to reprove them, is not liklie. For me^ are reproved, either for
amendment, or to take away excuses, which to these was needless, being past
all remedy, and excuse. Ninthlie, this preaching was then, when their
dis-obedience was reform-able, which was in the days of Noah, and never since.
Add to these (if it please you,) that most infallible reason of Bezaes, taken
from the drift and scope of the text: to whose notes I refer you, being not
able to handle it so well, as he has done it himself.

HILL his Reply.
Here you play the Captain, and will beat down bulwarks, and therefore you
should have these 4. properties in you: virtue, knowledge, authority and
felicity, for the first two they are in you (God Such a word out of your mouth,
might have lifted up my heart: if you had not said section the 7. that I wanted
either science or conscience or both: Howsoever your words agree I hope I was
the same, when you wrote that and when you wrote this.
grant you use the^ to his glory) but what authority you have to interpret the
word I know Then I will tell you. the same, that all Christians have to know
God, and defend his truth
not, The Paralogismes in the D. reply.
therefore in this case (I If my commission be warrantable this hope may hoppe.
hope) you shall have no felicity. Where you say, that this word (spirit) does
signify the deity: and this word (flesh) the humanity of Christ, and that
there is an antithesis between the divine and humane nature. I confess y^
(spirit) some time does signify the Godhead, and (flesh) the humanity of
Christ. But they do not so signify in this place: Here you promise to prove.
as I prove by the circumstances of the text and the words them selves. And
here you fall to confute: so soon you have forgot your self.
For where you say (...); killed or put to death, You alter the conclusion: I
said that the Scriptures never gives death to Christ, but for his whole
passion: which thing you should confute, if you could answer me.
does signify the whole passion of Christ, Still you change the question:
though quickened went necessarily before his resurrection, I never said, that
it signifies it.
(...) signifies the resurrection of I brought reason for the things I said:
and you answer al, with that cannot be.
Christ, that can note be: See the answer in the rejoinder.
for of the passion of Christ is mention made before in the same 18. verse,
Christ suffered for us, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God. Now after
his sufferings ended, If you can prove that Peter said so, I will prove that he
was like an Irish man, that coming out of a battle, boasted that he had
killed five men in the feet, that wanted the heads before he came at them.
as Peter says, he was both killed and made alive. What then
Now of his resurrection is mention made in the 21. verse, as of his ascension
in the 22. verse. Therefore, seeing the sufferings of Christ are mentioned
before: and his resurrection is namelye set down after: Is there no thing else
to apply these things to? or is no repetition tolerable?
whereof can these words he understood, but of the separation of the body and
the soul, and of the state of them during their separation, How does this
(for) prove any of these things that you have said.
for an antithesis as you know is of contrary, 378 Between these two * marks
there is a most dis^rde^ed hyperbalon, of many words, and not two lines
together directed to one purpose.
or diverse things, as in this place you see, in (killed and quickened.) now how
both these were true at on time, Peter shows not.
S. Peter does show, for at the This is foisted in the text.
same time, he was dead as concerning his body, he was alive in spirit, that is
in soul: That pro^veth not that spirit is the soul here.
for the soul separate from the body, is aptly called a spirit. Eccle. 12. 7.
And dust return to earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that gave
it. So is it taken, Heb. 12. 23. Act. 7. 49. and You beg the question.
so does this word signify in this place: He suffered the death of both. You
leave the word of the text (mortified) and chooses a word, that takes away the
duble death which he suffered this is pelting with the text.
for Christ was not killed both in body and soul, but only in body and in
flesh: True, but who says so.
for if the soul of Christ had been killed, then had it been mortal.
Therefore Athanasius, Epiphanius, and all the Fathers, which did confute the
Heretics called Damoerite and Appolinaris, which denied Christ to have a
soul, do confute them by this place, proving that his spirit was among the
spirits, that his soul separate from his body, And were all the souls
separated from their bodies in the hell of the damned: that he could not be
amongst such souls but in hell.
was among the souls separate from their bodies. This interpretation, you,
Truly, I see it not.
see is gathered out of Gods word, and is made more manifest by I see not
that, neither.
the words following: (...), which we translate. In which sprite he went and
preached to the (...) implyerh the Participle (...), and cannot stand without
it. Wherefore if you had cast an eye that way, you would have translated it,
that now are in prison.
spirits in prison, You dream, we translat it not (by the which)
First you translate (...) by the which. But in the 1. pet. 16 you do not so
translate it, nor in the 2. Chap. and 12. ver. the same word (...) are Ephesians.
1. 13. 2. 22. 5. 18. And you did, you would lose your labor.
and so could I cite at the least, an hundredth texts in the new Testament,
where if you translat (...) by the which, or by whom, you shall overthrow the
meaning of the holy ghost. The next word construing, is (...) which as I have
said before You said that no verb of motion could be give^ to the Deity, fol.
11 page 2. That I hope you are gone from. Now you have no reason, why this word
cannot pertain to the Deity, but because it cannot pertain to the Deity,
which is as if a man would fay, D. H. could not get a Bishopric, because D. H.
could not get a Bishopric.
so I auouche still, is spoken no^ of the deity never in all the Scriptures,
That is not of necessity neither.
and therefore must needs be spoken of the soul of Christ. To con^ute this,
you alleadg Genesis 18. 21. Exodus 3. 8. First, I must tell you these books were
written Are they the fitter for that, to speak improperlie of God.
in the Hebrewe tongue and not in the Ere^ke, I craved an instant out of the Why
man, is the old testament Apocrypha with you: you are a nice man.
new Testament. Secondly, in those places that you have named y^ interpreters
do translate Iarad by y^ greek word Katabaino and erchoma^ be verbs of mo^io^,
as well as poreuomai.
(...), nor Eltho I never red nor you neither in the present tense.
(...), and not by (...). And this I prove, John, 16. 7. (...). How can this
place prove that? John translateth not IARAD here.
For if I shall not depart the comforter will not come unto you, but if I shall
depart, I will send him unto you. Here you see when he speaks of the
descending of the deity, he uses y^ word 368 (...), 398. Eleutho is out of
use. You shame your self.
but when he speaks of the humanity (...). This place proves your
translating of IARAD, as the other does. And here you may mark that erches^ai
is spoken of the manhoodas well as poreuesthai. and so by your reason,
erchesthai cannot pertain to the Dei tie, more then poreuesthai.
And in the same chapter verse the 28. (...). I came out from the Father and
came into the world: again, I leave the world* and go to my father. Propriety
of speech: allace silly man, see the answer
And this propriety of speech which the holy ghost uses, ought to be
observed. I confess the scriptures uses the figure Anthropopatheia A vain
dream.
but when God is said to come down, there is used the verb (...), or some one
of the forenamed, and when mention is made of (...), it is always spoken of
the humanity Does any of these places affirm your assertion?
as it is to be seen Luke 4. 30. 9. 51. 52. 56. 57. Luke 13. 22. Ioh. 8. 1. And
in this place of Peter, the last verse, is used the same word (...) He went up
into heaven. I have quoted 8. and could have quoted 20. see the answer. But
with what face can you challenge a place of me, that is so used, when you ca^
bring neither reason nor place to the contrary.
Therefore, if you can quote but one text in the new Testament, that (...) is
figuratively applied to the deity, your interpretation may will it but seem
tolerable, when I have done? then it is better already, for now it is a known
truth.
seem tolerable: but if yon can not (as I know Your knowledge was but a ges,
and I have be guiled you.
it is impossible) then can you never prove your interpretation to I have
proved it both agreeable and necessary which I needed not. I stand at defense.
It was your part to prove, which you cannot do, if you had 7. wits as good as
your own.
be agreaeble to faith, because it is not agreeable to y^ word. Out of the next
word (...) this I note: he that was killed Ware sheep, that is against the
text: that wherein he was mortified preached not.
and quickened, did preach: but Christ was killed and quickened, ergo, Christ,
and Christ, and not this Deity? If I had said so, you would have exclaimed
upon ignorance.
not the deity preched. He preched not vocally, for he was I hope the soul
wherein you say he preached, was not killed.
killed, ergo, he preached I never heard a real sermon, without words.
really in soul: for here is noted. First, who preached? Christ, To whom? to
the spirits. Where? That is out of the text.
in hell. When? So is that also petitio principij twice together.
after his death, and before his resurrection. You beg the question again.
This is the order of Peter, and of our Creed, which cannot be by man
overthrown. The word (...), that is spirits also, is not as you take it,
Where, when, and to whom said I so.
for you say it signifies the men in Noah's time, but you can not bring one
scripture to prove it. It follows not.
Therefore, I say as I said before, it signifies souls separated from the
body. That my exposition is true, I have proved by three Scriptures. Ecles-
12. 7. These scriptures proves it not.
Heb. 12. 23, Act. 7, 59. Now, as mine is true, so will You dream, that is not
mine.
I prove yours to be false and impossible by Christ's own words. Luke. 24, 59.
where our Savior, to prove himself to be noe ghost, but to have a true body
after his resurrection, thus reasons: Behold my hands and my feet, that I am
the same handle me, for a spirit has no flesh and bones as ye see me have.
This was Christ's argument, I have a body, therefore I am not a spirit, You
fight with your own shadow.
and so I reason against you and your teachers. The men in Noah's time That
^ollowes not A man may say as well D. Hill is a wrangling spirit, as he calls
his adversaries fantastical spirits fol. 24. of his sermon and yet both he
and they have bodies.
had bodies, ergo, they could not be called spirits, you should hane left this
to the boys in Oxford: it is here a deformed patch
Every boy can tell you in Oxford, that substantia is divided into corpus and
spiritum, and that one of these opposite species can not be affirmed of
another. And therefore, to be short, when you can prove out of You do well to
hold you in that corner, but I hope you will refuse not the Canonical
scripture, for all this.
the new Testament, that (...) that is, iournying, is spoken figuratively of
the deity, or Pneuma that is spirit, signifies a man y^ has a body. Then I
see it bootles to hope for your promise.
I will give you the goal, but if you will run on this course, until you
have proved A narrow shift.
these 2. points (which you must do, if you will have me to recant) then take
heed least you run your self out of breath. Lastly, the word Phylake, that
is, prison, does signify hell, as it is to be seen The thing is true: your proof
is naught like all the rest.
Apoc. 20. 7. When a thousand years shall be fulfilled, Satan shall be losed
out of his prison. Thus thou see (good reader) how Hand-somlie: in good
sadness D. you cannot tell how to settle your self to prove any thing.
I have proved my interpretation out of the word of God for every word, which
Blush for shame, se the answer
our adversaries can not do for their interpretation: therefore, thou may
Upon your unsure guess? he were mad then.
safely assure thy self, ours to be good and theirs to be false. And that this
word prison does signify hell, you may see Epiphanius, Athanasius, Fulgentins
centuria 1. lib. 2. cap. 14. Peter Martyr on the Creed Nowell in his
Catechism, Beacon in the sick man's salve, Crowlev in his answer to the reasons
of Pound the Papist: All these First you say that they take prison f^r hell:
and you conclude, that they al alle^dge this place as you do: your pen runs
at random
old and new writers, have alleged this Scripture as I have done, with good
Their consc^ence I hope, was bett^r then their warrant
warrant and conscience. Now that I have proved this my own interpretation, I
will (by Gods grace) prove your answer You have promised that once already.
to be frivolous. First you It was never denied: what needs a confession in a
known case
confess, that killed and quickened are Participles of one tense, and yet you
say, they are not referred to Christ at one time, this is meerlye false, as I
thus prove: Christ was after his passion dead and alive, or never; if he were
never dead and alive at one time, then Now for your credites sake, tell me where
Pet. says that he was dead and alive at one time.
Peter says not truly, if he were dead and alive at on time then you speak
falsely. Now you For sham M. D. speak truth.
your self confessed that he was dead and alive at on time alittle before, and
proved it out of the 2. Cor. 13. 4. He was crucified concerning his infirmity,
yet lives he by the power of God. A tautalogie.
Here by your own words, Christ was alive when he was But not when he was
dead.
crucified: so may You will say that with Peter, which Peter never said.
I say with Pet. he was alive when he was dead, and at one time, Then you say,
the (flesh) signifies the manhood, and (spirit) the deitye: this also is
untrue, for the body may be This word expresses not the Greek thana totheis.
killed, but the And yet the whole man may be mortified.
soul can not. Again, show me any Scripture where See the answer.
on and the sam word in on sentence and period, is taken for diverse things: for
in this sentence, In which spirit, he went and preached to the spirits that are in prison, Here the word (spirit) in the beginning of the sentence
signifies the deity, in the latter end, the same word signifies the Not so,
but the spirits that now are in prison,
men that lived in Noah's time by your interpretation: but by my interpretation,
it signifies the soul separate from the body in both places. For as Cirill
says, as Christ was with the living in body and soul, so to show himself a
true man, his body was among the dead bodies, and his soul among And so it was
but not in hell
the souls, Then you avouch the preching of Noah, is attributed to the whole
Trinity, be it so, but can you prove that Christ after he was killed did prech
in Noah, for this How prove you that?
preaching was after Chri^^s death, The death and resurrection of Christ, and
his preaching in the days of Noah, ar here mentioned obiter, and as occasions
led them in, and expresses not the order, when they were done. If this
reasoning be good, the passion in the beginning of the 4 cap. following the
ascension, expressed in the last verse of the third.
which is mentioned in the 18. verse, and before his resurrection, which is
spoken of in the 21. verse. You go forward and tell me, that pote, does not
determine the Participle apeithesasi that is, disobedient: but ekeryxen that
is, preached. I must tell you plain you speak neither like a Divine, nor a
Gramarian. For But most commonly with a verb.
an Aduerb is some time put to a Participle, as Math. 2. 7. Tote erodes lathra
kalesas tous magous. Then Herod calling priuilye the wise men. Sometime to a
Noune This is like salve Domine, I am glade to see you well. M. D. begins with
greek out of the new Testament and ends in latin out of the English accidents.
as homo egregie impudens. Sometime to an Aduerb as parum honest se gerit.
Therefore the Aduerb pote, coming Every aduerb affects not the word it
stands by.
after apeithesasi, next and immediately, and being distinguished from ekeryxen
by Put out that comma, it is an usurper
a Comma, cannot by any example in diuinitye, or by any rule of Grammar be Nor
separated from it.
coupled with the verb ekeryxen That promise is twice made now.
Now to answer your infallible reasons. First your reason against me, that if
my construction be true, I said that nothing is spoken of Christ in these
words, (mortified in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit) which may not, etc.
then nothing did happen to Christ which might not be verified of any man. Did
you not blushe to rack my words to the wh^le discourse, which are spoken but
of one member.
And did you not blush when you wrote these things? No forsooth.
Can any man's soul go to hell, and return again? For his going down to
hell those be without my bounds.
I prove in the 19. verse, and his returning from those be without my bounds.
hell in the 21. verse: Secondly, you say the word spirit does signify that
which gave life, what then? as God gives life to the body effectually, That
is, the form gives the form to the (...)
so the soul gives life to the body formally. Why mine more then yours.
Your Geueua translation which you follow, says he, was quickened So say we
in the spirit, not of the spirit. And this I note against your side, en En is
not in that verse at all expressed.
in the 18. verse you translate (In) But in the next verse, as though you had
not done well in the former, you translate it You dream.
(by) Now you know the preposition dia, signifies (by) and not en, as it
appears in the 21. verse and in many places mo. You promise to prove that en
signifies not by, and prove that dia signifies by: this is common with you,
and a cunning point.
dia anastaseos, that is, by the resurrection. Moreover, if you had said
quickened You say it cannot be so taken: and would that answer seem probable?
of the spirit, then had you made a probable answer: but no divine is able to
prove this exposition, that Christ was quickened in the spirit: that is, in the
deity, for the deity is life it self. Your third pregnant reason is, that
thanatotheis, signifies not only the death of the body, but also the whole
passion of Christ. A flat negative, for an instance.
This can not be, for the A tautologie.
sufferings of Christ are set down before in the same verse: then in this word,
thanatotheis is showed the manner of the death, that Christ suffered, that is,
he was I have said that this word fitteth not the greek
killed, and suffered a violent death. For thanatotheis being derived of A
Passive participle from a verb active.
thanateo, must Why so?
needs signify put to death. Now I hope you will not say, Christ was put to
death in But I will say he suffered death in soul and body.
soul and body, but in body only. And where you say, that Christ suffered in
soul as well as in body, that is true, and that is gathered But why not?
not of thanatotheis y^ is killed, but out of these words antecedent ( for
Christ suffered the just for the unjust,) What reason should move a reasonable
man, to deny that Christ suffered the death of the soul.
No reasonable man but he will say, that the sufferings of Christ, are
comprised rather in the word (suffered) then in y^ word (killed.) To your This
will not answer my reason.
fourth reason I reply, that Christ was raised from the dead, but it is
specially signified in the word resurrection, ver 21. and A confused negative
of confusion. Put your antecedents to this (therefore) if your skill can do so
much.
therefore I do not confound those things that are distinguished, but your
self: where M. D.? the^ were I worthy to we are a babble A rogue burned in the
ear suffers, but is not killed.
for you make suffered and killed all one, where M. D.? the^ were I worthy to
we are a babble A rogue burned in the ear suffers, but is not killed.
and quickened and the resurrection all one, and so make not only a confusion,
but a tautology and needelesse repetition which never Untruth D. the scripture
uses many tautologies to help our memories and understanding: though this in
men's writing^ be a fault, in scriptures it is most necessary, that one place
may help another.
was read in the word of God. To your fifth argument, where you say,
zoopoi^isthai is to receive life, I confes^e it is to be made alive. Then you
urge, it can not be spoken of y^ soul which never lost life: Then by y^ same
reason more strongly, it can not be spoken of the This answer were somewhat if
you could make it good that we give this participle to the Deity.
Godhead, which has, does, and shall live for ever: for God ca^ not receive
life, but y^ soul is said to live, The question is, whether the soul is
quickened, or made to live, when it is out of the body.
when he is out of the body, not because he lived not before, but Non causa pro
causa.
because y^ body does hinder y^ actions of the soul, John. 11. 25. These
places prove not the question
He that believes in me. though he were dead yet shall he live. Sap. 9, 15.
These places prove not the question
The corruptible body is heavy unto the soul, and the earthie mansion keeps
down the mind that is full of cares. 2. Cor. 4, 16. These places prove not
the question
Therefore, we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet our inward man
is daily renewed. Here Paull says not so here.
Paul says, the weaker the body is, y^ stronger is his soul, It follows not.
therefore the death of the body is the life of the soul. To draw to ane
end, your Antithesis of the The Antithesis there expressed is between
mortified and quickened.
Deuinitie and humanity is answered before. For your Antithesis must be of
things contrary, or at the least diverse But diverse, but not always separate.
and separate, but as you affirm truly, the Godhead was never separated from
the humanity: This therefore is builded on the wrong side of the way.
therefore this antithesis is of the body and soul, which at this time were
divided, and not between the deity and humanity which were always united:
You call it in your margent fortissimum argumentum, but it is a starued
shrimpe. It cannot stand though it be not touched.
wherefore, this bulwark I can assure you will stand, and you have ouershot
both it, and your self in attempting to overthrow it. For the very scope of the
Apostle is this, all Christians must suffer afflictions for well doing, for
Christ did not only suffer both in body and soul, but also was put to a
shameful death in his body, Be sure that that be one.
and in his soul went down to the souls in That is out of the way: Christ's
going down to hell is no persuasion for us to suffer afflictions.
hell, which were unbelievers in the days of Noah: but Christ did arise again
from hell, and the grave, and ascended both in body and soul to heaven:
therefore, shall you, that suffer for well doing, be delivered from death and hell
by his merits, and go up into heaven, and be partakers of his glory, as you
have been partakers of his affliction Moreover, as you refer me to read
Bezas great notes one this text, so I pray you to read Aretius handling this
place, whose words ar these. Generally (says Aretius) Pet. repeateth three
effects of Christ's death, if you mark it well. The first pertains to the
damned, The second to the elect. The third the person of Christ. The first was
declared in his descending in to hell. The second in his resurrection. The
third in his ascension into heaven. This is the true and natural meaning of
this place which we will follow, leaving the intrications of other
interpretations. I willinglye confess this place is very hard, for Augustine
doubts of it, and Luther douteth of it how it is to be understood; but this
obscurity aryseth not of the place, but of the variety of interpretations, If
thou mark the plainness of the place, the matter will be easy, but that
pleases not all men: therefore that every on may establish his own sense,
they apply the words of the Apostle Peter to their own conceit. But leaving
these, let us embrace that which the words do teach us: in the which, if we
attain to the truth, it is well: if not, yet they shall be probable, because
they have warrant out of the scriptures, and lean to the very letter to reto,
otherwise it is certain, the knowledge of man to be imperfect in many questions
of holy scripture, of the which the Apostle does warn us, 1. Corin. 15. For
now we know vnperfectlie. I have said here is declared three effects of
Christ's death which differ in time, and are set in order in the Creed. The
first effect is, that Christ being dead, denounced eternal pains to the wicked
in hell. The words of the Apostle are these. In which spirit he went and
preached to the spirits detained in prison. I take the place simply of the
descence into hell, for so the words do plainly sound, and I see all the Fathers
so to interpret them: Augustine Epist. 99. and Ciprian does manifestly
interpret this place of the descending into Hell. Neither does the word prison
hinder this Interpretation: which in the Apocal. 20. 5. is taken for hell. When
a thousand years shall be fulfilled, Satan shall be losed out of his prison.
Therefore, the prison that Peter here speaks of, is the place deputed to the
damned. Hither came Christ, as we confess in the Creed, He went down into
Hell. But you make no dout but that hell is under the earth, in your sermon fol.
A^ page 2. in print
where Hell is, it is a foolish and curious question to enquire, since no man
coming to that place ever returned but only Christ. Furthermore, what Christ
did there, Peter expresses, he preached to the spirits, that is, he declared
that he showed himself manifestly to the world and made that dire and mornefull
sermon; namely, to y^ wicked, that the mirit of his death did nothing pertain
unto them, but by his presence, were confirmed those punishments of the which
Noah and other prophets had forwarned them. And the time of this Preaching, I
refer not to the times of Noah, but to the time of his descending into Hell.
Whereunto agrees the word pneumasi, that is, spirits, for he preached to the
spirits, that is, to dead, and not to living men. Thus sarre Aretius. You
should waste wind, and break your promise.
I could here allege many other new Writers, which are of my judgment, but
because you yield them no credit, therefore of purpose I will omit them.

HVME his Reioynder to the 12. sect.
THis berrie is so confused, that I can not find where to enter my firret.
First, I proved that Beza, whom we follow in this place, does no violence to
the words: but uses them as he finds them used by John, Paull, and Peter.
Which foundation being laid, I answer your 10. reasons, and put other 10. to
the other scale, to counter-weigh them. You neither defend your own, nor
answer mine, in order as they ly: But like a mad Dog, snatch here one, and
there another, and let them go, that you cannot bite. I cannot follow your
steps, they be so crooked. Wherefore, I will walk on my first steps, and
seek your answers, where I can find them. That which I say of the use of the
words, you confess, and diverse of my reasons, you slip without an answer.

The first of my reasons was from these words, 1. Reason.
(mortified in the flesh, and quickened in the Spirit) Thus, If (flesh) here
does signify the body, and (spirit) the humane soul: then nothing in these
words is spoken of Christ, that may not be verified of other men. But in these
words some singular matter is attributed to Christ, that other men are not
capable of: For, we cannot say, that Augustine, Jerome or Cyprian, are
mortified in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit in that sense, as it is
here spoken of Christ. Ergo, (flesh) is not the body, and (spirit) the humane
soul of Christ. Answer. Reply.
That which you answer of his desce^ding into Hell, and returning thence, is
not comprised in these words, whereon my argument is builded, though you gave
them your own liverie, and clothed them in your own colors.

The second was this. The Spirit here does signify that, 2. Reason.
which gave life to that which was dead. But the humane soul gave not life to
that that was dead, Ergo, the spirit does not signify the humane soul. Here
you deny the mayor, and allege against the (...) which you call ours,
Answers. Reply.
and should be yours as well as ours, if you and others of (...) highly (...)
in the (flesh, and (...) mortified as he was man, and quickened as he was God
by himself. John 10. 18.
According to that of John. I have power to lay down my life, and I have power
to take it up again. Take your note of (in) and (by) and make a wheele-barrow
of it. But you move me here another question of some importance: and crave an
instance (if I can) in all the Scripture. How one word in one period can carry
two significations You are not (I hope) so very an novice in Gods book, Math.
8. 12. Ioh. 6. 27. Mar. 8. 33 Ioh. 8. 55. Ioh. 4. 24.
as you make your self. Have you not read, Let the dead, bury their dead: Or,
labor not for the meat that perishes, but the meat that lasts, etc. Or,
Who so will save his life, shall lose it. Or Abraham rejoiced to see my day,
and saw it. Or, God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit, where you
have the same word in both significations. O how you would be-slouen me, if
you could find such a hole in my hose! Now, I fear nothing, but that you
craved an instance out of the old Testament.

The third was, If death, whenever it is attributed to Christ in the
Scriptures, 3. Reason.
compriseth the whole passion, the flesh in this text, must be the subject of
the whole passion: that is, the whole manhood of Christ. But death is never
attributed to christ, but for the whole passion. Ergo, flesh must be the subject
of the passion, that is, the whole manhood of Christ. Here you deny the minor,
and like a skillful Logician, give instance in the question. If you have not
forgot your old logic, the argument, and the thing argued should not be one.
You supply the imperfection of this answer, with two arguments (...), that
death in this place cannot signify the passion. (...). Your first reason is,
that the passion is mentioned before in the word suffered, Be it so: Yet it may
be repeated in more special terms. By your reason, in the belief, where a
repetition is less tolerable, crucified and died, belong not to the passion;
because they are expressed before in the word suffered. Suffering, which may be
in torturing, whipping, and imprisonment, is too slack a term, to express
the hellish torments of Christ's passion. The other is, if (mortified) pertain
to the soul, and body, it will follow, that the soul is also mortal. You
tell me out of Athanasius in the reply to my fifth section, that by the double
punishment inflicted on Adam, the soul should die the death. And I heard you
preach in our Lady Church at Sarum. That when it was said to Adam, thou shall
die the death, the meaning was, he should die the death of soul and body.
Now, if you will apply these two significations of death to Christ: the one to
the body, and the other to the soul: I hope this objection will neither
scratch nor byte.

My fourth reason was this. In this: Antithesis mortified in the flesh, and
quickened in the spirit: morfied belongs not to the spirit, nor quickened to
the flesh: but mortified belongs to the soul, for it died the death of the
soul, and quickened to the (...) for it received life again. Ergo, flesh is
not the body only, and spirit the humane soul. To this you answer, that
Christ was raised from the dead, and that was signified in the word
resurrection, verse. 21. and therefore you do not confound these distinguished
things, antitheticallie opposed. But we, that make mort^^ed, and suffered;
quickened and resurrection all one. How this may answer me, I leave it to the
^ead that bred it to explane. But you do us wrong, we make not mortified, and
suffered one, etc. Suffered and quickened ar terms more general, mortified and
raised again more special: expressing things more plainly and particularie,
which were touched before more covert^^ and generally.

My fifth reason was. To be quickened is to receive life, 5. Reason.
which the thing that is quickened either never had, or else had lost. But the
soul had life in the body, and never (...) after: Ergo, the soul cannot be
quickened. To this you answer nothing: but tell us by the same reason, Answer.
it can much less pertain to the Deity. Thus, thinking to wound us with our
own weapon, you strike short, and with the back, draw blood at your own
brow. I told you in my answer to your second objection, that quickened is not
here attributed to the Deity, but to the whole Christ, by the participatio^ of
proprieties. How can you excuse your self here of wilful falsification? But
you mend the matter, with a more sufficient answer out of Ioh. That the soul
of the believer lives, though he were dead. What then? John tells not your
tale, that the soul of the believer, is quickened when he is dead: That it
lives, is not the question. The burden of the body, which you allege out of
the book of Wisd. loadeth the soul, but kills it not. And therefore, when it
is delivered of that load, it is not quickened, but relieved. And the renewing
of the inward man, which you allege from Paul, quickneth not the soul,
being dead: but adds courage and comfort, to the living and languishing soul
by Gods promises. Here I see you are quite thrust from your hold at
Chippenham, that to be quickened is, to be delivered from miseries. Ingenuitie
would have confessed a fault. You conclude with a confutatio^ of the
Antithesis, between the divinity and humanity: but my reason is from an
Antithesis between mortified and quickened, flesh and spirit: which you (by a
corrupted gloss) taking quickened for a delivery from miries, did overthrow.
Yet because I said that Paul makes that antithesis, Romans 1. It shall not be
impertine^t to view your reasons. An Antithesis must be (say you) of things
opposite and contrary. I add, the Divinity and humanity be things
opposite: Ergo, there may be an Antithesis of the Divinity, and the humanity.
But they are united, say you. What then? So be the flesh, and the spirit; and
yet Christ says, the Spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak. A common
Logician, Mat. 26. 41.
(much more a Doctor) should know, that no uniting of things, between which a
difference may be observed, can let an Antithesis, if occasion serve.
Notwithstanding the uniting, a man may well say, Christ as he was man, was
passible, as he was God, he was impassible.

To these reasons, I added more in my latin which I sent you. The spirit here
does signify that, which his enemies, 6. Reason.
(hell and death,) could not touch: according to the text, he was quickened in
the spirit. But his humane soul escaped not the violence of his enemies: Ergo,
the word (spirit) here does not signify his humane soul. To this you make no
answer.

The seventh was. 7. Reason.
This spirit of which he speaks here, did preach: But the humane soul
cannot preach: Ergo, the spirit here, is not the humane soul. To this you
answer, that he preached not vocallie, but reallie, Answer. Reply.
that is, not in words but in deeds. A dumb man may preach so, as well as D.
Hill. If you stand 7. days in the pulpit of the great Church at Sarum, and say
nothing: there be not 7. men within 700. miles, that will commend your sermon.

The eight was. 8. Reason.
Whosoever does preach, he does it either to amend the enormities of the
hearers: or to instruct them in the way of salvation. But this was not to be
hoped for in damned spirits: Ergo, he preached not in Hell, Answer Reply.
to damned spirits. Here you answer, that he preached to reprove them of
their infidelity: but you fall still in one ditch. He that reproves
infidelity, does it either to mend it, or to take away excuses: But there was
no such hope in these, that were past all remedy and excuse.

The ninth was. This preaching was, when the disobedience of the hearers, 9.
Reason
was reforme-able. But this was only reforme-able in the days of Noah: Ergo,
this preaching was not, but in the days of Noah. This has no answer.

The tenth was from the circumstances of the text and necessary Analysis
thereof: 10. Reason
Which I remitted to Beza, who has done that better, then I can, and whose
notes, it is not likely that you want, having such a Library, as you speak
of sect 7. You in the margent will me to read Aretius and Alesius. The one I
have read, and the other cannot move me, though he be my countrie-man. I have
learned to prefer truth before men, what ever they be. These were my reasons,
which I joined to the lawful use of the words, proved by John, Paul, and
Peter. In them (so ouer-smoked is your sense) you smell no reason at all: But
tell your reader that we cannot prove ou^ interpretations by the Scriptures, as
you do yours: and yet you bring nothing for your own, but that the words may
be so taken: and a few silly conjectures answered before by me. Now,
having set down mine, let me see how stoutly you have defended yours.

THe first was. Poreutheis, (that is, went) does signify motion, from one
place to another. But the Deity cannot move from any place, M. D. reasons
confuted, and his answer displayed.
being at al times, in all places: Ergo, poreutheis, is not attributed to the
Deity. To the minor of this argument, I answered out of the 18. of Genesis,
and 3. of Exodus. That the Godhead is said to move from place to place,
Answer.
by a figure called Anthropopatheia. Reply.
You reply, that the books that I cite, are written in Hebrewe, And that the
interpreters do translate that hebrew word by katabainein or erchesthai, and
not por^uestha^. As if the Hebrewe tongue, Rejoinder
which is called lingua sancta, were fitter to speak improperly of God, then
the Greek, or that poreuesthai, had gotten some special license, more then
any other verbs of motion, to be free from that figure. Yet if it will please
you to read Exodus 13. 2. Nomb. 14. 14. Deuteronomy. 1. 33. Exodus 33. 3. Psalm. 132. 8.
Deuteronomy. 31. 3. Psalm. 71. 12. Psalm. 88. 7. and infinite such places more, you
shall find that plakket dear of a naked q. without a cap. But suppose that I
could not find it attributed to the Deity in all these Scriptures, yet you
were not the nearer your mark. For, if you be remembered, your reason was in
Chippenham, that poreuesthai cannot be given to the Deity, because it is a
verb of motion. Now, the mayor of your syllogism must be, that no verb of
motion can be attributed to the Deity. Which mayor being crased by my first
answer, and the examples there alleged. There is no reason left you, why
poreuesthai cannot be attributed to the Deity, as well as erchesthai, or
katabainein: and no reason you know, is too weak against ten such stout
reasons, as I have sent you, forcing this sense upon this place.

Your next argument, 2. Objection.
was from the participle (quickened) thus. No passive can agree with the Deity:
Quickened is a passive: Ergo, it cannot agree with the Deity. This syllogism I
granted to be good and told you withal, Answer.
that we do not attribute this Participle to the Deity, but to the whole
Christ, by participation of proprieties, following the text which says not,
that the flesh was mortified, and the spirit quickened: No reply, no rejoinder.
but that Christ was mortified in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit. This
answer, you stroke off your skore.

Your third argument was from the tense or time (...) be attributed to Christ
at one time, 3. Object.
they note, that he was dead and alive at one time. But the first is true:
Ergo, the last is true. To this I answer, denying the mayor, Answer.
That participles or verbs of one time attributed to one thing, must needs
pertain to one time. In the belief, we say, that Christ was crucified, dead,
and buried: where crucified, dead, and buried, be all of one tense or time, and
yet agree not all to Christ at one instance of time. To this you reply, that
they must pertain to one time, and prove your mayor thus. Christ was after
his passion dead or alive at on time, or else never. If he were never dead and
alive at one time, S. Peter speaks not truly. If he were dead and alive at
one time, then I speak falselie. In this Syllogism is neither mood nor
figure: and besides that, it stands on a begging of the question, That Peter
says he was at one time dead and alive, is the question, and you take that,
as if it were granted.

Your fourth reason was. 4. Objection.
If Peter says, that the flesh was dead, and the Spirit quickened, then does
he show, that he was both dead and alive at one time. But the first is true:
Ergo, the last is not false. The minor of this Syllogism, Answer.
I did deny: showing, that it is flat against the text, which says not, that
the flesh was dead, and the spirit quickened. But that Christ was dead in the
flesh, No reply, no Rejoinder.
and quickened in the spirit. This reason it pleases you of your courtesy to
send away in secret, without a God be with you.

Your fifth reason was. 5. Objection.
The Scripture does join this going and preaching cloase to his passion, as if
it would say: As soon as he had suffered, he went and preached. I answered
you, that (as) and (if) did carry too weak a consequence, Answer.
in so weighty a matter. No reply, no Rejoinder.
This ass sadled with an if ((...).

Your sixth reason was, 6. Objection.
out of the 6. of Genes. That the preaching of Noah, is there attributed to the
third person of the Deity, and not to the second. The words of that text be.
The Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is but
flesh. Answer
Which words I answered you in the Latin that I sent you, that I never saw
any interpreters. that do consent with you in this exposition, and interpret
these words of the third person of the Deity. Tremelius and Iunius their
judgment I set down, as that I liked best: who take these words to be a
Hebraisme, sounding as if he had said, I will not always stand disputing with
my self, what to do with these men which yield no fruits, but of flesh and
blood: for, now I am determined (except they repent) to destroy them at the
day appointed. Notwithstanding, granting you that it were as you would have it,
I told you, seeing the actions of every person of the Deity, are common to
all three, he erreth not that gives them to any of the three. Reply.
This you confess to be true. But you ask me, if I can prove that Christ
preached in Noah after his passion: affirming confidentlie, that this was
attributed to him of Peter, after the passion. Rejoinder.
It were requisite that you had good proof according to the weight of this
case, and your confidence in speaking it. But I will ease you of that burden.
Prove it out of the text, with any reasonable show of truth, and you shall
have my heart and hand. The order of the words which you stand so stoutly
upon, is not so strict, as you would have it. For the purpose and drift of the
Apostle here, is to persuade us to patience by the example of our Savior, and
not to set out his death, descending and resurrection, in order as they were
done: but obiter as they fall in hand, and follow the matter that here he
drives to persuade.

Your seventh reason was, 7. Objection.
if Christ was raised from the dead, by the first person of the Deity, and not
by the second: then the word spirit here, cannot be construed of the Deity:
but Christ was raised by the first person, Answer
and not by the second. Ergo, etc. I might well have told you, that this minor
is absurd and flat against the plain text, Ioh. 5. 21. Whatsoever thing the
Father does, the same the son does also with him. And Ioh. 10. 18. which
words I did quote not far before, in the defense of my second reason. I have
power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again. But then
sparing you and refraining all hard speeches, how ever they were due, I only
told you; that I saw not how that could stand with the truth of the
Scriptures, which tells me, Reply Rejoinder.
that the second person did put on man, and did not forsake him in all his
distresses. You reply in the margent of your written copy, see contrary to
this Act, 4. 40: Act. 13. 30. 1. Cor. 15. 15. Which places I have marked and
observed, to make nothing against my assertion. In them the raising up of
christ, is attributed to the Godhead, which works not (as I have noted
already) one person without another. Which thing, if it be an error, it was
John that seduced me. cap. 5. 7. The Father works, and I work. As the Father
does raise up the dead, so the son likewise, does raise up whom he will.
And in the 17. verse, quoted a little above. The same is agreeable to other
infinite places of Scripture, and the sum of our Faith, called the belief,
which says; the third day he rose again, and not that he was raised again.

Your eight reason was. 8. Objection.
If the time that they were preached to, and of their disobedience, was not
one: then this preaching is not to be understood of Noah his preaching, in the
time of their disobedience. But the adverbe pote does distinguish those times.
Answer
Ergo, etc. To this I answer, that the Adverb pote, does not determine the
participle apeithesasi, but the principal verb ekeryxen, You reply, that I
speak neither like a Divine, Reply.
nor like a Grammarian. To prove me no divine, which indeed I am not: and no
Grammarian, which I am but little: you allege no Divinity, and little
grammar. It will not follow, that because it may stand with a Participle,
therefore it is so here: or, that because it is distinguished from the verb,
with a comma, therefore it cannot determine it at all. You are not ouer-loden
with Grammar, if you know not, Rejoinder
that diverse and many reasons, may part words depending one on the other, by
a comma. And as for this place, pote, if it did depend (as you would have it)
upon apeithesasi, it cannot be distinguished from ekeryxen with a comma, seeing
apeithesasi it self, is governed of ekeryxen, without commixture of any
interjected member to part them. What ever your book has, take heed, that it
be not a stain to your skill in grammar, to credit a book in such a case.

Your ninth argument was. Noah preched to men These were spirits and not men:
Ergo, Noah preached not to these. I answered, that whosoever preaches to men,
preaches to spirits, because no men want spirits, that is, reasonable souls.
And now I ad, that they are here called Spirits, in respect of their
imprisonment, not in respect of his preaching. If he had called them men, then
the name of prison wherein they are now datained, had been improper. The
Apostle wisely choosed that word, which might best agree with both those
times. Bezaes opinion also, whereto Andradius the Papist agrees, is most
probable, that pote does determine the same Participle apeithesasi, and does
distinguish it from tois en phylake pneumasi, which must needs be understood in
the present time, by virtue of the participle ousi, in that kind of phrase in
Greek, most necessarily always employed. You reply not one word to the
purpose: but charging us with that we never spoke, nor thought (that we take
these spirits for the men in Noah's time) you allege Christ's words against us,
Luke 24. 39. But if you were a man, that could mark the words of them that
dispute against you, and take them as they are spoken: you should find, that
we say not that he preached to the spirits in the days of Noah: But to the
spirits that now are in prison, and were disobedient in the days of Noah. If
you can any ways turn Christ's words in Luke, to confute this, you need not
to care, what things you take upon you to prove. If you can prove, that Noah
preaching to the men of his time, did not preach to their Spirits: or that
these spirits in prison, which Peter speaks here of, were not the same that
rebelled in the days of Noah, you may drive us from this hold: otherwise you
may throw your cap at us.

Last of all, you charge our construction with violence. I answered, 10.
Objection.
that you do us wrong, charging us with things, that none of us do speak. Which
answer you pass by with silence, Answer
and so allow it for current.

To these you have added two new ones, which (to take away all scruple, I will
answer also.

First, 11. Objection.
say you, if the word phylake does signify hell, then Christ did descend into
hell: But phylake does signify Hell. Ergo, etc. I deny the mayor, it will
not follow, though phylake does signify hell (as here it does indeed
Metaphoricallie) that therefore Christ descended into Hell: Answer.
neither does the place that you quote of Math. prove that you would have:
except you can prove also, that phylake has no other signification, then the
prison of utter darkness, etc.

Your other reason is. 12. Objection.
He that was killed, dead, and quickened, did preach. But it was Christ that
was killed, dead, and quickened: Ergo, it was Christ that preached, and not his
Deity. Christ, and not his Deity, M. Doctor? Can Christ preach, and not his
Deity? You may say what you will. If I had let fall such a word, you would
have cried, Crucifige. But to answer you, Answer.
I deny the mayor. It is against the text. He was mortified, that is, killed
and dead in the flesh, and that preached not. He was quickened in the spirit,
and in that he went and preached. That which preached, was neither killed nor
dead: neither was it self quickened: but Christ was quickened in it.

These are all your objections. In my answer to your sermon, I answered 10. of
them. You have replied to 6. of them, and to the other 4. you have given a
pardon at large, never to be troubled by you. Your six replies I have here
rejoyned too, and have met your new supplies at the encounter, and have sent
them home to you for new help. All your forces thus defeated, and so mighty
and resolute an army against you, (if there be any conformity in you, if
your neck be not so stiff, that no bridle can turn it) I hope you will get you
to Chippenhames pulpit, and perform your promise.

HVME Sect. 13.
THese things being thus, I pray you (good M. D.) seeing you would have us
undoubtedly to believe, that Christ descended into Hell. Tell us undoubtedly to
what end he should descend thither. I trust you will not teach us, neither
Augustine, neither Ieromes lesson, that he went thither to deliver prisoners.
As for that new lesson, that he went thither to triumph: it stands not with
the manner of conquerours, to show the glory of their conquest amongst the
conquered: but amongst them to whom the joy of the victory does appertain:
and for mine own part, I have oftentimes read the name of Hell, joined with
shame and ignomie: but to this day, I never hard it joined with triumph and
glory. Neither seems it probable, that if Christ had purposed to show the
pomp of his conquest, he would have done it before his resurrection, lest
being yet in the hands of his enemy, he had me^t him with the proverb, Ante
victoriam, etc. To these reasons, may be added, that seeing his triumph was
celebrated at one instance, in Heaven, Earth, and Hell: if the presence of his
soul was required, as you bear in hand it will follow, that his soul was at
one instant in these three places, which is contrary to the nature of a soul.
You add two other causes, to bind the devil, and deliver us from hell. You
bring us many places of Scripture, to confirm this gear. Genesis 3. 15. The seed
of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Ose. 13 15. O death, I will be thy
death, O hell I will be thy destruction 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death, where is thy
sting, O hell where i^ thy victory. In all which places, there is not a
syllable sounding, that Christ descended into hell. As for his triumphing over
Hell, we never denied it, and do avouch that he performed, that most
gloriously, by the power of his Godhead, which did present his victory over
his enemies, hell and death: both to heven earth and Hell, without the presence
of his soul.

HILL his Reply.
YOu ask me why Christ descended into hell, The Paralogis. of this section.
and yet you co^fes I noted Those 3 ends in your opinion, are not ends indeed.
three ends of Christ's descending into hell, the one to He triumphed over hell
and death in heaven, earth and hell: not in hell only
triumph over the Devils: the other to If it was all one actio^ to bind the
Devil, and to take away his power, that he did, by his death, Heb. 2. 14.
bind the Devils, and to take away their power over mankind: That he did by
his death also.
the 3. to deliver us from hell. There was also set down a fourth end, that
is, Dic sodes: Had the Devils never known his death, except he had gone down
to the damned.
to manifest his death unto those in hell, and to reprove them of their
incredulity: and here laboring to catch me in a snare, you are fallen into it
your self: for first you say, Christ conquered hell on the Cross, then as
having forgotten your self you ask this question with admiration. How could
he You forge: my words were, how could he triumph over death, being in the
bands of death.
conquer being in the grave? Is it likly that he would triumph before his
victory? First you stoutly affirm that he had conquered, then you boldly Not
it that I said.
deny it. Ast ego mihi satis consentio.
Co^neniet nnlli qui secu^ dissidet ipse. Next you say, you have not read the
So says August. I never read the name of Hell in bonam partem. ad Evod. epist.
99.
name of hell, but joined with shame and infamy: why do you write then, that
the In these places the name of hell, is separate from triu^ph and glory
Godhead did triumph over hell; Did you not read your own writing I am sure in
this place? 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting, In these places the
name of hell, is separate from triu^ph and glory
O hell where is thy victory, In these places the name of hell, is separate from
triu^ph and glory
The nam of hell is joined with triumph. But you answer these places with a
flat negative. That is not his dese (...) ding into hell Frame this argument in
mood and figur, and you shall be collector the next lent.
here is not a syllable to prove the descending of Christ into hell. I am sure
Paul proves here, the That is not his desce^ding into hell Frame this argument
in mood and figur, and you shall be collector the next lent.
resurrection of Christ and of our souls, and how can he prove the
resurrection, unless he prove the knitting together of the body and soul?
for as death is the parting of body and soul, so resurrection is the reuniting
of them together again, and here Paul shows that the body coming out of
the grave, Wherein does Paul show that?
and the soul from hell, Christ did conquer both. And therefore it is not the
deity Where said I so: what will you blush to charge me with?
as you say, but the humane nature of Christ, y^ did vanquish death and Hell.
You have a special grace to prove things not denied.
Heb. 2. 14. For as much then, as the children were partakers of flesh and
blood, he also him self likewise took part with them, that he might destroy
through death, him that had power of death, that is the Diuil. There fore
Hemingius on the Col. 2. says. As on the Cross he conflicted with the diuill,
so by the glorious descending into hell, resurrection and ascension he did
triumph. It follows not.
Therefore these places prove his descending into hell as well as the burial,
for the reason of y^ apostle is this. Christ came out of the grave, ergo, he
conquered death, Where said the Apost so? Where is now Procustes his rack.
and Christ came out of hell. ergo he over came hell. Therefore thus I reason
Not me, but your own shadow.
against you, that did conquer which did fight, but the human nature of
Christ, did fight, ergo it did also conquer, If this were doutfull you
conclude more, then you include in the premises.
and is gone up into heaven, to whom the Angels: powers and mightes be subject.
These quotations are impettinent,
1. Pet. 3. 22. Col. 2. 25. phil. 2. 9. 10. Ephesians. 1. 20. 21. 22. Therefore, since
all these Scriptures do witness, that Christ as man did triumph, and is exalted,
and has al power, I doubt not but in your next answer you will reform your
My judgment was never deformed with this scare* and therefore needs herein
no reformation.
judgment.

HVME his Reioynder to the 13. sect.
I Beseech thee, (good Reader) take a little pains here, to mark the honest
dealing of this D. Whet I say, Christ could not triumph being in the bonds of
death: he for (triumph) sets (conquer) to make them contrary to my former
words, that Christ did conquer Hell upon the cross. It is one thing to
co^quere, another thing, to triumph. Pompey conquered the mighty Mithridates
in Syria, but he triumphed at Rome amongst his friends, Aug. ad Evod. ^9.
that were pertakers of the joy. Again, where I say with Augustine, that the
name of Hell is joined with shame, not with honor: meaning the name of hell is
shameful, not glorious: he takes me to say, that the name of hell cannot
stand in a sentence, with a word of honor, and quotes against me. 1. Cor. 15,
55. Hell, where is thy victory? in which place; hell and victory, are
separated, as if he had said, Hell thou have no victory. Thirdly, whereas I
say, that Christ triumphed by the power of his Deity: presenting his victory
to heaven, earth and Hell; he gives out that I say, that the Godhead triumphed,
and not the humanity, and notes in the margent, Hume contrary to Paul and
Peter: and wills me to reform this fault in my next reply. This is M. D. art:
If his cause were so good, as he would have it seem: he needed not this
cunning: or, if he carried as honest a mind, as he did protest in Chippenham
pulpit: he would rather perform his promise, then seek such
vn-christian-like shifts to maintain a bad cause.

Now to answer his cavils. I ask you M. Doct. why you send Christ to hell,
notwithstanding the three ends that you had noted, because those ends, were no
ends thereof: and because the Scripture does teach, that he had performed
all those ends by the conquest of Hell, upon this cross. You brought texts of
Scripture to prove them, and I answered truly, that not one of them sounds
any syllable that way. For, in all those places there is not a letter, neither
of his descending into hell, nor of his triumphing over hell. You reply, that
those texts do prove the resurrection (which is not true of all neither) and
that the resurrection is a knitting of the soul and body together: and that
the knitting of them together, was by bringing his soul from Hell (this is
your principle) and his body from the grave. Now, add the conclusion, that he
that proves Christ's resurrection, proves his descending into hell. If this
reason be good, I will yield. For, now (if it will hold) you have found a
way to prove your opinion, by all the Scriptures. When Christ cured the blind
man's eyes with spittle, it is plain, that he was a man: If he was a man, he
was mortal, and died: If he died, his soul went to hell, (this is your
undoubted principle) and his body to the grave. Ergo, he that writes that
Christ cured the blind man's eyes with spittle, does write that he went to
Hell. By this hook, you may pull all the Scriptures out at the window, and
make them prove what pleases you.

HVME his 14. Sect.
YOu allege for confirmation of the second. How can a man enter into a strong
man's house and spoil his goods, except first he bind the strong man. Here
is not that which you undertook, to prove that he descended into hell, to
bind the deuilles. This house whereof here is spoken, is to any man of
judgments eye, by circumstance of the place, not Hell: but this world, whereof
the devil had taken possession, and polluted many hearts: out of the which, he
was cast by Christ, who thereby proves himself to be stronger then he: and
not to work miracles in the name of Beel-zebub, as the Pharisees did bear the
simple people in hand.

HILL his Reply.
YOur interpretation is true: The Paralogismes in the D. Reply.
That cannot be, see the answer.
and the other true also, for How often have you told this tale, and never proved
it.
Christ did not only overcome the Devil in y^ world, but also in Hell. For,
as Cyrill notes on this place: there was before the coming of Christ much
violence, taking away the flock of God, and carrying them to his own house:
wherefore before the coming of Christ, the heathen and people of the world
went into eternal death: But Christ has delivered both their bodies from the
grave and their souls from Hell, by his death and Quote the place: these
words are suspicious, and sound more like Hill then Cyril
personal descending into Hell. This place is alleged by one Georgius
Princeps Anhaltinus, in his learned commentaries on the 16. Psalm, which you
may read, if you please. This (for) is as doutfull, as the thing it is brought
for
For as David trampled on the face of Goliath, Crambe, twice at one service: you
might have spared it till the next course.
so did the soul of Christ trample on Satan in hell, Even as you have painted
it in your book.
and trod on his face: and this is noted by the Prophetess Sibilla, as also
by the ^eathen Poets, whose words I have set down in my sermon at large. And
therefore Clenard in his grammar gives this observation, katelthonta eis adou,
id est, eis otkian tou adou, he went down into hell, that is, into A Grecian
wol^ have translated it, into the house of Pluto, Lord of Hell: or more
Christian like, into the house of death.
the house of Hell.

HVME his Reioynder to the 14. Sect.
YOu grant my interpretation to be true: but I will not grant yours, except
you bring better warrant then your self, and a man that I never saw. You will
me to buy him. I am not so well purst as to buy him only, to see this that
you quote him for, my interpretation is defend-able without him. It stands so
sure upon the text, that you confess it your self. You would feign shoulder
in yours too, and make the Scriptures double tongued: but I have learned, that
one text, has but one true meaning. Though man's opinions may differ, there is
but one that hits the nail on the head. I need no better proof therefore, to
confute your interpretation, then your own confession. Only this I add, that
seeing your interpretation is doubtful, it can bring no undoubtful proof, to
your doubtful and false opinion. As for the Sybiles, and Heathen Poets you did
well to spare them. The quoting of them would have been more laborious, then
their testimonies would have been effectual in this case. When you have to do
with a heathen (as some of the Fathers had) they may stand you in stead, (...).
As for the greek eis tou adou, you construe it wrong, into the house of hell.
Hell has not a house. They that speak so, meant the house of Pluto, called ades
in greek: the Lord of death, as the heathen did imagine. So is that word used
by Nonnus speaking of Lazarus raised from the death by Christ.

(...)
(...).
HVME his 15. Sect.
NOw one thing remains, wherein you seemed to run beyond your self, and
most men did wonder, what you meant thereby. Whereas our Savior upon the
Cross, did utter to the hearers then, and all posterities after, that he had
finished the work of our Redemption: You took upon you to prove, that he meant
not so: bearing the world as it were in hand, that we can speak nothing so
truly, but that you ca^ confute it. To this purpose you alleged these places.
Ioh 15. ^
I have finished the work which thou gave me. Act 13. 19.
As they had finished all things that were written of him. Ioh. 19. 28.
And seeing all things now finished that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.
Out of all which places (say you) it is apparent, that there remained some
things to be done after. What needs all these proofs in a matter that no man
denies. It is confessed of all men (I hope) that when he spoke this, he had
not yet given up the ghost. But I trust, you will not deny, that his meaning
was, that his work was finished, when he had breathed the last breath. Which
thing (if you grant) you have proved nothing against our assertion. It is a
common thing (you know) to speak that in the time past, which is meant that it
shall come to pass shortly after. Such were these words of Christ, it is
finished. And like to (...) words in another place. Behold, the hour
comes, and it is (...) shall be scattered. Where he says, that the hour is
already come, which was to come shortly after. This must needs be the meaning
of Christ's words. Neither could he otherwise (as man) show to those malicious
persecuters that stood about him, and us that read it now to our comforts, that
he had made an end of his work, and was past the malice of all his enemies,
except he should have told it them, after that he had given up the ghost.
Which thing could not have been done, without the miraculous assistance of his
Godhead, which did in all his passion (as it were) hide it self, and suffer
the innocent man, as man, to pay the ransom of man's redemption Here you gave
us a distinction of consummatum re, and consummatum spe. Deliver it again, to
the dunces whence you had it. There is no hair so small, which those subtle
wits, will not find a wedge to cleave, rather then confess it to be a hair, if
it make against their conceit, be it never so gross, and erroneous. And tell
those Harpya quae tactu suo optimas dapes foedarunt: that a thing may be
consummatum spe, which a man means not to begin 20. years hence, and
perhaps never finishe. Here we all wondered what you meant, and were
affraied, least you would have sent Christ down to Hell to suffer. Which if
you did you must needs argue him of an untruth, who is truth it self. For
his work had then been so far from an end, that he had not been
flea-bitten in respect of that, which was to come. This truly M. Hill, was not
ware worthy of your wit.

HILL his Reply.
What I have spoken is either proved, or needs no proof.
Here you have spoken much and proved nothing, The Paralogismes in this sect
I know but one reason in all the sermon unanswered, and that was not worth an
answer.
for of those reasons which I have laid down in my Sermon concerning this
point, not one is answered. Only as you told me before Both untrue He is not
well in his wits that could pike such a mad sense out of so tame words.
I was immodest, so now you tell me Both untrue He is not well in his wits
that could pike such a mad sense out of so tame words.
I am a mad man, and the wonder of the world. I objected nothing to you. I pray
God you use these words as David did. I wish you no more ill.
I must answer you with David, I am become as a monster unto many, but my
trust is in thy law. Your malice is sharper then your accusation.
But what will men Judge of you, that in one and the same matter affirm and
deny. There remained somewhat when he spoke these words, and nothing after his
death on the cross, are not contraries, if both your eyes could look one way.
You confess in the beginning, that there remain somewhat to do, and in the
end you wonder at me because I said, al things were not finished on the
cross. Your next words are these, when our Savior cried it is finished, he
had not given up the ghost which was the end of his work. It could not be
otherwise: for it had been strange if he had cried that, after that he had
given up the ghost.
It is true, that after the speking of Consummatum est, it is finished, he gave
up y^ ghost, Then were christ's untrue
but that was not y^ finishing of his work, That he shed before
for he must also shed his blood. Heb. 9. 2^. Without sheading of blood their
is no forgiveness of sins. 1. Pet. 1. 19. John, 1. 7. Apoc. 1. 5. You can do
well to prove things not denied, we have proved your strength already.
In all which scriptures it is set down, that we are redeemed with the pricious
blood of Christ. The blood of Christ does purge us from all sin: he has
loved us and washed away our sins in his blood. I deny the sequel.
Therefore the giving up of the ghost, was not the end of his work. Or else
by you.
Here is a fault committed by you, I thank you, you favor me much.
but I will not wonder at you, nor say you are runn besides your self, I thank
you, you favor me much.
but you runn against your self, Prove that, and I have done.
and resist also the holy ghost. Then you scornefully reject my destincion of
Consummatum re, and Consummatum spe, that is, finished in hope, and finished in
deed. I will defend it, for it comes not out of the Du^ces, It never grew in
that soil.
but out of Gods sacred word. Romans 8. 24. it is said, What makes all this or
any thing here to prove that Christ has consummat our salvation spe no^ re.
We are saved by hope. What makes all this or any thing here to prove that
Christ has consummat our salvation spe no^ re.
Gal. 5. 5. for we through the spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness through
faith. What makes all this or any thing here to prove that Christ has
consummat our salvation spe no^ re.
Luc. 21. 24. Lift up your head (says Christ to his Disiples) for your
redemtion draws nigh. What makes all this or any thing here to prove that
Christ has consummat our salvation spe no^ re.
Romans 8. 23. And not only the creature, but we also which have the first
fruits of the spirit do fight, even we do fight in our selves waiting for
adoption, even the redemption of our body. This is not to the purpose.
Musculus on the fourth Chapter of the Ephesians thus writes, the places ar
these, That we are called in hope, not in deed, and that the hope of future
blessings, is ye store of our faith, as long as we are in this flesh, for we
are saved, nondum in re sed in spe, not yet in deed but in hope. By all these
scriptures it is manifest, that The question is not of our consummation: but
bow Christ has consummat the work of out redemtion.
our cosummation is in hope, and not in deed (as Musculus notes) neither shall
be actually perfited, until the day of judgment. Therefore, I did with this
distinction You would say answer.
refute the argument which is made of those that are on your side, We conclude
not so, see the answer
who thus conclude. Christ said on the cross (It is finished) Ergo, he went
not down to to hell. By the same reason I thus argue. Christ said on y^ cross
(It is finished) This is a wonderful argument. Christ saying, it is finished,
died by shedding his blood: ergo he shed no blood.
Ergo, he did not shed his blood, These were adjuncts, but not works of our
redemption.
nor was buried, These were adjuncts, but not works of our redemption.
nor rose again, These were adjuncts, but not works of our redemption.
nor ascended into heaven to fulfill all things. Ephesians. 4. 10. for if all
things were then fulfilled on the cross, what need he to ascend, to fulfill
all things. You can never prove it.
Therefore, I did prove that this argument of yours, did make no more against the
descending into hell, then against the sheading of his blood, burial,
resurrection, ascension or judgment, al which are necessary to our That is not
the quest.
weal, and perfect consummation. To no purpose.
Farther, to prove my distinction to be true, I did then quote, that as Christ
is said to be the Lamb, slain from the beginning of the world, so the death of
Christ did reach to the first believers, and shall do to the last. Which
consummation by hope, is so enjoyed, as if we possessed it already: for all
the promises of Christ, are yea, and Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. But our argument will
not take that stain.
Therefore, I told you this argument, (It is finished) ergo, Christ went not
down to hell was a fallacy a dicto secundum quid ad simpliciter. And I noted how
these words were to be understood. All these be answered, fol. 16. and 17. of
your sermon.
First, that all the scripture and prophecies were fulfilled, for so the text
notes. All these be answered, fol. 16. and 17. of your sermon.
Secondly, it is finished, does signifye, there is no other sacrifice for
sin: for by one sac^ifice once offered, he has made perfect all that shall be
sanctified, Hebr. 10, 14. And therefore the Papists joining y^ merits of Saints
with the mirits of Christ, do err most shamefully. All these be answered,
fol. 16. and 17. of your sermon.
Thirdly, it was finished as concerning all his labors and sorrows. All these
be answered, fol. 16. and 17. of your sermon.
Fourthly al his sufferings both of body and soul were ended, which he finished
on y^ cross. All these be answered, fol. 16. and 17. of your sermon.
Briefly, his obedience to his Father was ended, for he yielded a pure, perfect,
and perpettuall obedience to his Father, and therefore had al power given him in
heaven, earth, and hell. Moreover, I did prove this interpretation by this text,
That text proves it not.
1. Cor. 15. 54. Then shall be brought to pas the saying that is written, o
death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory, These men deny not that
he finished our redemption on the cross
and did allege Beda, Peter Martyr, and Musculus up on this place, all which
were of my judgment, and therefore you had noe more cause to wonder at me,
then at these learned men, whom These be perrilous words. Be there any
Churches in England unreformed?
all the reformed Churches of England do reverence. Last of al, you seem to
charge me, as though I had said that Christ went down to suffer, which thing I
never mentioned, but that he went down to That was an obscurema nifestation.
manifest his death, to triumph in Who says he triumphed in an other person
then his own?
his own person over the Devil, Did he redeem us on the cross by a deputy?
and personally to redeem us from hell. Then you call them dunces whence I had
that destinction. You had it not from him, nor he from the word of God.
I had it from Musculus, and Musculus from the word of God, I deny the sequel.
and therefore you must embrace these distinctions, or else you will speak
erroneouslie. Omnia prohate, quod bonum est tenete. Try all things, hold that
which is best. Baseware it is, howsoever your wit and it does agree.
This work is worthy my wit or any other Interpreters. Neither will I leave the
ware that is in my poor pack for all the treasures of Egypt.

An absurdity in the D. Reply.
That Christ being nailed hands and feet to the Cross, died without
shedding of blood.

HVME his Reioynder to the 15. sect.
Our opinion is, that Christ upon the Cross, did offer a perfect sacrifice for
our sins, and finish the whole work of our redemption. This we prove by his
own last words, It is finished. For, after the manner of men, who having
brought their work to the last stroke, say (they have done) and withal make
an end: He having borne all the malice that death and Hell could inflict, told
the standers by, that he had done. And this he did immediately before he
gave up the ghost: because he could not as he was man, tell them the same
after that he was dead. Neither wanted this speech great reason. It was to make
full our hope, and to confirm our faith, which otherwise might have stood in
suspense. For, seeing our sins had deserved, not only the temporal death,
which the beholders did see him die: but also all the deaths of Hell, which
they, nor no mortal eye, could see him suffer: He told them himself, that he
had finished and done all, that there might remain no scruple for us to doubt
of. Thus therefore we reason against these men. If Christ finished the whole
work of our Redemption upon the cross, there remained nothing for him to do
in hell. But he did finishe the whole work of our redemption upon the Cross:
Ergo, there remained nothing for him to do in hell. This Syllogism is so
strong, that you dare not deny one syllable of it. Wherefore, when I hard you
in the pulpit violate the text whereon it stands, I could not choose but tell
you, that you ran beyond your self, and made your audience fear, least you
would have sent Christ to Hell to suffer, an error indeed, but such, as some
better divines then your self, that sealed the truth with their blood, to avoid
the absurdities of your opinion, did fall into in King Edwards time, when your
opinion was most generally embraced, and confirmed by convocation. Whereas you
say, that I say much and prove little: I prove as much as I intend. It was not
my purpose to confute any thing that you had spoken truly. For these words
(it is finished) are not to be referred to the instant, when they were spoken,
but to the end of his passion, which immediately followed. This you confess,
and why should I confute you? Or which is stranger, how could you find a
contrariety in my words, and see none in your own speaking the same, that I
do. But this is amongst much more worse then this, the fruit of your malice.
And here in your sermon at Chippenham, there was no more between us, but only
that you made a countenance to confute that which we avouch, and you confess:
convaying your battery in such sort, that you made the beholders think, that
you played upon our sconce, but in very deed, did ^euell all your ordinance
another way. But now you are grown somewhat further from me: for, though you
confess that Christ went not to hell to suffer: and that he died immediately
after he said, (It is finished:) yet you deny, that this was the end of his
work. Your reason is, that he had not shed his blood, and that without
shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins. And may we believe you M.
Doctor? That Christ was nailed hands and feet to the cross, without shedding
of his blood? If you will have us so credulous as to think this may be true,
first resolve us of what grief Christ died, in not much more, then three of our
common hours: being only wounded in the hands and feet, if not of the
effusion of his heart blood. Your distinction of consummatumre, and consummatum
spe, you will needs have us believe, that it was bred in Gods book. You must
bring better proof then I see, or else it never received bark nor branch in
that soil. The thing that you should prove, is, that the sacrifice of Christ
was finished in hope, not in deed. That we are saved in hope, Romans 8. 24. That
we wait for the hope of our righteousness. Gal. 5. 5. That we lift up our
heads, because our redemption draws near. Luke. 21. 8. That we sigh,
waiting for the hope, even the redemption of our bodies. Romans 8. 23. What makes
all this, to prove that Christ did finishe our redemption only in hope? The
question is here, how Christ has finished our redemption? not, how we
possess it. Seeing our hope is not uncertain and unstable, but settled on a
sure ground: does not these places rather prove, that Christ has done al
fully and absolutely? For if he did but hope how could we be sure? Your
vnshapely argument that you would fain fasten on us, and your other arguments
cast in the same moulde, to show the absurdity of it, with your long
impertinent tale of the rest of your sermon, I will let pass, as helping you
as little, as hurting us. Your counsel concerning the Dunces, I am not yet
ready for: when I have read all better books, then I will read them. For as
worthy men as they are in your eyes, I cannot hope that they will confirm my
judgment, to make me go sure: seeing your self being so well acquainted
with them, cannot keep your own feet from stumbling.

HVME Sect. 16.
IN the end of your sermon, you produce two inconveniences that you say, must
needs follow, if this article be not believed. The question is not about the
truth, but about the meaning of this article. Here, you do us open wrong, and
accuse your self of an untruth. You told us in the beginning of your sermon,
that neither M. Chaulfont, nor M. Wisdom did doubt of his descending into
Hell, and why now labor you to load your adversaries with ^nuie: as if they
took away hell, and the benefit of Christ's passion. What Rhethorick soever
this be, it is bad Divinity. We never denied that he went down into Hell,
but that ever he descended into the pit of the damned. From whence, if you
will in good logic, gather your conclusion: your wit reaches many miles
beyond our capacities. For, we are persuaded, that there can be no surer
argument, neither of Hell, nor of the certainty of our redemption; then that he
suffered all the torments of Hell upon the cross, and made a full
satisfaction for all our offenses. Which thing, he could not have done, if
there were no hell: and which thing, if he has done (as we are surely
persuaded) there is nothing more sure then our redemption. For, seeing he
suffered upon the tree, the pain of al our sins, as Peter witnesses, and
hell was due to our iniquities: it is as sure, (as what is most sure) that upon
the tree, that is, upon the cross, he descended into the lowermost Hell: that
is, into the heauiest torments that Hell could yield: and this, except you will
confess, you must grant that the Symboll (as we call it) of the Apostles, and
do so reverently embrace, is imperfect. For seeing the greatest part of our
redemption, consists in Christ's suffering in soul, for our souls: it was
more needful in that Symbol to make mention of them, the^ of the death of his
body, both because they were more horrible unto him, and further removed from
our senses. Which thing, if it be true, (as it is most certain) in what other
words (I pray you) of that Symboll, is that contained? but in these, he
descended into hell? For, that which goes before, he was crucified, dead and
buried, may be as well affirmed of the the thieves, that suffered with him.

HILL his Reply.
I Brought two inconveniences, This ground was uncertain: you are ready to
guess, when you are willing to speak.
if this article were denied. To move me^ not to do that, that you cannot name
one man that does.
to move the people, not to leave out any. The Paralogi^s of this section.
It is not unknown to you, that Seruetus I never saw. Carlill does not deny
it: blush for shame.
Seruetus and Seruetus I never saw. Carlill does not deny it: blush for shame.
Carlill deny it, and Name one.
diverse others now living among us (by reason of the Untruth.
negative doctrine which is preached of your side) will not repete this branch
of the creed (he descended into hell.) Twenty to one, they were men of your
own side.
And some have said to my face, that Thomas Aquinas did insert it into the
Creed. Any is too many: but I believe, your many is not any
Of these men I know too many, against whom I did direct my speech, Except I
am deceived. your fear wanted a subject.
for fear least some might be in that populous assembly. Who be they M.
Doctor?
Bad do they, that deny y^ personal desce^ding, but worse do they, which deny
both personal and potentiall. And worse do you, if you know none such.
Therefore I was not contrary to my self, but contrary to those which have
given But you were, except you can coin a better excuse then this.
occasion, that so comfortable an article of our Christian faith, should be
They that hold not here a negative, did not give such an occasion with a
negative.
put out of the Creed. You say, it was my part to deal plainly, A private
man's fault cannot well be called the putting out of an article.
for I preached the truth. Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Flatterye
gets friends, truth gets hatred. I know the ears of that So you say.
Auditory did itche for other Not at your hand: and yet the common sort were
well pleased. Obsecutus multis, paucos irritassi.
matter, but I am Gods Minister, and I have preached Gods truth, which I will
(by the help of my God) defend, So there be many that dissent from you.
against all gainsayers what so ever.

Hard and scarce.
HVME his Reioynder to the 16. Section.
BEtter a bad excuse, (says the proverb) but better to confess a fault. You
alleged these inco^ueniences, (you say) to move the people not to leave out
any of the articles of their faith. Men use to apply salues to sores, but I
believe you know not one sore for this salve. Yet you say, you know many that
will not repeat this article, by means of the negative on our side. I think
it is like true, that you know any such, and that we hold this article
negatiuelie. We hold that Christ descended into Hell, and suffered all his
torments for our redemption, which I have been taught to be an affirmative, by
better Logicians, then Doctor Hill. But one told you, that Thomas Aquinas did
insert this article: A discreet Pastor, would have admonished one man rather
priuatlie: then have troubled such an assembly with such a doubt in public.
Whosoever he was that told you that, he learned it not by any negative that
we hold, but of one of your Doctors. Erasmus is the first that ever I heard
bring that in question, a man on your side, and one of your cheef ankers.
Calvine in his book of the Institution of Christian Religion says, that some
are of that judgment, most likely noting him, and men that followed his
opinion. But how-so-euer it came, there he proves it to be an article, both
consonant and agreeable to the Scriptures, and necessary to the perfection of
the Symboll of our Faith. Therefore, Master Doctor, you do not well, to lay
the faults of your own favorites and friends, to our charges.

It was the improbabilitie of your opinion, that drove a man of so much
judgment as Erasmus was, to make that doubt. But Carlill and Servetus you say
do deny it. In your printed sermon, as you call it, you lay your malice more
open. There you allege for this antiquity joined with verity, (so there you
call your own opinion) all the learned of all ages, old and new: all the
Prophets and Apostles, and sybilles of the heathen: all the creatures in
heaven and earth, living and dead: and lastly, all the Devils themselves.
Only some possessed (you say) with Devils, as the Jews, Seruetus and Carlill
deny it. Here you utter your choler more plainly, challenging to your own
side, all the learned of all ages, old and new, and leaving nothing to your
adversaries, but block-isme, dol-tisme, and devilish giddiness. But, (God be
thanked) you have not the disposing of gifts and spirits. There be men that
denies your opinion to have any ground in the word, as far excelling you in
all kinds of learning, as you count your self before Sir Thomas your Curat at
Goosage: and of such zeal and constancy in Gods cause, with out regard of
wordlie preferments, as I pray God a man that can hold two benefices, and
would have seven if he could get them, might mend that fault, and show himself
as far from Devilish giddiness, as they. As for Servetus, I never saw his
book, which Calvine in his Epistles does say, was printed at Vienna. But this I
know, that he held many gross errors, concerning the Trinity, Humanity, and
Deity of Christ: as it is apparent in an Epistle written by the Ministers of
Basil, to the Syndicks and senate of Geneva. As for this question, I know not
what he held but it is not likely, that ever he touched it. And this I am sure
of, that he was burned, by the greatest favorites of our opinion, I mean the
Genevites.

Carlill, (excepting his fault) was a man for judgment and learning, many
degrees before your self: He made a slip, indeed, as who has not? Though you
throw the first stone at him, you are not clear your self. Besides the
mani-slips made in this book, and other pulpits also: you taught on S. James
his day in Trubridge Anno 1591. If I do well remember the year, that weomen did
bear children without pain, in time of innocence. And because you would be
sure not to be mistaken, you did repeat it in the after noone, in the same
terms that you spoke it in the fore-noone: a fault of less judgment and
learning then Carlils was. The Jews be enemies to our faith, and therefore
do not meet with us, nor acknowledge the truth that we do hold in this
article As for the place that they take from you in the Hebrew Psalm, and
whereupon your choler does rise, I see no cause why they are not to be
believed in their own tougue, before all others that have learned that tongue
of them. Their opinion of those words (if they be taken right) does impeach
Christ's passion, not so much as your own: what ever it pleases you and
Aepinus, to dream and suspect, without cause and matter. But upon the Jews,
the enemies of our faith, and Servetus an Heretic, with Carlill, whom for
his fault, (not so foul as your own) you boldly and peremptorlie term
possessed with a Devil, in this place, you would feign lay the first
broaching of our opinion, to deceive the simple. I hope you will leave this
craft one day. Howsoever you may purchesse a plause amongst the ignorant, the
wise and learned will hiss you out of the schools, if you run this course,
as you have begun.

HVME his 17. Sect.
THey say that you preached the same at Leycock, condemning all men that
dissent from you, of fury and madness, as men fighting against the holy
Ghost, and spurning at a doctrine so profitable, so godly, so wholesome, and
so full of all comfort, and solace. Here M. Hill, I appeal to your own
conscience, what profit, what commodity, what health, safety or solace, is
in your opinion, that ours compriseth not? Seeing our whole solace and safety,
comfort and commodity, consists in this, that we understand that Christ, God
and man, has taken upon him our curse, and paying a full ransom for our
sins upon the Cross, has reconciled us to the love of his Farher, which we
had lost by our Father Adam, that now we assure our selves of heaven,
without all fear of Hell. What either comfort or commodity, can the sending
of Christ into a place, where there was left no comfort nor commoditye, add to
this so perfect, and full a joy? All good men are sorry, that you, carrying the
commendation of zeal and learning, have joined your self with M. Chalfont,
who enterprised this matter so unadvisedly (to say no worse) and has almost
shaken the foundation of the Church, (which God forbid) with a dangerous
division. Your side (I confess) has many great defendants, which do rather
speak for you, then confirm your opinion, either with scripture, or reason. I
was my self of your opinion, till the sway of truth, (which I have always
rather followed, then mine own fantasies) did carry me to the contrary. I am
persuaded, that many of your authors, if they had heard the reasons that you
hear, would never have said, as you do. But because the ignorant may not
think, that you have all the world on your side. Whether you regard the number
or the excellency of the men: our cause is nothing inferior to yours. As for
M. Wisdom, if he had erred, it had been more Christian-like, to have
confuted him by private conference. But seeing his doctrine has the consent of
most of the learned of our times, and is so fortressed with Scripture and
reason as here you see: it wants all excuse of modesty to handle him in
open audience, before such a multitude in such sort, as M. Chalfont did, and
you confirmed in action, though not in words. For my part, I am, and will be on
his side, till I here better reason from you. Which when it comes, it shall
carry me to any truth, that you can prove. Further, I will not wagge the breadth
of a nail. If you can plainly without cloak and color, confute my reasons
and confirm your own: I promise you to turn my song If otherways, I hope you
will be as good as that word which you past in the pulpite, before so many
witnesses. If you will satisfy me, you must answer me by writing. For spoken
words pass faster away, then my dull senses can digest the reasons. I wrote
this in Latin, because I would not have it understood of the common sort. I
translated it into English, at the suit of a Gentleman, that lay here the last
spring. That copy (by some negligence,) went farther abroad, then I was
willing. I left it with a friend or two, to deliver it to you, when I went in
Scotland. They conferring together, delayed it till my return least I might
seem to have fled the brunt of your answer. I am sorry that it fell out so.
For (God is my witness) I sought not mine own praise, but did seek the truth.
Ex^use my rash enterprise in writing to you without any acquaintance. Let my
love of the truth, which pricked me for-warde, and your challenge which set
me a work, excuse that fault, if it was any. Far-well in the Lord. God give
us al understanding hearts.

Your friend though unacquainted, ALEXANDER HVME.

HILL his Reply.
Then you deny not but that you condemned all your adversaries of fury and
madness.
Truth it is, The Paralogis. of this section.
I did preach since a Leicock, and because I hard that M. Wisdom had set that
opinion of yours abroche again at Cosham, I did here also confirm mine, Not
because You hardly wind from that suspicion
I am desirous to be cont^tious, but because I would have no Did M. Wisdom
persuade men to d^ubt?
Christian man to doubt of the articles of his Faith* you ask me what
comfor^able or necessary matter you deny, that we do preach. I answer
Arrigea^^ res Pamphil^.
and I pray you consider o^ it. That we teach also.
we are borne in sin: how are we delivered from sin but by Christ, which
was conceived by the holy Ghost. And that if not so eloquently, yet as truly.
we have the magnitude of sins with Peter, And that
the multitude of sins with Mary Magdalen the turpitude of sins with the woman
taken in adultery, the infamy of sins with the Publican: the diuturnity of
sins with the thief on the gallows: the cruelty of sins with paul, and
the recidiuation into sins with diverse of the Saints: yet if we repent we
are pardoned for Chris^es sake, who purely, perfectly, and perpetualy obeyed
the law of God. And tha^
By reason of our sins we are subject to al punishments* both corporal, and
spiritual, and to the wrath of God: All the punishments due to us did Christ
suffer upon the cross, both in body and soul, and therefore it is called his
Passion. He suffered in the Garden, in Annas and Caiphas house, in Pilats hal,
but upon the cross (as you say truly) he suffered the agonies of death and
tormenets of hell. And tha^
Further by reason of sin this was laid upon the first Parents, Thou shall
die the death: so by reason of this sentence, not only the body was condemned
to death, but the soul to damnation. There is the difference that we teach not:
but we teach another thing far more comfortable, that Christ descended into
all the torments of hell, to quite us of them: by that he delivered us from
Hell.
To deliver us from these two punishments, the soul of Christ went to hell and
returned, and the body of Christ that lay dead in the grave, rose again
mightily, naturallye, speedily and happily. All that we teach as well as you
Beesides, Christ rose in deed, All that we teach as well as you
he gave himself to be felt and handled, hereupon we are assured that he
conquered death and hell. All that we teach as well as you
He ascended into Heaven, and therefore our prayers are hard, when we pray unto
him, All that we teach as well as you
and he gives us gifts for our ministry, All that we teach as well as you
and so he shall come to judgment at the last day, to give us perfect
blessedness. You confess that Christ was borne in deed, lived and fulfiled the
law, in the likeness of our flesh (sin excepted) he dyed in deed, he was
buried in deed, And that he descended into hell indeed: why past you by that?
aha D. aha D
he rose and ascended in deed, We never denied that: speak truth for shame.
and yet you will not confess that he personalye descended. How can al these
articles going before, and coming after be understood of the person of Christ,
and of his humanity, Fie man: who says so?
and not this. Therefore you denying this You s^a^der.
personal descending of Christ into hell, We take not away that comfort.
take away the great comfort of our deliverance from hell. You say we are
delivered from hell by Christ's And by his disce^ding into hell.
death: so are we too by his birth. So you may say, that we are delivered by
Adam: if he had never sinned, we had never needed Christ.
For if Christ had not been borne he had not dyed? so if there had not been a
separation of the body and soul of Christ, He conquered when he conflicted,
and he conflicted before the separation.
he could never have conquered death or hell: for by descending into This
Divinity is scarce current, see the answer.
the grave, and that personally, he conquered death, and has delivered us from
death, This Divinity is scarce current, see the answer.
and by going down into hell personallye, he has conquered hell. And for this
cause, the scripture applies it to the death of Christ, Not so: but because in
death he conflicted with these enemies.
because death was (as Paul says, Phil. 3. A dissoluiton of body and soul And
these 2. parts being dissolved, Christ came from the grave and from hell, This
i^ like the 606.
and Christ did conquer both, and triumph over them in him self, as it is Col.
2. 15. These Jews do ask asigne from heaven, This is superfluous.
Math. 22, 38. Luke 11. 29. to whom Christ said, A wicked and addulterous
Generation does ask a sign, but no sign shall be given them, but the sign
of Jonas the prophet, for as Jonas was in the whales belly three days and
three nights: so shall the son of man be in the heart of the earth, three
days and three nights. Which words Basilius Magnus interprets very well.
These words (a sign) is a matter made manifest co^teyning y^ declaration of
some thing that was hidden as y^ sign of Jonas, represents y^ take inferi
for the dead, and these men turn not this text to your byas
descending of Christ into hell, and the resurrection of Christ, and as Bede
says, take inferi for the dead, and these men turn not this text to your byas
and Rhab. also, he gave the^ a sign, but not from heaven, because they were
unworthy to see it, but from the depth of hell: Therefore (M. Hume) this is a
most comfortable doctrine, that That is not the thing you promised We teach
that as well as you.
Christ does deliver us from hell: which albeit you agnise as well as we, We
deny it not, see the answer.
yet because you deny the means where by it was purchased, you deny a most
comfortable doctrine: for not only the body of Christ was in the heart of the
earth, Simply say you? without a figure, if you do, I deny it.
but the son of man, which signifies the whole humanitye, that is, the soul
and the body. Jonas was in the whales belly alive and yet came forth, Christ
was in the grave dead in flesh, Petitio principij.
and alive in hell, and yet came forth* I deny the argume^^.
Therefore to take away this manner of descending, takes away from the Church a
singular comfort, It follows not.
and opens a gap to many errors confuted already by the Fathers. For, if
Christ did conquer hell, by the power of the That is your dream
Godhead only, and not as he is a man, what need had he to take upon him our
nature? but because as man he might be Lord not a heaven, and the Angels, but
of the earth and of the inhabitants thereof, and of hell and the devils. I said
Pi^ do^^^t.
You say the world is sorry for me. In the world says Christ you shall have
affliction. And he tells me the world will hate me. I way not these things: If
you be. I would you were not.
for I am noe manpleaser, nor lover of the world. But if in my Sermon I had
disagreed with David; Ezechiel, Esaias, Peter* Paul, 623. Words, see the
answer.
and Christ himself 923 as you have done in your an were, I hope I should be
both sorry But you cannot b^u^h.
and ashamed. Touching M. Chalfont whom you term a man without judgment, and
that he spoke impudently and enuiously, I never saw him before that time and
but once sense* but by that speech and conference which I had with him I ford
him to be learned His learning I will not meddle with, But if you had enquired,
how he used tha^ g^od soul M. W. sedome: you might have seen his gale run over
and v^id of gail. Such of his neighbors as I have talked with, did give him
y^ deserved praise of a learned and honest man. 626 That is the question.
And for as much as he has preached 926 sound doctrine in preaching the
affirmative, and that doct^in which is allowed by the learned convocation of
this land, it does not become you to Can a private letter be a ^bel^?
lible against him. for in speaking against him Fancy. They take neither your
part nor his.
you traduce al those reverend and learned men, which made an Iuiunction for
keeping of unity that no other Catechism should be taught of any
Schoolmaister then M. Nowels. Therefore because you are I am no stranger in the
church of Christ
a stranger you ought not to be Let the^ that know me better then you be asked
if this be trve.
pertergos and speak evil of those Ministers which uphold the doctrine Your
opinion is not established.
established: and because you are a Scholemaister, you ought to teach and not
to gainsaye it. Qui pergit dicere ea, quae vult, audiet ea, quae non vuls. as
you revile at M. Chalfont, so do Is truth a reueiling?
you and your friends priuilye against me, calling me a Bishop pling and a
time-seruer. Tell when, where, and before whom I said so, (...) you can.
Indeed I was brought up under You did well^^ put that in (...) but (...) in,
Vertute d^cer non sangui^e niti.
Bishop Jewel, who catechized I searse think it
me in this says, and therefore I will not easily or rashly depart from it. I
confess my self also to be a timeser^er, There was never worse time you have
laid me^ so fast a sleep, with this lu^labie, that now they dream, tha^ there
is neither heaven nor hell: God nor Devil: That Moses was a Politican, and
Christ a deceauer. Are these your days of salvation? Th^se are the times that
Paull did pr^phecie of 2. Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5 and Peter 2. Epist. 3 3. and ^f
which Christ says the elect should be deceived if it were possible. Math 24.
24. Praise them as much as you will*
for it is the day and time of salvation accepted. ^et them murmur with Martin
that list: I pray God my days may end with this time, and my time ma continue
no longer then these days of the stated our Church, that now is do continue. I
have seen the beginning, You have seen the beginning, but small propagation.
Men were glader of the Gospel in the beginning, then now: the fault must
needs be in the teachers. I leave that to your selves. God give you hearts to
mend in wrod and work^.
I have seen the propagation of the Gospel, I have seen God has de^ended
our Church merciful and miraculously from heaven. God grant that I and all my
Auditors may walk worthy of our calling, Godly, ius^ly, and soberly. Therefore
I end with this saying of S. Paul 1. Cor. 4. 3. As touching me I ^asse very
little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment* and in the 5. verse,
Therefore judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who shall lighten
things that are hidden in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart maniefest,
and then shall every man have praise of God.

HVME his Reioynder to the 17. Section.
TRuth it is that you did preach since at Leycocke, not for contentions sake,
but to have the last word. For, hearing that M. Wisdom had broached his
opinion at Cosham, and had persuaded Christian men to doubt of the articles of
their fatih, (so your words do sound) you could not hold your fingers. For my
part, I am much in your favor. For you were content to see me misuse all the
Prophets and Apostles, and Christ himself, and would not have said to me so
much as black is my eye, if some vnruelie tongues blemishing your credit, had
not set you a work. But blab it is, and out it must. You excused M. Wisdom of
this fault, in the beginning of your sermon at Chippenhame, and accused him
again (unawares) in the end of it. In the last section, you say, that you
spoke that of Carlill, Servetus, and some that told you, that Thomas Aquinas
did insert this article: and now again (unadvisedly) you say here, that you
preached again at Leycocke, after that you had heard of M. Wisdoms preaching
at Cosham, because you would have no Christian man, to doubt of the articles of
his faith. If this sermon to this end was need-full in your eyes: Then in your
conceit M. Wisdom had taught men at Cosham, to doubt of the articles of their
Faith: contrary to your first sermon at Cippenhame, and your last section
here. Carlil and Servetus did help to cover this slip before. Now, what cloak
will you find, to hide this contradiction again? My simple head cannot sound
into the depth of your excuses: and therefore, I leave it to your self to
prove, that this slip did leap over the hatch, against your will. Now, you
say, that I do ask you what comfortable or necessary matter you teach that we
deny. To this (with protestation praemised) that I mark it consideratlie, as
though you would not let one syllable fall in waste: you begin a long discourse
of the magnitude, multitude, turpitude, etc of our sins, and of Christ's
pains for our pardon, of his resurrection, ascension, and many other things
which we acknowledge, as well as you: all which, while my ears prepared by
your protestation, did hearken for the promised comfort we teach not: at length
comes out, that we being subject to two great curses, death and damnation,
Christ descended into the grave to deliver us from the one, and into Hell to
deliver us from the other. This is right Parturiunt montes. That Christ went
down into Hell, is not our comfort. Our comfort is, that he has delivered us
from the bands of hell, which we teach and acknowledge as well as you. But if
this your doctrine be true, then is it false that Peter teaches 2. 24. that
Christ bare our sins in his body on the tree, and his sacrifice imperfect.
Wherefore to conclude, magnus nugator, magno conatu, magnas nobis nugas parit.
But (say you) though we agnise this (that is your term) as well as you. Yet
because we deny the mean thereof, we deny a most comfortable doctrine.
The mean of our salvation was not his going down into the Hell of the damned,
which we deny: nor the laying of him up three days in Joseph's tomb which we
confess. But his suffering in his innocent soul and body, all the torments
and miseries of hell and death; which we must have suffered, if he had not
stepped in between us and them. I will not only say* this (after your manner)
but I will prove it so sufficiently, that you your self, shall not gainesay it.

The mean of our salvation, was the conquest of Hell and death: But his going
down into the Hell of the damned and Joseph's tomb, was not that conquest:
Ergo, his going down into the hell of the damned, or Joseph's tomb, was not
the mean of our salvation. Another.

The mean of our salvation, was that immaculate sacrifice that Christ did
offer for our sins: But his descending into the hell of the damned, and
Joseph's tomb, was not that sacrifice: Ergo, his going down into the hell of
the damned, and Joseph's tomb, was not the mean of our salvation.

Another.
There Christ redeemed us where he paid the ransom of our redemption: But
he paid not the ransom of our redemption in the hell of the damned, and
Joseph's tomb. Ergo, he redeemed us not by descending into the hell of the
damned, nor Joseph's tomb.

Here be three reasons in mood and figure, against your comfortable doctrine,
which when you have answered, I will bring a whole army of such mighty
soldiers, (for the scriptures have enough such) to turn your comfort into
murning, and your joy into tears, if it stand on no better ground then this.
But say you, if all the articles going before the coming after, be understood
of Christ's person: then this article of his descending must ca^e the same
sense: But the first is true: Ergo, the last is also true. This is a good
argument, but the conclusion is not for your hand. If you had but one such for
your maine-shot of descending, a whole reame of paper royal, would be too
little for your amplifications. But here your malice driving you to imagine
much absurdity in our opinion, does deceive you. For we hold and will die
for it, that Christ in his own person body and soul, did descend into all
the torments, that hell could yield. And this indeed is a true descending into
Hell. For the nature and name of Hell, does yield nothing but horror, terror,
tre^bling and torments. But in your opinion, we must imagine all things
contrary. Not torments, but triumph: nor sorrows, but solace: not shame and
ignominy, but honor and glory. Hell does yield no such fruits, nor the
descending into hell, can be to no such end. Take therefore your potentiall
decending into Hell, and the conquest thereof by the only power of the Deity,
and buy a benefice with it. Whereas you say that our opinion does open a gap
to many errors: you pretend a fear without ground, to make the Reader
affraied of the moone-shade. It is the manner of politic men, that would feign
hinder a thing, that reason does further, to set fear of sequels against the
force of known reason. Here you flee to that shift, though you know, that
amongst all the writers, that have embraced this opinion (which be many, and
of great name) not one yet can be tainted with one error growing in this
fountain. In this section you hamper about another argument, but cannot hit
the mark. Wherefore to save your labor, I will here make it up, and break
the point of it, when I have done, that you may see it cannot ^urt us. It is
this. There is greater reason that Christ should have been held three days of
Hell without pain: then three days of the grave without corruption. But he
was three days in the grave without corruption. Ergo, he was far rather three
days in Hell without pain. Because it is not likely, that the weaker did
fasten faster on him, then the stronger: being as far inferior in malice, as
it is less in power. To this I answer, that there is not the like reason,
much less greater reason. For, he lay three days in the grave to confirm
our knowledge, and to extinguishe all doubt of his death. Secondly, to lay a
grounded belief in our hearts of the resurrection: For, he was the first fruits
of the dead. Thirdly, to make his resurrection more glorious. For the longer
he was held in the bands of death, the greater glory it was to break them,
gathering strength by continuance. Lastly, to take all blocks out of the path
of faith, that we might walk in it more surely, without stumbling. I know
no such reasons why he should have descended into the very place of hell being
so far removed from our senses, as we could receive neither knowledge nor
comfort thereby. Now, whereas you take me up, for saying that the world is
sorry for you: my words might have had a tolerable construction, if you had
cast an eye to Christ's words in John. God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son for it: or if you had looked in my latin: you should have
found my words less subject to violence. Pij omnes dolent, that is, all the
godly are sorry, sounding much to the same sense. But you love not the world
(you say) nor the world loves not you: I think you speak truly. iiij. or v.
benefices to them that you have, would serve the turn, to maintain your
skarlet hood, and half a dosen of tall fellows in tawnie coats, to defend
that with the sword, which you cannot with the pen and that is but a piece of
the world. But you love not the world because it is not so liberal: nor the
world loves not you so, because you have more charges already, the^ you have
tongues to teach. You conclude that I being a stranger must not be
periergos, and that Si pergam dicere, quae volo: audiam, quae nolo. These
arguments were better in Queen Mary's fiery days for D. Story, then they are
now in the calmes of Elizabeth, for D. Hill. You slander the learned
convocation of the land, and wrong good M. Nowell, who, (as I hear)
disclaimeth your opinion. As for me, I am a Christian, and therefore no
stranger in the Church of Christ. I will not speak against my conscience, for
all the counsels and convocations in the world, and all the Doctors in both the
Vniuersisities, if they were my adversaries. But (God be thanked) it is not
so. I began with you in secret, and you have made it common. Wherefore you are
perierg^s and not I.

HILL his conclusion to M. Hume.
Master Hume, in the latter end of your answer you request me to recant: if
your answer did please me, as it does you: I would be as willing to recant,
as you and your friends would be glade to hear it. But I will plainly set
down my reasons why I do not recant: The first is, I alleged Act. 2 and
proved out of Peter's sermon my assertion, and to the reasons I drew out of that
place, you have answered nothing. Secondly, I alleged Syra, 17. 21. To prove,
that this phrase, (the nethermost parts of the earth) does signify hell, to
this you have in like manner said nothing. Thirdly, in all your answers to
my allegations, you have disagreed with the word of God. In answering of the
16. Psalm. you say my allegation is to be understood of the passion of Christ:
And Peter Act. 2. says, it is spoken of the resurrection, whether is to be
believed of Peter or you, I refer it to the indifferent Reader. Then I proved
that ERETS TACHTITH, that is, (the nethermost parts of the earth) did signify
hell, out of the 63. Psalm and 9. verse. In answering of this you dissent from
David, and M. Calvine. Now, whether it be more safe to sollowe David or you,
let mine enemies judge. I alleged Ezechiel to prove that point also 31.
chapter. 5. 16. 17. 18. 19. In answering to that place, you have gain-saide
^zechiel, Esaias in his 14. chapter Lavaterus, Munster, and Pellicane. Now,
whether it be more fit for me to believe you or Esaias, or Ezechiel, let your
own favorites judge. Then I alleged the known place of Peter, you travailed
much about this place, yet in your interpretation of this word pneumasi, that
is (spirits) which you interpret the souls of the men that lived in Noah's
time, you contradict the words of our Savior, Luk 24 39. For Christ says, a
Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. And yet you, and your
Masters ^ay, that this word spirit may signify a man living. Now, whether it
be more expedient for me to believe you, or Christ, I refer it to your own
judgment. You said my Sermon at Chippenhame did confirm you, and your friends:
but I hope your own answers will not confute me, but your self, and cause
your self, and them both to recan^: you say you seek to know he truth: so do
I, (as knows the knower of all hearts): wherefore, whether you or I have
taught the truth, let not Hume nor Hill judge, but the learned of the
^niversi^ies. For, as Paul says. 1. Cor. 14. 32. The spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets. That is, the labors of the learned men, are to be
judged of the learned. The God of patience and consolation, give us grace, that
we may be like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus, that we
may with one mind, and one mouth, glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Romans 14. 5. 6. To whom be all honor and glory, world without end.
Amen.

An answer to the conclusion.
IF you had been the man that you protested in the pulpite, and I promised my
self, when I wrote: there was good hope, that my answer might have pleased
you, as well as me. But now I see it impossible to please you, except I could
sing your song. And truly M. D. I could sing your song as soon as any man's,
if it did tune as well with the concent of scriptures, as other men's do. But
now you must pardon me: I am too old to learn your discords. The things in my
answer, which I hoped might have wrought it favor with you, was truth and
reason. But now I see, the one is a stranger with you, and the other a guest
at will. If they had been of that account in your study, and so familiar with
you, as I hoped: my poor answer had not found such hard handling, nor
unreasonable railing there, as it did. You sent it home so ragged, rent, and
torn: that it cost me a months work in the cold winter, to mend his coat.
Now, I have quilted it better, and sent it to you once again, to challenge
your promise, and to tell you that your plain reasons here set down, why you
could not recant are nullified and made of none effect: like an obligation,
that is paid at the day appointed. Wherefore, seeing your argument drawn from
the Act. 2. is answered sect. 4. and sect. 7. And seeing your place out of
Syrach is 7. ways defaced sect. 11. And seeing I have proved my consent with
the Scriptures in every place, where I met with that accusation. And seeing
our sense of the 16. Psalm, agrees with Peter as well as yours, sect. 7. And
seeing in my answer to Psalm. 63. I dissent neither from David nor Calvine,
sect 8. And seeing in my answer to the place of Ezechiel, I dissent neither
from him nor Esaias, sect. 9. And seeing I have proved by the word (spirit) that
men living in the flesh are not signified sect. 12. And seeing now I have set
down your words according to your own request: and seeing your sermon at
Chippenhame, and this anwsere also, has confirmed me: and seeing mine own
answer does no^ offer me, nor any of my friends sufficient cause to recant. I
hope now you are satisfied, and that you will satisfy me, and the populous
congregation, to whom you made your solemn promise of recantation in the
pulpite at Chippenhame. It was not a place to dissemble in, and therefore let
us see that you meant as you spoke. The Lord give you a heart pliable to his
truth.

ANd here to end, as if M. D. had set the bent of his wit to show the vanity
of his work, he makes the vainest brag, that ever grew in a vain head.
There was (good Reader) if thou know it not) one Ovid, of all vain poets the
vainest. Amongst many filthy, and vain works, he wrote a book entitled
Metamorphosis. In it he sets the edge of all his wits (which he had as sharp as
ever had any Poet) to the painting of lies in all colors wherein he shot so
near the mark, that in comparison of it, the lying legend commes not near
the whetstone, by as many miles as there be words in them both. The
conclusion of this worthy work, M. D. has pasted to his hell, as most
agreeable to that argument.

Iamque opus exegi, quod nec Iouis ira, nec ignis,
Nec pot^rit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
In which Ovid looking back into the work of his own wit, grew into such love
with the finenesse of his own conceits, that he doubted not to de^ie his own
imagined God Iuppiter. Now, that thou might see (gentle reader) that M.
Doctor did think of his own work, as well as Ovid could of his: he
brusteth out in the same brag. In which, if he mean Ovids Idol by this
Iuppiter, it is heathnishe, if the true God, it is Hellishe. That they that
understand not the latin, may understand it, I have thought not amiss to
english it as near the words as I can keeping the english meeter.

I have at length made up this work,
Which Iuppiter in raging fume:
With me, with fire, with edged sword,
And cankering age cannot consume.
To it I may well answer out of another Poet.

Quid dignum tanto fert hic promissor hiatis,
Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.
That is,

What has this vaunting bragger done
Worth gaping mouth and lips so wide:
The groaning Hill is brought a bed
And out a silly mous does slide.
Huic latino carmine sic respondero.
Nondum est exactum: ludit tua gloria ventos,
Ad sat a licta redi* I am renovatur opus.
In cineres* fumosque tui rediere labores,
Quod louis ignis agit, quod Iovis irae facit.
Aliud.
Dicere sibellum mireris tartara coelo:
Foedera Dis stygius cum Jove nulla colit.
Aliud.
Christum post stygios in tristi morte dolores,
Contendit stygias Hillus adisse domos.
Complexus vano nugas, tricasque libello
Provocat insanus tela, manumque Iovis.
Errat: fi tutum Iovis ira acheronta putarit,
Non coquit aeternis iguibus ille stygem?
FINIS.
CERTAIN PLACES QVOted out of Master Doctors own Authors, upon the three
principal places, where-upon he builds this his opinion, wherein thou may
see gentle Reader, how small cause he has to brag of so many old and new
writers. I leaning altogether on the word of truth, have not q^^ted them in
the treatise it self, counting them insufficient witnesses in such a cause,
wherein they have neither reveil^d, nor experimented knowledge, yet because I
would not defraud the^ of their judgments, I have thought good to set them
down here.
The first place is, thou would not leave my soul in (...) nor suffer thy
holy one to see corruption, where M. D^ct^r takes (...) to be hell, we the
general condition of them which are departed this life.
MOLERVS, In Psalm. 16.
caeterum movent hic questionem^^ descensu Christi ad inferos, qua^ prudens
omitto: cum ex hoc l^co id satis certo evinci non possit.

Felinu, non deseres ammam me^^sepu^^hro, id est, non destitues me, vt anima
mea morti concedat. Per she^l enim quod sepulchrum significat (vt in Psalm 6.
verse 6. d. x^) statum and con^^tionem mortuorum, In eundem
hoc est inferos, script^ra transnominare solet.

Muse Ius, non derelinques animam meam in sepulchro, nec dabi^ sa^ctum tuum
videre corruptionem, In eundem.
quasi dicat, tam certus sum ma^surum me perpetuo, vt vbi etiam mortuus fuero,
in m^rteta. men detineri nequeam: ideo quod, etc.

Hemingius: on thy psalm says, Vis verborum hunc sensum vt a Petro docemur,
suppeditat, non derelinques* id est, non sines, animam meam, In eundem.
id est, me: in inferno, id est, sepulchro permanere.

Pomeranus, Quoniam non derelinques animam meam, id est, vitam meam, (...)
^^ndem.
in inferno, id est in morte: Christus non solum pro nobis mortuus est* sed
etiam voluit pro nobis al^ quantisper* id est, vsque in tertium die^ descendere
ad tenebras tartareas, vbi est imago mortis, and sicut Job dicit sempiternus
horror absque vll^ordine, ho^ est voluit tam diu in morte teneri, ad quam nos
eramus in Adam damnati. sic and Joseph de morte sua loquitur, Genesis 37.
descendam ad filium meum lugens in sheol.

These be five of M. Doctors principal Authors, all agreeing with us, and
contrary to himself, these that follow indeed dissent from us* and agree not
with him on the meaning of this place.
Aepinus the great superintendent of Hamborough (as he calls him) on this
place says. Veteres ex scripturis respondent diversa^ ap^d inferos mansiones
fuisse, beatasque animas a corpore separatas ante Christi ascensio^em, neque in
terris mansisse, neque hinc ad superos in coelum migrasse, sed descendisse ad
infernum* and huic sententiae suffragetur Ecclesiae Ca^h^licae consensus, and
accedat scripturae sacrae autoritas: retineb^ hanc sententiam donec certior
scripturae interpretatio adferatur, and haec manifestis scripturae testimonijs
confuretur.

Peter Mar^yr in his common places holds the same in a manner. Et vero vna
atque altera tum piorum, spirituum, tum eorum qui damnati esse^t, societas
Christi praesentiam persensit. Etenim fidelium spirituum* q^i in loc^
tranquillo quies^^bant, qui sinus Abrahae apposite dicitur, vt cum sancto illo
Patriarcha eadem fide praediti ex^ectarent salutem per Christum, qua ab
Abrahamo denominabantur, spiritus inq^am (...) magna consolatione exhilarati
sunt, Egeruntque Deo optimo maximo gratias, etc.

Lossius on this place says. Christus ad inferos vere post mortem descendit,
ne nos ad eos descendamus. 2. vt inde Patriarchas vt vetus credidit ecclesiae
secum abduceret, cum quibus postea cum triumph^ in co^lum ascendit.

These three holds that the Fathers were in hell, though Marty^ dare not
give it that name, but calls it a place of rest and the bosom of Abraham, all
which M. Doctor denies.
Luther on this place tomo 3. of his works. Sicut Christus cum summo dolor
mortuus est^ta videtur dolores in inferno post mortem sustinuisse, vt nobis
omnia superaret. Ita ego interea verbis Petri inhaerebo donec meliora doctus
fuero.

To him agrees Latimer in his Sermons. And these two hold that he suffered in
hell, which Master Doctor denies.

The second place is in the 4. Ephesians. verse 9. but that he ascended, what is
it but that he first descended into the lovvermost parts of the earth.
Hemingius on this place says. Porro, qui ex hoc loco descensum Christi ad
inferos, and locum damnatorum co^cludant parum firmo nituntur fundamento. Non
enim comparationem in lituit Apost. vnius partis terrae ad totam terram: sed
totam te^ram cum coelo confert.

Musculus on this place brings two senses indifferently, the last accords
with this. Potest exp^^ deterra simpliciter cu^us parts sunt respectu coeli
inferiores. This much agrees with us against our Doctor.

Musculus his other sense is this. Descendit ad nos in hunc mundum, ad
sepulchrum, and ad inferos* descendit ad eos propter quos redimendos venit: and
quousque illi in partibus terrae cum vivendo, tum moriendo ad inferiora demissi
sunt: covsque ipse sese demisit, quo nos ex inferioribus secum ad superiora,
vnde descendit, subveheret. Where he diss^nteth also from this Doctor ho^ding
that he never descended farther than the Sancts of God does, whom he came to
redeem, which was not I trow so far as the damneds hell.

Pelicanus on this place says, Ascendit redivivus in sublime secum ducens
victoriae suae trophaeum captivoram gregem a peccati Diabolique tyrannide
liberatum. Here he holds that he did carry the fathers up to heaven, which our
Doctor demeth.

Petrus Martyr de vtraque in Christo natura contra vbiquitarios. fol. 59. in
typis Chistoph^^^ Froschoveri apud Tygurinos. says* Descendit ergo ad
infer^ora terrae, and ascendit super omnes coe^os, filius Dei, vt non solum
legem Pr^phetasque compleret: sed and alias quasdam occultas dispensationes,
quas solus ipse novit cum Patre. Neque enimscire p^ssumus quomodo Angelis, and
his, qui in inferno erant, sanguis Christi pr^fuerit and tamen quin profuerit,
nescire non possumus. Here this most excellent man avoucheth* that Christ's
blood was profitable to them in hell, which our Doctor date not ^ay of the
damned, howsoever Peter Martyr meant it.

The third place is out of the 1. Pet. 3. 18. 19. 20. mortified in the flesh,
and quickened in the spirit, in which spirit, he went and preached to the
spirits sometime disobedient in the days of Noah, etc.
Hemingius on this place says. Patet quod carnis voca^ulo tota humana natura
Christi intelligatur: sicut and spiritus appellatione ejusdem divina natura.

And a little after he says, Perpe^am quidam spiritus nomen ad animam tantum
referunt contra apertum Paul^ testimonium.

Aepinus upon the 68. Psalm says Petrus non meminit animae separatae a
corpore sed illius spiritus, quo tempore Nohae increduli^ praedicavit, nondum
^ss^m ta hum^na carne, and q^^ vivi^ catus (...) a morte, qui spiritus Deus
est. non rationalis anima. Deus enimisculcitav^t cum s^ lutis d^lo^^bus mortis.
Act 2. 13. no^ anima.

Aretios on this place says. Ideo car^em accipio libenter pro tota humana
natura Christi, qua^ assumpsit in v^^tatem personae. Contra* viu^^catus est
Spiritu, hoc est secundum divinam naturam. Pneum^ igitur est divina natura vt
constet fibi antithesis.

These three agree here with us against this Doctor, that bosteth so much of
their names.
Vitus Theodorus in the contents of the chapters of the first Epistle of Peter
trans^ated into Latin by Selneccer one of Master Doctors auth^rs says
Singul^ris haec est doctrina, and quae alib^ in sc^pturis nusq^^a^ legitur. and
quid Apostolus per eam intelligit, nondum perfect scire licet. hoc certitudo
est eum aliquot spiritibus praedicasse sed quot, and quibus videbimus in
aeterna vita. Here this man, demeth that which he supposes to be spoken here,
to have any other warrant in the word. and that it is not known to what
spirits he preached contrary to our Doctor.

Pelicanus on this place. Per spiritum intelligo spiritum sanctum datum
Apostolis die Pentecostes: and per carcerem errores, and Id^lolatrias Gentium,
and Iudaeorum. Our Doctor by s^irit understands the huma^e soul of Christ,
by the prison hell. This man (one of his own authors) understands by spirit
the holy Ghost, and by the prison the errors wherein the souls of the Jews
and Gentiles were capt^ued.

Thus thou may see (gentle Reader) that these three places, on which M.
Doctor builds his opinion, his own authors do interpret them some as we
do, and some othervvaies than he himself can allow. wherefore thou may
well think, that this is a vveake foundation to build thy faith upon. Now I
will note to thee how his own authors (that he calls his own I mean)
do dissent from him, and one from another on the very article it self. First
all his old vvriters send Christ to hell to deliver the fathers, and he to the
hell of the damned where the fathers never were, and there fore no more of
them.
Erasmus in Catechesi says, Ipsa inconcinnitas sermonis a^guit ab also quop^am
intertextum Emblema* and paulo post. An Thomas Aquinas addiderit subdubito.
Here he doubts of the Arti^le it self, and supposes Thomas Aquinas to
have inserted it.

Et postea vetustissimi patres magna religione cavebant, ne quid asseverarent
duntaxatin symbolo, quod non esset evidenter sacris literis vtriusque
testamenti expressum. Tales sunt omnes articuli hoc vno excepto. Here he
denies it (meaning the common sense of it) to have any sufficient warrant in
the word.

Afterward gathering all the places of scripture that are alleged by writers
to confirm it he concludes. Nihil istorum est, quod tergiversatorem cogat
credere Christi animam per se descendisse ad tartarum. And again, in his multa
sunt, quae nihil habent ponderis: sed nullum est quod non vel allegoriae nebulo
sit obscuru^, vel variam accipiat interpretationem. Here he denies the
sufficiency of all the scriptures, that this man and all that went before him
alleges, and yet this is one of his own auth^urs.

Petrus Martyr in symbolo, says, Quantum ad animam ipsam attinet, statim atque
ex corpore excessit, non mansit oti^sa, sed descendit ad inseros, quod nihil
aliud indicat, nisi quod eundem subijt statum, quem reliquae animae a corpore
sejunctae experiuntur. Here this man says that to descend into hell is
nothing else, but to enter into that same state, that other souls do, when they
are departed from the body, which our Doctor denies, and yet this is one of his
Authors.

Felmus on the 16. Psalm says, Non est in Davide adimpletum quod hic canitur.
Anima enim ejus tandem ad inferos descendit, and vidit caro ejus foveam. Here
this man takes the name of hell for the common condition of all the dead, which
our Doctor denies: and yet this is one of his Authors.

Pomeranus on the 16. Psalm, having expounded the name sheol of the state of
the dead as I have quoted before concludes. Atque hic habes articulum illum
fidei, with many more words prooving that Christ has wrought our deliverance
by his death and not by descending into the hell of the damned. And yet this is
one of Master Doctors best Authors.

Westmerus in tropis in voce, infernus, page 832. says, Ad infernum
descendere, nihil aliud est quam pessum ire, etc. And after in the same page.
and page 833. ad infernum descendere est corpus sub terra recondi* vnde cum
Christus descendisse ad inferos adseritur in symbolo vere mortuus, and sepultus
esse intelligitur Here this man says, that Christ's descending into hell is
m^ant but of hic death, and burial. And yet this is one of M Doctors authors.

Luther and Latimer hold^, that Christ suffered in hell the torments of hell, as
I have quoted already. This our Doctor denies, and yet these be two of his
Authors.

Hipperius in his Catechism, gathering the sum of this part of our faith
thus says. Primo dignatus est Christus se nostri causa humiliare nostram
assumens naturam per omnia (si excipiamus peccatum) par nobis factus, secundo
pro nostris peccatis expiandis maximos cruciatus pertulit, and mortem
ignominiosissimam Tertio quo donaremur iustitia a morte resurrexit quibus
peractis pristinam accepit gloriam, and ascendit ad coelos. Here this man
shouldereth it quite out of his creed, and yet this is one of Master Doctor^
Authors.

Lossius on the 16. Psalm says, Descendit ad inferos totus Christus sive
filius Dei, sicut idem conceptus est de spiritu sancto, natus ex Maria Virgin,
crucifixus, m^rtuus, and sepultus.

Hemingius in his Catechism has the like. Christus descendit ad inferos vtrum
anima an corpore scriptura non dicit: sed Symbolum videtur innuere totum
Christum descendisse. Here these two men say that Christ descended into hell
body and soull: our Doctor denies it: and yet these be two of his Authors.

Vrbanus Rhegius in Catechismo, says, Secundum animam descendit ad inferna ad
pias animas Adami, Noahi, Lothi, etc. Here this man says, that he went into
hell to the holy souls of Adam Noah, and Loath. our Doctor says they were not
there, and yet this is one of his Authors.

Aepinus on the 16. Psalm says. Quod autem Christus latron^ dixit hodie eris
mecum in Paradiso non abrogat fidem huic dogmati de descensu Christi ad
inferos: quia paradisus illa de qua loquitur Christus eo tempore apud inferos
fuit, nunc autem apud supero^^^ coel^ est. Here this man says that Paradise
was in hell before the coming of Christ: our doctor says no, and yet this is
one of his best Authors.

Lavaterus on Ezech 31. 18. says, hades apud Graecos generale vocabulum est
tormentorum and quietis. This man says, and says it truly, that the greek
name of hell, is a common name both to the place of the torments of the wicked,
and the joys of the faithful. our Doctor denies that, and yet this is one of
his chief Authors.

Alesius on the 19. of John upon these words, Exiuit in locum qui Caluaria
dicitur, orationem repetit luciani presbiteri Antiocheni vbi haec habet.
Adhibebo vobis loci ipsius testimonium adstipulatur his ipse in Hyerosolimis
locus, and Golgothana rupes sub patibuli onere dis^^pta. Antrum quoque illud
quod avulsis inferni Ianuis corpus demum reddidit animatum, quo purius inde
ferretur ad coelum. Here this man makes the place where Christ was buried the
mouth of hell, meaning thereby the place of death, our Doctor denies that, and
yet this is one of his Authors.

Aretius in the ninth of his common places, fol. 31. Sed de ill^ non satis
constat, quamdiu apud inferos sit commoratus: non diu vt apparet, vt eadem die
secundum animam ab inferis reversus gloriose Paradisum ingressus sit cum
latrone. Here this man says that Christ was not one day in hell, M. Doctor
says that he was there all the three days, that he lay in the grave, and yet
this is his chefest Author.

Master Nowell in his greater Catechism says, Christum, vt co^pore in terrae
viscera, Ita anima a corpore sep^rata ad inferos descendisse, simulque etiam
virtutis suae virtutem atque efficacitatem ad mo^tuos, atque inferos adeo ipsos
ita penetrasse, vt and incredulorum animae acerbissim^m justissimamque
infidelitatis suae da^nationem, ^pseque Satanas i^ferorum princeps tyrannidis
suae, and tenebrarum potestatem omnem deb^^itatam, fractam, a^que ruina
collaps^m ^ss^ persentiret: Contra vero mortui Christo dum vixerunt fidentes,
redemptionis suae ^pus jam peractum esse, ejusq vim, atque virtutem cum
suavissima, cer^^ssimaque consolatione intellige^ent atque perciperent. Here
(gentle Reader) because Master Doctor wrongeth this good man, then whom the
earth bears not many, and (as I am persuaded) (...) any better, I pray thee
mark this place well, for these are the only words that M. Doctor challenges
in all his works. First thou ma^est observe, that he uses the name (inferi)
not for the damned only but for all the dead: because he says that by Christ's
descending ad inferos, both the wicked felt the justnes of their damnation, and
the godly the sweetness of their salvation, and so Christus descendit ad inferos
is but Christ descended to the dead. Secondly that he says not that Christ's
soul descended into the hell of the damned, as our Doctor does: but that his
soul being severed from his body, that is, being departed this life, he
descended ad inferos, that is, was laid up amongst them whose life was blotted
out of the memory of the living. Thirdly, he says not that those, to whom he
descended saw him there personally* but they felt and understood the one their
j^st damnation, the other their sweet salvation together with his descending to
the dead that is presently upon the dissolution of his soul and body.
Wherefore great wrong has our D. done this man, to w^ing hi^ words being
somewhat obscure to a sense that he never meant, and to brag of him as being
the father of an opinion that I dare hope (for he is yet alive) he does
disallow. His opinion is amongst all the godly allowed to be true th^ugh not so
well fitting the article of the Creed: but our D. opinion no man accepts yet
for truth, except it be himself and his favorities. Thus I have set down, what
jarring there is between this man, and his authors. Now I will show thee, how
he has pulled some into this braul, that never dealt in the matter to make his
muster book long enough, and to fear m^n with naked names.

Robert Samuel in the bo^ke of Martyrs, making a confession of his faith when
he comes to this point, says no more tha^ the words of the belief, which be
meant as well with us, as with him, and him he quotes for one.

Lambe^t in the same book handling the question of the real presence, quotes a
place out of Aug. ad Dardanum to prove that Christ being corporally in heaven,
is not corporally in the Sacrament: in which place being long, Aug. amongst
those things, that Lambert quotes him for, says that Christ according to his
soul was in the bottom of hell (which if it be well taken may be) was devoured
and swallowed up of death* but Lambert himself neither allows nor
dissalloweth it, as being a thing beside his question: and yet he is alleged
for one.

M. Fox writes a little Pamphlet entitled Christ triumphing, be cause in it is
displaied the greatness of the battle, the worthiness of the victory, and the
joye of the conquest. The Printer (for I think M. Fox never cared greatly, what
sign they hanged at his shop door) or if it was M. Fox himself, all is one,
devised a picture to express the matter within the book. A man with four
wound, in his hands and fect, invested in a bright cloud, with a glistering
flame, as it were of fame, and glory glimmering about his face, standing with
the one foot on the head of a Dragon: and the other on the heart of death. This
picture M. Doctor took to be so sure an argument of Christ's descending into
hell, that he not only causes to set it before his own b^^k likewise: but
also repeateth the name of M. Fox 4. times if not oftener, as favoring his
opinion, having to my knowledge not one word in all his works, and I am sure not
one syllable in the book, which he quotes of Christ triumphing, saving that
picture. Thus gentle Reader, I have giu^n thee a vewe of 23. of M. Doctors
Authors, of whom some speak against him, some differ from him, and some say
nothing for him* wherefore thou may conclude, that it is but a painted cause
that alleges pictures for arguments* there is not one of all the Authors,
that he masters so often: that agrees with him in all things concerning this
opinion. Cajetane a Cardinal of Rome writing upon the place of Peter (I^ he
had not scarred at his popish name) comes nee^er him than any of these, Vt
ipse Christus mortificatus carne (nam vere mortuus est secundum carnem)
viuificatus autem spiritu (nam tunc cum mortuus erat viuificatus erat spiritu)
vt pote beatus secundum spiritum, and triumphans de daemonibus. Here he has
his descending into hell, his triumphing over the Devils, his being alive when
he was dead, and his flesh for the body, and spirit for the humane soul.
Therefore good Reader, let him follow Cajetan and follow thou the truth.

FINIS.

