THE CONFLICT OF JOB. By way of DIALOGVE. Compiled for illustration, or opening
of that great Encounter: and may also serve as a Paraphrase upon that heavenly
work. By R. H.

2 CORINTHIANS. 10, 4. The weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, but mighty
through GOD.

depiction of hand holding scepter with branches PRVDENTIA



LONDON Printed by William Iaggard dwelling in Barbican, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT NOble and Honorable: Robert Earl of Salisbury, vicount
Cranborne, Baron of Essingdon, principal Secretary to his Majesty, Master
of the court of Wards and Liueries, Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, knight of the Noble order of the Garter, and one of his Highness
most Honorable privy Council.
ALbeit (Right Honorable) my purpose was at the first, to have dedicated these
my labors to the Right, and truly Reverend Father of the Church of Christ, the
most wise and judicious Bishop of London, my very good Lord only, for whose
sake this task was undertaken, as being in his place a like President to this
Peer, whose virtues I labor to lay out: yet in regard they are more agreeable
to one of your sort, but chiefly in regard of a late accident, whereby I was
made known unto your Honor, I thought it requisite likewise, as well for the
testimony of mine own synceritie, as also of mine entire affection toward your
Lordship, to recommend the same unto you.

Behold then, (I humbly entreat your Honor) a subject suitable to a man of
your rank, and offering unto you a most worthy pattern for your imitation:
even such a one, as the whole Book of GOD, which ought to be a direction for
all estates, does not afford a more notable and eminent, for those of high
degree, sitting in the seat of Justice as your Lordship does. The wisdom of
God only wise has spoken it; That such as wear soft and costly attire are
in Math, 11, 8,
Kings Courts: It is an ancient Apothegge, Exeat aula qui vult esse pius, and
again, Libertas scelerum virtus, et summa potestas. Joseph his example has
sealed it for a truth, who by being in the Court of Egypt, inured his tongue
to swear by the life of Pharao, and the example of Moses more notably, who for
this cause refused to be called the son of Pharao his Hebr. 11.24, 25,
daughter. Non in Asiam venisse, sed in Asia continenter vixisse laudandum est.
Cic: pro Mur:
Nevertheless, this our Job, a man of great Honor, conversing among the
states of the Countries where he lived, and those Infidels to for the most
part, kept himself notwithstanding undefiled, yea remained both for life and
religion, the only mirror among men, not of that age alone, but of all
succeeding generations. An example therefore without comparison, the rarest and
most admirable of all other. For notwithstanding the supply of so many helps,
for the furthering them in the way of a godly life; as can hardly be recounted,
which this man wanted, yet nevertheless, Solomon with all his wisdom has not
left unto us the like: and David himself, a man according to the Lords own
heart, must come behind it. For Daniell, Nehemiah, Mordecai, Hester, though
children of the captivity of Judah, to separate themselves from the filthiness
of the Heathen among whom they lived, and claue to the Lord God of Israel, is a
thing very rare and extraordinary: but for Jonathan the son of profane
Saul King of Israel, having for his consorts ordinarily a company of beastly
Atheists, (for his Fathers Court yielded none other) is a thing more to be
observed in respect of our times, because the Spirit of God in the mouth of the
holy Apostle, pronou^ceth very peremtorily, Not 1 Cor. 1, 26
many Mighty, not many Noble are called.

Hence it is that all ages do yield us very few of his place, who are of
Joseph of Arimathea his mind, that have stepped forth to their Pilates, and
spoken for the Honor of Jesus: and that the number of these has been
exceeding thin, which have been of that renowned Queens affection, who
seeing her Nation the people of God, now ready to be yielded over to utter
destruction, resolved upon these terms, I will adventure my life for their
safeguard, and if I perrish, I perrish. Which being so, we of this Nation must
needs acknowledge the spirit of the Highest to have extraordinarily
replenished the heart of your Honor, because of the like resolution for the
maintenance of the same Cause, the faith of the Lord Jesus, against the
viperous brood of Antichri-christian Iesusies with their Accomplices: contemning
no less then one mounted on horseback does the barking of an idle whippet,
their base threatenings, and esteeming a rebuke for Christ, the greatest beauty
and grace unto your Name, that can possibly be cast upon it. And let your
Lordship stand assured, that together with his Majesty, the Heavenly Majesty,
the GOD of incomprehensible glory, will not be unmindful to 1 Samuel: 2, 30.
reward you for this.

Other policy there is I know, and means to procure and continue preferment,
but this is the only true Christian policy, to take Moses, John, and Elias
his part, and to stand for the Lord and his Word. Nothing is there in Heaven or
Earth, nothing so high and excellent which this shall not atchiue. What better
warrant can you have for it then his own Prou: 4.8, 9.
Oracle pronouncing it? True it is that all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution, but read and consider what James 5, 11,
end the Lord makes with our Job here, and respect the same for your self,
have an eye always to the Hebr: 11, 26, 1, These. 1, 7. Reave: 2, 10.
recompense of the reward with Moses. And as for this your mortality also,
persuade your self that he will not leave you comfortless. For what a strong
Iere: 1, 17, 18 Ezra. 8, 22.
assurance has he given you even for this likewise? Fight still therefore
manfully the good fight of faith, continue this your fidelity in the Lords
service unto the death, and gain to your self his protection impregnable
here, never ending security hereafter, joy and solace every way, as much as
your heart can desire.

Now, as you may seem for your Job, 29, 17.
courage, in the Lords behalf and Gideons, Job. 29, 9.10, 21, 22, 23.
(about which I have spent these many lines) and again for your prudent
government in your place, to have propounded this our Prince and Patriarch of
the Gentiles for your example, so in many other his admirable Pauareton. read
chap. 29 and 31 through out.
virtues, the only Impes indeed drawn from the vital iutce of a Noble
stock, (otherwise questionless there had not been such lamentation for your
Lordship in the time of your late sickness, for this must always be remembered,

Hor: lib. 1. Carm: Ode 4.
Palliola mors quo pulsat pede paupere tabernas Regumque turres)

Wherefore, though this my poor travel purchase not that acceptance, as did
the poor man's Pomegranate at the hands of Plut: Artax:
Artaxerxes, because that was Mire magnitudinis, this is Minimi momenti, yet I
doubt not, but that it shall obtain more favor, then at the hands of them,
who when they receive such like matters tending to godliness, are wont to say,
Who will show us any Psalm. 4.6.
good? Yea I persuade my self, your Honor will repute it in the number of
those blessings, which the Princely Prophet calls afterward so earnestly for,
Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us. For the Job. 33.8.
inspiration of the Almighty, a part whereof is this our conflict, gives
Understanding, which is the Mother and Lady of all graces.

The Lord of his mercy grant, that this Land may as long enjoy your Honor, as
it did your most worthy Father, (whose love unto true Religion, watchfulnes
over the whole State, will never be forgotten) our good Ichosophat, wise
Solomon, religious Josiah, may long sit upon his throne, and your Lordship
remain a faithful, and prudent Councellor to him, his enemies being clothed
with Psalm. 132, 18
shame, his Crown may flourish, upon his head, and the heads of his seed for
ever, our Sanctuary may be as was Sion in her flower, our Cities as was
Jerusalem in her beauty, conveying happy Peace, and pure Religion to the
posterity to come, until the Lord Jesus shall take all government into his
own bands.

Your Honors in all service and love most addicted, Richard Humfrey.

To the Reader.
THis work is set out by lightsome speeches, as well of the persons expressed
in that heavenly work of Job, as of some others there implied, following
altogether the rule of the divine Scripture, save only here in the
forefront, where also it retains the substance of the same, and is put out
of due place, to bring by way of introduction, all the rest into better form.

Divided accordingly, under the name of Syrraxis, which properly signifies the
beating together of violent waters, for that the subject is compounded of
nothing else in a manner, then matter of hot contention.

Subdivided answerably where the combat hangs long upon the hand of some one,
by certain Cumata, or raging waves, which bearing themselves all one way, yet
keep a distance the one from the other, wait their times and turns:
turbulent indeed every one, yet not in the like fulness and fiercenes, because
the Arguments whereof they consist, are such as are all carried with a mighty
tempest of words and matter, yet in a diverse manner and measure, neither
coming in confusedly, and all at a clap; but in as good order, comlines and
due place, as an Army is wont, where it is fought in a pitched field, and the
gayning of the day, is the glory of the Nation.

IOBES CONFLICT by way of Dialogue Compiled for illustration or opening of that
great encounter, and laying it out to every Christian Reader in most plain,
profitable, and familiar manner, even as linely as if it were now present
before his eyes.
Syrraxis. 1.
Speakers.
The Poor. The Naked. The Lame. The Blind. The Widow. The Fatherless. The
Stranger. The Innocent. The Oppressed.
The matter in this, and the next Syrraxis is taken from the 29. and one and
thirty chapters, and accords to the first verse of the first chapter.
THe poor man's cause is pitied of none, no comfort to be had; mercy and
liberality toward the distressed soul is clean departed out of the land. For
where shall a Man find one that will consider the cause of the needy: If he be
indebted, will call his neighbors and friends together and make a collection
for his releese; if he be in prison, will visit and redeem him, if sick, will
comfort him, if naked, will cloth him, if robbed and spoiled of his goods, will
do that for him, which Abraham did for Lot: namely, aid and assist him in the
recovery: or if that cannot be, will open his own hand and take some order
likewise among his acquaintance, and the wealthy of all sorts, for a supply of
his wants. This last is my case, for dwelling in the borders of the North, the
Deuteronomy. 1.44. called also Amalekites. Numb. 14, 45 because they dwelled near
together. Numb 13, 30
Amorite (an evil neighbor of ours inuading us) took away al our substance:
But what help is there to be had for us, or for any man in this estate; verily
though he that is thus afflicted be an honest, just, and upright man, fearing
God, and walking diligently in his calling; yet is there as little regard taken
of him, as if he were a man destitute of the fear of God, and care to do
well. O therefore brotherly affection what is become of thee! O fatherly In the
Haebrew tongue ab father, and Abon poor, have one root. (Viz:) Adah
signifiing to be willing to show that our affection and will to the poor, must
be like the affection of a father to his child.
compassion where art thou to be found! O comiseration where may thou be
sought for! Good Abraham is dead long ago, and good Hospitality is dead with
him; washing of the Saints feet was in use in his days, now it is forgotten:
He kept three, hundred in his house vprising and downelying, and yet was he
but a yeomanlike man (as it were.)

Beside no stranger could come near his house, but order was taken for his
entertainment, and the more bare he was, the more care was had for the
relecuing of his necessity, and so that he showed himself to be the child of
God, thrice better welcome did he find. Howbeit one man there is (and but one
that is commended for his care toward the poor. Chap, 29, 12, 16 Chap, 31, 16 19
) It is Job, a man by report of great wealth, honor, and reputation, beloved
both of the peers and people, admired for his wisdom, justice, and mercy: I
will therefore repair unto the place where he abides, which is (as I
understand) here in Huz, a land near unto us that are of Edom, and a part of
our Country lies toward the East, and bordereth upon Arabia Petraea, (where
also as I hear he has Lands, Lordships, and great store of pasture grounds
for his Cattle) unto him I will open my grief, nothing doubting but he will
yeald me some help in my distress, and the rather, because he descends of
good Abraham, and from that good branch of his Isaac, and from Esau his elder
(though his worst son,) for even in his seed remains circumcision, a seal
of the covenant of blessing made unto Abraham, as also among many at this day,
the true knowledge of the Lord God almighty, and faith in the promised Messiah.

Naked. HE descends from Abraham indeed, and he is not unlike that Noble
progenitor of his, but may well be his Nephew: for if there were ever any that
came near that holy Patriarch, it is this man: Chap, 1.5, 1
who is of singular sincerity and soundness in his profession, most absolute
in the administration of Justice, a man that has exceedingly profited in the
true practice of each virtue, not only those of a regenerate mind; as wisdom,
knowledge, understanding, judgment, counsel, art, foresight, prudence,
deliberation, (wherewith he is abundantly inducd:) but those which proceed
from a sanctified will: as courage, love, mercy, bounty, humility, gentleness,
meekness, kinde-speaking, uprightness, truth, patience, temperance. These as
they are the life of religion, so have they brought no small grace and credit to
his so honorable faith and profession, being the service of the high God, maker
of Heaven and earth.

These joined with the fear of God, reverence of his name, obedience to his
will, detestation of sin, renouncing of evil, hating of covetousness,
cruelty, and oppression; a zeal and delight to advance Gods glory, to stand
courageously for the maintenance of the truth, to stretch forth the bowels of
compassion toward the afflicted of all sorts (specially the most miserable) and
above all toward the distressed souls, whom the Lord of his grace has drawn
out of darkness unto the marvelous light of his word: these I say, are
undoubted and infallible evidences of that sure Anchor of hope, and invincible
fortress of faith to dwell in him, against which, all the policy and power of
Satan shall no more prevail then it prevailed against Abraham himself, the
father of the faithful.

Thou shall not fail therefore doubtless, but receive comfort at his hands:
for I never heard of any that made their moan unto him but he pitied their
estate, and yealded some help to them in their misery. But he will examine thy
life, and the cause of this thy necessity; he will inquire of thee and look
for some testimony of thy honest conversation, which if he find to be
answerable to that thou reportest, he will out of question show thee favor.

I speak upon mine own knowledge and experience, for traveling into Arabia I
fell into the hands of robbers (whereof that country has store) who stripped me
of my apparel, and left me stark naked: which being done, because I was
ashamed to go where I was known in that case, I spent much travel in that
pitiful plight, in seeking releef at the hands of many, but when I found
none, at length I calling to mind the great fame of Job, I thought I would see
whether his goodness were answerable to his report: And therefore I went and
showed my self unto him, and made known my estate; who as soon as he saw me,
was so moved with compassion, that he could not forbear, first to groan in
spirit, and abundantly to weep over me; afterward to break forth into these
most affectionate and loving words: (A less) my brother, my flesh, bone of my
bone, what has befallen thee? Then taking me straight way by the hand, he
spared not his own cloak (though a very costly one) but cast it over me, led
me in to a warm fire, and prou^ded me of apparel, and all things necessary.
See what a warm and durable chap, 31, 20
suite he gave me of the sheep of his pasture, and he is full chap, 31, 19
of such good works.


Lame. Receiving a maim in the defense of my country Idumaea ^^ainst the
Sabaans, Job beside his own princely benevolence, procured me a yearly
pension out of the Exchequer, which so reuiueth me, as if I had my lims Chap,
29, 15
restored me again. The like goodness he extends to all the impotent.


Blind. Job understanding that I was borne blind, beside the furnishing of me
with outward things convenient, caused me to be brought always to the place
of gods worship, where his will is to be opened by his servants, there to be
taught what was the meaning of the sacrifices offered upon the altar, which
with mine eyes I could not behold: That so I might see in spirit the Messiah
and savior promised, and enjoy the light everlasting in the world to come. And
thus he has been to me, and many chap, 29, 15
more in my case, to the aged (especially both men and women) better then
bodily eyes, which only behold these earthly riches, pleasures, and vanities,
but see not the end of their creation; that is, so to glorify God with the
eyes of their body here, that he may give them to enjoy the light eternal in
his kingdom of glory.


Widow. Chap, 29, 13
MY husband dyed, left me seven small Children, and greatly indebted, insomuch
that his creditors came as soon as he was dead and seized upon all my goods:
but when I complained to him, desiring his aid, he called the creditours before
him, demanded to see their evidences, told them he would hear the matter, and
so stayed their course. And when the matter came to hearing, and their right
appeared, he treated with them not to be extreme in exacting their right, but
to be conten^ed to loose if not all, yet a great part of their due. And what
they would needs have, if they repaired unto him at a day appointed, they
should receive it.

Now in the mean time, he sent to the wealthy of his acquaintance, desiring
them to join with him in a work of charity, and so they making a purse
together, yet in such sort, that he himself bare the greatest share, (as ever
he does in these gratuities) the debte was discharged. And this he did for me
at my first motion. Neither it is his manner to delay such as I am when they
put up a supplication to him, but Chap, 31, 13
forthwith to dispatch them, as also al other suitors, and the rather if they
be needy and distressed with all possible expedition.


Fatherless. I Being a poor Orphan, Chap, 19, 12
left to the wide world, destitute of a friend to bring me up, he took the
tuition of me, placed me where I was catechized in my youth, trained up in the
knowledge of the true God, my patrimony Chap, 31, 19
redeemed out of the hands of those untrusty frindes, to whom my father left
me. He has had a care of the fatherless, even from his infancy. Being a
child, he was wont to bring them home with him, to be Chap, 1, 18
nourished in his fathers house as his brethren, and he now takes a felicity
in calling such to his table cha 33, v, 17
: neither can he cate his meat with pleasure if he have not some of them with
him to partake of it.

The hungry of all sorts must needs be his guests, otherwise he thinks not
his meat well bestowed. For these he prepares ba^quets, these he feasteth, to
provide for these is his chief study and joy of heart. O therefore how would it
grieve him that a fatherless child should any way Chap, 31, 22
miscary, receive the least hurt or injury through his default: for he knows
that the Lord never passes them over without some fearful Chap, 31, 23,
judgment, that offend this way.


Stranger. When I was weary, hungry, weather-beaten, out of my way, and even
ready to perish; and the rather because of the darkness of the night wherein
I had occasion to travel, I lighted upon Jobs house, where I was so refreshed
by him, that my heart rejoices to think of it, and my tongue can never so
sufficiently commend it as I would; neither can I ever be satisfied until
some occasion be offered me to show forth some token of my thankfulness.

Infinite are the thanks that are due to him. For his house is as a common
chap, 31, 32
Inn to all passengers, there is a table always prepared for them, Water for
their feet, fire and lodging ever in readiness. A stranger can never come amiss
thither, some repast is to be had at all times, lodging at all seasons. His
Gates are shut against none, (carrying the show of honest men) none are
excluded, but all received as well at midnight, as at nooneday, reasonable
cause being alleged for their unreasonable traveling. And when they depart
they go not away empty, but he contributeth unto them according to their
necessity, even so much as may bring them if their need require to their
iournies end: And he sees them also safely conducted, accompanying them some
part of the way, either himself (if his leisure and their worth be thereafter)
or else by his servants, which is a duty that he chap, 29, 12
never neglects.


Innocent. IF a case be intricate and doubtful, very diligent and careful is
he to sift it out: very judicious chap. 29, 9. x, xi, 21, 22, 23
and sharpsighted to discern where the rightlyeth, and very just in giving
sentence accordingly; look therefore that you have not (being a borderer)
offered those Amorites wrong in times past, and now spying their opportunity
they have righted it; if it be so, he will quickly find it out, and cause you
to be we punished for troubling him in so bad a matter.

But if the cause be good, then fear nothing, but stand assured that he will
quickly see that you have sustained loss unjustly, and affoorde you the best
help may be had: and so that you your self shall confess, that he has dealt
well by you, yea beyond that you ever hoped for. So he dealt by me being
sometime in trouble, conuented before a Judge, imprisoned, arraigned at the
bar upon a false accusation, and like to have been condemned to Chap, 39, 13
death, had I not appealed to him.

When I came before him and pleaded mine innocence (he sifted out very
carefully and wisely the truth) not only cleared Chap, 29, 12
me of the accusation said to my charge, which was all that I expected; but
found out likewise to the great admiration of all men, and my credit for ever,
the offender (who was the man himself that followed the matter so eagerly
against me.) See therefore (I say) that your matter be good, and no fault
committed on your part, and that you be an innocent and harmless man (as) you
pretend, and then I make no question but that your remedy shall be above that you
look for.

He is a very rare man (I tell you) and such a one as the Lord seems to have
set apart for this purpose, to comfort the hearts of the chap. 29, 25
mourners, and to have lifted up to honor for this end, to remove the wrongs
of the Innocent.


Oppressed. Sundry times has he marueilously righted my cause, when the
violent hand of the oppressor has been upon me, and wroong the pray Chap, 19,
17
by the sword of justice out of his teeth. Now blessed be the Lord that sent
him, blessed the kingdom that inioyeth him, blessed let him be all the days
of his life, most blessed and happy in his death, after death most honorable
and glorious among the saints.


Syrraxis. 2.
PERSONS.
The Tennant. The Servant. The Youth. The Ancient. The Prince. The Commons. The
Abject. The Enemy.
TENNANT. I With my fellow tennantes that have lived under Job these many
years, (for he is a man that will not easily be brought to remove an old
tennant) must needs veryfie the testimony of these men concerning him: for
surely he is a man very pitiful, and been ficial to such as want, and ready
to succor such as have any way sustained wrong to the uttermost of his power.
And as for my self and my estate under him, it is such as I would not desire a
better Lord.

I know none like him in all this Country. I hear them complain every where
of the hardness of their Landlords, as that they are still commanding such
service at their hands, as they can never be quiet, nor have any time to
follow their own business. Their purse, provision for their own House,
Corn, Grass, Cattle, Cart, Plow, Oxen, Asses, Cammels, must be at their
command, whenever they will call them, what occasion soever they have of
their own, or what use soever of their commodities. Their fashion is like wise,
upon every light cause to put out their tennant, or if they can find no
coulourable matter against him, to find a hole in his copy or lease, and so
to make him forfeit his estate. And now that the world begins to abound with
people, to raise their rents, or to put them to great fines, ten times the
value they were wont to pay, and yet notwithstanding to abridege the^ very much
of their old estate. For if there be a good enclosure, meddow, piece of ground,
woods for building, or fuel, that, they take in their own hands. Let the
tennant speak to them of this, he shall be reviled; let him plead his right, so
far is he from having his cause heard, that they threaten him either with death
or banishment, or beggary, if he proceed, or else they rate him thus: What will thou quarrel which thy Lord? Thou wrangler thou, thou impudent fellow? How
dare thou be so bold to meddle with me thy Lord and Master, from whom thou,
thy Wife, children, and servants, have your maintenance, and by whom thou have
reaped this and that benifit? Or else they lay such matter of accusation
against him, that may endanger his life, and so the forfeiture of living and
goods into their hands. Of such Landlordes the word is full, and poor tennants
feel it to their smart.

But Job he is none of this rank, for if there be any thing grieueth his
tennant, he is very ready to hear his allegations, chap, 31, 13
and to yeald rather to the loss of some of his own right, then that he
should sustain the least wrong. Yea when a tennant complains unto him, he
is not at rest, until he has satisfied him to bis content, and he is glad to
see that he is willing to thrive under him. And when he perceives him to be
behind hand, he labors to help him, bid death him call for his letters, or
his word to any friend that may pleasure him.

In the time of War he defends him with his armies, and when the King
calls for his service or tribute, he eases him all he may; for he knows
that the Lord has appointed him but as his Steward over his people, and that
he must render an account unto him one day, how be has demeaned himself in
his office.


Servant. I Have served him these 7. years, he pays me my wages duly, he
uses no outrageous words or terms of reproach, no nor uncomely speech unto
me; he is not easily moved to anger, nor hastily to punish, but of much
patience, able to bridle his affections. He is often in his Godly admonitious,
and fatherly instructions, as well toward God, as in regard of our duty to man.
We have prayet evening, morning, and at noonetide, thanksgiving at meat, and
some matter of Religion handled, which we may term the reading of a Chapter;
being nothing else but a chief head or ground-point of Druinity delivered unto
us.

Every Sabbath we accompany our Master to the public place of sacrifice and
prayer. If a controversy arise among us that are servants, he will discide it,
neither must it go any further. If any thing trouble us about our places, he
will that we make the matter known unto him, for be cannot endure that there
should be any grudging, or mournning within his walls, but will that there be
contentation at all hands. When any one is found to be contentious, factious, a
false accuser, a talebearer, or discloser of secrets, or envious; a fighter, a
quarreller, a proud person, a boaster, swearer, drunkard, adulterer, one given
over to idleness, a common gamster, a deceiuer, a worshipper of false Gods, a
despiser of the true God, his words, ministers, or Servants, or else disloyal
to his Prince, (who is in Gods stead) he must not abide in his house, or any
way look for his countenance, or protection.

When a servant has cause to debate with him about a matter of difference,
Chap, 31, 13
he disdaineth not to confer with him about it, but with all meekness
submits himself, remembering chap, 31, 15
that he is made of the same mould, begotten of the same seed, formed after
the same manner in the Womb, purchased with the same blood, appointed to the
same inheritance with him. Notwithstanding he keeps them, and his family of
all sorts in awe, and will have them to know their duty toward him, to show
themselves modest, silent, and humble in his presence, and not to answer again.

If upon his usage toward them, (at the complaint of other) they find
themselves agrieued, his will is they should make their grief known unto him;
neither is he ashamed if he have done amiss in judgment, to reuerse the
sentence. He abhors cruelty, and bitter dealing, which is then properly when
the party that is punished is innocent, or the correction, and the fault are
not equal, neither does he like of overmuch severity, where the nature of the
offense deserves very grievous and heavy punishment; knowing that in regard of
the later, the Lord calls for mercy; in regard of the former, that he shall
not be able to answer chap, 31, 14
for it, when his master (which is in heaven) shall call him to a reckoning,
and judge without respect of persons.


Youth. THe gravity of this man's person, and his severe countenance (well
befitting a governor of the commonwealth) has made me withdraw my self
oftentims when he passed through the street, as being terrified with the
sight of his countenance, chap, 29, 8
and not daring to look him in the face. He does more good with his very sight
and looks, then others can do with their cruel threats, and punishments: for
it is a great matter to be of sober and grave carringe, pithy, and sententious
of speech, of a constant judgment, and settled resolution, and withal of a
countenance full of authority, and majesty; for these must all go together,
and join hands in a magistrate, that will do good among the people; Neither
is it the countenance of a man only, that will do it, unless the other
likewise concur.

But these linked together, like unto twins in the womb, are of more power to
persuade, then all the eloquence of the finest Rhetorician: these prevail
more, to bring both young and old to reverence, fear, and obedience toward
such as are in authority, then to be popular, or applyable to every man's
humor; smiling in countenance, pleasing in speech, and plausible in behavior.
For Rhetoric allureth only the care, gravity lodges in the heart: popularity
is not in nature, but comes of affectation; and therefore is liked but for a
time, and can never be fitted to all men's fancyes. Gravity is natural, or
divine, and therefore always esteemed and honored.


Ancient. I Have lived fourscore years, yet it never grieved me to do Chap,
29, 8
reverence unto Job because of his wisdom and gravity, being much greater
then theirs that are his elders. And though his humility and courtesy be such,
that he would not suffer me to be uncovered, or to stand, but bids me, (if
he be not in his seat of Justice) cover my head, and sit down when I come
before him; yet notwithstanding his place and worthiness requiring it, I think
I should derogate from the honor due to so rare a personage, if I should do
the one or the other in his presence. For if honor be to be given to ancient
years (which must needs be confessed to be a duty in nature,) then much more
to wisdom and virtue, which are more ancient then the world it self.

The special thing moving the younger sort to an estimation of their elders,
is a supposall of more experience, piety, and knowledge then to themselves:
which if they find not, they withdraw their reverence, and prefer in their
judgment such (how young soever) whom they find most beautified with these
good Ornaments. The elders likewise, and gray headed fathers themselves, that
are of greatest place, are wont to admire and honor the Persons of young men,
to whom they find themselves inferior in counsel and understanding. This
moves me, and the rest of the ancient, so highly and honorably to repute and
esteem of Job, for in him are most eminent, knowledge, prudence, gravity,
courage, constancy, godliness, and whatsoever beside may garnish a governor
and ruler of the commonwealth.


Prince. IN regard of this great wisdom and judgment of his, they that are
joined in counsel with him, are al silent Chap, 29, 9, 10, when he comes in
place. We may confer of matters, but we decree nor conclude upon nothing till
we hear him speak. And therefore we expect and respect altogether in our
meeting his sentence: which as it is expected and desired of us, Chapter, 29,
11, so when it comes, resolves so fully that was in question, that we
forthwith as muing nothing to except against it, are compelled to condescend
thereunto.

It was never known as yet, that any thing agreed upon, and decreed by his
apptobation, has been reuersed, disliked, or repined at afterward; but that
whatsoever ordinance has been enacted at his consent and desire, has had the
allowance and commendation of al men, and has procured him a blessing Chapter,
29, 11. at the hands of both rich and poor, together with the well disposed of
all sorts.

Hence it is, that the people have a conceit that all good that is done for the
commonwealth is by means of Job, and nothing done without him. This it is to
have the good opinion and hearts of the Commons.


Commons. VErily he has our good opinion and love of our hearts, the prayers
and blessings of us all, chapter 29, 11, which also he well deserves: neither have
we a conceit of him above his worth, but his worchines is far more then we
conceive. Whatsoever good has come unto the land, either he has been the
immediate cause thereof, or else it has proceeded from his good example. (For
the good example of a man in authority, is a special means to draw on others
to the imitation of his virtues.)

I would we had many such governors, that our love might not be thus abridged
to one, but imparted to more! O it were asweete thing, to see Princes
contending who should excel other in the government of the Commonwealth: yet
so, that they would not forget the emulation that ought to be in men of eminent
place concerning virtuous life. For no music sounds more pleasant in the
ears of the Commons, then to hear, that wisdom and virtue go jointly
together in the Nobility of the Land.

But it is very Lamentable to consider, what complaining there is every where
of Noblemen: If they would studdye to be like Job, then there would be no
such matter against them. He chap. 31, 1, has made a covenant with his eyes,
that they shall not allure him to Wantonness, and that he will not abuse them
vanity.

I would the rest of the Nobility would make such a Covenant, and keep it
as he does. For a chaste body, chaste looks, chaste thoughts, where are so
many incitements and prouocations to evil: deserves no vulgar commendation,
and the want of these is no small blemish and blot to their houses, it staineth
also their blood, whereby all manner of vice ouerspreadeth their families. For
though virtue does not, yet vice does come by propagation. What cuill then may
we not expect in the Noble, and what punishment are not they themselves to
look for, as diseases of body, consumption of goods, sale of inheritance,
rooting out of stock, anguish of soul, torment of conscience, and the fire of
Gods wrath to devour that their fire where the sin of uncleanness reigns.
Iobes foot goes not awry. Chap. 31.4, 7. But when shall a man find almost
other Noblemen in the way, they are out of the way in the administration of
Justice, out of the way in the government of themselves and their families,
out of the way in their recreations, as being either not lawdable, or
immoderate.

Iobes heart Went not after his eyes. Chap. 31.7, Their hearts are carried away,
and overcome with worldely preferments, and profits, with sensual pleasings and
vanities, with an ouerweening desire to have all at their command, according
to their liking; to have nothing to cross the^ in their opinion, affection
disposing of things, to be avenged upon all that stand in their light, Chapter 31
15 and to right all causes (as they term it) though it were never so wrong,
serving their turn.

Iobes Chap, 31, 7
hands were not defiled with iniquity, but covetousness, oppression, cruelty,
bribery, sticks to their fingers like birdlime. Neither has Job by the
brightness of the Moon, the glory of the sun, chap, 31.26. and the rest of
th^se heavenly spheres, being induced to forsake the Lord his God, the
Fountain of light, and perfection of glory and brightness; but they have been
easily misled, and seduced, not only by the beauty of those excellent
creatures, but by other most base, vile, and contemptible, making to themselves
not only Gods of gold and silver, but trusting in the Wedge of Gold it
self, believing to be saved by their own arm, yealding divine worship to the
persons of Men, placing their chiefest felicity and glory due unto God, in
earthly honors and fleshly delights.

Iobes rare virtues therefore, of piety and Godliness, may worthily be written
in great capital Letters, and set up as a mirror to all that are in authority:
neither to them alone, but to us of the Commons likewise, and men of all
degrees: for we, and they, being no less to be blamed then Princes and high
estates, stand in great need of the light of such a President to guide us.

And what has been spoken in the reprehension of you that are Princes, has
been only, and to no other intent, then to reduce you from error to the
imitation of that Noble pattern of life and religion, worthy Job, who daily
conuerseth among you. And further to incite and stir you up so to shine
before us in all good knowledge, and holy conversation, as you shine above us
in wealth and estimation.


Abject. Job supposes it an unreasonable thing to deal otherwise then he
would be dealt withal: for very nature it self prescribes this Method, and
therefore he does as willingly endure the censure of the meanest (be they never
so base) and their inst reprofes, as he would they should endure his: Yea, so
far is he from being offended with them in so doing, that he holds it a
great favor, that they would do him that kindness, as to put him in mind of the
neglect of his duty.

Such is his modesty, Chap. 31.34. that when the poorest man in the Country
obiecteth any thing against him, he will not (being guilty to himself of the
accusation) seek by virtue of his place to carry away the matter against his
accuser, but keep himself close, and not come abroad, to the end that all men
may both perceive his sorrow for his offense, and that he will not resist but
willingly yeald unto the silliest wretch, in a matter of truth.

His manner is, speeches proceedinge against him from a troubled and grieved
mind, so overcome for the present, with the violence of their passions, that
their understanding is overwhelmed: not to seem for the instant, to take any
great notice of them, but giving them way a while, until the fit be over,
afterward to reprove them for it.

When the injury is private, he holds it an honor to bear it, wisdom to
pass it over, policy, not to avenge it; for though it be good in the opinion
of the great ones, that such fellows as we are, should be made to know our
selves, yet even in their own judgment, he that shall bring them unto it,
shall procure hatred to his own person.

Let great Men therefore say what they will, yet this is certain, and
themselves do confess it, that mercy, lenity, kindness, patience, the
brooking of injury, passing over of offenses at all hands, is the only way
to win them to obedience, and reverence at the hands of the multitude of all
sorts. And in a Man that would draw others to the worship of the true God,
there is no such means as this. For this if any thing, (because it is above
nature, and such as moves to admiration) will cause the hearts of the ungodly,
and unbelievers to relent.


Enemy. THough we love not Job, yet we must needs say of him, that he is not
malicious, but easy to forgive an offense, and that he rejoices not at the
fall of of his enemy, but is sorry Chap. 31, 29
when he sees him come to misery. We know well, that he wants not some chap.
31, 31
about him, that would feign stir him up to recompense his wrongs to the full;
howbeit he will not be brought unto it, but (notwithstanding their continual
instigations to the contrary) cease not to render good unto us for evil,
striving to overcome us that way, and to draw us to a better affection of him,
by heaping upon us good turns from time to time. He deals with the Lord by
continual and earnest prayer, to change our hearts; then the which, what can
the greatest friend in the World do more for us? He is a rare friend indeed,
that will do this heartily for him that is his best beloved: But it is ordinary
in him, to show such duties of love to his most deadly enemies, as else where
can hardly be found among those of nearest alliance, or such as are tied
together in the dearest knot of frie^dship. The most part of men think they
have acquitted themselves like brau Champions, if they have beguiled their enemy
by any cunning practice; but his study is to deal faithfully with all men, and
to be most careful thereof in a matter that concerns his enemy, that thereby
their mouths may be stopped, when they shall have no color for that they
speak. Howbeit his weakness and his Chap. 31, 27
wantes he always confesses, and is ready to crave pardon if he have offended
at the hands of his enemy.

He still acknowledges how subject he is to transgress, and what a combat he
has with his affections, and evil desires, and how hardly he subdueth them;
and that sometimes they prevail. Let his adversary declare unto him wherein he
has committed a fault, he will confess it, and show tokens of sorrow for it.

And as for the increase of his substance, though it be grown to be exceeding
great, yet surely he is not proud of it, neither does he boast of it, as if it
came by his own wit, or industry, or as if he had received it for some desert
in him, more then in other men: neither does he so rejoice in it, as if the
delight of his heart were thereupon. But he is as humble with all his wealth, as
he that has not a morsel of bread for his belly: Blessing, and praising of
God for his great benefits, is ever in his mouth, his heart is lifted up in
prayer to GOD day and night, for grace to use them to his glory, the good of
his Servants, and needy people.

If we should not witness this, the heavens above, the earth and dumb Creatures
beneath, would convince us of malice, and all the world would condemn us to
speak against our own conscience. For there was never any one that has
spoken against him, but the matter being well examined, shame has covers his
face. And the trial of that has been invented to his discredit, has been as
a crown chapter 31.35.36
and ornament unto his head.

He offers to help him that will accuse him all he can, to put up a bil of
chap. 31, 37
of indictment against himself, to honor him as a prince that shall do it;
which argues his clearnes of conscience, his confidence that no man can charge
him with ought, his great desire both to know his faults himself, and that they
should be discovered to others. He that doubts of this our testimony, let him
consider that it has proceeded of no good will, but our conscience has forced
our tongue to pronounce it: And again, let him go when he will, (for there is
no time amiss) and take a survey of Job, and observe him well, in his equity
and wisdom, in the handling and disciding of causes, his divine and heavenly
speeches, his bountiful hand to the poor, his admirable modesty joined with a
goodly majesty in all his actions, the comely orders in his house, the grave
instructions of them that are about him, and most principally his fatherly
admonitions to his children will so ravish him, that he shall be constrained to
veryfie more then I have spoken.


Syrraxis. 3.
Persons.
Job. Children. Servants.
Job. O My children, the comfort of my life, I must remember you still with my
wonted instructions. Labor for the knowledge of the Lord, fear him, obey his
will, trust in him always, be diligent, and skilful in your calling^. Call
your family to the hearing of the word, and prayer, and examine them in their
faith, suffer no unruly person to stay in your houses, and for your own
parts, avoid the company of the ungodly, and give them no entertainment.

Keep good hospitality, if it stand with your hability, for the Religious,
Virtuous, Poor and Distressed. Do good unto all such every way, but let your
comfort there be greatest, where you find most goodness. Help the widow and
the fatherles; succor the stranger, right the cause of the oppressed. In all
these things, so far as I follow the will of the Lord, let my example be a
pattern unto you. But principally look that the morning and evening sacrifice
be held up in your houses, knowing that without it, it is as impossible that
the love of God should continue with you, as a lamp without oil, fire without
fuel, the life without norishment. Especially then look to this duty, when you
are either feasting Chap, 1, 4, 5
in your houses, or abroad with your friends: for at such times the flesh being
pampered, ouerwhelmeth the good graces of God, and causes a security in us.
The thing I simply dislike not, but greatly commend, as being a means to
increase love, to confer of Religion, and to join together in prayer. And
verily it rejoices me at the heart, to see this concord and agreement among you
my children, for therein I see (to my unspeakable comfort) the fruits of the
labors I have bestowed upon you, in your instructions; as also your loving and
kind nature, virtuous and godly disposition. But my counsel is, that you be not
too much in it, and that when you do it, you take heed of excess. For at
Feasts there is ever superfluity of meat and wine, which making the heart
merry, the tongue is apt to run over, and to break forth into either wanton,
vain, reuengefull, reproachful, or malicious words.

At such times therefore be sparing in your speeches, and for the avoiding of
idle, and loose talk, propound some godly question to be debated, make a
covenant with your eyes, your ears, your appetite, specially that they offend
not, and with your heart, that it be not drawn away, nor your minds so taken
up with those pleasant dainties, that you forget God. Beware likewise of
disorder, an inseparable companion of banquets, and that you have a respect to
the time; for then to give your selves to feasting, when the Lord calls for
weeping and mourning, for the trangression of the land; or in time of war,
famine, pestilence, or any other calamity, (either public, or private, and
concerning your selves) were such an iniquity, as the Lord would not suffer to
escape unpunished.


Children. We remember well (good father) your precepts, we know them to be the
commandments of God, and we will observe them to the vtterm ost of our power.


Job. But what say ye my sons to the matter of banqueting, has it not bin
a means to make ye forget God, to sin against him, and blaspheme chap. 1, v. 5
his name? I do not mean, that abominable blasphemy of thundering out curses,
either against God, our selves, or others, with the tongue severally, or with
the tongue and heart jointly, which is more heinous; nor rapping out detestable
oaths, nor of sinning against our own souls by damnable perjury, nor of
odious lying, and abusing the holy name of God by speaking vainly or
irreverently of him (for this were too gross usage for my children) and had I
received but the least inkeling of this, I would have broken the neck of your
feasting long ago: but my meaning is, of letting pass from you some sinister
affection of God, some evil thought of his service, of any of his servants, or
of my severe discipline, by which I kept you in awe in times past, or of my
fatherly authority over you now.

Tell me therefore my sons what ye have done? for I have had a fear chap. 1, 5
from the beginning, ever since ye first entered into feasting, that al things
were not well. Methinkes I can never be careful enough for you, because of your
youth, which is most prone in it self, to evil lusts, affections, desires,
and cogitations, especially, when it is inflamed with wine, and delicate meats.
For this cause, rising up early to day, I have for you, taken and offered up a
propitiatory sacrifice, Offered burnt offri^gs ibid, 5. Job sanctified the^
chap, 1. v, 5
or an whole burnt offering for every one of you severally a lively tipe of the
most perfect sacrifice of the Mesiah to come, which shall be offered upon the
Altar for us. Go to the Laver, wash your hands, cleanse your hearts, and be
prepared, and come my sons, and join now with me your selves in sacrifice to
God: for this is it, that must turn away the Lords displeasure from you, if so
be it should be gone forth against you, for your trespass in this matter.
Chil. Our father (my brethren) gives us good counsel, yet for the matter of
banqueting, as he allows and commends it simply in it self, so I cannot
perceive why honest meeting should any way trouble his mind. His caueats indeed
are notable, much to be regarded, and ruminated of us, and the rather because
good rules easily slip out of our minds, as also because experience teaches,
that dainties pleasing to the palate, make men exceed the mean; sweet Wines
swallow up remorce for sin, drown the holy meditations and desires of the mind,
and cause in us an unfitness for prayer, and al other religion. The sum of al is
this, that we have a care to be temperate, and in good order, which if we
look unto, there is no danger at al in the matter. Keep we then (dear
brethren) this precept, and we shall not need to stand in fear of any
disquietnes, that may come unto our reverend father, or hurt to our selves by
our feasting. For why should it be more hurtful to us, then to the godly of
former ages, that have al used it without exception? Seeing therefore that the
L. has given us abundantly wherewithal to do it, how can we spend it better,
then in making merry one with another. For it is the only thing for brethren
and sisters to meet: there is nothing comparable to it, that such should make
much of one another. Call we then our servants together, whereby preparation
may be made, and provision had, for we must go over cha, 1, v, xiii chap. 1 4
For where are banquets there must needs be servants
once again with our invitation, beginning with the Eldest, and so round about
until it come unto the youngest.


Servants. There shall be nothing wanting on our part, set you down what you
will have, where and when, and it shall be provided for you. Sirs, how like you
this, we shall have a World of good-cheere, the only thing that Servants
desire, for they love alife to see victuals stirring, that so they may be
merry, and bid their friends welcome. It is good serving of such Masters, for
they will not call upon us for work, as those worldlings are wont, that never
think they have enough done, though Servants sweat out their hearts for
them. But tell me my companions in good sadness, what you think of this
banqueting; of our old Master his praying and sacrificing so often, while our
young Masters are at their feasting. And for that he is never there present
himself, makes me something to doubt, and I am afraid there will come no good
of it. For the Devil is a very busy fellow, and a chief guest, as I have
heard old men say at these banquets.


Syrraxis. 4.
Persons.
Satan. Lord.
Satan. What a deal of holiness is there in this Man; Chap. 1, v, 6
Morning, and Evening sacrifice: Oblations for himself, for his Children peace
offeringes, offeringes of redemption, burnt offerings, praying with his family,
praising the Lord with Psalms, and Hymns, and singing them unto the Chap.
30, 31.
Harp, and other instruments of Music; preaching unto them, Catechizing
them, instructing his Children, by Doctrine, admonition, exhortation: talking,
conferring, reasoning about Religion with all, (as well strangers, at familiar
friends) and he has never done with it; he is in it day and night, early
and late, no time comes amiss for it, nothing can hinder him from it, those
that have any doings with him, shall be well lessoned I trow. But I will miss
fowly of my mark, if I alter not this gear shortly: for the Lord shall hardly
say me nay, or I will be doing with him ear it be long.

Oh I cannot be at rest, until I be about it. Oh, how much good it would do me
to be upon his skirts: for this is my delight to vex mankind, and to get them
into my clutches to torment them: herein is my joy, herein is my felicity, to
macerate that pampered flesh of theirs. O how tender, how dainty, and delicate
they are? But when I take them once in hand, I put them to such hard meat, and
so crush them, that I bring them to despair, and lo, then they are where I
would have them. But when it is so, that I cannot have my swinge at the Sons
of Adam, when the World flourishes, the graces of God abound in Men every
where, War cease, peace is maintained upon the face of the earth; then fret
I, then am I consumed with envy, eaten up with malice; then sorrow wounds my
life, grief and vexation teareth and renteth my spirit. Hence it is, that
because I am not permitted to meddle with Men themselves, I wreake my anger
upon the Corn, fruit, Grass, trees, Houses, Cattle, etc. procuring
mil-dewes, immoderate shewers, Hailestones, Caterpillars; lightnings, and
flames Chap, 1, 1
of fire from Heaven, to destroy them.

This does a little ease my Malady: but if this may not be granted me, yet I
never rest, night nor day, from venting out of malice one way or other to the
annoyance of men. One while leave being given me (for here is the mischief I
can do nothing without leave) Chap. xi, xii Chap. 2, 5, 6,
I so shake the earth with fearful Earthquakes, which turns up the
Mountains by the roots, swalloweth up Cities, and Countries, causes the very
foundation and Pillars of the earth to tremble: another while, I so trouble the
air (the feat of my kingdom) with Hideous and horrible Thunderclaps, pouring
down withal such mighty streams of Waters, and so darkning the light of the
Heavens, that it strippeth the sons of men of all comfort of life, causes the
hair of their heads to stand an end, and their hearts to shiuer in their
bellies. Neither does this satisfy my fury, (for I must be doing still, and
playing my prizes in every corner) but here I enter into beasts; there, into
men; and those of rarest gifts of wit and learning, whereby they become mad:
here I sow heresies, and false doctrine, there scisme, and contention; here I
lay riches and honors before the Religious professors of the truth, to pull
them from their sincerity; there I puff up the hearts of the learned with
pride. The just man I tempt with bribes, the Wise man, with a conceit of great
wisdom; the good Man with an high opinion of his deserts; the temperat man,
and him that has government over his affections; with dainties of all sorts,
with pleasures of each kind, with strong motions to uncleanness, uncomely
speeches; with matter of revenge; with prouocations unto blasphemy. When I find
a man's humor once I am safe (and I can quickly guess at that to) I follow him
at an inch, I am with him to bring at every turn whatsoever he be. There is
none that is free from my assaults, King or Beggar, young or old, Male or
female: All is one with me, I pity none, I spare none, very infants and
sucklings are my prey; I have a cast at all one way, or other, and so to, that
I never leave them until I have fetched them over the coals. Adam himself
escaped not my fingers (alas silly man) for all his great wisdom, he was no
match for me. None of these fell finally, but rose again.
Noah withal his righteousness, I turned into a very Swine. Lot withal his
godliness, into an incestuous beast. Abraham that was such a believer, into a
very dissembler, whom have I not overcome? Where have I not prevailed by my
tentations? What man was there living at any time under the cope of Heaven,
that I have not foiled more or less, first or last in the Combat? Shall Job
then be able to stand out always, and set up the flag of defiance against me?
No, no, the Lord will call for me shortly, I will then be in hand with him, to
see whether he may be won to let me buckle with him a little? O how does malice
with her poison and venim torment me, till I have disgorged my stomach upon
him?


Lord. Come Satan, give in thine account here before my Tribunal, do that
homage that to me thy Lord belongs. These my good servants, my holy Angels,
they are always most willing, and ready, most speedy, and cheerful, most
obedient and faithful, both to execute my comm^^dements, and to bring in a
reckoning unto m^ of their service; even of their own voluntary inclination,
love, and affection toward me. But I can have neither the one nor the other
done by thee nor by any of thy retinue (which cannot be numbered for multitude)
save only what by strong and violent hand I wring from thee. I make use of
these my good servants, and so of thee, not that I stand in need of any of
you (for I am all sufficient of my self, and therefore my name is Shadai
Shadai of Shadad, veftere because the Lord is able to lay all things wast that
shall any way anoy his children.
) but that through their ministry, my goodness might the better appear to my
church militant, for whose sauegard I employ them: As also thorough thy
ministry, whom together with them I have ordained as a terror and scourge to
the adversaries of my church, and as a trial of my spouse, that so she might
be comforted and encouraged in her warfare (on the one side) and on the other
side, experienced in my deliverance, hardened and armed against whatsoever
assaults for the advancement of my kingdom.

I dare undertake for thee Satan, that thou meanest nothing less then this,
and that it is full sore against thy mind to set forward my kingdom: for though
thou art here present before me among these my sons: yet is thy meaning as
contrary to theirs, as the light of this my throne, and the darkness of thy
Dungeon of Hell. It is my mighty power that has dragged thee hither,
otherwise thou would not have come before me.

And now thou art here, I know thou art come as a malicious enemy of mine,
and wilt also quarrel with me about something before thou departest; For thou
have not thy name for naught: but continuest a sworn enemy of mine (as thy
name Satan does import.) And such a one, whose guise has always been to
oppose himself against me and my servants, ever cauilling with us, peering and
prying spightfully into us, ever spying a knot in a bulrush, and seeking to
undermine us withal thy cunning; and therefore art thou justly termed the
Devil. Thy very countenance bewraieth as much for the present, and the fury
wherewith thou art inflamed, breaks forth in thy face. Surely there is some
great matter that inrageth thee. Where made thou thy last walk Satan?


Satan. I have bin walking up and down, over and over again in my chap. 1.7
principallity, according to thine appointment.


Lord. This is no chap. 1 8
direct nor perfect answer to my question. For I would know from what part
of the earth, and from what business thou now come, and art called from,
and withal thy true usage, what it has bin? which if thou will tell, thou must
needs confess, that thou have played the part of the geeedy Lioness robbed
of her whelps, in biting most cruely, in wounding most grievously and
incurably. In devouring; destroying whatsoever thou might, that came in thy
walk, without mercy. Playing the Dragon in thy wily, fierce, and malicious
dealing, still playing upon the advantage: suddenly assayling, hotly pursuing,
and never giving over. The Tyrant in thy cruel tormenting of the bodies and
souls of my people, murdering of the^, acording as thou have ever done from
the beginning, in that thy usurped principallity (where I have given thee
power) left no means vnatempted to draw to disloyalty, where I have not
restrained thee of thy will to hurt, and more particularly thou have carried a
most malicious eye against some one of my servants.

Show me therefore distinctly from what place and person thou now co^mest?
against whom thou did lay thy siege? whom thou soughtest to tempt? About whom
thou did use al thy might, and policy to overcome and subdue, as thou have
the rest of the world (for the most part) and yet could nor prevail? Which
is the thing that makes thee thus out of patience, not only ever since (and
that continually) I last reckoned with thee, but immediately before I forced
thee to come before me, and wast even then too too busy about it, when the
Scitation was served upon thee for this thine appearance. Show me (I say)
plainly and expressly without any further circumstance, whether this be not
the matter that displeases thee?


Satan. Most things please me well enough, yea all things in a manner, are
according to my hearts desire, yet, can I not, neither shall I ever be
satisfied as long as there is any thing at al, when I am in my circuit, though
it be of very great compass, that shall never so little cross me of my will.


Lord. Thou would feign cloak the matter of thy grief, chap, 1. v, 7
but thou can not hide it from me. Who so inconstant as thy self,
counterfetting all colors, yea even of the Angels of light, and yet in
dissembling thou art always one and the same. I perceive I must come nearer
home unto thee, and lay thee naked by naming the party. For I see, though I
press thee never so hard, thou will not withstanding for all that confess
nothing. Because my servant Job is a good man, thou do visit him I am sure
in thy walk, frequentest very often his house, over look him very
straightly, and have thine eye ever upon him: How say thou therefore, is it
not he that is a corziue to thee? Be not silent, but speak? He will not accuse
himself, though he be never so guilty, but had it bin to accuse other, we
should have had a thousand words in this space. Try him on that ear and he
will revive his spirits by and by. If Job be not my faithful servant, loving
me and mine in truth, fearing me exceedingly, walking in all my commandments
most carefully, he deceives me much, have thou ought whereof thou can
accuse him Satan?


Satan. I hear thee still marueilously commending him, Chap 1 v 9
but I see no such great cause.


Lord. Lo now he speaks, now his natural corruption, and cankred malice
breaks forth, toward my servants. No, do thou see no great cause why I
should commend Job? Is he not the only man in the world for knowledge, for
virtue, for religion, faith in my promises, fear of my name, obedience to my
will? Does he not love the saints, comfort the afflicted, countenance the good,
hate sin, punnish the wicked? Verily never was there wisdom nor gravity upon
earth, never Justice, mercy, nor integrity among men, if not in him. Deny me
Job for my servant, deny me also a Church upon earth, grant me that (which if
thou will not do, Satan then take from me the making of the world, and al, for
I made it for my servants which I train up therein) and thou can not
(though never so malicious) but grant in like manner, that Job deserves more
highly to be commended, reputed as my faithful servant, and to be rewarded.


Satan. Rewards Verse. 8
he has not wanted good store; honor, credit, chap, i, v, x
wealth, blessings of Cattle, lands, children, in great abundance: thy special
hand of sauegard, compassing him round as a wall of defense, thy favor shining
upon him continually from heaven in the early and latter rain, in pouring
down al comforts that his heart can desire, and in the remouall of al calamity
whatsoever.

This is the thing that has made him serve thee, who would not do it if he
might have so many benefits heaped upon his back as thou have heaped upon
him? Rewards will draw any man to fidelity. I have thousands that are as
careful to worship and honor me, though they receive none of al these things at
my hands, as ever Job was to serve thee. The fear of my punnishment brings
them to it: yea though I do afflict them never so much, yet they dare not
displease me, but bear it patiently, and seek by all means to appease my
wrath. Thus would not Job do, if thou should but once touch him never so
little, but would out of al peradventure cast upon thee as many reproaches as
ever thou have cast favors upon him.

Make trial of him by some more then ordinary affliction, see what is in him by
the susteining of the loss of all that ever he has (thou can give him more
at thy pleasure) and commit the handling of him to me, and either he shall
prove an Hippocrite, or else I will be contented (if any curses, and
punnishments can possibly be added to these that I now endure) to abide the
hazard of them, or if that be not enough, let me abide the shame of it for ever.


Lord. Thou know it Satan to be otherwise with Job, chap. 1
but that by these thy persuasions thou would feign draw me to deliver him
into thy hands, that by the malice (where with thou art swollen up to the brim)
might break out upon him. Thou enuiest his prosperity, and that is the cause
thou art so earnest against him. This Verse. 1
thou think will make any man good, but it is clean contrary: for albeit I
have appointed it as a means to make men better, yet through the corruption of
nature, it has turned to the marring of many of the better sort of men.

It marred the old world, it marred the Sodomites: neither did Esau (the
founder and father of the Country where Job dwells) want wealth. Many have I
blessed heretofore as abundantly as now I do Job, and many there are at this
time in the world, among the Egiptians, Canaanites, Chaldeans Sabaans, and
there are some in Edom to, that are not much inferior, yet notwithstanding none
of them al, have been induced thereby to serve me, but rather have thereby
taken an occasion, to cast off my yoke from their shoulders, and to yield
themselves over to al lasciviousness and wantonness of life.

Though I bestow riches and rewards upon men, to make them more in love with
me, yet for the most part they of all other are most unkind, unthankful,
forgetful, proud, ambitious, contemners of my word, cruel, crafty, and
requite me with worse and harder measure then any beside. It is wonderful to
see what contrary effects riches work to those that I intend? For whereas I
bestovv them as comfortes and helps to the godly in their proceeding and
growing in Religion: they turn to the choking up the good feeds of my word,
to the drowning of the good graces of my spirit, and converting them whom I
have not only endued with a reasonable soul, but inspired with divine
knowledge into unreasonable beasts.

And therefore Job is an admirable man, whom wealth has not corrupted, but
made more dutiful, forward, and cheerful in my service, and more humble
toward the poor. And as for the fear of thy punishments, it is a very idle
speech, and a fond thing, for any one to stand in awe of ought thou can do
against them, seeing thou can not lift up thy finger against any one (no not
the Not Achab himself. 1 Kings 22, 20, 22
most wicked) without my special leave and authority. For albeit thy power is
above theirs, they are by nature under thy thraldom, and thou leadest them for
the most part as captives and Prisoners at thy pleasure: yet my hand is above
thine, I redeem whom I will, how vile sinners soever, yea though vessels of
wrath, from under thy service, use toward them long patience, and show toward
them my rich favors, and mercies for a time. Neither can thou hold any in
perpetual bondage, until I give them wholly over unto thy tyrranny.

In that thou vauntest of thy thousands, whom thou have brought to thy service,
or rather slauishe servitude, for fear of punishment; thou say truly,
because it is for fear, and not for love they do it. But what a mischievous
mind is this, that nothing will content thee, but the loss of all that ever he
has? Which how can it be granted thee? For by thine own confession, I have
set a Hedge about him for a defense against thee? Will thou have me to remove
that Hedge without a cause? But he fears me not (thou say) as I suppose:
but whatsoever he does is in Hypocrisy, that so his turn may be served:
wherein to omit thy impudency in controling my testimony of him, (and that to
my face) thou shall find by woeful experience, that he is no Hypocrite,
neither can be brought by the greatest affliction thou can devise, to curse,
and blaspheme me.


Satan. Suffer me to afflict him and good enough? Chap, 1, v, xi



Lord. I assure thee thou shall have shame enough by it, Chap 1, v, xii
and the infamy thou think to bring upon me by his blaspheming my name,
shall through his patience, and constancy in glorifieng and blessing the same
in his extremest misery, light upon thine own head. And whereas thou make
account to destroy Job thereby, and to insult and triumph over my Church: so
far shall thou be from that, that thou shall destroy thereby thine own
kingdom, and do him such honor, as never shall be forgotten, and be a means
that my Church shall take up the same as a song of triumph and victory against
thee, in all thy tentations, unto the worlds end. Wherefore to put away all
doubts concerning Jobs constancy, I will yeald him over into thy hands verse. 12
. Spare not any thing he has, none of his thousands of Cattle, none of his
Sheep, Oxen, Asses and Cammels; none of his Corn, Grass, Woods, Vines,
Barnes, and Storehouses, none of all his seven Sons, or Daughters, which he
valeweth above all the treasures in the world, only meddle not I charge thee
with his person.


Satan. The Assisses being now ended, and my commission sealed: it remains
that I play the Hangman. I will be gone therefore in post Chapter 1 Employed in
exiuit, departed verse, xii
have, and put my commission in execution with all my skill and cunning, and
who can go beyond me? With all my industry and diligence, and I am vntireable
in my indeuoures. Neither will I abate him the least pinnes point of my grant,
save only certain messengers, to bring him tydinges of his losses, his Wife
to vex him, and some of his Servants to grieve, and contemn chap, 19, 16
him in his misery.

It grieueth me to do this, but that I must needs. For my desire is, to lay
on load upon all that he has, and to spare nothing, until I have belched out
all my malice, revenged my deadly and insatiable hatred upon him to the
uttermost, and with the stretching out of my commission even upon the tainter
hooks.

Notwithstanding if I should do this to, and sweep away all that he has hand
smooth, not leaving any thing behind me: yet would not my heart for all that be
satisfied. For there being an vndraineable fountain of spite there, against
the Lords elect, it is impossible I should ever have my fill at them as I would.
I having now sued out the lords commission, I am bound to follow the matter:
but that is not it that I regard. It is enough for the Angels, that keep their
standing, to aim at obedience to the law of God when any thing is imposed
upon them: Let the Lord intend therefore what he will here in my drift is,
through the greatness, sodainesse, strangeness, and diversity of affliction,
proceeding by degrees, and yet winding up it self together at the last, and
coming in upon him as it were all at a clap, to bring Job to curse, and
blaspheme God in his heart. The Lords purpose I know herein is, to use me as
an instrument to procure his honor by Jobs constancy: but my purpose, to
purchase honor to my self, and to deface his glory, all I can, by the
unmasking of this man's disguised holiness, and discoureing of his
dissimulation. Now for a time to play this my Tragedy in, I was never better
fitted in my life. For at this very instant; his Sons and Daughters are all a
banqueting Verse xiii,
together: and do not so much as once think of any evil, that is toward
them. I will fetch about for my other exploits, and be upon them in a trice,
before they dream of such a matter, and tumble down the very house where they
are assembled upon their heads. Chap. i,



Syrraxis. 5.
Persons.
Four Messengers. Job. Satan.
Mess. 1. AS we were plowing the fields, Verse xiiii
and attending upon the cattle very carefully, those old neighbor thieves of
ours, the Sabeans, a people together with the rest of the Arabians, famous as
thou know for their robberies upon the countries adjoining, rushed upon us
being very many and mighty, before we were aware, took away thy Oxen verse xv
and Asses by violence, slew all thy servants there abiding, though they
withstood them most manfully, save only my self, who have hardly escaped with
my life to bring thee tidings.


Mess. 2. A great, and fearful fire fell down from Heaven, and has devoured
all the flocks of Verse 16
sheep with the shepherds, my self excepted: whom alone, being horribly
scarred therewith, it has spared to be a Messenger unto thee.


Mess. 3. The Captains of the Chaldeans, a warlike people, and given to the
spoil, setting themselves in battle array, have ceazed upon thy Verse xvii
Cammels, have with theit triangle, Set out three bands. verse xvii
or wedgelike Army, cleaft, and broken through thy servants that kept them, as
they stood close together, and well appointed to resist: and they are put to
the sword every one, so that there is none of them remaining, beside my self,
and that not without much danger of death, to signify the matter unto thee.


Mess. 4. As thy Verse xviii
Sons and Daughters were banqueting together, a mighty, and firce storm A
great wind v, xix
rumbling a far off, and seeming to cleave the Heavens whence it brake forth:
came circularwise From beyond the wildernrs verse xix
upon the House where they were met together, with such a force, as if all the
four winds had conspired the downfall of it, and boistrously breaking upon
the four corners thereof, has blown it up from the foundation, Four corners
of the house v, xix
and it has crushed in pieces all thy children, and their family; only I, and
none but I, am left of the whole company, to declare unto thee the lamentable
accident.


Job. O wretched Man! Chap, 1, v, 2^
am I deprived not only of my Cattle, and servants, but of my Children to?
all my children, both sons and Daughters, and that so suddenly, so strangely,
so fearfully, to the woonderment of al men: Sabaan robbers, Caldean soldiors,
fire from heaven, a whitle wind, or rather a conspiracy of winds blowing from
four quarters of the world, taking away and killing all, consuming al,
ouerturning house, and over whelming al my children, my seven sons, my three
Daughters, so that not one of them is left: not one of three to cherrish me in
the the time of sickness; not one of seven to defend me in the day of
battle; not of ten, one to stand before me as a pleasant object to mine eyes
and solace to my soul, both in prosperity and adversity.

The rest I regard not so much; neither in truth is the loss of them any
grief at al in a manner to me, for I never posessed them with that love, but I
could easily part with them; but the loss of my children which proceeded out
of my loins, were partakers of my nature, were derived of my blood, were the
image of my person, the crown of my age, the joy of my life, my only worldly
delight, the most singular reward and special earthly inheritance of the
Almighty; Upon whom I had bestowed intolerable pains, but that they were my
children, for whom I had taken unspeakable care in their virtuous education,
godly instruction, wholesome admonition, and exhortation.

The loss of my children (I say) enters into my soul, had they not proved
well, their ordinary death (so they had died in repentance) would not have bin
so heavy unto me: but then to be taken from me when I saw such excellent
fruits of my labors in their Loue-feasts and religious meetings, in their
willingness always to join with me in sacrifice and the service of God: And
again that I should be stripped of them in such extraordinary and marvelous
manner, as if they had bin the most outrageous offenders upon the face of the
earth?

These considerations press me down to the ground, and pierce me to the
quick; And (in truth) what heart would not this make to bleed with grief?
What eye would it not cause to gush out with rivers of tears? Can I then that
am a father, (a most loving and indulgent father) forbear to lament? Nature
compels, Affection inforceth, Love constrains me to it? But if I should
strive to bridle nature, and bury my love and affection, because peradventure
I might be thought otherwise to be impatient (though indeed to refrain from
mourning insuch a case, were not only an unnatural part, but mere
savageness) yet beside this necessary duty which nature require that my
hands, the custom of my Country would call me unto it, after an outward form.

In this regard therefore, I must at the least arise up from my chair Then Job
arose, v, 20
of ease, and address myself to the renting of my garments, shauing of my
head, prostrating my body upon the earth, bowing and humbling my soul to the
dust: which ceremony, albeit it be common as well to the infidel, as the
believer, yet notwithstanding, it is not without very profitable use; as that
we have our hearts rent and wounded for our sins, which are the cause of our
misery; that we cut off and shave away by the hand of a sanctified spirit, the
superfluities and excrements of our corrupt nature and evil conversation; that
we submit our selves in all Fell down, verse 20
lowlines of mind unto his will when he afflicts us, and become suitors unto
him for help upon our knees by prayer Worshipped verse, 20
and thanksgiving. Conforming my self therefore to the fashion of my people,
and mourning after their manner, I take up this complaint. O transitory riches,!
O the uncertainty of the things of this life! O how vading and fleeting they
are, (even a very sponge) now full, now dry.

This very morning, I was owner of seven thousand Sheep, three thousand
Cammels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, five hundred shee-Asses. This morning I
was Master of a great Family, and I had many hundreds of Man-seruants, and
Maide-seruantes, bondmen, and freemen, Farmers, and Tennants, with their Wives,
and Children depending upon me: some for Tillage, and other for Husbandry: some
for the heardes of Cattle, some for the Cammels and Asses, some for Travail
and Merchandise to other Countries; which is a chief use of those Beasts,
Finally, (which is the only thing that indeed makes me thus to dwell upon
this recital, as being never satisfied with it, and ready to take every
occasion again and again to enter into it.

This morning I was a father of ten children, but now I am not owner so much
as of one Cammell, one Ox, one Ass, one Sheep? Now I am not Master of five
servants, no, not of one; for they are become my Masters, and mock at my
calamity; Now I am no father at al; now I am utterly childles, my fountain is
dried up, my fruit is turned into barrennes.

By the course of nature my children should have suruiued me; neither was there
any appearance to the contrary, they were all in the prime and flower of their
time, they were al lusty and strong, they lived in health, wealth, and
pleasure, yet the hand of the Lord has taken them away, and I their father
remain behind them, to do that duty for them which I looked that they
should have done for me.

But I must remember my self. For thus far I have yielded to nature: and now
it is time that I call my self back to the consideration of the smiter whose
hand has done this, who as he gave meal, so he might in right take all: For
his they were and not mine, I was but a Tennant at will in them, he might
recover them into his proper possession whenever he would. I brought nothing
into the world at the first but nakedness, had it not pleased him to cloth me,
I had remained so still: which if he had done, where had my costly attire, my
thousands of increase and goodly progeny been? But had I died possessed of
all my goods, could I have carried to my grave (whether now the Lord is about
to bring me) any thing more then a winding sheet?

God saw it good that it should be thus, he knows that men in prosperity
easily forget both him, and themselves; are unmindful from whence they come,
and dream of an immortality here upon earth.

Men when they grow rich, they grow lasie, and are like unto restie lades, and
therefore need the spur of affliction to quicken them. Abundance is a
lethargy, that benummeth men's senses in such sort, that they have no lively
feeling of their wretched estate: For these, the Lord has appointed the whip
of correction to rouse them from their security. As long as we are aloft here
in this world, our minds are taken up with the things below, and not lifted up
to him that is above. Wealth abounding, the worship of God is at a low ebb,
heaven is buried with us in the grave while we are in our glory; our eyes
being filled with the things of this life, our hearts are empty of humility
toward God or man, and of the consideration of other men's wants.

The best of us al are that point: it is good therefore that we should be
abased. While we have the spectacle of death before our eyes, we see into our
end: otherwise we cast it behind our backs. In this regard, that heavy and
woeful sight of my childrens Funerals (the saddest subject that ever I beheld)
may prove wholesome and fruitful unto me.

Thus Verse 22 In all this did not Job sin nor charge God foolishly.
he that is almighty, as he turns all things, (though the means seem never
so contrary) to his own glory: so makes he whatsoever rough and hard usage
of his (notwithstanding the harshnes of the course to our thinking) redound to
the good of his elect. Unless therefore we will deny the Lord his due, with
hold from him his right, be unreasonable not to see, unthankful not to
acknowledge his goodness; we must not be unmindful to render him blessed be
the name of the lord. v, 21
praise, nor forgetful to bless him with mind and voice, no not for his
greatest severity in our chasticements.


Satan. I have met with Job soundly: chap 2,1
yet have I not prevailed. When the Lord calls me next unto an account, I
will solicit him once again, and see whether I may obtain leave against his
person: for doubtless, the cause that he thus perseuereth in his integrity, is
nothing else, but for that he fears least the Lord should afflict him in his
body, or take away his life from him: Which were it not as a kirbe to hold him
in, he would certainly break forth into all impiety.


Syrraxis. 6.
Persons.
Lord. Satan. Job.
Lord. THough I decreed it before, Chap 2, v. 1.2
and cannot be drawn to ought, either by thy instigation (Satan) or the
persuasion of any other of my Creatures, but what I have determined within
myself, yet thou through the greatness of thy malice, wherewith thou did
provoke me, wast the only instrument to bring to pass, that Job, who
notwithstanding so many, and so great losses, remaining still as true, and as
sure a professor of my name; as dutiful a practiser of my will; as innocent,
and blameless a man as ever before, deserving for his singular care to obey
me in all things, and above all men, none like him. v. 3. of what kindred or
nation soever at this day (not the holy seed of Jacob excepted, whom I have
picked out as a peculiar inheritance to my self) the continuance of my former
mercies should be punished in this extreme manner. But what success have thou
had in it, does thou find Have thou considered. Chap, 2, v, 3 Chap, 2, v, 4
him an Hypocrite, or does he curse me according to thy suggestion?


Satan. Yea, but I did take away his goods only, which was but as it were a
stripping him of certain superfluities, that he might not be to gorgeous in
his attire, surfait of his daintaies, swell to much with the ouerflowing of his
riches, and thou have reserved also a remnant Chap, 7.13
of those. His Children they were but a cause of sorrow, and care unto him:
many a man has no feeling of the hurt of others (an other man's skin as it
were) though they be never so near unto him. If thou would therefore permit
verse 5
me to afflict him in his own body, Skin for skin v. 4
beat him upon his own skin and flesh, he would soon alter his note: grant me
this my suite also I pray Shelach fut^^ rum imperans mitte quaso Beza, Tremelli
us Mercer. and so likewise chap. 1 xi Imlo si non. And so chap. 1, xi,
includes in it an imprecation or curse which the Haebrewes for modesty sake
do for the most part omit. chap, 2 v, 3
thee, and then if he vomit not out of his hollow heart, most horrible
blasphemy, send me into the deep, or bind me under eternal chains of
darkness.


Lord. I have commended Job unto thee Satan: yet thou beleeuest me not, but
tells me to my head that I am a liar, yea would faigne obtain that at my
hands, to prove me so. Thou disanullest also my foreknowledge of things to
come. For in pleading that Job shall not continue constant unto me, when I
term him my servant, and give this title unto none, but such as shall
persevere so unto the end: do thou not all this? These things I bear at thy
hands: but thou shall have the shame, and torment of it at the last.

Lying is thy old trade, and of thy own invention: yet who so forward to lay it
upon another as thou, herewith I have been well acquainted heretofore: but as
for thine entreaty unto me that is more rare. What can Satan entreat, Is he
become a suppliant? Is it possible that he which was wont to be at defiance
with his maker should now submit himself? But ever mark this, it is for some
advantage to himself, otherwise he would never be bent against his nature and
haughty spirit, to be so courteous. Satan himself can be kind to get
commodity: but alas silly Serpent, how he is to seek in his own occupation
wherein he is so ancient, and how he begs for a whip to beat himself? Thou
would be doing Satan with Iobes body, thereby to make him despair (for
thou meanest to lay on load upon him) and to break forth into blasphemy
against me. Which how shall it be effected, when such as are mine cannot be
wrung out of mine hands: and therefore not so wrought by all the policy thou
have, how bloody soever, to rail at me, or distrust in my mercy in their
heart, and then where art thou with thy execrable protestations? Howbeit if
their be no remedy, but thou will still wilfully procure thine own infamy, and
confusion, be it so, take Job unto thee: (but with this prouiso) that thou do
nothing to endanger Nec appetito nec adimito Iunius. Verse 6,
his life.


Satan. What a prouiso is this, I cannot possibly so torment Job, as this
exception and limitation tormenteth my spirit. Thou speak of a Whip, this is
a whip indeed to scourge me withal. Endanger not his life (quoth he) what a
cooling card is that? I had as leave almost, (but that my fingers itch till I
am tampering with him, and that I have no power to forbear him, that has been
so long a sworn enemy to my proceedings) he had forbidden me to meddle with
him at all. It is miraculous at least, if not impossible, which he imposes?
Can the bottle be broken and the Wine preserved? So, can I smite Job in his
bones, and in his marrow, and yet save his flesh? Well, seeing I may not go
beyond my commission, I must be the more sparing: yet so notwithstanding, that
I will make him smoke for it, before I have done. Neither will I delay the
time one Verse 7.
moment, but put the matter in execution: for I cannot be at rest now I have
obtained leave, until I have done the feate. I am not like those lazy
servants, that when they should go about their business, must be followed
with a Whip; but I am nimble and quick; neither do I think all is to much
that I do for my Master, but I never think that I do enough for him,
specially when I perceive that the matter I go about concerns my self, but
then it is passing pleasurable unto me when I see I may revenge my self in it.

It is wonderful how this sets me an edge, and how swiftly it carries me
about my work; And the more holy the party is against whom I am sent, the more
hotly do I pursue and follow him. That holiness of his is the thing indeed,
that makes me strain forward with all my might, stretch as it were every
joint of my body, and throw my self headlong with the greatest violence. Now
as I am swift in flight, so am I speedy in the devising, and conc^iuing of the
means to effect that which is enjoined me.

The distance between Heaven and Earth being very great? I pass it over as
it were in an instant, and therein without any longer deliberation, cast in my
head for the whole issue of my business. This is now my plot, I will poison
the air with noisome and contagious vapors, which I will cause to light upon
the body of Job: whereby shall arise With sore boiles. verse 7
botches so innumerable, that they shall cover his whole body like a Leprosy;
so great, that they shall equal the bunches of the Camels, and transform him
into a most ugly Monster; for bigness like unto the Elephant; for deformity
beyond any of the living: Their matter it shall be fiery, or mela^cholick,
choler exceeding Adust, burning, aching most vehemently, and payning him more
then if he were cast into a burning Furnace: Their name it shall be unknown
unto the Physicians, and much trouble them about it, whether they may call them
cruel bile-sores, or Carbuncles, or Plague-sores, or the Egiptian scab, or the
Leprosy, or Elephantiasis, they shall not be able to define: For they shall
come somewhat near to these, but exceed the worst of them by many degrees, and
shall be such, as no Physician nor Chirurgian ever laid his eye upon. Their
effects shall be a deadly stinch, as of carrion, or whatsoever may be thought
more noisome: Which venting forth, when he Verse, ^
scrapeth off the parched scurfe, shall distemper him out of measure, and make
his head in a manner to break asunder.


Job. Somewhat the Lord has left me, as my Wife, a few Servants, an house,
chap, 7, 13
a bed with some furniture: Chap, 3,8
but as for the former I have no benefit of them, for they neglect that duty
belonging unto them, forsake me now in my calamity, and leave me here
mourning. Though others stand aghast at me, being so monstrous with biles and
botches, yet it is not their part to be as strangers unto me, but rather
according to the greatness of my distress should give me the greater
attendance; and the more others shun me, the more should they be careful to
look to me. Servants to be unkind, it is not so much to be admired, for they
are oftentimes very untrusty, void of all love and duty, specially then, when
there is most use of them: but for my wife that should be as my right hand, yea
as mine own heart to run chap 19, 17
away from me, is more strange; yea more to be wondered at then the hugenes of
my body, and the exceeding strangenes of my disease, albeit very fearful, and
strange indeed: For beside the bigness and vglines of my botches or ulcers, (for
I know not what I may term them) whereat al men are astonished. I am so
pestered therewith, that there is not so much as the point of a needle From the
sole of his foot unto the crown of his head.
free throughout my whole body. I would think my self an happy man, if I had
but the use of my nails and fingers end: But such is the malignity of the
sores, that I have lost even the use of them, and am compelled to make my teeth
do the service, that belongs to them, (an unseemly piece of service) Testa
pus cor rodens abster sit Kimhi. V 8
yet had I a fine linen cloth or any at al, were it never so course, which I
might hold in my mouth, after I had scraped my sores with a potsheard to do
away the matter that yssueth from them (because a potsheard is so hard and
sharp that the roughnes thereof does agrauat my pain exceeding grievous in it
self) it would somewhat ease me, yet for all that, the malignity of these my
sores are not so grievous unto me, nor so extraordinary, (all circumstances
laid together that may augment it) as the unkindness of my Wife, who though
she will not come at me her self, yet might she (were not she not past al
feeling of her duty) furnish me with linen in my necessity.


Syrraxis. 7.
Persons.
Iobes Wife. Job. Satan
Iobes Wife. Do thou not see how ridiculous thou art, in that thou
continuest sittting in chap. 2.8 and he satte down among the ashes
Ashes, to show thy magnanimity, humility, and repentance: seeing that he does
nothing but afflict thee more and more? When we lost our Cattle, Servants, and
Children, thou criedst chap 2.9 Do thou yet continue in thine integrity
Blessed be the name of the Lord: now, though the grief of thy body be never so
great, thou bewraiest no coffeehouse, which declares that thou art of the
same mind still, and would utter it to, but that it is painful for thee to
speak. A man that is suddenly oppressed with affliction may be cast into a
trance, and be so amazed therewith, that he is able to say nothing for a time,
but remains speechless: but this affliction was not sudden, but thou had
a warning peale thereof in thy former losses: neither is this thy disease, such
as benummeth the senses, but such rather as would make a man roar, and cry
out like a woman in travel, or as they are wont that are pierced with hot
yrons, even hundreds at once.

Thou striuest mightily against nature, thinking it to be an admirable virtue
to forbear anger and fretting in such a case, but thou hurtest thy self more
inwardly, and gainest nothing by it. When we received rewards from the hands of
the Lord for our service, then blessing was seasoable; but now, methinkes it is
very unseasonable and absurd. But I know it is thy only delight to be praying
and praising the Lord, howsoever the world goes. Al is out of course with
thee, if that be not done, and that being once formed, thou think thy self
well, how wretched soever thou at,

No marvel surely thou have profitted so greatly by it: he that has
aduantaged himself in such manner as thou have done by it, cannot but be
further encouraged thereunto. These botches, this deformity, this groaning of
thine, are the fruits of thy great labors and thankfulness. Art thou not well
recompensed think thou? I pray she speaks by way of derision v. 9
thee as long as thou have a tongue to speak, never leave magnifying of the
Lord. For do thou not see how this kindness of his calls for it at thy
hands?


Job. MY prayer and praising of God, Chap: 2: 10
is not the cause of my affliction, but it is the Lords pleasure to try me, how
contentedly, I am able to bear it. He Shall we receive good at the hands of
God and not receive cuill, verse. x
has sent us prosperity a long time, and now it is will to deal in another
sort with us, and we are to praise God as well for the one as for the other.
Have I not told thee so many times, and used prayer in the time of prosperity,
to prepare us against the day of adversity? There was never any of the Children
of God, that have been exempted from it, but have al undergone it, and that
with patience; yea have rejoiced that the Lord has vouchsafed them that
mercy, and have reaped exceeding benefit by it. What a saying therefore is
that of thine, to bless God in time of afflictioni svnseasonable In affliction
to bless him there is nothing more profitable for us, because there is no more
speedy nor sovereign remedy to rid as from the sorrow of it then this. Alas,
what an ignorant woman art thou, not to understand that God has ordained this
for his servants to humble them: and again, that he has appointed Women to be
comforters, and to give good counsel to their husbands in this case. It
greeueth me more then my calamity, that thou which have had so many good
instructions above other women, have learned no wisdom at all, but at worse
then many unbelieving Persian women, Hester, 1, 22
women, so far from thy duty in being a good wife that thou art worse then a
beast, yea even a block. For they in their kind specially mate unto mate, are
a comfort each to other in their misery.


Wife. Away with such wisdom to become so deformed, the like whereof was never
heard of. If this be the Lords kindness toward his Servants, let him serve him
that will for me. But serve thou him still, bless him as long thou have any
breath, look upon thy self, and consider how well he has deserved it at
thy hands? Would thou have me to attend thee in this case, or to command any
of thy servants to do it? Do thou not perceive that the scent chap. 19, 17
of thy sores is so strong, that it will kill as many as come near thee? yet
bless him notwithstanding: no doubt but this extraordinary goodness toward
thee, is worthy of more then extraordinary praise and thanks?


Satan. Iobes wife to be incited to deride her husband was by Satan's
instigation, and a joy un to him questionles when he had drawn her unto it.
THis is a sport alone for me: all that I have done hitherto is nothing to this:
For I with my plagues have hurt the body alone, but she wounds the soul; She
comes roundly indeed and directly to the point. These Women they are the best
in the world, for that what they conceive they lay it down at the first or
second word: If her husband must perish, she thinks it were as good for him
to come unto it by blasphemy Beza makes her persuasion no greter fault, then
that she did advise him to give glory to God in coufessing of his sins, and
acknoledging that his holiness was but in Hippocrisie accordingly as did his Job
friends: but I follow the general received opinion, for they which take the
word in its proper signification, hold it notwthstanding to be an execration.
then any other way, for that is a speedy course, and she must have al things
dispatched out of hand: wherein she fitteth my humor well, for I would have a
short cut made of it. These delays I cannot abide, no more can she. We iumpe
in opinion likewise for the means, for blasphemy to be the only means of al
other is the resolution of us both. If the L. suffer that to escape without
present death; he were worthy to be railed at. And I presume though he be
very patient, yet he will not endure to be reviled, and I make no doubt but
that Job can do no less at the last, but yield unto his wife; for is he
stronger then Adam was in his innocence?


Job. Chap, 1, 10
Be these words for one that has been instructed in the knowledge of the high
God? The worst of all the Heathen, among whom we live, could not speak more
wickedly? But this is thy wisdom, thou would not have me bless God. What
then? Rail against Heaven, and blaspheme the ever living God? O miserable and
exerable wisdom! What a strange thing is this, that receiving so much good
from the hands of the almighty, we should not be contented now with this
misery: which how long it shall endure we know not, the Lord may remove it, to
morrow next, if it please him.

Though our goods be lost, the Lord has enough in store if we serve him: and
as for my trouble, (I being contented with it my self) what need thou to
murmr? Thou would do something if it were laid upon thine own body. I
know for a truth that it shall not continue over long: so merciful is the
Lord, that he will remove it in due time, one way or other: and we must wait
therefore his leisure a while. The mighty God give me strength to bear
willingly and comfortably this his visitation, and supply unto me by the power
of his spirit, that which is wanting, that as my pain shall increase, so my
faith, and patience may be greater; and as I shall be deprived still of outward
comfortes, so the inward joy of my soul (fixed strongely upon his promises in
the Messiah) may abound more and more.

Rest satiffied here with I pray thee my Wife, and disquiet me no longer: and
seeing I am so loathsome and unsavory, keep thee I beseech thee far enough
from me. I would be loath to infect thee, and more loath that the sting of thy
tongue (more deadly then any Serpent) should poison me. Hitherunto (O Lord my
God) thou have so supported me with thy grace, that notwithstanding all my
troubles, I have not showed my self impatient. Continue I pray thee thy favor
toward me still, even to the end, that no assaults of Satan, (how strong
soever) may overcome me: that so at the last, thou may be glorified through
my victory, and receive thanks and praise for my deliverance.


Syrraxis. 8.
Persons.
Eliphaz. Bildad. Zophar. Satan.
Eliphaz. MY good friends, Chap, 2, xi
we are met together to consult of going to see and comfort Job, who is most
strangely and grievously visited with sickness by the hand of God? How say
ye, shall we go lovingly together to comfort this our old friend in his
adversity?


Bildad. You do well Eliphaz to admonish us of this duty: for we ought to be
mindful of al men, (specially of the godly) and more particularly of such among
them as are our neighbors and acquaintance, in their tribulation.


Zophar. I like the motion well, I will be ready whenever you shall appoint:
Some comfortable doctrine in this his estate would be very welcome; it were
good therefore we were provided this way.


Eliphaz. Let us go about it cheerfully, being a thing both commanded of
God, and commended of Men. Many a one had been a castaway if this duty had
been neglected; the best of us all needs counsel in such a case, for we are
not easily persuaded to die, we are not easily armed against Satan's
temptations, whose manner is more strongly to assail us, then at any time
beside. Sickness is trouble some, brings forgetfulness, idleness of brain
oftentimes, and therefore good admonitions are necessary, to put us in mind of
God; to stay us from despair. to advise us in our affairs, as well for the
disposing of that we have, as for the ordring of our selus in the extremity of
our sickness. Concerning our behavior, speech, and demeanor every way; for
therein we become children again, needing no less guides to direct us, then
Nurses to feed us, by whose exhortations we may be brought to bear patiently
and with contentation of mind, the Lords visitations, how tedious soever, and
intolerable to the flesh.


Bildad. Doubtless the visitation of the sick in general is a necessary duty,
and it were not only a want of love in us, but of common humanity to neglect
to visit our friends, and those with who^ we have bin familiar (chiefly such as
we are well persuaded of for their religion and conversation) in their
affliction and calamity. But the special duty that God calls for at our
hands in this behalf, is, that we join with them in prayer, being the only
means to procure unto them sound comfort, a sight and sorrow for sin, an
assurance through faith in the Lords promises of the forgiveness of it, together
with his favor in the remouall of the guiltynes of conscience, which otherwise
will ever be griping the heart, and the punishment due unto the same, in a
word, an ease and help every way, in their distress.


Zophar. I verse, 12. when they lift up their eyes a far off they knew him
not,
cannot say it is he, for this is such a disfigured body, monstrous and
terrible to look upon, as big as two bodies, covered all over with blood, and
ilfauored matter, that I have no knowledge at all of him: but by that which I
have heard it should be he, yonder he lies in the midst of a heap of ashes
all alone, as a man forsaken and forlorn: no eye pittieth him, that has bin so
pitiful to all. See what a solitary companion poverty is, all have betaken
them to their wings and fled from her, as from a desert. It is because there is
no food here as in times past? O this feeding of the belly is a notable load
stone to draw company unto us. It is because there is no mirth here? For mirth
has a certain hidden virtue in it to procure an appetite there, where mourning
marres the Market? Where is his Wife with her handmaidens? Where are his
Servants that are left? Is there no trusting to these in sickness? Not to
them that live by us, nor to them that are one with us? Whom then shall we
trust? But what a fearful spectacle is he? Does not his sight affright you?
How is he pestered with sores, are you not amazed at it? Would it not make all
the World to wonder at him, if they saw him? Can you forbear marueling? Can
you forbear weeping to see your friend thus handled? Verily it would make an
Adamant to shed tears.


Eliphaz. Indeed I know not whether I may wonder, Chap, 2, v, xii
or weep most, while I behold and consider him? That which is above my
understanding moves me to the one, nature to the other; which when I look
higher I must yeald unto. For what is not the Lord able to do? Desist we
therefore from the former, and address we our selves to the latter, for to
make a wonderment of our friend, and a man of that, worth, what folly 'What
want of discretion, knowledge and love should we bewray? Admit it were our own
case, would we be contented to be made a gazing stock, pointed at with the
finger, and that all men should stand astonished at us, and there rest? Such
usage would go nearer our hearts out of question then all the troubles, and
torments in the world beside. As a token therefore of our sorrow Verse 12, They
lift up their eyes and wept, etc.
which we conceive, that we are humbled in spirit, rent we our clothes,
lifting up our voice unto Heaven with a lamentable cry, cast we dust upon our
heads, and shed we forth Ryuers of tears for the desolation of our friend.
Harken how lamentably he groaneth, groan we; and grieve we in spirit with him:
sit we here, or rather take we up here an abiding for a certain Verse xiii,
Nothing is more ordina rythen the in sulting of the wicked over the Godly which
they have from Sa than. 1 Kings 22.24.
time by him, observing his gesture, that so we may apply our speeches
accordingly.


Satan. See how these men wonder at my power, and they may well wonder at it:
for I have painted Job with as many colors as the rainbow. The Leopard is not
fuller of spots then he with sores, the Giants are not more huge, and admirable
for their stature, then he, for the greatness of his swollen, and misshapen body.
My workmanship is absolute, of corupt matter, festering, swelling, burning,
aching of blisters, botches, biles, stripes, wounds great plenty; these are in
the view of the world to make him and his religion odious. Besides, I have
stirred up his Friends, who are able because of their ancient love, gravity,
and knowledge, to prevail very much with him, by setting before him the
greatness of his sins, and the exceeding anger of the lord against him, to
bring him (and that under the color of kindness and goodwill) to despair of
the Lords favor toward him. This my plot does maruelously please me above all
the rest, and hitherto I have had my desire in it: for I perceive they begin
already to suspect him, not to be the man they took him for in times past, and
that because of my strange wonders that I have wrought upon him. This was done
in the depth of my policy, and it proceeds happily. Adams smart has made
some men suspicions of their wives, so that they will not be led by them. But
what man is there, but that he will harken to the counsel of an old wise and
faithful friend, whom he presumes does intend his good? I have provided me of
three of them for failing; that in the mouths of three witnesses my persuasions
may be ratified. Three to one, and they al hail persons against a diseased
wretch, bereft of his wits, is odds enough.


Syrraxis. 9.
Persons.
Job Eliphaz
The substance of Iobes complaint in the 3. chap. is set down in that which
succeeds, though I have not precisely tied my self to the order of verses,
and to speak the truth, the speech proceeding from a troubled spirit,
confounded with the violence of his passions, what method could he observe in
it? and therefore to have kept my self to an order, had bin nothing else, but
to transvert the nature thereof,

Job. OVnhappy day wherein I was borne! O cursed hour chap 3, 3.
of my nativity! O that the womb had shut me up, and that I had never seen the
sun? Let it be from henceforth noted for a day of misery, covered with Verse 4
darkness from above: a day of fear Verse 5
and horror to the sons of men, and utterly without al joy or comfort, why
was I brought forth into the world? Why was I nurced Verse. xi xii.
by my mother, nourished, and trained up? Why lived I in pleasure, prosperity,
wealth and honor? How much better had it been for me to have lien in the
grave, Verse. 13
that so I might have felt no torment? Lamentable Verse, 20
is the greef that I now suffer? I have no ease, no part free; boyles and
ulcers, that ouerrun my whole body! O most welcome now would death Verse, 21 22
be unto me, the most greevous death, that the head of the cruellest Tyrant
could invent. If any kind of death might betide me, I should think my self as
happy as the Kings, Verse xiiii
that while they lived here upon earth were co^manders of the world: or as the
Princes Verse, vx
that had their houses filled with gold, or silver, all manner of treasure and
wealth, now sleeping in the dust, where high Verse xix
and low are alone without difference: For they without al fear, void of all
labor Verse xiii
and sorrow; free from anger, threatening, oppression, they complain not; they
sigh not, they are not heard to groan or roar out through pain.

My golden days which before I enjoyed were full of terror, Verse 25 26
for even then I stood in awe of this wretchedness that now is fallen upon me.
And though I did what I could to prevent it by public and private prayer, by
obeying the Lord in all things, yet would it not do it. Blessed death therefore,
how much do I desire thee? How does the remembrance of thee refresh me in my
irksome and wearisome life. As often as I consider that thou will bring me
Verse xvii 18
case, that thou will put an end to al my grief, and lay me in the grave,
where I shall feel no pain: so often do I call and cry for thee, so often do I
wish for thee as the hireling verse xvii Laborer
for the night, or as he yt grindeth Prisoner
at the mil, for an end of his thraldom. I would part with all my wealth were
it again in my possession, for a little ease, for a little freedom, so that I
might be washed or bathed, or any way find some mittigatio^. Was there ever seen
such a huge and ugly body? Nothing but sores, and those so grievous Verse
xxiiii the matter from hence to the end of this speech depends hereupon
as if I were pricked with needles in every part? I am al of goare blood,
mingled with scabs, scum, and scurffe, together with such abundance of corrupt
matter, as if there were an vndrainable fountain thereof in every vain and
joint of my body, which makes me to do nothing else but sigh, and sob
continually. If the dogs might lick my sores I were thrice happy, their
tongues are physic, they would remove this stinch, which is so strong that it
infecteth the air, and would be kinder unto me then my friends that vvonder at
my sight, and are astonyed at my trouble. The burning of my ulcers, the
grievous burning is as the fire to torment me: yea better were it by far that I
were in the burning flame, for that would dispatch me quickly. Now these my
sores are devised doubtless in the forge of Satan's deepest malice, into whose
hands the lord has now deliuerd me; and how subtle Satan is to invent new
torments, and how cruel to inflict them, specialy upon the dearest children of
God, whom he most hates, if the Lord give him leave, who knows not.


Eliphaz. These 7. chap 2, xiii
days space have we mournd with thee in silence only, not using so much as a
word at any time unto thee: which we have done partly because thy pain Because
they saw the grief was great, v, xiii
was so great that it would have hindered al exhortation: partly because we were
so amazed and terified at the wonderful hand of God upon thee, that we could
not tell what to judge of thee, whether thou were the man we took thee for in
thy prosperity, or one that made show only of religion, and of external
honesty, having a corrupt heart, and being closely of a wicked life; and partly
because we expected something from thee, whereby we might from thine own mouth
receive directions for our speeches. For being in a great doubt because of thy
sudden and fearful punishment, though we knew thee well before, and had a good
opinion; yea were marueil ously in love with thee, for those excellent virtues
and soundnes in religion, seemed to be in thee, yet durst we not determine the
matter, until we might hear thee speak. But now that thou have uttered thy
mind and that at large, and therein have discovered most fowly and shamefully
the wickedness of thy heart, and thine hypocrisy in times past, we can^ no
longer forbear, but must needs (now soever thou take it) impart what after long
consideration we conceive of thy calamity; and withal make a confutation of thy
words, wherein thou pleading thine own chap 3, xvii
innocence and the injury chap 3, 23 24.25, 26
that is offered thee in this thy heavy affliction, thou iustifiest thy self,
and condemnest the L. as unrighteous and unjust. Howbeit we may safely protest,
that howsoever we are exasperated by this thy speech, because it derogateth
very much from the Lords justice, yet we came unto thee with a purpose and
desire to administer words of comfort unto thee, according as our weeping,
renting of our cloths, casting dust upon our heads, lamenting for thee with a
loud cry, sitting by thee so long, and coming so far to see thee, does witness.
And thus having yielded reasons both of our so long silence as also of that
shall ensue, (I will if thou will give me leave chap, 4, 2
) yea without thy leave (the matter being of such importance) according as my
years require, begin first to reply upon thee.

HOW comes chap, 4, 3.4
it to pass, that thou which have bin in times of prosperity a strengthner of
others in the faith Verse v
do now in thine adversity shrink under the burden, and despair of
salvation? Surely thou have bin no goodma^, thou have but deceived the world
with this name; neither did thy fear to offend god Verse vi.
proceed of an vnfaind love and reverence of his majesty; but that thou might
still enjoy thy health, peace, and abundance, thou did frame thy self
thereunto, as the manner of worldlings is, that do al for the commodities of this
life, and their credit here without any further respect. These men making the
getting together of riches, the living in honor and pleasure their happiness,
will be drawn to any religion, and be as forward, as careful, as earnest in it,
as the soundest professors themselves in the sight of men, as long as they
prevail in that their drift: but if they fail in that, then they straight
way fall away and speak evil of of the way they professed, and revile the
Author of their religion. Even so do thou, which declares that thou had
no Verse 6.
confidence in him, whom thou did worship. For as is the man, so is his
hope: a good life is ever in expectation of a good end. Seeing therefore thou
despairest, thy profession doublesse has not bin sound, nor thy life Godly,
nor thy conscience innocent, but guilty of much wickedness. For were it not
so, why art thou thus destroyed? Verse 7
Neither do I judge thee in this, but they are thine own words: for thou
criest out that thou art perished, Chap, 3.23 Whose way is hid.
and come to destruction, whereunto none that are truly righteous and godly,
do ever come.

This is a sure, and infallible position. Consider the histories of al times,
and thou shall find it so; do but look into the ordinary course of the world,
and there thou shall be taught the v, 7, where were the up right destroyed.
Verse 8.9
same. It is true in them that are contrary minded, who as a fruit of their
travel in the plowing up the fields, and preparing the heart unto evil, in
sowing the seed, and doing the deeds of ungodliness: are wont to reap the
reward of iniquity, and to vanish away with the wind of the Lords indignation.
The Verse 10
fierceness and cruelty of the Lion and Lioness, making afraid the other
beasts with their roaring, raging against them, and preying upon them
continually, is the cause why they are Verse xi
destro^ed with their Whelps. And so of the Lionlike Tirants, whom the lord
depriving of their goods gotten by oppression and violence, none otherwise then
those ravening beasts of their prey, causes to perish with hunger, and the
teeth of their posterity thereby to be broken and left destitute;
notwithstanding the loud crying, and woeful ado of their fathers for them, of
al means to help them, and so compelled to wander like vagabouds, and
runnagates upon the face of the earth.

THou boastest of thy absolve Chap, 3, 26 Vide Iunium.
care and diligence in the carriage of thy self every way: could it possibly
be such think thou, as wherein there was no defect? I have received it in
(...) Heavenly viso^ chap. 4.1^
at the deadest verse 13
^ime of the night, when men are in their deepest sleep, and again the
imaginations of them that are waking most prosoud, a Verse, 15
mighty tempest, going before, as a he rauld to proclaim the Lords coming
unto me, at whose presence when it passed by me, and I had but a little glimpse
of it, because of the exeeding brightness, and surpassing beauty thereof,
every joint of my body did Verse xiiii
tremble, and the Verse xv.
hair of my head did stand an end, all which circumstances do notably clear
it from the least suspicion of false-hood: I received it I say from Heaven, and
in an Oracle from verse. xviii
God, that the righteousness of the holy Angels verse, xviii
themselves, being compared with the incomparable righteousness of the Almighty,
is imperfect.

Shall we then poor Creatures, that have our dwelling in earthly houses, which
are base and of no durance, that so dainly vanish away, as being to day living
bodies, to morrow dead carcases and Worms meat, that with all our excellency,
wealth, and wisdom, cannot prevent the stroke of Death, when he once lays
his are to the root of our tree, or draw him to a truce of one day or hour,
stand upon it, that we are just; and that we are so absolutely verse, xvii,
xviii, xix
good that there is no want in us, no not if the Lord himself should examine
us, according to that integrity that is annexed to his own essence? This were
to make our felues better then the Angels, yea, equal with God himself; who
alone in the judgment of the very Insidels, is simply, and perfectly good.

Alas silly Worms, we may more truly confess of our selves, because of the
corruption of our nature, so polluted throughout, that nothing pure can
possibly be remaining in us, that notwithstanding all our care and diligence to
do well, we are never thelesse far from perfection, as by the effects of all
our actions does appear: for without all exception made from the general
rule, we offend in every action; even in prayer it self, the best of all
other. And in that we walk more uprightly then many others, we must knowledge
it to be the hand of the Lord upholding us: which were it not, we should fall
most grossly every moment, and finally to destruction without recovery: which
being so, the case is most plain and evident, that God when he punishes the
best of us, he does us no wrong, or injury; neither does he show himself
unjust toward us, as thou exclaimest against him, because of thine own
particular calamity, but executes most righteous judgment howsoever he deals
with us. For as has bin said, the most righteous man offen death in the most
holy action that he undertakes, and so to, that for his default therein, he
Verse. 20, 21.
deserves to have his name rased out here on earth, Chap, 5, 1
and to be deprived of the favor of God for evermore. It is manifest then, that
thou art in an error, thus to stand upon thy perfection, as who should say,
thou were so good, as that the lord had nothing against thee. What aduo cate
have thou that will plead for thee in de fence of that thou maintainest? Or who
is there, that thou calling upon him never so importunatly, or crying aloud
never so outragiously and shamefully for help, will take thy part? If thou fly
to the Godly, they will not, for they are ever the forwardest of all other to
acknowledge their wa^ts, and to confess that their sins have pulled the
judgments of the Lord upon them: they know, that to reason as thou do, and to
say they undergo the Lords indignation undeservedly, were to make themselus
more righteous then god, which were a detestable kind of disputing, as
diminishing the Lords, and establishing their own righteousness; pulling God out
of his throne of justice, and placing man in his room; advancing the creature
above the creator, which is blessed for ever. If to the ungodly, they cannot,
for we see the wrath of the Lord breaking forth against them daily for their
transgressions, rooting them out, and that in a moment, when they in their own
imagination have well nestled themselves, and are strongly persuaded that they
are seated for ever, and shall never suffer any change or alteration in their
estate.

When a destruction Chap 5.1
comes upon a land, these ever go to the pot, and first pay for it; if the
these comes he takes of theirs; if the needy, Verse 5
he eats up theirs; if a rain or flood, it marreth and drowneth evermore
that which belongs unto these; if the sword, or pestilence, it deuoureth
these, together with their Verse 4
progeny: which argues them capital male-factors, and that they are with out
all pretense or excuse.

Other Verse 6
judges punishing them, they might allege peradventure indiscretion, malice,
oversight, cruelty, or the like for themselves: but the judge of all the World
executing his wrath upon them, they can take no exception, but must
acknowledge, that the Lord has by his displeasure toward them, (which
appears in their punishment) laid them open, as great offenders, to the view
of all men.

Does he not deal so with thee now, Chapter 5.
what cloak therefore have thou to cover thy sins? Will thou say there is
nothing in thee that is the cause of this thy misery, but that it comes out
of the earth, or it is a casual thing incident to Man, or else the course of
nature, in the which there is sometime a flourish, sometime a decay? To this I
answer, that the cause of man's affliction is in himself, and comes no other
way. For, as we see in the sparkles chap. 5, v, 7
of the coals a natural lightness to fly upward, so in us there is a natural
corruption, which as fire covered breaks forth, and kindles the coals of *
actual sin; This is spoken not that original sin deserves not death, but to
snew how sin comes in.
sin when it is conceived, the coals of Gods anger against us, which never
returns empty without some blows upon our backs that moved him to
displeasure. So then the cause of our calamity is not external, but internal
proceeding from our sins within us: whereunto we are as inclinable, through
the deprauation that cleaves unto us, as the flame or smoke to ascend upward.

To acknowledge Verse 8
therefore unfeignedly thy fault, and to seek unto him by came prayer even
upon thy knees, that is as able to help thee, as he was to hurt thee, thou will find when thou have al done to be thy best course. This verse. viii, I
would inquire at God
way would I take if I were in thy steed. And so having proved that the Lord
does now visit thee for thy sins, and so deal with thee as his custom has
been to deal with the most wicked among men, (whom for a time he suffers to
flourish, that their fall might be greater) I will now verse. 9
confirm unto thee, that God is able though thou despairest thereof, as thy
speech more then bewraieth, and will, because he is merciful, cure such as
sue unto him in sorrow and assurance. And further that which he has done unto
thee, has been in the high Court of his eternal wisdom and Counsel, first
concluded upon, and then afterward in most perfect equity and Justice
administered and executed likewise upon thee: al which show thy folly, to
contend with him.

We cannot handle these his properties so distinctly by themselves, because
they are inseparable companions, and so go to gither, that they can hardly be
found severed the one from the other in any of his works, for sometime his
power, sometime his wisdom, sometime his mercy is the most predominate
artribute; and sometimes they are al so eminent, that it can hardly be
discerned whether of them does bear the greatest sway in action: wherefore we
shall be compelled to let them go together. His power verse x
and so his wisdom is unspeakable, in providing an habitation and raiment
for man, beast, and plants: in feeding and nourishing them together with all
creatures which are inumerable with the dew of his blessing: In ruling and
ouerruling them at his pleasure, for when he vvil he changes the very order
which he has set in nature, and turns all things vpside down.

How fruitful does he make the earth, that is an element in it own nature,
most unfit forgeneration? for cold, and dry, (which is the constitution
thereof) is no friend thereunto. The fruit of the Sea, how contrary is it unto
the Fountain? the one being fresh, the other being salt? The verse. xi
Counsel of the wicked he confounds, takes the most crafty v, xii: xiii
xiiii
and politic of them in their own net, and so o^d^eth mutters that they
contriue their own o^^^^ throw.

A man would wonder how it should come to pass, that men of that place,
wisdom, and experience, should be so blinded, as to stumble at noon day, or
grope for light when the sun shines. Can verse, xv xvi
be do these great things, and can he not raise up him whom he has debased;
Yes verily, he both can, and will, if he belong unto him: for such he
preserves from the 18, verse xix 20 etc
sword, from oppression, from violence, from evil tongues, and from whatsoever
Six troubles verse, xix
evils, which the wicked are continually subject unto.

There verse 27
is no doubt therefore, but that the Lord (if thou have recourse unto him by
prayer) will deliver thee out of this thy calamity: and if thou sue unto him
for forgiveness, with a promise of amendment he will restore thee again to thy
former estate, and make thee no less blessed Verse, xvii Chap, 6 verse 2, 3
then in times past.


Job. Thou maruellest at my complaint, but considerest not my pain, though I
am wounded by the Arrows verse 4
of the Almighty, and my grief if it were well weighed, would be heavier then
the verse 3
sand? My soul does abhor such manner of me at as thou do administer. It
has no more relish or comfort in it, then there is in the white of an Egg,
yea it is more bitter unto me then Wormwood.

Thou condemnest me for my vain verse 6
speeches, not considering that many light speeches are wont to pass from
men in such vehemence of pain as I endure. For were I of stone x ver:xii
or brass, I were not able to bear it? How then should I under go it, but
that I must needs express some grief? In the greatest bitterness of my
affliction, I ever showed forth some token of my ver x
hope in the Lord: and that which thou gatherest upon my Words to the
contrary, is but thine own finister conceit.

For what if I swarued aside a little in my words, does it therefore follow by
and by, that I despair of salvation, and so am become a reprobate? Is this
your charity, thus rashly to judge your Brother? How if I take not that
comfort to my self, now in the time of my sickness, which I gave unto the
diseased when I was in health; does that prove that there was no foundnes
within, but that all was done in Hippocrifie? Or does not rather the
vnsupportablenesse of my trouble cause the same? Which being so great (were
there that Friendship and kindness in you, you pretend toward me, in this your
visitation;) your hearts would rather melt thereat, then you would stand thus
amazed and incensed.

And I tell you, he that does not relent in heart to see his Brother in such a
case (as you now see me) howsoever he flatteteth himself to the contrary, yet
in very deed he has cast off the fear chap, 6, 14
of the Almighty. When I needed you not, you would be very pleasant with me,
but now you are like a brook v, 15.16 xvii xviii xx, xxi
dried up in the time of drought, which defraudeth the traveler of his
expectation: who seeing such abundance of Waters in the Winter, repaireth
thither in his necessity, with a hope to be relieved. For there is nothing with
you now but dumpes, or rough and harsh Words, unsavory and unseasonable
speeches, and condemning my life and religion without cause.

If I should desire your relief (which nevertheless one friend may honestly
crave of another) either for my self or for mine; Verse xxii
or your labor and travel for me, or else your substance to ransom Verse
xxiii
me out of the hands of an enemy, or to free me from prison: it were no honesty
for you to deny me a good word, kind and loving speech, your charitable
opinion, which would be no hinderance nor loss at al unto you? Thy heavenly
vision proves that the righteousness of man is not to be compared with the
incomprehensible righteousness of the Almighty: And again, that there is no man
but would be found faulty, if the Lord should strictly examine him: but this
is nothing to the matter in hand (being this) Whether God punnisheth for no
other cause but for sin? Verse xxv


There is great force in a just reproof, but no man regards these frivolous
Objections. Thoustandest trifling upon wondes, and those also are wrested to
^wrong sense: what can thou truly reprehend (Eliph^^) in the substance Verse
xxvi
of my speech? Leave off then to be verbal, and learn to be more material;
let go words and instance in any particular, convince me of error in it, and I
will yield: which if thou can not do, as in my conscience thou shall not be
able (for I am not guilty within my self of ought whereof thou accusest me)
then cease thy reprehension. But were it that this thy reprehension were just,
yet were it want of discretion in thee to grieve a sick man, as weak, and as
unable to help himself as a sucking verse 27 2^
child. For he that will do good by his physic, must have respect unto the
time, and then administer it, when his patient is fit for it.

Such a one derideth not his patient, though he be never so much diseased, and
never so great a stranger unto him, but ye play upon me that am of your old
and familiar acquaintance, with terms of reproach. It is not good counsel thou
give me Eliphaz, when thou aduisest me to accuse my self that am innocent
Verse xxix.
of al impiety and ungodliness: For hereby should I dishonor my holy
profession, and deface the graces of God in me, and sin against mine own
soul.

Wherefore seeing you can give me no better counsel then so, Chap 7
I will turn away from you and speak unto him that is able to inform me
aright: harken unto me thou which iudgest righteously, while I put my pain and
my complaint together in a balance. Every chap 7* 1.2.
day has his grief, the servant wishes for the shadow, the laborer for an
end of his work. The travels of no condition or degree of men have an end, but
while they live they are tied unto them as an hireling to his wages: yet these
are not contional, but have some intermission; neither are they without fruit:
but Verse 3 4
in this my visitation I have no relief, no ease at al, neither is there any
commodity at al coming unto me thereby: come not against me, therefore (I
pray thee) any more, which already have no rest night nor day, I am courted
with Worms, Verse 5
bises, break out of my flesh, my skin cleaves asunder as the earth partched
with the Sun, neither do thou hasten my life, that flies as fast away as a
Weauers shuttle, and cannot be recalled back when it is once gone, it
vanishes away in a trice, like unto a puff of wind, or a bubble of Water,
before I am aware or can see cause why: I shall never be partaker any more of
any thy blessings here upon earth; I shall be deprived of thy eyes Verse 8
of providence to attend upon me, I shall be consumed as a Verse 9
cloud before the Sun from the society of Men, never return again to live a
natural life, to converse and have my habitation among them as now I have. In
that I do complain so much, and show my self impatient in this my distress,
it proceeds from the unableness (or as it is indeed) from the impossibility
of flesh and blood to bear it.

O let me know what is thy purpose? Herein am I as the Sea, Verse xii
or the Whale-fish, that thou should keep me in ward? A small matter would
tame me: I was never as these wild Creatures, but most willing to obey thee.
What extremity is this, that my Verse xiii,
bed should yealde me no comfort, no sleep come into mine eyes, fearful
Verse xiiii
visions always affright me in the night; this causes me so much to complain
and to wish to die, yea rather to be strangled verse xv
(the most cursed death of all other) then to carry about me longer these
rotten bones.

To what purpose is all this? Less verse xvi 17 xviii.
ado would bring me to the grave? Will it not serve the turn, but that I must
be proved night and day, morning and evening, every moment, and that I must be
so followed and plied, that not so much respit must be yealded as to swallow my
verse xix
spittle, but that it is ever ready to choke me up: which being so, how can it
otherwise be, but that thou have determined that I shall now sleep in the
dust and not recover? Take away therefore my sin and my transgression, remove
the guiltiness of my crimes, that otherwise may be as a Clog and terror to my
conscience, and free the same of fear, through the comfort of thy spirit, and
of all doubt of forgiveness and salvation, through the assurance of thy mercy.


Syrraxis. 10.
Persons.
Bildad. Job.
Bildad. I See I must be compelled to interrupt thee? Chap 8
how long will thou vsesuch speeches as these, being like a Verse 2
tempest, to overthrow the Lords judgments? Thy gesture, is as harsh as thy
words: thy loud voice, earnest speech, angry countenance, moving of thy body,
beating with thy hand, do declare thy overmuch heat, and distemper, and that
thy passions ouerbeare thee? And as for thy words, I marvel how thou dare
utter them, for that they tend altogether unto thine own defense Verse 3
and derogate from the Lords justice.

Be these good speeches: I am innocent, Chap. 6, 2.
I have not offended; my affliction Chapter 6, 2, 3, 4
is not deserved on my part; the Lord therefore in punishing me peruerteth the
rule of justice; the Almighty does not that which is right. So thou make the
Author of all equity, unrighteous; and no God. For seeing righteousness is
annexed to his essence, if he be not righteous, he is not. But remember what he
has done to thy Children, and why? And repent thee betimes, least he strike
thee with Death, as he did them for their transgression: which if thou do, it
shall go well Verse, 5, 6, 7
with thee, and it had gone well with thee always, but that thou did
dissemble with him, and thy latter end had been more blessed then thy
beginning. And so it shall be still, if yet thou do bewail thy former life.
But for Verse. 8, 9, 10
proof of the former, concerning the Lords handling of the wicked, I refer
me to former times: for what should we speak of our own knowledge or
experience, yt were born as it were but yesterday, and our days are but a
shadow in comparison of theirs. The lives of the ancient fathers that lived
before the flood (though nine hundred years) were but a shadow to, as well as
ours (in respect of eternity) and the L. God, with whom a thousand years are
but as one day. Howbeit in regard of our days they were long, and many: and
therefore whereas by means of the shortness of our life we fee not the
rising and fall of the wicked and their posterity, they living long saw it.
Beside, the Lord who talked familiarly with them, revealed his will unto them
in more special manner then unto us: and further being so grave and of that
excellent wisdom, (through long practice) they would not be rash, nor
ouerseene in their censure.

Now Eliphaz Chap. 5.3
, to be reverenced for his years, has taught thee what their judgment has bin
concerning the Lords punishments: namely, how he afflicts no man but for
sin, and every man for sin, in that measure as his sins deserve, and this
order to be always kept, and never any swaruing from it. And I tell thee, that
it stands no more with the justice of God, that an Hypocrite should continue,
then with nature, that a Chap, 8, xi 12, 13, xiiii
rush should grow in dry ground, or Sea-grasse without water, or a Spiders web
remain in a place frequented. He may flourish for a time, and spread abroad,
but wanting the fountain of living Waters and a sure foundation, the heat of
the Sun of the Lords indignation will partch him, or the beasome of his
vengance will sweep him away: neither Verse xv
shall the prop of their riches, though they have it to lean upon in
abundance, save them from his wrath.

NOw for thy comfort, Chap. 8, xvi
if thou take hold of the latter, he that follows after righteousness,
though the Sun shine upon him, yet is he not scorched with the heat
thereof, but flourishes the more, because the place where he grows, is a
pleasant and fruitful soil, well manured, watered with the living spring of
the Lords blessing, and he is deeply rooted in the banks thereof, consisting
of a Verse xvii
craggy Rock, into which his root windeth it self, and so his branches, are
diffused, far and near. Neither is his grubbing Verse xviii
up to be feared, because his root lies hid in the rock and cannot be found.
And Verse xix
therefore, as when he is living, many young plants spring from his root,
wherein he rejoices; so, when he is withered and rotten, they arise from his
stumpe, lying hid in the earth (as it were) out of the dust, in the which being
dead he lives.

Hence it appears on the one side, that the Lord never yealdeth comfort to
the impenitent in their distress, and on the other side, that he never
rejects such as in repentance Verse xx
seek unto him. If therefore thou (acknowledging thy former wickedness) shall
resolve upon a better course, according as we have admonished thee, this thy
excessive mourning shall be changed into inestinable Verse, xxi
joy, and thy mouth has not been so full of complaints in this thy
adversity, as it shall be of praises, for the rich mercyes thou shall receive
in thine own person, and for the confusion thine eyes shall behold to fall
upon the Lords Verse. 22
enimyes, the haters, and despisers of his servants.


Job. YOu condemn me (my friends) for a wicked Man, Chap. 9
and an Hypocrite, and that upon this ground, because I plead for mine own
innocence: for therein say you I disanull the Lords righteousness. Which
collection of yours, how far it is from my meaning I will now makes manifest,
and herein I will answer, not only to thee Bildad, but to Eliphaz too; who
charged me with the same crime before.

I acknowledge therefore that the L. is just in his ways, and that man in no
sort may be compared Verse 2
with him, neither ought he at all to contend with him, as being not able to
answer one of a thousand Verse 3
things, that he shall object, not to see one fault of a thousand that he
seeeth; not to use one reason amongst many for his defense, which is more
light then vanity it self, when he comes to his scanning. For man's wisdom
verse 4
and strength, how is it turned into folly and weakness; into how small a
compass does it come, and how little way does it reach, being conferred with
the infinite wisdom of God, whereby he determines of things, and his in
comprehensible power to put his counsels in execution? It is not then for any
one to gain say, but in all submission to yield unto him. And there is a
necessity in it to; for if the excellency of his wisdom and the
vnsearchablenes thereof, will not bring me to condescend; his strong arm will
press them unto it perforce: neither shall they find either peace of conscience
to themselves, or any outward comfort, until they cease their rebellion, and
become obedient. For who can resist his force, when sometimes he translateth the
mountains verse 5
that are so huge and mighty out of their places, and sometimes being angry,
lays them level with the plain, so that the place where they stood before
being sought for, cannot be found: makes the earth verse 6
that stands so sure to tremble, and the foundation thereof to shake.

When he causes the sun verse 7
to shine most gloriously in the firmament in the day, guiding thereby the
world, and dividing the times, and the Moon by her light to abate the
darkness of the night; and these both, even as if they were sealed up to
withdraw their shining at his beck. When he stretches out the heavens as a
goodly verse 8
Canopie over the whole face of the earth, and walking amidst the untamed waves
of the raging sea, apeaseth the fury thereof. When he disposes of the time, and
deuideth it into Autumn, Winter, Spring, and Summer, according to the four
constellations of verse 9
Arcturus, Orion, Pleiades, the Climates of the South answering thereunto,
whose diverse influences work the diversity of these four seasons.

This is the Lords doing to govern the earth below, by the firmament which is
above, and to give names to all the host of Heaven, and to appoint to every
star his office and course, and likewise his operation in those inferior
bodies. Thus Verse x
is the Lord, wonderful in his ways, as being such, as neither can be numbered
nor found out: so difficult and hidden are his Councels, that though he set
them before our eyes, Verse xi
and bring them home unto our view, yet can we not comprehend them. Wherefore,
as often as it shall seem good unto him to take any man's substance from him, or
his life, who shall compel him that is of that mighty power, to make
restitution? Nay, who shall demand of him, that is of that surpassing
wisdom, Verse xii
and abundant mercy, why he does so? for these two being always present with
him, how can there be either error or rigor in his judgment? Neither does
the supposition of his will, derogate any thing from the manner and rule of his
Justice.

For albeit it be his will and pleasure to afflict us, yet is not this will of
his tyranical and unjust: because, it is never severed from the attributes of
his Wisdom, Equity, Mercy, Goodness, and Patience, whereby he is inclinable in
his Divine nature, which is unchangeable to nothing, but that which is right,
and in such sort to, as he cannot be drawn to the contrary, or to ought that
swarueth but the breadth of a nail therefrom.

To let fly his anger Verse xii
against the strong and haughty of spirit, with their co^plices and coadiutors
of al sorts, declares his Noble valor and puisance, and that he is a worthy
warior, not fearing the faces of the mightiest and proudest adversary, but
dares encounter him with his confederates, how venturous, how resolute, how
well provided, how strongely combined soever he be? That heroical virtue of
magnanimity is seen, in the pulling down the pride and stomach of these
Champions, and the effect of his greatness in grinding them to powder, and
confounding their conspiracy.

Here is no iniquity in this, but most perfect equity, that rebellion should be
taken down; disloyalty courageously repressed. Now if these great ones may not
prevail when they contend with him, nor contend with him neither, but to their
ruin, how shall I Verse 14
that am so base and vile, standing out against him, make my part good, or be
able to deal with him by argument, but that I must bear away the shame of it,
and be well beaten for my presumption?

ADmit I were free from all spot of sin in mine own sight, chap. 9. xv.
yet would I not (neither was it ever in my mind here to fore (though thou
laiest it to my charge Bildad) chap 8, 3
to strive with my maker about my integrity: but rather, to sue unto him that
is my indge for mercy. For, shall he that is arraigned at the bar, be at
variance with him that has his life in his hands? The Judge can better skill of
the law then the Prisoner can, and sees him faulty and culpable, where he
least suspecteth; has sundry accusations against him, and many ways to
condemn him which he never dreamed of. But grant I were of that mind, and
that the Lord would yield unto me so far, to suffer me to plead my cause
before him, and maintain my innocence; yet notwithstanding the dread of his
majesty would strike such a horror and trembling into me, that I should not be
able to do it. And again it is not credible, neither can I believe it, that he
would give sentence on my side, with an acknowledgement of injury offered me
one his part: but believe rather, that he would satisfy me in rendering a
reason why he thus handles me. For he is a just God, and there is none
iniquity in him: Again, he is constant in his proceedings, and will not revoke
them, until that which, he intends be accomplished.

And as for the fear and astonishment I conceive in the beholding of his
glory, it arises from his terrible and dread full judgments which are now
upon me, so many ways, and so grievous, as is almost incredible. When the
Lord would draw men to an awe of his Majesty, his manner has bin suddenly to
descend from heaven in a Whirlewind, Verse xvii
Tempest, and Thunder, for so has he showed himself to me in this my
calamity. He has broken me in pieces like a Giant, all the waves and storms of
his anger, (not from beneath and wrought by secundary causes) but from above,
sent immediately as it were from his own hand, as if he had my raculously
opened the Windows of heaven, have turmoiled me, and he himself
extraordinarily in the height of his indignation, as being incensed out of
measure, Verse xvii Without cause.
has thundered out of heaven against me, pouring out the whole viols of his
wrath upon my body, insomuch that by means of the excessive bitterness of the
grief which I suffer thoroughout my whole body, I have no respit to draw
Verse xviii
my wind.

This deterreth me from being desirous to enter in disputation with the Lord
about my affliction, as fearing least thereby he should be moved the more
against me: This also persuades me that there is no hope of life remaining for
me, and that therefore your arguments making for the restoring me again to my
former estate upon my confession of Hippocrisie, and of many other notorious
offenses committed by me, (which as long as I have any being, my Conscience
testifying otherwise to my unspeakable comfort, I will never acknowledge) are
al spent in vain, and to no purpose.

In vain likewise (for I see not to what end it is): Diakenest. Septuag. chapter
9, v, xvii without cause
at leastwise without cause in my understanding, and the apearance of men is
it, that I endure this fearful torment; for they cannot say, neither can I my
self conceive, no not then, when I take a straight view of my life, how I have
so offended, to be so strangely afflicted? Howbeit the Lord being my Judge (in
whose sight no flesh whatsoever can justify it self,) I know for a surety
that I shall not be found, neither shall I be able to contend: For he that will
stand in contention, must have either strength Verse 19
to defend himself, or right on his side: but I am weak, and the Lord is
strong; he has the law in his hands, sits upon the judgment seat, and
defines what right is: I have small knowledge in the law, to him that is the
lawmakers: I have none to commense suite for me in his presence, neither can I
my self come in place.

Moreover, the right of a virtuous life which I claim to my self (in regard
of Men) will not be admitted of in his court. My insufficiency to Verse 20
speak for my self, were my cause never so good, and the fear of
condemnation by mine own tongue, because of his sharpness, and my dullness,
abate mine earnestness this way. If I should be received into his presence,
and should use these words, only to make trial how he would convince me, he
would forthwith without any further proof, for this my boldness and
presumption, that I durst utter a syllable tending to my justification in his
presence, judge me of mine own mouth, as a proud and wicked person: Yea, upon
his dislike, carefully examining mine own conscience, Verse 26
I should be compelled to acknowledge, that the pangs of my disease distracted
my mind, and so be constrained to disalow of my self, and to detest what
formerly I had defended.

HItherunto I have spoken in the Lords defense, Cha, 9, 21, 22
and have said as much (and more to) in the behalf of his power and justice,
as you have done. Now, that we may leave the rest to the censure of them that
shall consider of the conflict between us, whereas in handling the justice of
God, you showed it to consist in the reward of the godly, continuing in their
uprightness; or if they go astray, in blessing them after chastizement, upon
their amendment, and in the punishment of the ungodly, and that speedily, and
to the utter cutting them off, or else if he suffer them long, in reserving
them to a more heavy, and fearful judgment: yet such as never fails to be
inflicted upon them, even in this life, and proceeded no further, I have added
this withal, that it is a part of the lords justice, to correct his own
servants, that are righteous and innocent: because, though the world nor their
own conscience do not accuse them of ought, yet the Lord Verse xii 1 John 3, 29
whose eyes are better then men's, can find out matter against them, and bring it
to the light of their own knowledge; in such sort, that they shall be driven
to denounce the sentence of guiltiness, even against themselves.

This is it only troubles me: which because you see not into, brings in the
defference between us. In your opinion, if the Godly fall not away from their
integrity, he afflicts them not at al: which, if it were true, then a verse 23
scourge coming upon a people, the wicked only should smart for it: but
common experience shows, that they which remain in their integrity, pay for
it as well as the dissolute and disordered: and in such manner and measure of
extremity to, and continuance of misery, that the Lord may seem to be
delighted in their sorrow, and laugh at their distress.

Then the wicked should not be Lords of the verse 24
earth, and the righteous trodden underfoot, as we see every where in the world
at this day. Then such as are hood He covers the faces of the judges. verse 24
winked when they should punnish capital and notorious offenders, and are more
then Eagle sighted to spy a hole in an honest man's coat, hunting him in every
corner for his virtues, should not prosper and flourish as they do in all
places. If this be not so, let him be brought forth that can disprove me,
either in the matter, or in the Author that I ascribe it unto: For, if God
should not have a stroke in the preferment to earthly honor, or if this
should come to pass, without his ordinance, we might justly exclude him from
the government of the world.

But alas (that I may return again to that I intend) how momentany is the
prosperity of such, as give the^selus to piety? The light verse xxv
Horse that runs in a race striving to win the prize, flies not more
swiftly. The verse xxvi
ship, that is laden with nothing but a few dainties, greatly desired,
having wind and tide to help her forward, and being near the Haven which she
has long wished for, passes not faster away: The Eagle when she is hungry,
and hastes to the carcass, cutteth not the air more speedily, then their
happy days vanish away. Lastly My days Verse 25
I my self, who had al my substance and reputation taken from me in the
turning of an hand, am a visible proof thereof. Thus your positions, as well
that the wicked come always suddenly to destruction, as that the godly
continue firm and immovable in their happy estate, fall both to the ground.

Trouble and grief, indeed, the godly are sure of; that sticks by them, they
cannot be free from it, but as for joy and gladness, the wicked have it in more
continuance, and greater measure then they. I must therefore dissent from your
opinion, wherein you affirm, that the Lord chastizing his servants, never
smites at the root, Bildad Ch, 8, v. 17, 18 Elip. chap. 5, v xix, 25, 26
to the utter ruin of them, and theirs temporally, but raises them up again,
either in their own person, or in their posterity: and say of my self (howbeit
his servant) notwithstanding your rash judging to the contrary, that he will
never Verse 27, 28
cleanse me of these ulcers, which vex and consume my body in every part. For if
I should be wicked verse 29
as you accuse me, then the Lord would not hear me, and so I should use but
wast words in my defense for my recovery: If I should Verse 30
be innocent and clean from offense, as he that is washed with snow water, or
purged with soap, and so become as white as Snow, or wool; yet should I be as
a man fallen into a Verse. 31
ditch, and wallowing in the mire in his sight. And therefore his decree shall
take place upon me, the And mine own cloths shall make me filthy, v, xxxi
hearse shall cover me, and the mourners with their black attire shall
accompany me to to the grave, which all men avoid, and this shall convince me
to be defiled with sin.

THe cause why I should not be found innocent, pleading my cause before the L.
is, because he is not a man as I chap, 9, v, 32
am: our estate and condition is diverse and far different, and the power of his
Godhead would ouerwhelme me. He gives the mouth to man, he may stop it up: He
opens the understanding, and powers reasons into it, he may close it, and
leave it so naked that I shall not have one argument for my defense. In every
disputation it is necessary, that there be some verse 33
moderator and judge appointed, who by his authority, may prescribe an order
therein; as to reduce them to the point again, when they stray from it, to
restrain them from inconvenient terms; to command silence; again, as
occasion shall be offered, to arbitrate the whole controversy in every
particular.

Now, seeing the Lord, who is of that incomprehensible glory, power, and
wisdom, must be one party in the disputation whereof I now speak: where is
there any, in heaven or earth, that is able, or may be admitted as arbitrator?
Howbeit, if he might be entreated to ease me of this my verse 34
pain, to put avail between mine eyes and his infinite brightness, and to
answer me not by thunder, tempest, or Earthquake, but in a still and soft
voice: then verse xxxv
I doubt not, but I should purge my self even in his presence, of those
heinous crimes you lay to my charge, and prove my self to be another manner of
Man, than you make account off.

To take this course, mine innocence (both in respect of men) though they be
mine enemies, if they speak truly, and of mine own conscience imboldneth; and
my necessity, because I have none beside to judge my cause, compels me. My
purpose therein, is not to clear my self of al fault in the examination of
the Almighty, for that I cannot do, (according as I have often acknowledged:)
but that he might disprove your accusations as false, and approve of me as an
unfeigned fauorer of his truth, and lover of virtue, though now smitten by him
as you see.

NOw will I presuppose that the Lord had given me audience, Chap. x
and that I were to speak for my self in his presence; then thus would I say
unto him. O my GOD, through the excessive grief of my body, and Verse i
anguish of my Soul, my life is so loathsome, so tedyous, so heavy and
wearisome a burden unto me, that I cannot withholde, but must needs let go
what I conceive in my mind. I know thou art a just God, judging righteously,
and the earthly Judges are not of that equity and lenity as thou art: Do not
thou therefore denounce the sentence of condemnation Verse 2
against me, before thou have made the cause of my punishment known unto me:
For this were to deal worse with me, then the Judges of this world are wont.
Opression and cruelty is far from thee: thou will not then I trust defraud me
of that which is mine own spoil, and deprive me Verse 3
of mine innocence and Justice, which is my right: for why should thou do so
when it will be no commodity nor commendation unto thee at al? This manner of
dealing is among wicked Judges, whom all men condemn.

The common artificer has a love to his own handie work, and cannot abide
that it should be defaced: I am the work of thy hands, my hope is, thou will
deal no otherwise by me. They are furious craftsmen that rent in sunder their
own labor: they are as monstrous as the damme that regards not her own
young ones, that have a loathing or dislike of their own cunning. The
Magistrate here below shows favor oftentimes to guilty and apparent wicked
persons, and thou thy self let them prosper here in the world: Thou will
not (I persuade my self) be more hard then men? thou will not be kind to the
open offenders, and unkind unto me that have endeavored my self to a better
course.

Men are carried with affection Verse 4
arising from their corrupt nature, with a perverse conceit, with a
preiudicate opinion: they judge by the countenance, they ouershoote themselves
in their doings through the ignorance that is in them, they are blinded with
anger, malice, self-love, desire of worldly gain, fleshly delight, earthly
honor. None of al these are incident to thy most pure nature, no affection does
ouersway thee; sinister opinion, conceit, superficial knowledge, thou wast
never acquainted withal, but thy doings are in soundnes of judgment, and
deepnes of wisdom fetched from the roots themselves, so that thy search is
of the inward parts and Original of things, and thy proceeding to judgment
by that rule; which makes me to marvel (speciaily seeing thou never swaruest
verse 5.6
from the same method,) how thy sentence has passed against me thus to afflict
me that am of that singleness and sincerity of heart toward thee? And again,
why thou sholdst take so much time to enquire into me, and defer me off so
long before thou call me to my answer.

Our rulers here on earth use delays in difficult causes, because they cannot
see into them at the first, and their manner is, to torture offenders, to draw
them to a confession: but thou know what is in the breast, and spiest into
the ways of men before hand, and therefore need not to use any such
extremity toward me (if I were guilty) but being not guilty verse 7
, whence comes it, that I am denied release from these troubles?

Thine own hands verse 8
have fashioned me, and that in great wisdom; there is not the least part of
my body, which thou thy self have not framed. My very excrements, as my
hairs and nails, are thy handy work. These could not have bin added by any
creature, if thou thy self had not anexed them, as a full complement to the
residue: shall thy displeasure then be as a gulf to swallow me up every
whitte, upon whom thou have bestowed such great labor? Have a respect (I pray
thee) to my weakness and frailty, consider how brittle a vessel verse 9
I am, and that I am as soon broken as the Workmanship of the potter. Remember
the base matter which thou have ordained as the ground of my substance, at the
first; into the which I shall be resolved at thy pleasure, though thou never
use this violence.

Where the city is strong and will not yield, there needs the siedge of an
Army well appointed: but for a Captain to make an assault against a place that
makes no resistance, is a needless and vain attempt; such is thy contending
against me.

I Have received many pledges and evidences of thy love toward me; thou did
prepare the womb, convert the blood there, Chap, x, verse x, xi
into the similitude of milk, which being thin and liquid, thou did bind
by the conjunction of hotter matter, which concurring with the former, resemble
the cruddes: then thou couerest me with skin as a fence or hedge to keep me
from hurt, and with flesh to shelter from danger those more Noble parts that
are within. Afterward thou gave me veins, as so many conduits to convey
nutriment unto every part; sinnewes, for the better and more nimble motion to
every member: and these did thou fasten together and strenthen by bones,
which thou made as pillars and supporters, to bear up my whole building, and
frame of my body, and to bring force and power unto it.

Herewithal thou did inspire into me life, causing me to breath through thy
Divine power myraculously, verse xii
being closed up within the matrix: Being drawn out of the womb by thy
special providence, thou have dealt more beneficially with me an hundred times
then with the beasts, not only in that Divine soul which thou infusedst into
me in my creation, but in the instructing and informing the same daily in thy
law, and framing it to thy obedience: and moreover in the watching over me by
the eye of thy goodness and providence, from time to time.

These thy blessings were so exquisit, and so admirable, that nothing could be
more desired. But that thou should come in with such a change as thou now
do, and together with thy favor, verse xiii
set thy heart upon revenge (for it could not come to pass but that thou
did determine it before for me) what may I conceive of it, but this, that
thou tookest a note of every transgression of mine, when I lived in prosperity,
that at length thou might be doing with me for it, as now thou art, and
hold me very long in it, as long a time peradventure as thou did forbear
me before, or rather without end.

For now I am fallen into thy hands, which way should I redeem my self? If I
have been a wicked and abominable liver, then I have pulled upon my head the
curse, by breaking verse xiiii
thy Law, which will not easily be removed? If I be found to have bin of godly
verse xv
innocence and vprightnes, it shall nothing avail me; notwithstanding while I
remain thus wretched, thus pressed down with grief and sorrow, so that I
cannot lift up my head: For let me call upon the Lord, acknowledge my sin,
and what further may be thought to be a means for the easing of my vexation, I
am still notwithstanding at the same state as before, (yea worse every day then
other) so laden with affliction and reproach that I am ready to sink under
them: for they increasing more and more, are a means that my disease gets
still stronger possession of my body, and waxes as it were prouder every day.

It is thee (O God) that do pursue me, fiercely chasing, and cruelly griping
me as a Lion verse xvi
does his prey: yet so, that thou do not make a speedy end of me, but use
delays, and come a gain upon me, doubling still and tripling thy wounds,
in such sort, as it is marvelous to behold.

Thy strokes they keep their turns, as orderly as if they were called in for
so many witnesses against me of my faults, and thy displeasure. In the fiedge
of a strong City, the soldiers fight not al at one time, but one company
being spent, a new supply comes in: so do thy armies of stripes which thou
sendest out against me, one being over and worn out, another fresher, verse
xviii
more eager, and bitter then the former eftsoons succeeds.

Much better had it bin for me if thou had stifled me in the womb, g that no
eye might have looked upon me, then that I should be borne to bear bitter
calamity. verse xix
O I would I had been like them that never had any being verse xix
at all, or that my Mothers Womb had been my Grave; or otherwise that I
had even been an abortiue and untimely birth, that so being delivered out of
one pit, another might have swallowed me. But seeing this is no way to bring
thee to mitigate thine indignation, in this my present estate, let me make a
further request unto thee, that for as much as the glass of my life is almost
run out, it would please thee to afford me a verse xx
breathing time, wherein I may gather my strength together, and receive a
little refreshing, before I depart hence, unto the place where is nothing but
perpetual verse xxi
darkness, and that most palpable, and with out any interchange, where is no
order verse xxii
at al, but a confused heap of all degrees, high and low tumbled together,
whence, I shall never get forth.


Syrraxis. II.
Persons.
Zophar Job
Zophar. ELiphaz showed thee, that thy affliction was a sign that thou were
wicked, Chap. xi
and proved the same unto thee very copiously, by the punishment of the evil
living in all ages; and on the contrary, by the rewards that follow the good.
Bildad added unto that, that the good are sometimes afflicted as well as the
bad, but to their greater preferment, and that they might receive upon their
amendment, larger blessings then before: and further, that if so be the
ungodly flourish a while, yet at length they come to destruction, because their
fair show of goodness which they made unto the World, was but counterfeit.
Now I will annexe a third point: namely, that the wisdom of the Lord in his
ways is above our capacity, and that for this cause, though thou Job see not
where in thou have offended the Lord, yet he has observed many defects and
declinings in thee. But before I enter into it, I must reprehend thee for thy
much babbling; and then for justifying thy self before God.

Is this tolerable, that thou sholdest carry away the matter and gain the
cause by Verse 2
multiplying of words: and those idle ones to; in substance untrue, spoken by
way of derision, Verse 3 For so signifies Subsanno Hebr, tilahag of Lahag.
and receive no answer from us to check thy folly, that with bended brows
make a mock at him? There is no wisdom nor virtue in using so much talk,
and less wisdom, and very little honesty should there be in us, if we should
dissemble it, and let thee alone in it. There is no profit in it, for it will
not make thee just never the sooner: nay, the matter of it is unjust, and
therefore to assent unto it, were to yeald and subscribe (as it were) unto
blasphemy, which is impossible for the truly virtuous and Godly ever to do.

This is one of this peeches, Verse 4
(and this is the point I purpose to handle.) What I do teach, speak, or
think, there can be no fault found in it, and why? My conscience conuinceth
me not of transgression, neither can Men accuse me, and thus thou disputest
with the Lord; imagining thy self to have access unto him. But when thou
shall have a day of hearing Verse 4
before him indeed, it will be otherwise with thee then thou supposest. Thy
purity, innocence, and justice, will not go for paiement. Thou boastest how
well thou art seen in thee deep and abstruse Verse 5
wisdom of God, and that thou performest all which he requires of thee,
when in truth the duty the Lord calls for, is much greater then we
conjecture, and justice in his vnderstandding far above that we think it to
be, and therefore punishment is in an higher degree, and more Verse 6
severity to be inflicted upon us, then we make account off, if he should lay
it upon us accordingly as we fail in the perfection of righteousness, which
he in his wisdom, and equity exacteth.

The debt which we owe we shall never be able to pay unto him, unless he
remit much more then he constrains us to give in. That which God has not
verse 7
revealed, is much more then that which he has revealed according to that
which is in his revealed will, thou deseruest punishment: what then should
become of thee if he should deal with thee according to his revealed will?
Even this thy punishment Job, as just as thou think thy self, and as great
and intolerable as thou reputest of it, for the payment of the dew debt which
the Lord in his exact account reckons to belong unto him, is ten times
less how extreme soever, then that which he might justly lay upon thee. And
if he shall at any time, (as I Supra v. 5.
wish he would) submit himself to debate the matter with thee, no question
but that he would condemn thee also to more bitter affliction, then this thou
now indurest, and that for thy sins, without any further respect, unless
bewayling thy former ways, thou sue to him for mercy. Heereunto thou can not
be persuaded, and therefore troublest thy head to find out some other cause
of thine affliction then thy sins.

The general and undoubted cause of all calamity is sin, and what intention
soever beside, the Lord has in it, yet that is the maine and principal; for
without it, misery had never had any being: this the Lord has revealed unto us
to be the cause of distress, let us admit of it therefore, and leave to study
what other drift the Lord may peradventure have in it, until it shall please
him to lay it open unto us: when we have tired our selves about other
respects, they will prove uncertain and doubtful, such, for which we have no
sure ground, neither can we rest upon them. They will prove dangerous unto us,
because secrets and such as the Lord would not have known, and so, forbidden
us; even as Paradise, into which no man may enter, but the Angels with their
flaming Sword, will fley him.

Moreover it is a more impossibility to climb into Chap. 11. verse 8.
Gods bosom, to know what he does there determine. If it weremans counsel
that he would find out, there were some likelihood in it, for that he is like
unto us, and we have reason and understanding to guide us unto it, as well as he.
But God is unlike us, eternal, immortal, invisible, unsearchable in his
judgments, and in his counsels, and his ways are past finding out. He is
omnipotent, al sufficient, and absolute in power: and we altogether
insufficient to any thing.

So that we want the means to come to that which is in him, he has denied it
us, and of our selves wear nothing; of that impotency and imperfection in
nature, that our eyes dazell at the beholding of the Sun, how then is it
possible that we should behold his glory? Our dulnes is such, that we cannot
conceive of those things which the Lord has laid before our eyes: most unfit
then and unable are we, to ascend up to those high mysteries, whereinto he has
given us no light.

We attain not to the perfect knowledge of the heavens verse 9.
which we daily behold, nor of the center and bowels of the earth which we
daily tread upon; nor of the length of the same, nor of the breadth of the
Ocean; neither is it possible for us to do it, never any man has or shall be
able to find it out. They that have spent their time in it, have labored in
vain, because the Lord will not suffer it to be known. Some that have
attempted it, have come to confusion, that others might fear to enterprise the
like.

If therefore the wit of Man cannot reach so high, as to comprehend the
wisdom of God in the Heavens, of what distance they are from the earth, but
by conjecture: what is the number of the Stars, what is their bigness, what
excellency and beauty there is in them; nor his wisdom in the earth, to know
exactly how deep, or how long it is, how to dig through it, or how to find
out the last borders of it; nor his wisdom in the latitude of the huge Sea,
to say that it consists of so many Leagues, or else stretches so far to the
West, and so far unto the East; here the South Sea ends, or there the
North sea; or to tell what is beyond it. Is it not a mere madness once to immagin
that, that other wisdom of his, (in the forknowledge of things, decree upon
them, disposing of them, drift in them, their vpshotte and end, which he
reserueth as a prerogative to himself above his creatures, communicating them
to none, no not to the blessed Angels,) should by our search and inquiry into
them be obtained? Hereunto notwithstanding thou striuest to the disquieting of
thy soul, Verse x
and incensing the Lord yet more against thee: Who though he shut up in
prison, call before him into judgment, give sentence against, or send out his
Armies to kill, destroy, root out from the face of the earth all the living,
dare any man resist him, or demand why he does so, that is of that wisdom
and power, for they go both together in the stretching out the Heavens, Earth,
and Sea, as thou have heard? We marvel at his judgments when they fall upon
us, thinking we have not deserved them, but he seeing verse xi
corruption in the heart, (albeit it appear not outwardly) and we dissemble,
he cannot dissemble, but must needs, (because he cannot abide that wickedness
should go unpunished,) reprove us for it, and scourge us too, if his reproof
will not serve the turn: Here by making us to see, that were as blind Him that
understands nothing v, xi
as Beetles before: to understand, that were not only without understanding,
but void of a heart capable of understanding; and by nature, as unteachable,
and intractable as the foal verse xii
of a wild Ass (which of al Beasts is most blockish, and untoward.)

Consider thou this, and let this his scourge upon thee, (al stubbornness in
defending thine innocence being laid aside) be a means to mollify thy hard
heart, and strike it with compunction for sin, move thee with voice and mind
lifted up, arms stretched out, hands spredde abroad, to seek the Lord and
call upon him: which that it may be effectual, prepare thy heart, verse xiii
and dispose it wholly thereunto.

This thou shall do by putting off the garment of the flesh and putting on the
garment of the spirit. The former consists in the expelling of ignorance,
renouncing of sin, denying of thy self, in thy will, affections, and
desires: the latter, in studdying for the true knowledge of God, striving for
virtue, and following the Lords direction in all things.

And moreover purge thy verse xiiii
hands from iniquity, injury, deceit, oppression, and if there be any thing
within thy Walls, or in thy possession, that thou have wrongfully gotten, make
satisfaction and restitution for it. Then, may thou boldly have access unto
the Lord, verse xv
and stand before him without horror of Conscience: because thereby the
deformity of sin, wherewith thou art now defiled, shall be wiped away:
thereby shall thou verse xvi
remember no more the misery thou now sustainest, but it shall pass away as
the water floode, that never shall return: or if peradventure the remembrance
thereof come at any time into thy mind, yet shall it be like unto a dream
only, and as a passenger that tarrieth not: thereby shall the darkness and
blackenesse of thine affliction, be as glistering, and as glorious as the
sunneshine at noone day, and as the brightness of the verse xvii
morning arising out of the East, which increases more and more.

Despair not therefore, (notwithstanding all thy trouble:) but trust in the
Lord while there is hope, verse xviii
and while there is time, taking a view of thy former ways, have a lothing of
them, and return unto the Lord; so shall thou be secure from al danger, and
like unto the Arabian, when he has pitched Thou shall dig pittes.
his tent deeply in the earth, fastened it with nails, ditched and fenced it
round about. So shall thy sleep verse xix
be sweet unto thee, thou shall be at rest in thy house, and none shall
disquiet thee, no fear shall come near thy dwelling, but such honor and
wealth shall be restored thee again, that thy help and countenance shall be
sought for of many, and among others of thy very enemies themselves; who shall
bow down unto thee occause of thy Authority.

But if thou will not obey this my counsel, but remain still in despair
verse 20.
of the Lords mercies, and unrepentant, thine eyes shall fail thee in looking
for help, yet shalt thou find none; and thy soul shall melt away with
sorrow, before that thou hopest for, or the least part thereof shall be
fulfilled.


Job. YE think your selves the only wisemen in the world, Chap. 12. verse 2.
and that you have al knowledge closed up in your own breasts. For you could
not set a better face upon the matter, if you represented the Persons of all the greatest, learned, and most expert Divines upon the face of the earth. You
suppose belike that your heads alone are the storehouses of heavenly Doctrine,
and beside it there is none to be found among men, and that therefore you
dying, all learning should die with you: otherwise you would not repute so
highly of your own, and so basely of other men's guiftes.

But even in mine knowledge verse 3.
(of whom you make small account) is nothing inferior to yours: and there is
no man so ignorant, but conceiueth as much as you have spoken, that reckon your
selves such great Clerks.

This therefore is to be reprehended in you. First, in that you conceive so well
of your selves, and prefer your selves before others, when there is no cause of
the one, nor of the other. Secondly, in that your are so void of honesty, to
deride verse 4.
a man that is you old friend and companion, so deep in the Lords Books that
he answers his requests, and one that is a plain hearted man, sincere in his
religion, and just toward men. Thirdly, in that you affirm a good man cannot
be afflicted: which (last for the other are not to be stood upon) is confuted
even in my example, whose state is changed, and in the opinion of the wicked
themselves, who if they will acknowledge the truth from their conscience, must
needs confess, that they have the godly in no better reckoning then they have
a torch verse 5
that is consumed: that they repute of them as of those whose feet have almost
slipped into the pi^^ of vnrecoue^able destruction temporally: yet are they not
for all that to be condemned, nor to be accounted as those that are out of
Gods favor, neither will you so esteem of me when you have well weighed my
cause in the ballaunce of your conscience.

Fourthly, you are to be reprehended, in that you are so absurd, to deny that
which you behold daily with your eyes (which even the very fowls Verse 7
of the Heaven, the brute Beasts, the dumb Fishes, the senseless Earth, are
able to teach you (if they could speak) namely, that ungodly and unjust men
(incensing the Lord against them by their iniquity) live Verse 6
according to their hearts desire, abound in wealth, honor, peace, and the
greatest security that may be here in this life, and the godly and just
oftentimes, (if not for the most part) live in dishonor, misery and trouble,
having the world frowning upon them. In this the sensible and insensible
creatures would instruct you (I say) if they wanted not speech to utter it,
and they utter it forth too in their kind, though not in a sillabical sound of
words, that the Lord being creator of the Or lives according to that
distinction, anima vegetatina, sensitiua, rationalis, and warranted by the 10.
verse of this chapter.
souls of all the living, and of those Divine spirits of men, may dispose of
them at his pleasure, give them their portion, what qualities soever he has
endued them withal, as likes him best; appointing the better sort to
affliction (if he will) and the worse to prosperity, or otherwise.

Thou art very eloquent Zophar, and profounde chap 11.8 at sequent
in thy discourse, about the admirable wise dome of GOD, in framing the
Heavens, the earth, and the sea, and yet thou have no understanding chap. 12.9.
at all in the manner of the Lords governing of the world, being a matter more
plain and apparent, and such as no man that considers can deny. For the sea,
which in nature is a more noble element, is put into a more base and
ignominious place, and the earth which is much less Noble, is seated in a more
higher room: this, if there were nothing else, overthrows your assertion,
that every Man flourishes in the world according to his goodness, and he that
is afflicted cannot be a godly man.

There wants therefore judgment in thee to discern of things aright. The
ear is made not only to hear, but to allow, verse xi
and disalow of that which it hears thereafter as it is: the palate, not only
to taste, but to put a difference between sweet and sour, wholesome and
unwholesome meats. Thou have heard me speak (but not with an understanding
ear) and have a smack of my reasons, but do not relish them well. No marvel
therefore, though thou distinguish nor aright of the works of God, and his
dealing toward Men: Wherefore weigh first my arguments thoroughly, and so
judge, and then if thou find them light and of no strength, (though thou
scorn them) I will not be against it.

Long experience verse 12
of those that are very old, and at the pits drink, because they have heard
and seen much, because they have had trial and practice of many things, and
gathered knowledge by continual observation of such accidents as have fallen
out in their times, may seem to imply (for that Eliphaz is elder then my
self) something, for the approbation of your judgment in this controversy;
But though reverence is to be given to ancient years, and the remembrance of
fathers is to be honored, yet notwithstanding we must harken to them no further
then they follow the wisdom of him that is without beginning, or term, most
ancient of al; within whose breast verse xiii
is wise dom to decree and determine, and power to put in practice what is
determined, concerning the government of the World, as well in every
particular, as universally is included, and shut up: to whose nature, and
essence, the counsel and understanding of such great matters, as is the
bestowing of blessing, and executing of judgment, is appropriated, and does
only belong.

What knowledge the oldest man that ever lived (though it were Methusalah
himself, who lived nine ages in a manner of the men of our time) has obtained
this way, it was but a spark blown from that great light.

Eliphaz his antiquity therefore is nothing to his, that is the ancient of
days and antiquity it self; and his judgment grounded upon the experiment of
a few particular examples, and those also peradventure mistaken to, is of no
value to his, that is the judge of the whole earth, and before all times. But
you that extol so much the wisdom of an aged man, and have such a conceit of
your learning, (alas) how shallow are ye in debating of the wisdom, power,
and providence of him that is eternal? Which makes me less to marvel, when
I consider your dullness in conceiving of the former point, specially being so
plain that the unreasonable creatures (as has bin showed) yea the very
insensible creatures themselves, as the Sun and rain, seeing they declare it
in their effects, do doubtless according to their nature comprehend it. To the
end therefore that you may the better see your shallownes and slenderness
therein, I think it not amiss to lay it open more manifestly then you have
done.

IT is a worthy argument to consider, Chap, 12
how all things and their estate depend upon God, wherein is his providence:
what an alteration and change there is in his government, and his power; with
what secrecy and admiration, because otherwise then we imagine things are
carried: wherein is his wisdom. That which one man destroieth, another man
may build again: that which one man shuts up in prison, another man may set
at liberty: but God destroys Verse. 14
so, that none shall be able to Sodom, Icricho.
restore, and so closes up, that none shall be able to Pharao.
deliver.

He that shall be fenced with the sauegard of some strong Castle or
fortress, may be pulled thence by the valor of his enemy; but when God takes
any one into his protection, he lays such blocks and bars in the enemies
way, that the place where he abides (though never so mean and naked in it
self) remains impregnable. For his force cannot be resisted; what he will must
come to pass, and his decree is unchangeable, whosoever gainesayeth it.

The Verse 15
Lord it is that contains the waters above (as it were in Bottles) and the
waters beneath within bars, that they cannot break forth. When he intends to
bring a famine upon a land, or the destruction of a When he sends them out
they destroy the earth, ver. 15
Country by waters, he causes them to break out of their fountains, and the
clouds to set open their windows, that a flood may ouerwhelme the earth.
Howbeit he plays not the Tyrant Verse 16
in this his government, but keeps the rule of equity in it, does it in reason
and wise dome, for though we see not oftentimes into the cause of his
proceeding, yet most sure it is, that his power, and a prescript rule of his
justice in every action, are never divided the one from the other.

Herein may we admire his wisdom, in that things casual (as we account
them) 1 Sarn. 6, 12. Pro. 16, 33.
are ordered by him, and that also according to the law of reason, and equity.
For albeit neither the deceiuer, He that is deceived, and he that deceives are
his. Verse 16
neither he that is deceived, (which falls out oftentimes to be a matter
casual, and by chance in our estimation) have the ground of their error from
him according to their creation, yet that the one goes astraye, and that the
other is led into error, is not without his appointment: yea, it is his act:
For there is no action, be it good or evil, but it is of the Lord: For it
stands more with his glory to let evil to be, and turn it to his honor,
then to suffer none at all to be: because this would be a diminishing of his
honor.

True it is, that that which the Lord intends in himself, the wicked by
their evil affection, evil means which they use, and evil end which they
propound, make faulty and sinful. Now here of reuolting from God in Adam,
natural corruption, pronenesse to sin, hardness of heart, Satan's
seducement that they believe lies, is the cause; Howbeit, is comes not to
pass without the Lords ordinance from the beginning, commaundment to Satan
to intise them, yealding them over thereunto, guiding and leading them in the
way according to his fore knowledge, and decree, even to the very point; and
yet for all that himself free from the Empy mouentur and agunt mali a de^.
Male. i. malis affectobus, malis consiliss, mal^ modo, male fine a se.
vitiousnesse of the act, Fond therefore is that of the Poet. Now tibi
Tyndaridis facies inuisa Lacaenae, Culpatusue P^ris verum incl^ mentia Diuum
has euertit opes Virg. Aeneid. lib. 20.
and clear from being the cause thereof: Which as the efficient is the Devil
(the father of lies and all cuill,) and as the material their own wicked
heart, and corrupt nature.

The reflection of the Sun upon a dead carcass, is no way the cause of the
evil scent and stinch thereof, nor the efficient, for that is the stroke of
Death, not the formal, for the badde savor would be without the heat of the
Sun, and is caused by the air, which is the object of the smell, not the
material, for that is the corruption which remains in it self, the Sun
only concurreth with these, and helps forward as a collateral means: So is
it with the Lord in the matter of deceit, whether it concern the agent or
patient; as also in other sins. This is a deep point indeed, and beyond
our reach in this regard, because it will not admit of any similitude, to
illustrate it exactly in every particular. A rule in the Mathematickes without
any example, is very obscure: so is this action, that the Lord leads into
error, seeing we cannot instance in the like, for demonstration sake.

For this cause it does more notably commend unto us the power and wise dome of
God in his ways, and declare that not only the truth, but error it self
has a dependence upon him, and is not committed without his foreknowledge,
determination, guidance, and instigation. Kings 22.20.
In the evil of punishment it is a plain case; in the evil of sinning not so:
of the one, he is absolutely the Author, no way of the other: Which appears
by this, in that he severely punishes those evil Instruments, which he uses
in his service, either for the exercising, or chastizing of the elect, or for
the executing of his judgments upon the wicked: but yet he disposes of
error, and transgression it self.

AND so he does of the Counsel of great Peers cha, 12.17
in the matter of estate in a Country, when they fail in their devises: yet
falls it not out by hap hazard that they have decreed for the welfare of
their Realm, (as they suppose,) turns to the downefull of it: but he has
blinded them that they should not see rightly into the matter, seeing he has
determined the ruin of that Nation. Sometimes the sins of the land,
manifestly show why the Lord does thus deprive the wise of Council, and take
away judgment from the learned and prudent: namely, that he might be avenged
of her for her abominations; and sometime he concealeth the cause, that so men
might the more be astonished. Ordinary accidents how great soever in
themselves, yet because they are usual, they pierce not the minds of men, as
those do that are strange and unusual. Therefore the Lord comes in sometimes
with strange and extraordinary dealing, that he may awake us from security
unto a consideration of our ways, and an admiration of his majesty: Neither
does he strippe them only of their wisdom to govern; but of their power,
making such as were rulers over others, themselves to be under the yoke, and to
be deprived Verse xviii
of that reverence wherein the people have the persons of their Princes,
because of their office: For the Lord translateth kingdoms Verse xix
at his pleasure, and the ordinary means which he uses herein, is by removing
these three pillars: Wisdom, Power, and Authority, whereby all government is
supported. But not the alteration of the Kings alone, together with the
Counselors Verse xx
and Judges, proceeds from the Lord, and that oftentimes for such causes as
are unknown unto us, but of the meaner sort, as of such as are assistants unto
these in government, such together with the Captains and men of War, Verse
xxi
he causes to be made a prey and spoil to the enemy, as being not able either
by their Wit, policy, or strength to make resistance.

The brave Orator, the learned Lawier, the wise and eloquent Ambassador, the
Ancient and Grave Senator, he so confounds in their speech and judgment,
that they are not able to perform any scruice for their Country. Whatsoever
they be that are in credit, either for their wisdom, wealth, strength, or
birth, in City, or Country; at home, or abroad, he brings into disgrace,
takes away the girdle of their loins which is as the channel of the rivers,
to give strength and comelines to their imploiment.

No consultations, no conspiracies, yea though they be done in the darkest
night, in the deep Verse xxii
under the ground, in the solitary wilderness, can be so secret, but he
discovers it, and produces it into an open Theater, for all the world to
behold. Whole Verse xxiii
Nations and Kingdoms he rooteth out, and places other in their steed: If
then the Lord by his providence, wisdom and power, thus disposes of the
commanders of Countries, shall we think that the silly people and vulgar
fort are exempted from his government? No such matter: for one while he does
multiply these mightily, and another while he does destroy them, by famine,
pestilence, the sword of the enemy, and civil dissension: anon after, he
increases them again, or having carried them into bannishment, restores them
into their old habitation.

It is with the people as it is with the guides, Verse 24.
if the Lord deprive them which are as the eyes to the body of Counsel, and of
a heart, and wisdom to rule, and in steed thereof give them the spirit of
giddinesle, shut them up in the darkness of error and ignorance, that they
wander out of the way, and cannot tell what is good for them: can it be chosen
but that the people which are the body should remain in blindness, and be
out of the way? There is none of al these things, but either I have seen them
my self, with Chap 13 verse 1
mine own eyes, and therefore know them for a certainety, as I have set
them down; or else I have received them from such Ancestors of ours, as you
have councelled me to advise withal, whom not to believe were infidelity:
For, not to give creddite to these, were to reject the word of God, which in
these times we have only by relation and tradition, from those Patriarchs and
holy Fathers which have gone before us; who have left unto us in the mouths of
many witnesses, Presidents of the most things which I have mentioned.

And as for the rest, the Lord having revealed them in these days, it is our
part to observe them, and keep them as carefully in record among the residue
of the Lords mighty and fearful works, for the posterities to come, as our
predecessors have bin studious to keep in remembrance those wonders of old
for our instruction. And verily for mine own part, I have used much diligence
this way, to have a regester in my head of those acts and monuments that have
happened in my time, that so I might be able to teach them unto the younger sort.
This course, as having a care to make my pattern according to Ancient records,
whereby I am forced to call them often to mind, has made me very expert and
prompt in antiquities, and so cunning and ready indeed, that your skill Verse
2.
(though thrice greater then that you have showed) cannot go beyond mine, that
make it my continual studdy and meditation. You have compelled me thus much to
speak, for that you extenuate my experience and knowledge in Histories of old
and latter ages, and make me a nouice in comparison of your selves, when in
truth, I am more ancient then any here, but Eliphaz.

ANd as for thee Zophar, Chap. 13
thou have an over hard opinion of me, to think me void of all goodness: For
other wise thou would not affirm, that if the L. would give me audience
according to my desire, my affliction should be found twice lighter Chap. 11
verse 5, 6.
then I by my sins have deserved: Speciallly, seeing thou have heard me
acknowledge my self a sinner before God, and that the defense of my innocence,
has been only in respect of your accusations against me, of rebellion
against God, condemning him for unjust, cruel, unmerciful: of hypocrisy in
religion, oppression, and fradulent dealing, and other notorious offenses
toward men, whereof I am no way guilty.

Very intemperate therefore and rash is thy censure in this, for what man (well
advised) would undertake to judge before hand what the Lord is about to do,
being of that abundant mercy as he is, though the matter were clear to thy
thinking: much less then in a doubtful point, resting upon the conscience of
a man, and such a one, as both is blameless to the world, and protests his
sincerity. I enduring calamity to the terror and astonnishment of all the
world, grief of my body unsupportable, the like whereof has never bin known
before, what inconsideratnes is this, to say, my heinous sins have deserved
much greater temporary judgments.

This makes me to be weary of disputing with you, and to desire to propound my
cause unto the Lord, verse 13
whom I know (notwithstanding thy words) will not condemn me for an
Hippocrite, or for an extraordinary wicked man, according to my extraordinaiy
punnishment (which is thy ground) as thou ouer-boldly does avouch. The reason
why I am weary in contending with you, is dubble; one is false dealing; verse 4
for the foundation of all your arguments you bring against me is untrue, yet
you will not acknowledge it; which is, that it stands with the Justice of God
to punish none but the Wicked, and those also in such a degree and measure as
is just, and aunswerable to their offenses.

Hereupon you infer, that the Lord punnishing me in the seuerest manner, I
must needs be an extreme and gross offender; Which ground of yours, (though I
have before confuted,) yet you still maintain, and condemn me as one
striving to overthrow Gods Justice, in that I labor to defend my innocence. My
defense likewise, you wrest to a wrong sense, taking it for granted, that I
say I am no sinner at all, no, not in the eyes of the Lord himself; when that
I only deny my self to be guilty, of those your foul impositions, of
dissimulation, of infidelity, despair, blasphemy (as they are tokens of a
reprobate) injury, oppression, extortion, and the like, in regard of Men, and
withal how great soever my sins be in Gods sight, that he respects them not
at all, as the end of this my affliction. These be your grounds, these the
weapons of your Warfare against me, yet notwithstanding, with these, though
like unto a rusty blade in a painted sheath, you have made such a flourish, as
though you would make the standers by believe, you contend for Gods right: But
let God alone with his right, he is able to defend it without your false
grounds, without your wresting of matters otherwise then they are meant; without
your neat style, witty invention, cunning applycation of doctrines; true in
themselves, to the condemnation of the innocent.

You greatly mistake the matter; he will not rob his Children of those
virtues he has bestowed upon them, thereby to justify himself, he has
other means to do it then so: But do ye not (think ye) while ye take from
me my justice, rob God of his? For being the God of glory, he does cloth his
servants with the robe of righteousness, which whosoever takes from them, he
holds as an injury done unto himself. That therefore which you cast upon me,
I may more truly cast upon you, and lay justly to your charge: First, that in
making God, (who is righteousness it self) so naked that way, that unless
your lie bear it up it must needs fall to the ground: Next that in stripping
me, which am the Lords servant, of those graces wherewith he has adorned me.
Thirdly, in wounding through my sides the true worship of God, and the holy
conversation of the professors thereof: and so giving advantage to the
adversaries of the truth. Lastly, that in falsifieng of the Lords Testimony
concerning me, who^ he has pointed at as a pattern of goodlife, in liew
whereof he has wonderfully extended his favor toward me and mine
heretofore; you exceedingly derogate from the justice of God, offering all
extreme offense and injury to his excellency. An other reason why I am weary
in contending with you is, because your disputation is vain, and to as little
purpose, as your coming to me at the first: wherein though your meaning were
to comfort me, yet you do nothing less: You are like those Physicians And all
you are Physicians of no value. Verse 4.
that annoint the eyes of dead Idols with eye-salue to make them see, which
how fruitless a labor it is, who knows not? The physic you administer for
the most part is good, and so is the ointment the Idolaters use about their
idols; but you look not to the constitution of your Patients, nor to his
disease, no more then they do. What physic is the threatening of ye law, being
so terrible, that it throws him down to the nethermost Hell, to a man
swallowed up with the horror of Gods fearful judgments? Is this to have
regard to a man's constitution? A man exceeding sick, and weak, had need of no
bitter pills, such as you give, but of some comfortable potion. The sweet
promises of the Messiah, the only seasonable and soueraign medicine to an
humble spirit, is quite swept away out of your remembrance. I wish therefore
that the seven days silence Verse 5.
which you used in the beginning (though you so exceedingly grieved me with
it, that you moved me unto that first intemperate speech of mine) had been
perpetual. And now I would to God you might be entreated to say no more, which
were better for you, then thus to bewray your folly, in maintaining of
untruths. The very action of silence carries away oftentimes the reputation of
wisdom in him that is of no understanding. Lay your hand therefore upon your
mouth, and falling down upon the earth, worship God, and reverence his truth;
which I doubt not but you would yeald unto, if I might so far prevail with
you, to persuade you to heed and weigh carefully this my disputation, e which I
now make with the Lord, which shall be a confutation likewise of that you all
with one consent most stiffly affirm.

These two precepts: Thou shall stand for the Lords right, and do thy
neighbor no wrong, must go together: He that breaks the latter, keeps not
the former. To use sinister means against thy neighbor, to defend the truth is
unlawful, because it is against the rule of gods commandments, and so against
him. Thy honest neighbor is the image of God; Can thou bear false witness
against him, but injury must be offered to the Lords person? He that loueh his
Prince will not deface his picture. Must God have favor showed him in
judgment, or else will his cause fall to the ground? That which God forbid death
toward men, will he have extended toward himself, that his Verse 8
person may be accepted more then his right requires? Will this gear go
current, when he shall look into it, that ye should thus daube Verse 9
up matters and smooth them over under his name? Doubtless he will not suffer
his name to be so abused, but will reprove Verse 10
you openly for your offense.

You charge me with hypocrisy: There is Hypocrisy in you, in arguing thus
against your conscience. This conscience of yours he will lay open and naked at
the length, to your shame. Your false positions, cauelling, wrangling,
overthwart speeches; your obscure, intricate, wily reasoning above the capacity
of the common sort of the standers by, he will at last discover, who sees in
secret and is able to resolve all doubts. I marvel the Lords greatness verse
11
does not strik a terror into your hearts, while you thus dally with him? Do you
never consider, how glorious, and fearful he will appear, when he shall come
to judgment? Would not the noise of an enemy prepared in battle array, and
coming against us, move us to fear? Such will be the Lords appearance in
judgment to them that transgress.

You seem not to be touched at al with this, neither with the excellency of
his glory, to the which the best things verse 12
that belong unto men, as wealth, honor, credit, gravity, and wisdom, are as
the dust and dung under our feet. Whatsoever is eminent, or of any account in
any of us, (even in you that have so high an opinion of your selves: is but as
a molehill in a plain ground, a matter of nothing, not worth the speaking of
in his sight. The properest body, the most comely countenance among you all, is
but of clay and earth, which being considered, causes me to muse the more at
your boldness of speech: for dust and ashes to approach before the immortal
God, without due reverence to his majesty, is not to be borne withal; but to
produce in his presence falsehood and wrong, to dissemble in your tongue, and
yet to think to make all good with this apology; We have done it to maintain
thy right, is such impudency, as cannot be expressed.

This impudency of yours, makes me desirous to be rid of you; that so I might
argue my cause alone before the Lord without enterruption. Hold your peace
Verse 13.
therefore and let me speak unto the Lord, I have determined thus to do
whatsoever shall befall me. You think (peradventure) that it shall go hard
with me, because of my reproachful and blasphemous words against the Lord,
and because of my impatiency many times: therein I have bin faulty (I confess)
for the present, but what is that for my former life? To rip up what has now
happened is but to trifle; when the question between us is of my life past.
This your trifling with me, provoke me to this serious and weighty
resolution of mine, as to appeal to the great judge, might it please him to
yeald me a day of audience, I should have my desire howsoever. Howsoever (I
say) not that I despair, but that I would have you see my boldness, which is
evermore a companion of a good cause, specially if it be in the heart, as well
as in the face, as it is with me.

But I pray you tell me my friends, Chap. 13.
you that profess so great skill in the matter of affliction, would not this
make you despair of life; if your flesh were thus mangled throughout your
whole body, and were made fit Morselles Verse 14.
for your teeth to tear, and rent asunder as you see mine is? Were your lives
in your hands, as it is in the Proverb, wherein we can account nothing safe,
as being subject to marring, loosing, taking away, and miscarrying twenty
wales, would you think there were any other way but one with you? I nourish
in me no other kind of despair then this, that I have no hope to live; and
for this you condemn me as a distrustful person, and a man without al hope
of salvation, which you gather from my pitiful crying out, by reason of the
extremity of my disease: concluding thereupon, as if I were so enraged, that I
did gnawe my flesh, beat my self with my fists, knock my head against the
wall like a Bedlem or Frantic man; and thus were become an executioner of my
body, and a Butcher of mine own life, and for that I call upon the Lord to
judge my cause, a traitor to mine own soul.

But I would have you know, that in the battle between the flesh and the
spirit, though the inner man be not overcome, yet in the best of the Lords
soldiers it is soiled oftentimes by the outward man: So then, albeit I have
received many a wound by my flesh, whereby I have bin sometime brought to
misdemeane my self in this my combat, yet I have held mine own still, I have
reserved my heart from yiedling, yea my faith is as strong still
(notwithstanding so many afflictions one in the neck of another) as ever it
was. All the miseries and torments in the world, could not draw me to
despair, nor draw me from that trust verse 15
and confidence I have in my God, concerning a better estate after this life:
and as concerning my recovery again here in this life I doubt not of the power
of God: but be cause of the weak and unrecoverable estate of my body, in the
sight of flesh and blood, it seems to me to be his decree to take me out of
this vale of misery: And hereevpon I persuade my self that it cannot be
avoided, but that I must needs go the way of all the living.

You further object, that I have no regard of my life, nor of my soul, when
the greatest regard that I can have concerning these, is to labor for faith in
the Lords promises, which is my continual practice, and whereby I have gained
this fruit, (not only in whatsoever calamity, but in death it self to trust
and depend upon him) knowing Verse 16
that it shall go well with me, as long as I hold me to this fortress.

This answers to your reprehension, chap, 4. v. 5.6.
As is a man's religion and life, so is his hope; but my hope you see is great,
and therefore I conclude from your own ground, that my religion has not bin
counterfeit as you immagine, but sound and sincere: nor my life wicked, but
godly and virtuous: namely, such as has proceeded from a lively faith and
steadfast hope in the Lord, with love of his name, and zeal of his glory, which
have ever bin accounted as the only true marks both of the one and of the
other. This is that which I have stood upon all this while, that I have sought
the lord and his honor in all my actions, and served him with my whole heart;
and hereupon would I still stand, were death to ceaze upon me by and by, and
were I now to yield forth my last breath. This is my confession, no other but
this shall be wrung from me.

My innocence in the matters whereof you accuse me is that I strive for, and
were I now about to render my soul into the hands of my Creator, this is it I
would crave at his hands, the arbitrating and compounding of this controversy
between us.

Now for the carriage of my self in this my present visitation; thus much I
may truly say for my self, that though my conflict has bin long and bitter,
yet the Lord of his goodness has so kept me, that I have not fallen from him.
I have indeed offended against his Majesty with my tongue, and failed of my
duty many ways, but he which is the beholder of such as trust in him, has
kept my heart upright: and I doubt not but he will so keep it to the end, and
place in it such a confidence in his mercies, in the midst of death, that
Satan (whose instruments you now are) and whose part you take in this
disputation, with all his policy, shall not be able to surprise the iuuincible
Castle of my hope.

Were I an Hippocrite (according as you accuse chap. 8.13.
me) I could not be thus confident: For, he that is such a one, dares not
come to his trial, he had rather that all the world had his cause in handling,
then the Lord; for he knows that he will lay open the Book of his
conscience, which is as a filthy sky full fraught with deceit, lying,
dissembling, impiety, and ungodliness: and discover with the brightness of his
presence, the deeds that are done in the night, the uncleanness thereof,
together with the detestable affections, desires, and cogitations of the same,
and with all make manifest to the eles of all men what a monster he is become,
that outwardly is a lover ofreligion and virtue, but inwardly a mortal hater
of them both.

I fear none of all this, which makes me so forward and earnest with the Lord
to take the cause into his own hands: But what makes you so plentiful in
dissuading from this course? Is it not the contrary; namely, a distrust that
you have in your cause, a guilty conscience that you have not dealte faithfully
and according to your heart, in that you have so vehemently urged against me,
and a fear that you should receive a check for your unkind and indiscreet
behavior toward me: as also for the application of al your doctrines, true in
themselves for the most part, untruly and wrongefully to my person? But
meethinkes I see you relent, when you hear me thus confident and bold in my
cause.

Hear Verse 17.
me therefore diligently with your ears, and consider well in your minds, what
I am able further to say for my self, not against the Lord (as you would have
it) for his righteousness and truth I reverence, but against your accusations;
and I doubt Verse 18.
not, but I shall make you yield much more unto me; Especially, if I may have
the mannaging of my cause, the ordering and disposing of my reasons my self,
and the information which I give in, shall be taken and accepted.

Before the Lord I would answer for my self, because none dare gainsay his
Verdict, being judge of althe world, because no controversy can have a final
end until he discide it, either by himself, his word, or his Oracles; and
because when he has had the handlig of it, no man will presume meddle withal,
but will rather subscribe unto his determination.

So that the Lord giving sentence on my side, who Verse 19.
will be so bold to attempt (or if any man may be found that will attempt it)
shall be able to lay any thing to my charge? Until my cause be tried before him,
it stands me upon to defend my innocence in those things you object against
me, while I live: For if I should not so do, but hold my peace, and say
nothing for my self, greef would break my heart, whereof while I thus largely
speak for my self, I feel great ease to my soul. And further, by my silence I
might weaken my cause, and offer injury unto the truth. Hereupon I force my
self to this paineful travail, for can it be chosen but that my word (being a
man in this estate) must needs pass from me with great pain, to use long
Apologies for the patronaging of mine innocence from your imputations?

But that I may return again to my desire, chap. 13
and that my soul most lo^geth after, Verse 20
might it please God to let my cause come before him, I would entreat of him two
things: One, Verse 21
that he would withdraw his hand of punishment from me, during the time of my
answer: another, that he would lay aside the excellency and brightness of his
glory, and would conform himself to my condition; that so those impediments
which now compass me round, might be removed and I might apeare before him
without fear, and confer with him as with a mortal man, either by way of
opposion Verse 22
or replication. Let me understand from thee I beseech thee (O my God) wherein
I have offended my neighbor, wherein I have ignorauntly or wilfully erred; or
if there has bin any rebellion in me against thee, or reuolting from thee,
show it me; and withal why thou art like unto one that is angry, that turns
Verse 24
away his face, and will not look upon him, against who^ he has conceiud a
displeasure, which also thou declarest, by pursuing me with such kind of
plages, as if thou had no greater enemy upon the face of the earth then my
self.

To what end do thou it? Will it bring any honor unto thy name? Or is it a
thing beseeming thy majesty to contend with me that am as a leaf, Verse 25
withered and ready to fall off my self without any shaking? Or as the dry
stuble, which if a spark of fire be put unto it, is by and by consumed?
Howbeit thou come against me in judgment, and decreest against me a most
severe Verse 26
and bitter sentence, and that in the most rigorous manner, as omitting the
good that I have done, and noting the bad in the hardest construction, without
pretermitting the least particle that might make against me.

The sins of my youth, Verse 26.
which I thought had been utterly remitted long since, and blotted out of thy
remembrance, thou (seem to have as fresh in thy memory, and in such sort to
come upon me for them, as if they had bin committed but yesterday; or as if
they were such as did still cleave unto me. I accounted my self as a man
acquitted and free, yet thou condemnest me as a guilty person, through west me
into prison, layest cold chains upon me, and as if I should never be fast
enough, hamperest my feet in the Verse 27.
ftockes; and being there, thou art also suspicious of me; and whenever I
wagge my foot, thou make me faster for fear of escape. But if thou grant
me at any time a little more liberty, thou art ever at my heels, that I cannot
stir a foot, ever at my back that I can do naught, but thou ouerlookest
it: yet all this thou do against a rotten carcass, as it were against an old
and over worn garment, (for to such may my coat of flesh be fitly resembled)
or as one gnawen over and eaten with Mothes.

HEre is occasion offered me to bewail the state of all mankind, Chap. 14.
being of a polluted and unclean birth, proceeding from a weak Verse 1.
Vessel, full of grief in her conception, Childbearing, and travel: and
such as is the condition of the Mother, such is the condition both of the Son
and Daughter, though not in the same kind: wretched in his beginning,
proceeding, and end, and never otherwise during his continuance in this life.
His Verse 2
life (how long soever it be) is nothing, in regard of that eternity which is
in the Lord: nothing, because of the infinite dangers whereunto it is daily
subject: Nothing, because of the sundry, and almost innumerable diseases
whereunto it is incident: For hereby he is not only exposed to death, but in
expectation thereof every hour: where these are neither felt nor feared, there
is the hand of God ever prepared for sudden destruction. What continuance is
there in a flower? What hold to be taken of a shadow? Such is the life of man:
soon withered, always flying away, no means can be used but it will decay,
and that quickly as the flower: no cunning can be devised for staying of it, or
laying hold upon it, no more then upon the shadow? Alas how short is the time
between the blowing and fading of the flower? It must be taken in the very
nick, otherwise it is gone. A shadow has no substance in it, it cannot be
touched by the hand, it will not bear to be embraced of the body, neither it
will not come into any man's possession. There is no building therefore upon our
life, for it will fall away in the turning of a hand, it makes the show of
something when indeed it is nothing, it possesses us as a traveler does his
Inn, for a night or more; but we possess not it at all: It is in us indeed
but as a Lord to command us, not we it. For who has the command of his Lord:
yea, who has any interest in him, any further then at his pleasure. This being
the miserable-estate of man. For what will not a man do for his life? And it is
of us, and we of it; neither can there be a separation between us, but by
death: yet can we not say it is our own, but lent us, not for a year, nor for
a day, nor for an hour, but to be returned back unto the owner and Author
thereof at the same instant, whenever he shall call for it. This being the
miserable estate of all men, what need is there that thou should so narrowly
look Verse 3
into him, and to call him into question for every offense? Who would think
thou would once regard him being thus vile and contemptible, as has bin
declared: specially such an abject and forlorn wretch as my self, that no man
respects? Thou seem to forget thy self in that thou punishest man for his
sin, the root whereof he drew from his first parents: through whose default his
nature remains tainted with the corruption thereof. For how can it be that any
thing pure Verse 4
should spring from that which in it self is impure and defiled. Thou have
appointed Verse 5
an end to my life which I cannot pass: the ordinary troubles and travails
incident unto this life, are means sufficient to bring me unto it, without this
extraordinary scourge of thine. Withdraw Verse 6
thy hand therefore, and let me alone until that time be come, so that I may
willingly, and joyfully lay down my life: For if thou would let nature take
her course, it would be with me, as it is with an hire ling when he lays him
down to rest, whose bed after his hardy labor is sweet unto him; so would
death be unto me, were these violent means removed, and thou contented to
suffer me to come unto it naturally. Might it be with me after Death, as it is
with a tree, Verse 7, 8, 9, 10.
(which being cut down, and the root left in the earth, springs up again) I
would not be so earnest with thee, to spare my life, but because, when I am
once taken away from hence, I shall never return to live again upon the earth,
that makes me thus instantly to entreat. For eue^ as the waters of the Sea,
Verse 11.
or rivers which are drawn out of their channel, either by virtue of the sun,
or any other way, though they retain still the nature of water, yet they never
return to their old habitation; the self same in number they were before, but
there is some alteration, some addition, some detraction, some mixture evermore
in them. So man, when he shall once sleep in the dust of the earth, shall never
while the sun remains in the firmament of heaven, Verse 12
be awaked from thence to lead his life again in this world. O that these
arguments might persuade thee to mittigate thine anger toward me, which is so
terrible, that I wish my self in some den or cave verse 13.
under the earth, thereto lie hid for a time until it be over. The time also I
would gladly have set down unto me precisely, when thy wrath shall be appeased,
and when thy loving countenance shall return unto me, that so I might come
forth: for seeing that after I am once dead, I shall not return again to live
in this world, I labor to retain my life as long as I may, and not to
despair of thy favor, but to wait verse 14
for it still, to see if at length it may be had, even so long to expect it,
until death come, and I can do it no longer.

But if thou will needs call me out of this life, I shall be most willing (in
regard of the misery I sustain) yet I trust Verse 15
thou will not break me in pecces, but spare me a while, that am the
workmanship of thine own hands. I am wavering I confess in this my
confidence, yet this prevails not with me, that I cannot but hope for life,
until thou shall strik me even with the weary stroke of death it self, and I
shall have no more being in this world. Now the cause of my willingness to die,
and that I have no comfort but in the waiting for an exchange, (if thou will
have it so) and there be no remedy to the contrary, is for that thou take a
note verse 16
of all my transgressions.

If I slip aside never so little, thou straight way accountest that among mine
offenses, and (by and by laiest on load upon me for it. Neither so only, but
reckonest up a bedroll of all the sins that I committed, and severely corrcrest
me for them all at once. No man keeps a more straight account of his gold, or
silver sealing it up in bags, verse 17.
and locking it up in his chestes for fear of loosyng, then thou do of my
faults. Thou bindest all my sins together in a bundel, throwest them upon my
shoulders, and pressest me down to the ground with the burden of them: as the
covetous Merchant does his Cammels, when he fetches Gold out of Ophir.

For when thou make the burden of thy punishment, answerable to the bundell
of our sins, who is able to endure it? Who is able to stand under it? For if
the mountains verse 18.
that are so strong, if the craggy Rocks that seem to be so immovable, if
the hard Stones are broken in continuance of time with clouds of waters,
rushing against them, if the sea verse 19.
breaking in upon the firm land, choaketh up the fruits, and deuoureth it in
time, (be it never so large) is it possible that man, who is so weak and frail,
should long sustain such surges, and such beating against of the floods of
affliction, and those inferred upon him by thee that art so powerful, that
thou preuarlest verse 20
to the unrecoverable overthrow of his estate here upon earth, turnest the
brightness of his countenance into perpetual darkness and bannishing him
out of this world for evermore? What a wonderful change is made of him,
appears from hence; so that he remains utterly ignorant what is done here;
understands not at al what is the condition of his children which he verse 21
leaves behind him, comprehends not whether they live in wealth or misery,
or a mean estate: and that his body lies in the grave verse 22
mourning, because of the worms that devour it, and wailing, because of the
separation between it and the soul, whose society and fellowship was so
comfortable in times past.


Syrraxis. 12.
Persons.
Eliphaz. Job.
Eliphaz. Would thou be accounted a wise man, Chap. 15
and yet deliver such a deal of windy and vain matter? so many fierce and
hot words, verse 2
(but as dangerous and hurtful to the hearers, as the East winds to the verse 3
fruits) and to as little purpose, as he that spends his time in plowing up
the seashore? Thou have cast off the fear c of God, verse 4
and al reverence of his Majesty: they that are suppliants unto him stand not
upon terms with him as thou do, but are humbled before him in prayer. Thy
manner of invocation, is rather a complaint then a petition, a comanding of God
to fulfill thy mind, then a commending of thy desires unto him by lowlines, and
submission. I desire not to be mine own judge herein, but appeal to thine
own mouch, verse 6
which has broached iniquity and rejected all fear of God. When thou pleadest
thine own innocence, we demanding of thee how thou will be tried, thou
make a subtle kind of answer, saying, the Lord shall arbitrate my cause: and
hereupon take upon thee to dispute thy cause before him, usurping the office
of Opponent, Respondent, and arbitrator to thine own self, and so carriest
the matter upon mere Thou haste chosen the tongue of the crafty verse 7
imagination, as if the day must needs be thine and we all farle in our
judgment. I account it a subtle plea; because thou make choice of such a
judge as cannot be procured, and so flyest to an impossibility, and withal
assignest him before hand his sentence: both which, argue the foulenes of thy
cause. For where as first thou refusest an ordinary, and flyest to an
extraordinary Judge, thou show thy despair otherwise to prenaile: and next,
whereas thou framest unto him his judgment before hand, thou discouerest thy
great folly and impudency. I pray thee whence arises this high conceit of thy
self and verse 7
thy wisdom? I am sure that some of us Pe so much before thee in antiquitye,
knowledge, and ^^^arity, that for any of these thou can not contend? It
should seem by thy words that thou wast the first man that ever was made in
the world; or rather more ancient then the world it self. Nay, if thou
should be so skilful as thou would make us believe, it cannot be chosen,
but thou must needs be present in that holy and sacred Council verse 8
of the divine Trinity, for the framing of Heaven and earth, and all creatures:
For otherwise whence should it be that all other men are left naked, and that
al knole dge is drawn together into thy bosom? But thou do but deceive thy
self in thine own opinion, it is not so as thou supposest: For we are not
behind thee any way in knowledge, and as for antiquity, there is some of us
more ancient then thy father, verse 9
which makes us to be accepted and reputed of among the people who are wont to
ascribe very much to the Authority of the aged. Notwithstanding for all this
thou have despised us and our counsels, and made light reckoning of those our
spiritual and Divine comforts, verse 19
which we have laid before thee even accordingly as we received them from the
Lord. Some thing is amiss, either thou art to confident in thy own opinion,
or thou having no good opinion of us, wilt not give entertainment to our
exhortations: For the good opinion we have of a man, makes us like of verse 11
of his admonitions, though weakly delivered: whereas if we were otherwise
affected toward him, the strongest persuasion would not be admitted: Again,
there is somewhat that otherwise blinds thine eyes, so that thou can not
see into our intention, or seeing into it, thou make as though thou saw it
not; thereby to keep close some secret, not as yet uttered, which being
disclosed, would be of more efficacy and more material thenal thouhast
hitherto spoken.

It is thy proud heart Why does thy heart take thee away verse 12
that is out of frame, and carries thee beyond the bounds of al modesty, the
nodding of thy head the winking of thine eyes, What do thine cies mean. v. 12
like unto the Archer, together with the rest of thy scornings, proceed from
that root. But no marvel though thou handle us thus, when thou sparest verse 13
not the Almighty himself, but take tomacke against him aspirest so high as
to challenge him into the field to encounter with thee, and that in terms of
vile reproach and blasphemy. But dare man be so audacious, to brave the Lord to
his face, and stand upon terms of disgrace with him, that is of that admirable
glory and maicsty, as cannot be conceived? He could do no more if the Lords
honor were vpheld, by him, or if he have Heaven and earth upon his shoulders,
or if Gods Justice, truth, righteousness, power and al, (were he not) would lie
in the dust.

But alas poor worm n="a" verse 14
of the earth, Chap. 15
what help is he able to yield unto God, if he should need his service? He
made him the last of all his creatures, that he might arrogate nothing of all
his workmanship unto himself. The heavenly spirits themselves which he made
before, he uses only for his pleasure, not that he at all stands it need
of their industry, for he was in equal glory, and power before without them:
what cause then is there, why he should any way call for the service of man?
but that it is his will, so to dignfie him that is most unworthy: In substance
like unto the potters vessel, which is broken at every knock: In nature as
weak as she that bare him, subject to as much grief and sorrow as she in her
childbearing, as defiled and filthy as the very polution and menstruousnes
from which he proceeded. The blessed Angels themselves could not stand in that
integrity of theirs, but that they are supported by the hand of the Almighty.
Their righteousness consists in the fulfilling of the ten commandments, For
the perfection of man and angels in their first creation was alike, they both
had free vvil unto good as well as unto evil, they both had power to keep
the ten commandments: which if they had don, they had not lost their hapines:
they both in their fall tra^sgrest against the first commandment, the state of
of them both after the resurrection shall be one and the same.
and that is all the Lord requires, and all that they are able to perform.
But there is another righteousness in God, which is annexed to his essence,
cannot be separated from him, and is incomprehensible: in this they would be
found to fail of that perfection that were to be looked for, if the L. should
call for such duty herein as were to be rendered him, acording to that
unmatchable dignity of his Godhead, which is so holy, pure, and perfect, as
the service of no creature can be answerable thereunto. For unless the Lord
had imparted something of his own essence unto them, which he has not, nor
could not do: It cannot be, they should be comparable to him in
righteousness, It cannot be they should yield him obedience suitable to his
worthiness; It cannot be but there must be wants in them, when they are matched
with him that is matchles and has no peer.

For he alone it is that is absolutely good, absolutely perfect and righteous,
and none but he, and the service of that which is finite cannot be complete
toward him that is infinite. The Angels therefore if they be called to an
acount, to see whether they have performed their semice to God in that measure
as the greatness and excelency of his majesty requires, they would doubtless come
far short and be much behind with him, in such duty as might be suitable to
the surpassing excellency of his glorions nature and deity.

The Heavens above that are free from the contagion of these inferior bodies,
and have much beauty and purity in them, in respect thereof, yet is their
perfection nothing to that which is in the Lord, whose glory darkeneth the
brightness of the Sun (in a far greater measure,) beyond our estimation,
then the Sun does the brightness of the rest of the Planes and Stars of
the firmament.

This purity of the Heavens, is less then that of the Angels, and man's less
then either of these. The one, in that they are not only void of reason but of
sense, are inferior to Man; but in the integrity of their nature not a little
superior: the other, every way in nature, in understanding, obedience, in
desire, without all comparison, more pure, more perfect, more just then the
most regenerate man that ever lived upon the face of the earth. The redeemer
thou spakest of, (by casting upon men his own righteousness) Man is made more
excellent, then the Angels: Howbeit, through community of their head, they
remain notwithstanding both of them of equal dignity: yet nevertheless,
during this mortality, no man attaineth unto that estate, but while he lives
here, carries about with him a body of sin.

Man at the highest, Angels at the highest degree of perfection, must stoop
to the Almighty, throw down their Crowns at his feet, and sing of his
holiness: The Heavens must give place when his glory shines forth. And must
not mortal man (who has his dwelling in the dust) though never so much
regenerat, in never so great expectation of his redeemer, never so much clothed
with his righteousness, and justified through faith in him, do the like? Were
it then Job that thou were of this rank, yet ought thou not to seek thus to
justify thy self before God, which neither the elect Angels and heavenly
Citizens, nor Saints departed, will attempt, but do acknowledge by continual
praises, and thanksgiving, their righteousness, whatsoever it is, to come
from him; neither in any sort to be compared with his, which exceeds
measure, and number, and is as infinite as the Lord himself. But thou art not
of this rank, for these are washed from their filthiness, and so art not
thou, a remaynder of sin, indeed they have abiding, but they have it not
reigning in them as thou have: For do thou not follow the sway of thine
affections? Art thou not a wilful and obstinate offender, and such a one as
disdaineth to be reproved? Did ever the tongue of any run into more gross
error, and more manifest blasphemy against God, then thine does? This is worse
then to be a mere natural Man: for, many Men lying in the corruption of their
nature, break not out into this outrage and impiety, yet because less sins
are ordinary with them, (even as ordinary as to eat, drink, Which drinks
iniquity like water. verse 16.
walk, and talk) the Lord has them in detestation, and they stink in his
Nostrilles; they are abhorred likewise of the Lords people, and avoided no
less, then if they were infected with the Leprosy: the smell of them also is
as noisome unto them, as the savor of the pestilence.

The cause hereof is, the accustoming and delighting themselves no less in
sinning, then the Dropsy Man in drinking, and the Epicure in feeding upon his
delicates. This makes God and his servants to loath them, for deserve they not
to be loathed, that as a common sink having abundance of all manner of
filthynesse in them already, are made still a receptacle for whatsoever
uncleanness? Satan setting before the eyes of a natural Man, the pleasures of
the World, the Wealth thereof, and the honor of the same: such is the
corruption of his heart, that he is entangled by and by, and if he may enjoy
these, he will not stick at any means but swallowe up ill, be they never so
abominable. For these are the ends he aims at, further then the which, he
sees nothing.

A Man therefore in nature may well be resembled to a musty caske of Wine,
from which all that is drawn out tastes of the mustinesse thereof, and pour
in what you will and draw it out, it will do the like: For the thoughts of
Man, his affections, his desires, his words, his actions conceived within,
have a tongue of the mustinesse of the caske of his flesh: Whatsoever he
receives from without, and apprehends by his senses, as by the ear or eye,
when it is once settled within him, it is tainted with the Vessel of the body,
but principally with the Leaven of the heart: Which as it marreth the whole
lump of the flesh, so it causes all that is any way conuayed into it by the
outward senses, (how wholesome, and good soever in it self) to smacke and
relish thereof.

As for example, when the ear of a natural Man hears of the wonderful
power and wise dome of God in the work manshippe of Heaven and earth, and all
Creatures, he thinks not of any spiritual worship, but frames unto
himself straight way a bodily worship, and therefore sets up a graven
Image, and so in stead of a worshipper of God, becomes an Idolater, and a
deprauer of his worship. In like sort, when the eye of a natural Man beholds
great abundance of the fruits of the earth, this enters not into his heart,
to give thanks to the founder of them, or to remember the needy, but
concludes thus with himself; Now I will take mine ease, now I will be merry,
now I will eat and drink my fill of the best, now I will cloth my self in
costly apparel: And thus is it very common, and usual with him, even as
common as to drink when he is a thirst, in whatsoever object is offered to his
outward senses, in whatsoever he thinks, affects, lusts after, speaks,
performs with his best discretion, counsel of his pillow, studdy, meditation
of his mind, and so wi^th full consent and allowance of his heart, (which are
matters inward:) to swallow up sin in as great abundance, as the drops of
the Water in the ouerflowing of the rivers.

But for that other point of Gods dealing against the wicked, Chap. 15.
if thou will hear me, thou shall see that I my self of mine own knowledge,
verse 17
am able to confirm it unto thee, to be so as I have reported, and to show
that our wise verse 28
and prudent forefathers of latter times, have been of the same judgment, and
their auncientes likewise even from the beginning of the creation. Neither have
they barely only, and coldly, avouched it, not regarding whether their opinion
were embraced or no: but have very carefully left it in record Have not kept
secret verse 18,
for the guiding of the posterities, and settling of their judgment in the
matter.

In those days, such only as excelled in wisdom, power, and justice, were
made governors of the commonwealth: such only as were able both to repel the
force of the foreign enemy, and repress the domestical; verse 19
both to ordain hole some and profitable laws, and to execute them with good
discretion, being enacted. Yet these, even all of them with one consent, are
absolutely of my opinion: that God always follows the wicked with his
fearful judgments. And verily so it is, they affirm it, and I find it; that
as long as the Tyrant continues upon the face of the earth, so long shall his
sorrow be as great as the sorrow of a woman verse 20.
in travel, neither shall he know an end thereof.

Indeed his days shall not be many, but so grievous, that they shall seem
exceeding long, and when final destruction comes, it shall ceaze upon him so
suddenly, The number of years is hid from the tyrant verse 20.
and so strangly, as he shall have no time to consider of his end. This verse
21,
sorrow shall arise from the guiltiness of his conscience, tormenting him day
and night, because of his iniquity: which for that it is inward, and not
visible to the eye, he may seem outwardly to flourish, and be at rest, and yet
notwithstanding, because of a fear and distruct which he has, that his estate
shall not endure, be void of all peace, and comfort within: which fear of his
when it falls upon him indeed, then he makes it evident to al men, how
miserable he was even then, when the world deemed him most happy. For no sooner
does the least adversity take hold of him but by and by he is cast into
despair, and so cast down, that they have no power to arise up again, verse
22
but thorough the heavy burden of a bad conscience is so pressed to the ground,
that he conceiueth no hope of recovery, and thereupon yeildeth himself over to
a wretched condition, and lies down in this grief, as a man utterly forlorn.

Hence it is, that he is affraide at the wagging of a leaf, that the sight of
his own shadow makes him quake, that the very conceit of an enemy causes
him to fly, as if an Army of men chased him at the heels. For the Conscience
of a man, accusing and condemning him of wrongs done, makes him think that he
hears the drum of them to whom he has offered the same continually sounding
in his ears, and biddieg him battle, or else the Trumpet of the L. coming
against him for it.

To this kind of men, no place is sanctuary but the best walled Castle, the
strongest guard is a weak defense, they dare not trust their dearest friend,
every one that comes to them, is as the Messenger of death.

If they see it lighten, they suppose it has no other matter to feed upon
but their carcasses: the Thunder, they think to be sent of purpose against
them which makes them hide their heads, and run into a bench-hole: the least
puff of wind arising, they fear the tumbling of the house upon their heads,
how sure soever the foundation be, because of the weakness and wrack of
their own foundation, as being without faith, and having made shipwreck of a
good Conscience!

O miserable condition, they are in expectation of nothing but the terrible
hand of death and condemnation to take hold of them, and that every moment,
and what they fear, falls upon them indeed at the last, and then to, when
they least of all think upon it, for utterly free from this thought they are
at no time. When they are most secure at peace in their house, at rest from
their enemies round about at the highest pitch of their prosperity, in the
midst of their mirth, behold tribulation breaks in suddenly, horror is
present before their face, opening her mouth to swallow them up. For being once
cast down, they are like to him that is in the bottom of the sea, or in the
grave, that is past all hope to get forth.

Malefactors that are thrown into the dark Dungcon, (because none are cast in
thither, but such as are taken for notorious offenders) never look for their
liberty again: so is it with them, such a mist is between them and the Sun,
that they cannot see any way of deliverance; and in this their desperate
estate, their eyes are in every corner, still looking behind them, misdoubting
all that is before them, trembli ng at every step, standing in bodily fear,
least that one should lie in wait or fall upon them, to slaye them with the
sword. In their greatest abundance, they so turmoile themselves, so carke and
cares, as if they had not a morsel verse 23
of bread for his belly? the young Ostriches make not more lamentation and
complaint then they do; Future want is a word that they wearye their mouths
withal; their distrustful heart, their troubled Conscience tells them, that
a black and dismal day is coming, when after every bird shall have his own
out of the nest which they have so well feathred, they themselves shall be left
naked. They can by no means verse 24
be freed from this fear, that though they be fulnowe yet they shall be
emptied forthwith: though they be at rest now, yet destruction is at hand to
invade them suddenly as a tempest, and so forcibly as if a four square Army
of eight thousand men should beset them round on every side, so that they
could by no means escape.

THis is the portion of such as make n="a" verse 25
war with God, Chap. 15
either in his own person, or in his members: which have an opinion of their
own strength that they can do wonders, are able to make their party good with
God himself, and as for such as depend upon him, to tread them under their
feet as the clay in the streets. It is admirable to see how strong and fierce
he is in the encounter, he puts out himself, and stretches his joints to
the uttermost, he runs verse 26 The Geneva fails here.
amain at God himself with a stretched-out neck, and strives to cast him with
his shoulder; and where he thinks him strongest, there he assailes him most
of all, and drives at him most eagerly: where he defends himself with his
buckler, (as it were) not caring for the bosse and knobs thereof. Such is his
pride such is the presumption of his prowess, that if he should not set up a
flagge of defiance against the highest and mightiest of all others, he
reckons he should be accounted Nobody.

Howbeit, he does but strive against the stream: the waves of the Lord shall
go over his head: he shall wast the collups verse 27
of his flank with the heat of his displeasure. It will not serve his turn
that he is fed like a stalled Ox, his puffed up cheeks when the Lord comes
shall melt like snow against the Sun, his houses and fortresses which he
has raised out of the ruins verse 28
of some desolate City, to purchase him a name by, shall be like the confusion
of Babell, and his intent therein as was theirs, shall be frustrate, for his
posterity shall not enjoy his fair buildinges, verse 29
nor thrive by his care that he has taken for them: his houses themselves
shall become heaps, and his inheritance shall be an habitation either for the
stranger, or else the Owl shall lodge there.

His glory while he lives, shall be changed into verse 30
darkness and misery unrecoverable, and the flame of affliction which he
himself shall kindle with the blast of his own mouth, speaking presumptious
things, shall devour his branches: for so mighty is the Lord, and so wonderful
in the contriuing of his purposes, that he makes the wicked spinne the thread
of their own wretchedness.

No argument is more strong, then that which is drawn from the event, yet tell
these kind of men what shall be the end of them, and their progenny, what a
fond thing it is for them to build upon these Verse 31
vain and transitory things, that do nothing but lead into error such as
trust in them, that have many fair shows, but such as feed only men's
fancies, and therefore termed vanity, because they are without any during fruit
at all, save bitterness; more grievous then wormwood or gal it self, they will
not be brought to believe it.

The fancy likewise which they have of their felicity when it is in the flower,
verse 32
shall be but as a dream in the night, having a seeming only of some thing,
but of no soundnes nor continuance in truth, it is nipped in the head by and
by, whatsoever it is, as the fruit with the frost; some untimely and unnatural
wind shall shake the bows of verse 33
their stock, substance, and creddite, then when it is in the prime, even as
when a Vine or Olive are shaken with a tempest in the spring.

For as a Tempest then arising, takes away all the beauty of the Olive, all the
Grapes, and leaves of the Vine, leaving nothing behind it; so does the blast of
the Lords displeasure in their chee^est iollity, and so unseasonably, in
respect of themselves, sweep them clean away, root and branch, head and
tail, and blow them up from their very foundation as it were powder, which
causes their memorial to perish from off the earth. A heavy judgment thou will say, yet no heavier then that Devil incarnate, the seeming professor,
verse 34
and under color of doing Justice, protector of judgment, for lucre sake
deserves: For as Satan that he may the better deceive, changes himself
into an Angel of light, so these under pretense of holiness and administration
of Justice, delude the eyes of the simple and sincere hearted, but most of all
they beguile themselves, with their cunning and curious painting, with their
cleanely and cunning conueyaunce of matters notorious, and impious in their
own nature.

For notwithstanding all their great policy, whatsoever they conceive, verse 35
that shall they bring forth at the last; their harvest shall be answerable
to there seed which they have sown. The crafty Fox must not think always
to escape, the expert Hunter will find him out at the length, and when he
has once gotten him, no favor must be looked for, either toward himself, or
any of his kind, but they must all be yealded over to the merciless mouths of
the greedy and insatiable Hounds. For a Wolf covered with a Sheep skin, is
fitter to be torn in sunder by the Dogs, then for the slaughter house.

It is accounted a worthy piece of service any way to destroy him with all his
breed: and if it cannot otherwise be, to burn Fire shall devour the houses of
bribes. Verse 34. Chap. 1.
him up in his den, with his whole litter.


Job. You always Verse 2.
harp upon one string, and that out of tune too, you have even dulled mine
ears with your discourses about the destruction of the wicked, I my self have
both acknowledged as much, and confirmed the same with you; but how often shall
I tell you that God afflictes the Godly here in this life, more then those?
But were it as you say, to what purpose do ye tire my ears with this vain
matter? My disease is extraordinary, and therefore requires some extraordinry
comfort, such harsh and unseasonable stuff as this that you bring, beside the
loathsomeness of it to my sick stomach, is enough to kill a whole body.

A weak stomach will bear but a little at once, and must have variety of
dishes, and some pleasant sauce to draw on the appetite: you have therefore
very much forgotten your selves, in that you have fed me all this while with
nothing else almost, but this one dish, causing me to surfeit upon it again and
again, as being ouercharged with it; in so much that now my stomach does
abhor the same: Wherefore, away with it, and let me hear no more of it (I
pray you.) Certain particulars there are, against which I may justly take
exception, for thou cuttest me off (Eliphaz) of all hope of comfort, and art
more cruel against me then before: before thou leftest some place of mercy for
me upon my repentance, but now thou shuttest up mercy from me: This is
vnmercilesse dealing. Thou do not reason against me, but cauell like unto
some sophister, which becomes not a Man of thy years, unless thou will
confess thy self through age to be a Child again. I hope thy memory is not
so weak, but that thou art able to carry away the truth of my words, nor thy
understanding so dull, but that thou art able to conceive my meaning aright,
but if it be so, acknowledge it, and learn more wisdom.

Thou noddest Verse 4
thy head at me, which is a thing that much offends me; would thou be
contented with it, being in my stead at my hands? I would not offer it to the
most contemptible among Men, but would strive rather to show my self pitiful
and applyable to the condition of such, mourning and lamenting with them, and
being inwardly touched with a feeling of their tribulation, would labor to
Verse 5
refresh their fainting soul, by the best persuasions I could devise.

Thy refreshing is a devouring of Verse 9, 10. Chap. 17, v, 2,
me with open mouth; and a beating my cheeks with thy blows of reproach. I am
a laughing stock, and a byword unto you continually: this Verse 6, 20. Cha.
17, v, 2, 7
makes my eyes to guish out with tears, and my heart to bleed within me. If I
have done any wickedness whereby I have deserved this What it is apeareth. v.
11 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Which because it proceeds from distemper, I have
but touched it in a word, as my manner is euerywhere save only in the 3.
chapter.
usage, O how do I Verse 18.
desire that the earth would reveal it! O how earnest am I that my prayers
might never enter into the ears of the Lord! O then take my heart you Archers,
according to your desire, make it your mark, verse 12
spare it no more then you do the butte you shoot at. God therefore that
know mine innocence, Verse 19.
join some Chap. 17, v, 3
Man with me I beseech thee to help me in the truth Verse 4.
against my eloquent Chap 16, Verse 20.
adversaries, who are blinded and cannot see it. Cause him to declare to the
world that they flatter Cha. 17, v, 5
such as are in prosperity, when they make them believe that they, and none but
they, are the Men whom thou O Lord fauourest, and that their eyes shall be
cast Verse 5
down, and their faces confounded for this; as also for that they deem such
as are in poverty, or any way distressed, for notorious sinners, and wicked
persons. And as for my self, make him to publish to the people, that though I
have been Verse 6 This complaint is more large. Verse 7, 11, 12 13, 14.
played upon with blows of contumely, as a tabret, which I omit for the
reason before alleged, yet I shall be for all that in credit again, and tule
Tremell. Chap. 17, v, 6 Ad praesidendum populis.
over the City: for hereby Verse 8, 9
occasion shall be given to all men, to admire thy goodness toward thy
seruanets: hereby, the innocent shall have cause not to fear the condemnation
of the wicked; and hereby shall the virtuous and Godly be confirmed, and
encouraged in their uprightness. This (I say) would put life into a dead Man,
raise me out of the grave and pit, the father of corruption, where I have long
lain in persuasion, as a household Servant to that great Verse 13.
Grandam of the family, among my brethren and Systers the worms of the earth;
Verse 10.
Hear this, ye cross friends of mine, and change your opinion concerning me.


Syrraxis. 13.
Persons.
Bildad. Job.
Bildad. Will thou never leave Chap. 18, 2.
replying? It shall be thine, though thou art but one against three, yet shall
thou carry away the matter from us all. Seeing thou will needs have it so, thy
opinion shall be best, thou shall be Disputant, Respondent, and Moderator:
likewise of the controversy between us, prescribe us an order when, and a
form how we shall speak, and command us silence at thy pleasure, for thou
esteeming of us as unreasonable Ver. 3
beasts, it is but reason we should give thee place. But remember that thou
tarest thy flesh Cha. 13.14.
with thy teeth even now, where was then thy profound judgment? This is thy
deep divinity, that the Lord has perverted the order of nature, and has done
as much as if he had removed the center of the earth or craggy rocks out of
their places, in that he has thus afflicted thee? for in his orderly course he
punishes sinners: now thou have not chap. 16 Ver. 17
sinned, how is that proved? Thy Chap. 16 ver. 1
conscience accuses thee not. Does not thy conscience accuse thee? thy Chap.
16 ver. 23
mouth doubtless speaking from the abundance of thy heart, and so of thy
conscience, confessing that thy days are consumed, evidently accuses thee:
for why are they consumed, but because of thy sins? And the event which is
the best proof of all makes it manifest, for shame has covered ver. 6.7, 8,
etc
thy face, thy posterity is destroyed, thou art become a gazing-stocke to the
World, a fear to thy stock, and a spectacle of the Lords terrible vengance
against transgressors.


Job. Will you never leave grieuing ver. 2, 3
me with your objections, wearying me with your repetitions, and abusing me
with your terms of infamy? Were it so that I had ver. 4.
erred and gone astray, yet were it notwithstanding for you to reproach me
therewith, and to insult over me? Were it not more commendation for you to
bear with mine infirmities (how great so ever, especially being in this case)
exceedingly diseased, and in a manner a dead Man? If there were any mercy in
you, the more my misery is, the more would you be moved to compassion toward me.

But this shows your, cruelty, in that you are so eager in prosecuting the
matter of the Lords wrath against the wicked, that you clean forget once so
much as to make mention of his rewards toward the good; which plainly
declares that thy hatred toward me (BILDAD) is greater then before, and that
thou art now become a very malicious adversary of mine: For, whatsoever thou
speak against the wicked, thy purpose is to apply it unto me: in that
therefore thou art so hot against them, heaping the vengeance of God upon their
heads and their seed, in the terriblest manner thou can devise, I fee the
greatness of thy stomach against me.

The vanity of the name of old acquaintance and friendship apeareth in you: who
(were you the greatest strangers in the world) I could not have worse dealing
offered me at your hands. You blame me for my affliction, whereas you ought to
blame him verse 5
rather that has sent it: When another has entangled me in a verse 6
snare, is it my fault? Will you impute the taking of a Bird in a net, to the
bird, or to the fowler? It is the Lords pleasure to handle me as you see, can I
do withal? My manner of living has not called for it, and since I have been
in it, I have made long prayers and loud cries verse 7
for my freedom; yet for all that he does still so hedge verse 8
me in, that I can see no way of cuasion. My honor verse 9
is gone, my verse 10
root is withered, my kinsfolks and acquaintance, are estranged, verse 13 14
my scruants verse 15
regard me not, the wife of my bosom (though I had many verse 17.18, 19
children by her) flies from me; great and small, the bad and better sort of
men, my familiars and beloved, hate me, scorn me, loath me, and which is more
then all this, the Lord himself is incensed against me; yea that which is
strangest of all, I my self do abhor mine own body, which is consumed to
nothing, having no skin throughout to cover it, but only a little about the
gums, verse 20
having such and so many following it, so many afflictions upon it, as manage
their fight against it like unto the troops of horsemen rushing fiercely into
the battle, each of them in their order and turn.

Take compassion of me my friends, verse 21
be not so cruel, as to harden your hearts; be not so savage as to sharpen
your tongues against him that is so miserable, but let it suffice that the Lord
verse 22
pursues me in such bitter and fearful manner as has been described.

THe only thing why you are against me is (as you pretend) because I am a
Wicked man: Chap, 19, 25, 5, 26, 27.
for confutation whereof, that so I may the rather draw you to pity my
estate, consider with me what a wicked man is. A wicked Man is he, that is
without faith, and he is a godly man that is endued therewith: for the want of
faith is it that only condemns, and the inioying thereof, that only
justifies a man: Because all the sins in the world cannot condemn a man where
faith is, nor all the good works in the world can save a man where faith is not:
because no prayer, no preaching is pleasing to the Lord without sacrifice in
these days, which leads us to faith in the redeemer to come. No
transgression or offense so great, but is purged thereby, because faith can no
more be without good fruits, then fire without heat, or water without moisture,
nor good works where faith is wanting, any more then light appear in the world
the Sun being taken out of the firmament; or life remain in the body, the
soul being separated from it.

Before oblations be offered to the Lord, there is necessarily mioyned Exodus 19,
10 Job, 1, 5
washing; this washing, does fignifie faith, where by our hearts and hands,
the inward and outward man are Acts 15.9
purged from sin: where as otherwise we a Cage of all uncleanness,
delivered over to a Rom, 1, 28 29
reprobate mind, and full of all unrighteousness. As therefore when the
sacrifices are laid upon the Altar, the fire comes down from heaven and
consumes them, it is an evident and infallible sign of the Lords presence;
so, where faith inflameth the heart, with astedfast expectation of the Lords
deliverance from death and destruction, there doubtless is a sure and certain
testimony of his fear and freedom from the bondage of sin and Wickedness:
so that it reigns not in his mortal body (whosoever he be.)

For this faith it is neuerydle, never so litarie, but always in building and
repairing of the Temple where it abides, that so it may befit for the
receiving of her honorable redeemer when he comes: always attended with
such royal virtues, as may grace it in the eyes of him that cannot endure
iniquity.

Now let this be a testimony of my faith, grounded upon a true knowledge of the
Lord, which you Chap, 8.21.
deny to be in me, and let it be as a confutation of your reasons to the
contrary (which also I desire may remain in record ch, 19, 23
to all posterities, and be engraven with anyron pen in marble, never to be
razed out) that I rest upon the promise of the Lord, for the resurrection of
my body from death unto life, the restoring of it again, after it shall be
eaten up with Worms and consumed to dust, and the beholding of the glory of
my Savior and redeemer with the very same eyes which now I enjoy: that I rest
upon the coming of that blessed seed which shall break the Serpents head, and
recover me together with the whole household of faith to the state of
immortality lost in Adam, because he is immortal, co-eternall with his Father,
lives for ever, and will make us like unto himself. I confess indeed that he
has not as yet taken upon him our humane nature, neither will do it until the
last days.

Yet I know for a certainty, that he himself through the power of his
Godhead, shall be the first that shall arise out of the grave, by virtue of
whose resurrection, I^ogither with all that beleene shall be revived and
quickened again. For this is the office of the Messiah, to make that good
again which was de^aced in Adam, and therefore I term him my redeemer: as
standing assured of the restoration of this my weak and frail slesh to that
happy estate which was in Paradise, a life like unto that of the Angels in
heaven, which never shall have an end, and so replenished with joys, as is
unspeakable.

This my disease, teaches me as much, wherein though my skin and flesh be
rotten, my bones broken and so consumed that dust verse 26
may as it were be shaken out of them, yet notwithstanding by the power and
goodness of God, I am preserved alive. Howbeit though I be thus afflicted, and
my faith rooted in the Zord, yet you cease not still to persecute me with your
verse 28
bloody words, denouncing more peremptorily then at the first, Gods heavy
judgments against me. But take heed that you pull verse, 29
them not upon your selves by your iniquity and cruelty toward me. For
certainly the Lord will not suffer such hard measure as you have offered me,
which has pierced my soul like unto a sword, to escape the sword of his
indignation.


Syrraxis. 14.
Persons.
Zophar Job
Zoph. THough thou reprouest verse 3
me I will pass it over, Chap, 29
and prosecute that which has bin interupted: namely, that it cannot go well
with the verse 5
wicked. And here I appeal to thy own knowledge verse 4
and conscience, whether since the beginning of the world the prosperity of the
Hippocrite and wicked man has been of any verse 5
durance? The glory of such thou know touching the clouds, verse 6
has bin brought down to the dunghill, has vanished away suddenly as a dream
verse 8
neither do their Children verse 10
which they enjoy according to their desire, cha, 21, 1
possess Chap, 21, ver. 16, 17, 18
any part of their wealth, flowing in unto them most happily, chap, 21, 10
how great soever it has been. Be it that their sins have remained with
them a long time, and that they be so sweet, that they cannot leave chap,
20, 11, 12, 13
them, they become not withstanding at length as deadly as the poison of Aspes,
or the sting of the tongue of the Viper unto them. The Hippocrite and wicked
must not look always to flow in wealth, neither when he is once down, by all
his labor to recover his former estate: for how should he still prosper that
has enriched himself by oppression verse 15, 16 17, 18, 19 et sequent.
of the weak? The Lord in his Justice must needs repay unto him, the like
measure as he has offered to others. And therefore as he has deprived poor
of their food, so shall he perish for want of nourishment: and though he have
abundance, yet notwithstanding he shall not be satisfied. When he has
provided for his belly, the wrath of the Lord shall scatter it, and he shall be
disappointed: if he fly the Bow, the Sword, fire, and destruction are prepared
for him. If there be none to witness against him, the Heavens, Verse 27.28
and earth themselves will lay him open, the Stones and Walls cry out against
him; the Rocks, Woods, and Mountains, where he wandereth, will give forth an
Echo for the bringing of his wickedness to light. There is no Verse 29.
shelter therefore for the evil dooer, no place of harbor for him that uses
oppression, deceit, or any way inuenteth evil, or closely commits evil,
though it be but in the Chambers of his heart only, for the hurt of his
neighbor.


Job YOu came hither to comfort me, Chap. 21. The scope of this chapter is only
generally touched.
I desire no other comfort Verse, 2, 3.
at your hands, then that you would let me speak my mind to the full, or at
least so far forth, until I shall briefly confute your reasons: which being
granted me, spare not Zophar, if thou can take any just exception against my
words to deride me. That which thou affirmest of the wicked, is not always
true: because for the most part they themselves al their life time, their
Children, and Childrens Children greatly flourish in the world. And though it
be so, that he punishes the wicked oftentimes, yet he will not be prescribed
by Men, when, or how, or upon what cause to do it: being done, he hides from
them oftentimes the grounds thereof, and reserueth it to the last judgment,
which is done to restrain us from rash judging. What do we know how they might
be disposed inwardly, who^ the Lord strikes with sudden Death? When his
fearful judgments fall upon Men, who is there that can absolutely set down
and say expressly, it was for such a sin committed? That which thou applyest
to me, Verse 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
that the Chap. 20, Verse 29.
Evil ever come to an evil end, is untrue: for the Godly being taken, they
for the most part (yea many times such as break forth into blasphemy against
God) escape, undergo no affliction, and are no way brought under. What if a
ma^die before he is old, does it follow that he is by and by a wicked man? That
is no good consequence. For it is enough, that for the time he lived, he lived
in good sort: and it is happy for him by the shortness of his life to prevent
much misery that might ensue. Thirdly the grave is a stay unto his mind verse 3.
: because there he shall not need to fear any change as before. Lastly, the
time is not so much to be respected as the thing, which is common verse 26
to all, Prince, Verse 28
and people, good and badde: if any verse 33.
were exempted then indeed you said something to the point. And your reproach,
verse 28
which you cast upon me because of my calamity, might have a kind of pretense,
if not that which follows after this life, but that which happens here,
being other wise then well, were to be accounted a destruction.


Syrraxis. 15.
Persons.
Eliphaz. Job.
Eliphaz. What meanest thou to strive with the Almighty? Chap. 22
what verse 2, 3.
gain is it to him that thou iustifiest thy self, or what do thou thy self
get by it? But strive while thou will, thou shall never clear thy self from
suspicion of ver. 5, 6, 7, 8
all kind of wickedness. How answerest thou to the Lords judgments upon the
old world, was it not for their great wickedness ver. 15, 16, 17
that he swept them clean away from the face of the earth? The Godly he
spared, the rest he overwhelmed. In this it is evident against whom the Lord
uses these temporary scourges: confess therefore thy injustice toward Men,
acknowledge thy impiety against the Lord, whose ver. 12, 13, 14
providence thou denyest. and return unto him in sorrow for the same, and in
assurance of mercy, and he will receive thee to favor, to bless Verse 24, 25
26, 28.
thee again, that thou shall have cause not only to praise verse 27.
him for thy freedom from this thy misery, but for thy restoring again Verse
30.
to thy former estate: Yea thou shall be so gracious with him, that he will
hear thee, when thou shall be a suitor for others, Verse 30
and they shall fare the better for thy sake.


Job. In that I complain Chap. 23 Verse 2
because of my grief, I am thought to rebel against God. O Verse 3, 4, 5
that I might once be admitted to the presence of the Lord to plead my cause. I
know ver. 6, 10, 11 12.
assuredly, that for the government of the commonwealth he would not
disco^mend me, and so for the rest of my actions: For such speed well that come
before him, which have endeavored Verse 7
to frame their lives answerable to his will. You take upon you to determine of
the cause of my punishment, not considering that the Lord does not ordinarily
Verse 8, 9
reveal the cause of his punishments to the dearest of his servants:
Notwithstanding, you are such as will prescribe him a rule how, and for what
he must punish, and a time likewise when he shall do it, setting down
expressly hypocrisy, Chap. 22 Verse 6, 7, 8
cruelty, oppression, Cha. 22.13
impiety against God, as the sins for which he now punishes me.

If you observe well the Lords dealing against the wicked, you shall find it
to be in another sort then he has dealt with me, for he suffers the^ very
long to continue in their wicked course, and to offend against him with an high
hand, committing sin upon sin, until their iniquities make strong cries in his
ears, (as did the old world), before he comes against them in judgment,
and he forewarneth them likewise of their destruction before it comes.
Whereas on the other side, he takes his Children napping, when they make
their first entrance into transgression. All which pleads for me that I have
not been a notorious offender, for I have not been admonished by the Lord at
any time of my transgression, but comforted and encouraged by him in my course,
no Man has cried unto the Lord against me.

The Lords displeasure has appeared unto me by no former affliction, neither
if I had bin afflicted by him, should it necessarily follow that he was
therefore angry with me: For he never chastises his children in his anger, but
in his love, always in his mercy, how severely soever he seems to correct
them, not at all in his fury and wrath, for then he should utterly consume
them which he never does. True it is, that the Lord favors a whole kingdom
for a righteous man's sake, and that at his suite and petition it is redeemed
from destruction; but this is no certain rule with him: at his pleasure he
will do it, and if he have determined verse 13.14
the contrary, many, yea, multitudes of his servants assembled together to
entreat him, may not prevail with him. Nay so far are they in prevailing
for others by their supplications, that they themselves David. Ps. 69, 3.
Jeremy 10, 24
(notwithstanding their often and earnest prayers) are compelled to endure
affliction for a long time together, and so long indeed oftentimes, that there
seems to be no hope at all for their relief.

The wicked they oppress them, hold them in miserable servitude many years
togther, whole Cittyes and Countries they spoil at their peleasure: showing no
pity to the fatherless, verse 3
staruing the poor, Verse 4, 9.
murdering the rich, wasting and devouring all with Fire and Sword, where they
cannot otherwise bring the people into subjection: Yet the Lord suffers all
this, nothing regards their loud cries, Verse 12
nothing esteems their pitiful wrongs, be they never so many, never so
virtuous, never so devoted to his obedience, never so steadfast in faith, and
depending upon his assistance. Hereby it is evident, that we cannot discern of
the Lords judgments, the variety of them is so great, that we are not able to
do it, were they laid open before our eyes, and such as might be attained to,
the diversity of them would cause us oftentimes to fail.

But the Lord hiding them from us of set purpose, how can it be chosen but
that we should err in our Verdict? For, what he intends by them, is one of
his ways which is past our finding out, and whether they come in his love, or
in his indignation is a secret which he reserueth to himself, and reuealeth not
to the lookers on: The substance of this chapt. is sufficiently unfolded, the
drift laid out: though it acordeth not so exactly with the verses of the
chapter, and so of the former: neither is that largenes need full now as in the
beginning both the speakers and matter being the same.
they which feel them understand better then the beholders, how it fares with
the^. Howbeit, these also have no further sight into them then for their own
particular estate, how it will go with them after this life. For some the Lord
judges here, that he may save them in the life to come, with some he
begins his judgments here in this life, and proceeds with them afterward
to further condemnation: whether of these two ways the Lord takes with them,
is best known unto themselves, others are not able to define. The sum of all
is this, the Lord being a free agent, will not be tied to any one set course
of government, but will be at his choice to dispose of every action according
to his will: sometimes he will revenge the blood of the innocents; and sometimes
he will not do it until the end of all things: sometimes the wicked go
vnpunnished, and sometimes he powers forth his wrath upon them here in this
life. The end will show, k that this his manner and form of government (though
in our understanding it seem otherwise) to have bin most excellent, for order
most exquisite, for equity without comparison, for wisdom most singular and
admirable.


Syrraxis. 16
Person.
Bildad. Job.
Bildad THou stand very much upon thine innocence (or purity rather,) For
though thou use many words and very long answers unto us, yet that is the
maine of al. For confutation whereof, do no more but consider with thy self
what thou art, in comparison of those heavenly bodies, (the stars of the
firmament,) which are his creatures? Admirable is the Lord in his quiet,
comely, and constant government of them, together with the whole cope of the
Heavens carried about with contrary motions: Innumerable verse 3
are his armies and hosts, which he has prepared both in heaven and earth,
wonderful is his brightness, as being the fountain of al other lights, giving
beauty and comelines to al other things.

Hence it is that his majesty is reverenced, his power verse 2
feared, his glory and excellency adored of all the world, which being
considered, I think there is no man that dare presume to compare verse 4
with him? But why do I speak of comparing with him that is the maker of all,
and matchles in that regard; that as he is over all, so is he above al, and
has no Peer? The Moon, verse 5
(that I may say nothing of the sun, whose beauty is far greater) together
with the rest of the Plannets, yea the least star in the firmament, is far
more pure then man (which is but a Worm verse 6
of the earth) far more worthy and perfect, as being framed of more simple
and singular matter, and not subject to infection from beneath.

Is it not so Job? Can thou deny unto me that those superior bodies are
more Noble then these earthly bodies of ours, as proceeding not only from
better beginnings then the defilement from which we spring; being of a more
lasting, and more unchangeable substance; and yet notwithstanding the glory of
the Almighty utterly obscureth their brightness, and so the rest of their
commendable virtues whatsoever? And that I may give thee an instance in some of
the chiefest (concerning their continuance) time will make old, and work a
decay in that durable Garment of the heavens, and the perpetual motion
thereof, and which is now without interruption, shall fail in the end. Now the
garment of the Lords majesty decays not, but he reigns for ever in glory,
his motion and government has no end.


Job. Surely thou have made an excellent speech and very profitable to a weak
verse 2
man, Chap, 26
a man cast down, and an ignorant verse 3
man: For it cannot be chosen, but these matters must needs help, comfort,
and be much for my learning: no doubt but they are of power to raise up the
dead, verse 5
and reform them that were long ago overwhelmed with the deluge. The
controversy between us is not concerning the Lords power, but concerning the
state of the godly and and ungodly; so that thy contending for *d that, makes
nothing for the matter in question, supra chap 5, verse, 2.
and therefore moves me with the standers by to muse what thou meanest? But I
pray thee, dooest thou notwithstanding (I have declared the contrary so largely
heretofore) still immagin that I am ignorant of the power and majesty of the
Almighty? It is so plain a subject that no man is to seek in it, and I
should be able to say more in it, then the common sort, because I have had
better means of instruction, and been more studious of these things then
ordinarily men are: beside, there is no argument more ample then it: For first,
to begin with the mighty power of God in the creation of the metals verse 6
and minerals in the bowels of the earth, and reaching even unto the center of
the same, whether the influences of the heavens are thought to distill: next, to
take a view of his works being many and marvelous, upon the face of the
earth, and go to the Waters of the sea, and thence to the Clouds and meteors
above, and afterward to ascend up to the firmament, were a matter of infinite
discourse. I will therefore limit my speech, and insist in some particulars.

The graves, and secret places, how deep, how dark, how far distant soever
from the heat and light of the sun, yet does he clearly see verse 6.
into them. Hell and destruction are disposed of in his providence, he has
made the heavens as a Canopy, to adorn and cover the earth, stretching verse 7
them forth all over in most goodly manner, as far as the land or sea does
extend it self. He has contrary to nature placed the waightier Mass of the
earth above the lighter Element of the waters: the scenter of the world which
is the earth, he causes to stand vnmoneable having no foundation, but his
mighty hand to support it.

He binds verse 8
up the Waters hanging in the clouds, and ready to fall down upon the earth
all at once, and to ouerwhelm it (as it were) in Bottles or Bags in very
myraculous manner, (for the air containing the Water is lighter then it)
causing them to drop down at his pleasure there, whether the winds at his
command shall carry them when he will, and in as scant or large manner as he
sees good. He hides from us his throne, verse 9
which he has in the upper region of the air (whence he sends forth the
Thunder, Lightning, and Rain) by interposition of thick clouds, very closely
and soundly compacted together, between it and our sight, that otherwise might
manifestly be seen. He has compassed the earth with Waters, to which
notwithstanding he has prescribed such bounds, verse 10
as they shall not again ouerflow the same, as long as the sun and Moon
endure. He framed the glorious Curtains of the Heavens which hang over our
heads, he shakes the mountains whereupon they seem to lean, verse 11
as upon pillars, and terrifieth the world with his thunder. He created the
mighty Whale Serpent, verse 13.
which by means of his strength, length, and greatness, is as a bar to stay the
course of the raging sea: whose roaring likewise and violence is most terible
and exceeding measure, heaswageth verse 12.
in a moment. These are great things, yet are they but a small verse 14
parcel of his omnipotency, a superficial collection only to that which is
hidden from us. For we are not able to understand the hundredth part thereof,
much less are we able to speak of it to the full.


Syrraxis. 17.
Persons.
Job. Elihu.
Job. SEeing that now you give me a breathing time, and answered me nothing
(specially Zophar whose turn it is) overcome with my speech of the Lords
power, Chap. 27.
I will here set down the whole state of the controversy between us. Where
first I must use a protestation; that (as the Lord lives) who now afflicts
me, and has hidden the cause thereof from me, I will deal plainly Verse 3, 4
and use a good conscience in all things. I have hetherunto defended my
innocence, which also I must still maintain, as long as I am able to speak
Verse 5, 6
for my self. I have reproved you heretofore, for calling my life and
sinceritye in religion into question, v^^^ (...)
and now I persist therein in this my last speech unto you, to the end, it may
be the better observed of the standers by, and remembered of you hereafter when
you shall find the truth of it. For I assure you, you shall reap little
credit by it in the end.

It has ever been accounted an egregious offense to condemn the righteous,
Verse 7.
the same shall be cast in your teeth at the last, in regard of me, and you
shall be numbered with the wicked, and among the enemies of the Lord, and his
servants. Wherefore, that it may more evidently appear, how justly I have
reproved you, I will show you again wherein you have erred in your arguments,
which you have produced against mine innocence, and withal, confute the
grounds whereupon you rely; and afterward, I will strengthen and confirm mine
own reasons, which I have used in the defense thereof. For here has been the
cause of this long contention between us; you have labored to prove me a wicked
person, and therefore thus afflicted; I have endeavored to p^rge my self from
that accusation, and to make it manifest, that the Lord has some other drift
therein, then to enter into judgment with me for my sins.

THat I may begin therefore, Chap, 27
with a confutation of your assertions, whereas you condemn me for an
Hippocrite and vile person, because of the greatness of my calamity: to that I
answer, that affliction is common both to the good and bad, and that the
righteous cannot be discerned thereby from the unrighteous, neither by a
prosperous and happy estate, neither is the Lords love or hatted to be valued
according in the degrees of these. But if we will here distinguish aright, we
must look to the demeanor, and to the disposing of the mind in the one, and in
the other; and what use they make of the lotte and portion whatsoever it is
that the Lord measures out unto them. And if it be in extremity of pain and
grief, with what patience they are able to bear it, and what hope and
confidence they have in the Lords mercies, being in the midst thereof, and even
at the point of death.

The Hippocrite, verse 8
and ungodly person in such a case, or if he sustain loss in his outward
estate (in regard whereof he made some show of shrowding himself under the
Lords wing, while his favor therein shined upon him) he is by and by at
despair with himself, and his hope is utterly at an end. And therefore he can
no more pray unto God, he can no more delight in his word, he can no longer
depend upon him, no longer expect any good at his hands. He may verse 9
cry unto the Lord (because of the greatness of his sorrow, I will not deny) but
all in vain, for that he never walked before him with an upright heart, and
never had any true seeling of his mercies, but sought only under the color
of godliness, to gain unto himself these temporal riches, without any respect
at all, either to the Lords honor, the good of his brethren, or the welfare
of his own soul. Howbeit this crying cannot properly be termed a prayer,
because he that properly and truly prays, Hebr. 11, 6
believes that the Lord is both able and willing to yeald him his help, and to
reward him that seeks unto him: For this cause, he that is godly indeed,
though he be stripped of al his earthly commodities and comforts, yet he
cease not to be a suitor to the Lord for a new supply, nothing doubting
(notwithstanding his former losses) but that in his goodness he will relieve
him: Which albeit he do not for the present, accordingly as he hoped, yet
desisteth he not to rest upon him, yea so far is he from being deterred from
seeking unto him, (because he speedeth not at the first) that he be comes
more earnest in his supply cation, more humbly minded, more grieved for his
sins (conceauing the want of these, to have withheld the Lords favor from him)
that he armeth himself with patience to take many denials, to wait the
Lords leisure, how long soever, knowing that at the last, his desire shall be
granted.

And when the Lord lays his chastizements upon him the more grievous they
are, the more is he pressed down with the burden of them, the more is his heart
lifted up, the more fervent is he in spirit unto the Lord for deliverance:
or if that may not be granted; for some ease of his pain, or else, if he will
not be entreated to withdraw his hand, strength to bear them so, as he
murmr not against him, but may be able willingly and cheerfully to sustain
them joyfully, and thankefully to undergo them: for he considers that the
Lord does this not to destroy him, but to save him; not that he should perish
therein, but that being tried, he should be made more perfect; should have
experience how the Lord respects such as believe in him, and can by no
adversity be drawn away, from a love and delight In a clean contrary course
to the Hypocrite. Verse 10.
in the obaying of his will.

These things being well laid together and examined to to the proof, there
will be no pretense left you, why you should account me in the number of the
Hyppocrites, and ungodly, because that I evermore, even in any most bitter
perplexity, have vtte red forth some words of hope and trust in the Lord, and
have carried my self very patient indeed (as I suppose) and I doubt not but
they that have been here with me, during the whole time of my visitation,
will witness as much; especially if they regard the extremity of the pain
which I have suffered: But did they see that in me, which I feel within my
self, to the incomprehensible joy of my heart, namely, the love that I have to
the Lord, the delight in his service, the striving within my self not to
transgress in my words, the keeping of my heart upright unto him always,
which is my triumph, even from the beginning of my sickness unto this present
time, I make no question but they would not only come forth to testify on my
side, but stand as strongly in my defense against you, even as I my self have
done. Howbeit, for all this, you condemn me, because of my affliction for a
wicked person, holding it for a general truth, that all men are so, who are in
calamity; which is such an opinion, as there is no man having any understanding
at all but is able to convince.

THe wicked always to be under the rod of the Lords indignation, and none
but they in this life, Chap. 27
is too large a defense; Yet this you maintain; but with what success, your
silence now shows. True it is, that the Lord to declare himself to the World
to be a just God, and to the end that others may be deterred from the like
transgressions, and won unto virtue, does sometimes Verse 13
punish the wicked most fearfully, even in this life, and abundantly reward
and bless the Godly. I deny not therefore but that sometimes be depryueth the
wicked of all things, wherein soever he places his hope, as Verse 14, 15
Children, Riches, Verse 16
Munition, Verse 18
costly and fair buildinges, renown, and creddite, that there is no outward
v, 19, 20, 21, 22.
calamity so great, but he is thrown into it, and that fear, terror, and
astonishment unspeakable does ouerwhelme his soul, through the many Waves of
troubles which go over his back: and this to be so evident too, that al men
verse 23.
that see it, skip for joy in the beholding of it, clap their hands, and hiss
thereat.

This the Lord does when it pleases him, to the end to manifest his just and
righteous judgments: But this is not the matter about which we contend, but
our controversy is about his taking of a contrary course; as whether the cause
of his suffering the godly to be under affliction, and the ungodly to flourish,
be a thing which may be precisely determined of us at all times, or rather;
whether it be not a mystery which the Almighty oftentimes locketh up in the
closet of his Divine breast, and imparteth not to the sons of men? Which when
we have pondered as we ought, it will appear unto us very plainly, that we
must leave to busy our selves to search into it, Chap 28,
and when we have thoroughly learned how to fear verse 28
the Lord and fly from evil, that there we must rest our selves contented,
and go no further: For this if we well understand, and practice accordingly,
though it fares not with us so happily in this present life, as with the
wicked, yet in the life to come, for their momentany prosperity, intermingled
also with much bitterness, we shall have neuer-ending joy, and freedom from all
sorrow and grief.

WE may perceive how infinite the wisdom of God is, Chap, 28
if we do but compare it with the wisdom of man, in searching into the bowels
verse 1, 2
of the earth for iron, Brass, Silver, Gold, and Precious stones, and for his
skill in the handling and using of these: as also for the finding out of the
virtues of them, being dug out of the earth. This knowledge man has,
because the Lord has infused it into him: which had he not done, he could not
possibly attain unto it, by any care or diligence.

In vain then is it for him to strive for the knowledge of that which is far
greater; especially when the same is denied unto him: Such as is the cause why
he afflicts the good, and passes over the bad: For this wisdom is one of
the Lords Counsels unrevealed, which cannot be ver. 12 13 14
dug out of the earth, neither can it be found in the depth or bottom of
the sea: no Gold of Ophir, no Jewel, be it never of so rare and high price, can
purchase it. You conclude therefore your arguments which you produce against
me upon an impossibility. For you taking this as granted, that the secret
Wisdom of God (which by no means can be comprehended) may be known of us:
you infer thereupon notwithstanding you had condemned me for the same fault
before, as if you had undergone such studdy for the ataining unto it, that you
had indeed come unto the depthe of the same in every particular, and nothing
at all therein contained, had escaped your knowledge. But God himself being
the fountain head where wisdom dwells verse, 20, 23
and his dwelling in that excellency of glory, as no man can approach unto it:
verse 24
how exceedingly are you confounded in your judgment? The eye of the Lord is
over all the earth, beholding whatsoever is done from one end of the world
unto another: Is man's eye of that brightness? He appoints to the winds ver
25, 26, 27
and waters that are above, their order and measure; to the thunder and
lightning their course; having not acquainted man with the time, neither in
what quantity they shall be: how much more then unlikely is it, that he will
communicate unto us those secrets of his, concerning the cause of al his
judgments hereupon the earth, which he does not impart, no not to those
heavenly spirits, themselves attending daily in his holy presence? And thus
much for confutation of your arguments which you have produced against me.

NOw that I may strengthen mine own cause, Chap, 29
I desire of you to call to mind my verse 2
former life, when the Lord kept me from trouble, when his countenance shined
verse 3
upon me: and his goodness in a secret and special sotte did follow me; when I
had abundance of Wine, Oil, verse 6
Butter, and honey; when I was in credit and estimation in the world, had my
guard and train attending me in the gate, verse 7
was reverenced of all verse 8, 9
men for my deserts: preferred of the princes in the judgment seat to the
chiefest place, receined of the people with acclamation; blessed of the poor
verse 10
as their only comforter among men: and then to consider, whether being thus
favored, not of men alone of all sorts, but of the Lord himself, the
approbation notwithstanding of all men here below with one consent, and of God
above, from whom the truth of nothing is hid, can possibly be dissanulled.

What is done without ambition and vain glory, with a purpose to gloryfie God;
and to help our Brethren, and that in vprightnes of heart, persuades our
Conscience that it is well done, that the Lord will not be angry with us for
so doing: All my actions in the time of my prosperity were acording to this
rule, which made me say in my heart, The Lord doubtless will never ver. 18,
19, 20 Chap, 31 Because the matter of the 29. and 31, chapter is the same I lay
them together: and because I handled them be fore in the beginning of this
book, I do here only gleane up such things as I thought more fit to be
reserved for this place,
alter my estate; will never impair, but rather increase my substance and
reputation; will cause my seed to multiply, my posterity to be renowned in the
world, from generation to generation.

Then also I made a Covenant with my self not to offend in my affections, and
not to transgress in my cogitations; which argues that I was no Hippocrite,
for such labor not to bridle their affections; Verse 1.7
such strive not to keep under their evil thoughts; but both give way to
these, and suffer their hearts to go after their eyes; nourish secretly in
their bosom, incontinency, Covetousness, Hatred, Envy, Wrath, Pride,
Contention, Cruelty, and contempt of God; and so they may walk outwardly to
please men, that is all they regard: neither can they withal their cunning so
suppres what is within, but at one time or other, itbreaketh forth.

But I may truly say of my self, verse 25
that thorough the mercy of God, and the assistance of his good spirit which he
has caused to dwell in me, I have so lived, that no man can acuse me that I
have openly ^asgressed in any of the former offenses; and if I go to mine own
conscience, that likewise in the same manner will testify with me, that I am
free from them all.

This imboldneth me to call GOD to record, verse 35
(who beholds me within and without sees my heart, and examineth the ways
of my good conuerfation: yea not to fear to call for his cursses verse 39.40.
to be powered forth against mine own soul, if I have not studied unfeignedly
to please him in all things. Nay, which is more, if I have not performed
(through his grace,) such service unto him, as he has well accepted, has
rewarded heretofore, and will reward again at the last, howsoever he seem
now to be angry with me for a time, not that I am thereby made perfect, nor
that I can claim or challenge unto my self thereby any thing at his hands, as
a due debt (for by duty I was bound unto that and much more whatsoever I have
done,) but that I know he both has and will make perfect (thorough the
absolute merrits of my redeemer) shall see all the imperfections he has
seen, or shall see in any of my works: both has from the beginning and will
crown according to his promise, his graces in all, and every one of his
obedient servants, and that in every particular, and in a measure answerable
thereunto to the worlds end.

In this regard, as being assured with the acceptations of my actions in my
redeemer, from whose sanctifying spirit they have proceeded, I have a clear
Conscience before God. It is not my estate alone, but it is so with every
regenerate man, having bin endued with faith from above, to apprehend his
redeemer, and strengthened by his good spirit to Walk in a good course, having
labored, and thorough his Grace prevailed in some acceptable measure, also to
subdue and Conquer whatsoever Rebellion of his will and understanding, and to
bring them into the obedience of the law of God, he staudeth freed in
conscience from the guiltiues of sin.

It is no strange Doctrine there fore which I maintain, concerning the
innocence of my conscience, from all those crimes you charge me withal in the
time of my prosperity. And in very deed, the virtuous life which I then lived,
declared as much, and you knew it well, though you will not acknowledge it.
This my adversity which is wont to sweep away all friends, has swept it out
of your remembrance. The desire that you have to get you a name, by putting
me down in that which I defend makes you to bury my virtues that shined
forth to all the world, in the time of my welfare ( I speak it to the honor of
my profession) in utter oblivion and forgetfulness.

And therefore the good which I then did, has never bin once men ioned of you
in this whole discourse: Nay, which is more to be wondered at, the good deeds
which I then continually put in practice, and were admired of all men, undergo
at your hands the name of dissimulation, chap, 22, v, 5, 6, 7, 8.9.10
and vain glory, my liberality is made covetousness; my mercy, extortion; my
compassion unto the poor, oppression; my clothing of the naked, spoil; my
defending of the innocent, wrong; my Justice, bribery; my careful serving of
God, security; my holy profession, impiety; my daily recourse unto the Lord in
prayer, an abhorring of his presence.

THis measure I meet withal at the hands of the ancients, Chap. 30
and such as are reputed wise: whereupon those that are base, verse 1
and vile in the account of the world, fall to scorn, and deride me to my
face. Spots in great men, are spurs to the inferior sort, to carry them so
far beyond the bounds of al honesty, that a man would wonder at it. When age
doteth in her folly, youth goes a madding thorough her example. Men of
Learning (especially being in authority and high place) erreth in their
judgment concerning the godly: the rude and ignorant, bear themselves bold
thereupon, and care not to offer them all abuse.

It amazeth me to consider, that I should be thus hardly laid to at all hands
without cause. The grave and prudent to rebuke me, is a thing where-withall
mine ears have not been acquainted heretofore; the most contemptuous among
men, the scum of the people to scoff at me, those whose fathers were branded
for Rogues, banished into the verse, 3
desert, there compelled to eat verse, 4
grass like an ox, to fly into the verse, 5
rocks and woods, like unto the foxes, for fear of being verse 5
apprehended, to verse 9
Rhyme upon me, and verse 10
spet in my face, is a matter that goes nearest me of all that hethervnto I
have suffered, and what man ever suffered more then I have done? (for what
grief greater then contempt? What contempt comparable to that of the
unreasonable and brutish sort, whose education has been like unto the
beasts, and behavior as unseemly as that of the dogs of the flocks.) The
children newly crept out of the shell, to verse, 12
trip me on the toe, take me by the legs, lie down suddenly in my way,
cast me to the ground, and when I am down to give a loud verse 13, 14
shoute, and having once gotten me, to hedge me in with a ring, so that I
cannot escape their insulting (I say) over me, is more strange then that, and
more harder to be borne.

The grief of my body to increase daily, as having my veins and arteries
beating even in the verse, 17
night, when by the course of nature, sleep should draw the heat to the
inward parts, my disease always raging upon me in that manner that it
compels me to roar out like the verse 29
Dragons crushed in pieces of the Elephants; and as lamentably as the young
Ostriches forsaken of their dammes. My ver. 19, 20
flesh like unto a pot, and as black as the brande; my verse, 18.
garments polluted with the blood and matter of my ulcers; my weakness such,
that I am ever sowning, and looking every hour to yield up the ghost,
aggrauateth the former. The fearful fight of the verse 20, 21, 22
Lords angry countenance, to present it self evermore before mine eyes, and
to terrify me as a mighty tempest does the sea man: the God that was wont to
be so loving, to become so cruel, as never to make an end in pursuing me with
his plagues: that was wont to be so ready to hear, now to be so inexorable,
as by no cries, no sighs, no groans to be moved to compassion, is enough (I
confess) to make me utterly out of love with my self, and to drive me
clean from the defense of my innocence. These very words, The learned are
against thee, the Fathers of the Church are of another opinion, the Judges of
the land have otherwise determined, would make many a man to alter his mind:
But this, Do thou not see how every odd companion, the very runnagates and
shame of men, every boy, the children that are but now called out of their
swaddling cloutes, do play upon thee, and make a pastime of thee and thine
aunswers? Whom would it not dash out of conceit with himself? Yet this. Thou
have no rest night nor day, thy pain is so great that thou art constrained to
cry out extremely, thy body is like unto theirs that lie in the grave, thy
apparel like unto theirs that live in a spittle-house, may seem much more to
condemn me, but this most of all, (God himself by thine own saying) is
angry with thee, yea so angry, that though thou solicit him continually, and
most carefully, yet he turns his back upon thee, and will not hear.

Whereunto I reply, that the wisest and most learned, Chap. 30 arising from
ver. 1. et sequent: appertaining to that matter.
the greatest, grauest, and most ancient men that ever were have had their
errors: and this error is as old as any, to esteem of Gods favor or
displeasure, according as he disposes of us for these outward matters. For
thus we reason, affliction came in through sin, and had not this been, we
should have lived still in Paradise, a place abounding with all manner of
pleasure and delight, and into the which, no trouble or sorrow might enter. I
acknowledge it so to be, and yet I say, that God for all that, is at liberty to
afflict in other respects, as well as for sin, which also he does oftentimes.
There were many hot Debate, emulation. Galat: 5, 20
words together, with a vehement striving in his affections, to over come in
Eliphaz from the beginning: but I perceived not that there was any Thumoi. ibid:
wrath in him until the last. We may see therefore how dangerous a thing it is,
to be too forward in words, before we be sure that we stand upon a sound
foundation. For it will bring us at the last to oppose our selves maliciously
against the truth, to slander our brethren most grossly even in those things,
wherein our own knowledge, and experience being diligently examined, pleads
for them, and so has Eliphaz dealt by me.

Anger that predominate affection in old age, has made him forget himself; in
which case, the words of the profoundest, and oldest man in the world must not
be regarded. In that I am in contempt, and derision among the outcasts, the
froth and filth of the earth, this portion is common with me to all good men,
this is always a note of a godly man, a seal and assurance the better to
confirm unto me the right and interest that I have through faith in my
Redeemer, in the kingdom of God. For so it was with Noah that righteous Father.

He standing out against all the World in the maintenance of this truth,
that unless they repented, the Lord would bring the flood of waters, and
utterly consume them all: what did they else but deride him, and those
doubtless most of all that were most notoriously wicked; and among them, the
most vile and contemptible in the eye of the world, being incited the rather
thereunto to please the great ones, who are wont to use such as instruments to
execute their malice. Neither were the children in the streets, whose manner is
to follow the example of their Parents, exempted from a part in this offense.
And in very deed so it is, that scorn and contempt is evermore an inseparable
companion of the truth: and that there was never any one that took in hand the
defense thereof, but he has bin despised more or less of the world. Error has
many ways, and so many followers: the truth but one, and therefore but few in
respect that embrace it. The truth is hardly found, and as hardly kept when it
is found: for he that will find it, it will cost him much sweat, and when he
has it, if he be not exceeding careful, he shall loose it before he be
aware. This makes it dainty, because Industry and Care be rare qualities.
Nature and Grace are opposites: in Nature there is blindness, and ignorance,
it is Grace that brings us to the knowledge of the truth. Howsoever, reason may
seem to be some help thereunto, yet because it is greatly defaced in regard
of that it was in our first creation, it cannot apprehend without the other
that which is divine. For reason can neither beget, nor foster, nor continue in
us the truth, nor discern it from false-hoode; but all these are the works of
Grace. Howbeit, the greatest part of the world content themselves with that
which Nature affords, and goes no further.

Hence it is, that they which attain unto the truth, are wondered at for their
singularity, which procures them many followers, and such as flock after
them: and withal, the hatred of most, especially of the mighty, and renowned
of all sorts, the condemnation of all degrees, save only of a very small
remnant, and that because they want the light of grace to reach unto their
doctrines. Even so it falls out in this disputation, for that I defend such
doctrines as are not futable to the general received opinions among men; and
for that again they are above the capacity of that, man in nature
comprehends: the learned, specially in the school of humanity, or
professing Divinity without the gift of the spirit of Grace, reprehend them;
and the unlearned, carried away with a conceit of the deep judgment of those
their profound leaders, make but a scoff both of me, and what I affirm.

Heerevpon also comes the vnreuerent behavior of the children toward me:
hereupon likewise it is, that no man pittieth my misery, but when they see me
grow weaker every day then other, my garments more defiled through the
noysomnes of my disease, my conscience more affrighted with the honor of the
Lords indignation; my mouth opened unto louder cries, my heart breathing out
more pitiful sobbes, and that unto the Father of mercies, and God of
consolation himself, and yet receining no comfort: I am had in the greater
contempt, and derision of all men. Which because I know from what root it
springs, and withal, that I am not the first which have sustained such
crosses, I satisfy my self with this, that I have a clear conscience before
God, and desire no favor at his hands, if I have not walked with an upright
heart in regard of his majesty. Neither do I doubt, but assure my self, that
if I hold out, (as I hope to do, through the strength of the same his grace
which has hethervnto supported me) in the fear of his Name, and confidence
of his mercy, constantly and courageously in this my fiery trial: this my
rebuke, reproach and injury which I now suffer, shall be recompensed me at the
length, with praise, honor, reward and victory, to the great and endless joy
of my soul.

It is very long before the Lord hears my complaint, my sickness has been
very tedious, and void of all outward relief, and I am now brought to the
last cast, which makes me utterly out of hope of the continuance of my life
any longer: yet for all that I doube not of the Lords power therein, and I
know that his manner has been from time to time, then to show himself most
strong unto them that depend upon him, when themselves are most weak, then to
succor his, when they are even sinking down under the burden; then to open
unto them a way to escape, when they see death and the grave present before
their eyes, and preparing to swallow them up. Howbeit, so notwithstanding, that
he has not always tied himself to this course, in the temporal deliverance
of his servant in every particular: and therefore I stand otherwise ver. 23.24
persuaded in mine own behalf.


Elihn. Albeit I am not the fittest man by reason of my years, neither came I
hither to that intent to be a Moderator in this famous disputation, but with a
purpose, Chap. 32.
and desire hear only: but yet Notwithstanding, for as much as I perceive
there is silence on both sides, the controversy remains still undetermined,
the auditory is like to depart not satisfied, and there is none here in this
assembly, that will undertake the disciding of the matters that have been
here discussed I hold it necessary, for that I find my self furnished for
it, to enter thereupon: and I am emboldened to do it, be cause these
Copartners descending all from Abraham, and I that come of Buz the son of
Nahor, Abraham's brother, are of alliance, and Job also the adverse party, who
is so hardy that having none to back him, fears not to take up arms
against three, is not only of the same stock, and lignage with me, but an
importunate suter unto the Lord, for one to arbitrate the controversy.

And again, because Aram my Country and Nation is of account, and renowned for
courage, for wit, humanity, and humane knowledge; neither is the religion of
our predecessors utterly extinguished among us nor the holy faith, and
profession of our great Uncle Abraham clean forgotten and abolished: therefore
though I be not so verse, 6,
grave, yet am I as great, and as honorable as these Princes themselves here
contending together in argument.

And lastly, (which is not the least, but the weightiest cause of all the rest,
and such as verse, 18
violently carries me unto it) because I am so replenished with the gifts of
Gods Spirit, that if they should have no vent, would break me in pieces, as
we see the new Wine does the verse, 19
barrels that are closed up, be they never so strong; and so inflamed with so
great a verse, 2.5.
zeal of Gods glory, that like unto the fire of a hot burning Furance, it
cannot be contained, but will forcibly come forth, whatsoever resistance be
laid against it.

It is a high step I confess that I climb unto, and a great office that I
undertake, to moderate between such learned and wife men, to determine of such
profound and hard questions: and I do acknowledge that it belongs rather to
a man of more experience. Howbeit for that I see the verse. 7, 8, 9, 10.
aged are led into error as well at others, neither is true judgment always
found in the gray-heade, but the Lord gives it where it pleases him, induing
young men sometimes with more soundness of understanding, with more sharpness
of wit, then the elder sort: having yielded them that reverence which is due
unto the^ in giving place and leave to debate the points of doctrine in
question between them, until they had no more to say on either side I cannot
perceive, why I should conceive to my self, any discouragement by means of my
youth, but rather in the former respects, as being called unto this business by
the motion of Gods holy Spirit, and it being the Lords work, assume unto my
self without all fear or doubting, the anthoritie thereunto appertaining, and
proceed with courage in giving my sentence. Wherein my purpose is, to set down
plainly, and omitting all circumstances of speech, to verse 21, 22
name still the parties whom I reprehend, according as they are ordinatily and
usually called. For it is a fault to use cunning this way for fear of blame,
(as the manner of some is) who will not say expressly, It is you that thus
offend: but the wicked man, choosing rather in general terms, and so in the
clouds, in a dark and obscure sort to utter forth their minds, rather then
in famillar and evident manner. This is too much nicenes, and it bewrayes some
subtlety in us, some weakness also, and want of courage to reprove: want of
uprightness to commend freely, and according to the truth.

The titles, the authority, the greatness of men must not be regarded, neither
must we be carried with affection toward any to pervert judgment, no partial
dealing, no couloring or smothering of things must be admitted: all flattery,
smoothing, fauning upon any man's person, favoring one side more then another,
winking at one man's fault, and wounding the cause of another, must be banished
from hence. For he that is faulty any of these verse 22
ways, the wind of the Lords indignation shall go over him, and he shall be
no more scene.

Yea, he that uses any means to keep back the due execution of Justice, or
stops the truth from coming abroad into the light, shall be taken at
unawares, and perrish in a moment.

No man for that he is terrified with the excellency of some man's person, or
place, desisting to do his office, though he hold but a low and mean place in
the common wealth, shall escape unpunished: much less the^ may I, that am
appointed to sit here in Gods stead, and that in the Highest room, in a
matter for the Church, and that not of the smallest weight, think it will go
well with me, if I dally and trifle in it, if I look more unto men whom it
concerns, then unto the equity, and verity of the thing it self that is to
be compounded.

THe manner which I determine to observe herein, Chap. 32.
shall not be insuch verse. 14.
acerbitie as you which profess your selves the friends of Job have used, but
I will show my self much more mild and merciful toward him, I will make
more fit and reasonable applications of my doctrines. You have exceeded all
modesty, I will strive to keep my self within the listes thereof: you have
condemned him for his former life, when he lived in prosperity, thereunto I
cannot be induced, only I shall reprone him for his raging against God,
together with the rest of his vnreuerent behavior toward him since the time of
his visitation. Job provoked you by his speeches to deal more roughly with
him, me he has not verse 14.
touched; you were moved with anger, zeal of Gods glory has stirred me up:
for that I saw the Lords glory defaced, my heart was wounded, and my spirit
thereupon kindled within me; you contended for the victory after a fleshly
manner, because of the assembly here present.

The arguments which I shall produce, chap. 33 verse 3.
shall be * only divine, well premeditated; yours were intermingled with much
humane Learning, or Leasing rather, and very much extemporarie stuff. You
suppose this makes strongly on your behalf, for the evicting of Job to be a
wicked man, that he is handled in this rigorous sort by the Lord, who, had not
his sins called for it, Chap, 32, ver. 3.11.12. All the matter following unto
the 3 Cumata depends heerevpon.
would not have been drawn unto it, and therefore you are contented to be
silent, and would have this very thing, together with that his striving against
God, and calling his holiness into question, to speak for you, and confute him
as obstinate and wilful, given over to a reprobate mind, a refuser of
wholesome admonition, a reiecter of his own salvation: but I am persuaded, that
the Lords hand upon Job in that heaviness, does not strengthen at all your
assertion concerning the greatness of his sins, that he has sufficiently
refelled your reasons, stopped your mouths, with plain and evident
demonstrations, in such wise, as that you have nothing to reply, as being
drawn from the infallible rules of Gods word, which from time to time he has
revealed in vision, that he has convinced also your consciences of error,
ignorance, untruth, and unjust dealing against him. And for mine own behalf,
I make no doubt, though you, nor no man else beside as of himself, or by his
own wisdom or profunditie is able, yet the Lord is able to bring him even by
me, a weaker means the^ your selves, to a sight of his folly which he has
committed in this disputation, and a more reverent regard of his majesty.

You see therefore what difference there is between the course that I shall
take, and yours, what disagreements there is in our judgments concerning Job,
and to how much better an end I hope to bring the matter? Attend now while I
further show you wherein you have failed. Among many other things which you
have lay de unto his charge, this has not been the least (as before I urged)
that he is a perverse and obstinate offender, such a one, as by no means can
be brought to acknowledge his fault, when you your selves are culpable of this
crime, and not he. For obstinacy is not to stand stiffly in the defense of the
truth, as Job has done: but in an error, which is your case.

Moreover, where he is innocent, there you labor to find a hole in his
coat: but where he is guilty, and to be blamed, there you press not home
enough to his conscience. As namely, that he stands too much in his own
light, in that he acknowledges not his sins to deserve so great punishment
as he indureth; co^plaineth too extremely hereof, is not humbled enough in his
own eyes, derogateth greatly from the Lords goodness to make strong his own,
dreadeth not the Lord as he ought, neither yields that obedience and
submission unto him as is due.

The latter of these two, argues a want of that judgment, understanding, and
wisdom, together with that temper in your affections as had been requisite,
for otherwise (but that ye were blinded thereby) you would not have ouerslipped
such manifest faults: the former, a want of love and equity. Yea, it
convinces you of impudency, that you would vpbrayde him with obstinacy for
defending his innocence, in whom you had seen an hatred of vice, and a
continual practice of all virtue. Righteous judgment is accompanied with none
of all these. And in truth, these laid together, first to errein judgment,
then wilsully to persist therein, who^ our experience teaches, and our
conscience tells us it is otherwise, to conceive hardly of our brother, upon
some fond imagination of our own, and to condemn him thereupon, without any
regard of many evident arguments to the contrary, and those so cleer^ to that
we cannot avoid the^, but must needs yield unto them, yea so forceable, that
they drive us to utter silence, is a sin committed not only with a high hand,
but bearing it self against a manifest and known truth, with a stubborn heart
and impudent forehead.

ANd thus having delivered my judgment concerning thine Accusers, Chap. 33.
I now (Job) verse 1.
convert my speech wholly unto thee. And seeing my words are not vain and idle,
but of weight, pure, perfect; not rash and inconsiderate, but grounded in me
before, and thoroughly premeditated for this purpose, not proceeding from a
preiudicate opinion, but from the singlenes of a sincere verse 3.
heart, from a well tempered affection, from a mind rightly disposed, afford
the^ thine attention. Which also thou may do without verse 7.
terror or astonishment, because I am not as the Lord, whose glory would
ouer-whelme thee, nor of that excellency as the Angels, with whom thou
might not for their beauty and majesty (above that is in man) be familiar,
but such a creature, into whom the Lord has inspired a humane soul, such a
one as is framed of the same verse, 6.
matter, appointed to the same condition, of the same lineaments, proportion of
body with thy self, and as is every way according to thy desire. I will take
therefore the Lords verse 6,
part, stand for the defense of his Justice, deal with thee hand to hand,
calling for no man to assist me, that so the combat may not be unequal as
before. And though I be appointed to compound this controuerfie, and what end I
make of it the same must stand, yet for all that, it shall be lawful for thee
(according as thou have often desired) to give in thy verse, 5, 3^
reasons, demand mine aunswers if thou shall have ought to say against that
shall be alleged by me, before I grow to censure thee.

WHerefore, Chap. 34.
that I may bring my allegations against thee, as I have done against thy
Accusers, the first accusation which I have against thee, is for that thou
affirmest the Lord can find verse 8, 9. There is none iniquity in me.
nothing against thee if he would examine thy deeds never so strictly,
whereby he should afflict thee in this manner, unless leaning his revealed
will, which he has given as a perfect rule of our life, should go unto his
hidden and unrevealed will, and thereafter, not because of thy deserts, but
because of his own decree, execute his judgments upon thee. When in truth the
most righteous man, if he should be handled accordingly, deserves by reason
of his transgression, not only the most extreme temporal calamity that can
be devised, but endless torments in the life to come. For be it, that the Lord
has engraven his will in the tables of thy heart, and many ways purged the
same by the fire of his spirit, it being notwithstanding wholly corrupted,
unless he should consume it all, how can it be all pure? it being deceitful
and wicked, a above that any man knows or conceiueth, how can thou say of
it, that because of some good inclinations therein, that it is utterly clean
from all sin?

Hence it is, that in the defense of thine innocence thou go too far,
when one while thou vtterest forth this voice, verse, 10.
My innocence is thus, and thus, yet am I handled in this grievous manner as
you see: and hereupon complainest continually, though somewhat more warily of
the Lords hard measure which he offers thee, in a bitter style, and in thy
heat, the fit of thy disease coming strongly upon thee, cryest out openly of
his violence toward thee: when another-while thou appealest to the Lords
Tribunal seat, desiring to have thine innocence there tried, and that so
securely and confidently, as if thou had to do with a mortal man: with so
little awe, and honor of his Majesty, as if he were meaner then the meanest
upon the face of the earth. There is no reason indeed thou should yield to
the imputations that are laid upon thy former life: and there is as little
reason thou should go about to clear thy self from all offense, telling
us still that thou art pure, and there is no iniquity in thee. What if in
regard of men thou were unblameable, what if in regard of thine own conscience
thou were upright, does it therefore follow, that there was nothing amiss in
thee in the sight of verse 12 God is greater then man.
God?

But howsoever it were with thee before, sure I am that for this action thou
art greatly to be blamed. For while thou indeuourest to maintain thine own
innocence, thou art so hot, Chap. 33. ver. 9.10.11.
and headstrong in it, that thou forgettest the Lords righteousness: so that
there being a gain one way, there is a greater loss another way; getting
honor to thy self, thou impairest the honor which should be given to the
Lord: beating down these thy fleshly Accusers, thou openest a gappe to the
spiritual and capital A c^user Satan, the better to bring his bill of
Indictment against thee, and to charge thee of blasphemy: and I see not how
thou can escape it neither, unless it be so that thy heart and thy tongue
have not consented together, which is the most favorable construction can
beyeelded in this behalf.

It must needs be confessed, that the unjust imputations of thine Accusers,
laying to thy charge very confidently, one after another, again and again,
every one in his order, beginning, proceeding, and ending with them, things
whereof thou art no way guilty, were great means to draw thee to this
excess: yet will not this excuse thee. The like must be acknowledged of the
complaining of thy calamity, so odious, that it would loath the ears of any
man, so tedious, that it would tire the patientest spirit in the world to hear
it: which declares that it cannot be chosen, but that it must be highly
displeasing to the Lord.

Neither will this free thee from blame herein, more then the former, that
thou were compelled unto it through the violence of thy disease: whereby thy
heart being grieved out of measure, thy affections exceeded the mean. For these
are tentations wherewith the Lord uses to try what is in man, which he
bids him resist, and not yield unto; showing him withal, the danger that
will ensue upon it if he do not withstand them: as that before, as long as
he fought manfully against tentations, he was under the Lords banner, now for
his cowardice, he is brought under the captivity of Satan. This Satan, moving
my familiar friends to revile and slander me, shall I go so far in the
justifying of my self, that I shall deny that I am a finner? This thou do,
in denying that thou have not transgressed against the Lords revealed will. For
sin is a breaking hereof, without which there is no finne, because of which
only, and for no other cause, all men are finners: so in the case of
affliction: when the hand of God lies heavily upon me, to try what is in
me, shall I suffer the corruptions of my heart to break out without restraint,
and think that I have not offended? When there is no more noble victory in the
world then to subdue it and keep it under, nothing that can redownd more to
my reproach and shame then to give it way and let it prevail. When if I do the
one, heaven shall be my reward, if I do the other, my portion shall be the
same with his, that working upon my corrupt affections, accomplisheth his
desire in them, and conquereth me? This is it therefore that puts a
difference between the Citizens of heaven, and the firebrarnds of hell. The
one bear with patience and long suffering, cheerfully and thankfully the
Lords chastisements, suppress their evil affections, abstain from evil
words: the other, yielding the raines unto both, murmr and grudge in their
hearts, curse and blaspheme with their tongues, whenever they fall into any
calamity.

Though peradventure thou go not so far as this, yet that thou moderatest
thine affections no better, but give way unto them, as thy words do bewray,
does evidently show, that there is great wickedness and rebellion even in thy
heart against God, and that thou art not far from the blasphemy of the same.

But to prosecute a little the matter of grudging, Chap. 33. ver. 8.9.10.
and repining against GOD, (for if we may judge by thy words, thou do no
better) this very one fault alone makes evident to all men, that thou
think thy self more just then he. For no man is stirred up to anger,
moved to impatience, and murmuring against a thing, but he conceiueth a reason
unto himself, why he is so affected, and that reason he approves of, as the
strongest and soundest of all other, and disaloweth the contrary; accounts
of this action of his, as just and right, and of whatsoever opposes it self
unto it, as unjust and unrighteous.

Whereas therefore in this time of thy visitation, thou subscribest not to the
Lords ordinance, submittest not thy self, neither willingly referrest thy
self wholly over unto him, to do with thee whatsoever best pleases him, he
not revealing the cause thereof unto thee, waitest not, nor expectest with
patience until it shall please him to declare the same, but art out of measure
discontented withal, thou preferrest doubtless thine own wisdom before
his, thy righteousness before his that is most righteous, and so iustifiest
thy self more then God.

Even to wish and desire only, as thou do, that is might be lawful for us
to dispute with God about our trouble, though there be no purpose in us to
accuse him of injustice, is a sufficient argument to prove that we are not
pure, because God is infinitely greater, more to be admired, and honored for
his excellent virtues of wisdom, instice, together with the rest of all
sorts, then any of the sons of men, then Adam himself in his first creation,
yea then the Angels themselves, howsoever adorned with most divine parts. O how
much better therefore had it been for thee, not to have inquired of the cause,
but to have been still and silent when the Lord struck thee: not to have
called into question his judgments, but to have reverenced them, not to have
demanded why, not to have stood in thine own defense, not to have called for
his indictment: but to have humbled thy self under his hand, to have trembled
and feared when he held up his rod against thee, to have confessed thy
faults, brought thine in ditement in thy hand, even to thine own condemnation,
cried out and exclaimed against thy self, instantly craving pardon, for that
thou wast disobedient and disloyal unto him.

IS this such news that he shuts thee up in prison, Chap. 33. verse 11.
that have no way offended him as thou supposest, and will not let thee know
the cause of it though thou ver. 13, why do thou strive with him?
strive and struggle with him never so much about it? For is he verse 13. He
does not give account of his matters.
bound to communicate his secrets to man? are not sundry of his counself so God
is greater then man. Verse 12.
wonderful, that being laid open, man cannot comprehend them? are not many of
them such, that it is not for his profit to be made partaker of them? We have
the law of Nature, or Morrall law written in the tables of our hearts, and a
great part of his will delivered unto us in visions and dreams from time to
time, even before our eyes to guide us: And vvithall, he verse 14.15, 16, 17.
fore-warneth every one of us in his time, in his place, severally before hand,
more or less, either by one means or other, of his secret judgments, which
he determines to bring upon us, though our dulnes be such that we see it
not, our carelessness so great that we observe it not, but shut our eyes
against the means when they offer themselves, and against the daily
admonitions which he gives us in other men's harms, whereby he intends to
instruct us. Oftentimes verse, 14, 29
he does this, uses all these means, leaves no way unattempted, that may
stir us up to prevent his judgments. And there is no wise man, though
peradventure at the first he may stand amazed, not knowing how to demean
himself, but at the last will be admonished.

Some there are indeed that will take no warning, the first, second, third,
fourth, fortieth caveat, because they are hardened in their wickedness, will
do no good upon them. It is just therefore with the Lord, not to vouchsafe to
manifest any further unto such, or to give them any more the least light into
the cause of his proceeding against them: but they, denying after so many
admonitions to harken unto him, it is a righteous thing with him, to deny
utterly to communicate his will unto them: to refuse afterward to gratify them
never so little, that have refused his instructions so often tendered unto
them, though they make loud cries unto him, be most earnest and importunate
with him about it. True it is, that all his councels, all his judgments, which
he has decreed upon the sons of men, he participateth to no man, to no
Prophet, to no Angel, but yet many more of them to his faithful servant,
then to others. Howbeit, he fore-warneth every man, and that sundry times,
either when he is sleeping, by some divine dream, such as greatly disquieteth
him, or when he is waking, by some vision in the dead time of the night, or in
some solitary place in the day time, fit for contemplation: or else, if these
will not stay him from transgression, by the execution of the fearful, and
grievous punishments verse 16, 17, 18.
foretold therein upon him. As by afflicting of him so in verse 19.
body, that he can take no verse 20.
sustenaunce, but has a loathing of the choicest food that can be prepared
for him: and hereby has his verse 21, 22
flesh consumed, his bones dried up, and is ready to enter into the pit.

And then withal, sends unto him some Man of knowledge, of excellent and
rare gifts, such a one as if thou should make thy choice of the wisest and
best disposed persons in a whole Verse 23
Country, thou could not find the like, culled out of the World, and set
apart for this purpose, roundly to tell him wherein he has offended, and
soundly to instruct and inform him of the way that he must take for to get
verse 23
out of his misery (for the Lord does not his work by halues.) Which if it
cause in him an acknowledgement, Verse 27
and confession that he has offended the Lord, and grace to Verse 26
call upon him in assurance of his mercy, he shall command that Prophet of his
to proclaim Verse 24
unto him that his sins are pardoned, and a reconcilement is made with him. And
so shall his strength notonly be restored to that it was before, but renewed
verse 25
again, and made like unto that it was in the prime, and flower of his time:
his Verse 28
body shall be freed from all affliction, and the same, together with his
soul, not only saved from eternal darkness, but made partaker, of the
joyful light of the Lords most glorious presence, the fullness, and
perfection of all blessedness.

COnsider Job seriously with thy self, Chap. 33, v, 31 Mark well Job.
whether the Lord has not used these means, to reclaim thee from thy
vnreuerent carriage toward him, in this thy calamity? For he calling upon thee
these ways, thou ought to have given ear unto him forthwith, and not to
have deferred the time to return unto him; for thee to be dull of
understanding, or to harden thy heart when thou understand, are such faults,
as he cannot endure. He having acquainted thee with his mind once: And again,
he loves not to beat it into thy head any more, neither can he abide such a
dullard as is not capable of his meaning with competent instruction, but
delights in such a one, that assooone as he admonishes him any way, will
stir up his wits by and by, and labor to conceive what he will have him to
do, and when he has attained unto it, be forward and careful to accomplish it
out of hand, whatsoever it is. This is his course with all men. He fails not
to give them such, and so many instructions, as shall be sufficient for them:
but he will not go beyond this stint. He allows every man time enough to
advise of his admonitions: but this being expired, and refusal made, though
he be sought unto with tears and lamentation, yet will he not incline his
ear.

But this thy affliction, which is one of the means, whereby the Lord uses to
instruct us, and proves his greatness above that which is man, (for what man is
able to bring any trouble upon the Lord) no less then the arguments
hitherunto produced, which I have drawn partly from the nature and admirable
virtues of the Almighty, partly from the ignorance of man, not able to reach
unto his counsels, partly from his dullness when he is admonished of his
judgments not to understand them, and partly from his carelessness not to mark
when he informs him: this thy affliction (I say) still continuing upon thee,
plainly declares, that though he has peradventure forewarned thee before of
his displeasure for thy misdemeanor in thy speeches, yet he has not as yet
given thee over, but still offers thee salvation upon thy repentance. Which
because thou can not be persuaded unto, he does handle thee more rigorously,
and increase his anger more and more, that thereby thou might be compelled
unto it. Neither will he be induced to listen unto thee, for the easing thee
of thy extremity, until such time as thou do acknowledge thy faults committed
against him in this action, and humble thy self. Whatsoever therefore thou
conceiuest of thy scuere chastizement, the end thereof notwithstanding
shows, that it is for thy good. For what can be better, then this way to
imprint in thy mind, none otherwise then by dreams and visions that either the
Lord has already (and hereof I am persuaded for mine own part in regard of
thy present evil behavior) or should have, by some other greater
transgression, which he fore sees thou art about to fall into, something
against thee, that so thou having offended (as doubtless thou have in the
words that have passed from thee in this thy misery) thou might lay to
amend: or seeing thee running into some more notorious offense, by this
visitation thou might be prevented and stayed from it: thy pride of heart,
Abimelech Laban.
(for heereunto thou seems to be very much inclined, then the which no pain
is more dangerous unto Man, nothing more detestable in the eyes of the L.)
might be pulled down. Not miserable. and wretched therefore as thou supposest,
but most blessed, (but yt thou can not see into it) is thy estate now, in
respect of that it might have bin, if thou had bin let go^ on in thy
course, without correction. But most happy of al, in that the Lord has raised
up one (and let it be admitted that I am the man) to put thee in mind of that
is amiss in thee, and so to redeem thy life from perishing, by believing the
Lords promises made to all penitent sinners, through the immaculate Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world; not to look upon thine own righteousness
verse 23
being altogether imperfect, but to seek to be made righteous through him,
whose righteousness alone is able to justify thee before God; Even such a one
as will be an earnest suitor James 5.
unto the Lord for thee, and never give over, until he has obtained for thee
atonement with the Lord, a recovering again, or rather a doubling of the
Lords favorable countenance unto that thou did formerly enjoy: I infer
this conclusion, because these things here arising from the 31. verse are
brought in according as every thing else in Elshu. His speech looks that way,
as a proof of the 12. verse of this 33. Chap (Viz:) I will answer thee that
God is greater then man.
inward comfort, peace of conscience, a confidence that thy sins are
forgiven thee, much greater then that thou had before, which also he shall
publish in the ears of the congregation to thy inestinable consolation, and
joy of heart. All these are plain evidences of the Lords greatness; the
greatness of his wisdom, mercy, and justice together with the rest of his
attributes, which are as inseperable as is his Godhead: above that which is in
man.

THis I have spoken not with a mind to overthrow thy innocence, which I wish
rather thou were able to approve, that so I might Cha, 33, v, 32 I desire to
justify thee.
contend for it: but that thou might see, what important reasons there are
to the contrary. But if thou think still, notwithstanding I have used al these
prooses, to beat down that high conceit of thine, concerning purity and
perfection, which thou exaltest above the Lords, that thou have committed no
fault in the carriage of thy self and thy cause, in this disputation, but art
void of all blame, neither have gone to far in the justifying of thy self,
but given God his right to the full: produce thy Verse 32
arguments and disprove me: which if thou can not do, then let me proceed
unto that which is behind; and while I utter it, hear me with all attention
verse 33 Keep silence.
and patience, and I assure thee the matter ver. 33, I will teach thee wisdom
shall be so profitable, so necessary for thy learning, so replenished with
Divine and heavenly wisdom (for as I said in the beginning, the Lord has
inspired it into my heart from above) thou shall not repent thee of thy
diligence. Chap. 34
I refer me to the Wisemen verse 2
here present, such as are able to discern, whether in saying thou art ver. 5,
righteous, innocent, and pure, God has not done thee right, for thou have not
offended, no way deserved this grievous calamity, thou do not openly speak
against God? Let this whole assembly judge, whether thou should do thy self
most injury, (or to use thine own phrase) belie verse 6.
thy self most, if thou should acknowledge to have transgressed in this thy
affliction: or the Lord if thou should deny the same? Who sees not that
these and such like speeches of thine, bring thee into derision, verse 7,
even with the very scum of the world, of whom thou so much complainest, and
make all Men of knowledge, among whom thou have bin numbered heretofore, ashamed
of thee? And in truth, is it possible any man to forbear to scorn thee in an
holy and Godly manner, thou carrying thy self in contemptious sort against the
righteous God? No marvel though thou have reproaches cast upon thee at all
hands, and it be a thing as ordinary with thee, as thy meat or drink Drinks
scorufulness^ like waters. ver. 7
digest them as thou can: seeing thy words, and the words of them that are at
defiance with God ver. 8
agree together: thy actions, and others are very consonant? For is not this a
position with such, and do they not express it in their practice, that the
Lords care does not extend to all alike, good, and bad? Let a Man live as he
list, or let him keep himself within the compass of Gods command the best he
can, all is one, his regard shall be the same? And is not this also an axiom
ver, 9
with thee, and does not thy behavior declare as much? How say ye that are men
of understanding? ver, 10
Is not this good stuff? Can there be any greater pulbacke to the Servants of
God, then to persuade them, yt let them endure what they will for his sake, let
them be as serviceable as possibly can be unto him, there is no recompense
notwithstanding in store for them: but the undutiful, the disobedient, the
obstinat and rebellious, shall be in like reckoning and account with him, for
all that? If this be not to esteem of God as of one that has no respect unto
his followers, bears not a beautiful mind to such as depend upon him,
neglects the duty of equity and love to those that have by all means possible
sought to please him, and to win his good liking: what may we imagine it to be?
If this be not to disanull gods providence in general, and his special
providence over his Church, and Children? what shall we make of it? If this be
not to turn the Lords excellent order in the government of the world, into
confusion, what is there that can do it?

FOr the confutation therefore hereof, Chap. 34
and that we may purge the almighty of this blot of disorder, and injustice in
his Kingly office, which he holds over all the Princes of the earth, people,
and Nations, as supreame-head to dispose of all things therein; and concerning
all men from the highest and greatest Monarch, unto the lowest and meanest
subject: look up with me ye that are Men of knowledge, to the firmament of
heaven, and see what an excellent order he keeps there: Behold the face of
the Verse 15
earth, and observe his government there: consider that he alone created al
things at the first in those degrees, in that goodly and amiable order, in
which they now remain; fashioned them unto that comlines, wherein they are;
continues them still in frame, that he alone (howsoever it my seem to be the
work of man) is the deviser of the laws, decrees, and ordinances of every well
ordered commonwealth here beneath, and that as he is under the authority of
none but has an absolute power over all in himself, is in nature most wise,
holy, righteous, abundant in kindness to all, so is his eye of goodness
reached out chiefly unto such: his arm of protection principally streached
over such as deuote themselves unto his service and obedience, neither may any
shorten away or alter the course of them. For he having provided them for
these, the property of them must not be changed, but they must have them in the
cheef place: and first every one according as he shall be found most worthy,
in ye performance of his duty. Which course of his, though it be not always on
foot, neither will he observe it still, as soon, and as often as he would have
him: yet he fails not Verse 13
evermore to keep it first or last; in this life, or that which is to come,
according as it shall seem best unto him to put it in place and execution. But
if he should deal with the godly after this rule continually, and never swerve
from it here in this life: yet according to thy desire for thy self, those
that are most virtuous of all other, should be never the near for reaping of
any temporal blessings (no nor spiritual and eternal neither) any favor or
mercy whatsoever, more the the wicked. For thou make thy supplycation that
thy worthiness might be thought upon, which alas, were it verse 14
straightly looked into, how would thou, together with all the living, be
deceived of thy hope: and in stead thereof have the curse of God always
following thee at the heels here in this life, and the sentence of death and
condemnation after this life ended, to pass upon thee and them, to the utter
consuming of al flesh verse 15
. I suppose Job thou art of more understanding Verse 16
(and I pray thee if there be any thing in thee mark what I shall say unto
thee) then so to conceive of him that is the founder of the law, as not to be a
lover of Verse 17
equity, which is the only thing that it intends to bring men unto. For to
give the Lord his due, and man his due (which is nothing else, but equity and
justice) is all that it requires. And I think thou art of more discretion,
then to believe, that he which is Lord over all the world, should be an enemy
unto right, a chief pillar to support his Kingdom. I persuade my self, thou
would not dare to complain publikcly of a man of eminent place and in great
estimation, for the due execution of his office, much less to speak evil of a
King Verse 18
that commands to death who^ he will, that appoints what punishment he
will, how extreme soever unto offenders: remember then, that thou have bin too
forward in thy accusations against him that is highest, and most eminent, above
King and Kesar, mightiest and greatest Emperor or Monarch of the earth,
infinitely lifted up above that prince and god of this world: which rules in
the air above those glorious thrones, principalities and powers, in heavenly
places: that is renowned before all, most absolute in his place, and without
exception, more perfect, and complet in himself, then the virtues of all men
joined together in one could make him; that regards not kindred, nor cuntry,
nor condition, but valeweth one as he does another, waigheth every one in the
same balance, puts no difference between the learned, and unlearned, rich
and poor, Prince Verse 19
and people, but esteems of each person in like sort, because he made them
al; put no distinction between them in nature, but framed them of one and the
self same substance equally.

The difference that is, is for order sake among our selves, which he will have
to be kept, and an account to be yealded him according to our degrees: But in
respect of himself, there is no privilege, or prerogative belonging to any
above his fellows: Because there is no man, but is his subject, and bound in
like manner as others are to obey his Laws: to which all mankind without any
exemption are tied, under pain of eternal damnation to submit themselves.
Against him there is no Man that is able to make resistance, in respect of him
whole Nations and Kingdoms are as one verse 15.
Man, altogether unable to withstand his power: at his pleasure these must be
translated, The people shall be troubled at midnight. verse 20
and brought to nothing: and then too when they seem to be verse 20. They
shall dye suddenly.
furthest of all from it, must perish in a moment, and come to confusion, and
that without any ado, without the help Shall take away the mighty without
hand, verse 20
of Man: the beck of the Lord only shall either change and alter them in
another form, or cause them utterly to vanish away, according as his will is,
and so too, that they themselves notwithstanding being Judges verse 23
shall be compelled to confess, be has done them nothing but right, nothing
but that which is reasonable, and equal.

VVHeras therefore they having escaped a long time for many notorious crimes,
Chap, 34
they now committing nothing so foul and heinous as heretofore, the Lord
notwithstanding breaks out against them, and brings them to destruction is
no strange thing, because his eyes were upon their former verse 21
ways, neither were any of them hidden from his sight. For there is nothing
past but he keeps a regester of it, nothing so verse 22
closely, secretly, obscurely, or cunningly done, but he beholds it even as
clearly, as when a thing is acted in the face of the World at Noonday.
Which though he will not seem to see for the present, yet afterward least they,
or others by the example of such, should flatter themselves in their
wickedness, or imagine him to be forgetful of that which is past, or ignorant
of that which is committed in the dark, or else unjust in suffering iniquity
to go unpunished: hoe will make it evident to all Men, that he marked it well
enough.

Howbeit even then he will so moderate the matter, that their mouth shall be
stopped up from complaining of hard measure, and shall be forced to
acknowledge, that it is nothing above, but rather much less then their sins
have called for. If any suppose that their might or multitude, may exclude them
from the hand of the Lord, they deceive themselves. For the Almighty is of
power to turn their Sunshine into darkness, their glory into shame, how
strong Verse 24
and puisant soever they be, that have played the rebels against him: And let
them be sure, though all men conceal their misdeedes, or be are them out in
them, maintain and defend them in their wickedness, yet he is of strength to
draw them out of their lurking places, and set them upon an open theater, Verse
25, 26
and there to cause their abominations to be written in great Capital Letters,
to be read of all the spectators, not of one City alone, but of the whole
company and host of Heaven and earth. And all for this cause, because they
refused to understand Verse 27
when they might, what belonged to their good, and contemned the God of their
salvation. The cry of the poor, whom they have oppressed Verse 28
with their infinite wrongs, piercing the heavens, and ascending up unto his
throne, has caused the Lord to descend down, and make them feel the force of
his Arm. Whom when he has broken in pieces, and utterly consumed with the
strength thereof, he then gives a time of refreshing verse 29
unto those his supplyantes, establishes peace in their borders, for the time
to come, even as long as they continue loyal and dutiful subjects unto him,
in such sort that no man, no Who can make trovble? Ver. 29
Tyrant shall be able to trouble their tranquillity, for the Lord frowneth upon
him who dares to take his part. The hatred that the Lord bears to the
haughty and proud spirit, to the cruel and savage heart, on the one side,
provoke him to pull him down: the goodness of his nature, k on the other side
binds him to help the afflicted, and through his power he brings to pass
whatsoever he will. These as they go together, so are they unchangeable in him,
and therefore when he will shake off the yoke of the oppressor, be he never
so mighty, from the neeks of the distressed people, it must be so, there is no
changing of his mind, there is no persuading him to the contrary. Nay, they
that shall go about to do it, though they be whole nations, When he hides his
face who can behold him, whether it be upon nations, or a man only? verse 29
Chap, 34
and countries: yea though all the world should be met together about it, and
deal with him only by way of supplycation, he would be so far from
condescending unto them, that according as hoe makes the Mountains to
tremble, so would he make their hearts to quake with the sternnesse of his
looks.

THere is no striving therefore Job for thee with thelord: if Ver, 31. Like unto
that, Psalm 3, verse 8
his pleasure be to afflict thee still, thou must be contented with it, if to
send thee deliverance thou must praise him for it. But if it shall seem good
unto him to be gracious unto thee, and to redeem thee out of this thy trouble,
upon thy calling to mind how lewdly thou have behaved thy self in this thy
misery, then there is no further I will not destroy. V, 31
danger behind: Otherwise, his indignation shall hang over thy head still,
though he forbear thee for a time. Let me advise thee therefore, to that which
belongs to every man's duty, which is, that though thou know nothing amiss
in thy self, yet because the Lord is clearer sighted then thou art, cry unto
him for mercy, profess thy self to be ignorant of many things, and desirous
If I see not, teach thou me. Verse 32
to be taught of him; unable to stand of thy self, and willing to be
strengthened by him; a transgressour of his covenant, a grieved sinner, and that
thy care is for nothing so much as to be reconciled unto him, and If I have
done wicked ly I will do no more. V, 32
lead a new life, thereby to have his favor continued unto thee.

For the way that thou take to accuse the Lord as a rigorous Judge, and to
assume unto thy self so much wise-dome, as to prescribe him how to execute his
judgments: is in no sort to be admitted. And be sure if thou despise my
counsel and proceed in it, Verse 33
he will not assuage his wrath, but be incensed more and more against thee. And
now thou have my mind, against which in the defense of such absudities as thou
have broached, I think thou can have very little to say, but if thou haft any
thing thou may produce it. If thou neither wilt nor can answer any thing
for thy self (for one must needs follow because thy mouth is stopped up) I am
contented to endure the censure of the^ that stand by, being men of wise dome,
Verse 34.35
and judgment, whether I have not clearly proved thee to be a man wanting both
knowledge and descretion? My prayer therefore (for their silence shows that
this whole company does consent unto me) unto the Lord for thee is, that he
would follow Verse 36
thee on still with his corrections, even so long until thou be so humbled in
thine own eyes, that thou shall acknowledge thy self to have transgressed in
thy answers unto thy friends. This my prayer though it may seem very harsh, yet
surely it is such, as I know not how to make a more profitable for thee,
because if thou should be permitted to conclude according to thy proceeding
hetherunto, albe it the Lord did afflict thee at the first, for no great
extraordinary or flagitious crime, yet as he has already laid his hand more
heavy upon thee, for that thou growest every day to an higher degree of sin,
so shall he be forced (thou increasing in thy contumely) to augment Verse 37
the weight thereof till he shall have thrown thee down unrecoverably.

And verily it is to be feared, that unless the Lord show himself mighty in
subduing the rebellion of thy heart, thou art growing apace into a most
dangerous estate, insomuch that (say what I can in the Lords behalf) yet thou will for all that clappe thy hands at me as thou did at thy friends, in
token of victory; wilt also multiply words at the length, notwithstanding thy
present silence, to the defacing not of us alone that are the image of God, but
to the blemishing of the beauty of his own honor.

The zeal of this glory of his, makes me to desire of him to keep thee
still under his chastizementes, because I know there is no better way to give
thee a light into thy errors, and to teach thee what belongs unto thy duty
toward God, then this means.

FOr this duty thou art still to learn, Chap, 35
otherwise thou would have more government of thy tongue, then thus to
ouershoot thy self, and say: What Justice may be expected at the hands of the
Lord, when he has no more regard of the innocent crying unto him in his
oppression, verse 3
then of the most wicked liver. chap, 7, 20
And as for affliction, it is a great word in thy mouth * c that there is no
use of that, verse 4
and therefore for me to pray for the continuing of that any longer upon thee,
whereof thou have had too much and too redious a trial already: is but a vain
thing. This is that which every man condemns in thee for a foul fault, which
I must now again, (and the rather, because thy friends have not satisfied the
auditory in it) take in hand to confute.

Be it therefore that the Lord puts no difference between thee, being a
good man (for I know this pleases thee well, and I am contented to grant it
thee for disputation sake) and another man that is evil, but afflicts you
both, scourges you both alike, and in the same measure and manner: Will thou
challenge him for it, that is so far above thee, verse 5
as the heavens * d are above the earth? Why do thou not rather consider,
that as the wickedness of the other cannot hurt him, so cannot thy goodness
Shethakim though it properly signify the upper region of the air, and so is
used for the clouds, as coming of Shathak contundere to break in pieces,
noting thinnes and the subtlenes of the substance of it, yet it is taken
oftentimes and so here, as the matter shows, for the highest part of the
heavens which we see, verse 6.7,
profit him or make him indebted unto thee. For howsoever it fares with the
actions of men, be they virtuous, or be they vicious: look notwithstanding
what the Majesty of Gods king dome has been from everlasting, it does still
remain the same without any increase, or decrease at all: Indeed in respect of
us, it is otherwise. For the godly inciting others to the praising of God, and
a virtuous life by their good example, the ungodly drawing on others to the
contemning of his name, and casting off all care to do well, by their inordinat
walking: do in regard of men, added honor and dishonor unto the Lords kingdom.

Howbeit, this is nothing to the amplifieng or impairing of it, as it is in it
self. For so the brightness of it is in that Psalm. 16, 2.
perfection, that no blotte can stain it; the glory of it in that excellency,
that no beauty can be cast unto it, more to adorn it.

Understand then, that if the Lord please to bestow health and other blessings
of this life upon us, it is not because he has received any good Introduced
because of that ver. 2, of this chap.
from us, that moved him to affect us, but it has proceeded merely from his
own merciful inclination. Or if he please to execute his judgments upon the
reprobate ones, or his chastisements upon his own, having disobeyed him; it
is not for that his kingdom must needs go to the ground, did he not auendge
himself upon the one (according as it is with a man if he prevail not
against his enemy) and did he not cause the otherby some feuere means to come
in again to do him homage. But for that the end why he made the world, the
preservation namely of the elect should be frustrate, if he should not
sometimes proceed unto judgment even here in this life against the one, and
his ordinance and decree concerning the other, namely the salvation of their
souls should be made void (if he should not keep them under discipline.) Let
the latter be thine own estate, which if it be so good, shall not the Lord
deal well by thee in continuing this calamity yet longer, seeing that which
thou have hitherunto endured, has not (how bitter and grievous soever it has
bin, a thing that thou still complainest of) wrought that in thee (Viz)
humiliation and repentance for the which it was imposed? But if thou still urge,
thou can not see how this should be, because thou art righteous; verse 2
weigh with thy self, that the Lord has some good drift in every action of
his, and because he inendeth nether his own verse 7
good, nor the good of the wicked and reprobate, in this thy conflict, he must
needs intend thy good therein.

ANd I pray thee is thy righteousness so absolur, Chap, 35
that thou need no discipline? Indeed thou would be more verse 2
righteous then God, because thou having bin an obedient subject unto him, he
handles thee like a rebel, verse 3
and when thou would confer with him about it, he chapter 30, 20, 31 35
will not be seen. But I assure thee he will handle Rebbels otherwise then he
has handled thee hetherunto, for there is a further judgment in store for
them, then that which is felt in this life. And as for a sight of the Lords
countenance (a thing which thou often calest upon him for) who ever has had it
during this mortality? and who ever almost has he vouchsafed to confer
withal here below. Those whom he has thus dignified and honored, being like
unto the seven planets in the firmament, one among infinite thousands have
carried humble and lowly minds: thou art a man of a swelling and lofty spirit,
shall he lend his ear to such a one that conceyueth no better of him, then
that he is a companion for a base and vile worm of the earth? Would thou
have him give care unto them, that cry out because of verse 9
oppression, when they er^e in the right manner of invocation, as doing it with
no hearty affection, no affiance in his help, no remembrance of singing praises
verse 10
unto him for former mercies, together with present miseries, because ordained
for their good received. For these even al of them must be in place, in the
extremest misery, otherwise there is no hope for the procuring of any blessing
from the Lord.

To cry out in their affliction is the remedy which the brute verse 11
beasts and fouls of the heaven do use: but to cry with knoledge is that which
puts a difference between them and us. Though he hear them therefore when
they barely cry unto him, yet unless it be done of us in reason, in wisdom,
in understanding, which guide us unto thanksgiving, an acknowledgement of our
faults, contrition for them, humility in his presence, dread of his Majesty,
persuasion of his power that he is able, and in his promises that he is
willing, and in his compassion that he is inclined to ease us: he will not
hear us to our benefit and the extending of his favor unto us. How then
should thy prayer prevail with him, in whom there is not only a defect if not
in all, yet in the most part of these: but also in that thou take from him all
care of his chosen, of the administering of Justice unto them: which is a
maunifest detracting from his Imperial state, Crown, and Dignity. Howbeit as
for such as direct their prayers unto him in that manner as has been
prescribed, though he may peradventure, for to exercise their patience, and
make trial of their faith, defer them for a while, yet he does not
evermore reject them, but they continuing constant, do receive them at length
in all kindness. Chap 36 verse 6, 7
Wherefore my counsel unto thee is this, which both my self and my friends have
given thee heretofore, every one in his order, and more then once, acknoledging
the Lord to he a righteous judge, submit thy self, commit thy cause unto
him, confess thou have offended in thy Conflict, depend up on him for the
clensing thee from thy misery: for then shall thy prayer be in the right form,
and then may thou expect some good to be toward thee at the chap, 36, 11
last. What though thy sins have derserued greater calamity? What though thy
tongue has vttred much vanity? What though thou have sought to make the Lords
throne the seat of injustice? yet for all that, cha, 3 5 verse 15 (...) eni^
qui^ nihil istor^^ est visitat ira ei^, brought immediately upon the counsel
which he gave him. v. 14 Iudica cora^^ (...) et ex specta (...) Tremeli and I^^
The reason of this answer of Job to Elihu being not in the text, is inserted,
because it may be very well presumed that if the L. had not immediately upon the
ending of Elihu his speech (and for this consider of the sense of chap. 36.
ver. 2) given his sentence in this controversy, that Job himself would have
answered as much and more unto it.
if thou first bewail thy Pride of heart and presumptuous speeches; and then
suest unto him for mercy, he will case thee, hopest in him he will help thee,
call upon him he will have a blessing for thee. And know for a surety, that
the want of the performance of these duties, has bin the cause of the heat of
his displeasure against thee thus long.


Job. I do acknowledge (Elihu) that the Lord who never sends away empty his
poor suppliants, has in favor unto me abundantly inspired thee with divine
wisdom, and raised thee up according to my often and fervent desire unto him
to compound this controversy. For these things are so evident, that not to
confess them twere mere wilfullnes. I do believe, that holy anger and zeal
for the truth, because of my friends unjust imputations laid upon me, and
mine own going to far, and standing to much in my defense, together with my
breaking out into unseemly words tending unto the Lords dishonor, Secondly,
because Elihu had little eased Job of the anger of the Lord toward him, for
though he cleared him for his life past: yet he condemned him for this present
action.
has moved thee thereunto. And I am heartily thankful unto the Lord for this
mercy vouchsafed me at the length, and even then when I was at the point of
desperation; and likewise unto thee for thy love, and faithful dealing,
Thirdly, because Satan used even this Elihu (though a special man) as an
instrument to move Job to blaspheme the Lords name.
in clearing me on the one side to my great contentation, and the confutation
of my accusers of blame in my life past, and on the other side, in conuincing
me of ignorance, presumption, Fourthly, because Iobe through this speech of
Elihu, (though delivered in more discretion and mildness, the^ the rest of his
friends) yet in too much acerbity, had been brought to a more desperate estate
then before, and made more headstrong in his affections, to break out against
the Lord, if he had not in most merciful manner thereupon, straight way
uttered his voice.
vntemperancy in my affections, that so I might see mine error, be cast down
in mine opinion, and conceive sorrow within my selse. Howbeit some things
there are, wherein thou do not so well acquit thy self. As first, in not
waighing so thoroughly the importunatenesse of mine accusers (and those, such as
I had a good opinion of in times past, touching very deeply my creddite, then
the which nothing is more dear unto us,) provoking me to go to far in mine
own defense: nor the vnsupportablenes of my calamity, which made me break
forth into unsavory speeches, and show my self impatient (for such
circumstances ought not to be neglected by him that will duly arbitrate a
matter) Then in making an harder construction of my words then that I intended:
and whereas I deserve to be reproved, there through the heat of thy zeal
(which is a common fault of most so Though this were a fault in Elihu, yet the
Lord reproved him not for it, neither Moses when he brake the two tables
written by the finger of God. Exodus 32, 19. Nor Phinehas Numb 25, because they
all did it in zeal of gods glory. Which declares that they which offend this
way, are to be borne with all in some measure.
affected) to exceed the mean, and to run out into overmuch bitterness.

Sharpnes I confess was fit for me, and so fit, that without it I could not
have been called home to acknowledge mine own weakness and vileness in that
manner, and in that lowliness to bow my self at the feet of the Lords
Majesty, as now I am brought: yet for any Man, specially one appointed as a
Judge in a cause to be more rough, and violent in his reprehension, then ye
nature of the offense does quire, is not commendable. For concerning the former
of these two last, namely, thy oner-hard construction of my words, I must tell
thee that thou have very much forgotten thy self, to Chap. 33 verse, 8.
say that I used any such as these: I am Chap. 33 verse 9.
pure, clean, without iniquity, free from transgression. Some others indeed
I used tending that Chap, 33 verse 18
way, but not with a purpose to justify my self (according to thy collection)
before God. For I have professed the contrary Chap. 9. ver. 2, 20.21, 14, chap.
14. ver 4
sundry times, but that I might refell the cavil of my Accusers against my
former life: and this, and no other is my meaning in all my speeches to the
like effect.

That long Chap. 34. from verse 13 to 31.
oration therefore of thine, concerning the righteousness of GOD, though it be a
worthy one, yet nothing worth to confute any thing that I have spoken, (for I
have Chap. 12.
commended it as much my self) I will not deny, but that I said the Lord has
removed away my Chap. 27. verse 2.
judgment, but I utterly deny thy interpretation thereof. For I had no thought
therein to disparage the Lords upright dealing toward me, according to thy
illation; but I conceived it in this sense, that my judgment in the sight of
men, was such as belonged to a most wicked person, and that which belonged unto
me, was not to be made a terror unto others, in my rare and fearful
punishment, because of my extraordinary wicked life, but to have my reward;
and this is removed from the eyes of men with the faithful, whom the Lord in
his mercy is wont to exempt from the horrible vengeance which he has prepared
for the ungodly.

I know well, that the righteous cannot be discerned from the unrighteous by
these outward afflictions, for that they are common as well to the one as to
the other. And yet I know again that the world is of another opinion, thinking
them only in Gods favor, that live here in a happy estate, which caused me to
utter forth these words, The Lord consumes the Chap, 9, verse, 22
just and unjust: that is to say, freeth neither of these from temporal
calamity: but this is far from that thou gatherest Chap, 12, verse 27,
thereupon, namely, that to study to please God, has no profit in it. And let
this suffice to show unto thee, that thy construction of my words, is harder
oftentimes then that I intended in them.

Now, that I may prove in like sort, that when thou have just cause to reprove
me, thou go too far, I will begin with that bitter Chap. 33. ver. 11, 12,
13, etc.
reprehension of thine arising from these words: The Lord looks Chap. 13.
verse 27,
narrowly unto my paths. For thou do so take me up for this speech, with
some other of the like nature, as if I had therevy sought to prefer my self
before verse 12,
God; or inflamed with the spirit of arrogancy, I had Chap. 33 verse 13
lifted up mine arm against him. Whereas in truth, the vehemency of my pain
forced me to utter those words, in regard whereof, thou should rather have
comforted me, and exhorted me to constancy, then to have aggrauated my sin
to my further discouragement.

Sometimes thy confutation is by way of Chap. 34, verse 2
insultation, Hear o ye Wise men, o ye of understanding harken unto me; For
what is this else, but in triumphing manner to call in all men as witnesses of
my vndiscreetnes: sometimes thou do number me among the Chap. 36 verse 17,
18, Elihu says as much elsewhere. The former place is noted though it follow,
because it is most evident of all other for this purpose.


wicked, sometimes among such with whom God is Chap. 36, verse 18,
angry, as with the rebellious and blasphemers. Only this is the difference
between thee and my other Accusers, they condemn me for my life past, thou
for my present carriage in this cause. And thus I am provoked and grieved even
by thy moderating of the controversy, because partly thou do not see so
fully into the matter thou undertake, as were to be wished; partly, because
either thou do not understand my meaning in many things, or else (which is
worse) thou do wrest the sense of my words, and do carry them to another
end then they were produced by me: partly also, because the feruencie of thy
zeal has made thee to transgress the bounds of modesty, and moderation in
thy reproves.

For he that will do good by his reprehension, must not only look to his
grounds that they be sound, and such as cannot be confuted, but he must have
also a regard of the manner of his proceeding therein, that it be not in too
much lenity, nor in too much acerbitie, but suitable every way unto the
offense. Which being greater, the reprehension must be in the more sharpness,
being less, the reprehension must be in the more mildnes, this last thou have
not remembered. But notwithstanding, proceed I pray thee, neither let this
break off the thread of thy speech: for I trust there is something behind, and
such as shall make recompense for whatsoever is past, and yield me much more
comfort, then all the discomfort I have hether-vnto received from thee.


Syrraxis. 18.
Persons.
Elihu. The Lord. Job.
Elihu. HEthervnto I have been in the confutation of those things which I
thought to be amiss, Chap. 36.
wherein albeit I have labored to keep an even course, save only that my
study has been to hold up Gods honor to the uttermost of my power, yet I
perceive (Job) by thy Chap. 36 verse 2. Exspecta me paululum.
forwardnes to answer, that it does not very well please thee. Nevertheless,
give me leave a little, to produce some other more clear proofs, and to
fortify and strengthen what has been spoken more fully. My proofs shall be
fetched from the verse 3.
ancient records, and from such as are memorable, and famous in latter times,
from the miraculous works of the Lords high and deep wisdom: and of these
I will produce as well such as are extraordinary, as those that always keep
wonted and usual manner continually.

And is it not good reason (think you) that I should thus search my wits and
beat my brains in the Lords And will attribute righteousness unto my Maker.
verse 3.
behalf, strive and contend for the maintenance of his credit, to free him
in his good name from the least suspicion of blame all the ways I can, that
has made me so noble a creature, and endued me with Verse, 4. He that is
perfect in knowledge speaks with thee.
understanding to see so far into his excellent and admirable works tending
thereunto? For is not our learning given us to that end, to honor our God that
bestowed it upon us? And I dare avouch, that this learning of mine which I now
profess, is most perfect, and sound indeed, most exquisite, most absolute,
and without all exception, and such as stands upon sure and infallible
grounds, and that thou have not to do with such a one as knowing the truth will
deal verse 4. For truly my words shall not be false.
unfaithfully with thee, in adding unto it, or taking from it, revealing some
part, and concealing the rest, or in the misaplying of the doctrines, but with
such a one as is well affected toward thee, will truly and sincerely demean
himself in the carriage of the whole matter, both concerning the substance it
self, and also the circumstances aunswerable to a good Teacher pertaining
thereunto.

The propositions are the same as before, first, that the Lord has a care of
his servants, and defends them from the injury of the verse 6.
Oppressor. For he is of so good a nature, and so full of compassion, that he
cannot see his suffer the least wrong but he must succor them: and though the
Oppressor be strong, he fears not to encounter with him, because his verse
5. Est validus et virtus est cordis.
strength is more then all the power of man, and crusheth it in pieces, gives
also fortitude to his soldiers to overcome. And no marvel, for being just
how can he wink at the violence of the wicked, Verse, 15
or pass over the * wrongs of the afflicted?

Secondly, though it go otherwise with the^ for a while, yet he lifts them
to verse 7
honor at the last, and blesses them in the end. Thirdly, if they have gone
astray, rejects them not, but reduces and ver 9, 10, 15,
brings them home again by his loving verse 8,
chastisements, and after their conversion, comfort their hearts with the
verse 11
sweetness of whatsoever earthly delights, with a reservation also of more
permanent joy to ensue. Fourthly, and for the verse 12
other sort that will not return unto him upon his corrections, this is my
rule, that the Lord will pursue them with the sword, and other messengers of
his wrath, neither will ever lean them, until he has brought them unto
final ruin and destruction for their obstinacy.

Fifthly, much after the same is my observation for the close and cunning
hypocrite, who can so finely dissemble the uncleanness of his verse 13
heart, even then covering his fault when the Lord corrects him for it:
neither will he be induced to confess it, how heavy soever the hand of the
Lord lie upon him, but still (though this be a means to heap the Lords
plagues more grievously upon his head) seek to purge himself, and lay the
fault upon God. Such a one never cries for mercy, never magnifieth the Lords
goodness, but is ever telling him of his own deserts, and of the greatness of
his merrits.

Both these must look to drink of the same cup, with the most abominable
and detestable livers, who are cur off by verse 14.
untimely death, when they least think of such a matter, even in the flower of
their time and chiefest iollity.

TAke heed Job thou be not of this last rank, Chapter 36
for among these must all such be reckoned, as being afflicted, will not
(though their heart be never so corrupt) acknowledge their faults, but murmr
against God, as if he had done them wrong. But if yet thou will be an humble
suter unto the Lord, for pardon of that thou have committed against his
highness, I will exempt thee for this sort, and will assure thee, and as many
beside as are peticioners unto the Almighty in this kind, that there is verse
15
mercy in store for them, what affliction soever it is they are under.

And if verse 16
thou had thus done heretofore, thou had been delivered out of the
mouth of destruction before this time, which for that thou art guilty of high
treason against the Majesty of GOD, whom thou condemnest as an unjust Judge,
is verse 17
now life to devour thee. For certainly he is angry with thee in that
measure, because thou submittest not thy self unto him, that without he see a
relenting in thee, nothing, no not the best and most verse 18
precious things in the world, shall be taken for thy Redemption: no strength,
no verse 19,
power upon earth, shall be able to reskue thee from his indignation.

When he is determined therefore to come against thee, and that his wrath
shall break forth, it shall be in vain for thee to long for the verse 20
night, that thou may take thy rest. For he whose manner is, when after long
forbearance he is resolved indeed to smite, not to make any truce at all,
neither to give any breathing time to him that stands out against him.

Now then, he that spares not whole Gene. 14, 17
Nations, but comes upon them in the night, and consumes them with the
sword, will not verse 22
spare thee that art but one, and such a one to as is not only at war with
him, but goes about to impeach his honor; chooses rather to accuse him as
injurious, the^ to be obedient in suffering with meekness, such corrections as
he knows to be most profitable for him, for his What Teacher is like him.
verse 22.
special benefit if he could rightly consider of them, and therefore does
impose them.

Wherefore, even as in thy former prosperity, so now in this thy present
calamity is made manifest, how careful the Lord is evermore for thy good. And
this meets notably with thy murmuring on the contrary, in thine own behalf
principally: but withal, in the behalf of his Church and chosen servants.
Which point I will now enlarge, and declare how wonderful the Lord has
always been, in the providing for the safeguard and welfare of them.

ME thinks it is very much, Chap. 36. verse 22.
that any one should murmr against his government, the absolutenes whereof,
all the world, in all ages, have had such notable experience, both concerning
his verse 22.
ability, wisdom, and care thereunto. He sees and knows how every thing
stands for the present, fore-seeth for the time to come what will be the
event of it, and that so exactly in each particular, a^ nothing can be more
required.

To this his knowledge and speculation, his practice is every way
correspondent, as being drawn forth proportionably unto it, as by a pattern
of direction. The one therefore being most exquisite, it cannot be chosen but
the other must be so to. And this is the form of his regiment. Which, as
appears by the most excellent order which he has set, and established in all
his works, so far is it from verse 23 Who can say thou have do^^ wickedly?
reprehension any way, as he left it to be a platform, to guide all such as he
has placed here in earth in the seat of authority.

The framing of the World in that goodly manner as we see, was merely his
own Who has appointed to him his ways verse 23.
invention, and so the disposing of all matters that are done therein. For there
is no man, that can challenge the least right or interest, in the one, or in
the other, neither is there any man that can justly find fault with ought,
either for the portraiture, and draught which he has drawn out, and engrossed
all at once, or for his intendement therein, or else for the means which he
has provided, for the supporting of the same from time to time, unto the end
of all times, in an equal proportion unto the first foundation.

It is a clear case then, that order and government is the Lords right, wholly
and only belonging unto him, as the deviser and vpholder thereof; and the
imagination of an idle brain, to think that he is able, in the shallowness
of his own conceit, to frame a Commonwealth beyond his. Which were it not
laid out in the heavens, and in the earth, as a great light, and as the
Mariners star to guide our ship, there would be nothing but confusion among
all people. If such a one would take a view but of those presidents, which are
presented daily before the face of all ver. 24, 25
men, and hidden from none, save those that have no eyes to see, his mouth
would be stopped up. Call me to mind therefore such evidences of the Lords
dealing as are plain and known, and whereof no doubt can be made, and judge
we by them, of such works of his as are obscure: For by the Romans chap. 1, verse
20.
visible things of God, to come to the knowledge of those ways of his which
are invisible, is an excellent course.

TO see the equity of his government, which is the thing now in hand, Chap. 36.
appearing by the good order that he keeps in all his actions, the power and
wisdom he is of, his merciful and bountiful dealing to man, this is a
notable way. Howbeit, though we be never so skillful in these his visible
works, yet are we not capable for all that of the Lords greatness, and the verse
26.
admirablenes of those his ways.

These we beholding always with our bodily eyes, do rather ravish us with
their beauty, and cause us to wonder at them, then instruct us fully in those
other, which are out of the view of flesh and blood, yea then bring us to the
absolute knowledge of their own excellency as they are in nature. Which we
may perceive by this, in that we are not able to number the Lords years, or to
know his beginning or ending, that so we might begin and end our reckoning. And
this cutteth the throat of all curiosity of man, (and so Job of thy to too
much boldness and presumption) that will busy himself in things above his
reach, convinces him of exceeding ignorance of GOD and his attributes, (for no
more can he apprehend his Justice, in that height of perfection and
excellency as it is, then his Eternity) and so of extreme pride, that
knowing nothing, will take upon him to judge and condemn him, in whom are
Colos. 2.3.
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Whose justice is as infinite,
as Dan. 7, 9,
ancient, as unreprovable as is his power: which together with his wisdom
and providence, how worthy, how wonderful they are, is to be seen in his
admirable works which he does here in this visible world. Into the
declaration whereof I am now entering, and that for this cause, as well to make
manifest thereby unto us the righteousness of his judgments, that if any thing
happen whereof we cannot find out the reason, or that displeases us, we will
always be censuring of the Lord about it: as also to restrain our curiosity,
that will never leave meddling with things that are too high for us.

FOr if we do look into his power, Chap. 36
which we may behold in his marvelous works, we caunot choose but
acknowledge, that such an excellent artificer must needs be no less just then
he is mighty, no less beyond us in his government, then in his workmanship:
and the rather if we consider that the attributs of God cannot be But are the
Beasts and their wheels Ezech 1.19
divided, which makes the approbation of the one, the allowance of all the
rest. The generation of the Verse 27, 28 29.
Rain is an ordinary, and common work of the Lord, and though some have
attained to the knowledge of it after a sort: yet could never any climb unto
the reason, how a Cloud should be able to contain such slippery matter,
consisting of so many deuisions and parts.

This is all they are able to say, that the sun by his virtue draws from
out of the waters, or as they term it vapoures, which being extenuate is
resolved into air, which air remaining in the middle Region, is thereby
means of the cold (which comes to pass by reason that the Sun has no
resting place or reflection there) is congealed for a time, and afterward
dissolved: and then because of the gravity of it, as consisting of water and
grosser matter, heavier then that element which contains it, distilleth down
there, whether it is carried by the winds, sometimes in a greater, sometimes in a
lesser quantity, according unto the measure of the elevation of the Meteor. But
they are utterly ignorant, verse 29
when it shall drop down, neither can they define the place, or yeald a
reason how it should disperse Secondly, shall any be able to under stand the
extensions of the Cloud Miphresei-hab of Paras to stretch forth.
it self into so many cuntries far distant, and lying opposite, yea diffuse it
self notwithstanding the wind, as sometimes it does over the whole face of the
earth.

They are not to seek likewise how far the noise Teshueth a shaah the same with
shaah personate to make a noice ver. 29, and so taken for the Thunder.
of the thu^der goes, how the wind Iun. understands this noyce to be of the
winds. verse 29
being an exhalation and higher substance then the vapors whereof the rain is
engendered, should notwithstanding be of force both to drive away the rain,
and bring it in, in great abundance, even to the covering where it falls of
the whole earth, not only where it is the root verse 30.
of the Sea, but to the darkening By light here understand the rain because by
the coming down hereof the light shines forth.
of the maine Continent it self, and the ouerflowing of it in such sort, that
Rivers run in the dry places of the Wilderness, whereby the people are both
ver, 31, he judges the people.
confounded and comforted. Confounded when it is extreme, and of long
continuance: comforted when though it be much, yet is it not immoderate. This
the Lord does at his pleafure, when he will, and which way he will: and then
he works the one and the other, when it seems strange to humane
understanding. With the turning of his hand, verse 32 Manibus obtegit lucem
Trem. cappaijm caph the palm of the hand, of Caphaph curnare, to bow. And so
by senecdoche the whole hand.
light is turned into darkness. When the Sun shines most glory ously in the
firmament, God commands a cold vapor to verse 33 Chap. 36
meet with a fiery exhalation, Verse 31
sucked from out of the bowels of the earth, being full of chinkes, whereby the
beams of the Sun enter in, and thereby calls for Thunder and lightning, and
so upon the sudden the Heavens are spread over with blackness. Seeing
therefore we are not able withal our cunning to find out the cause of these
things, which are daiely before our eyes: what hope can we have to come to the
light of those secrets which are not only above the clouds, but above the
heavens? Were it not then a senseless thing for us to censure the Lord in
that we know not.

But if thou shall reply here, that the knowledge of the Rain, Thunder, Winds,
and such like, is such, as we are guided unto, by the instinct of nature: I
must return it home again unto thee thus, That to diue into the depth of
these things, as they are indeed, to procure unto our selves such an exact,
and complet science of them, as the Lord himself has, were we adorned with
the rarest natural parts, with the most exquisite skill and judgment of the
best, and most experienced heads in the world, could not for all that be
obtained. Nay, man in his first creation, the Angels themselves have it not in
that perfection I speak off: but they both did admire it in the beginning, and
the Angels do still wonder at, and Revel. 14, 17.
magnific the Lords power and wisdom therein. For the Lord has pitched his
Verse 29 The thunders of his tabernacle.
pauilion there in the middle Region, of purpose to do wonders, and such as
shall yeald matter of admiration and praise to all his creatures, accordingly
as does every action of his, as well the least as the greatest.

And verily for mine own part though my skill in those things be nothing
inferior to theirs, Chap. 37
that be the best naturalistes: yet notwithstanding must I needs confess, that
as often as I think upon them, so often do such doubts arise, whereof by no
study, nor conference I can be resolved.

And thereby am forced to acknowledge the wisdom of the Lord, not only in
these high my steries: but in the vilest, and basest of his creatures, to
surpass my understanding, and surmount my wits. Hence it is that I cannot call
to mind the great raines, the mighty winds and Thunders of former times: but
my heart Verse 1
forthwith is astonished at his power that is so mighty, stricken with the terror
of his majesty that is so fearful, and my mind pricked to the honoring of
him, submitting my self unto him, in awe, and trembling, that is so glorious,
and great every way, in every act, and work of his, above that I am not able
to conceive.

But were it that I could see into all things, Chap. 36
whatsoever they are that belong unto them, even as far, and as fully as the
Lord himself: I ought notwithstanding not so much the less, but so much the
more to admire and reverence the Almighty, to commend and extol his excellency.

For therefore it is, that the Lord gives us a sight of his greatness, though
not in that measure before mentioned: but so as is more meet and requisite for
us, that I should be brought to a deeper consideration of his wortthynesse,
thereby to praise and obey his name, in more ample, and humble manner, then
they, whom he has not endued with the like understanding.

But this by way of digression, because a worthy observation. Now to return
again to my former purpose, and to show further that we are not able to
comprehe^d the Lords power in full perfection in these visible works of his, or
let it be if thou will his greatness (for that this lodges in the lap of it, all the rest of his proprieties) mark how he declares it in the Thunder which
goes not forth without his commandment. Verse 2 1 Protinus horvisico tonitru
caelum omne remugit: Bucha. Psalm 38.
For this being his 1 mighty voice is heard from one end of the earth unto the
other, pierces with his lightning (being his younger Sister, as first
perceived, but fast conceived, which is never divided from him, but cleaves
unto him like a twin in the womb) into all parts verse 3
of the world, even unto the very bottom of the sea, raises fierce and raging
tempests, causes terrible waters Verse 4
in exceeding great drops, and wonderful abundance to power down from Heaven;
makes the most Suetoni^s de Nerone 60. Imp. 48. mortalia corda stra uit pauor.
cruel and flinty heart that ever lived to shake, shiuer, and rent in sunder
with his horrible cracking, Psalm. 29, 89 Deutro. 8, 15 Fugere fer^ Virg.
forces the Lions, how greedy soever of their prey, to get them packing to
their dens, the Dragons and Eliphants which otherwise never part without giving
a deadly wound to each other, to leave their fight, the hardy Ostrich which by
means of his swiftnes, scorneth the Horse, and his Rider, never looking behind
him to ply him wings and legs, to toss and turmoyle himself in the alte, that
he may betake him to his covert: Verse 2. Shimhu shamoha, audite audiendo hear
diligently. Berogen cum tremore of raga^ tremere, ver. 2 hear diligently with
trembling.
compels the Hinds that do most hardly Job 39, 6,
of all other beasts bring forth their young, to cast their burden, breaks
in pieces the stately and durable Cedars, Psalm. 29, 5,
tumbleth down to the ground the high Towers, Aut Ahon aut Rhodopen aut alta
Cerannia tele ^eijcit Virg. lib. 1. Georg.
turns up by the roots the strong Oaks, makes the foundation Psalm. 18, 7
of the huge Mountains, and craggy Rocks, the very center of the earth, Quo
manima metu terra tremit.
Sea, and Land to tremble: and therefore as it is to be received with due
regard, and dread, and to be esteemed as the marvelous work of God, so is it
such as may appear, by these wonderful effects, as the causes thereof cannot
be fully attained Verse 5. He works great things which we know not.
unto by the wisdom of man. I make no question but we may probably conjecture
at some Pliny Natura: Hist lib. 20 Cap, 43, renders sundry causes of the
Thunder.
causes of it: but the perfect knowledge thereof, depending upon the Lords
power and will, and he keeping from us the sight of the middle Region, we
cannot have, and see the error of those, that profess great skill this way. For
they suppose that the thunder must take a time for generation, when the Lord
no sooner speaks ver. 6, for that which is there applied to the Snow may as
truly be affirmed of the thunder, and the meaning there is as Genesis 1, 3
concerning the light: namely as soon as ever the Lord com maunded snow to be,
it was.
the word but it breaks forth in a moment. Which may be truly avouched also
if the Snow lying upon the earth like Wool, of the soft shewers which
proceed of his favor, of the violent, and tempestuous storms, tokens of his
wrath compelling man, Verse 7, 8 Chap. 37
and beast to his harbor, and not to dare to look out of their doors, namely
that the lord has them at command in an instant. And this does augment the
greatness of the work, being otherwise worthy of eternal praise and
admiration, and declares our unableness to come unto the complet knowledge
thereof.

Pass we the^ from hence unto the Verse 9
whirlwind, which the Lord, when it is shut up within a thick cloud, (...) it
were in an inward preson, under many locks and keys, causes to issue forth
with great force, and a mighty noise, with abundance of rain upon the fall
thereof to pour down. And forthwith upon it, the scattering North wind to come
in, dispersing the Clouds, clearing the air, drying up the moisture,
lessening the slouds, turning the earth which seemed before to be molten even
as wax against the sun, into as hard Verse 10
a substance as the Clay in the midst of Summer, changing the liquid waters
into as firm and solid a body, as the Iron, or Adamant it self: and though
there be many clouds Verse 11
threatening moisture, yet for all that it never suffers them to take effect,
but tossing them to and fro in the air, chasing them as a Partrich on the
Mountains, leaves them not until it has wearied them in their course, driven
them to such an exigent, that they must needs yeald themselves and vanish away,
even those that are joined with Thunder and lightning, being the fullest, and
forciblest of all the rest. Verse 12
Thus interchangably, now after this manner, now after that manner, does the
Lord by these Meteors bring to pass: whatsoever he has before determined upon
the face of the earth. Sometimes for the Verse 13
good of man, as also for the good of the residue of his creaturs; sometimes for
his punishme^r, that in ye variety of his works he might be brought to consider
of his perfection, behold in the greatness thereof, his power, adore in the
sundry effects thereof his justice, magnify his superaboundant kindness toward
him, in those worthy blessings of his, which he receives from that his throne
and chair of estate, the upper region. I would have thee Job to weigh Verse 14
these things, and the course thou take in the defending of thine innocence
together in a balance. Can this stand for a truth, that the Lords Justice
being no less absolute then his power (which his visible works daily before
our eyes do evidently show to be of such admiration, that all the world would
say we were stark blind if we should deny it) is perfect and good, in the
government of the world: and that thy complaint also of the hard measure he
offers thee, is rightly framed? May this be, God is above the heavens, Job
sits upon the earth, which is the Lords footstool, and yet is Job able to
teach God how to rule in equity? Is it credit yt Job which is not able to
climb up to the Clouds, nor come to the cause of their effects, should ascend
up unto the Lords high Tower, and know what purpose he has in his affliction?
Be admonished therefore to look better into thy book of accountes, and to cast
over thy reckoning again and again in the closet of thy conscience.

FOr surely thou have done it too slightly, Chap. 37
if thou find in thy valuation, that thou art able to set God to school, and
read him a lecture for the due administration of justice: that there is nothing
in God, but thou art capable of it, because even this that is so common thou
art ignorant of, how the Lord will dispose Verse 15
of the matter which he draws up unto him, by the beams of that great and
goodly light of his: whether he will convert it to the benifit or detriment of
the inhabitants of the earth? whether he will cause it to descend down again in
the nature of Rain, Hail, or Snow, or turn it into wind, or reserve it to
make War with the wind, thunder, lightning: To make the light of his cloud to
shine forth. Verse 15
whether it shall fall down there, where it was fetched forth, or in some other
place? whether it shall be contained in a Cloud a long time, and the air
cleared after a sort, or the Heavens being changed into blackness, shall
distill down again shortly after it is taken up? Of these small things, mere
trifles in comparison of that great point, what belongs unto him in his
afflictions, and judgments, which thou presumest to enter into: thou art as
much to seek, as to number the drops of the waters which he lifted up above the
Genes. 1 verse 6, 7
heaven, when he made a separation between them, and these below: or if thou
had bin present with him in his creation, to have set down before hand
definitiuely, and for a certainty, what he intended in that division. Neither
art thou able to attain unto the natural reason of the changing In the Gene.
the variety of the cloud, but in the original Miphlesei of Palas libramen tum
a weight or balance. Verse 16
of the clouds Verse 16
(being a thing ordinary and unusual) in the air, which are no less in
quantity doubtless, then the large Sea: the end whereof never any ship-maister
could find out, and therefore would drown the whole earth in a moment, were
they not restrained by the Lords infinite power. This is all thou can say for
it, that they depend there by virtue of the word (howbeit this reason is above
nature) which God spoke in their creation: Let there be a Genes, 1, 6 Rakiah of
Rakah expandere to stretch out And so the Septuag. conceived of it, and
therefore termed it Stereoma of stereos solidus massy.
spreading over of the air between the waters and the waters: which how can
it be in reason, when the air is thin and light, such a body as there is not
the least weight but pierces through it, and had need be exceeding strong and
solid to contain so huge a burden, heavier doubtless then many mountains, so
many small drops, whose nature is to get out at the least cranny. This matter
therefore is above reason, and cannot be apprehended but by faith. For that the
hand of the Lord bears up the Clouds, that his will is they should not come
down, but stay there, are not sufficient arguments in the understanding of a
mere natural man: neither can he rest satisfied therewith, but remains
uncertain still, until he have apprehended something by his outward senses,
which may persuade him thereunto, because he holds this as a sure principle,
that a man can understand no thing truly, but what he first infallibly
comprehends 2 thereby. 2 Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu
Arist. Phys. lib. 1. de Anima 2.
For the intellectual knowledge of a thing (says he) depends upon the
sensible knowledge, either of the same thing, or of some other that brings us
unto it. By the latter of these two, we are guided unto the knowledge of God.
For by his effects we are led to see what he is. But neither of the two, how
the Clouds should remain in the air without somewhat sensibly to rest upon.
The effects thereof show it not, and the cause thereof is unknown any further
then this, the Lord has appointed if so, which may as well be alleged for
any thing that is done under the sun. And this answer implies in it, that it
is a mystery, which the Lord has reserved unto himself, and denied unto all
men, that if we would consider well of the Lords works, we should perceive
not only those things which he does in the Clouds above (where it would
appear that he is admirable Mirabilia perfecti scienti^s. The wondrous works
of him that is perfect in knowledge. verse 16
indeed if we might beholdal, or but apart of yt he there does) but every one
of these here below to be a wonderful work and far beyond our capacity. As
namely, the composition of man's body, which for the perfection of the work,
singular comeliness and beauty thereof, is rightly termed a little world, and
the constitution of the same, no less beyond the pitch of our wits, as not
conceiving the cause of the heat Ver. 17
of the body more in the outward parts when the wind in the South is calm,
then when it is loud and blustering. The clouds which before were dispersed.
now gathering together, keeping away the quicknes of the air, and causing a
reflection of the sun upon them, which being well warmed, makes us no less
warm then does a pan of coals the bed that is under it, and through there
excluding of the cool air from us, causes us no less to sweat then they
that are shut up in a close house, which has a great fire in it, may be a
reason of the present heat of the body, but of the sudden alteration thereof
from heat unto cold, in respect of the principal cause, which is the change of
the weather, no reason can be yealded. Which argues the ignorance even in
those things that belong chiefly, and most properly unto him: and again, the
most perfect, According to that which is written in the former verse being the
16. of him that is perfect in knowledge
and alsufficient understanding of the Lord every way, that having endued man
with such excellent wisdom, has notwithstanding better skill in the state of
his own body, then he himself.

THus impotent and weak of judgment art thou Job when thou descendest into
thy self, Chap, 37
and there make trial of thy cunning: but alas, how poor is thy learning;
when thou look unto higher matters, and ascendest unto the firmament verse
18 Shathaki^ of Shathak contu^dore, showing the teunity of it, in latin either
the sky. Coelo tegitur qui non babet vrnam.
that is next above the clouds, and lies between them and the Stars, which is
so large and ample, that it covers the earth from one end of the World unto
another alouer, and is a fairer ornament unto it, more beautiful to the eye
then the most costly canopic in the world: much more thin and subtle then the
air below, and yet far stronger then it: never was Saphir stone or Cristal
more clear, and yet never Adamant more firmly compacted together, even like
unto the matter of a Looking Glass when it is in the melting, of passing
brightness, lying also close together, as all things that are molten do, and
therefore as fast and surely conjoined together, as Iron when it is souldred
into a Rock with lead.

Could thou have framed such a piece of work had thou bin with him in
the beginning? or could thou now make the like if need were? I am such a
dullard, and verse 19
so gross of understanding, that I am able to say nothing belonging to these
things, and so in like manner am I Verse 20
able to answer nothing for my self when the lord that is of infinite wisdom
and justice afflicts Verse 20
me: and I dare avouch there is no man of judgment but is of my mind, and
thinks if he should not only stand out against him himself with open face,
but desire to get another to ioyn with him and mutter likewise against him in a
corner, both which thou do: he must needs be confounded with the majesty of
his presence. Teach Tell us what we shall say. Verse 19
me therefore I pray thee, with these that stand by, so to order our words when
we come before the Lord, and so to dispose of our defense, that we may see it
will be accepted; and as in the beginning, so now again I promise thee that I
will for my part (and I make no doubt but they will do so too) stand forth to
justify thee. Yea, (though it be such a matter as makes me tremble to speak
of it) even before the Lord himself, that is most fear full and terrible to
them that contend with him. But thou art a man of a more pure conscience,
passing rare parts, and therefore do not fear any thing.

But all this while (to say nothing because it is invisible of the exceeding
glorious seat of the Angels and souls of the Saints, Chap. 37
which notwithstanding how spacious, a spectacle soever, is not of compas^^^^,
nor state enough to contain all the Lords counsels) my speech has nor reached
so high, as to the lowest of those shining verse 21, 22
lampa of heaven, being a visible place, and such a one without the which the
light of the Caudle of our eye could no longer burn. Howbeit in the subject
(because Eliphaz has been large in it) I will use one instance only, but such
a one, as shall so cut the comb of that high conceit of thine, that thou art
wiser then God, more righteous then he, that after thou have heard it, it
will make thee leave thy crowing in like sort all the days of thy life.

Zahab aurum gold verse 22 because the clearing of the heavens coming from the
North, is like unto the color of Gold.
The North wind coming in with his golden blast, chasing away the clouds, and
purging the air of all that may hinder our sight, art thou able Job with open
eyes steadfastly to behold the bright beams of that glorious creature of God,
the sun shining at noone day in the Heaven? Can it be then that thou should
be able to bear the majesty of the Lords presence that is ten thousand
times brighter? Can it be that thou should see Verse 23
further into the matter of equity then he does, that is of that excellent
glory? Leave off therefore thy contending with God. For beside that he is a
consuming fire to all such, he has all power He is excellent in power Verse 23
in his hands, insomuch that thy very own strength lies in him to dispose of
as he lists, to withdraw from thee when he pleases; neither do thou beat thy
brains any longer about his counsels, for he has hidden them in a He is
excellent in judgment, he is abundant in Justice, v, 23
bottomless depth: And look, look I say, upon the Lords mercies how they
ouerflow, and cease to conceive of him as a rigorous Judge, or unjust in his
afflictions. Lastly, let this compassion of his that he has spared thee from
destruction, having been so presumptuous, move thee to conceive more meanly,
nay, more odiously of thy self and more reverently Verse 24
of his glory (and to this end have I pressed thee so much therewithal) least
he viterly cast thee off. For they that will lift up themselves above their
maker, deserve no other favor but to be thrown out as fuel for Hell fire.


The Lord. Chap. 3^
That this controversy might have a final end between you, without any
further contention, and remain in perpetual record for instruction to all
future posterity, as also that thou (O Job) might hane a more effectual
feeling of my greatness and righteousness above thine own, I whose name is
Iohouah, Iohouah of haiah to be, for that he gives being to all things.
fignifieng that I am he only which has a being, without whom nothing in
heaven or earth could remain or be, from whom whatsoever virtues man is
adorned withal do proceed, which name is a pledge evermore of my fidelity in
the performance of my promises to my servants, and none to be forsaken that
cleave unto me: which is a name of terror, Genes. 15.7 and 28, 13, Exodus 6, 1
and Exodus 4.22 and 5, 1.
renown: (I say) whose name is Iohouah, am here descended down in a
whirlewinde, accompanied with Exodus 6, 3 and 14, 4
thunder, lightning 1 Samuel 12, 17 Ezech 1, 14
and great rain: and do join with Elih^^, and will prosecute the matter of my
power as a warrant for the truth of his doctrine spoken to this purpose.

The Verse 2
cause that moves me unto it, is partly the unadvised speeches void of
understanding and judgment, which have eftsoomes slipped from thee, and among
many others worthy of reprehensio^, those which thou have spent about inquiring
into the reason of thy visitatio^, which thou ought not to have done.
Specially both to demand the question, and resolve the doubt, and to determine
in such manner, as that it is not for thy sins, making thereby thy self no
sinner, putting thy auditory in doubt, whether original corruption, were a sin
deserving punishment: and not contenting thy self with thy affliction until I
had revealed it unto thee. As being ignorant that my judgments how secret
soever they are, yet are they always just.

And partly, because through thy so immoderate complaints and so without al
measure of thy calamity, thou have offended the hearers, and made them to
think that the Lord (in thine opinion) did put no difference between the good
and bad, but did handle them both alike, aiming at one and the self same end
in each of them. And partly for thy so eager defending of thy innocence, and
that without all measure, as having never done with it, never spoken enough of
it, together with an utter forgetfulness of my righteousness: Where by thou
have given an occasion to all that heard thee, to conclude from thine own
mouth, that thou hold thy self more righteous then I: confirming them
likewise in this their opinion, by challenging me often very boldly, without
all reverence and dread of my majesty, to give thee a day of hearing.

Thus have thou by thy unskillful, and vndiscreere carry-age of thy cause, both
obscured thy self, defaced thy religion, and also impeached my justice,
weakened my power, darkened the brightness of my glory and renown. And thus
far have I suffered thee, answering nothing in mine own person, to thy
objections made against me until now: and that only in a word. Now then give
me Verse 3
leave a little to reply unto thee, and provide thou thy self by all means,
gather thy strength together, stir up thy wits, take courage unto thee, and
answer me. First of all, I would gladly know of thee, that seeing I made Man of
the earth, how it covld be that I should have thy help or council, or any Man
beside, when I founded Verse 4
the same? Thou professest thy self a great Wiseman, and wilt teach me how to
govern: I pray thee resolve me this doubt: what Verse 5
squire or line used I for the fashioning of the work being so comely, or the
hand of what Mason or Carpenter called I for, to lay the corner stones and
pillars for the joining together, and supporting of the whole building, or of
what matter they were off? For the earth being the foundation Verse 6
of the World, and that upon which the heavenly spheres are turned about;
the other three elements of water, air, and fire, do leave, and being of it
self of that exceeding great weight: must it not of necessity be both well
vnderdroped, and firmly compacted together?

Look upon the glistering Stars, verse 7
that are wont to show themselves so bright and clear before the morning, do
they not in their shining commend the excellency of the work of my creation,
and proclaim my praise throughout the World to be inestimable? So likewise,
does not that innumerable host of Angels, the Noblest of all my creatures, and
nearest unto me and in that respect my Sons, extol me for my unsearchable
wisdom therein? And thus they did forthwith after I had framed the Heaven and
the earth, applauding my skill, and greeting me with praise.

So did the heavenly bodies in like manner, lighting up their Torches all at
once, standing every one in his due order, flaming forth diuersely in an equal
and distinct sort the one from the other, make a sweet harmony and song of
degrees lifting up their voices in their kind, in the highest note of
admiration.

But though the divine spirits and celestial company of heavenly Soldiers,
did upon the sight of that exquisite work of six days, sound forth with joy
and gladness Hymns of holiness, reverence, and honor unto my name: yet far
was it from them to take upon them such state as thou do, namely to seem
companions and equals with me in the work, or to intrude themselves into the
possession of my prerogative, titles of Creator, Governor, and Disposer of the
world.

Now from the stars and seat of glory, go we back again to the Sea, verse 8
an element adjoining to the earth, where we began: and tell me when it
proceeded forth in mighty and violent streams out of the womb of the deep,
and that in so great abundance, as it threatens the covering of the face of
the whole earth, as before? Show me withal whose help I used for the
shutting it up within certain bounds? And to speak as it is, the division of
the Waters being made in a moment, and the struggling of this great Babe the
sea, at the same instant: if need had required and help might have been had,
how could I so much as have consulted with any, much less have obtained aid
for the staying of her huge waves, swelling up to the Heavens, and swallowing
all?

No, no, there was none that had or could have a hand in it but my self alone.
I took her as soon as she was born, how vnweeldy soever, and bound up her
feet from sprawling any further then the lap of the sand, and shore of my
decree. I alone lapped her in swaddling cloutes vrese 9
covered her face, and laid her in the Cradle of the thick Mystes, which I
have appointed as Chains verse 10
to restrain her force. I have cut out for her a Channel to walk in, and set
my verse 11
command upon her back, that for all her big and lofty looks, she offer not
once, no not so much as the breadth of a nail to exceed her compass, though
fixed in plain and even ground, as oftentimes it is, where is nothing to make
resistance, even as if the hard and high Rocks, or stately hills mounting up to
heaven, were opposed against her to keep^ her in.

THY days are nothing to the creation of the World, Chap. 38
and the creation of the world nothing to my eternity: Is it likely then, that
thy experience should be more then mine, to rule and govern? Is it likely that
thou should command the Sun Verse 12
to arise at thy pleasure, appoint it a place where, and when to come forth,
that was so long before thou were borne: or set him down a better course, for
the discovering Verse 13
of the works of darkness committed upon the earth?

Specially when as his beams now go from one end of the fame unto another,
reach unto the very utmost parts thereof, and suffer nothing to be hid from
her light? when as in the night verse 14
the earth seeniing to be as a lump of clay in the hand of the Potter, without
all shape and form, his beams, even as the hand of the Potter the Clay, bring
it to a passing comeliness, and make it like unto the cutious work, and sundry
costly colors of the Painter, which he had shadowed before with some course
cloth?

And thus changing the earth Verse 15
put a cleart difference between them (as altering therein the how of them
that were jolly fellows in the dark, none otherwise then long wearing does a
garment) and the Godly, that so these may produce their evidences against them,
for the hauling of them to the judgment seat, whereby the knot of their
confederacy may be laid open, their power broken, and their pride cut down by
the Sword of Justice.

There is as little probability for it, that thou should be able to descend
down into the bottom Verse 16
of the deep Sea, take a view of her Springes, and emptye her Channel of
Waters, or Verse 17, 18
into the lowest pa^tes of the earth, where is such darkness, as Death may
seem to have builded her Chambers there, to behold the mineralles and
inestimable treasure that lies hid in the deep places: Verse 19, 20
or thither whether the Sun and night goes when they leave the Climatte
where thou inhabitest. For the knowledge of these things requires more
antiquity then the state of the World it self, which when it was framed alas
poor man thou know Verse 21
not thou should have any being at al, much less live a long life, to come
to an experimental understanding of them, if so be that might bring it.

ALL this while I have insisted in matters belonging to the creation of the
World, Chap. 38.
now I come to such as belong to the government of the same, and those very
familiar and usual: show me therefore Job where is my arm^ry where I lay up my
weapons of snow, Verse 22
and Hail, which I keep always in a readiness for mine enemies, Verse 23
how the lightning should break through the thick cloud, or divide in sunder
the furious East wind? Who but my self can so place the Spoutes Verse 25
in the Clouds, that they should pour down Rain in such abundance to the
making of the barren Wilderness verse 26, 27
most plentiful, and yet leave the Valleys to be scottched of the Sun; so
dispose the Thunder and the effects thereof, that it should be in one
Country, and not in another, in one City, and not in the next adjoining unto
it.

Can thou ascribe the cause verse 28, 29
of the Rain, Dew, Frost, Ice, and the congealing together of the deep Waters,
that for all their largeness and profundity become like unto the hard verse 30
Marble Stone to any other then to me? Does it not rest only in my power, and
providence, that there should be an order kept in the falling, and a time
appointed for the coming down of these?

And though I observe and order, and ordain ase^son for these, yet what man is
there, that is able to define the manner, the measure, the place, the time
precisely, when these shall descend? The four Seasons verse 31, 32.
of the year, Genes. 1, ver. 14, 15. 1 Vergilie, seven stars. 2 In his girdle
are the bright stars called our Ladies waine. 3 Cains mayor, or Sirius. 4
Boots Latin, his constellation consists of 22 stars. This star seems to
be named before the rest, and for all the rest, because he is first seen next
unto the tail of the great Bear, whose constellation we call Charles waine.
differing the one from the other, the pleasant Spring, guided by the 1
Pleiades, the cold Winter ruled by 2 Orion, that draws together, and binds
the earth (as it were) with cords, hot Summer, swayed by Mazzoreth, as the 3
Dog star, blustering Autumn, governed by 4 Arcturus, with his constellation,
together with the great Bear, are ordered by me under the conduct of these.
Neither may thou, or any man, alter them from that course which I have
appointed, disposing them sometime after this sort, and sometime after that
sort, and not tying my self to any set rule.

The cause also why the Verse 33
Heavens should always go round, the Planets be ever in motion, the one this
way, the other that way, and yet keep a constant course, what are the effects
that they work when they reign, what order and time they keep in their
reigning, what power they have over the inferior bodies, as to say certainly
thus it is; these undoubtedly be their opperations, is unknown unto thee. Thou
can not affirm there is no more to be learned this way, then that thou
conceiuest, thou can not give a particular instance, what shall be wrought
when such a Plannet reigns.

THy verse 34, 35,
power comes as short as thy knowledge, Chap. 38.
thou can not command the Clouds, nor the Lightning, and for that knowledge
to which thou have, had thou it not from verse 36.1 Iesapper. verse 37
me? But for 1 thy power, can thou tell which way to make the Heavens as
Cristall, or else to cause the tables of the clouds to power Shacab is so used
Exodus 16.13. verse 37. Huius, cap. 38
down for the binding together of the dust, as the leaven does the meal, and
fastening together of the clots rent asunder before, and scattered abroad with
the drought.

Take therefore these things unto thee, as lights to show thee thine own
ignorance and wants, in respect of me. And if my power in the creation of the
world may not satisfy thee, then look into my wisdom, in the universal
government of the same: and if this neither may not suffice thee, attend while
I declare unto thee in sundry particulars, together with the former, my
goodness also, that so thou may understand at length, that forasmuch as thou
come so much behind me in all these, thou may acknowledge, it cannot
otherwise be, but for Justice likewise thou must needs give me place.

Wherefore, having gone through the Heavens, the Air, the Earth, the Sea, the
Deep in the general, I will now make it manifest in more particular manner,
that so thou may have no way left thee to auoy de my arguments, but must of
necessity be driven to yield that thou art convicted.

AMong the Beasts, Chap. 39,
the verse 1,
Lion, the King over all the rest, being insatiable, both the old and the
young, which walk in the Deserts in troops I satisfy, providing them food
enough in the barren Wilderness, so that they range not out from thence. I teach
them to keep themselves close, and to verse 2.
couch down in their Dens and lurking places, whereby they may ceaze upon
the pray, which I offer unto them daily in such plenty, that they are glutted
therewith. Where have thou to fill the bellies of these, so many Heardes, so
many Droues, that a whole Country would not contain them, a world of
provision content them?

Among the Birds, the verse 3
Raven being mostrauening and greediest, I feed abundantly with his young,
even then when there is no hope. These crying unto me for their relief, I
supply their need to the full, I am better unto them then their own Dammes
that beget and hatch them. For I harken unto their complaint, and fill their
crops with my hidden treasures.

Could thou devise, how either to furnish the old, being great deuourers,
and whereof all places are replenished, live very long, are not diminished, but
multiplieth daily, because of their great subtlety and foresight, with
necessary food, if the charge thereof were committed unto thee? Or else, when
they leave their young destitute, giving no care at all to their pitiful
lamentation, could thou invent any means, for the preserving of the lives
of the young that were never fed by their Dammes?

The verse. 4
Wild-goate, and the Hind, that so hardly bring forth their young, did
thou prescribe them a time for it? Though thou observe their verse 5
rutting time never so well, can thou set down the very moment when they
shall calue, that so thou might provide for them the hand of the Midwife?
They that see them in their verse 6.
travel, would think it impossible that both they and their young should
escape without death; yet I so order the matter, that their labor is no sooner
over, but all their grief is gone, and that their young come forth into the
world without any verse 7.
bruise, hurt, or blemish at all: yea, so far are they from any maime or
impediment, that for nimblenesse and swiftness they excel.

The verse 8, 9, 10 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Wilde-Asse and Unicorn will not bear the yoke, they have not their
intractable nature from man. The one, he regards not the fatnes of the
Valleys, contemns the society of men, lives one'y, and delights himself
with the gleaning of the parched Wilderness, and as barren (in a manner) as if
it had been sown with salt. The other, though he be strong to labor and
till the ground, yet so sauadge is he, that he will sooner die then be drawn
unto it. Is it in thee Job to sustain the life of the Wild-Asse with such
slender repast, or to beget such wildnes in him, and in the Unicorn?

I Cloth the verse 16, 17 18, 19, 20, 21.1 Pelarges. 2 Premia, conos bellicos,
et galeas adornantes, penna. Plin. Nature: hist. lib. 10. Chap: 23.3 Fessos
duces ad terga recipient. Plin. li. 10, cap: 23 4 Genetricum senectum invicem
educant ibid:
Peacock, Chap. 39.
and not man, (not Adam in the state of his innocence, (all that he did was to
give a name unto it) much less then Job springing from his loins in his
corrupt estate) with that surpassing, pleasant, and beautiful array, with
those shining and glistering colors. I put on those 1 partie-coloured feathers
of the Storke, and those great and brave 2 pinions of the Estrich. Into the
Storke I infuse such a singular care and love to his 3 Guides and 4 Dammes,
such a wonderful forwardness to support and comfort them in their need, as
is rarely found among the sons of men. Into the Estrich such cruelty, that
she forsakes her nest without all regard, and gives no care to the Job, 30,
29, Micha. 1, 8. The word is Iahauah in these places, and here in this, yet
diversely translated, as sometimes an Owl, sometimes an Estrich.
pitiful cry of her young: yet for all that I preserve Estrich by sundry
Interpreters.
the^ under my wings, hatch them, feed them in such sort, that they grow
greater then any Bird, taller then the Horse and his Rider, and swifter to of
foot then he, though never so excellent, never so much used to the race, yea
such as scorneth him for a Lubber.

And as for this noble creature the verse 22
Horse, with the Hawke and Eagle, whence have they their courage, valor and
swiftnes? Thou see Job how terrible the Horse is, his neying like unto the
thunder, his verse 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 5 Such as Gualt: upon Joel
reports to have come into Germany anno: 1545.6 Curfibus auras prouocat Virus
Geri: 7 Vix summa vestigia ponit arena. 8 Qualis Ityberboreis aquilo cum densus
ab oris incubat.
snorting, the tossing and flinging of his head, the trampling and sounding of
his feet, like unto the rushing in of swarms of 5 Locustes, the sight of the
sword, the rattling of the spear, the noise of the trumpet is his delight: When
he hears the shouting of an Army a far off prepared to battle, no kirbe
can restrain him, but 6 flings away, and 7 voydes ground to go against it, as
fast as if he flewe in the air, and striued to match the 8 North wind in
fierceness. Can he have these things from thee, that art of less force and
celeritie?

THe Hawke he mues himself, Chap, 39,
and verse 29.
gets him into the South. Where has he this understanding, where this
knowledge to find that his pray is there, and so betake him to his wings and
follow after it? Can he receive it from thee that art Ietem: 8, 7, verse
30.31 32, 33.1 Valeria minima magnitudine. Plin: lib. 10, cap: 3. Meneth^s
elachistos. Arist: hist: any. lib: 9. ca. 6.2 He is not afraid of thunder,
Negant have alite^ fulmine exani matum ides armagera Ionis. He fights with
Dragons, Esti aetos kai dracoon Polemia. Ari. hist. Anni: lib. 9 ca. 4. He
prays upon the Serpent. Trophen poieitai Tons opheis oxucopstates. 4. She
kills her young that cannot look with open eyes upon the sun without
shedding of tears. Apocteinei ta tekna ^on ^i ophthal^^i pr^^ to^ helion
dakrusosin. Arist. ibid.
less provident?

The b Eagle, that is the hardiest of all Birds, and yet but 1 small in
quantity, which takes her flight and soreth aloft, higher then any foul,
which abides and builds in the top of the steep and craggy Rocks,
discrieth the carcass a far off, feeds her young with blood in stead of
water, had she these properties of 2 magnanimity, wisdom, 3 sharpness of
sight, 4 cruelty from thee? Now then, that say thou to all these things,
is there not some mystery in every one of them, more then thou art able to
attain unto?

Could thou have framed the world, disposed and ordered the same in better
sort? Could thou have made it more rich, more comlie, could thou have
provided for every creature therein more conveniently, for any more bountifully
and costly then I have done? Can thou charge me with injustice in any one
thing in this large recital that I have made? Where do thou find in all
this Catalogue which I have used, cruelty, oppression and tyranny, such as
thou throwest upon me in regard of thy self? Nay I will yet go further with
thee, art thou able to give me one action that ever I did, fince I first framed
the world, where. I have not showed my self exceeding Exodus 34, 6, 7.
pitiful, tenderharted, full of compassion when an offense has been
committed against me, slow to displeasure, of power to forbear anger, easy
and ready to forgive whatsoever has been amiss?

Behold therefore more clearly then in a Cristall glass my wisdom, both in
the creating, and also in the disposing sing and ordering, as well of the dumb
and insensible creatures, as of those sensible creatures now mentioned, is more
then thou art able to comprehend. And therein consider, that the mysteries of
my high counsels, which I have decreed upon the sons of men for their
government, be too far above thy reach; my providence likewise for my
children, my just dealing toward my servants, my compassion toward my beloved,
the stamp of mine own Image, being such and so great as thou have heard
toward the unreasonable creatures, must needs be very large and abundant.

But what meanest thou Job, Chap. 39. verse 35
art thou blanked already that of late wast so bold? Have thou now never a
word to say, that weariedst me heretofore with thy sures to dispute with
thee? Must I now after so long discourse, weight and stay for thine answer,
call upon thee again for it, that wast so full of arguments unto thy friends
in thy defense, before I can have it?

The multitude of my Objections peradventure confou^deth thee, or perhaps they
are too deep for thee, or so weighty, and such manifest truths, as no reply
can be made to them, or else thou art ravished with the admiration of them.
Weigh then with thy self how unequal GOD and man are matched together in
disputation, weigh with thy self, how short thy wit is, how shallow thy
judgment in respect of the Lords? And then look back upon thy folly, in
being desirous to contend with me, thy unadvisedness also to take upon thee to
instruct me in my office of government, and thy want of understanding, to
think thy self able to diue into the depth of my bottomless counsels,
thereby to foresee my drift in thy visitation. But if the multitude of my
Objections ouer-whelme thee, take any one of them, the weakest and meanest as
thou supposest of all the residue, disprooue that, convince me of defect,
cyther of power or wisdom, providence, justice, mercy therein, or else find
out all the hidden virtues that are in it.

Take thy choice of these two, do one of them if their can, which if thou
can not, yield thy self in a fault for that thou have so often called my
righteousness into question, stood so much in the defense of thine own
righteousness, complained so much of thy affliction, and searched so far into
my secrets, being most difficult, altogether impossible to be waded into of
any mortal man.


Job. I acknowledge my vileness and baseness, Chap. 39. This Jobs repentance is
but in part, for here is an acknowledgement only of his wa^ts, no clear
confession that he has offended, not that humiliation of heart, nor co^trition,
which the lord requires of his obedient servants, and he afterward shows
forth, chap. 42. a verse 37, 38. 1 He promises fair for the time to come,
but that is not enough, without a bewayting of his finne^ past.
in comparison of thee (my Creator) which art far more excellent, perfect,
and holy, then any of thy creatures: of more judgment also, and wisdom in
thine aunswers, of more authority and equity in thy government, as making all
things in Heaven and Earth to stoop at thy beck, and to be silent before
thee, as ruling so, that no man may justly conceive the least dislike, no not
in any one particular action of thine. And therefore I here promise, before
thy great and fearful Majesty, (that may it please thee to affist me with
thy grace) that I will abstain hereafter even from a good words, and I true
aunswers, which may seem to carry any show unto men, to derogate never so
little from thine either justice or wisdom, or power, or merey, or else
praise and exaltation.


Syrraxis. 19.
Persons.
The Lord. Job.
The Lord. But that thou may be as yet more humbled through the sight of
thine own weakness, Chap. 40.
make a more evident, plain and particular confession of thy misdemenure
toward me, be so far from commending any thing in thy self, verse 1, 2, 3.
that thou renounce viterly thine own goodness, and stand wholly upon the
commendation of my virtues: I have raised up again this vvhirle-wind, and will
proceedea little further in the declaration of my greatness. But first I would
have thee openly to confess, that thou have done me injury, in charging me
with unjust dealing toward thee. For had thou no way to clear thy self
from a notorious Offender, but by condemning me of severity, and unrighteous
judgment, in that I afflicted thee? For albeit it be granted that I had
another drift in it, then to punish thee for thy wicked life, can thou
therefore say that thou did not deserve it, when the least sin that is
committed, yea when there is no actual transgression at all, as in Infants,
there notwithstanding eternal torments are due? Thou will abstain thou say
from such answers as before. That is not enough, unless withal thou revoke
thine error, and make a large recantation of thy several faults, committed
against me here in the face of the Congregation, in calling my righteousness
into question. Yea, thou must break forth into an ample discourse, of my just
and upright course in all my ways, otherwise thou can not satisfy for the
wrong offered, nor then neither indeed, but when thou can call back that
which thou have spoken, which is Volat irrevocabile verbum.
impossible simply to do. For a word uttered, an opinion set down, may be
recalled, called in, or reuersed, but not be anihilated, or loose the nature
thereof. The only way therefore for thee is, to be an humble suter to me for
pardon of thy faults, which thou have already done against me in this
disputation, that so thou may pacify my wrath, and work a reconciliation.

If this course please thee not, verse, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
exercise thy power in the suppressing of sin, in the putting down the wicked,
show thy self honorable in the advancing of virtue, and defending the godly,
execute judgment, but all in that manner and majesty, to as great purpose as I
my self am wont, and then I will commend thee, then I will yield that thine
own hand has saved thee, and not my mercy. In the mean time, I desire none
other evidences of my power and providence, then my creatures. Let them
therefore speak for me, and principally Behemoth and Leuiathan, which I made,
as manifest demonstrations of my greatness.

verse 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. etc
BEhemoth, which I created the sixth day, Chap. 40.
when I created thee, that lives upon the Land where thou live, and
wherewith thou may be better acquainted, because he is not of that ravening
nature as the other vvilde Beasts are, then with them, is both greater and
stronger then thou art, and yet his best feed is the grass of the Mountains.
My blessing upon this poor means, does nourish him unto so huge a quantity,
that he is a terror to all that behold him, and yet is he of that gentleness
of nature, that he hurts not the least of my creatures, but suffers the
silly Goat to play by him.

His greatness is such, that the channel, banks, reeds of the Rivers, though
very high, the willowes, or other trees growing usually in Fennes, and Marish,
grounds where he frequenteth, cannot cover him when he takes his rest. When
he enters to drink in any of the greatest waters, as Jordan, Euphrates,
Tigris, or the like, he swalloweth up the whole River, and makes it low for
the time in that place. He stops the course of the stream where he
wadeth, and makes it to stand on an heap and ouer-flovve the banks. His
trunk he lets down to a marvelous length when he goes to drink, his
teeth are so long that they bore through unto the bottom of the waters: his
sinnewes behind are like unto the goodly boughs of the Cedar twined together.
And as for his strength, that appears in the largenes and thicknes of his
ribs, in the broadenes and bigness of his nauill, in the easy and quick
motion of his tail, that is as big as a Cedar tree, in the mightines of his
bones, being as beams of Brass, or as pillars of Iron, and in the two tuskes
or teeth under his trunk, being most precious, which are as pipes of Steel.
Of that fortitude therefore is he, that of all my works that I have ordained
to live and breath upon the land, he is the chiefest, testifying most of all my
greatness: Chap. 40. verse 30, etc.
and of that power indeed, that as his mightines declares that none could make
him but my self, so his fortitude shows, that none can overcome him save my
self.

But Leuiathan, the King of all my creatures, both in regard of his Causa
euidens humoris luxuria.
hugenes and force, verse 20, 21, 22, 23, etc.
that lives in the waters, can neither be surprised by the might nor policy
of any man in these days. I have ordained that Behemoth, though of sarre more
power if he would contend then is in man, should be drawn by gentle
allurements, to be serviceable for man's use, but as for this mighty Fish, I
have provided, that none shall be able, either by power, or else whatsoever
subtlety or cunning, to subdue him hethervnto.

He that goes about by flattering words, or by stroking him on the back to
win him, must expect nothing but death, and that no ransom shall be taken
for his life, that dares to give this attempt. No hook, or whatsoever
instrument of the Fisherman, no though it be as strong as the anchor of a
Ship, is able to hold him, no Cable, be it never so well twisted, is able to
hale him ashore. Was it ever heard as yet, that the children made a pastime
with him, or that the Mariners had a day of triumph for his taking, or that he
needed to be a suter for his life or liberty: unless I (by my providence) for
the welfare of a Country cast him upon the Land? Was he ever known as yet to
be vanquished or ensnared, was he ever seen upon the Land, laid open to the
view of men, his carkase brought forth of the sea to be wondered at, a measure
of his vastnes taken, his body hewn in sunder with Axes, beetles and wedges,
many panniers filled, many carts laden with his head divided into diverse parts,
but when I my self have offered him as a pray. Nay which is more, was there
ever any man hethervnto so hardy to endure the sight of him when he walks in
his kingdom? Chap. 41.
was there the^ ever any man that durst adventure to provoke him to battle?
whence therefore comes this presumption of thine, to challenge me that
created him, for he is no more indeed, how fearful soever he seems unto thee,
then a very small portion of my power. And my justice is as large as it: for
the right of all verse 2.
things being in my self, and none of the sons of men having any interest in
any thing under the sun, I of my mere bounty, bestowed to every one his
portion. Which also he inioyeth to the full, without any scanting, or
restraint of whatsoever freedom, commodity, or delight is meet for him, when
in equity I might have cut him off utterly because of his transgression, from
the fruition of any blessing at all, being imparted only upon condition of
obedience, I suffered him to partake of sundry, yea innumerable my mercies
notwithstanding. Such as at any time took hold of my promise, entered into a
covenant to sever themselves from the world, and to serve me, I have not
forsaken, but always stood by the^, in defending, preserving, inabling them to
bear the cross, in comforting the^, in encouraging them in their godly
course, and in the end, when I have made due trial of their co^stancy, in
delivering and rewarding them. Let him come forth and show himself here before
me to who^ I am beholding, that has any way been desirous to set forth my
glory, or maintain my truth, or obey my will. Let me see who has been
aforehand with me in any duty, which my former goodness has not called for,
that so I may make him full requital in the best manner. For if any thing in
heaven or earth may suffice him, I am able to command it for him, yea
whatsoever it is that he desires, I have it at my disposing to bestow where I
will. But alas wretched man, seeing all things are mine, how could thou
bestow any thing upon me, which was not mine own before?

This for application sake to thy self, Chap. 41.
that thou might more clearly perceive how they concern thee, and this
business. Now to return again to Leuiathan, that my power in him may quail
all such as oppose themselves against me, consider with me the verse 3.
parts and members of his body severally, and therein weigh his incomparable
strength and vigor, how well (contrary to all hope of his enemies to prevail
against him) he is provided and appointed for the battle.

For first of all he plaieth upon the verse 4, 5.
advantage, because like a Cock upon his own dunghill, he ever fights in
his own element, and that to with his skirts uncovered. From this element and
harbor, or rather kingdom of his, he can by no means be beaten. He is very
big, yet can no hold be fastened upon him in these times to bring him to land,
that so thou might see his largenes. He is able to bear a burden as great
as any ship, yet will he not admit the least weight to come upon his back.
No bridle can be fitted for his head, because his cheeks are as broad as the
great portall of a Palace, and of that thicknes and length, that though it
were double, and double again, yea tenfold, yet would it not serve the turn.
But might there be one framed for him, how should it be gotten into his mouth,
he being both as untameable and as forceable also, as the raging Sea wherein
he abides? Besides, his swallowe is so wide, that he would devour a whole
stable full of furniture at one mouthfull. His teeth fetch such a large circuit
about, and are so many and so marvelous, as does astonish the beholder.

His verse 6.
back is as vnpenetrable as any Buckler, Habergion, or coat of Maile, so hard
and so close, that neither wind nor weapon can make any entrance, the sharpest
steel can make no division. Herein he vaunteth, and bears himself so
bold, that he is at defiance with all the world. When he swimmes against the
wind and stream, and drives the swelling waves of the sea before him with his
verse 9, 10 11, 12.
neezing, such flashes of fire appear, as when the Smith fashioneth his great
Iron work upon his slithy. He arising out of the deep, thou would deem
the Sun to arise out of the Sea, or lightning to proceed from the East, for
his eyes resemble the beams of the morning, his mouth a furnace, his nostrells
a Diars Fat. At his breath the whole Sea seems to be set on fire. By reason
of the brightness of these several parts, thou would imagine here a Torch
to be kindled, there sparkles of fire to issue forth, here stubble to burn
into a great flame, there a thick smoke like unto a cloud to ascend up. His
neck is of such verse 13.
strength, that it crusheth in sunder whatsoever it meets, and covers the
faces of all that come in his way with sadness, but he emptieth his own loins
of all sorrow, which makes his bones fat, and replenished even with rivers of
Oil, which moves him to a delight and felicity, to wrestle with the surges
of the Sea, albeit they assail him most fiercely, and lift themselves up unto
the Heavens.

It is not with his Ilorin. 15, 39
flesh as with other my creatures, but the tenderest part of his body is
infinitely harder then Brawne, for that his flesh cleaves unseperably to his
bones, and is equal unto them in toughnes. And thus have I gone through all
the parts of his body, which I know thou can not choose but conceive to be
most wonderful.

ANd yet for all that, is it not more admirable then, Chap. 41.
the valor and courage of his verse 15.
mind, being so stout, that nothing can daunt it, so strong, that it can be
no more broken then the Flint, or nether Millstone, but what the one is able to
effect, the other is ever as forward and venturous to attempt, according as the
event does make manifest. For by reason of his verse 16
magnanimity, the valiant men fly, come running and crying unto me (because
only of my power) as to Purify them selves by prayer. verse 16.
purify and purge them from their sins, so to protect the^ from the power of
this invinsible Champion, which otherwise would grind them to powder by reason
of his strength, and weight of his body.

Neither can the verse 17, 18, 19, 20.
sword, spear, dart, or Iauelin pierce him; nor the Iron, Brass, Sling,
Crosse-bow, nor any other warlike engine batter him. S^^ike up the Drum,
sound the Trumpet, make the Armor to rattle, shake the spear before him, he
regards it no more then the moving of a straw, flying of the chafe or
feather in the air, or tossing of a piece of rotten wood upon the waters. For
seeing nothing can hurt him, he is afraid of nothing. Seeing his skin is of
that virtue, that it cracketh the very verse 21.
stones asunder as if they were Oyster-shels, knappeth Iron in pieces as if it
were a stick, casting the^ with more violence into the verse 22
bottom of the Sea, then they were sent at the first out of the hand of the
strongest man. He makes but a pastime of whatsoever is thrown at him. The
skillful and hardy Mariner that fears almost no colors, when he sees the
whole Sea on a froth, foaming and bubling like the vessel of the Apothecary
boiling with his drugges, and a verse 23
whitnes behind him, lifted up above the rest of the waters where he has
marched along, like unto the tops of the Mountains covered with snow, or
like unto the hoary hairs of the grave Fathers, he is amazed at the sight,
and dares not abide the combat, knowing that if he make not escape, he must
meet with such an enemy, as is without all verse 24.
fear, all mercy, and cannot be subdued, presuming also to be Lord, as indeed
he is, over all the high and lofty in his walk, and therefore scorneth at his
heels whatsoever opposes it self against him.

Lay this description Job to the former, lay them both, and that of Behemoth to
heart, apply them to thy conscience, see there thy weakness, and my power, thy
wanting of judgment, to think so highly of thy self, and so basely of my
providence and prudence in government; that am able to do whatsoever pleases
me, and nothing is pleasing unto me but what is passing good: that being so
great, and wonderful in strength, must needs be as great, excellent, and as
much to be admired, in the administration of just and righteous judgment to
all that live within the lists of my dominions.


Job. I now confess Lord from the bottom of my heart, Chap. 42,
without any gaine-saying, thy great and infinite power, the vnsearchablenes of
thy counsels, and that whatsoever thou verse 2
conceiuest against man, howsoever he strives against the equity of it, is
notwithstanding most just, and shall take effect. Which because I understood not
before, I therefore offended, but for that it was of verse 3.
ignorance (for wonderful are thy judgments, and such as no man can attain
unto) remit it unto to me I beseech thee (o my God,) and vouchsafing me the
covering of my former ouer-bold behavior, the seeking to justify my self
without a due regard of thy righteousness, my ignorant, rash, inconsiderate,
impatient, froward speeches, words of coffeehouse, dishonorable to thy name
in the construction of the Auditory, my presumption of heart in taking upon me
to know thy secrets, which are lifted up far above my reach verse 4.
instruct thou me aright in thy ways. For what knowledge soever I professed
before, yet through the light of thy word being brought to a sight of my
error, I perceive now that it was nothing, that unless thy holy spirit guide
me unto the truth, I must needs go astray, and therefore do wholly submit my
self to be taught of thee.

Infinite are the praises due unto thy Majesty from me, in that thou have now
showed me the verse 5.
properties of thy nature, given me to see fully and perfectly with the eye of
my mind, the effects of thy greatness, (which before I had only sounding in
mine ear) wrought in me inwardly such a feeling of thy excellency by virtue
of thy presence, as all other presidents could not draw me unto; and withal,
such a verse 6.
loathing and detestation of my self, by means of the abundance of my
unsavory speeche^, which have broken from me in this my adversity, that
abhorring my self, I lie prostrate upon the earth, humbled in dust and ashes.


Syrraxis. 19.
Persons.
The Lord. Eliphaz.
The Lord. Now as for thee Eliphaz and thy two friends, Chap. 42, verse 7.
though I have first reproved Job, as beginning my judgments ever at mine
own house, yet must thou not think, but that I am much more angry with thee
and them, then with him.

For his fault has been the transgression of his lips, whereunto also he
has been enforced through the greatness of his calamity, and your unjust
imputations. Your fault the bitterness of your heart against him, his ignorance
of the vnsearchablenes of my counsels, your error, in the matter of my
providence, his such as he has repented of, yours such, for which ye have
showed no contrition: he has laid his case very Ye have not spoken of me the
thing that is right, like my servant Job. verse 7.
right, as contending justly in the defense of his innocence, and has aimed
also at a good end, as to bear patiently my visitation: wherein also he has
prevailed thus far, that he has kept his heart that it has not been overcome
with impatience. Your case it has been wrong laid, builded upon false
grounds, and you have aimed at this end, to overthrow the truth, and to bring
my servant to despair.

He, though he has not always hit the white, yet has he evermore shot
fair at the mark: every shaft out of your quiver has been sent a clean
contrary way to that it ought. He has showed forth much love and mildnes
toward you, though he saw you exceedingly out of the way, and used all means to
reduce you from your opinions, you have cast off all humility, all mercy and
compassion toward him, respecting nothing his weak estate, nothing regarding
his grievous torment of body. You have utterly forgotten, that to add
affliction to affliction, to carpe, cavil, and scoff at him that is diseased,
to take him at the worst that is distressed in mind, yea to wrong him in his
meaning, to tell him of the Lords anger, that is wounded at the heart with the
terror of his judgments, is not the way to win his soul, but to cast it
clean away.

You have thrown behind the back to charge the righteous man upon mere
presumption, of foul and notorious crimes, what a heinous sin it is, and
with how high an hand committed: verse 8.
seek therefore to pacify my wrath every one of you, by a Take unto you 7
Calves and 7 Rams.
full and perfect Sacrifice, offered up for each of you in particular, by the
hands of my servant Job. But first of all craving pardon for your unkind
usage, your folly, vndiscreetnesse, overmuch bitterness, your rash censures
toward him, your denuntiations against him of my beamy judgments, debarring him
of all hope of happiness hereafter, because of his unhappy estate here: labor
to be reconciled unto him, and then desire him, whom I have ordained in the
office of priesthood, to be a Mediator between me and you, and to sley seven
Calves, and seven Rams for a whole burnt offering for every one of you
severally. For I will not admit you into the function of priesthood, and
therefore not accept it at your hands (for such as I anoint for Priests unto
me, and none but they do I accept in this holy duty) but at the hands of my
servant Job whom I have appointed, even as in former times Melchisedech,
Abraham, and before them Noah, Sheth, Abell, with the rest of the godly
Patriarchs, in their ages and families, as a type of the true Priest-hoode of
the Messiah to come, whose bodily sacrifice shall be all in all, and put a final
end to these resembla^ces. And let him be an Intercessor for you to me, and
that shall be notwithstanding your great offense committed in this action, an
expiation and atonement for you, and such as shall remove far from you those
judgments which by your sins in this controversy you have deserved. You
accounted him the greatest sinner of a thousand, you indeed are so, and
therefore are worthy to feel that and more to, which I have inflicted upon him
for a trial only of his virtues. But upon his intercession, and your amendment
I am contented to spare you: yea in regard of the love of his person, whose
sufferinges these your oblations present, to clear you altogether from the
guilt of it, and to bury this your fault in forgetfulness for evermore.


Eliphaz. I with my companions (O Lord God most mighty) do with exceeding
gladness of heart embrace this thy superaboundant mercy unto us: Chap. 42, v, 9
and are most desirous to submit our selves to Job, and to crave at his hands
forgiveness for the injury which many ways we have done unto him. We have
erred in the doctrine of thy providence, we have labored to deprive such as
endure affliction in this life of al hope of salvation, we have perverted Jobs
words, and wrested the^ to a wrong sense, grieved his soul with our iniust
accusatio^s, sought to make him a reprobate, and to bring him to desperation:
this have we done being beguiled by Satan, whose instruments we have bin, for
the subuerting of the constancy of thy servant. He blinded our eyes that we
could not see the truth, he inflamed the corruption of our heart, and kindled
the heat thereof against our friend, hardened the same that it could not be
induced to forsake the error thereof, neither to relent: notwithstanding his
excellent persuasions to the contrary on the one side, and his great calamity
and misery on the other side, might have bin sufficient to have overcome the
most barbarous, and unmerciful men in the world. There is no reason (O Lord)
that we which have bin so unreasonable, should be consecrated Priests unto thee
that art most righteous, and wilt have none vncleaue person to come near thine
alter: but rather great cause that we should magnify thy marvelous ^^^dnes
toward us in vouchsafing us that favor at the mediation of an other, to receive
our sacrifices as a pacification for our iniquities, done both against the
honor of thy majesty, and the salvation of our brother. Most just is it, that
you should deny us reconcilement with thee: unless we be first reconciled
unto him, to whom we have offered such infinite wrong. Most righteous is it,
that thou should make us know him to be most dear unto thee, and in highest
estimation with thee: by refusing our own, yea al other intercession for us,
save his alone. And therefore we must willingly subscribe, to the order thou
have prescribed for our purgations: nothing doubting of Iobes tenderness and
forwardnes that is so tender hearted, so ready to for give (specially us now,
having showed our selves never so great enemies unto him, seeing we are
commended unto him from thee, whom he loves so entirely) both to renew again
a covenant of friendship with us, as also to gratify us in this our
supplication, wherein thou commaundest us to become suitors.


Syrraxis. 21.
Persons.
The Lord. Job his Wife. Acquaintance. Contemners. Job. Kinsefolks. Servants.
Lord. THat all the World may know, Cha. 24, v. 10
that I am a most bountiful rewarder of such, as when the greatest afflictions
and tentations are upon them, bear them notwithstanding patiently, hold out
without fainting in the combat, and trust in me, and as well in the storm as
when it is over, pray for their enemies, as thou Job have done: I will free thee
from the captivity of Satan to whose tyranny I deliuer^ ^^^^ee over for a
time, and enuiron thee round with the sense of my Angels, as in times past,
remove away thy disease and restore thee to health of body, make thy Wife and
servants to humble themselves unto thee, thy Kinsfolk and acquaintance to
repair unto thee with great gifts in their hands, those yt contemned thee to
sue unto thee for forgiveness. I will also bless thee Verse 12
more about dantly then in thy former prosperity, with all manner of riches, the
number of thy sheep, Camels, Oxen, Asses, shall be doubled unto thee, Sons and
Daughters more vert^ous and Verse 15
comely then the former; longer, Verse 16.
and more happy days shall be be stowed upon thee, and at length which is a
thing far more blessed and desired of mine elect, because of that which
follows, then all above mentioned, a timely, peaceable, and honorable
funeral. Hereby to let thee with the rest of my Children see, and understand,
how beneficial I am in my temporal favors when is shall be good for them:
but specially how infinite are the heavenly treasures which I have reserved in
my everlasting kingdom of glory for such as in the time of tentation, trial,
and aduerfity, bear contentedly my visitation, and constantly cleave unto me.


Job. It cannot be chosen, but that he which was endued with so many notable
virtues, and blessed god in his lostes, must needs break forth into praises
unto the Lord for his enlargement, and ouerflowing liberality unto him: and
therefore is added this thanksgiving.
Wonderful is thy goodness toward me (O my God) great is thy power, and thy
wisdom infinite. I forgot to extol thy righteousness, notwithstanding thou
now honor me: I murmured against thee, yet art thou liberal unto me* I
cursed the day of my birth, howbeit thou make my life most happy unto me.
Thou did dest, because it was thy pleasure, and for my profit, wound me, now
thou healest me: when I was rich through thy beneficence, thou made me poor,
to humble me, and now thou have again enriched me to declare thy power what it
is, thy love and bounty to them that fear thee. When I looked for nothing but
death, even then thou gave me life, my grief that was so unsupportable, thou
have turned into such gladness as cannot be expressed: my misery, wherein I
was thought to be the most wretched man upon the face of the earth, thou have
made most comfortable and commendable unto me. For what greater inward comfort,
what greater outward commendation can there be unto a man, then being tried so
many ways, in such admirable manner, and to the astonishment of al men as I
have been, yet notwithstanding for all that to be found faithful unto thee.
Hence therefore does grow forth matter to praise thee, in that thou have
supported me in that sort with thy mighty Arm, that no assault nor battery of
that puisant enemy, the God of this World with his spiritual forces, has
surprised the bulwarcke of mine assurance in thy mercy. Hence is my heart filled
with love unto thy majesty, that have thus magnified thy Name in my great
deliverance: and my hope strengthened for the victory over all future
calamities and tentations whatsoeuer^, because of this my present conquest,
that has bin so miraculous, as makes all the World amazed to think of it.

Who can deny thee to be most wonderful in this, the contemplation of thy
blessings to have utterly overwhelmed the remembrance of thy punishments, thy
fearful plagues to be vanished away through the beholding of thy inestimable
favors? This thy mixture of mercy and judgment prosperity, and adversity
together: whom would it not incite to extol thy greatness? And the former to
bear the preheminance above the latter, whom would it not provoke unto thy
love, and the commendation of thy goodness? O that Men therefore could see thy
singular wisdom in the chastizing of thy Children, consider aright of thy
power in the upholding them, that amiddest the greatest calamity they dye not,
in the withholding them among the most strong tentations, heauiest conflictes,
and extremest tortures that can be devised, that they fall not away from thee:
and so advance thy mercy therein, as the fountains which causes thy strength
to lift up it self in their deliverance.

O that such as are afflicted could be persuaded to learn to endure patiently
their corrections, undergo willingly and thankefully their visxations,
inregard of the blessed end thou make with them that thus suffer, in regard
of the never perishing joy they shall reap at the last, that are thus pressed
down for a season.


Job his Wife. Albeit her reconcilement with her husband be not exprossed.
Chap. 42, v, 11 Yet is it very likely because there is no mention of her death,
and her husbands chastity so commended by the spirit of God, that it is not to
be thought he would take another Woman, because also her sin by the judgment
of Boza was no other then that of the three friends, which the lord forgave,
and lastly because this book as it began with judgment, forrow, and vexation
on all sides, so it concludes with mercy, joy, and consolation unto all: as it
began with miraculous trouble, so being shut up with miraculous deliverance,
the birth of Iobes latter Children must in correspondent manner be
extraordinary, and so by consequence borne by the same wise now in years, and
therefore she was reconciled to her husband.
Husband, I perceive now, that the Lord in indeed loves thee, and therefore
confess that my counsel was wicked, whereas I bid thee ply the Lord with
prayer, and thanksgiving by way of derision, I am now sorry for it. That which
I then did, the extremity of grief wherewith I was touched, moved me
thereunto. It was strange unto me, that the Lord whom thou had so carefully
served, as I think no Man upon the earth did the like, should for that thy
service, deal so hardly with thee. If the Children which I bare unto thee, the
long society in the which we have bin yoak-follewes together* if thy faithful
promise made unto me at the first entrance of our love, which notwithstanding
ought to be special inducements, may not win thee to continue thy wonted
kindness. Let the frailty of mankind, the weakness of our sex above thine own
move thee to pity.

Or for that the offense was so gross and monstrous, thou can not be
brought unto this: yet let the resemblance of our marriage between that of the
Messiah and his spouse the Church, as being bone of her bone, and flesh of her
flesh, how foul and notorious soever her sportes appear in the face of the
World, draw thee to reconciliation.

What if I could not abide to come at thee in the time of thy calamity: was not
the loathsomeness Chap. 19 Verse 17.
of thy disease such, as no body was able to endure to come near thee? And
beside who is their but at one time or other he forsakes his Messiah? What if
I have transgressed through my impatiency? The Messiah is patient toward his
spouse, and bears with whatsoever her infirmities.

What if I have been a vexation or a tentation, make the worst of it thou
can, unto thee in thy calamity: do not our sacrifices show that when the
Messiah comes he shall not only forgive them, but be slain for the sins of
all the world, and so for them that grieve, tempt, contemn, deride, revile,
with words of blasphemy, yea more then this, though this be the most that
thou can make of my fault, buffer, kill, and crucify him? Thou professest
thy self the Lords Disciple, he remitteth thy transgressions, and this great
one made against him, or rather a multitude of transgressions concurring
together in one action, and some of them in the same nature with mine: tread in
thy masters steps, do by me as he has done by thee. Upon thy repentance he
has received thee again that had gone out of the way, upon the same
condition accept of me thy disobedient and undutiful wife. Wicked am I indeed,
and most unworthy to have that name any way to be cast upon me, because I
derided him that conjoined us together in that holy estate, and has been ever
from our first coming together, save only now of late for a small time, a
most good and bountiful father unto us: yet for that I am now grieved for my
offense I know he will not refuse me, do not thou then reject me, but
vouchsafe me the place and honor I before enjoyed with thee.

And I vow unto thee, that come what can come, I will (...) hereafter sorsake
thee, neither will I ever gri^^^ the^ (...) more, but yield what comfort
possible I may at all times, specially in the time of adversity, when there is
most need consider of ye vehemence of sickness what it is, stick by thee unto
death, how tedious soever shall be thy visitation, obey thee both in word and
deed, render al due reverence unto thee, yea endeavor my self by all means unto
that good carriage every way unto thee, as is recorded to have been in Sara,
the only excellent pattern for married Women to follow, toward her worthy
husband Abraham Who also may be a notable spectacle for all married Men, as
well for his wise dome in gouermnent, as for his love unto his Wife: from whom
rather then he would endure a separation, he chose to be at defiance with
Kings, for whose sake though she were barren, he renounced his Co^cu^in, by
whom he had issue, and therefore most dear unto him.


Kinsmen. We committed a fault in that we did not visit thee (Job) in the
time of thy calamity, Cha. 41, v, 11
the greatness and strangeness thereof, caused us to forget our selves, and
thee, how dear soever unto us. Our hearts were with th^^ then, and we prayed
for thee: so that there was no love wanting in us. The defect of our duty did
arise from an amazedness, which possessed our hearts, in regard of the
wonderful burden of the Lord upon thee, and his unwonted dealing toward thee.
And moreoner, we durst not Pro. 4, ^4
come at thee, least peradventure we might have been punished after the same
manner. For many times, the Lord scourges those, that have any familiarity 1
King 22 32.
with the wicked, even for that cause only, because they consort themselves
with them.

This made us to forbear, from resorting to comfort thee in thy great
extremity and misery: for that we knew not what thine heart, and secret sin
might be to Godward, albeit we had seen thee demean, and carry thy self no
otherwise then well outwardly. But now the LORD has approved of thee, and we
know we may repair unto thee without danger, we do most gladly, and willingly
come unto thee, for to administer what comfort we may after thy distress. And
for that experience teaches us, that nothing is more delightful unto us, then
to confer and discourse of our adversity when it is over, our purpose is to
sit with thee a while to that end: And further, for that we are not ignorant,
that the body after long sickness, needs to be cherished, we are not
altogether unmindful to gratify thee in that respect, as also to leave with
thee beside some token of our good will.

Our desire is, thou would take these things in good part, and renew again
toward us, (and the rather for affinity sake) thy former love and amity, Nature
has wrought this kindness in us toward thee, let it work the like in thee
toward us: and as we are met together in thy house, which we thought we should
never have done, to solace thy heart after thy great sorrow, so vouchsafe thou
to frequent our houses upon the like occasion. But if thou shall please to add
unto this, as a supereminent friendship, a care to see us as well when we are in
our affliction, as when we are out of it, we shall hold thee more faithful
unto us a great deal, then we have been to thee. For to speak ingenuously of
our selves, we have been to to unnatural, yet we confessing this, thou
ought so much the rather to forgive us.


Acquaintance. We should have seen thee (Job) rather in thy affliction the^ now
in thy recovery, Cha. 42, v, 11
but better now then not at all, and in some sort our coming unto thee now is
better then before, because now we may perform a double duty, first to declare
the grief of our hearts for thy heaviness, past, and our gladness for thy
present deliverance, all under one. Howbeit we come not with an intent to
excuse our selves, (for we cannot but acknowledge that labor to be ill spared,
that might be spent to the comfort of the distressed) but having brought with
us something to make merry withal, and some remembrance, that all former
intercourse of benefits rece^^ed, is not quite buried with us: our request is
thou would accept it at our hands, and think no worse of us notwithstanding
the neglect of that care we should have had of thee in the time of thy misery,
then heretofore thou have done: thou would let this our love present, blot
out utterly the imputation of our former unkindness, even so far forth to
afford us, upon a promise of fidelity on our part, that inwardnes with thee
again, which we have had in times past.


Servants. Our calling to be necessary, Though there be no express mention cha.
42, v, 11. of Jobs servants return, and humbling themselves unto him after his
prosperity recorded, yet is there very great likelihood for it, because of that
which is written, of the alienation of them in plain terms, Chap. 19, v, 15,
16 See the reason hereof afterward upon Contemners.
all Men are compelled to confess: because there is no degree, or estate that
can live without us: Howbeit very few there are that commend our fidelity. Our
love (they say) is seldom knit, our hearts seldom bent to do them good, to
whom by bond and covenant we have tied our selves, where is honor and wealth
bringing gain and ease unto us, there we strive to be entertained, their we
are contented to use some diligence for a time, until our turn be served: but
where is either great store of business, or else the least show of poverty, or
want any way, there we are soon weary: and during the time that we serve
such, if the work seem any thing tedious, we are ever repining, if there be
any kind of tribulation, we are both unwilling, and unable to suffer with
them, discontented straightway, impatient to bear that we see our betters
undergo.

Yea, we take (they say) an occasion hereby to scorn and deride them, to
shake of all obedience and duty toward them, to contemn and disdain their
persons, office, and authority over us. This voice goes upon us that are
either Men Servants, or Maid Chap. 19 Verse 15.
Servants. And it is true we confess for the most part, neither can we excuse
our selves herein toward thee (Job) our good Master, but must acknowledge our
selves faulty, and worthy of the greatest blame that can possibly be laid upon
us: nay, that we have deserved to be made a public example, by some extreme
punishment justified upon us, that others may beware how they show themselves
undutiful toward their Masters, how they mock at their calamity, whose
misery they ought to reckon as their own. For this belongs unto servants so
to be affected toward them whom they serve, as toward themselves: to esteem
their loss as their own, their visitation as the hand of God upon themselves.
None of all these things came once into our minds, while it was in season to
be performed: but now when it is past, we consider it and lament with tears.
Receive us to favor good Sir, upon our promise of amendment, conceive of it
as an ouer-sight in us, and a want of true wisdom and judgment: a common
defect in those of our place. We are given to follow our leaders, our Lady, and
Mistrisse, together with your three friends, they were the parties that misled
us. Their reasons, and example so prevailed with us, that for the present time,
we thought we did rather well to disobey and scorn thee, that wast at
defiance with the Lord, (as we supposed) then ny whit offend in that we
pitied thee not, and were not serviceable unto thee.


Contemners. It cannot be denied, but Jobs recovery must be in an equal
proportion unto his misery: now his misery consisted, First, in the loss of
his goods. Secondly, in the loss of his Children. Thirdly, in the visitatio^
of the Lord upon his own body. Fourthly, in the forsaking, and contemning of
his friends and acquaintance together withal other, and therefore his
recovery must be in the like largeness, which moved me to add the coming in
of his contemners, unto the former points laid open.


WE that are a heap blown together of all sorts, friends and foes, known,
and unknown, of the mighty, middle, and meanest ones, learned, and unlearned,
of such as are not at all acquainted with the truth, or being acquainted with
it, do either embracc it carefully, or are careless of it, are driven through
the Lords mighty delyuerance which he has wrought for thee, to condemn our
selves for our contempt toward thce, and to bewray the exceeding grief we
endure by reason thereof: had we felt before the weight of this sin, no
benefit, no punishment in ye world should have drawn us unto it. For what is
there upon the face of the earth, that on the one side, or on the other can
counteruaile the same. But alas, we were ignorant that thou wast the Lords
servant, For these in the time of his calamity see chap. 19. Verse 18
or that thou had the truth on thy part; yea, we rather thought thee to be
an enemy unto him, and unto his righteousness, because thou both spakest
against him, and for thy own righteousness, to lift it up above his. For so
we conceived of thy speech? And who would have thought the matter should have
come to this pass? But we see the wisdom of the Lord is too deep a point for
us, or any man to wade into, without some direction from above. We perceive
also, that no Man is able to judge what shall be the event of things; and
again, that temporary affliction is no certain argument that the Lord hates,
nor these outward blessings that he loves. This was our opinion before, and
that which all the world for the most part imbraceth for a truth: yet
notwithstanding they are beguiled in that they build upon it, and so are we in
following the^. But howsoever relying our selves upon this ground: such of us
as had knowledge, bare our selves bold to break forth into open contempt,
scorn and derision against thee Job, and such among us as had no knowledge,
imagined that thy misery, wherein thou wast, to be laid upon thee to that very
end, that thou should be in disdain and repr^ch. And thy very words, as
being at defiance with Heaven, and making thy self a God for thine integrity,
did not only confirm us in our opinion, but also stir us and encourage us, to
more outrage against thee: supposing indeed yea being verily persuaded, that
we had done God very good service, and had performed a most laudable and
commendable part therein. Yet we speak not this as indeuoring to purge our
selves of al blame, but to show the manner of our offense, that thou might
the more easily be pacified toward us. For all this cannot free us, but that we
have broken still the bond of charity, that ought to be between man and man:
nay, which is more, that we have persecuted the Servant of the high God, and so
are in the rank of the chiefest sinners.

For in that we did it of ignorance, does not exempt us from the rank of
Persecutors of the Church of GOD: something indeed it does extenuate the
sin, yet for all that our Names must be enrolled still among that number.
What then would our case have been, if we had willing lie and maliciously
fallen into this so notorious an offense? What pretense then could we have had?
What allegations could we have made for our selves, seeing now as it is, we
remain inexcusable, and seeing as the matter now stands with us, did we not
seek reconcilement both of the Lord and of thee, as we unfeignedly do, even
all of us, our state were damnable, and we should be adjudged to most horrible
torments, because of our most heinous transgression.


Syrraxis. 22.
Persons.
The Lord. Satan.
The Lord. HOw say thou now (Satan) does not Job stick unto the truth, The
scope of the history being to strengthen the Lords servants, through Jobs
constancy, against the temptations of Satan, it was requisite to infer the
Lord triumphing over him in that respect.
and cleave unto me, notwithstanding all thy sore and grievous plagues? What
desperatenes therefore was that in thee, to call for my more terrible
vengeance? might there be more then that, whereunto thou art already
condemned, though it be not fully in place as yet, (because thou art not as yet
chained up under everlasting darkness, neither have thou as yet Hell mouth
sealed up upon thee, never to be opened again during all eterniti^^) if this
my servant did not belch out blasphemy against me from the bottom of his heart,
and did not utterly renownce my service; so that I yielded him over unto thy
hands body and goods, to execute thy full measure of malice and cruelty upon
them both?

Thou think thou art well experienced in matters, and that thou have a deep
reach into things, but thou see how short thou come of the mark? And no
marvel, for thou iudgest only by the outward appearance, but art not able to
look into the heart, which alone gives sure testimony what is in man. The
infallible signs of an Hypocrite, are neither found in the complexion, nor
gesture, nor wealth, nor honor, if from hence thou drewest thy conjecture
concerning Job, but do rather appear in his fruits. Why did thou not seek
them there Satan, before thon did peremptorily lay thy self open to
heavier curses? If thou had consulted but with the ordinary sort of men,
they could have certified thee otherwise concerning him, because of his many
good works wherein he daily exercised himself, and because of the worthy
commendation that every where went of him.

Thou art more anncient a great deal, and of far more antiquity the^ any
man now living. Thou art also of a more ripe conceit, and subtle judgment by
nature then is he, whence then is it that thou have so ouer-reached thy self?
Can it be imputed unto any other thing, then unto thine immortal hatred toward
my Children, toward mine honor, toward all goodness, yea toward my self, my
very essence and being? For thy malice against them, grows from this head,
that thou can not abide me. Have I cast thee down to the nethermost Hell,
and yet will not thy proud and malicious spirit be abated? Well, my servant
Job having vanquished thee in the combat, thou have forfeited unto me that
liberty which I suffered thee to enjoy: so that the freedom of wandering
throughout the whole compass of the Earth at thy pleasure, permitted unto
thee heretofore, might I now justly take from thee, and send thee unto the
deep, and there bind thee up until the great day of my appearing, according
to thy voluntary deprecation against thy self. But for that nothing is more
common with thee, then to forfeite thine enlargement unto me by making such
manner of deprecations against thy self, to thy further condemnation every
time I scire thee before me: and moreover, for that I have to employ thee even
unto the end, I will put up this at thy hands, as well as I have done all the
rest, and recording it only in my book of Accounts, among the residue of thy
most memorable actions, will reserve thy payment for it, until that general
Assizes and universal Doom, which I have ordained for such like matters. But
then I will assure thee, that what thou call for against thy self, shall be
rendered thee to the full, even until all the vials of mine indignation, which
are bottomless and have none end, be drawn out unto the very dregs, and
powered upon thy head.


Satan. It is my trade to try practices, and prove maisteries. I have foiled
many a one that carried as great a show of holiness as Job did. Satan and his
instruments, how wickedly soever they do, yet have they somewhat ever to say
for themselnes, and some show of reason left the to gain confederates unto
them, to hold up the pillars of their kingdom from falling unto the ground,
until the end of all things, and therefore is annexed this reply.
Mine office is to forge matter of accusation, will thou be against me for
doing my office? I have always been the Executioner of thy terrible vengeance
upon sinners, is not Job a sinner as well as others? Did not thou command
me to afflict him, and in that measure as was done? Let him therefore thank
thee for it, and not blame me. For to move thee thereunto, and to make him
feel the force of my hand, was but to do my kind. But what need thou to
have given me leave, and to have sent out thy Commission by me, without the
which I could not so much as have moved my finger against him? Yet see for all
that what a deal of threatening here is against me, when I have done nothing,
but that which both my nature and my duty led me unto, and also my calling
required. See what tryumphing there is over me, and how I am trampled under
foot by and by, if I come never so little short of my aim?

I think Job has very little to brag of if things were well waighed. What
do I know for his heart? Sure I am that with his mouth he uttered forth most
accursed blasphemy against thee. The first speech that passed from him after I
smote him in his body, is it not wholly compounded of desperate, banefull,
blasphemous matter, the like whereof has not been uttered of any, how wicked
so ever since the World stood? Which kind of style is it not continued
likewise throughout his conflict?

Can thou show me the place where it is not to be found? Can thou turn
me to the page where there is not laid open some notable piece of
coffeehouse, impatiencie, inordinatenesse of his affections, violentie of
his passions, presumptuousnes of his knowledge, oner-headinesse of his
judgment, overmuch pride and sauciness in looking into thy secrets,
determining of thy hidden counsels, even to the setting them down in
particular what they are, vnreuerentnesse in his behavior euer-more toward
thee, such familiarity with thee, even as if thou were mortal and wretched,
and every way as base and vile as himself: yea such an abject, that he might
justly prefer himself, his wisdom to govern, his righteous dealing for
thee and for thy people, before thine unto him?

Has not Elihu, have not thou thy self repro^ed him for these things? Was he
not so obstinate, that Elihu could do no good at all with him, and thy self
wast feign to take him to task again and again, show thy self terrible unto
him the second time, before he would be humbled for them and reclaimed. Thus
far prevailed I against him, yet for all this, because forsooth he kept his
heart upright, (which who knows sane thy self, for he must not be his own
Judge) his constancy must be preferred, and I must be condemned, his state and
credit bettered, mine damnified. But he were best look well about him, that
he continue soundly settled in his constancy, for let him be fully assured,
(though he has escaped my fingers now) that I will not thus give him over. In
an hundred and forty years space, 1 Can^u^^ (...) longi^qua v^let muta^e
^^tustas.
if there be no 1 change in him, specially having the world still tumbling in
upon him, (for thou have doubled it unto him already, and no doubt but it
shall be tripled upon him tenno-folde at the last,) I much marvel. And this I
will protest for my own part, if there be any means under heaven to draw him
to an alteration, it shall not be unattempted.


The Lord. This thy trade is not of me, but of thine own invention, the
practices and proving of maisteries, thou pretendest as a trial of my
Servants, thou intendest to my dishonor, and their destruction. Thou have
never so foiled any one that belonged to me, but he has risen again, and put
thee to flight. Jobs profession it was not in show, but in substance, such
though thou have heaued at never so often, yet have thou not at any time
utterly overthrown. Who has imposed upon thee the office of accusation? I
made thee to no such end, thou hold it therefore by usurpation, finding thee
a fit Instrument to execute my Chastizementes upon my Children (for my
vengeance I execute only upon thee and thine) my manner has been sometimes to
use thee that way, yet so that thou have first sought for this employment very
importunately, suggesting withal some matter against them, that might move me
to condescend thereunto.

Though Job and all Men be sinners, and I might justly punish them for their
offenses: notwithstanding because some there are that cry unto me for pardon in
sorrow and confidence of my mercy, to them I remit their crimes, and punnish
them not for them. For what needeth-that, seeing they are penitent straightway
as soon as they have done any offense, which of it self is a punnishment
sufficient, and inferior to As being on the one side, an horror and anguish of
soul, a feeling of the anger of God against sin. Psalm 5.1, 17, and 3. On the
other side a crucifieng of the fleshly corruptions, Romans 6 6. A compelling to
spiritual subjection, as we would force a slave to grind at the Mill, Doulago,
a battering of the body as those are wont that try masteries with plummets of
Lead, until the blewnes of the wound appears most grievous, Vpopiaz^in. 1
co^. 9.27. And further a continual delivering over unto death through outward
dangers and afflictions. 2 Co^inth. 4.11.
none? But if I do correct them at any time, it is for their trial, further
instruction, better experiment of my goodness in their deliverance (as now in
the chastizement of Job) that I do it. Upon thine accusations brought against
Job, and insulting over him as if he would no longer cleave to me, then I
held him up by the chinne, and made him to swim in wealth: I willed thee to
do thy worst against him, and he has now in very deed good cause to thank me
for it, because it has redownded to his unspeakeable benefit. Howbeit hereby
art not thou exempted from blame: for envy drew thee to procure my commission
to afflict him, malice stirred thee up unto it, which now is become as kindly
unto thee, as if thou had it in nature, and by creation.

To accuse my servant thou say is thy office, to tempt them thy trade, to
execute punishment upon the^, thy kind, nature, duty, calling, when thou art
nothing else but a mere Intruder into them all. Which to go^no further, is
apparent even by this, in that thou challengest unto thy self so many
functions. Jobs infirmities in the time of his visitation, must needs be
acknowledged to have been very many, and very great, but what of that, he
holding still the foundation, and trusting in his Redeemer, never forsaking me
the fountain, but evermore earnestly calling upon me for help, he
disappointed thee of thy purpose. For thou vndertookest that he should be at
utter defiance with me, forsake quite his confidence in me, fall finally from
mine obedience, and become wholly and perpetually thine without recovery. Thou
make light account of the knowledge of the heart, when that is all in all,
neither can there any right judgment be given of the actions of man, without
the true knowledge thereof. And this may yield great comfort unto man, that
howsoever thou accusest him before me, whatsoever grievous matter thou layest
to his charge, yet thou do all upon bare conjecture, not knowing indeed
how it stands with him, as being altogether ignorant what is the affection
of his heart, and if that be faithful, not to regard thy objections.

But what blasphemy is that thou vomitest forth by way of Parenthesis, who
knows Jobs heart to be upright beside my self? How now Satan, will thou
disanull my authority? Shall not my Word, which alone gave being to all
Creatures, without any other witnesses, be a sufficient confirmation of it
self? But were it not so, would thou make the world believe that I am
alone? Does not the Father and the holy Spirit give testimony with me? In the
difficulty of subduing Jobs high conceit of himself, in the humbling him unto
me, and making him fully to confess his faults, thou may see what a do I
have to reform man that has fallen from me, and to recover him home again
unto me. But yet though it be with much labor and pains, I bring it to pass
notwithstanding at the last. But as for thee and thy retinue, that fell from me
before him, there was no means to reclaim you, no way to reuerse you, but
albeit I Humanitus dictum.
striued, and studied what I could for your alteration, nothing would work
upon you, your mischievous disposition would admit no restraint, but flinging
from my presence, ye would throw your selves headlong into that rest-lesse
bed of endless misery.

Is not Job therefore, together with every true believer, notwithstanding all
these frailties, worthily preferred before thee, and art not thou woorthily
condemned? do they not justly triumph over thee, and trample thee under their
feet? And seeing my honor is in vanquishing such an enemy, that is so
maliciously bent against me, why should I not set up my Trophies as a sign of
victory over him? The elder men are, the more wily and wary be they, thou have
experience of this in thy self, and therefore thou shall more hardly take them
with thy baits then before. Had thou any advantage by the long lives of
the Fathers that lived before the flood? Did not those that were godly among
them, through their many years, gather unto themselves more wisdom and
strength to over come thy tentations? Thou have small cause to presume, and
less to vaunt (and had dest thou not more then a forehead of brass, thou
would not now do it) of hope of victory in time to come, through the
increase of wealth, yea of doubling and tripling the same unto him tenne-folde,
this thou speak by way of scorn, (I would indeed the world regarded riches
no more then thou do, but only that thou may use them as a Fouler does
his Net, to ensnare the souls of men, and thou the honor of my Name more
then thou art wont) seeing that before thou did dest complain of that, as the
only bar against thee.

Use what means thou will, do thou and thy accomplices what you can, (yea let
all the creatures under heaven join with you in it) lay your heads together,
plot your attempts over and over again, invent, consult, execute what may
seem most probable for your purpose, you shall effect notwithstanding, no more
against Job, nor any of my servants beside, then what my pleasure is, then what
shall make for their good, my glory and renown, your further shame and
confusion. Thou confessest, that thou could not have so much as moved thy
singer against Job, without my special Commission, were there not therefore
great weakness in him, or any other, (for my protection reaches unto all my
Chosen in like manner) to esteem of thy threatening? But in this thy
threatening, thy extreme malice against me and mine, bewrays it self what
it is, which malady of thine, foster and nourish it within thee as much as
thou will, it shall but breed thine own woe, it shall not any way touch me,
or any of mine Elect, any further then it may serve for their benefit; not any
way turn to my dishonor, but make for my greater honor and renown, as does
most lively appear by this present action against Job.

For what greater glory could thou possibly have brought unto my Name, then
thou have done hereby? For herein how ridiculous (for most odious have thou
been in the eyes of all men from the beginning) thou have shevved thy self, I
shall not need any longer to dispute, seeing the event it self, now shining
forth to the view of Men and Angels, is and will ever be, even unto the worlds
end, when soever thou shall make the like attempt, as an Herald proclaiming in
thy ears, Job gave Satan a notable repulse. Which straight way,
notwithstanding thine intolerable impudency, shall confound thee with shame,
cast upon thee an utter despair of victory in whatsoever thine enterprise, to
thy perpetual vexation, and torment of spirit.


FINIS.
To God only wise, be praise, both now and for ever.

