A VIEW OF THE ROMISH HYDRA AND MONSTER, TRAISON, AGAINST THE LORDS ANOINTED:
CONDEMNED BY DAVID, 1. SAM. 26. AND NOW CONFVTED IN SEVEN SERMONS:

To persuade Obedience to Princes, Concord among our selves, and a general
Reformation and Repentance in all states: By L. H.

Psalm. 11 Behold the wicked bend their bow, they have made ready their
arrows upon the string, to shoot in the darcke at those, that are righteous in
heart.

Psalm. 5 Destroy them O God, let them fall from their Counsels, cast them out
for the multitude of their iniquities: because they have Rebelled against thee.

AT OXFORD. Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's
Church-yearde at the sign of the Tigers head, 1588.

The Dialogue, and talk of David and Abishai touching King Saul, whether he
being cast into a dead sleep should be killed or no? taken out of the first
book of Samuel and 26. Chapter.
8 Then said Abishai to David, God has closed thine enemy into thine hand
this day: now therefore, I pray thee, let me smite him once with a spear to
the earth, and I will not smite him again. 9 And David said to Abishai,
Destroy him not: for who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be
guiltless? 10 Moreover David said, As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall
smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle and
perish. 11 The Lord keep me from laying mine hand upon the Lords anointed:
but, I pray thee, take now the spear that is at his head, and the pot of
water, and let us go hence. 12 So David took the spear and the pot of water
from Saul's head, and they gate them away, and no man saw it, nor marked it,
neither did any awake, but they were al asleepe^ for the Lord had sent a dead
sleep upon them.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORD ROBERT DVDLEY, EARL OF LEICESTER, BARON OF
DENBIGH, KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, OF HER MAIESTIIS most
Honorable privy Counsel, and Chauncelour of the University of Oxford:
LAVRENCE HVMPHREY WISHES GRACE, PEACE, AND MERCY FROM GOD THE FATHER and OUR
LORD JESUS CHRIST.
THERE are, Right honorable, as far as I can judge, Two perilous poin^^ of
popery.
in the Romish Religion two principal parts, and peremptory points, corrupt
Opinions, and outrageous Actions: both drawn and borrowed from our common
Adversary: who one way sows, in darkens and in the night, among the wheat of
gods word, the cockle and darnel of pernicious doctrine: the other way he
murdreth them from the beginning, John 8. 1. Pet. 5.
and roareth like a Lion, and in his continual and cruel circuit seeks
whom he may devour: every way hunteth after blood, and our destruction
spiritual and corporal. As Christ is humble and meek: as the cognisaunce of
Christians is love: so the badge of Antichrist is bloody, full of cruelty, void
of charity.

To pass over the corruptions of doctrine, This second Monster of Rome, Hydra
of Rome has many heads
this Hydra is of many heads: These Actions of Popes are diverse, both here
seen and felt, and understood abroad, and every where practiced. As Ashur was
Gods rod, and Vespasian his servant against the Jews: so this reputed Vicar of
Christ, has been the whippe of Princes, the scourge of all Christendom. By
his opinion in Mass, he has learned to offer an unbloody sacrifice: In his
Actions, he is Pilat mingling sacrifices with man's blood. Lu^. 13.
By his opinion he is guilty of that which is written: Psalm. 144.
His mouth speaks lies: In his actions, of that which follows, His right
hand is the right hand of iniquity. But o that al Princes were of King David's
mind, not to meddle, nor to communicate with such bloody sacrifices, Psalm. ^.
nor to have these false cruel gods names in their lips.

Although your Lordshippe knows his doings in this realm better then I can
deliver: yet I purpose, by your good leave and license, to set down the
proceedings of this Hydra, and his actions by degrees and steps for some
Instruction, and a Caveat to my countrymen.

The first Act and head.
The first head of this Romish Monster is a Temporal sword, open defiaunce
against kings and kingdoms, misliked by him: He will be not only a Bishop of
Bishops, but a king, nay a Conqueror of kings: He has in his hand the
wheel of fortune to make kings go up, and go down, according to his
pleasure, in driving and guiding the chariot, and makes them thus to say:
Regno, regnabo, regnaui, sum sine regno. One says: I do reign, another: I
will reign, another: I have reigned, another: I am put from my reign. He
makes Apollo to give over the chariot of the Sun, and to resign it to any
rechles and rash Phaeton, though he set on fire heaven and earth. He will win
the horse, or loose both horse and saddle. He can be content that David or any
other godly Prince be unhorsed, and vnseated: and that wanton and rebellious
Absalom be placed and settled. This bloody action of warring is performed
sometime in their own person: as Julius the second that fought against the
French with Paul's sword, and others both Popes and Cardinals may be
witnesses: sometime by inciting, and setting on other Princes against a Realm
or Seignory. As Pippin and Charles were employed against the Lombardians by the
commandment of Adrian: Cau. 23. q. 8
And Gregory the great wills the Tuscans to do the like. Thom. walsing. in
Ed^ar: 1.
Boniface by letters solicited the King of England against the French King,
and promises aid. And another time Kings of France are set up against
England. Al these experimentes fall out in our time by a Catholic consent in
the council of Trent: that all Catholic Princes should prepare against
England, and others of the reformed religion. This cannot be good: for even the
Pope himself says that it is not good. Cau. 23 q. 8 ^. Tim. 2.
Pope Nicolas says to Charles the Emperor: No man that is a souldior to God
entangleth himself with secular business. And if the soldiers of the
woorlde apply themselves to warfare, what has the Bishops and soldiers of
Christ to do, but to go to their prayers? Quid ad Episcopos and milites
Christi, nisi vt vacent orationibus?

If this head of Hydra by Gods mighty and merciful hand be cut off, so that
forreiners will not, nor cannot satisfy the turn, and his lust, The 2. head a
trumpet of civil war
behold another head rises, A Proclamation of Rebellion to al Catholics
against their dread Sovereign, for he will set all at six and seven, and move
every stone, he will go thorough thick and thin. Examples we have in
England and Ireland with banners of civil dissension displaied to the offense
of Almighty of God, to the disturbance of our public and godly peace, and to
the utter overthrow of noble families.

Yet, there is another head springing as a supply to the rest, The spiritual
sword, Excommunication of Princes, The 3. Exco^mmunication.
interdictment of Realms, condemning all that be not at his beck to the
bottomless pit of hell. As Boniface the eighth excommunicated Philip King of
France, because he would not honor and worship him nor acknowledge him to be
his Land Lord in the Kingdom of France. In this action, he curses and banneth,
he absolueth and blesses, and yet this absolution is not worth a straw, nor
his curse more to be feared of a wise King, then the noise of a tumbrel or a
rattle, as that Noble Prince of Orange did well account, and boldly protest. Jn
Apolog.


Besides these, 4. Deposing of Princes.
another cruel Bulls head grows out, forthwith by a Bull to depose, ex
officio and pro imperio, a Christian Prince. So it pleased Pope Zachary to
throw out King Childerick and Pope Gregory the fourth, King Ludowick: ^^ug.
Steuc. contra Vall.
Pope Pius the Queens Majesty, releasing the people from al bands of loyalty
and subjection, with a full license of rebellion: but this was but a word, no
blow.

God sometime gives that spirit to Prince and people, that these proceedings
take no place: then an other head starteth up, 5. Privy practices.
Privy murdering, authorized as lawefull by this Antichristian Prelate.
Secretly and subtillie this Popish Hydra woorketh with poison, with pistol,
with gunne, with sword, with tools of Death, all framed in the shop of the
lame Smithe Vulcan, Vasa mor^ia.
nay rather in the furnace of the Devil, as the Massacres and murders of many
Honorable, and worthy men in many places do testify: In france the murder
of Prince of Conde, after he was taken prisoner, contrary to the law of arms:
of the Admiral Chatellion shot through in the streats and murdered in his
chamber: of Dandalot: of Ramus after he had given a certain sum of crowns to
save his life: of Marlorate walking in his garden: of an other preacher killed
in the pulpit: In Scotland the murder of the King: of the Lord James: of the
Lord Russell: In the low cuntries the murder of the Prince of Orange, who
first was perscribed, and proclaimed a Traitor and an heretic, with this
large promise, that whosoever could bring him quick or dead, or kill him, In
(...), se^ proscription^.
should have five and twenty thousand crowns in money or land. And if he were
meanly borne he, should be made a gentleman, and if he had committed any
fault, never so heinous, he should be pardoned. These be horse-leaches that
draw blood, Prou. 30.
and have never enough.

Al these actions have been here attempted: in these steps has this Monster
walked among us: which all savor of violence, oppression, murdering of the
Lords anointed, and of his Saints. The reason of this Action is set down by
August. Steuchus, Contr. La^ Vall.
descending from the root of an erroneous opinion: Contra Haereticos opus est
fustibus, non Anathematis, quae contemnunt. The Heretics contemn the Popes
curses, they must be beaten down with clubbes.

To accomplish these fierce, 6. Head ^f craft and peri^^^^, Original of the
rest.
and forcible actions, there is joined another crafty head of this monster,
and now lately and principally by Jesuits, having Commission from Rome to teach
perjury, and disobedience to Princes, to promise fair, to perform nothing, to
dispraise the state, to magnify the Pope, to tell the subjects in their ear a
tale of a tub, of a Catholic Church, and a Catholic faith, of pardons by
their Agnus Dei, masses, Confessions, and of many other goodly bables, of
salvation by their tradition, of damnation by our religion, which is nothing,
but lying, cogging, and deceiving the simple. This quality and counterfaite
Religion has bin told before in an exhortation to Princes: It is most evident,
that there is no part of the Christian woorlde, In fas^ic. rer. expe^e^dar.
co^tra decimas.
which has not been craftily tempted by these kind of Monsters: and that many
Kings and Princes have been fraudulently circumuented by them. And again: They
know how to deceive notably, to circumuent, to forswear, to forge testaments,
to profane divine and humane things, to make strife, to trouble the quiet, to
confou^d heaven with earth.

There is yet to make up 7 deadly sins, the seventh head, a Magical head, The
7. the head of witchcraft.
woorking by witchcraft and sorcery: for as he will co^secrat, so he can
inchaunt, as bless, so poison the creatures of God for the dispatch of
Princes, Alphonsus a learned Prince.
but God is above Beelzebub. Alphonsus, when his enemy Cosmas a Florentine sent
him for a present the books of Titus Liuius, and his Physician counseled him
not to handle them, as sent from an enemy, for fear of poison or infection: Do
you not know (says he) that the souls and lives of kings are not subject to
the will of private men, Aeneas sylde dictis Alpho^.
but safe and secure under the providence and carefulnes of god? Cor and corpus
Regis in manu Domini: Prou. 21.
The heart and the body of a king is in the hand of the Lord.

These and such like heady actions are in this realm continually practiced:
which may witness to the world what monstrous religion the Pope brings and
brocheth to us. No marvel if the first part be naught, and his faith corrupt,
since the second, his fruits and actions be so abominable. The Pope is like
Martial Marius.
Marius the great Captain of Rome was wont to say: That he could not hear
the voice of Laws, among the peales of gunnes, the noise of drumslats, and
sound of trumpets. The Pope, that is so busy, so occupied in bloody and
Martial matters and co^spiracies, has no leisure to study or hear or preach
the Law of God, or to advance the Gospel of Peace in Christ Jesus.

I have, Right Honorable, entered into the consideration and confutation of both
these parts of popery in other books: but now seeing daily the present and
perilous practices of the later, both here and elswher: setting aside for the
time the first concerning the Pope and his Iesuitical doctrine, I have lately
travailed somewhat in the second, opening to my countrymen their frontick and
bloody dealings, and calling them by all means of persuasion, as I could, to
conformity and due obedience to the Prince, and to the love of their own
country, for the common safety and preservation of us all, in body and soul.
Alas, who would have thought that there should have been any need to have
either spoken or written of this matter to English Subjects, living so long
under a gracious, and peaceable government: far passing the times past, and
the like not to be hoped for after it? Who would have thought that any English
and Christian man would have once muttered or murmured against such a Prince?
for countries sake to be loved, for religion to be obeyed, for sundry graces
and gifts to be woondred at, for all these good blessings of God by her to us,
to be honored? Are there yet foolish frogs, begging of the Romish Capitoline
Jupiter either a block to crush them, or a Storcke to devour them? Though by
Gods appointment the Olive is content to be over us with her fatnes, and the
fig with her sweetness, and the vine with her fruitfulness: yet we are not
content to have them, but only Rhamnus, or a bramble good for nothing but to
burn and consume us. English Jews.
Are there yet remaining the Offpring of Jews, desiring a Saul for a Samuel?
Professing and protesting, Nolumus hunc regnare, We will not have him reign over
us? and that cannot abide the title of Christ's cross, Jesus of Nazareth, King
of Jews? Or can there be found yet an Esau, that will say in his heart, Genesis
27.
The days of mourning for my father will come shortly: then will I slaie my
brother Jacob? I will make away with the mother of the Land, and the godly
brethren too? And must we after the invention, yea the fruition of wheat, and
sweet corn, return with the old world, ad glandes, to Akornes: as in the late
time of Queen Marie? The Religion published by her Majesty offends them: And
can this Romish Religion being so stained with blood, as I have declared,
please them? Is there no remedy, but to turn the blessing of the Prophet Esaias,
by a contrary Text into a curse? Esa^^^.
For our gould, to receive brass: For our silver, iron: and for this
government of peace, the tyranny of Exactours and Taskmasters?

For remedy, and some redress against these bloud-suckers of Rome, The ^sse^
of the Sermons following.
and our rebellious mutiners at home, I have eft soones called to the memory
of our countrymen, their duty toward God and their Prince, and Country, and
then doubtless God will be a Buckler, and shield to them and to us all.

In this copulative, An exhortation to a true unity.
in this double dutifulnes toward God and the Prince, we must be joined with a
full consent altogether, as one man, or as the twins of Hippocrates, who were
sick together, and had their fits together, and recovered together, as
Austine recites out of Cicero: So we, head and foot, De ciuit. Dei lib. 5.
cap. 2.
and all the body must consent in the true worship and service of God: we al,
high and low, with heart and hand must agree in this duty toward the Prince
against all foreign or domestical adversaries. These two duties are
recomme^ded to us by Ambrose. This becomes Christians to wish for the
tranquillity of peace, Ambrose Epist. 33.
and for the constancy in the faith and in the truth. And in the same place:
Rogamus, Ibidem.
Auguste, non pugnamus, We beseech O Emperor, we fight not.

If we deal thus duetifully toward God, and obediently toward our Prince,
then will God mercifully and mightily defend both Prince and us. No devilish
witchcraft, no Ruffians dag or dagger, no invasion of forreiners, no craft or
art of any enemies, no nor this seuen-headed beast shall annoy Prince, Pear,
or People. He can, he will send twelve legions of Angels. Matthew. 26. Pohd^h. 8.
Hist. Ang.
Then shall be truly verified that which long a go was prophesied: The Kingdom
of England, shall be the Kingdom of God: and that God is alone, and must be the
Protector and King of it. If our Prince and Nobles, and Subjects will sincerely
serve him: we shall have the protection of our lord, 1.5. in ora^. cont. (...).
Seruum Christi non custodia Corporalis, sed Domini prouidentia sepire
consueuit, says Ambrose. No guard of men or bodies, but the providence of the
Lord is the hedge and defense of the servants of Christ. It may be for our
sins, that the great ships of Tharshis may come: Ies. 2.
but upon our repentance, De ^^heneide so^ Remora, Pl. l. 9. c. 2^
God will send Remoram even a little fish that shall stay the ships though
under sail. It may be, that some Load stone may draw some Iron upon us, but
the Lord will prepare a Diamond that shall with stand the Lodestone, Lib. 13.
c. 4.
that it shall not have power to draw any at all. It may be that Catiline will
make a coniuration, but god will send one Cicero or other to espy it and
overthrow it. All the Traitors against Julius Caesar within three years
perished, Sue^on in Julio Caesare.
some one way, some an other way, some by Judgment, some with ship wrack,
some in battle, others with the same poinadoe, wherewith Caesar was stricken,
none of them had a natural death. Calippus, because he would stab in and
stick Dion his friend, was stabbed, and killed with the same dagger himself
by his own frinds. This shall be the reward of al those that conspire against
the Lords anointed.

I have troubled your honor with many words, uttering my wishes to my
countrymen, and declaring to you the argument entreated of in these Sermons. I
have displaied the new Monster lately received, and daily rising and raging
against us. And as in this general division of Christendom, every nation and
faction provide their Armor: And as your L. and the whole body of the right
honorable Counsel make every way a politic preparation, and every man seeks
his piece, and his furniture: So I, having no weapon, but only my tongue and
pen, have thought good in my calling, after my weak and simple sort, to fight
with the help of them both, against this huge Monster, and against all
enemies. When I began first to expound this Text of Scripture in January
last, at Oxford, and proceeded in it there and in some places of Hamptonshire,
and ended it at London, at the Cross in May: I little thought of printing it:
and so the matter out of my head, and almost out of my papers, I fear my
short, and imperfect notes have brought forth an imperfect, and untimely
fruit. Howesoeuer it is, I must commit it now to the world, and appeal to your
Lordships patronage for it. I had rather offend by this temerity and
negligence, than to incur the suspicion of silence and neutrality, knowing
the danger and penalty of Solons law, if in this common trouble; Plutarc^^^
Solone.
and turmoile I should show my self to be idle and of no part.

I am bold to offer to your Lordship as a poor scholasticall New-yeares-gift,
and as a gratulation of your prosperous return, and as a small signification of
my bounden duty to you, my very good Lord, and a special Patron of our
University, and a friend of this cause which David began, and I have rudely
prosecuted and ended. The Lord Jesus protect our noble David, your honor, the
honorable Counsel, and the whole Realm, and grant unto us all many good
new years, to his glory, and to the commodity and comfort of his Church, Amen.

Oxon. December. 28.
A Table of the special points and common places.
OVT OF THE FIRST SERMON.
THE practice of traitors was prophesied of before, and is ancient. Treason
against the Country and Prince detested. The manner of traitors, double.
Examples of hypocrisy, and flattering in traitors. A warning to Princes and
Noble men to expel such deceitful persons out of their courts and houses. 4
Motives and causes inducing men to weasons Unbridled and licentious liberty,
Covetousness and ambition, Envy and Jngratitude, and Religion pretensed, and
specially Popish: And the Pope by specialties is declared to be the Abishai
in our days. Two ways the Pope uses, by himself, or by his instruments,
Nouices, Monks, ^riars, Cardinals etc. Papists in their Religion make bloody
vows, which ought to be broken. The Popes Religion dispenses with good oaths
of allegeaunce made to Princes, and he can depose them by his Religion.
OVT OF THE SECOND SERMON.
SEdition and discord disproued. The answer of David to Abishai threefold. 1
David's prohibition in which he forbids the murdering of Saul. The reason of
David by the effect, and discommodities expounded at large. Jn the person of a
Prince are two circumstances: by condition, as man; by calling, as King, the
Lords anointed. Whether any man, may be killed of any private man, and how.
The Exposition of the law, Thou shall not murder, out of Augustine. Princes
ordained not of themselves, nor of fortune, nor of Jupiter; but of Almighty
God, and therefore not to be touched but by God, whether he be good or evil.
Why evil Magistrates are advanced. The office of a Prince, in that he is called
a God. The true oil wherewith Princes are anointed is only the holy Ghost.
The office of Subjects to a Prince as being God, and also a double Jmage of
God. A proof of David's opinion for obedience to superiors by nature a good
schoolemistresse, as in beasts, birds, fishes, serpents, and other natural
creatures. Also in the time of Nature before the Law, and to natural and
Ethnish Princes, with the commodities of such obedience to the heathen
governors. The punishments inflicted upon traitors by the judgment of these
natural Ethnish men, among the oulde Romans, Turks, and other infidels.
OVT OF THE THIRD SERMON.
THE Pope a Zoganes or a Lord of misrule: A viperous and Serpentine brood from
Rome spread among us. Chrysostom excellently discourses of this obedience of
David. A general rule of revenge: Like will have like. The Law of Nature, a good
argument. Other particulars in Nature, of dogs, horses, panthers, and men.
Laws in Jndia. The Law of God in the old testament given to the Jews, and
examples there to persuade this obedience. Against Accessaries, and Iustifiers
of Traitors. A notable pattern of Obedience is David, and his example a
sufficient glass to look in. Particular Laws against murderers, and
Mutiners. Laws and examples in the new testament. The opinion of the fathers
after Christ, the dutifulnes of our first Christians toward their wicked
governors. The Civil Laws against al abuses touching a Prince, in fact, in
purpose, and intent, in his coin etc. Executions and experiments of Civil and
Christian Magistrates against such disorders and outrages.
OVT OF THE FOVRTH SERMON.
A Rule of Chrysostom necessary for Preachers. Decrees and authorities out of
the Canon and Popish laws against murder. Three kinds of murder. The Popes
sayings and doings contrary to his decrees borrowed out of fathers. The verdict
of John Caposius against Pope Innocentius, verified in the rest of the Popes.
The savings of Pope Nicolas, and others presumptuous against Princes. The
sayings of Aug. Steuchus, out of the Popes Register, for the claim of an
universal dominion over all the west church. The special claim made of Spain,
England etc. A Seminary or School of Englishmen at Rome, erected long since.
The doings and practice of Popes agreeable to his own proud sayings and brags.
The plagues and judgments of God against these proud priests of Rome, and
their factours and. Adherents. The perjury of Papists notably punished by
Turks. The Turk better in this matter of faithfulness, then the Pope. The hand
of God upon Popes by themselves one upon another. Athenians and Romans, are
mou^ting Eagles but plucked. The monster in Pope Julius time a figure of this
monstrous Popedom. Popes enemies to France, and yet France a friend to
Popes.
OVT OF THE FIFTH SERMON.
THE unthankfulness of people against Magistrates. Laws of Canutus, Edgar, and
Alured, Richard the first, and others in England. Disobedience against the
Laws in England. England subdued by Iul. Caesar, Danes, Saxons, and that
cheifely by discord, and treachery of our own countrymen. A terrible example
of perjury. Traisons in the time of diverse Kings in England punished. Treachery
and prodition by an Italian in betraying Calice to the French. Ancient
practices of English Rebels for the defense of their Popish religion, and yet
frustrated and vain. A concubinary Priest, and traitor made a Martyr of the
Popish people in England. Welsh prophecies defeated. Traisons of Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, Minorite Friars, Monks, and Priests in England, and some
executed in their best habit of Religion. New traitors for the Religion of the
Pope in the time of K. Henry the 8. K. Edward the 6. and of Queen Elizabeth,
rebelling and rising, but had always a ^al and an evil end. The Queens majesty
follows the example of her Ancestors in this Realm resisting the pride and
authority of the Pope.
OVT OF THE 6. SERMON.
Foreign examples in. France and Flaunders. The law of Conscience the last
and worst witness and tormentour of murderers and Traitors. Of the trembling,
and terror of an evil conscience in this Act. Dogs, Fishes, Swallows,
ravens, al creatures terrify and astonish a murdering and guilty conscience.
The conclusion of the first part of David's reply against Abishai. 2 The second
part is David's Protestation, in himself detesting that fact with the reason
annexed, that god has ways to kill Saul at his pleasure, and therefore he will
not take upon him gods office in that behalf. Death common to all, and of the
late mortality among us. The vanity of this world, and end of all flesh: we
are all the naked image of Hippocrates. Infants and youngest must die. The great
personages, Saul and such Princes must die, by one of three kinds of death, set
down by David, and under that his division many are comprehended. The death
of persecutours and traitors. Their bravery and bragges against the godly,
but all in vain. Examples thereof old and fresh in memory. No Eloquence can
save from death. The Pope that delivers others out of purgatory, and by
battle, and Bull kills Princes, cannot deliver himself from death: whereof he
is warned by his own ceremonies, and it may appear by the end of many Popes,
specially even in the very Act of their rage against Princes. Albeit these
wicked men must die, as Saul did: yet the godly delight not in their death, no
more then David did in the death of Saul. The compassion and sorrow of good
Princes, Pagans and Christians, and of Queen Elizabeth in the death of the
traitors and offenders that suffer. An admonition to traitors, and offenders
yet living. The death of good Princes is of necessity: but yet a plague to
common weals and to the church. Mutations and changes perilous. Prayer for the
good Princes.
OVT OF THE SEVENTH SERMON.
A Question whether the Papists be the authors of these troubles, and tragedies
against Princes, or Protestants. The resolution is flat against Popes, the
trumpets of sedition. The stir betwixt the Pope Paschal, and Henry the 5.
the murderer of his father. The detestation of these Traitors by a few more
examples of Jews, Romans, Hungarians, and of Danes. The cause of these
practices against good governors, is their goodness and Gods cause: the second
cause in the practisers is their ignorance. Christ and his gospel a stumbling
stone. The lot of the Prince and the Prophet is, to be hated for their
Religion. The third part of David's division, his politic and provident
Resolution. The providence of god gathered out of the circumstance of the text,
threefold. The first part, Gods special care, providence and protection of
Princes, as here of Saul Murmurers and mutterers always against rulers,
against Moses though no ruler then, yet appointed by god, against David, and
Christ. And yet all these and others were preserved until their time appointed,
as appears by the notable examples, of Cyrus, Romulus, Seruius Tullius,
Constantine, Antonine, Vespasian, Waldemar, Lodouicke, Charles 5. Henry 4. and
by authorities. The second providence of god over David and his church, and
every member thereof. A comfortable doctrine to the elect and godly: who
sometimes stagger, seeing their affliction, and the prosperity of the godles.
The mean that God uses here to preserve, is a deadly sleep. God has many
ways of deliverance, comprehended in two general ways by Origin, declared by
examples. The providence of God defined by Aquinas. The decree of man and the
determinations of god contrary. Prince and preacher must run their course
without stop. The third kind of providence for temporal things. Murmurers in
this point. God^ providence reaches to the godly and to the followers of the
word and religion. Almunition of Roialms, al promotion of men from God.
Contrariwise sin the cause of division between God and us, and the only
impediment and hindraunce of his carefulnes and providence. The purity of
Christians in the time of Constantine and Traian. The care of her Majesty, and
her honorable Counsel in the time of dearth. A Citation and summoning of
England to judgment for sin in all Estates, Magistrates and Clergy people. Two
sorts of men specially offending, irreligious and superstiously religious. The
way of reconcilement to god, is a general reformation of al, and repentance.
Faults escaped correct thus.
Page 49. Lin. 5. Falerians., P. 107. L. 28. Prodition.

P. 116. L. 12. Detestable. P. 117. L. 3. Inestimable.

P. 147. L. 24. Procession. P. 171. 18. put out, Of.

1 SAMUEL 26. VER. 8. Abishai said to David, God has closed thine enemy into
thine hand this day now* therefore, I pray thee let me finite him once with a
spear to the earth, and I will not smite him again, etc.


THE FIRST SERMON.
IN the beginning of this Chapter we have Saul persecuting, and David
persecuted; the Ziphians discovering him, David his espies, Saul sleeping with
his soldiers, the coming of David with Abishai to Saul's camp in the night:
and now in this part of Scripture we hear the conference and disputation of
Abishai and David.

The argument and question is, whether Saul the king may be lawefully slaiue
by them his subjects or no?

As the persons are two, A general division of the Text.
so are the parts of this speech two: first Abishai the Opponent, obiecteth
and defends the Affirmative, requesting withal that he may kill him.
Secondly David the Respondent, holds the Negative, denying that act to be
lawful.

A matter in mine opinion most necessary for Preachers to entreat of, and for
us all to hear and consider of in these days, when subjects utterly forgette
their duty and reverence, which they owe to the sacred Majesty of Princes, and
to all lawful Magistrates. A thing long since prophesied of by God in his holy
word, and in all ages detested of the better sort. Iesaiah among other things
prophecieth that the boy shall presume against the Ancient, Iesaia. c. 3
and the vile against the honorable. Paul also prophecieth of these later
times, ^. Tim. 3.
that men shall be fierce, enemies of the good, traitors, headdy, high-minded,
The hainousnes hereof, both Heathen and Christians have abhorred. The mistocles
a notable captain, being banished from his unthankful country by the
Athenians, and entertained of Xerxes King of the Persians, was willed,
according to his promise, to subdue Graecia unto his Empire: but rather then
he would betray his country, he drank up a bole full of Bulls blood, Plutarch.
and so after his sacrifices and prayers to his Gods, gave up the ghost.
Vsthazares chamberlain to Sapor King of the Persians, being apprehended for
his confession of Christ, and refusing to woorship the Sun their God, Sor.
lib. 2. cap. 9.
does only make this petition to the King, that by the voice of a crier it
might be proclaimed and signified to al men: Vsthazares is beheadded, not for
any treason, or crime in the Kings court, but that he is a Christian, and
refusing to obey the king, cannot abide to deny his God. So much was the very
name of a traitor abhorred of the^. Now, seeing the enormity of the fault, and
necessity of the time, give me leave to speak to you as Bernarde once did in
the like case unto the Romans, Epist. 24^
departing from the Pope Eugenius. When the head a keth, does not the tongue
cry for all the parts of the body, that they ache also with the head? Ego
corporis membrum minimum. As he, so I, the smallest and simplest member of our
body, crave leave to utter our common grief, for the head and Sovereign of
this Realm, of late without cause troubled and assaulted by open and privy
practices of such as ought to have been true subjects, and faithful
countrymen. And for this purpose have I chosen this parcel of Scripture, in
the which we may first learn the wickedness it self in the person of Abishai,
and next in the person of David a controulment and a confutation of it, as in
the Sermons following shall be declared.

Touching the first, when has there not bin an Abishai? Naie some worse then
Abishai, seekers and suckers of blood? 1 Part.
Abishai would have Saul a wicked persecutor dispatched out of the way,
Treason ancient and news
others conspire against the godly and innocent. Abishai uses more good manner
in asking leave of David, others headdily attempt the same, consulting nether
with God, nor with good men, but only with their own frontike pates, or
factious mates, Abishai yealdeth reasons, that he may dee it: The authority of
God, the opportunity of the time, the possibility and easines of the fact: for
he says, God has delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day, and he saw
both Saul, and Abner, and the people in a deadly sleep, and promises at one
blow to destroy him, but the others do far differ from Abishai, especially in
the manner how they do it, and in the causes why they do it.

The manner is, The manner of Traitors.
not only fiercely, and forcibly to rise against man, but most communelie and
cunningly with sweet and fair words to commit this foul and filthy Act. The
first murderer that ever was, used this pleasant speech, speaking to Abel as it
is in the greek text: Brother, let us go walk into the field; but a good
beginning in show, brought an il end, according to that which is written by
this our David against his false familiar friend, The words of his mouth were
softer the^ butter, Psa. 55.
yet war was in his heart: his words were more gentle then oil, yet they were
swords. And also by his Son Solomon: A man that flattereth his neighbor,
Prove. 29.
spreads a net for his steps. This Cainicall course followed Absalom, 2.
Sam. 13.
who inuiting his brother Amnon to a sheepe-shearing feast, killed him. When I
read the Commission given by Absalom, to his servants, it seems to me that
the Romish Absalom Pius Quintus speaks against a Prince: Smite, kill, fear
not, for have not I commanded you? Be bold therefore. Is not this a strange
father of Peace, an Absalom? Likewise Ioab laid his net against Amasa, 2. Sam.
^^
whom he took by the beard with the right hand to kiss, and with his sword
privily, and traitorously smote him to death. I omit Judas the disciple and
traitor of Christ, and that with a kiss and with fair words. Aue Rabbi, Hail
Master. Luc. 22.
This Judas had two Schoolmasters, Scribes and Pharisees, but the chief was
Satan who entered into him, even as these Papistical Traitors are not
successors of Peter in this point, but of Judas, and are schoole-fellowes with
him. It is not only Judas his treason, but a Turkish-trick against Christian
Princes and governors. One Sarracene used this against Edward king of Britane
or England. It may be the Author means Rich.
To him ayding the Christians against the enemies of Christ, came this fleeting
fellow secretum colloquium ab eo petens, requesting secret conference with him,
and strikes: but after two wounds received, the King laid hands upon him and
sieve him. Another Sarracens was suborned by the Sultan to kill James Lusignane
king of Cyprus, under the pretense of caryeng letters: but he missed, and was
tormented for it. These flattering traitors that with this courtly or rather
crafty courtesy, and Popish holy water, work this cruelty, either by words and
insinuations, or by presents and gifts, or by delivery of letters, or messages,
or other ways under color of friendship, the more close they be, the more
crafty are they, the more priny, the more perilous: for flattery is more
hurtful then the most cruel poison, according to the verse: Blanditi a
plusquam dira venena nocent.

Wherefore it were to be wished, that Princes and great personages would purge
and cleanse their Courts and houses of such that have been taught in the
School of Gnato to deny, to double, and dissemble, and by the lesson of Cato,
Saluta libenter, seek not to salute nor to save, but to slaie them. Take the
dross from the silver, Prou. 25.
and there shall be made a precious vessel for the finer. Take awie the
wicked from the King, and his throne shall be stablished in righteousness. Out
David had his eyes upon the faithful of the land, that they might dwell with
him, and upon them that malk in a perfect may, that they might serve him. There
shall (says he) no deceitefull person dwell in my house. Psalm. 101.
He that tells lies, shall not remain in my sight. This faithfulness is
first toward God, and then toward the Princes and neighbors: this
deceitfulnes, flattering; glosing, temporizing must needs offend God, and man:
and therefore ought not to be regarded. The example of Constantius as it is
noted by Eusebius found out these inconstant men-pleasers, Lib. 1. de vita
Con^^
and tanquam Proditores Dei as traitors to God esteemed them unworthy to be
with an Emperor, and determined they should be banished out of the Court: for
that they will never be true to Emperor, who are found unfaithful toward
God. Quomodo enim Imperatori fidem seruarent his qui erga Deum deprehensi sunt
perfidie Because these fleering counterfaites are hardly found out, therefore
there needs great circumspection in discerning and tryeng them, and also
earnest prayer to God that he would give us the spirit of discretion, and by
his providence to preserve us from them. Such discretion this Consta^tius
seemed to have. A Philosopher the nephew of Plato discreetly espied it, who
said unto a flateterer, Desine adulari, nihil prosicis, cum te intelliga^.
Leave off this flattering and fauning, for thou preuailst not, I perceive thee.
Prayer also is needful, as an old proverb imports: Cui fidem adhibeo, ab ^o
me deus custodiat. God keep me from him in who^ I put my trust, for the other I
will see to my self. The effect of this is, that the manner of dealing in these
me^ is worse, the^ the doing of Abishai. You may see by this that al is not
goulde that shines like gould: that even Bees though they carry honey in their
mouth, yet may sting: that Sirenes or Myrmaidens sing sweetly, and have their
amiable entertainementes and allurements, but otherwise bring Shipwreck to
Mariners: and therefore Ulysses gave counsel to his Shipmen to stop their
ears. I wish al men to take heed of Scorpions, though flattering in face, yet
pernicious in the tail* the beginning may be plausible, the end clean
coutrary. The Crocodile whyneth and plaieth the Hypocrite, but it is to catch
and to kill. The flattering Dragon the Devil, as Augustine terms him, is
worse than the roaring Lion, and this is the manner and fashion of this new or
rather old rotten naughty world.

Now we are to consider the motives and causes persuading these men to enter
into these high points of treacherous actions, 2. Part. Causes of a reason.
passing the compass of this Abishai. There are many, but I reduce them to
these following: Some men are led or rather missed by covetousness, 1. Cause
^^centious^esse.
that is, either desirous of liberty and impunity, which is loosenes; or else
of gain, which is ai^arice; or else of henour and dignity, which is ambition.
In the time of the Emperor Henry the fourth certain gentlemen not liking the
bridle of discipline, nor the restraint of their dissolutenes, laid their heads
together how they might rid that Emperor out of this life, or bring him into
the low order and base and bare condition of a private man, In vi^a Hen^. 4.
not remembering that they did owe a peace unto their countrymen, justice to
the Realm, and fidelity to the Ring. So far were these from the rule of
obedience, that desirous of their licentiousnes would hazard the servitude of
the country. The desire of lucre is another motive to treason. 2. Cou^^^^nesse.
It was the covetous question of Judas, Quid vultis mihidare? What will ye give
me? Which makes a number of malecontentes, seditious, troublers of a
commonweal for apriuate commodity. So that now the case is, as in the time of
David, When the Prince studieth peace, Psalm. 110.
and speaks peaceably, they are ready to fight. Their feet are swifte to
shed blood nay they know not the way of peace: Romans 3.
They will neither know nor have peace. They seem to be kinned to that mad
soldier, that passing by the Church, and hearing them pray for peace,
Donanobis pacem, was angry with them, Phy, quoth he, Peace? Manliue.
how should we live? Such a Prince Cor. Agrippa tells of in Italy, who being
moved by the said Agrippa, to take away that famous or rather infamous faction
of Gibellines and Guelphians in his Territory, Naie not so, quoth he,
confessing plainly it was not for his profit, for that there was brought into
his coffers yearly about twelve thousand ducats by occasion of this faction.
De van^scienti.


This greedines is the cause that many being now become bankerupts, unthrifty
and born to consume and to spend the fruits of the earth, think by mutations
and chaunges to recover, and to lick themselves whole. This is the cause, that
moves some to fly from their country, and captains to serve strangers
contrary to the Law of GOD and man. Nemo miles ab imperatore extraneo
stipendium accipit, says Chrysoftome. No man takes wages of a foreign king,
or Emperor. How much more wicked is it, for Christians professing the gospel to
be in service under the conduct and banner of a stranger, both in nation and in
religion? and that for money, bloud-gilt, the reward of Judas? Quidagis
Christian, sidomini hoste^ amicum habueris? what do thou o christian, what
avails thee if thou have the enemy of the Lord to be thy friend? The same
Chrysostom has these words in an homily De proditione and Judah. There is a
third kind of covetousness not of these mean things, but an insatiable desire
of honor, principality, and sovereignty: Julius Caesar imagining or rather
dreaming of such a thing, ^^^ic. offi. 1.
for a kingdom and a Monarchy brake the laws of God and man. This is pride and
presu^ption when men will not be content with David to tarry their time, but will
adventure by hook or crook, by right by wrong to surmount. (...) lib. Dor^^i
secure. ^^rm. 6
I read of the Romans that they painted pride with a triple crown Pope-like,
because, as R. Holcot testifies, Holcot. fol. 23^.
the proud man will ouerrule al his equals, his inferiors, his superiors. The
first crown has this title, Transcendo, I surmount: the second, Non obedio, I
disobey: the third, Perturbo, I trouble all: which in verse is expressed
somewhat otherwise in Holcot, Effluo, transcendo, quo quis priuatur babendo,
Tra^smigrat genus exceditque homo qui nec obedit:
Turbor and affligor, perturbor, and vndiquelaedor.
Meaning thereby, that those that will be climing and transcendent, and
disobedient and troublesome, must find trouble and affliction themselves.

Another motive of these rebellious interprises is Envy and Ingratitude. 3.
Envy.
Envy is a smoke that ca^ not abide ye brightness of good proceedings of her
Majesty, that goes about to smother and obscure the blessings of God shining
among us in all prosperity and felicity, in the time of her government.

Liuor tabific^m malis venenum. Virgil.
It is a poiso^ that gnaweth and co^sumeth the vugodly, that cannot abide the
happy estate by which we enjoy the gospel, and al spiriual consolation, by
which we have the fruitio^ of peace and plenly, if our sinfulnes and
unthankfulness do not abridge us.

Promeritis male tractarunt Agamemnona Graeci. The unkind dogs monstrously
rent Acteon their master. Plut^^^ Inuidia.
The ougly toad cannot abide the good sent of flourishing vines. Cantharides
green worms, though they have their being and succor in the tops of ashes, in
olives and sweet roses, yet they will show their nature, their juice is poison,
and they will make blisters, tumbling, and trouble in the common weat. It is to
be feared least by their unthankfulness and grudging, this our prosperous and
good estate, which we have many years by Gods goodness seen and felt, will be
turned by his heavy displeasure into dearth and scarsity, as since these new
traitorous enterprises we may, if we be not blind, see some experience. Our too
much plenty heretofore has made us wanton, new fangled, busy bodies, not
contented with our blessings of Manna, as murmuring Israelites, preferring
before this heavenly felicity the garlic and fleshpots of Egypt, or rather
the burdens of intolerable taske-masters under Romish Pharao. These benefits
and this repining cannot long continue together by the justice of God and by
the course of natural things. Too much rancknes beats down the corn, and
bows are broken with the burden; overmuch abundance of fruit comes not to
any ripeness, as wise Seneca writes: even so our prosperity, I fear, has
corrupted some of us. and made us forgetful of our duty toward God and our
Prince. Gregory the great, when Popes were not so great, but did acknowledge
the sovereignty of Princes over them, did well confess writing to one Theodore,
^pish. 103.
a Physician, in this manner: How great benefits I have received from Almighty
God, and from my most soueraign lord, the Emperor, my tongue is not able to
express. Would to god our Gregoria^s, folowers, and fautors of the Pope, would
have such meditatio^s.

Another motive, and cause of these stirs, 4 Religi^^^
and tumultes, is forsooth Religion, A strange Religion doubtless, that
teaches men to murder Princes and Monarchs of the world. It was a pretense
of Religion in Herod, who told the wise men of the East, Mat. 2.
that he was desirous to know where Christ was, that he might worship him:
but his Religion was a full intent to kill Christ. True Religion is ever
assaulted and unpugned by a false Religion. Haman could not abide good
Mardocheus, nor the Jews for their Religion, calling their laws, new,
strange, Hest. ca. 3.
and differing from all people, and so procured from Assuerus the King a bloody
decree, to destroy all the nation. When the Christians in Persia, Soz. l^. c. 7.
by reason of acquaintance, and conversation with the Osroens, and Armenians,
had gathered a church and congregation to serve Christ: that thing offended the
Magicians, or wise Divines of Persia, who by succession, as Priests, had the
charge, and ministry of that heathenish Religion. It offended also the Jews:
so that Christians for their Religion were tormented, and good Father Symeon
Archbishop of Seleucia, was accused to Sapor the King, Quasi Regni, and
Religionis Persarum proditor, as a spy, and a betrayer of the Realm, and of
the Religion of the Persians, reueiling the secrets of Persia to the Emperor
of Rome, Soz. libae. cap. 8.
and so was imprisoned and put to death, with an hundred Christians. The ground
of these violences or rather vilanies is Religion.

But there is a difference between the true and false Religion. The Religion
of Jeroboam was a false, and caluish Religion, contrary to the Religion of the
house of David: and therefore he made two calves of goold, the one in Bethel,
the other in Dan, made Priests of the dregs and rascalles of the people, 1
King. 12.
commanding them, that they should no more sacrifice at Jerusalem in the
house of the LORD, and persecuteth the Prophets and the professors of the
true service of GOD. And this was a pretense of Religion. But the Religion of
Ezechias, and of Josias Kings of Judah, was good Religion, 2. Chron. 29. and 35.
to pull down Images, and all Idolatry, to restore the Law, and the Bible of
GOD, and the true use of the Sacraments. What other Religion is the
Reformation of Queen Elizabeth, then this of these Kings? And if their
reformed Religion was commended by GOD, and of all the godly: why should the
Religion now received from GOD, and restored by Queen Elizabeth be condemned?
May not I justly say to the posterity of cruel Saul, as Jonathan said to his
Father Saul? What harm has our David done, 1. Sam. 19.
more then oulde David, then Ezechias, then Josias did? Why then will you sin
against innocent blood, and slaie David without a cause? Why does the Popish
Saul of Rome the Supreme Vicar of CHRIST, persecute the anointed of God, and
the handemaide of Christ? Surely it is he, and none but he that is Abishai in
name, The Pops is Abishal in name and nature.
and in deed, I say the Romish Abishai, that is the Father of bribes, and
gifts, by corruption a taker, and giver, inueigling, and persuading the
Potentates, and people of the world, to rebel, and to murder the Lords true
anointed, to rise, and to take weapon against their own natural, and
lawefull Prince. It is he that blesses, and consecrateth with holy water, and
incense a sword, In defensionem S. Romanae Ecclesiae: for the defense of the
holy Church of Rome, and for the revenge of the Popes enemies, and that in the
solemn feast of the Birth of Christ: which he fendeth abroad as a present to
some most Christian, or most Noble Prince, for the protection of his Catholic
Church, against the true Catholic faith of Christ, which is not without a
mystery, C^r^. Romans Eccele. lib. 1. Sect. 7.
Fog^^rat hic pontificalis gladius potestatem summan^ temporalem a Christ^
Pontifici eius in terris vicario collatam, i^xtae illud^ Data est mihi omnis
potest as in caelo and interra. E^alibi, Dominabitur a marivsque ad mare. This
Pontifical sword, does signify the supreme temporal power given of Christ to
the Bishop his vicar on earth, Mat. 28.
according to that saying: Al power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
And in another place: You shall have dominion from sea to sea. Behold what a
fisher of men Peter's successor is, that fisheth for the dominion of all the
woorld: all is fish that comes to his net, where with he draws to
himself that which is properly and truly spoken of Christ by David: unless he
will also have that which follows, That al kings shall adore, Psalm. 72.
and worship him, and that his kingdom is eternal and before the Son: But
he will prove in the end, to be that foolish fisher in Theocritus, that
dreamed he had caught a golden fish, and waking, he got not so much as a frog.
It is that Abishai, that likewise scatters abroad in Lent his consecrated
golden roses to some Princes, and also sends to the captains or
sta^derd-bearers of the Church of Rome, Ibidem in C^rem.
his banners and armor, likewise hallowed at a mass: It is he that sends
soldiers signed with the Cross against Christian Emperors, as against
Frederike the Emperor, who does signify to the King of England treasons, and
conspiracies against him. Jn Hem. 3.
The practisers whereof, being beseiged, Matthew. Paris.
were accompanied with Friars, and by them received the sign of the Cross
against him, pretending the authority of the high Bishop by his Apostolic
letters, ac praedictae mortis, and exhaeredationis nostrae, summum Pontificem,
Greg. 9.
sic asserunt incentorem, affirming that the Supreme Bishop of Rome, was the
author of his disinheritaunce and destruction. This Bishop of Rome, taking
occasion of the absence of Frederike, being now in the service of Christ
against the Turk, as well to perform his vow in visiting the holy land, as
also to please the Pope: notwithstanding this his dangerous viage, and humble
obedience, he took from him his land in Apulia and Lombardie. And when
Frederike sent letters unto the Pope, of the honorable peace betwixt him, and
the Sultan (wherein he was forced to surrender unto the said Christian
Emperor Jerusalem, whereof he was crowned King, and many other cities) and
wished him to publish that great joy unto all Christendom, and to thank GOD
for that glorious victory, he refused it, and cast away the letters:
excommunicateth Frederike, grants the Cross and the crossed warre-fare
against him as against an Infidel and Turk, who at his commandment fought
valiauntly against the Turk. He gave out also at one time this false Alaram,
that he was dead, and the soldiers of Germany and France that returned from
the holy land he put to cruel death, that they should not tell the truth: all
which things we may read in Carrion, Cuspinian, and in Abbat Vrspergensis. Lib.
3.
And here the Author exclaimeth not without cause: Who rightly considering such
factes, Ann. 1228.
does not lament and detest them, which seem to be signs and certain
prognostications of the ruin of the Church? Greg. 9.
The same Gregory by letters privily desires the Sultan not to yield up the
holy land unto the Emperor, but as an enemy to kill him. Cuspinian.
Against Friderick whosoever would fight, had a pardon and a promise of life
everlasting. He about that time commanded to be sung, Salve Regina. But
behold more faith and charity in the Turk, then in the Pope: for when the
Solda^ had received letters from the Hospitalars and Te^plaries how Friderick
might be taken, he detesting this treason, sent the letters unto Friderick, and
said unto his own Counsailers: Ecce fidelitas Christianorum Behold the fidelity
of Christians! A vile and shameful fact of the father of Christians the Pope,
that set him a work to go this voyage, so unchristianly and uncharitably to
betray him abroad, and to invade his countries and dominions at home. Dum
Imperator oues Christi, ne a lupo discerpantur, ense suo tutatur as defendit,
Pontifex radit, deglubit, and deuorat saginatas. Hoc est enim vere pascere
ones. This is he that claims three Pasce, Feed, feed, feed, for his triple
crown and triple Regiment: but of a feeder is become a sheep-biter, yea a
woolfe, swallowing and devouring the sheep. God bless us from such fleaing
and butcherly sheepe-hards. Of these and such like Acts we may cry out with
Cuspinian: O integritas Romani Pontificis! And again, In Frides
o scrinium pectoris sanctum! This is the honesty of the Bishop of Rome: This
is the holy chest of his breast. Thus the poor Emperors, and Princes are made
vassals and subject to the check and censure, yea to the slavery and slaughter
of the Pope, either by himself immediately, or by others his means and
instruments. How did Gregory the seventh otherwise Hildebrand practice
traitorously against Henry the fourth? Varijs modis, he did many ways lay in
wait to destroy him, but especially once, when the Emperor was at his
devotion in S. Mary's Church at Rome, Cardinal Bem^^.
even in that time and in that place this Pope from the top of the Church by a
stone did mind to murder him, and for that purpose had hired a young Nouice to
do the feyt, but while he was tempering his stone, by the weight of it the
board brake, and he with his stone, fell down to the ground and was bruised and
dashed in pieces. The citizens of Rome worthily incensed at it, caused his
foot to be tied with a rope, and to be drawn through the streets of the city
for the space of three days. Thus the Pope was disappointed, and his conduict
and hired man condignely punished, and the Emperor by God his providence
mightily preserved. This practice of theirs is principally wrought by
themselves, as you have heard, and sometimes by others their deputies, by
sword, A double practice of Pope^ by themselves and their Agents. Jn Philog.
l^b. 28.
dag, dagger, poison and so forth. For the Pope has his Popelings and
Parasites more than ever had Gnato in his school of Flattery: very like those
clawebackes of whom R. Volaterrane reports to be among Sontiates a people of
France, whose king has flatterers, called by them in french Silodures, by the
Graecians Euolimi (or rather by transposition of letters, Euomili
(sweet-tounged men, or fair-spoken men, who always cleave to him, hang on him,
follow him whithersoeuer he goes, do as he does, whether he laugh or weep,
apishly fashioning whatsoever he delights in: if he lie, they lie, or if he
die, they die with him. Even so the Popes adherentes and Silodures are at his
beck, to go, to run, to flee, to execute al his commandments upon any Prince
in the world, in such sort as he prescribes. I told you of Gregory's
slattering factour, that brake his neck for his labor. A Nou^^^ the Pope^
factour.
King John by the Pope was excommunicated, and released upon this condition,
that he and his successors the Kings of England should acknowledge themselves
tributaries to the Bishop of Rome, but afterward he was poisoned with confected
wine in the Abbey of Swinsheade by a Monk, A Monk.
who perished with the King. Henry the Emperor, the seventh of that name, or
rather the sixth as I take it, Carrion. l. 3.
was poisoned by Paulinus a Friar, A Friar.
corrupted by money, Denarijs and pluribus florenis, at the receiving of the
Sacrament, of whom thus it is written in certain ancient rithmes,

Sic Satanae Archangelus
Transformat se sicut Angelus Jn lib. Poemat.

Infector luculentus
Post vitae alimoniam
Dat mortis acrimoniam
Amicus fraudulentus.
The same Henry the sixth was called Lucemburgensis by Raph. Volaterrane, In
Anthropolog. l. 23.
and by Baptist Ignatius, Lucelburgensis, mentioning also of his poisoning in
the Eucharist.

An other instrument was of late our Cardinal Pole the Popes penne-man, A
Cardinal.
who in his book for the Supremacy of his great master the Bishop of Rome
incited Charles the Emperor then preparing against the Turk, to bend his
force against his own country of England, and against his sovereign Lord
King Henry the eight, a Prince indeed of famous memory, but by the opinion of
Pole worse then the Turk: for these be his words: In Anglia sparsum nunc est
hoc semen, vt vix a Turcico inter nosci queat, idque anthoritate vnius coaluit:
Terming the good seed of Gods word sown by the appointment of God, Mat. 13.
and spread by Authority of the King in England, to be but a Turkish seed,
and worse then that, for that the Turk does compel no man, as King Henry did,
when he commanded his subjects to renounce subjection to the Pope, and to yield
it to their own natural Prince. I need not speak of late hyrelings against
the Prince of Orange, nor of the latter Mercenary men against our dread
sovereign Queen Elizabeth by Pius Quintus and his successors: Parrie and
other hyrelings against Q. Elizabeth.
and al is, as they bear men in hand, for the Religion of the Catholic Church.
Such a Catholic faith must be maintained by such Catholic means, namely by
open rebellions, privy practices in a Catholic and universal manner, that
is by all unlawful means.

A piece and a part of this religion is a Vow, not of forced chastity, but of
voluntary cruelty, which the Pope gives presumptuously, and the Popelings take
foolishly. Such there have been, and such are among us, whom Ambrose
reprooueth: Saepe plerique constringun^ seipsos iurisiurandi sacramento etc.
Off^^. lib. ^. cap. 13. Religious votaries against Princes. Can. 22. quaest.
4.^. inter cae^.
Oftentimes the most part of men bind themselves with an oath, and when they
themselves know that it should not have been promised, yet they do it in
respect of their oath. Is not their own Law contrary to this? Is not there
forbidden every oath that is the hand of iniquity? And is it not an unjust band
when we swear the spoil of Princely blood? No man likes the vow that Iepthe
made and seemed to keep for the slaughter of his own Daughter. Iud. 11.
Dura promissio, acerbior solutio, as Ambrose thinks. Lib. 3. c. 13.
No wise man will allow the rash vow performed by Herod for the beheading of
John Baptist at the motive of a dancing damsel the Daughter of Herodias:
Matthew. 14.
neither yet the vow of the Jews, Act. 23.
who swore they would neither eat nor drink til they had killed Paul. And why
shall our men bind themselves by a cruel oath, and make a conscience in
observing it? Ex Hid^r^ in Syno^.
In the same Popish decrees it is called a wicked promise, which is fulfilled
wickedly, and in a Council we are taught, (...) ^onsil. ^^ibert.
that an unadvised determination may lawfully and laudably be broken, neither
is it a transgression, but a correction of rashness. If any vow have been
made among our countrymen, you see it ought in no wise to be stood too, and I
desire them so to think and do. For so thought David when he swear by God to
kill that great fool Nabal: yet Ensem in vaginam reuocauit, he put by his
sword in the sheath, at the request of Abigael, and was not sorry for that
perjury, as it is well applied by Beda. Hom. 44.
Eue^ as the same Ambrose exhorts that a man shall promise no dishonest thing,
Libro Offic. 3. cap. 13.
or if he has promised, it is more tolerable not to keep promise then to do
that, that is dishonest. Which sentences even the Popes Law recites, C. 22. Q.
4.
but falsely cites the first book for the third.

But if any Papist either of scruple in mind and conscience, either of good
nature, or rather grace of God cannot be induced to communicate with such
traitorous enterprises, alleging their duty and former oath made to Princes in
the league of association and otherwise: the^ the Pope has this religion and
omnipotency, that he can and will dispe^se with any oath. Plat.
Adrian the Pope the fourth of that name excommunicated William King of Sicily,
and assoiled al those that were subject to his government from the oath of
obedience, that they might, being freed from that, the sooner revolt from him.
Pope Innocent the 3. Cuspini. in Frideric. 1.
in a counsel at Lions for hatred he bare against Frederik the 2. deprived him
of al Imperial dignity, and gave an absolutio^ to ye Princes from ye oath of
fidelity, exhorting the^ to choose another: and all this is catholic and current
religion, and at Rome is avouched good doctrine from Peter and Paul the
Patrones of that Church. O blessed Saint Peter, says Gregory the seventh, I
depose Henry the fourth from al Imperial and regal authority, Plat in vita
Gregor.
who has lifted up his hand too boldly and rashly against thy Church, and I
do release his loial liege people of their oath. You have heard of Thomas
Becket our countryman a man like Mercury in Aristophanes, In Pluto
a man of all arts and occupations, a courtiar, a clerk, an Archbishop, by
his hair cloth a Monk, by his inwardest garment nighest to his skin an
Heremite, a man that first swear the oath of fidelity to Henry the second, and
the same man was the first that brake it by a dispensation of Alexander the
Pope ad soluendam, I^^^^^^ Thomae Beckes.
quam ad confirmandam fidem promptior, a better Schoolmaster of perjury, then
of obedience: and this prodition was such a religion, that by the Monks of
Caunterbury it was praised and approved. This is a right Supremacy, to do and
undo what he lists: this is the pride and the cruelty of the Romish Abishai
against the Lords anointed, not fearing to violate the majesty of Princes, to
break oaths, to teach disobedience, and wilful periuries, and all this he may
do absolutely by his new religion, and large commission.

You understand by the premises the effect of the first part, and the meaning
of the first person Abishai: al tending to the death of the Lords anointed.
You understand the predecessors and successors of Abishai in number to be
many, in manner of attempting to be violent and fierce, or else hypocritical
and flattering, and the causes moving them to be either covetousness catching,
either ambition aspiring, either envy maligning, either religion pretensed, or
some such like. As I reported before in the beginning out of Bernard to the
Romans, so in the conclusion out of the same Epistle, I speak to the Romanists:
You foolish Romanists, Epist. 242.
do you neither judge nor discern that which is honest? Do you disgrace and
dishonor as much as in you is your own head, and the head of us al, for whom
you ought not to spare your own necks, if need should require?

I end with this good note of the said Bernard. I knew once (says he) in
Babylon at the voice of one young man, that all the people which were deceived
by the unjust Seniors of the city to condemn Susanna, did return to
Judgment, and reuerse it, and so that innocent blood was saved that day. I
pray God, that you of whom I conceive well, and others who may be suspected
elsewhere, may harken with indifferent ears, if not at the voice of Daniel,
yet at our daily motion, that you will avoid the devise of Abishai, that you
will not be seduced by the false old judges of Israel, that you will not
condemn our Susanna rashly and without al cause, but abhor al wicked
conspiracies, mutinies, practices, against her Majesty, whom the Lord preserve
many years among us, that she may attain that happiness which wise Thales spoke
of, Principis faelicitas, vt senex secundum natural in suo lectulo moriatur:
this God grant, Raph. Vola^ in Philol. 30.
that she may have that felicity of a Prince, to die according to nature in her
bed an old Mother in our Israel, and after live and reign eternally with him,
to whom I commit you, and to him be al honor and praise, world without end.
Amen.

1. SAM. 26. And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can lay his
hand on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless, etc.


THE SECOND SERMON.
HERODIAN an Historiographer co^plaineth that it was an old disease among ye
Graecia^s, Lib. 3.
that they were always among themselves at discord, and were willing to
destroy those that seemed to excel others, and so in the end consumed Greece. A
fatal matter, a mortal sin is sedition, reckoned woorthily among the works of
the flesh, tied and chained altogether as it were with a lincke in the Epistle
to the Galathians: The woorks of the flesh are hatred and debate, Cap. 5.
wrath, contentions, dissensions, sects, envy, murders, al of one cognation and
kindred. This sedition is, and ever has bin not only in Greece, but by sundry
makebates at al times and in all places, by Abishai in Jury as you lately heard
co^spiring against King Saul, and by others against David himself as he thus
lamenteth: Psalm. 71.
Mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul, take their
counsel together saying: God has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for
there is none to deliver him. I have also declared that the Romanists and their
Prelates have bin Graecians in this behalf, consenting with Abishai against
Saul, nay David, and made much trouble in the commonweal and Christian
churches, (...) and they have wasted our Greece, most parts in christendom,
absoluing al ecclesiastical and laymen from their oaths made to their lawful
Princes, and presenting abroad their Roses, their ba^ners, their swords
consecrated or rather execrated to such, as should betray and persecute the
good. This cruel devise of betraieng godly governors was here of Abishai, but
not of him alone, but an invention of the devil himself, who seeing Gods work to
go forward, ever laboreth to disturb, and to throw it down: Semper Diabolus
bono operi imminet, vbique gradientibus ponit laqueos. Hieran. Jereman the
pr^ssu^ of his 4. books.
He is still peering into the good works of the godly, he is ready to hinder the
course of the gospel, and lays snares against them that walk in the way of
the Lord.

You remember the Sermon of Abishai, I need not repeat it: now the second
person must be produced, namely David replying to Abishai.

This answer contains these three sub-diuisions, A division general of
David's Reply.
his Prohibition, Protestation, and Policy. The Prohibition forbidding
Abishai. The Protestation of himself detesting the fact. His Policy in
taking away the spear and the cup as a sign of his faithfulness, who might
as easily have taken away his head as his helmet, or those things whatsoever
that were by him then sleeping.

At this time only of the first, and so far as I may for the time, A
special Division.
in the ninth verse standing upon these two points: A proposition forbidding,
and a reason proouing the same.

The first in these words, 1 Proposition against murder.
Destroy him not: and this was always the opinion of David to be good to the
bad, to be a friend to his enemies, as in the case of Shimei who railed and
cursed him, and called him a man of blood, and a man of Belial, a murderer and
wicked man. And here again the same Abishai the son of Zeruiah following his
hot spirit, 2. Sam. cap. 16.
termed this Shimei a dead dog, and would have feign cut off his head, but King
David then reproved and restrained Abishai, and said that no man should die
that day in Israel, Cap. 19.
and swear to Shimei he should live. Cap. 24.
And in the twenty fourth Chapter of this book David found Saul in a cave, and
though his servants and frinds told him that the Lord had delivered his enemy
into his hand, he spared his body, and only for a token cut off the lap of his
garment privily, and even for that he was touched and stricken in heart. 1.
Sam. 24.
So in this place he would not have that forward or rather froward man Abishai
to take that advantage: and used this argument, For who can lay his hand upon
the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? Saul is the anointed of the Lord, 2.
The explication of the Reason.
therefore no man can lay hands on him without punishment, which reason I mind
to open to you and prosecute.

In the person of the Prince are to be considered two things, his ma^hood, and
Princehood. Aliter Rex seruit, quia homo est, August. Epist. 50.
aliter quia etia^ Rex est: one way a King serves because he is a man, another
way also because he is a King: so yt he bears and represents a double
person. 1 As man, he must ^o^ be killed o^ man.
As man, if there were nothing else, he may not be spoiled by any private man.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.
for in the Image of God has he made him. Moses has made a Law general: Thou
may not kill. And yet not so general, Exodus 20.
but that it has an interpretation and limitation. It is not meant, says
Austine, of cutting or as it were of killing of shrubs, trees, or such like
which have no sense in them, neither is it meant of unreasonable creatures
flying, Whether is be lawful to kill a man, and how.
swymming, walking, creeping: it remains therefore that we understand it
only of men, that we should not kill any man, and therefore not our selves.
This general also has another exception, Austin. l. 1. de ciuitate Dei cap.
20.
for it is lawful to kill a man, as in lawful wars, Deo auctore, by the warrant
of God, nay a souldior lawfully constituted, if he do not kill, he is guilty of
contempt, imperij deserti atque contempti, as the said Augustine teaches in
another place of the same City of GOD. Li. 1. c. 26.
Again it is lawful for a Magistrate to put to death a malefactor, or for
such as bear the person of public power by the Laws of God, or of any which
is moved certainly and called thereunto by a special inspiration of the holy
Ghost, or for that authority which did choose and ordain that governor, or in
any such like case and cause. Otherwise no spirit, no reason, no friend, no
carnal respect may authorize any man of his own head, or his private
affection to draw weapon against any man, much les against a double and
compound person, as the Prince established by lawful and public authority.

What if Abraham should have killed his own son Isaac? Genesis 21.
Is it therefore lawful for all parents to do the like: The commandment of
God for the killing was only to try his faith, but the saving of Isaac by God
was a secret commandment to all fathers, to commit no such thing against
their children. Of this example Augustine also writes in his first book De C.
Dei, cap. 16. Though Moses killed the Egyptian, Exodus 2 Number 25. 1 Samuel 15.
Acts. 5.
and Phinehas the fornicatours, and Samuel Agag, and Peter Ananias and Saphira
without sword, with a word, yet the specialties are not general rules for
private men against men: according to the saying, Priuilegium non est lex: A
privilege is no law: It is said of the Magistrates rightly, by Hierom upon
Jeremy: Lib. 4, c. 22.
To punish murderers, Church-robbers, poisoners, is not shedding of blood, but
the ministry of Laws. It is said to Magistrates, and to private men by
Jeremy in the same Chapter, speaking to the King of Judah: Cap. 22.
Do no violence, nor shed innocent blood in this place. These words, as
Hierom expounds them, forbid not only the Kings court, but Episcopos, and
socios eorum presbyteros: al Bishops, and their fellows the Ministers,
Deacons, and all the order Ecclesiastical, or else they leese their dignity.
What shall we say then of the Bishop of Bishops, that draws his sword as
the fool does his wodden dagger against every body, and for every trifle? No
man, public, or private, secular, or Ecclesiastical, inferior or superior,
ought without crime, or cause, to put to death any man. It is said to Peter,
and to Peter's successor the Pope, Joan. 18.
(as they will have him) Put up thy sword into his sheath, for all that take
the sword, shall perish with the sword. If Peter did il in cutting off an ear
of a servant, how much more do they offend that cut off the head? And if the
servant may not be stricken by Peter, how can they escape that strike the
Master, the Lord, or Lady of the land? And if Christ found fault with his
servant fighting in his own quarrel, how much more will he be angry with them
that take weapon against his Anointed Prince, his lieuetenaunt in the earth,
nay, against himself in defense of his adversary and Antichrist?

For now consider with me the reason of David, 2 Person. No man ought to be
slain of private men, Ergo much les a Prince of a subject.
and the second qualification of Saul, that he is not only created a man, but
also anointed King. For what do these Nephilim Giantes, and tyrants of the
world think? Or what do they esteem of the blood of a Prince? Or what do they
imagine of the ordinance or institution of Princes? Are they vpstartes by
themselves, or able to rise and stand of themselves? No, that was the phrenesie
of mad Ajax, That Cowardes did get the victory by God, he would win
whether GOD would or no. Or is it a matter of force or fortune? No, that was
the desperate saying of Antiochus (...) Let him take the kingdom, to whom
fortune, or the sword shall give it. Or does policy and government of the
world, or the world it self consist of the Sun beams: That might be the
fantasy of Democritus, that scoffed at all things. Or is it the ordinance of
Jupiter or any heathen God: No, for so dreamed Homer, Illud. (...)
that termed Kings, Nursed up and fostered by Jupiter: and Hesiod, that wrote,
In ope^^ Dier. lib. (...).
some to be noble, and some to be base, by the will of great Jupiter. So Julian
the Apostata thought, who caused in all his public and popular images, So^
(...) 5. cap. 17.
Jupiter to be painted, as appearing from heaven and reaching to him the
crown, and the purple, ensigns of the Empire. No: it is only the ordinance
of our living God, the gift of Christ, who has that written in his garment,
and in his thigh, the King of Kings, Apoc. 1^.
the Lord of Lords. So is the Prince desined of Saint Paul to the Romans: and
by John Salisberg lib. 4. Polycrat. A Prince is a public power, Ro^. 13.
and in earth a certain image of the divine power. Therefore as before I proved
him to be a double person, so is he now a double Image of God, for he was
made after the Image of God, and by office represents God may: further, he is
a God himself. God is God by nature, the Prince by name, God by propriety, the
Prince by grace: So God himself says, Ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.
and the children of the highest: And the same David in the same place, God
stands in the congregation of Gods: he judges among Gods, quia ipse est
solus qui Deos faciat: It is he alone that makes Gods, as Tertullian
expounds, aduersus Hermogenem.

Even Saul himself is named here the anointed of the Lord, and so are all
other Potentates that are by their vices evil men, yet by office the ordinance
of God: Prou. 8. Job. 34. Cap. 13.
By me Rulers reign: The hypocrites rule not without him: And God himself
says in Osc, I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my
wrath. John. 19.
Christ told Pilate that he could have no power at all, except it had bin given
him from above. Romans 13.
There is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God. The
Fathers if need were might be brought for the same, Lib. 3.
as Optatus: Paul teaches (says he) not without cause, that we must pray for
Kings, and powers, although the Emperor were such a one as lived heathenishly.
And Augustine: We call them happy Princes, Lib. 5. de cimitate Dei, cap. 24.
if they command just things etc. And if they make their power as a servant
and handmaid to his majesty, especially in setting forth his honor. And in
another Chapter, Cap. 21.
Let us not give the power of bestowing kingdoms, and Empires to any, but
only to the true God: He that gave authority to Marius, gave it to Caius
Caesar: He that gave it to Augustus, gave it to Nero: He that gave it to the
Vespasians, either the Father, or the Son, most sweet and mild Emperors,
he gave it also to Domitian, a most cruel man. And least I should pass
through al, he that gave it to Constantine the Christian, gave it unto Julian
the Renigate. And why are the bad as well as the good advanced? The fame Austine
against the Manichees gives two reasons hereof: De Na^^^t. Bon^. c^^. 3^.
It is not unjust that wicked men receive power to hurt, both that the patience
of the good may be tried, and the wickedness of the evil punished.

Hereby the Prince and the people may learn these notes. In that the Princes
are called Gods, they must serve God, Psalm. (...). 2. Chapter c 19.
and not exercise their own judgment: Again they must gather a good heart
unto them, A notefo^^ Princes.
and conceive a comfort of this doctrine: because they are set up by God, they
cannot fall, but by God, and if they serve their lord, Lib. Not. histor. 16.
cap. 39.
the Lord will serve and save them. Pliny says that the Cedar tree and the
Juniper, if they be anointed with oil, they feel neither moth nor rotting:
even so the Prince and governor being anointed not only outwardly, but also
inwardely with oil of the holy Ghost (for the holy Ghost is called an oil or
anointing) they need not fear the moths of the commonweal, 2 John. 2.
that seek by fretting and eating to consume both Kingdom, and King: And so
may I woorthily call them as Licinius did, Tineas, soricesque palatij, the
moothes and rats of the court, In vita Constant.
as Sextus Aurelius Victor testifies in his Epitome. This comfort gave Bernard
both to King, and to Pope: to Jews the King of France, thus: The Kingdoms of
the earth, Epist. 255.
and the Laws of Kingdoms do then indeed stand sound, and stable to their
Lords, if they do not withstand the ordinances and decrees of God. To the
Pope Eugenius thus: I have read in a wise man, Epist. 256.
that he is not a valiant man, whose courage and spirit does not increase,
when his case is most hard: but I say, a faithful man must more trust when the
scourges hang over him. Therefore the Gods of the earth, if they will be
preserved by God, with all trembling and fear must serve God: Psalm. 2.
if not, they must hear, be they Popes, be they Princes, what the same Bernard
says to them in the same Epistle: Quale est hoc, principatum tenere, and
ministerium declinare? What manner of thing is this, to hold the principality,
and to shun the service? But the good Gods must conceive hope, and have a
boldness with David that feared not, because God was with him, and because God
will defend him whom he annointeth.

Now let us consider being inferiors our note, D^^^ sub^^^^ T^^^
touching us in the conclusion of David's argument. These be men, and worthy
men, made after the similitude and image of God, therefore they ought not to
be oppressed, or made away by private men: nay, they are Gods and Christ's, the
anointed of God, therefore you Abishai his offspring, destroy not Saul: If not
Saul, much-lesse David, much-lesse your good and gracious Prince. Touch not
mine anointed, my Christ's, says God. Psalm. 10.
Man is to be loved and helped because he is man, the image of God: therefore
the man that is God, and by God a Prince, must be honored, and spared, not
spoiled, and butchered: for he is in two respects the image of God. He that
defaceth this image, defaceth God, and God takes his quarrel upon himself,
and thinks the vilany to be done to himself: They have not cast away thee,
but me, 1. Sam. (...)
that I should not reign over them, says God to Samuel.

Although this might suffice for the unfolding and opening of the Text, and of
the reason of David against such Abishais, The method and order of proceeding.
yet I purpose further to confirm the same by Laws and practices among the
heathen, and all natural creatures, among Jews in the oulde Testament, and
also in the new Testament by Scriptures, and after Christ by Christian fathers,
by Princes, by Civil constitutions, and Canonical decrees, by Laws and examples
abroad and at home, as time and leisure will serve, and in such order and
method as I may: to this end, and purpose, that in all these, obedience may
appear fully proved, and al kind of disobedience utterly disproued.

The Law of nature might instruct natural citizens, 1 The Law of nature
teaches kindness and obedience.
and countrymen to love, honor and obey their natural Sovereign. Shall I
begin to our shame with the kindness of unreasonable beasts toward their
masters and feeders? The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib:
Es. 1.
and shall not Israel, I say, shall not England acknowledge their dutifulness
toward their Sovereign? What should I speak of these two both simple and
vile creatures, and yet kind, patient and obedient unto master-ship? There is
none but observe the first ordinance of God, which is the acknowledgement of
superiority. The first Law is, that man should have dominion over the fish of
the Sea, over the foul of heaven, over the beasts in earth: Genes. 1.
and is not this commandment by them toward man observed? Chrysostom has,
that among brute beasts, Bees, Romans 13.
Cranes, Heardes, and flocks of Cattle this order is kept, and also in the Sea
this discipline is retained, that many kinds of fishes are ruled, and as it
were wage war under one. Of the fearfulnes and awe of fishes we may read
Basil, Hexaem. Hom. 10. how according to this first creation, they acknowledge
at the sight of man, his dominion ever them: And the Dolphin, though he be a
most regal and Princely fish, vbi hominem prope esse conspexerit, reueretur:
when he sees man near, he shows reverence as to his Lord. Cyprian likewise
confirms the same of Bees, Epist. l. 4. epist. 9.
Apes habent Regem, and Iudicem, and ei fide^ servant: The Bees also, says he,
have their Praepositum, their provost and Rector, whom they honor and fear. It
is strange that Pliny records of the faithfulness of Dogs toward their
Master. Lib. 8. c. 40.
A Dog has fought against thieves for his Master, and never departed from the
dead corpse, though he were wounded: and being not able to faue him, yet drove
away birds and wild beasts from tearing, and eating of him. A dog in Epirus
did know the man that struck and killed his master, and never left barking,
and biting of him, until he made him confess the murder. Two hundred dogs
brought from banishment Garamantus the King, praeliati contra resistentes, as
it were, warring against those that withstoode him. The dogs alone know their
Master, and a stranger if he come suddenly: they alone know their own names,
and the voice of any of the house. I refer you to Ambrose in his Hexaemer.
Lib. 6. c. 4.
reporting of a dog, that kept in the night his masters corpse at Antiochia
slain by a soldier: and afterward in the troop caught the malefactor with
his teeth, and never left him, until by the barking of that dog, and of his
own conscience he confessed the murder. I omit the dogs of Sabinus, Jason,
Lysimachus the King, and Hieron, never forsaking their Masters living or dead:
you may find them in Bap. Fulgosus. As also of an horse of king Antiochus
slain by Centaretrus Gallata, Lib. 5. cap. 2
who perceiving that his masters enemy had got up on his back, never left
running until he cast himself and the horseman headlong from an high rock.

In the time of nature, I mean before the Law of Moses, although there was
much violence and tyranny by Cain, Nimrod, and others, yet naturally there
was a detestacion of this shedding of blood. Some of the brethren of Joseph
envied his parti-colored coat, Genes. 37
and would have slain him: but Reuben delivered him out of their hands and
said: Let us not kill him: shed not blood, put him into a pit in the
wilderness, lay no hands upon him, minding to restore him to his father
again: Judas although he was a right Judas, predecessor to Judas the
traiterous scholar of Christ, gave a sentence meet for Judas, but better then
others his brethren gave, that he should be sold to the Ismaelites: for, He is
our brother, and our flesh, and so agreed to sell him to the Midianites. The
brethren by a ly coloring the matter, colored Iosephes coat and dipped it in
the blood of a goat, which Jacob seeing and thinking it to be Joseph's coat, and
that he was torn in pieces by a wild beast, rent his clothes, put on sackcloth,
not abiding the sight of blood. Plutarch.
The father with the sons Reuben, and Judas in this time before Moses abhor
blood. As Iulia the wife of Pompeie, seeing the gown of her husband bloody, by
the touch of others blood, more afraid than hurt, fell down half dead, and in
this agony was delivered before her time.

What were the Magistrates in the time of Peter and Paul, but heathen, and
tyrants, as Nero and such other? And yet Paul exhorts every soul to be
subject to the higher powers: and whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God. Romans 13.
Whereunto Bernard alluding, declares his own judgment in this question very
wisely to the King of France: Epist. 170.
If all the world should conjure against me, and swear me to attempt any
thing against the Majesty of the King, yet would I fear God, neither durst I
rashly offend the King ordained by him, neither am I ignorant where I have
read, He that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. 1. Peter. 2.
Peter exhorts to be subject to all manner of ordinance of man in the Lord:
and Paul, especially above all, beseeches us to make supplications, A reason
in nature drawn from commodity of obedience.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for Kings, and for all that are in
authority: and all this is proved to be profitable for common tranquillity, to
obey Nero, and such like: although they were heathen men in profession and
conversation. The commodity of that heathenish government is thus set forth:
He is the minister of God for thy good: Romans 13.1. Tim. 2.1. Pet. 2.
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life under them in all godliness and
honesty: Governors are sent for the punishment of evil doers: and for the
praise of them that do well. Chrysostom shows the commodities of this
politic government: In that there are principalities, in that some command
and some obey, Ad To. 13.
and in that al things are not turned vpside down by fortune and chance, and
the people are not tosted hither and thither, I affirm it to be the work of the
wisdom of God. And he says, it is for the avoiding of discordes and
dissensions in these words: Because the equality of honor and state brings
in commonly fighting and braules, God has ordained many principalities and
many subiections, namely of the husband and the wife, of the son and of the
father, of the old man and the young, of the servant and of the free, of the
Prince and the subject, of the schoole-maister and the scholar: he concludes
thus: Innumera bona etc. Infinite commodities come to cities by Magistrates,
which if you take away, al things will come to wreck. Now let us recount with
our selves: if this be the blessedness of government under the heathen, how much
more are we bound to God for a Christian and godly regiment? Even
Nabuchadonezer a tyrant and infidel was to be prayed for: And the Jews are
willed to pray for him, and for Babylon: and to seek the peace of that City
where they were captives: for thus says Jeremy, Ierem. 29.
In the peace thereof shall you have peace: This is the office and duty of the
Jews, though strangers, toward the Babylonians, notwithstanding their
strange, and idolatrous religion. O that our great soiourner received in
England with favor, Q. of Scots.
entertained with honor, used with all liberal liberty, pardoned many times by
mercy, would have sought the peace of the land where she harbored, or at
least had not sought the disquietnes of the state, the disturbaunce of the
realm, the havoc and undoing of many Gentlemen, the peril of the person
of the Prince of the land, so graciously affected toward her, being but a
Queen quondam, a Queen without a Kingdom, and only in name. Such
soiournours have been here not a few: What shall I say, a Snakish and Serpentine
generation? I might so. Thomas Walsingham remembers in his Chronicle of three
unkind guests, a Mouse in a wallet, a Serpent in ones bosom, and fire in the
lap: Nay I might say worse: They pass some Serpents. In Egypt an Aspis or
Serpent by nature learned this, to show friendship to a friend, and an host:
for being brought up in a poor man's house, and delivered of young-ones, and
perceiving that one of that brood had with biting and stinging killed the good
man's Son, she did sley al her children, and was never after seen in that
house. O admiranda Dei virtus, says Baptista Fulgosus: O wounderful power and
virtue of God! A cruel Serpent toward her host would show her self
thankful, even with the death of her younglings, and with her own
discommodity: and a man, Full. l. 5. c. 7.
a reasonable creature oftentimes more cruel than the Aspis, will destroy man
and host: Doubtless a great and gross ingratitude. But now what reward either
forreiners, or domestical practisers, and traitors have had from time to time
among these heathen under the Law of nature: give me leave by exampls somewhat
to make manifest unto you. Great Pompeie flying for succor into Egypt, and
requesting to soiourne under Ptolomeie a young King, a Council was called
about it, and whereas one thought him to he admitted, another to be repelled:
Theodotus Chius Schoolmasters to Ptolomeie in the Art of Rhetorik, agreed to
neither of them: For if they received him, they should have Caesar an enemy: if
they should refuse him, it would turn to some reproach to them, and be
offensive to Pompeie. Wherefore the best is (quoth he) to dispatch him, adding
(as Plutarch says) merrily, (...): Dead men bite not: J^^i^e Pom^^^.
and yet here was no present practice by Pompeie, but a fear of some troubles
and treacheries by him. Among the Romans it has bin severely punished,
whenever any such traiterous prancke has been displaied, either against
their country, either against their frindes or foes. Lib. Offic.
Ambrose commends highly Fabritius the Roman, who perceiving that a
Physician offered to poison Pyrrhus his Kingsent the traitor back again to
his Master, to suffer condign punishment for it. Metius Suffetius keeping
touch neither with the Albanes, nor with the Romans, as he was double, and
traiterous in heart, so with wild horses his body was rent, and divided: where
Tullus confesses, that there is no war greater, or more perilous than cum
proditione and persidia sociorum: Liui. decad. 1. lib. 1.
when there is falshoode in fellowship. Tarpeia the daughter of the
Lieuetenaunt of the tower or Capitolium, in the battle betwixt the Romans and
the Sabines, corrupted, In vita Romul.
either by bracelettes, as Plutarch writes, or for gold, as Liuie tells,
betraieth the tower unto Tatius, and had reward, but such as choked her.
Maximinus killed men as it were beasts, against whom when the Osdroens bowmen
had made a faction, and commotion, and chosen a new Emperor, one Macedonius
did slay him, and brought his head to Maximinus, who thanked him with
courteous words, but afterward in severe manner as a traitor put him to
death. What should I repeat the traitorous Schoolmaster of the Faliscians, who
bringing out of the city, his scholars, as the manner was for their recreation,
now comes into the camp of Camillus, and delivered Principum liberos, Noble
men's children unto him, joining with his wicked act more wicked speech, that
the Valerians did yield themselves into the hands of the Romans, in that he
yielded into their power those children, whose parents were the heads and
chiefest there: but Camillus espyeng the treachery, after his sharp answer
to him, stripped him naked, tied his hands behind his back, committed him to the
boys, with rods in their hands, to whip the traitor into the city again:
whereby Camillus got thanks, and renown of the enemies, and of his
countrymen, declaring to the world the ancient justice of the Romans, not to
win by fraud, but by virtue and manhood, virtute, opere, Decad. 1. l. ^
armis vincere, as Liuie alleges his words. The same Liuie tells how
Papirius Cursor handled certain traitors, or reuoulters, Lib. 9.
first beating them with rods, then beheading them with an axe. These be some
examples of Romans. In the wars betwixt Alexander and Darius, the like
severity against like offenders is to be found. Ariobarzanes promised to kill
his father Darius, but Darius understanding of it, struck off his head.
Barsanetes a Prince perceiving Darius to be overcome by Alexander, killed him,
but he for his pains or rather perfidiousnesse by Alexander was requited by
death: so writes Brusonius. Paulus Orosius says, Orosius. l. 3.
that Alexander found Darius bound with golden fetters, and afterward in his
journey left all alone, stricken with many wounds, and ready to yield up the
ghost: and Alexander pitieng him, when he was dead honorably buried him.
Carrion writes of another traitor Bessus, captain of Darius, who seeing his
master fly, wounded him: and Alexander coming, and finding him half dead,
promised him, that that notorious treachery of Bessus against his own Lord,
should not be unpunished: and so took him and commanded him to be hound
between two trees, and plucked in pieces, Lib. 2.
and rent. O worthy execution of a traiterous subject, and that by an enemy for
an enemy!

I pass over many others that attempting the death of tyrauntes, escaped not
the judgment of God, Zeno Eleates was diverse ways tormented by Nearchus
Mysius, Dion by Dionysius, Raph. Volat in philol. lib. 30.
and Apollonius Tyaneus a great learned Philosopher was imprisoned by Domitia^.
What then deserve such as commit this heinous act against their mild and
merciful Prince? Surely no mercy, being merciless themselves, yea more cruel
than Tygres. I will add in the number of these heathen one Turk. There was in
Constantinople a great rich citizen, who taking snuff against his Emperor,
came privily to Mahomet, then intending to besiege the city, and made this
bargain with him, that if he would let him have one of his Daughters to be
his wife, with a large dowry, one of the gates of the city should be at his
commandment. The Turkish tyrant agrees, the gate is opened, and after the
cruel massacre, he demands his reward. Meruisti (quoth the tyrant) you
have well deserved it, and commands a great mass of gould to be brought to
give him: but because thou do ask my Daughter with a dowry, being thy self
a Christian, thou must first put off this skin, and leave this life: and
forthwith commands the officer to flea him from top to toe, and casts on
hot ashes with salt, Cuspinia in Constant. 8.
and lays him, and covers him in a bed, that a new skin might grow upon
him, that he might be the more apt to receive the new spouse of a new sect.

Here we may see as in a glass the working of nature in brute beasts, in
natural men and others before the Law of Moses, and in very Pagans, and
Turks, how they reverenced their masters, and superiors: how they hated, and
plagued this horrible sin of treachery against them: I should proceed in the
rest, but I must differ it. God grant that we Christians, may not be found
more ungrateful, more unthankful, and more brutish, than the beasts and
beastly men. God open our eyes to see that old saying to be true, (...),
Traison is evil: evil to the Prince, evil to the country, evil to the woorkers
themselves.

GOD preserve her Majesty, the whole Realm, and us all from these practices in
these dangerous, and doubtful days: To him be praise etc.

1. SAM. 26. And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not. etc.


THE THIRD SERMON against traiterous practices.
ATHENAEVS alleges out of Berosus an ancient author, L. Deipnos^ 14. ^th. 17.
that about the sixteenth of the Calends of September, there was a feast called
Sacea, solemnised in Babylon for the space of five days, in the which, this
custom was, that servants should have rule over their masters, and that one of
the^ should be brought out of the house in Robes like a King, whom they termed
Zoganes: If (dearly beloved) such a feast should endure, not for the space of
five days, but for mo days, and mo years, would you not think this to be a
right Babylon? A disorder and a confusion in a common weal? There is in our
time already, in the sight of al men of any judgment, a new Babylon, Rome,
where a Servant, nay, a Servant of Servants by name, is indeed a Master of
Masters, a Lord of Lords, Zoganes of Rome.
a Zoganes, not in sport, but in earnest, not for a few days, or years, but
such an one as without good warrant claims a Perpetuity, not only ruling
himself, but setting up other servants against and above their Lords,
Princes and Monarchs, usurping authority over the anuointed of god. O double
pride, that celebrateth such a double feast all the days of his life, not
only chalenging a dominion. for himself, but also placing servants, and
subjects, displacing the right inheritours and possessors of the Crown, with
the utter desolation of commonweals. This Babylonicall Priest reuiueth and
raises out of the earth again, The Pope a Babylonical priest.
those old Giants, Terrae filios, private men to be (...), to strive and fight
against the gods of the earth, and against God himself. He has bred a new
brood of vipers, that cannot be content to come into the world, A serpentine
offspring bred and spread from Rome in England.
and live, but by the death of the mother. He is, and has been the cause of a
Serpentine generation, not grateful, but graceles, requiting evil for good,
gaping for the destruction of those, who have by all means' endeavored to
preserve, relieve, and promote the^. Now you know the fable of AEsope of the
snake found in the snow and cold, by the hus ba^dman brought to the fire, and
warmed, and refreshed, but afterward, recovering heat, and health, hissed
against his benefactour, and poisoned the house:

Ore serit virus coluber, sic toxicat aedem. And afterward, Amplectensque
virum, sibila dira mouet.

O beastly brood and viperous children, when, as Epiphanius describes them,
Epipl^ To 2. Her. 2.
latus matris sauciant, and sic gignuntur, vt pater, and matter ipsorumpereant:
They goare, and wound the side of the Morther: they are so begotten and so
borne, that by them, Father, and Mother perish. The moral and meaning is this:

Reddere gaudet homo nequam pro melle venenu^,
Pro fructu paenam, pro pietate dolum.
To apply this to our purpose, these oulde Giants, vipers and Serpents are
newly born again, in these days, unthankful men set up by this romish
Zoganes, unnaturally, ungodly, mo^strously attempting whatsoever means unlawful
against the Mother and Parent of the country, under whose protection, by the
providence of God, After the winter of Q. Mary ae summer of Q. Elizabeth.
they have enjoyed after the winter and tempest of Queen Mary's persecution,
the warmth and heat of the fire, and many blessings of God, both spiritual,
and temporal.

For a remedy of these evils, and for redress of this be astlie ingratitude,
disobedience, and rebellious behavior against the royal person of the Prince,
I have as you have heard, discoursed of the history of David the last day,
replieng against Abishai: which history Chrysostom so liked, Hom. de David and
Saul. Chrysostoms Amplification of this history. Exodus 21.
that he made Homilies of it, and amplifieth the excellent integrity, and
faithfulness of David toward Saul the anointed: in that David did this in the
oulde Testament, where some revenge was in a sort permitted: in that David
bestowed benefits upon Saul, sparing him, when he might have killed him, 1.
Sam. 24.
aduenturing his life against Golias, 1. Sam. 16.
defending both Saul the King, and the whole host of Israel that day, and with
his harp charming and chasing away the furious spirit, that possessed Saul:
and yet, this notwithstanding, Saul's spear was ever ready to pearce David. And
whereas he should have had for the victory over Golias, a dowry with his
Daughter, 1. Sam. 18.
the King set down this cruel condition against him, that he must win in
battle and hundred foreskins of the uncircumcised Philistines, which he
valiantly performed with an advantage, bringing two hundred foreskins with him.
And lastly, when he had cut off the lap of Saul's cloak, he was stricken in heart,
and lamented for it: and yet for the defense of this fact Gods name was
avouched, Gods his authority was alleged by David's servants and soldiers:
Deus tradidit illum in manus etc. God has delivered thine enemy into thine
hands. Allegant illi diuinam authoritatem, as the said Chrysostom testifies in
that Homily, They allege the authority of God.

Wherefore once again I am to request you, patiently to hear the rest. I
began to prove the opinion of David against Abishai (although many did hold
with Abishai) that it was not lawful to kill Saul, nor any the anointed of the
Lord, being contrary to the law of nature and al laws.

Before I enter into the particular probation hereof, A general Rule of
Revenge.
I do set down this ground generally received by common Law, Lex talionis:
The Law of retaliation: That like will have like: Woe be to thee that do
spoil: Esa. 33.
when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: when thou shall make
an end of doing wickedlie, they shall do wickedlie against thee. He that
diggeth a pit, Psalm. 7. Prou. 26.
shall fall into it himself: and he that casts up a stone on high, it may
return upon his own pate. It is the plain case of Shimei, pronounced by the
mouth of this Solomon, upon this general rule: Thou know all the wickedness
whereunto thine heart is privy, 1. Reg. 1.
that thou did to David my father: The Lord therefore shall bring thy
wickedness upon thine own head. Let al Shimeians beware of this strait and
sharp verdict: for

Sape sagittantem didicet referire sagitta,
Inque virum plaga conuersa recurrere plaga.
The arrow oftentimes hitteth the shooter himself, and the stroke reboundeth
back, to the striker. Plin. l. 34. cap. 8.
Perillus that devised the brazen Bull to increase the cruel humor of the
Tyrant Phalaris, in the which men should be burned quick, with intolerable
pain and roaring, was by Phalaris appointed, first to feel the smart of his
own invention:

-- Neque e^^ns lex iustior olla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
It is not amiss but a most just law, that the truel workman, should perish in
his own workmanship: It is a true proverb among the Hebrews, Middah Keneged
middah, A measure for a measure: And our savior uses the same: What measure ye
mete, Matthew. 7.
it shall be measured to you again. It is the law, Quod fecit, semper expectet:
Col. l. 3. Nemo.
and our law in Moses, Huic fiet, que^admodum ipse fecit. Wherefore as it was
said once in Exodus Exo. c. 21. Leuit. 24. Deuteronomy. 19.
A breach for a breach, or a fracture for a fracture, an ey for an ey, a tooth
for a tooth: so is it also the judgment of God, a limine for a limme, blood
for blood, and this is a law universal.

To return now to our particulars, I have declared the law of nature, how this
common law is verified by creatures void of reason, and by men void of
religion: which law of nature is established by the wisdom of God himself,
who has created and directed all things in wisdom. Themgument of Nature
forcible.
Ambrose has a sentence pertaining to this, and an example, proving this: The
sentence is, Omnia penetrat diuina sapientia, implet omnia, idque locupletius
ex irrationabilium sensibus, quam ex rationabilium disputatione colligitur:
validius enim est naturae testimonium, quam doctrinae argumentum, noting the
force and validity of nature, and of unreasonable creatures, for the plain
demonsiration of this argument. The example is of a dog, A Dog faithful so
man.
whereof I spoke the last day out of Pliny, and out of Ambrose, who in general
words confirm the fidelity of dogs. They know to fly upon thieves for their
master, Hexaemer. 6. cap. 4.
and in the night to forbid strangers to come near, and they are ready to die
for their masters, and oftentimes, they give evidence, to convince men guilty
of muther: so that their dum testimony has bin credited for the most part. I
reported before out of the same Ambrose, that in the suburbs of Antiochia, in
the dark, a man was slain, that had a dog accompaniing him. And the worker and
minister of the slaughter was a soldier, discovered by the dog, who pursued
as he might the revenge of the enemy, because he could not woork the defense
of his master as he would. I omit the kind nature of Bucephalus, Plin. l. 8.
cap. 42.
Alexander his horse, who when he was decked with the trappings and furniture
of the King, would suffer no man to ride him but the King, otherwise he was
content with any man. O that men would be as wise as Bucephalus, to know a
King from a common man, and yet, In horse and mule there is no understanding.
Psalm. 32.


But to come from beasts to men, from the horse to the master, Alexander
himself a natural man was taught by his Master Aristotle, this supernatural
lesson, in a certain book written to him: Quantum potes: As much as you can,
take heed, that you shed not the blood of any man. Euripides also condemns
it as a wicked thing to kill a King. Holcot recyting certain laws of India, Jn
moral. 5.
sets down against traitors, Laws of Jndia.
that they should be banished. The reason of the law is, that the King might
be without fear, and the kingdom in peace: and if a traitor were taken, all
the sieve counsailers should give sentence against him, and that judgment once
pronounced should not be revoked. O that England had the Law of India, or
rather that happy effect of the law: that Prince and people freed from them,
might live in quietness and security. Hierons, in Mac. c. 10.
We al naturally defend our head as the Serpent does his, and naturally, the
head is either reverenced, or feared most, as the Panthera, Plin. lib. 8. cap.
16.
though for the variety of her colors, of other beasts she is most gazed
upon, and for her savor is marueilously comfortable, yet with her head she is
most terrible: And though she be wild, and cruel toward others, yet
feeling a remedy even by the excrementes of man, against poison, does so love
man, and covet them, that if they be hanged up in a basket, or a vessel by
sheepheards, higher than she can touch them, yet by reaching and leaping after
them, she fails, and faints, and at last dies. Cap. 27.
Princes are the heads of our common-weals, they ought therefore to be had in
reverence, and to be defended, feared, and loved, except we will be worse than
heathnish miscreantes, than beasts, as dogs, serpents, horses, and savage
Panthers.

Now we must pass from the law of nature unto the law of God, The law of God
to the Jews.
although indeed the law of Nature is the law of God, but I mean the written
law of the Jews: in the which we find, Eccl. c. 10.
That the birds of the air shall carry the voice of him, that speaks evil,
or curses the King even in his thought, or in his bedchamber, and the foul of
the heaven shall declare the matter abroadt. Examples of Gods plagues against
disobedience. Numb. 16. Numb. 12. Exodus 14.
And that Mary the sister of Moses himself murmuring against her brother a
Magistrate, was stricken with a leaper: that the Israelites for mumling, and
making mutiny against him their Captain were punished: that Corah, Datha^, and
Abiram, rebelling against him, the one with fire, the other with earthquake
perished, with their wives, children and goods: And that the common people, for
saying to Moses, and Aaron, That they had murdered the people of the Lord, were
plagued with death by God himself to the number of fourteen thousand, and
seven hundred, besides them that died in the conspiracy of Corah. If for
thinking, or speaking, and murmuring against the Magistrates such punishment was
inflicted, how much more for conspiring the death of a Prince? Let the^ also
take heed, who justify traitors, Against accessaries and Iustifiers of
Trainours.
aad ask with these Israelites, Why have you put to death these good men
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram? Why have you shed the blood of Campian, and other
Catholics? Such reason as served against Corahits in the judgment of God,
may serve in the opinion of al good men, against Campianistes, and such
spiritual, nay, such spiteful Catholics. The end you see grievous, by the
judgment of the law, and by the displeasure of God. What murder is, by the
private man committed against a private man, The terrible example of Cain the
first nu^derer.
let cursed Cain teach al men. He is first cursed, and the earth also made
barraine and fruitless who opened her mouth to receive the blood of Abel. He
is pronounced a vagrant man, banished from the face of God, he falls to
desperation, crying out that his sin is greater, than that it can be pardoned.
Genesis 4.
He has a mark of trembling, and quaking, fearing every shadow of man, and
the shaking of the leaves of the trees. This severity was exercised in the law
of Nature, I mean before the sentence of the Law Mosaical, and before any
example of punishment showed against any murderer, being himself the first
that ever suffered that way for that offense. Afterward we find too many
examples and punishments: a few may suffice. The Daughter of Amry Athaliah
rose up and destroyed all the Kings seed, 2. King. 11.
only Ioas excepted, and she cried: Treason, treason, but she her self as a
traitor was slain with a sword, whereat the people of the land rejoiced, and
the city was in quiet. I pray God we may have the like sequel, for the like
justice extended upon our traiterous persons in these days. When King Assuerus
found out by Hester his Queen upon the information of Mardocheus, Lib. Hest.
cap. 1.2.
that there was treason in his privy chamber against him by Bighthan and
Teresh, either by poison as some write, either by the sword as Caietanus the
Cardinal gathers by the phrase and manner of speaking, to rid him out of his
life: the conspiratours were hanged, the discloser Mardocheus honored, and the
Act for memory sake registered. The life and reign of David may be once again
a myrror to behold all this Tragedy, The example of David in himself.
in ye which we have partly seen before, and now also may see his vprighteous
dealing, and obedient behauior toward Saul, who would not suffer Abishai to
touch him, nether he himself would at any time having just opportunity to
adventure it, whose discreet moderation is by Chrysostom wondered at, and also
noted in the Popes decrees out of Ambrose. Hom. de David. and Saul. De paenit.
distinct. 2.1. Sam. 31. David's severity against other murderers.
Saul in battle pursued to death by the Philistines, requested his armorbearer
to draw out his sword, and thrust him through: but he would not, being afraid
to offend, and of better nature tha^ to show any kind of unthankfulness to his
King: so that the desperate wretched King was driven to that extreme Exigent, to
die upon his own sword. But the Amalekite that brought tydinges to David of the
death of Saul, and confessed that he made an end of him, was for his pains
rewarded with the like death by David. 2. Sam. 1.
Thy blood be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has testified against
thee. In this government of David Absalom the Kings Son did slay his
Brother for his Sisters sake, 2. Sam. 3.
but knowing and fearing his fathers justice, fled away for the space of three
years, and after that upon great entreaty was made a prisoner in his own
house, and did not see the Kings face. Afterward when the same Absalom was a
rebel against his own father, Cap. 14.
though David perhaps in a fatherly pity would have spared him, yet God
himself did execute his judgment upon him, 2. Sam. 18.
and was without the hand of man, hanged upon a great oak by the long locks of
his head. A strange execution of a Rebel: as was that also of Achitophel that
had his hand in this pie, for he was his own hangman. Cap. 17.
But mark in this history another proof. When Ioab asked the messenger that
brought word to him of Absalomes hanging upon the oak, why he did not smite
him to the ground, that he might have had a recompense for it, Cap. 18.
he auswered as becomes a faithful private man, Though I should receive a
thousand Sicles of silver in my hand, yet would I not lay mine hand upon the
Kings Son. He would not touch the Kings son, and yet the son did rise against
the father: and how then dare subjects hazard and enterprise the like against
the lords anointed? David went further in this point of justice, that he did
not suffer any murder to escape unpunished against private men, neither did
God suffer those to go scot-free: 1. Reg. c. 2.
Abner killed Asael brother to this Abishai, and Ioab killed him again, and
David cursed Ioab for it, and by the fathers appointment Solomon the Son put
him to death: no refuge, no sanctuary, no Altar could save him. She bah raises
a power against David, 2. Sam. 20.
but by the procurement and wisdom of a woman, his head was cut off, and cast
down to Ioab. This history of David alone diligently considered is enough to
enstruct us in our duty toward the Prince, and sufficient to prove our
proposition, that blood requires blood.

As these examples among the Jews do warn, Other laws of God against murder.
Cap. 21.
so the laws among them warrant the same. It is written in Exodus: He that
smites a man and he die, he shall die the death: which is repeated in Leuiticus,
and again in Exodus: If a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to slay
him with guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar, Cap. 24.
that he may die. A plain precept we have against sedition and rebellion in
Solomon: My son, fear the Lord, Prou. 24.
and the King, and meddle not with them that are seditious: for their
destruction shall rise suddenly, and who knows the r^^ine of them both? And in
another place, Giu^ not thy ways to destroy Kings. Cap. 31.
The penalty of this offense felt ambitious Adomas by Solomon executed, and the
traiterous Priest Abiathar deposed, and railing Shimei at length put to death:
whereof came a good end, Et confirmatum est Regnum in manu Salomonis. 1. Reg 2.
By this justice the Kingdom of Solomon was established. The Lord grant of
the like cause the like effect among us.

Another Law of God is in the new Testament, Laws and example in the new
Testament. John 8
which plainly avouches that this murdering comes from the Devil, and
teaches us a clean contrary doctrine to the Romish rebellious religion,
namely, to obey, to pray for Princes, and to pay duties to them, to give to
Caesar, that which is Caesar's. Matthew. 22. Cap. 13.
Paul to the old Romans gave this lesson, to render honor to whom honor is
due, and fear to whom fear belongs: Cap. 3.
and in the Epistle to Tite: Admonish those to be subject to Princes and
powers. So does Peter: 1. Pet. 2.
Honor the King. And in his second Epistle he says, that God does preserve
the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished, Cap. 2.
and chiefly those that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and
despise the government, which are presumpteous, and stand in their own
conceit, and fear not to speak evil of them that are in dignity. The like is
read in Judas. Judah.
Paul acknowledges this out of the old law in the Acts of the Apostles: Thou
shall not curse the Prince of the people. Cap. 23.
Whereupon Chrysostom infers this exposition, I take it that he did not know
at all that he was the Prince of the Priests, otherwise he would have honored
him. Shall I trouble you with the recital of a few examples? Theudas made a
conspiracy, but he was slaint so did Judas of Galile, Act. 5.
but he also perished, and they that obeyed him were scattered abroad. I
conclude this with the terrible example and ruful end of Judas the traitor of
Jesus Christ his Master, forsaken of God and of man: of God, for that having no
grace, he hanged himself: of man, for when Judas bewailed his case to the
Priests, Of Judas the traitor two notes.
and confessed to them that he had sinned, betraying the innocent blood, What
is that to us, (quoth they?) see thou to it. Mat. 26.27 C. 11. q. 3.
Two notes we may gather out of Beda and R. Holcot, both our countrymen, the
first the cause, the second the time: the cause, was mony^ in Judas that moved
him to betray his master^ which fault of Judas, Mat. 27.
says Beda, many thi^ day abhor as cruel and wicked, but they tak^ not heed
of it: the other is the time, wh^^ he betrayed him, even when he had taken h^^
Supper, he went out and betrayed him. B^ware al traitors of Judas end, beware
a^ avoid the cause, that is hope of silver, and of a better change, his
change was no Royal Excha^ge, but instead of his Apostleship, a rope. Let us
dearly beloved seek no alteration of the state, nor of the Prince: let us
consider our blessed time, better tha^ this unkind Judas did. For we at this
time are no less the^ Judas was both corporally fed with the plentiful
provision at Gods hand, and also spiritually refreshed at the table of the
lord, and with the right use of the sacraments.

From the law of Christ, we come to the opinion of Christian Fathers. The
judgment of Christian Fathers.
Ignatius the Martyr allows no such rebellion, but avouches the Scripture of
God, that God takes this quarrel of Princes upon himself, as he said unto
Samuel, he alleges the Scripture of Moses saying, This murmuring of yours is
not against us, but against the Lord God: and sets down this severe
sentence: No man that lifts up himself against his better, Epist. 3. ad
Magnesios.
went at any time unpunished, co^cluding thus: Wherefore we must reverence our
superiors, for that it is no great matter to be cal^ed a Christian, but to be
one: as though he would employ, Ad Scapul.
that those that are disloyal and ^ebels, are not good Christians. The same
reason Tertullian renders. We are defamed as ^raytours against the Majesty of
the Emperor, and yet Christians were never found to be Albimans, nor Nigrians,
nor Cassians, but he there discharging the Christians, charge the heathen who
condemned the christians: Christianus nullius est hostis, nedum Imperatoris. A
Christian is foe to no man, much less to the Emperor. The office of
Christians and private men is by Augustine thus described: Cap. 23. q. 8.
Quicunque.
Whosoever strikes evil men in that they are evil, and has a cause to kill
them, is the minister of God. But he that kills or slaieth or maimeth a
sorcerer, thief, churchrobber, a perjured man, or any other malefactor, shall
be judged as a mankiller, and the more sharply, because he was not afraid
abusiue or disorderly to vsurp unto himself a power not granted unto him from
God. The same Austine ratifieth this order political and the authority of
Magistrates as necessary and inviolable. Jn. l. de bono Discip. cap. 3.
Except there were ordained an order of living certainly, nature would never
make an end of sinning. Chrysostom agrees to the same. If thou take away
the tribunal seats of judgment, Hom. 6. ad pop. Antioc.
tho^ have taken away all order of our life: and thou shall separate from the
ship the gouenour, thou have drowned the boat: if thou t^kest away the captain
from the army, tho^ deliuerest up the soldiers captives to t^^ enemies: eue^
so if thou take away Prince from cities, we shall lead a life more
unreasonable, then unreasonable wild beasts, biting and devouring one another,
the man of might him that is the poorer, the boulder him that is the simpler.
1. Cor. ^^; Him. 3^.
The same father upon the Epistle to the Corinthians shows the Majesty of a
Prince, and that by the outward ensigns of his office, and royal robes:
Although we see cloth of gold, and shoes of gold, and such like, yet we
still require and desire another garment and vesture to know a King: but
as soon as we behold his Purple and Crown, now we look for no other sign of
the Majesty of a Prince. And again, No man will entertain a King
irreverently, Cap. 10.
no man will touch the Kings robe with unclean hands, although he were alone
in a solitary place: and yet the garment is nothing else but the thread of
worms. If thou wonder at the coloring and dyeng of it, even that is the blood
of a dead fish. Again he tells us that this vplandish and barbarous
shedding, of blood came from our old Ethnish forefathers the Britanes, who did
eat man's flesh, very Giants indeed: it came from the Massagets and Derbices,
who thought them miserable that died of any sickness, and therefore when they
came to be old, killed the^ and devoured them, Father, Mother, Cosens, Kinsmen,
whatsoever. The like and almost in the same words has Ierom. Li. 2. aduer.
Jouinian.
These and such like may be authorities and positions of the Christian fathers
to disanull all these saucy and insolent attempts.

To these opinions of fathers might be added civil Laws, if a Ciuilian had
this matter in handling. Civil laws.
They could tell you out of the Code: Cod. l. 3. Nemo.
Let every poisoner, sorcerer, adulterer, coiner, murderer, parricide suffer
torments, and he that is guilty of treason, let him not hope for any pardon
of his lord, against whom he has presumed such things: He could tell you by
the law of Pompey this decree, That if a man kill his father or mother, ff. l.
1. de parricidijs.
wife, husband, patro^, or patroness, and such others, there mentioned, he
must be in danger of that penalty which is set down by the law of
Cornelius. They could tell you, L. Cornel. de ficarijs Cor. 1. sept.
He that walks with a weapon, with an intent and purpose to kill a man, is to
be punished, as if he had killed a man: for in great and grievous offenses the
will is respected, and not the end. And their Rule is, that the will is to be
punished as severely as the deed. They could also report out of their Law, that
it is a wicked thing for a man to ly in wait against man, because Nature has
linked us altogether with a certain kindred and cognation.

And again, That whosoever raseth, washes, counterfeiteth the money of a
Prince, L. Diu^ C^ ad. L. Corah. sica. ff. ad L. Cor. de falss^. l. 2. c. de
fall. mon.
if he be a free man, he is to be thrown to beasts: if a servant, he ought
to be extremely punished. And also he that coineth a new coin without the
authority of the Prince, he must be burned. What then may be thought of such
Giaunts that are not only contumelious against the coat of the Prince, but
also against his person, not only injurious against his coin, but against his
body, not only intend murder, but practice it?

We may ioyn unto these laws, Exampls, experimentes and documents which we
learn by civil and Christian governors. Examples of civil and also christian
governors.
For when did not God one way or other meet with these new deuisers of treasons
and rebellions against the Lords anointed? Maximus an vpstart, set up by
soldiers, circumuented by craft, and killed by violence Gratian the Christian
and gracious Emperor preparing his journey into Italy: Augustine. l. 5. de
ciuit. Dei. cap. 15. Socra. lib. 5. cap. 11.
did not Theodosius put to death the same tyrant? Was not Symmachus a Senator,
for writing the praise of that Maximus, reputed guilty of Treason? and fearing
death, was he not forced to take Sanctuary? Hist. Trip. l. 9. c. 23.
Did he not retract the same by an Apology? Did not the same Theodosius tame
Eugenius, Cap. 26.
who was intruded into the Emperors room? Abbas Vrs. f. 158.
Phocas killed his Master Mauritius the Emperor with his wife Constantia and
his children and was not he afterward vanquished by Heraclius, by the means of
his own Son in Law Priscus? Did not the common people after his apprehension
put him to death and burn him? Constans the good protector of Athanasius was
deprived of his kingdom and his life by Magne^tius: Did not Constantius
brother of the said Constans pursue him, so that at Lions he was brought to
this extremity, Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 19. Orosius. l. 7.
to kill himself with his own hand? A certain man called Constantinus
furiously ran upon Belisarius with his dagger drawn: was not the traitor
killed himself? Were not the Goathes made lords, Blondus l. 5. decad. 1.
and conquerors that day? How egregiously Traitors were punished by the
Emperor Valens, we read in Sozomen and Socrates. Soz. l. 6. c. 8. Soc. l. 4.
c. 5.
Procopius an usurper encountered against the Emperor Valens, but by the means
of his own captains was taken alive, and betrayed by them. These traitors,
notwithstanding the oath made, were cut in sunder with sawes. Procopius the
usurper was tied by the thighs to two trees, and straungely torn into pieces.
You may read Cuspinian of the traiterous dealing of Manuel Emperor against
Conradus and against Jews King of France, Jn^i^^ Manuel.
and of Caniclinus, and other three courtiers against the Emperor, and their
punishment. Berhardus the nephew of Jews the Emperor consptreth, and by the
sentence of the french men was condemned to die, Abbas, Vrs. fol. 192.
but by the favor of the Emperor his eyes only were put out. I told you out of
Tertullian of certain traitors named only by him, Ter. lib. ad. S^apulam.
as notorious in this lewd sect of Traitors: and now shall be more at large by
Historiographers displaied to you. The one was Clodius Albinus, Sectaries in
Treason, 1. Albin^as. Jn Sen^ro Jmperator.
of who^ Aelius Spartianus writes, that he rebelled against the Emperor
Seuerus in France: how sped he? When he was overcome, and his body was
brought, he commanded his head being half dead to be cut off, and to be
carried to Rome, the rest of the carcass to be quartered, and set up before his
own house: some ad that he willed the same carcass to be thrown into the
river Rhodanus with his children. 2. Nigrian.
Another rebel was Pescennius Niger saluted as Emperor by the band of the
Syrians: what was his end? He was stain by Seuerus, his head was carried upon a
spear, his children, who had been entreated of the said Emperor as his own
children, were banished with the Mother: and after the rebellion of Albinus he
put them al to death. 3. Sectaries Cassians.
The last was Cassius descending of ye line of the Cassians the great
co^spirators against Julius Caesar, as Vulcatius Gallicanus witnesses. He
wrought treason against Verus, he rebelled under Marcus Antoninus Philosophus,
his delight was to be called Catiline, bragging that he should be also Sergius,
if he might kill Dialogistam and Philosopham aniculam, naming and meaning
Antonine, because he was a learned disputer, and given to the study of Ancient
Philosophy. What was his reward? Antoninus himself was merciful: but
Faustina the Empress writes to Antonine, that if he loved his children and
wife, he should sharply pursue these rebels, for that these mutinous and
seditious captains and soldiers had an evil custom, Quinisi opprimantur,
Faustina a worthy and wise counsailor against traitors.
oppriment, except they be oppressed, they will oppress. And in another
Epistle she alleges a sentence of her Mother Faustina unto his father Pius,
That he should first show pity to himself and to his own, and then
afterward to strangers. In fine, the Senate took order, that he should be
judged a traitor, and his goods confiscated, Et consensu omnium, praeter
Antiochenses, interemptus est, and by the consent of every man (excepting the
Antiochians) he was executed.

Now for that I must end this time, apply this in our latter and lewd days, as
you think good. Our learned Antonina for her own part of her admirable
clemency, has showed pity, and mercy to many traitors: our Honorable
Counsel, and our Laws have provided against them, and some of them have had
their desert by Justice, as you have heard it should be, and might be by the
law of Nature, by the Law of God among the Jews, and also among the Christians,
by the judgment of Christian Fathers, by the constitutions civil, by Emperors
and Princes Christian and others.

You also my brethren and countrymen, have taken anoth of fidelity as the
Athenians did, (...) etc.

The oath of the Athenians and English subjects.
I will defend Religion, holy and profane things, and fight for them either
alone, or with many, I will not leave my Country in worse state, but in
better. I will always obey the Magistrate, and chief Ruler, I will be
subject to Laws ordained, Ex Apoph. Aristoxeni Pythagori.
and to al other Decrees set down by the Commons and Parliament. If any will
frustrate or make void the Laws, or not be obedient to them: I will not
agree, but will revenge it either alone or with many. I will observe and
reverence the Holy Ceremonies of My Country: whereof God be my witness and
judge. We of this land do swear and protest in the name of Christ, a fidelity
to God, to the Prince, and to our country. This oath must be kept, you know the
rule of law: Nimis indignum esse iudicamus quod quisque sua voce dilucide
protestatus est, infirmare. We think it an unworthy and shameful thing, that
a man should break that which he has protested plainly with his own mouth.
God grant us al to be mindful of it: To whom etc.

THE FOVRTH SERMON against Abishai, and al trayteterous persons.
CHRYSOSTOM a worthy and eloquent father, has uttered a good method and order
of teaching to be observed of all that shall occupy the room of Ministers in
the Church of Christ. A method in teaching and preaching.
For he entreating of the same argument which we now handle, says thus man
Homily: De David and Saul.
Hic mihi videtur optimus esse docendi modus etc. This seems to me the best
way of teaching, if we do not cease to counsel and exhort in any matter,
before we shall see our counsel and admonition to come to effect: for if one
reasons to day of alms, to morrow of prayer, the next day of humanity, and
again afterward of modesty and humility of mind, he cannot well make perfect
any of these in the hearts of his auditors. I am therefore returned to this
place, to prosecute the same matter, which the last time was delivered to you.
You have heard obedience toward Princes and Superiors has bin commended by
diverse laws of Nature, of God in the old and new Testament, commended by
ancient Christian fathers, by Civil Co^stitutions and Examples of Princes, and
how contrariwise. disobedience, treacheries, rebellions were evermore
condemned, and condignlie punished.

Now I am to proceed to other laws, The Popes Law condemns treacherous
murdering.
and decrees, and examples to prove the same. The next law, is the Law
Canonical, aduouched, and recited by the Pope himself, whereby al kind of
murder against any person never so mean is utterly forbidden in private men:
De Poenit. did. 1.
as out of the Epistle of Clement: That blessed Saint Peter said, there were
three kinds of Homicides or murderers, killers of brethren, slanderers, and
haters: out of Hierom: Al iniquity, and oppression, and unrighteousness is
judgment of blood, Jn Jesaia^.
and although thou do not kill with the sword, yet do thou slay with thy
will. Austin. ibi.
And out of Augustine: Murder forbidden by Law was thought to be nothing else
but the killing of the body: Therefore the Lord has opened to us that every
unjust motion to hurt a brother, is to be reputed among the kinds of murder.
This doctrine gathered out of these fathers, and borrowed out of the
interpretation of our savior Christ, Matthew. 5.
defining murder to be threefold, operis, oris, cordis, in work, word, and
heart, inserted and allowed by the Popes own law, Triple ^^ther.
does touch the quick and the very point of this controversy: It is not lawful
to murder by detracting, by thinking against any person: and shall it not be
accounted of these Catholics murder indeed to lay violent hands upon the same
person? And shall this be esteemed murder against private persons, and shall it
not much more be so esteemed against public Magistrates? Shall not the
murdering hand, the murdering tongue, the murdering heart against Princes be
guilty also by this Law't We understand what they say in their Popish Decrees.
And this also I would have our cou^trymen note, that if any have taken an oath
to Pope or any other, C. 12. q. 5. (...) Glossa.
Tamen contra propria^ patriam non iuuabit ipsum, He shall not aid any man or
master against his own country. And whereas in sundry places of scripture we
are bound by the commandment of God to obey, to honor, to fear the King and
al higher power, as the places rehearsed before declare: now their Law
inforceth that being a precept or commandment, it must be done and
followed: Whosoever obeys not commandments, C. 14 q. 1.
is guilty and a debtour of the penalty, out of Austin, De sermon Domini in
Monte. And in the same Title out of Gregory. That which is given in precept, is
commanded: that which is commanded, must needs be don: if it be not done,
Paenam habet: it has the penalty. Why then should any Pope dispense with any
Princes subject, and not incur double punishment, in that he breaks
himself, and causes many thousands to commit the like? The Popes law can tell
him, Quod alter mandato nostro facit, nos reputamur fecisse. The Popish
Schoolmen teach, That if a man does not fulfill his penance enjoined to him by
his ghostly father, he commits deadly sin. Scot. in 4. d. 15. and so does
Bonauenture require obedience to a Prelate under pain of death. And to disobey
a Prince shall it be venial, and a thing of nothing?

Now let us set their own sayings, and doings in one ballaunce, and see how
far they disagree from this authority of these fathers, The Popes Acts
contrary to their laws.
alleged by their Gratian. It is written that Pope Innocentius the third of
that name, when he had intermedled, and made debate by his double dealing
between Otho the first, and Frederik, B. Fulgos. lib. 6.
he made a cunning collation at Rome in the holy time of Lent, of peace and
agreement: but this judgment was given of that Sermon by a noble Citizen of
Rome, John Capocius: O holy father, your words are the words of God, but your
deeds are the deeds of the devil. So may we judge of the rest of the
rabblement of Popes, whose laws compiled out of these fathers, are godly in
some cases, but their own words, and works are devilish.

Touching words, N^c (...) C. 9. qu^s^
in their own high maiestical style, thus they speak. It is certainly most
evident, that the judgment of the Apostolical See (whose authority is greatest)
must not be retracted of any man, neither is it lawful for any man to judge of
her judgments. And again, Junnocent. cap. Nem^
The judge must not be judged, neither of the Emperor, neither of all the
clergy, neither of Kings. And again: The Church of Rome alone by her own
authority may judge of al, Calixen^
but it is not permitted to any to judge of her. It is a great usurpation of
the Bishop of Rome, both in his notorious claim of all Kingdoms, and in his
oppression of all Kings: which by general terms, and particular discourse may
be found in Histories, and are couched together in Augustine Steuchus a great
Proctor of the Pope, even out of the bowels and priuities of the Popes
Epistles, and Registres. De Dona^^ Constant. cont. I aur. Vall. The
Universality of Rome.
The generals are: Papam habere vetustissimum vniuersalemque Dominatum etc,
that the Pope has a most ancient and universal dominion over the King domes
of all the west Church. That Rome is content, King Pope, Queen Rome destroieth
all Kings and Queens. The special and peculiar Provinces of the Pope. Sect
93. Spain.
and suffers Kings to rule, so that they acknowledge her to be Patronam,
Dominam, ac Reginam, as the Patroness, Lady, and Queen: so that al pensions be
paid to her, and she as Queen to be saluted, and worshipped, Adoretur. These
specialties be many: Gregory, otherwise Hildebrand, gives the Kings of Spain
to understand, Regnum Hispaniae ex antiquis constitutionibus Beato Petro, and
Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae in ius and potestatem traditum esse: That the
Kingdom of Spain by ancient Records and constitutions has been given up,
and delivered to the right, and propriety of Blessed Saint Peter, and of the
holy church of Rome. Sect. 94. Hungary.
The same Pope writes to Solomon King of Hungary in like sort, chalenging that
Kingdom as his proper possession. Pope Alexander the third certifieth William
Conqueror, that before King John offered up England to the Church of Rome,
England.
it was in the hand of the Prince of the Apostles, and under his Tutorship or
tuitio^, until some others came, who following the pride of Satan, Pactum Dei
abiecerunt, Sect. 95.
and Anglorum Populum a via veritatis auerterunt, that is, Until they did cast
away the covenant of God, and turned the people of England from the way of
truth: And praises English men, as faithful Contributours butours, Exhibeb^e.
and Exhibitors to the Sea Apostolical by a yearly Pension, partly to the
Bishop, and partly to Saint Mary's Church, Quae vocatur Schola Anglorum, which
is called the Schole of English men. It is likely our English Seminaries
receive some portion and piece of this Exhibition at Rome, and Rhemes, which
our Popish Jesuits brag to be the Popes liberality. The Pope gives a Pig
to our Papists of our own Sow.
But there is another effertuous point in that Popish Register: A sure, and
certain warrant to William, that he shall have Peter a pitiful and gracious
debeour, Pium, and propitium debitorem. I know not with what measure of mercy,
and pity, Saint Peter has paid this debt to King William: but Queen
Elizabeth and her predecessors of late have received small Alms, but rather
have felt a shroad recompense. The same Alexander chalengeth Denmark, Denmark.
tanquam peculium and vectigal Romanae Ecclesiae: As his own peculiar, and
trybutary to his church: Sect. 96. Ex Regist Im^^c. 3. Alex. 3. Paschalis.
Bohemia. Genua. Sect. 97. etc
Item the Kingdoms of Aragonia, of Sardinia, of Portugal, of Boemeland,
Swethland, Norway, Da^tia are subject with like conditions, as also Ianua in
Italy. Our neighbor France is so holden: and King Demetrius, and the Queen
of Ruscia so confess to Gregory the seventh, That they received it, Ex dono
Petri: Of the ree gift of Peter: And yet their printed Text is in a Distinction
against these Registres: Imperator non habe^* Imperium a Papa, Abbas Vrs. fol.
231.
sod a Deo: The Emperor has his Empire not of the Pope, but of God. I omit
the rest, as Croatia, Dalmatia, who acknowledge that they have their Regiment
per vexillum etc. By the banner, sword, Scepter, and Crown rendered from Gebyzo
the Legate of the Apossolick See. What is the conclusion of this new father
Augustine? Domine sac, dic, da totum.
Quidigitur superest in Occidente, quod aperte non sit Sedis Apostolicae? What
is left in the west, which is not by plain evidence belonging to the
Apostolical See? Ergo this is the meaning: Al is ours, quoth the Devil, or
rather the Pope, who^ the devil has lifted up not only to the Pinnacle of
the Temple, as high and universal Priest: but set and exalted upon an high hit,
and given to him all the Kingdoms of the world, for his good service, in
adoring and worshipping him, which he offered before to Christ, Matthew. 4.
but he refused that his conditional offer, and now Antichrist has accepted it.

In their Decrees and Decretals and Gloses and Doctors we may find those and
the like speeches. The Pope may take away privileges, and depose Bishops, and
the Emperor: He is Lord of Lords, having the jurisdiction, and the right of
the King of Kings over Subjects.

As his brags are big, so his practices are not unlike, Aenead. lib. 7.
Sabellicus is witness of the pride of Clement against Frauncis Dandalus
Ambassador, and afterward Duke of Venice, who coming from the great Seignory
of the world for peace, F^. Danda^.
as a poor penitent, was used like a dog in an iron collar about his neck,
lying prostrate under the Popes table: and with much ado at length obtained
absolution. Henry the fourth Emperor, Hen. 4.
being also discommuned of Gregory the seventh, came speedily to Canossum
(which Abbas calls oppidum Canusinum) bare footed in winter and trost, A. D.
1076
putting off his princely robes, and coming near to the gate, desires to be
let in, which was denied to him: so remaining in the suburbs the space of
three days, Platin in vita Gregorij 7.
continually craving pardon, at the length by intercession of Mathildes a
Countess, and a familiar frind of the Pope, and the Earl of Sauoy, and an
Abbat, was absolved. The same Platina does not deny but that many misliked such
cursing and ba^ning, and did instantly urge and hold, That a King ought not so
suddenly to be pronounced an accursed man or an Anathema. Joan. 21. ^eed, th^^
is, Rule.
The Pope had Scripture for this, that Peter had commission from Christ to feed
his sheep, Pasce oues meas, and makes a Co^me^tary or rather a comment upon
it, Excepit ne Reges? Did he except Kings: And Peter had authority of binding
and loosing, Jbidem.
and therefore exempted no man, and Gregory in earth appealeth to Peter and
Paul in heaven against the same Henry, abusing the Text of Scripture:
Astiterunt Reges terrae: The Kings of the earth and Princes of the world stood
up, and Ecclesiastical persons, Psalm 2. A Gloss meet for a Pope.
and other common men have coniured against the Lord, and against us his
Christ's, and Henry has too proudly lifted up his horns, and heels against
the church of GOD, meaning the church of Rome. Gregory Christ. Abbas in anno
1106.
Gregory proceeds still by excommunicating, and persecuting by himself and
his Catholics, blasing him out in his arms, and colors to be an
Archheriticke, and an Apostata, whom notwithstanding the other Historiographers
commend, Lib 7. The Italian writers partial on the Popes side against the
Germans.
as Sigebertus, Otto Frisingensis, Auentine, Cuspinian, who finds fault with
these men that carry the King, and namely with Bertholdus, who continued the
history of Herma^nus Contractus with the Abbat of Vrsperg, affirming that,
vterque ardentius quam conueniat pium Imperatorem insectetur, reproouing their
heat against the godly Emperor. The Pope also makes the subject Rodolph to
rise against his Master, and the son Henry against Henry his father, who by the
hypocritical protestation of the Son, and the crafty counsel of some
Peers, rendered up hie Regalities, that is, his cross, his saunce, his
scepter, and crown: which practice so displeased the good father afterward,
that shortly after he fell sick and died at Leodium, and his corpse by these
Popish men's cruelty was for the space of five years unjustly kept from
Christian burial. A matter more than tragical that has no end, but in life and
death, yea after both, persecuteth the anointed of the Lord.

This is the practice of Popes and specially of Gregory: now consider with me,
The plagues of Gregoria and his adherentes.
whether David's argument holds or no, whether the Pope so ouer-reaching in
loftines of words, so surmounting in hautinesse of deeds against such
Personages, has escaped guiltles in the sight of God? And whether any Popish
commissioners under him have gone unpunished? Was not Gregory subject to the
censure of August, and of the clergy, and of the church, contrary to that brag
of the Popes, Nicolas, Innocent, and Calixt, of whom before is spoken? Gregory
notwithstanding these Popes charters and lofty style, Gregory. Abb. Vrsp.
anno. 1080.
was judged to be a manifest coniurer, sorcerer, and a stragler and runnagate
from the true faith, and that in a Council holden at Brixia, and as says Abbas
Vrspergensis, Factus est omnium consensus aduersus Hildebrandum Papam, There
was a general consent of al against this Gregory, whom they term a false
Moncke, and totius Vesaniae pestiferum Principem, and of all this
brainsicknesse a pestilent ringleader. He was judged before in a Council at
Worms, and deprived with this plain speech, Because thou have declamed, that
none of us should be a Bishop to thee: therefore hereafter thou shall not be
Apostolical to us. He was also judged in a Council at Mence, Ann. Dom. 1076.
where in the presence of the Emperor and the Legates of Rome, Inanno 1085.
all those Bishops rebels to the Emperor, were deposed, and others accursed.
And the Romans with one consent deposed him, and as Christianus Massaeus
affirms, Ann Dom. 1083.
a Noble man Cincius at the beginning, when the Pope song his first Mass, Lib.
chr. 16.
plucked him from the Altar, and cast him into prison. This Pope shamefullie
fled to Salerna, and tarried there unto his dying day, Abbas. fol. 238.
confessing before his death that he had molested injuriously Henry the
Emperor, and therefore even then assoiled him. Platina the Popes Secretary
says, that when in the synod of Bishops Gregory was deprived, Gilbertus was
chosen in his place, whom they called Clement. Cuspinia. in Hen. 4. Horman.
Cuspinian also says, that Hermannus a noble and valiant man, but factious,
rebelling against the said Henry, was slain even of a seely woman, out of a
tower by a great stone thrown down upon him: Eggibert
and that his own kinsman Eggibert for the like seditious attempt taken in a
mill, was put to shameful death by the soldiers of the Emperor, Rodolph.
and that Rodolph a subject of the Emperor, whom the Pope advanced and freed
from his oath of allegenunce, being conquered in war, when he beheld his
right hand cut off, lamentably said: I do confess that I am well served: In
Hen. 4
for with this hand I made a promise and took anoth of fidelity to my lord,
which I have unhonestly broken by your persuasion, I have a just reward for my
perjury: and, as also the Abbat; of Vrsperge confesses, Abbas Vrs. ann. 1080.
he being carried to Meresburge, made his moan unto the Bishops that he had
lost his right hand. Kingdom and life by their means. These be the fruits of
Popish Counsailours and ghostly fathers. Here is one thing to be noted out of
John Cuspinian touching the good nature of the Emperor against this lewd
Rebel, that he buried him honorably with roial pomp, which when it was
reproved and misliked by his frinds, he answered: Vtinam omnes mei adversary
eo ornatu sepultiiacerent, A prayer for Rebels.
I would to God that all mine adversaries mightly and die with such an
honorable burial. So (dearly beloved) let us al pray, that all the fors and
rebels and if willers of her Majesty may either be converted, or so confounded,
though they had afterward asumptuous funeral.

Now what became of Henry the fist, Man. 5.
the parricide of his father, the Popes darling, an Emperor of the Popes own
cecation: He drank of the same cup of affliction which he offered to his
father. First the Pope denied him that privilege, which iustlio he claimed in
bestowing Ecclesiastical dignities, and inuesting of Bishops and Abbats, which
was the spark, and beginning of a great flame of dissension betwixt Henry the
father, and the Pope. Pope Paschalis the second in a Council holden at Lateran
reuoketh all his promises which he made to the King, even by the receiving of
the Sacrament solemnly and religiously at his Mass, Abb. Vrsp. anno 1116.
calling that a Prauilege, and not a Privilege: and in the end excommunicated
him, striking him, as some write, Grandi fulmine, with a great lightening or
thunderbolt. Afterward he was driven to release all the Inuesting to his Lord
Calixtus: and as the Pope began with him, so God in judgment proceeded against
him. For there fell out in Germany tumultes, spoils, burning, wasting,
murdering every man as he listed: Cities were destroyed, and they made a pray
of al things that was the Emperors. And the same Abbas reports that there
were certain conspirators against them, Ann. 1124.
and the tempest of civil seditions inceased, and, as the Prophet says, Lying,
and perjury over flowed, Ose. 4.
and blood touched blood: so that he drank the dregs of that cup which he
made his father taste. Inan. 1117
There followed most terrible wonders and signs from heaven, and earthquakes,
thunder with hailestones, and lightning, whereby cattle, men, towns, and
fields were destroyed. There fell out also a great famine and mortality, so that
it was thought that the third part of men perished, and that scarcely men were
left to bury the dead carcasses. And not long after died Calixtus the Pope, and
a multitude of Noble men, and the common people so fast, and in such heaps by
hunger, and pestilence, that no man (says Cuspinian) was able to number them.
The Emperor himself was stricken with a strange disease, called Dracunculus,
a foul ulcer or botch in his privy parts, whereon he died, in his life being
in miserable pain, and had infamy and an evil name after his death. For thus
the history records of him that he was a Prince, In. Heur. 5.
not greatly to be commended, for that under the pretense of Catholic Religion
he deprived his father: Whose life is thus painted out by Cuspinian: his
impiety and cruelty toward his father: his own wretched life and shameful
death.

Qui crudelis erat Patri, quem sustulit omni
Imperio, and vitam praecipitare facit:
Henricus quintus funestum transigit aeuum
Assiduis bellis perpetuisque notis.
Thus the Pope Gregory with all his treacherous practisers is come to naught,
and judged of God and men, who will be judged of no man: (...). Hesiod.


The saying of the Poet is verified: Evil counsel is woorst for the
counsailour himself. What should I speak of Henry the sixth Emperor, Rebellion
against Heur. 6.
against whom the Bishop of Leedes rebelled, and was slain for his labor: and
so by his death the rebellion ceased? A good end of good justice ministered: God
grant the like event in these days. Earls also and Barons rebelling in
Apulia against their promise and faith, were not their hostages taken, and
their eyes plucked out, Abbas. 1191.
and the rest of their rebellious captives put to death by sundry horrible
punishments? Among the prisoners was an Archbishop of Salerna, but his eyes
were spared, more of the Kings goodness then of his desert. I told you before
of this Henry out of Bapt. Egnatius and Raph Volaterran how he was poisoned in
the Sacrament, Lib. 3. Anthrop. lib. 23.
which he was wont often to receive. And Abbas Vrsper. Multi asserebant eum
interysse veneno, albeit he himself doubts of it.

I might add unto these the treachery of Pope Lucius the third against
Frederik Barbarossa, Luci. Pope against Frederik.
in stirring up controversies and quarrels against him, for which God judged
him, so that he died strait in his consultation at Verona, and was buried with
this Epitaph. Abb. Vrsp. an. 1185.


Luci Lucatibi dedit ortum, pontificatum
Hostia, papatum Roma, Verona mori.
Read also there of the rebellion of the Milleners, Alexander. P. and Milleners.
who contemned their oath to their liege Lord, upon the bare word and warrant of
Alexander the Pope: Read there of the treachery of Urban the third, called
Turban of many, Urban.
for his troubles moved against the Emperor: but al three Popes died before
him, Jn anno 1186.
and Urban disquieting the church was stricken by the hand of God and perished.
This is the just plague of God upon such Successors of Peter, that draw the
sword: and as Otho writes, such priests are to be blamed greatly, that go
about to strike Kings with that sword which they have received by the courtesy
and favor of the Kings. In lib. 7. in prolog.


And has not also the cup of poison walked among the Popes themselves as they
have given it to others? Popes poisoned.
Did not Gerhardus Brasutus dispatch with poison six Bishops of Rome, Benno
Car.
Clement, Damasus, etc. only to make a room for Hildebrand aspiring to the
Popedom? Was not Victor the third of an Abbat made a Pope, and within a year
and four months was he not scrued with this unsavory and pestiferous sauce? In
Poemat. Antiquis. Volat. li. 22. Lib. 16.
was he not poisoned in a chalice by a Deacon? Or as Christian Massaeus
writes, per fautores Guiberti, By the favorers of Guibert? Did not Alexander
the sixth when he had prepared a poisoned cup, In speculo Romans Pont.
taste himself of the same bottle by error of seruitours at the table, and
died with them: There is none of this Popish brood that commit such treachery
against Christian Princes, or periuries against Turks, and Infidels, that God
will suffer vniudged, Treachery of Popea against Turks. Bonf. lib. 6. Dec. 3.
Amurathes.
and unrevenged. One not able History we read in Bonfinius, and in the
chronicle of Carrion, that Hunniades a valiant captain with other christians
had made truce for ten years with Amurathes the Turk: but by the persuasion of
the Pope Eugenius, and his Cardinal Julian, Vladislaus the young King and the
rest brake it, for that the Papists avouched that no such platte of peace
should be pitched without the consent of the Pope: Whereupon Vladislaus was
forced to send for help to his friend Dracoles a Wallachian, and he received
from him, besides the aid of two thousand horsemen, two swift horses, one for
himself, and another for his Son, with signification, that, as soon as they
could, they should run away, for that the Turk should of all likelihood
overcome: which prophecy or forespeaking came to pass: for the Turk spreading
out toward heaven the book and Articles of Pacificatio^ agreed upon, betwixt
them, and sworn to, by the Christians, upon the Enangelists, by the other upon
their Alcoran, cried out to Christ, that if he were a true God, he should be
revenged of his false Christians, Immediately the King was stain, the Cardinal
running away was thrust through, Hunniades hardly escaped, and the Christians,
who had the better hand before, were with great loss, and shame of al
Christendom vanquished. Thus the Romish Ismael has his hand lifted up against
all men, Genesis 16. Epl. 242.
and the hands of al men are against him, as also Bernard did apply this text
against the Romans in like sense.

The Turk truer and inster than the Pope.
A Turk sometimes keeps touch better than the Pope: and punishes most
severely al unfaithfulness. Saladine Soultan of Egypt, as he was fauourahle
unto Guye Lusignane King of Jerusalem his prisoner, so he was severe against
Rainold Castilian, Saladine. Bapt. Full. lib. 6.
and cut off his head with his own hand, because he waged battle against him
contrary to the league of Truce and contrary to his faith and troth given in
that behalf. So it falls out that either God, or by his permission the Devil,
either Christian, or Turk, or Soultan, or one, or other will meet in the end
with such Popish Prelates. If none will, they among themselves will take order,
that they shall be murdered or cousoned. Mark I pray you an Pistory. Celestinus
of an Eremite made Pope, pretending a reformation of the Clergy of Rome in his
first Consistory got displeasure by it, Tantum incurrit indignationis, vt
delirum and fatuu^ susurrarent, that is, Pope against Pope
He incurred so much their indignation, that they whispered among themselves
that he was an old doting fool. And one of them, Benedict, non re, sed nomine,
not in deed, but by name, set one at the Popes chamber door, many nights, by
a reed to sound as it had been an Angel: Celestine, Celestine, cede, negotium
supra vires est: Boniface a Cousoner of Celestine.
O Celestine, Celestine, give place, this is more than thou can perform:
which voice the simple Pope hearing answered, Faciam quod Deus voluerit: Gods
will be done, I will do as pleases God. But the pleasure of Benedict or
Benet was, Mass. l. 17.
that he should to prison, where he remained more then seven years: And the Sea Papal was vacant scarcely one day: and this Benet was suddenly transformed
into Boniface the eight: but as he entered in as a for, so he lived as a lion.
Ju^^^^ Bonifae.
And Platina thus describes this Lion, Qui imperatoribus, regibus,
principibus. etc. This Boniface that did strike into Emperors, Kings, Princes,
nations and people a terror, rather than a religion: He that went about to
give, and to take away kingdoms, to thrust out and thrust in at his own
pleasure and arbitrament, dies, and as it was commonly said at that time,
Mat. West. in Edo^^ (...) De Don^^^ Constan^^^
vt canis, as a dog. Little better was the end of others by the confession of
Augustinus Steuchus, declaring how the Romans themselves hardly entreated
their Popes. How many have they cruelly killed? How many have they taken,
imprisoned, and strangled? And yet the same Steuchus will go about to prove
unto us the perpetuity, and eternity of the Romish Seat, and that out of a Poet
Virgil, Imperium sine fine dedi. the sense is,

That their Papal Empire shall be endless: wherein I may well resemble these
Romanistes unto the people of Athens, Aristoph. (...) Equitibus.
who promised unto themselves, an universal government over the whole world,

Treioice that I shall be as an Eagle in the clouds. Athenian^ and Romanists
mounting Eagle^
Notwithstanding this conceit, and crochet of these Romish Athenians about
their everlasting continuance, and Eaglelike mounting, I must say of all these
Popes, Chr. Mass^. L. Chro. 18.
as the Chauncelour of Paris Gerson in the Counsel of Constance said many times
of one Pope, Peter de Luna: Non erit pax Ecclesiae donec auferatur Luna: There
will be no peace to the church of Christ, until this Lunatike Papaty be rooted
out from us, and out of al Christendom, This also was once prefigured, and
shadowed out to us in another sort against Julius the second that Romish
Ruffler, and against that bloody Seat by a strange monster born at that time,
Chr. Massae. lib. 20.
when Julius his army fought against the Frenchmen: The monster had in his
head an horn: for arms wings: both sere, in part a man, in part a woman: in the
knee an ey, the foot of an hawk: in the breast these marks, V. The Monster of
Rome
The interpretation of it was thus then set down: Pride, lightness, want of
virtues, Sodometry, the love of earthly things, forgetfulness of God, and
insatiable covetousness, FLAGELLO FRANCORVM PVNIENDA: These monstrous vices
must be punished by the scourges of Frenchmen: Iulijstes and Papists enemies
to France, and yet France a friend to Papists.
which partly was verified then in the great slaughter of the Popes host: and
partly in the miserable ransacking of Rauenna by the Frenchmen: but shall be
fully accomplished when France will reform the Religion, and embrace the
Gospel of Christ, and shake off the tyrannical cords, and cartropes of that
man of sin, whereas now they cry a contrary note against God, and his
Anointed, Let us break their bands: let us cast from us their yoke: Psalm.
2.
for the which, He that sits in heaven laugheth them to scorn: Pray dearly
beloved for them: Pray for the French now afflicted, Pray for the French that
afflicte: for the one, that they may be comforted, for the other, that they
may be converted. Their conversion will be the Popes destruction, and a
consolation for us, and for all the Godly: Therefore O Lord so be it: Say Lord
Jesus, Amen.

The total Sum which I have now spoken of in this latter argument, The
Conclusion.
compriseth these three points: First the Popes own Decrees and
Constitutions, which are sound. Secondly their own breaches of the same,
which are many. The third their deserved end and judgment, which from time to
time falls upon them, sometimes by man, and always by God, whom they do
grievously offend. The same God turn them or bridle them, that we and our
governors being delivered from the hands of al our enemies, may serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life: who be praised for ever
and ever. Amen.

1. SAM. 26. And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who lays his
hand on the Anointed of Iehoua, and be guiltless?


THE FIFTH SERMON
I HAVE confuted in the last sermon Abishai of Rome, and al traiterous
Remainstes, by their own Laws of Rome, Canonical^ in name, and indeed good
Rules against al kind of murder: I have complained justly of their irregular
and unruly rashness in contemning and breaking their own rules, and making
their own will their law and rule.

I am now to speak to Englishmen, and out of English laws and others, A proof
of David's Reason out of English Laws.
to admonish you; Fathers, Brethren, and Countrymen, in such ordinances and
practices as come to my knowledge: which I wish some learned Law. yer would
take in hand, and better perform it. In the mean time I exhort you which now
by Gods only goodness securely dwell in the Land, to think of your loyalty, and
to be more and more thankful. A virtue the more to be exercised by us al, for
that it is most rare, and very hard to be found in the world. And a woride it
is, to see the world altogether grudging and spiting such Principal persons,
and Peers, as are excellently qualified, Murmuring and unthankfulness against
the best.
and have infinitely well deserved of the common weal. When Tully had defended
by his eloquence Chapter Popilius in a doubtful cause much perplexed, and hazarded,
and was by his means quitte, and returned safe and sound to his country, and
neither in deed nor word hurt at any time by the said Tully: yet he, such was
his unkindness, Tully.
makes request unto Antonie, that he might be sent to cut his throat: and
upon the grant he runs to Caieta, commands his Orator to yield his
throat, and by and by cutteth off the head of the Roman Eloquence, Lib. 5.
and the most noble right hand of peace, never remembering, yt he carried that
head, which had made an Oration for his head. I report almost the very words of
Valerius Maximus. Lycurgus, of whom Apollo gave this Oracle, Lycurgu^.
that he knew not whether he should number him among men, or among Gods, was
notwithstanding cast at with stones, sometimes cast out with a public and
popular rage, and by Alcander had his eye put out, and in the end was driven
out of his country, and in that cuntry, where he had made, enacted and
established many good Laws. Let us not be Spartans, churling and spurning
against our Lycurgus, nay our Christian Lawe-maker: Let us not be unthankful
Popilians to covet the head of our Sovereign, who has saved and preserved
many heads. Harken therefore, well-beloved Countrymen, to our own Laws, old
and new, and afterward to other constitutions, and Examples abroad among our
neighbors, if occasion serves.

An old Law was by Canutus, Canutus.
Edgar, and Alured, that he that railed only against a public person,
Aluredus.
should have his tongue cut out. If a man fought before the Kings counsailour,
or in the house of a counsailor, he was amerced and fined for it. Jnas.
If in the court, he was amerced in his goods, and whether he should die or no,
it was in the Kings pleasure and discretion. Another Law of Alure du was, That
whosoever laid wait to kill traitorously the King, either alone or accompanied
with others, Jn Archaeonomia.
he should loose living and life. The Law of King Aethelstane was, that if a
man wrought mischief against his lord, it was a capital crime, and the loss
of his head. Even at that time as you may conceive by the premises, were laws
devised not only to punish manslaughter, but wounds, not only wounds, but
blows, not only blows, but words. This Canutus as he was a good Lawmakers, so
he practiced the same against Traitors, even against the traitors of Edmond
King of England his enemy, Fabian. 6. c. 205. R. Holinsh. lib. 7.
who after the peace made between him and Canutus, was traitorously slain at
Oxford, as he sat doing his necessaries of nature. And yet Canutus
persuading his Countrymen the Danes to pay the tithes truly, that ministers
might be the better relieved, was contrary to the Law shamefully murdered of
them in Saint Albanes Church, whereof more at large you may read in Iac. Lib.
3. Am^.
Meyer, in the Chronicle of Flaunders. In this and in other examples hereafter
you shall find to be true, that against these blood-thirsty me^, Sunt leges and
legum paenae. Their be Laws, and penalties of Laws, not laws as a sword hid
in the scabbard, but drawn out and executed upon them: and also that there is
no succor by Law, or by dispensation for Lawe-breakers, according to that
saying in Law: Lauxilium. 37. ss. Raphael Holinshed.
Frustralegum auxilium implorant, qui in leges co^mittunt. King Richard the
first though a warrior, and now marching toward the holy Land, yet made
Laws among his soldiers against murderers, that if it were committed in the
ship, Rich. 1.
he should be cast into the Sea with the corpse, if upon the Land, he should be
bound with the dead body, and buried quick with it. And these cases were of
smaler weight than treason committed against great estates. It is therefore
provided, that a traitor should be half hanged, and taken down alive, his
bowels cast into the fire, and in the end quartred, if he were a male: if a
woman, burned.

These Laws notwithstanding, Disobedience against the laws.
yet the unbridled and cruel Subjects have always unkindly and unnaturally
conspired against Prince and against their own country. What invasion has
there been in this Island either by Julius Caesar and the Romans, either by the
Danes, either by the Saxons, either by the Normanes, but by the unthankful and
graceless children of this our common Mother? Gildas complains of the
Britanes, that they were conquered, non armis, not by battle, but by their own
slouthfulnes, and treachery: and as Demosthenes accuses his countrymen the
Athenians, Jn Olynthiacis.
that Philip King of Macedonia thriued and prospered not so much by his own
strength, England always subdued by treachery of her own children.
as by their default: Even so our king Egilred, or as others term him Ethelred
complains in an Oration in this sort: We are overcome of the Danes, not with
weapon or force of arms, but with treason wrought by our own people. The
cause is opened by Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, Page 396.
that when the King, and his Son Edmond were like to have the upper hand
against Cneuto or Canutus the King of the Danes, Edrike Traitor.
Eadricus played the traitor, went about by sleight and subtilty, and allured
of the Kings Navy forty ships, and he slipped to Canutus, and subjected
himself to his dominion, whereby west-Saxonie and the Mercians with their
horses, and artillery offered themselves to him: Intimatum est Regi, quod nisi
cautius sibi prouideret, ipse a Gente propria hostibus traderetur. It was
privily told the King, that if he did not provide for himself more warily,
he should be berraied into the hands of his enemies, by his own nation. I
signified before how King Edmond surnamed Ferreum Latus, Iron-side, at Oxford
being at the Privy on Saint Andrews night, was slain by the Son of Eadrik
through the fathers instigation: and the father after the fact comes to
Canutus with this salutatio^: Aue Rex solus: Matthew. Westmona. page 402. Polyd.
Vir. Ang. Hist. lib. 7.
Hail O King alone, but he heard this his reward by Canutus, Ego te hodie ob
tanti obsequij meritum cunctis regni proceribus reddam celsiorem, For this your
great service I will exalt you and set you higher than all the Peers of the
realm. Perjury and perdition or treason had in this realm evermore according
to their desert. When King Edward the Confessor kept his solemnity of Easter
at Winchester, at dinner Earl Goodwine being burdened at the table with the
treacherous murder of his brother Aelfredus, Earl Goodwin.
added to the murder perjury, and desired of God, as he was true and just,
that the morsel of bread which he held in his hand might never pass his
throat, if his brother by himself or by his counsel at any time were nearer
to death, A terrible example against forswearing.
and any way further from life: so putting the bread into his mouth with an il
conscience, was choked by it. When the King saw him pale, and without breath,
Carry out (says he) this dog, Jn vita Edwardi Confessor.
this traitor, and bury him in the quadrangle, for he is unworthy to enjoy
Christian burial. Another traitor in the time of Egilred, or Ethelred, was
Elfrik, who being made Lieutenant of the Kings army left his Master, Elfrick.
and took part with the Danes upon the sudden, when he should have discharged
upon the enemies of the King and the country: Polyd. Vir. lib. 7.
but afterward being Admiral of the Kings Navy, and destitute of all hope of
preferment with the enemy: because he returned to the King, and craved pardon,
his punishment was mitigated, for he saved his life with the loss only of his
eyes. In the time of King Edward the first, the Scots breaking peace which
they had made to their liege Lord, King of England, and conspiring now with
the king of France, partly because John Beliol by the king of England was made
their King, one Thomas Turbeuile more acquainted with chiualry, than honesty,
Th. Turbeuile.
played on both sides, promising to the Frenchmen, that by treason they should
possess the Kingdom of England, upon condition to receive a large sum of
money and land, leaving for assurance his two children, as Hostages: And so that
deceiuer returning from beyond the Sea, told the King of England another
Parasiticall tale: how he escaped hardly out of prison, and how he had
learned the weakness of France. But here a crooked Snake lurked, he carried
poison mingled with honey, wherewith they that touched it, might be infected:
and creeping into favor, and into the secret counsels of the Realm, set down
al in writing, and directed the^ to the Provost of Paris. This fraud and fact
being opened by the providence of God, (who is well called of the author,
Exterminator impioru^. The destroier of the wicked) and declared to the king:
he was immediately by sergeants apprehended, bound with cords and carried to
judgment, accused, and by his own confession condemned. First laid upon an Ox
hide, drawn at horse tails thorough London, guarded with disguised
tormentours, baited at and railed on by the way, and mocked, was hanged, and
his body unburied, the people passing by scornfully asking, Mat. West. in Edou.
1.
Is this Thomas Turbeuile? Whose Epitaph a versifier wrote in this sort: That
Turbeuile was a troubler of the tranquillity and quietness of the Realm, and
therefore he that would be an hoate burning sparkle, was become a dead spark
himself, as in those rythmes may appear at large, whereof this is the
beginning: Turbat tranquilla clam, Thomas turbida villa,
Qui quasi scintilla fuit, accidit esse fauilla.


In the time of Edward the second, Andrew Earl of Carlisle.
Andreas Hartlee created Earl of Carlisle at York, and sent by the King into
Scotland to King Robert to entreat of Peace, made another matter, and turned it
into a message for war, privily, and fraudulently to compass the destruction
of his own King. This though contrived secretly, yet it was certified to the
King, and he immediately at his return upon the commandment of the King,
Polyd. Vir. Hist. Ang. lib. 18.
was attached and taken by the guard, and so by and by co^uicted, and put to
death. Ita Andreas crucem sibi construxit ex qua penderet: So Andrewe prepared
for himself a Gallose to hang upon, and made a rod for his own tasle. In
the time of Edward the third like conspiracies against the Prince had the like
measure, Polyd. l. 19.
when Edmond Earl of Kent, Roger Mortimer, and others were beheadded.

Thus you see exemplified by these traitors that which was by Laws enacted: as
also by another example of an Italian, indeuouring to betray Calice to the
French. An Ita^^^ trick against Calice.
For when an English man had committed it unto the Italian, the Frenchman
knowing the nature of that Nation to be most covetous of gold, secretly dealt
with him, that he would sell the castle to him for twenty thousand crowns. The
Englishman being made privy of this, dissembleth all things, drives out the
French, and takes them, and with them the principal cause of that treachery.
In the time of Richard the second, there was a conspiracy of some, Jn Epit.
Frosardi. lib. 1. Eccle. 10. Ansley and Carton.
that had in their mouth the Proverb of the Hebrews, Woe be to the Land, whose
King is a Child: And of others even in the court, as of John Ansley knight,
and of Hugh Carton minding with their accomplices to set upon the King and to
murder him: although they two were enemies before, yet in this made one,
agreeing too well: but God turned all to the best, and merry it was for the
Land and the King, when thieves fell out: for Ansley detecting Carton, and
Carton Ansley, it was determined by the privy counsel, that it should be tried
in a Combat, in the which at the length Carton was wounded, and thrown down,
and even now at point of death, confessing his fault, was drawn to the place
of Execution, as Polydor testifies.

I have entered into a long and large field, and mind to go out of it, ^^pish
^^actises a^^inst Reli^^on in England.
and only now to declare how our Countrymen in former time, have been
bewitched by Popery, and have attempted to erect and prop it up by treachery,
and yet al ended in vanity. The Pope has still practiced by many, but not
prevailed: though they came in his name, and sometime with his consecrated
ware, and armed with his consecrated Crosses, his Agnus Dei, and other holy
blessed stuff, Trebellius Pollio.
no wiser indeed then those heathen men, who believed that those that carried
about the^ the image of great Alexander expressed in silver or gold, should have
al things fortunately fall out unto them as they would, wherein Erasmus touches
the Bishops of Rome: In Chiliad. 1. Cen. 10.
Nechodie desunt, qui gladios in bello fortunatos, and huinsmodi nugas
pollicentur Principibus. There be some now a days, which promise to Princes
swords and other trifles happy and fortunate in war, which have notwithstanding
an unhappy end: and there he much more marueileth that any man can believe such
subtle merchauntes. There was such a flattering Papistical Preacher, William
Fitzosbert, otherwise called Long-beard, W. Long-bearde.
who in his Sermons entised the people to rebel against their King, Richard the
first, whose Theme was taken out of Esaias: Cap. 12.
You shall draw with joy waters out of the wels of salvation. A fair allurement
whereby he got after him many thousand followers, as fond people will hearken
to the whistle, and dance after the pipe of such Popish Libertines. But this
liberty was servitude, for though he fled into Bowe-Church with his
concubine, and others, yet it was not long a Sanctuary for him, he was plucked
out, and by Hubert Lord chief Justice of England was adjudged to be drawn
thorough the streets, R. Holinsh. Et in vit^ Huberti.
and tied to the horse tails, to be hanged, to be let down half quick,
his head cut off, and his body cut in four quarters. See here, I beseech
you, the superstition of the people, they took this Concubinary Priest and
Traitor to be a Saint forsooth, A Traitor in Popery a Martyr.
because his chains wherewith he was bound wrought miracles, and the woman
visited the place where he was laid: In sana plebs vt Martyrem diu colebat,
The mad people did long honor him as a Martyr, worshipping his members and
bones, as Relics. In Wales what Superstition has there not been? Welsh
prophecies.
They were so deceived with false prophecies, that they persuaded out of
Merline, Leoline the Prince, that he should wear the crown of Brutus, and
therefore took armor against King Edward. In vita Iohannis Peccam.
They were willed by John Peccam Archbishop of Caunterbury to carry in their
hands books of the Gospel, as relics. All these fantasies could not save
the heads of Leoline and David, Leoline and David.
which were set upon long poles, and erected on high upon London bridge. What a
Saint was the Traitor Thomas Becket? Th. Becket Traitor a Saint of the Pope.
In what favor with the Pope Alexander? And yet was he in a council at
Northhampton accused and convicted of extortion, robbery, forgery, falsehood,
treason, and perjury, in the presence of the King, of the Peers, and Prelates
for some matters in his Chancelarship: whereupon although he lifted on high his
cross staff, and ran out of the court and council in have and in an heat
over the sea to Rome, yet neither the Pope nor the cross could save him from
ye cross of death. And here observe the unjust dealing of the Pope Alexander,
who canonized among the Saints, Thomas the Traitor, the Kings deadly enemy,
and persecuted King Henry the second, who was not accessory, nor privy at that
time to it, as it fell out in proof: for when the doers thereof slipping aside
to Duresme looked for great thanks of the King, for that they gave out, that
they had most faithfully defended him, and rid his enemy out of the way: it is
written by Polydore that Henry did take this heinous act as no benefit, Angl.
Hist. lib. 13.
but utterly misliked it: insomuch as they hearing this, and hoping for no
pardon, ran one, one way, and another, another way, and by reason of the kings
displeasure died al within three years, and yet the Pope an heavy master of
the King, not believing his Ambassadors purposely sent to Rome: sent into
England his Cardinals for the trial of it, and though the cause did not
appear, yet was he compelled by oath to purge himself, and by inforceme^t of
their order to send to Jerusalem two hundred soldiers, and himself to lead
an army into Syria within three years after (which was performed by his son
Richard:) and to promise to be good afterward to the clergy, and that by an
oath, and (as some write) that none after his and his Sons death should carry
the name of a King, but such a one as the Bishop of Rome did nominate and
appoint, albeit by our Chronicles, Ibidem.
and by the practice in the tract of time no such bondage does appear. Thomas
Walsingham in Richardo 2. The seditious sermon of J. Ball Priest.
Another seditious Preacher named John Bal Priest, proves the equality of
States without any difference of callinges, which made the simple people to be
giddy headed. His text was not taken out of scripture, but borrowed out of a
common proverb: When Adam delued, and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman?
But the Epilog and conclusion of this Sermon was sorrowful for himself, being
drawn, hanged, and beheaded at Saint Albans, and his quarters sent to four
cities of the Realm. There was another zealous Monk in co^spiracy with the Barons
of England against king John and against his son Henry the third, Jbidem.
who being no great friend to the Pope, was therefore the worse liked of the
Monk Eustachius, in that point more destable the^ a dog: Eustachius a
Trayte^ous Monk
for the proverb is true: Canis canina^ non est, nec lupus lupinam: A dog is no
deuourer of a dog, nor the wolf of a wolf: And yet in the war betwixt our
King and Jews the French King, he played the Apostata, a rebel and renegate,
reuoulting from his King to another vnco^stantly, and perfidiously, worthily
called of Matthew Paris, In Hypod. Neustriae, per Thom. Walsing.
Proditor Regis Angliae, and Piratanequissimus, being turned out of his coule
into a Traitor of the King of England, and a most wicked Pirat: and, as it is
in another history, ta^quam de Monacho, factus Daemoniachus, as it were of a
Monk made a Demoniacal man, and possessed of a Devil. But this devilish man was
drawn out of the pump of the ship where he hid himself, and his end was the
chopping off of his head by the hand of the Earl of Cornwall, Richard, the
Kings brother, carried to the King, Man. Da^^^ in He^^^^.
and so to diverse places of the Realm, which the Moucke would have redeemed
with an mestimate mass of money, but could not. Adam.
Adam the Bishop of Hereford was accused of treason, and yet was protected by
the Archbishops of Canterbury, of York, and of Dublin, Th. Walsing. in (...)
wardo^.
and of ten other Bishops, and with violence, and with the Archbishops crosses
was plucked out from the place of judgment, but afterward being found guilty
by the sworn Jury of all the crimes objected, was so pronounced, and his
goods confiscated, and the traitorous and horned Priests blancked: for so these
verses signify. Nostri cornuti sunt consilio quasi muti,
Sunt quasi consusi, decreto legis abusi.


This Adam, as this history reports, was arrested openly in the Parliament at
London, to the great reproach of the clergy, and prejudice of the whole church
of England. Against Henry the fourth, Conspiratours against He^. the 4.
what conspiracies were there not? by Earls, and specially by Clergy men?
whose meaning was suddenly at the castle of Winsor, in the time of Christmasse
plays, to rush in, to kill him and his children: but their Christmas py, was a
deadly pie to them: some ran away to London, and so meant to pass beyond the
sea, but the wind being against them, they were taken and beheadded: The
clergy men, Maude. Ferby.
Maudlin Maude, and William Ferbie, were hanged, drawn, and beheaded at
London, others at Oxford. The Priest of Ware, that had matriculated in a roole
the names of the conspirators, whereof some were innocent, had the same
judgment. The Prior of Laune once Canon of Dunstable, Walter Baldock a Prior.
Walter Baldocke confessing himself to be privy to it, for conceiling it, was
hanged, so were the Minorit Friars even in the habit of their religion. Friars.
An Abbat of Westminster.
As for the Abbat of Westminster, a chief stickler in this matter, in whose
house after the feast this conspiracy was devised, was by God himself stricken
with a palsy, and by and by was dum, and so died. At the same time Thomas
Walsingham writes of Owen Glendar a Welsh man, Owen de Glendour. In Henr. 4.
a rebel against the same King, intending by his Magical coniuration to kill
the King, the Devil so working by rain, wind, snow, hail stones, and al
tempests against the King and his camp, Jbidem.
Fuerunt plures, si fas sit credere, qui dicerent haec aduersa, art fratrum
Minorum contra Regem fuisse commentata. It was a common rumor then, that
Friars having familiarity with Devils, wrought and brought al these miseries
against the King, as friends to the Welsh: but you heard, how the Devil was
overtaken by God: The Minorites executed by the King in their best and most
holy weeds: and so Owen Glendar in the absence of the King following his
prophecy, wandered miserably up and down in the desert and in solitary places,
and by penury and hunger pined away. The like judgment fell upon Falcasius a
rebel against Henry the third, of a great rich man so miserably poor, that he
in banishment begged his bread in France, and had not a bolster to lay his
head upon. I might have reckoned up many Iackes, as Jack Straw, Th.
Walsingham n. Hypod. Neusiri^.
or Wat Tiler, Jack Miller, Jack Carter, against King Richard the second, and
also Jack Cade of Kent, who was in a cart brought to London, taken before in a
garden in Sussex, and his head set on London bridge, his quarters sent into
Kent in the time of Henry the sixth, but these are matters of rebellion indeed,
but not so much for Religion, which is my purpose and chief scope: And yet all
these drink of one cup, bitter enough here for such, and most bitter in the
life to come.

Now to come nearer unto our time and memory, Late Popish traitors for their
Religion. R. Holinsh. in Henr. 8. Rebellions for religion vnde^ Henr 8
our Popish Traitors have had no better success. In the reign of Henry the
eight by Parliament, the Lords prayer and the ten commandments were decreed to
be learned in English: for this good service to God and to the common weal, the
blind people seduced by blind guides, Monks, Priests, made a commotion in
Lincoln shier: In Lincoln shiere.
God fought for his cause and for his King, and gave to him the victory: The
multitude by proclamation was pardoned, a new oath of fealty to the King
received, Captain Cobbler, Doctor Mackarel.
a Monk named Doctor Mackarel, and others put to death.

How fell it out in the North by their religious rebellion? In the North an holy
pilgrimage.
It was forsooth for the Cacholicke Church: It was called a holy blessed
pilgrimage: In their banners was painted Christ hanging on the Cross, a
Chalice with a painted cake, in the sleeves of the soldiers were embrodered
the five wounds of our Savior: But God ouerturned al their purposes, and they
were supplaunted, and by a flood on Simon and Iudes Even their heat was cooled,
A butcher and a Priest executed.
and a butcher at Winsor wishing, that these good fellows of the North had
some carkases of his sheep, with a Priest procured to preach in favor of
Rebels, were adjudged to die by Law Martial.

Good king Edward the sixth proceeded in zeal as his father began, Rebellions
for religion in the time of Edwa. 6. Jn Cornwall.
and more sincerely reformed religion: but (alas) in Cornwall and Devonshire,
it was not brooked nor digested: the king his Commissioner in Cornwall was
slain: but God did not suffer it is remain unrevenged: a Priest was taken,
and executed in Smithfield by Law. In Deuonshiere they did rise for the six
Articles, In Deuonshiere.
they would have Mass, holy water, holy bread, but they wilful men lacked
all, they famished for want of bread. The Lord Russel, the Lord Gray, the
kings army overcame them. Sir Peter Carewe, and Gawine, and other faithful
subjects, with the city of Exceter, perseuering true and loyal, were rewarded,
and highly commended: but Welsh, vicar of Saint Thomas in Exceter, a new
reformer of religion, was hanged up in chains upon the top of the church with
his sacring Bell, holy water bucket, and sprinkle, beeds, and other Popish
trash, and the chief captains most disloial carried to London to be executed.

In Northfolke was another rebellion of such as partly were deceived, In
Northfolke.
or not thoroughly persuaded in religion: they had an old Oak, a tree not of
life to them, but of death, called by them the tree of Reformation, The tree of
Reformation.
but it was the tree of Absalom, upon the which Miles their Gunner, and two of
their false Prophets were executed, for they trusted in vain Prophecies, which
were partly uttered in these verses:

The country gnuffes, Hob, Dick, and Hick
With clubs and clouted shoone,
Shall fill up Dussin dale with blood
Of slaughtered bodies soon.
This prophecy was a dream, their captain Ket crept into a corner, but was
openly put to death: his other brethren were hanged in chains, the rest of
meaner sort hearing the pardon proclaimed by an herald of Arms, cast down
their weapons, and lifted up their voices, praying to God to preserve King
Edward.

There brake out a new stur in Yorkshier, In Yorkeshiere. False Prophecies
cause of rebellion.
by false prophecies and by a fond misliking of the Kings proceeding: But here
also the captains that thought to raise a great flame, and to set al on fire,
made but a smoke, wherewith they were choked themselves, namely a poor man
William Ombler, and a simple parish clerk Thomas Dale, and such like. All
these meant unhappily, by extraordinary means, to turn all the Laws of God, and
ordinances of Princes topsie-turuie. About that time of these rebellions we
had set forth by the authority of the King to these rebels an Eloquent oration
by a great learned man Sir John Cheek Schoolmaster to the King, Sir I. Cheek
gravely and pithily dehorting them from such vprores, as contrary to Gods
word, the honor of a King, and the safety of the comon-weale, which in mine
opinion would make any hard heart to melt.

These former and foolish attemptes in the beginning pernicious, and tragical
in the end, might have persuaded our countrymen to have learned by their
forefathers to keep themselves within their tedder and compass of obedience.
The Reign of Q. Elizabeth.
But (alas) our Soueraign Queen Elizabeth has felt too much of their wilful
disobedience, and they tasted somewhat of her provoked severity. Wherefore did
Thomas Pearcie Earl of Northumberland, and Charles Earl of Westmerlande
against the Laws of God and man by forcible means set up Masses, burn
Bibles, and books of Communion? Why did they rise themselves, when they might
have been quiet? And raise the people, which should have been taught obedience?
Let the death of the one, and the miserable flight of the other, and the
execution of Parson Plumtree at Duresme, and of others hanged and beheaded at
Knaves. Mire not far from York, be instructions and examples for subjects.
These and many mo cannot warn us, neither the history of John Story
prouidently caught beyond the Seas, and trimly shipped into this land, and
afterward justly executed upon a new pair of Gallows, even at this day
commonly bearing his name: Saunders li. 7. de visibili Monarchia. Ann. 1566.
neither the terrible end of John Felton, who upon Corpus Christi day at London
at the Bishops gate published the Declaratory sentence of Pius Quintus Pope,
making this Realm of England, and the Queens Majesty, a pray, and a spoil to
our neighbors and to al nations: neither the beggarly, and lamentable state of
James Desmond, neither of John Desmond, bearing himself too bold upon an
Agnus Dei, and a ring sent from the Pope, neither of Nicolas Saunders himself
the rebellous preacher to the Irish-men, Saunders and the rest.
in the end taken with a frenzy: these al, while they bend the uttermost of
their wits, and of their forces against the Majesty of our Prince, whom the
Majesty of God has enthronized, they al, I say, have but knocked their heels
against the prick, and spurned to their own destruction, and to the confusion
of that Popish sect. By these and many others, neither Campion nor the rest of
the Jesuits new Incommers, Campion and other Jesuits.
and Inmates in this Realm could beware, neither yet by them other new
cutters, and practisers could be warned, neither yet to this day the people
could be taught or persuaded, but that their holy fathers Bulls and Decrees,
and Declarations must be obeyed, and that his wax, and his lead, and his
Pontifical presents consecrated by his execrable authority may preserve and
exempt them from al dangers and touch of our law, and hereafter from al peril
and punishment either in hell or in purgatory.

I am to pass over at this time other examples and ordinances of other
countries adjoining to us, as of Flaunders and France, which we must differ
till another time if God will.

In the mean time let us aliena frui insania, by the madness of these men
learn to be wise, as many of our predecessors both Princes, and learned men
of this University have done, and know that the Queens Majesty has waded no
farther in these causes, than other Kings of this Land, who have broken the
ye before. King Stephen perceiving that Theobald Arch-Bishoppe of Caunterburie
brought Popish laws from Rome into England, by decree of Parliament condemns
them, and burned them, as hurtful to a common weal, John Bale cent. 2. in
ape^^lice.
as John Sarisbury bears witness in his eight book and two and twentieth
chapter of Polycrat. King Richard the second also molested with Romish affairs
and tyranny of the Pope in Parliament holden at Westminster decreed and
enacted, that it should be lawful for no man for any cause to plead before
the Bishop of Rome, Polyd. Vir. lib. 20.
for excommunication of any Englishman by his authority: and if any such
commandment came from him, it should not be executed upon pain of loss of
all their gooddes, and perpetual imprisonment, and therefore great marvel
that any such sentence of excommunication from such a forreiner and usurper
against our gracious Prince should in these days of more knowledge by our
countrymen, be either received or harkned to, or feared. You (dearly beloved) I
hope will not: and that you may not, take an example by old Oxford Students,
who could ne would like of a Bull of Gregory directed against John Wicliffe,
and therefore are chidden of the Pope that would suffer cockle and darnel of
his heresy to grow among pure wheat, and in the beutifull fields of their
University. You may also call to mind, that are ancients, the days of Henry
the eight and Edward the sixth, and justify the things to be true which I have
alleged, and much more which might be said, to this purpose and to the
proof of this argument of David, that whosoever lays hand of the lords
anointed, shall not be accounted innocent, but shall be plagued for it. The Lord
give us grace to have this doctrine fixed and settled in our hearts, and
expressed in our lives: To whom be all honor etc.

1. SAM. 26. 9 And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can lay his
hand on the Lords anointed, and be guitlesse?

10 Moreover David said, As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall smite him,
or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle, and perish. etc.


THE SIXTH SERMON.
THE question between Abishai and David has been disputed and discussed, and
lastly out of the laws, acts and monumentes of England, and determined by the
allegations and premises before, that it is a true conclusion, that no such
thing can be justified, that al such rebellions and traiterous enterprises are
forbidden and punished.

I must now go forward, and first make an end of this first part, and so
proceed to the second part, the Protestation of David for himself. I should
make a discourse of other countries, but because it has been by the way
touched already, and may be hereafter incidently glaunced upon: I will cut it
off in these few words. In France I read this same matter fitly declaring our
Tert, Christian. Massaeus lib. 20. Ann. 1510.
and much tending to this our purpose, well debated by king Jews: who
understanding that Pope Julius the second, now joined with the Venetians, did
attempt somewhat against himself and his subjects: in a Council at Towers
proposed these two questions: the first, whether it were lawful for the Pope to
raise war against any Prince without cause? Questions proposed in France.
The second, whether any such Prince in defense of himself and his Realm may
invade the first-onsetter, and withdraw himself from his obedience? The
answer was, that it was unlawful for the Bishop, but lawful for the Prince to
do that which was in question, and that the co^stitution called pragmatical
should be observed throughout all France, not regarding the lightening, or
thundering of any such unjust censures, if any should be. This determination of
France might be a resolution for the^ and for us, Examples.
to make no more of the Pope than he does of us, especially if he unlawfully
use his authority. Sleidan. lib. 1. Histor.
In Flaunders I might show like examples: as namely, of James Arteuillanus, for
ye like practice against his cuntry put to death by the Citisens of Gaunt, as
it is in Frossard: and also out of Jacob Meier his Chronicle, Lib. ^6.
Au^talium. Flandri^.
who tells of many seditious men upon the scaffold beheadded, and of Jews
Wallan condemned, and of Gertrude his wife, whose judgment was to loose her
head with her husband, and to be buried in the midst of the market place,
with this inscription, A monument of Gertrude wife to Jews Wallan, a pestilent
woman, who by her fraud and deceit has brought a noble Prince to great
danger, and the City of Burges, into extreme calamity. Although the rigor of
this sentence was afterward mitigated by earnest intercession of some
honorable Ladies and principal personages. The same author makes mention of
one Arteualda a poor man's son, who prospering and prevailing by his
rebellion, Iac. Ma^ter. Annal Fla. Lib. 13.
took upon him lustily and loftily the person of an Earl in his gold, and
silver, his wines, and his garments, ascribing his victory not to God but to
himself, and was so blinded, and puffed up with pride, that he doubted not
confidently to brag that he would be Lord of France: because (says he) the
Frenchmen durst not encounter with the Englishmen running over al France:
yet for all these brags he was slain among his own soldiers in the conflict
at Rosebeck. It is a good Moral that is there added, Quem Deus punire
decreuit, intellectum illi aufert. Whom God minds to punish, him he bereaueth
of his wits.

I have one Law behind, The law or testimony of our conscience. Romans 2.
Quintil. Orat. institution. l. 5.
and that is the griping and gnawing Law of the Conscience: The Law written in
our hearts inwardly accusing us, and bearing witness against us, which is in
steed of a thousand witnesses: which alone will persecute us, and seek
reuengement, though all the Laws rehearsed before should sleep and pronounce
nothing against us. Such is the Conscience and custom of such offenders (says
Chrysostom: Chrysostom. Hom. 8. ad pop. Antioc.
) they suspect all things, they quake at shadows, they fear every blast, and
noise, they think al things come against them. And again, Such a sinner has
within him an accuser pleading always against him, and this he carries every
where, with this he is scourged whither soever he goes, as the Scripture
testifies, that the wicked man flies when no man pursues. Prouer. 28
As we may see in the Proverbs, and in Job, Job. 15. Leuit. 26. Pro Roscio
Amerino.
and in the book of Leuiticus. Which vexation Tully painteth out of the Poets,
and terms it a continual and domestical fury having whot burning torches;
calling night and day for reuengement against such Parricides, and murderers.
Cap. 66.
It is the worm in Esai, that shall never die. The woorme that suddenly smote
the gourd of Jonas, wherewith straitwaies it withered, as Theophylact in these
words expounds it not absurdly. This Conscience, Ion. cap. 4.
says he upon that place, is the worm that makes us always have a feeling
and sense of our sins: This is that sensible moth of our bones and our hearts,
setting before us our wickedness. Theoph. in 4. cap. Ion^.
And whereas Scripture sets down certain sins that are called, Peccata
clamantia, which we may read in Genesis and in Exodus, Cap. 18. Cap. 2. Cap.
5. Genesis 4.
and in Saint James, and otherwhere: The chief and most Crying sin is
murder. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me out of the earth. For
as a good conscience is the best companion and comforter unto us, as it is
written: Prouer. 15.
A merry mind is a continual banquet, and as our David did marueilously rejoice
in himself that he did not slay Saul: Even so contrariwise, 2. Sam. 15.
they must needs have an heavy heart, a corrosiue, and an eating canker of an
evil conscience still vpbraiding them with this heinous and detestable act:

Nocte dieque suum gestant in pectore testem. They carry a witness against them,
and shall have no rest night nor day. Tertullian says: Omne malum aut timore
aut pudore natura perfundit. Denique malefici gestiunt latere, Ter. in ^polog.
deuitant apparere, trepidant deprehensi. Sin has two companions and
followers, either fear or shame: fear teaches them to hide themselves, they
shun to be seen, and being taken, they quake and tremble. Shame makes
them blush.

Heu quam difficile est, crimen non prodere vultu? Fear and shame make them
not only to seek corners, but to hang themselves being afraid and ashamed
to show their heads in the world. This testimony of the conscience brings
the^ to these two inco^ueniences, The inconveniences of an evil conscience.
to betray their fault, and for sorrow or desperatenes to make themselves away,
and that upon every light occasion at the sight of any man or beast, at the
shaking of a leaf, at the voice of any creature. Alexander a tyrant of the
Phereians beholding a tragedy, Plutarch.
and bewailing the miseries of Hecuba and Polyxena, ran out of the stage in all
have, upon some grief of mind, and ashamed any more to be looked upon,
because he had killed so many citizens. Bassianus the Emperor after he had
murdered his brother Geta, Spartianus in Anton. Caracallo.
whenever he did see his picture, or heard his name, he wept, and poisoned
Laetus the first counsailer of his brothers death, and killed all those that
were privy to it, that there might be none living to give any testimony, or
once to know it. In what an hell was Nero that put to death Peter and Paul?
Herod. Eusebius ax Iosepho. Act. c. 12.
And Herod that beheaded John Baptist? And Herod Agrippa that murdered James,
who after great torments and horrible pains, the u^st day died miserably by
the stroke of an Angel in a visible manner appearing to him. In what a pitiful
case was Theodoricus, Theodo^*
when he had flame Boethius and Symmachus? the sight of a great sish brought to
his table, and gaping upon him, stroke such a conceit and impression into him,
that he believed verily, that it was the terrible and lowering face of
Symmachus threatening him, Procopi^^.
wherewith he was brought to a sickness, and so to his end. In what a desperate
case was Richard the third the usurper of the crown, Rich^^.
the murderer of two young Princes: Who, after the fact committed, could never
have quiet sleep, and thought in the night at Boswoorth, (where the field was
fought) in his terrible dream, that he saw about him as it were the Image of
wicked spirits, that would not suffer him to take any sleep. Hear I pray you
the Commentary of Polydor Virgil. Angl. His^. lib. 25.
I believe (says he) it was no dream, but the conscience of his wickedness, a
conscience, I say, the more heavy, the greater the fault was, the which if
never at any other time, yet at our last day is wont to represent unto us the
memory of al our faults, and show withal the pains that hang over us. I need
not put you in mind of the lamentable end of late Traitors, Someruile and
others. All these felt the remorse and biting of an evil conscience, whereby
their hearts were as the trees of the forest moved with the wind, as Achas his
heart was: Iesai. c. 7.
to who^ the Lord does give a tre^bling heart, and a sorrowful mind, so that
they shall fear night and day, and shall say in the morning, Would God it were
evening, Deuteronomy. 28.
and at evening, Would God it were morning. I will not refer you again to the
cerrible examples of Cain saying: Genesis 4. Matthew. 27.
Whosoever finds me, will kill me: nor to the tragical end of Judas.

I signified lately how dogs have betrayed murderers, Dogs.
and made them to confess their faults of murder: Fishes.
and even now, how a fish amassed and daunted a King: and before, how Solomon
tells the same of birds of the Air. Eccle. 10. Plutarchus desera numinis
vindicta. Birds betray murderers. Swallows.
Bessus killed his father: it was long hid: at length after supper among
strangers he was so mad, and so persecuted in conscience, that hearing
swallows sing, he forthwith with a spear threw down their nest, and killed
the young ones: and being chidde^ for it, he answered: Do ye not hear how
these birds defame me, as though I had killed my father? Whereupon he was
atterwarde in tudgement found guilty, and suffered, Ibycus a Poet fell among
thieves: when he saw he should be killed, he made as it were a certain
prayer and obtestation to the Cranes flying there above at that time, to be
witnesses and reuengers of his death. Cranes.
These men afterward seeing Cranes, ieasted among themselves in the market
place, Behold, Jdemde furili Inquacitate
The reuengers of Ibycus are come. This jest being ouer-heard, and the Poet
well known and found dead, when they were racked upon these suspicions, they
confess al. I have seen in Heluetia the like evidence and testimony of this
conscience, in a man, who for a little paultry pelf set upon his
fellow-pedler, as I remember, and gave him many wounds, killed him, buried him
deeply in the ground, that no body might see him, but the Ravens found him
out, they sly after him and upon him, Rauea^.
persecuting him from place to place, from village to village, until people
running out, and wondering at that strange accident, enquired earnestly after
it: the fellow perceiving by no means he could drive away the birds, and
guilty in conscience, and straightly examined, cried out: It is I that killed the
man, and so being apprehended and imprisoned, as he had mangled the man when he
was dead with many strokes, to make him sure: so was he after condemnation and
judgment broken in many parts of his body, and set upon the wheel, for birds
to pick at him. How true is the saying of Isocrates, Though a man hide it from
al men, yet he cannot hide it from himself? And that of Gregory Nazianzene,
(...), The couscience strikes and beats the mind.

And thus far have I gone in ye proof of David's reason, that no man can be
guiltles that lays his hand upon the Lords anointed, but shall be condemned
by all laws, sacred profane, divine humane, Imperial Pontifical, christian
heathnish, foreign abroad, positive at home, yea by the conscience it self, a
severe accuser, and witness and judge of al murders. The conclusion of the forced
part of David's speech.
In consideration hereof, although I hope I need not, yet I must in few words
speak to us all subjects, Remember the proposition of David, Destroy not the
Prince: Remember the reason hereof: For God will not suffer any such destroier,
or open conspirator and rebel, or privy murderer, or any other practiser to
escape unpunished, but will by one torment or other revenge the quarrel of his
anointed, and this is the conclusion of the first part of David's reply.

THE second part of David's speech, is his PROTESTATION for himself in these
words: Verse. 10. and 11. Text of the 2. part.


10 Moreover David said, As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall smite him,
or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle, and perish.

The Lord keep me from laying mine hand upon the Lords anointed.

AS David has forbidden Saul's murder in Abishai, so he now protests for
himself and that with anoth, As the Lord lives, that he detesteth the fact,
and relieth himself upon God: that God shall strike this stroke, and desires
God, that he may not be so graceles as to lay his hands upon his anointed. And
why: Either the Lord shall smite him, The summa of David's Protestation.
or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into battle, and perish.
The Argument is this, God will in his wisdom appoint his time for the dispatch
and death of Saul: therefore I may not, ne will intermeddle in this action
against Saul, as though he should in the name and person of God thus say, If
Saul have offended, the judgment is mine against mine anointed. I am, and so
am called the God of reuengement. Psalm. 94. Romans 12.
Reuengement is mine, I will repay: Ergo, I will be no revenger, neither will I
vsurp that office, which pertains to God. What need I, or you Abishai, or
any other haste^ the death of a Prince, which is set down in the book of
foreknowledge by God himself, and cannot be prevented by any mortal man, or
any wates altered: No fate or destiny, no constellation, no fortune or
chance, no cunning of star-tooters or figure-flingers, no conspiracy of
number, no strength of confederates, no counsels or polices of wise men can
change the Prognostication or Almanacke of God, which is that Saul and we al,
Prince and people, Magistrate and private men, young and old, man and woman,
good and bad, all must die, but not when we will, nor when friend or foe will,
but as God in his fatal book has written it down.

The consequence and congruity of David's Protestation thus explaned: I pray you
mark these notes.

First our mortality generally incident to us al high and low, which is worth
the noting at al times, 1. Note, death common to al. Genesis 3.2. Reg. c. 14
especially in the time of these new and strange diseases assaulting us. The
general sentence is, that Adam is Adam still, he came from dust, and shall
return to dust again: that we die al, and as water slide away. Who lives, Psalm.
88. Hebr. 9.2. Cor. 5.
and shall not see death? It is a statute and decree, that men must die once: We
know that our earthly house of this tabernacle shall be destroyed. In this
declaration our David is very copious, particularly for himself, and generally
for us all: Psalm. 39.
Behold, thou have made my days as a-hand breadth, and mine age is as nothing
before thee, Psalm. 102.
surely every man is altogether vanity. And again, My days are like a shadow,
and I am whithered like grass. What is a shadow, but the defect and privation
of light, and then what is the life of man but death? The same vanity of man is
painted out lively in the hundred and third Psalm by comparing us to grass
and to a flower of the field, Esaie. 40. 1. Pet. 1.
as we have also in Esaias and Peter, David is not alone mortal as you have
heard, but al,

Ortus cuncta suos repetunt, matremque requiru^t,
Et redit adnihilum, quod fuit antenihil.
The effect is, that all must return to the Mother from whence they came. In
Boeotici^.
A figure of this is declared by Pausanias: Among the gifts and oblations of
Apollo there was cou^terfatted after the imitation and resemblance of the old
works in brass one Image, the flesh was clean gone from the skin, so that
there remained nothing but bones. They say that Hippocrates the Physician did
dedicate this at Delphos: Phaylus captain of the Phocensians in his sleep
dreamed, Hippocrates naked Image.
that he himself was made like unto this gift, a naked dead man: and so
being deadly sick, ended his life, and proved his vision true. So fares it
not only with captains and Emperors, but with us al, who al shall be the image
of Hippocrates. A bare Anatomy, a schelito^ or picture of death.

Who then shall escape? Shall children: No, 2. Note, Children and youth mortal.
not the babe of one year.

Huc puer atque senex pariter venisse feruntur:
Hic par diuitibus pauper egenus erit.
When the Prophet proclameth al flesh to be grass, Ies. 40.
and al people to be verily, and truly hay: (but yet this must be taken not
properly, but by a figure) when common experience teaches, that an apple fresh
and red does perish or fall down with the woorm, with wind, or with a staff,
and when the proverb says, that as soon goes the Lambs skin to the market as
the sheep: shall we think that the younger sort and lusty folks shall be
priuileged from death? 3. Note, Great die.
Shall the mighty men or nobles or valiant or Princes be freed from this
sentence of death? 3. Kinds of death.
David says, No: and shows three kinds of death, either extraordinary
before time, either ordinary and natural, either by an externe cause or
accident, as in battle. I speak of the death which is the separation of the
body and the soul: for the death of sin, and the death mystical, which is
mortificatio^, De bono mortis.
pertain not to this point, whereof you may read in Ambrose. This triple kind,
or triple way to death here set down by David, is manifold, there are many
paths and steps to death, Prosper. L. Epigram.
as one does express it.

Ferro, peste, fame, vinclis, algore, calore,
Mill modis miseros mors rapit vna homines.
That is, we die by sword, pestilence, famine, imprisonment, cold, heat, yea by
a thousand means, which God can and will devise, as David has set down for all
men, especially as it is meant in our Text against Princes and Potentates of
this world. And to begin with Saul, did he not desperately kill himself? as
David here talks in battle, but yet by the hand of the Lord, and indeed
extraordinarily by his own hand? It is reason that mighty men should mightily
suffer torments, according as it is written, and also Saint Austine has a
notable place: Let the king know, Sapi^us. 6. De 12. abusionum grad.
that as he is ordained chief in his throne above all men: so in punishment if
he do not justice, he shall have the chiefe-dom, and first place. And in
another book, Idem in L. Q. Noui and Vet. Test cap. 16. Lib. 9. D^ cad. 4.
Viri sublimis culpa, grane est peccatum. Shall perhaps great captains and
warriors avoid this stroke? Liuie rehearses of most valiant captains,
Scipio, Annibal, Philopaeme^, that al three in one year died, but nether died
nor were buried in their own country. Suidas tells of Thulis King of al
Egypt unto the Ocean sea, that builded an Island of his own name, that asked
the Oracle of Serapis: Tell me who before me could do such acts, An Oracle of
the death of Thulis, and of the eternal dominion of God.
and who shall do after me? The Oracle was, (...). That is, in effect, that
first God the father, next the word and his son, and with them the holy
ghost, the blessed Trinity in unity did reign before, and should after
everlastingly: but for himself he was willed speedily to depart, and
immediately after the Oracle, was slain, (...), of his own people. What are
all these mighty men but the Gourd that was given to Jonas for a shadow to
sport himself for a time, Ionae. 4.
but in the morning God sends a woorme, and strikes the Gourd, and it
withers away? The death of persecutours.
Are not al these persecutors temporal or ecclesiastical under the sentence of
this mortality? you have hard before of some, and in Orosius you may see the
death and destruction both of traitors and of persecutors, Lib. 7.
namely of Magne^sius, Constantius, Decentius, Gallus, Syluanus, Julian. We
have in Egesyppus a marvelous History of Aristobulus King of the Jews, not
only for his persecution of the good, but also for the murder of his brother,
in body and in conscience fore afflicted, his blood gushing out: Lib. 1. c. 8.
which when his boy had poured out by chance upon the blood of his slain
brother, an horrible fearfulness increased his pain, and took away his
life. O that these worldely men persecuting and seeking after blood would
consider that which is written in Herodotus: Tomyris to K. Cyrus.
Thou have thirsted after blood, and now thou shall drink thy belly full of
blood. What brags are given out in every cornet against poor Protestants in
England, in France, Flanders, and Geneua, as though al were on their side, as
though they were Gods upon the earth? They have their forefathers whom they
imitate very brave and glorious in threats, Bragges against the godly.
but miscarieng in the end. Pharaoh and his soldiers say: I will pursue, I
will overtake them, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied. But the
Lord blew with his wind, Exodus 15.
the fea covered the^, they sanck as lead in the mighty waters. In the book of
Judges there is the like triumph of the Heathen against Israel, where the
Ladies flatter the mother of Sisera, that he had gotten the victory, and had a
great spoil, Iudic. 5.
when Sisera was by a woman Iael knocked in the head. Ben-hadad threatened the
King of Israel, but Ahab answers: Let not him that girdeth his harneise,
bost himself, as he that puts it off. 1. Reg 20.
It is an easy matter for God to crush these Kings conspiring against his
anointed, and against his church, Psalm. 2.
with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel: Psalm. 3.
To smite al his enemies upon the cheek bone, and to strike out the teeth of
the wicked: to pull down the great heart of Pharaoh by all kind of scourges,
Exodus c. 9.
with botches and sores, with murreine of beasts, with hail, thunder, and
lightening, with the death of the first borne of Egypt, with grasse-hoppers,
Exodus 12.
with frogs, flies, lice, to strike persecuting Herod with vermin. Cap. 10.
Cap. 8. Act. 12.
We have heard a long time against our Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and against
our country the smoke of threats: but God be praised, no flame that could
annoy us. We have had among us the brags of the Pompcian souldidurs, that have
made a reckoning of the spoil of us at, and division of our livings among
themselves, but they were but only brags: for why? the lot is cast into the
lap, Prouer. 16
but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. Therefore let al men take
heed how they vvast of a day, whether it be in the summer or winter, whether
it be in the year eighty seven or eighty eight, whether they be forreiners
abroad, or cuntrymen at home: Let the^ harke^ to wise Salomo^: Prouer. 27
Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth. All the wicked persecutours, traitors, rebels know not when they
begin, what shall be their end. Look in the book of the Kings, home many
died losing Kingdom and life in the space of three and thirty years? 2. Reg.
15.
Look in the Histories, how suddenly the Emperors went, Otho, Galba,
Vitellius. To be short, I say to them, Plutarchus desera numinis vindicta.
as Bias said once to an ungracious fellow: That he was afraid, not that he
should not be punished, but that he himself should not see it.

But yet perhaps Eloquent men may escape this death? Nay Cicero, Val. Man. The
death of Oratora
as it is declared before, was traitorously murdered leesing his tongue and his
head. Demosthenes drank poison and died.

But I trow the Popes holiness cannot be touched with any dart of death, The
death of Popes
for he that is able to deliver out of Purgatory and hell, may also save
himself from death. No: he has no freedom, no immunity above other men, being
one of Adams brood: for so even his own Ceremonial book gives him warning
hereof. Sacr. Cer. lib. 1. cap ^
The Bishop of Rome, although he pass al mortal men in dignity and
authority, and can bind, and lose al things in earth: yet can he not loose
himself out of the bonds of fatal necessity. The scholar is not above his
Master, and therefore he wills him to think, that although he be the greatest
man, yet he is a mortal man, and bids him remember the form of his
consecration, which is after this sort: When the new Pope is chosen, and Te
Deum song, and he newly, Cap. de Consecrat.
and Pontifically reuestred, and his hands and feet kissed, even then in all
this solemnity and glory a Clerk or Master of the Ceremonies sets tow on
fire (after the Pope is come out of the Chapel of Gregory) and kneeling down
sings with a loud voice: C. Deegr^^. and exeq. Pap^^
Pater sancte, sic transit gloria mundi: Omnis carofaenum, and omnis gloria
eius tanquam flos agri. O holy father, as this hemp or tow burns, so passes
away the glory of the world: al flesh is hay, and the glory thereof is as it
were the flower of the field. This Ceremony notwithstanding, the Pope
forgetting all this lesson, rides through the City with a great troop of
Mitred Bishops and Abbots, his horse trapped and trimmed with red scarlet, the
Emperor himself holding the horse bridel: and when all the jews met him in
the market place, and reached unto him, as the manner is, their Ceremonies and
their law, he flingeth them behind his back, saying proudly: Recedant vetera,
noua sunt omnia: Away with these oulde things, al are now new: As Thomas
Walsingham declares at large in the Coronation of Pope Martine. Jn Henr. 5.
I have told of Boniface the eight, of whose end Celestine his predecessor gave
this prophecy: Tho. Walsing. in Hypodig. Neustriae.
Ascendisti vt vulpes, regnabis vt Leo, morieris vt Canis: Thou did clime up
like a Fox, thou shall reign like a lion, and thou shall die like a dog. As he,
so others, like flax set on fire have passed away, most of them suddenly and
shamefully, specially such as have been cruel in excommunicating and
persecuting Emperors. Carrion. lib. ^. and Abb. Vrso.
You heard of Lucius and others before. And as we read of Fabius the senator,
choked with an hair in his milk: so Adrian died with a fly, when he had
excommunicated Friderik the first. Urban the third was stricken nutu Dei, Abbas
V^. in an. 118^
attempting the same against the Emperor. A Pope of one year, and little
more. And have not of late Pius Quintus and Gregory the thirteenth proved to
be quenched tow, notwithstanding all their glory, and their Bulls against our
Soueraign Prince Elizabeth? Were they not indeed Bullae? Bubbles of water: The
great whore of Babylon, whose cup is full of abominations and fornications, who
has her self been drunk with the blood of Saints, Apocalyp. 17.18.
and with the blood of Martyrs of Jesus, shall drink of the same cup double,
and then shall it come to pass which happened unto Cerylus, which of a
servant was waxen rich, and so insolent, that he changed his name into Laches,
to whom Vespasian gave this lesson of humility in greek words in this sense, O
Laches, Laches, Sutton. I^ Vespasian^
when thou art dead, thou shall be called again Cerylus, as before. So I say
of Pope John, The Pope is Cerylu^
that so shamefully died in travel going on precession, shall in the end again
be harlot Joan: Sergius shall be Os Porci, hogs-mouth. Julius the second shall be
Julian agiane. Leo the tenth shall be John again. Julius the third shall be
John Marie. Paul the fourth shall be John Peter Gregory the thirteenth shall be
Bone-Companion, Sixtus Quintus a poor man's son borne in a little village,
though an high name, Alto-monte, though now lifted up to the Popedom, Act. c.
9.
and like Saul breathing out threats and slaughters against the Church, shall
be as he was a Franciscane, and Faelix Perenettus again. They al shall be of
Lords servants, of Popes poor Priests, nay of men, earth, and worms meat.
They shall be successors of this Saul, as in persecuting David, and in murdering
Abimelech, and the Priests of the lord, I mean the Princes, and the Preachers
whom the Lord has anointed and called: Even so of his death either smiten of
God, or when their day comes to die, or when they shall desce^d into bloody
battles, as many Martial Popes have done.

Although the enemies glory against the Godly, The good delight not in the
overthrow of the evil, but in their conversion.
yet the Godly have no delight in the death of these before rehearsed,
persecutours, Emperors, Popes. We are sorry that they had no more grace. As
always merciful Princes have used moderation and compassion: so the Sex, the
good nature, the piety of our Prince has always desired rather the good
behauior and conversion of the offenders, then the subversion of destruction of
any one. David never sought nor desired the death of Saul, but contrariwise
lamented for it, and punished the Amalekite that brought him the news. We are
not more unnatural then men only endewed with natural affection.

Julius Caesar a natural and an heathen man, when Pompey fled into Egypt, and
was beheaded at the commandment of Prolomei for his sake: Christi^^^ Masseus
lib. 7. Ch^^
yet when his head was brought to him, he wept. Vespasian the Emperor seemed to
be a tender-harted Prince, in whose time no man was lightly punished without
cause, except he himself were absent, or ignorant of it, or in deed unwilling
or deceived. A notable report Suetonius makes of him, that he never at any
time rejoiced in the slaughter of any man, but justice supplicy sillacrymauit
and ingemuit, Sueton. in vita eins.
he wept and sighed when any man suffered, though for a just cause. Theodosius
was a most gracious Prince, of who^ it is said, Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 22. Sozom.
lib. 7. cap. 24.
that he never punished any man of whom he was hurt. He made a law by the advice of Ambrose, that the officers, which should execute his commissions or
commandementes, should differ the punishments of those that were condemned
to die for the space of thirty days, to the intent that in the mean time the
Kings wrath might be assuaged. When the people of Antioch had raised a
sedition, and yet afterward repented, he hearing at his table a Ballad or song
in a mourneful Melody, was so moved, that his anger straightway ceased, he was
reconciled to the city, Cap. 23.
and with tears trickling down he filled a cup that he held in his hand.
Alexander the great lamented when he saw the body of Darius. Antoninus desired
that no Senator or counsailour in the time of his Empire should be slain,
that his Empire might not be stained. He was not much offended with the
defection or reuoulting of Cassius, neither did he exercise tyranny against
his children, but although the Council did punish him, as before it was
touched, yet the author says, Julius Capitolin. Vulcatius Gallicanus.
that it was most certain that he would have spared him, if it had been in his
hand: and when the head of Cassius was brought to him, he did not rejoice at
it, but it grieved him that the occasion of mercy was taken from him. What
should I speak of our Christian Princes and rulers: Constantine, as it is
written by Eusebius, was very careful for the commonweal, Lib. 2.
Nec magis pro salute suoru^, quam hostiu^ orabat. He did not pray more for
the safeguard of his own, then of others his enemies. It is reported of William
Conqueror, that even in his death bed he repented him of many things,
Polydor. Virgil. in Histo. Ang. lib. 3.
but specially he was sorry that he had been somewhat severe against the
Englishmen. When certain had conspired with the Frenchmen against Henry the
fifth, and were by the judgment of their peers condemned: as some were
executed, so some were pardoned, for the King pitied their case, The W^^. sing.
in Hypon. N^^^
so that Englishmen turned that praise which was spoken to Augustus Caesar by
Ovid, unto him, Sit piger adpaenas Princeps, adpraemia velox,
Quique doler quoties cogiture esse ferox.


The same verses may be more justly applied unto our Augusta, who to punish
has been most slow: to pleasure, and to do good most ready, and when she must
needs be severe, it grieueth her. I need not exemplify it, they are fresh in
memory. How unwilling was she to consent to the beheading of the Duke of
Northfolke? The de na ne^e of Q. (...) beth in pardoning or punishing.
How often did she stay the execution? How graciously did she then wineke at
the Queen of Scots, who was as guilty even then as he was? How many have been
in her time pardoned? How many yet remain unpunished, though not uncondemned,
and I doubt not, but that she thinks as Theodosius said: Vtinam mortuos ad
vitam reducere possem: Socrat. t^^. 7. cap. 22.
I would to God I might call to life again some of those that are dead. I have
also to make a wish, that those that are faulty and living, would remember one
Story, that I would tell the^. Licinius a rebel fought against Constantine, but
was overcome, and had a pardon with this charge, ^^crat. lib. (...) 3.
that he should keep his house at Thessalonica, and live quietly: but when he
had gathered a new hand of vplandish and barbarous men, then he commanded
him to be slain. Well: The effect of my speech is, God will not have the death
of a sinner, neither do godly men desire these evil men to be rid out of the
way, but to turn into a better way, and to reform themselves, and yet the
Protestation of David is true upon their impenitency and frowardnes, God will
ease the world of these burdens of the earth.

I am now to make up my general, that all must die, The death of Princes.
not only the bad, but even the good shall depart from us. The bad for our
comfort, and for the consolation of the church: The good for our plague: for
not only wicked Saul, but even good David is gone. O that we may not say in our
days, Our David is gone: but she must go, and perhaps the sooner for our
wickedness. Let us pray therefore for her long and prosperous reign among us:
we have great cause so to pray: The righteous perishes, and no man
considers it in his heart, Esaie. 57.
the merciful men are taken away, and no man understands it, as the Prophet
says. Mark I beseech you, mark you that love chaunges, how perilous they are:
What good comes by the good Princes: what loss comes by their departure.
Augustine writes: De Ciui^. Dei lib. 4. cap. 3.
Vtile est vt bons long lateque diu regnent, neque hoc tam ipsis quam illis,
vtile est, quibus regnant. It is profitable that good men reign far and wide
and a long time: neither is this so profitable unto themselves, as to those
over who^ they reign. The mutation of Princes, and alteration of States how
dangerous it is, may appear by former times. After good Samuel, and in the time
of the banishment of David, the Philistines warred against the Israelites, in
the which battle Saul was slain, and the people of God conquered, but by David
that succeeded, the common weal and the church flourished. After the death of
Josias was the battle of the Babylonians, whereby the Kingdom of Judah was
brought to slavery, 2. Paralip. 32.36.
and afterward subverted. After this Josias and Ezechias followed evil rulers,
as it is in the book of Chronicles. Alexander the great is called of Daniel a
mighty King: but his King dome was divided toward the 4 winds of heaven, and
not to his posterity, Cap. 11.
nor according to his dominion. Where wise me^ ruled, as Solon, Lycurgus and
others: who now rule there but Turks and Infidels? After the death of William
Conqueror came famine, pestilence, thundering, and lightening and flashes in
heaven, fires in England, as a certain Prognostication of miseries and ruful
calamities in Rufus time. Polydor Virg. lib. 9
The death of Heroical and great personages is ominous and unlucky.

Therefore, that I may draw to an end, and to the conclusion of David's
argument, The Conclusion of David's reason in his protestation.
seeing God has set down a periode and course for every man, and a term and
time of death, seeing all, young and old, rich and poor, noble, unnoble, yea
Princes, Monarchs and Popes must die, by some of these means and kinds of
death, which David sets down: let us obey the reason, and reserve to God his
judgment. Let us not prevent his hour, no not against the wicked governors:
and since God has sent us a David, let us not by our unthankfulness forgo her
Majesty, or by our treacherous behavior cut off her days. God has numbered
them, and they cannot be shortened, no nor prolonged, but that number will come
once to an end, though when, we cannot tell. Augustine makes me affraide in
these words: De Ciuit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 25.
Iouinianum multo citius quam Iulianum abstulit, Gratianum Ferro Tyrannico
permisit interimi, long quidem mitius, quam magnum Pompeium, colentem
videlicet Romanos Deos. God took away Iouinian much sooner then Julian, he
suffered Gratian to be killed with the sword of a tyrant, a great deal more
gently, then great Pompeie, a man forsooth that worshipped the Gods of Rome. If
the certainty be such of death, and the uncertainty of the time so great, let
us once again pray to our heavenly father for the prosperity of her State, for
the peace of her reign, for the continuance of her days, and for us al: which
God grant through the merit of Jesus christ, to whom with the father etc.

1. SAM. 26. 11 The Lord keep me from laying mine hand upon the Lords
anointed but, I pray thee, take now the spear that is at his head, and the pot
of water, and let us go hence.

12 So David took the spear and the pot of water from Saul's head, and they
gate the^ away, and no man saw it, nor marked it, neither did any awake, but
they were al asleep: for the Lord had sent a dead sleep upon the^.


THE SEVENTH SERMON.
FOR ye better understanding of this text, and of all that which I have to say
in this place, I must in few words repeat and rippe up that which went
before. A repetition of David's discourse.
David has answered the motion of Abishai in this proposition, That King Saul
should not be destroyed: and yields two reasons, for that he is the Lords
anointed, and whosoever lays hand upon him shall not be holden guiltles:
Another reason is in the protestation of David, that he will not do it,
because the matter lies in Gods hand, and he has ordinary and extraordinary
means to remove him or kill him at his own pleasure: and therefore it pertains
not to him a private man, although he be next in succession, to use any
fraudulent or violent prevention. Which reasons I have elsewhere examined, and
by many laws and autorities confirmed to be of force and moment: the
particulars whereof I omit.

At this time I purpose to proceed, first in the proof of the reason, and so
nextly to entreat of the last part.

It is a scruple or question now in these days, who be the successors of
Abishai in these mischievous, and malicious conspiracies against Princes.
Staphylus seems to burden Luther, that he commands subjects to rebel, In
Apolagia Fride^. Staphyli, in praefa^.
and to disobey the commandments of Caesar, and forbids to sight against
the Turks. But this Question we have resolved and determined before, that the
Popes are adversaries and no friends of Caesar, and that they are the only
authors of insurrections, and rebellions against lawefull authority. As for
Luther, he teaches obedience in all his writings, he loves not such
presu^ption against superiors lawfully placed in the Throne of God, and says,
He that is inarmor against them that sit in high places is like to them that
cut wood, and look high, and sometimes the chippes fall into their own eyes,
as it is in Ecclesiasticus, Who so casts a stone on high, Cap. 27.
casts it upon his own head. Such cutters and casters you shall find the
Popes of Rome to be. Reinerus Reineccius says, that Helmoldus grants the
Popes to have been oftentimes, Bellorum and aliorum seditiosorum motuum tubas:
In prooemio Annalium, Helmoldi.
The trumpets of wars and of other seditious commotions. How bitter Paschalis
was against the Emperor Henry the fifth, and how Henry the fifth was sturred up
against his father Henry the fourth, by the inticement and incitement of
Papistical trumpeters: I have opened before. The troublesome tumults between
this Pope and this rebellious son, Hebnoldus in Chron. Sclauor. lib. 1. cap.
60.
may appear in the Chronicles, when Paschalis in the consecration of the
Emperor required his oath, that he should be perfect in the obseruaunce and
obedience of the Catholic faith, and ready to reverence the Apostolical See,
and careful for the defense of the Church: it is thus notoriously described to
the utter shame both of the seditious Pope and of the rebellious Prince, The
plague of Pope and son for the rebellion against, Henr. 4.
as the just judgment of God for the death of the good father, Bellum in domo
Petri, There was war in the house of Peter, between the Clergy and the
communalty, there was no difference, the sword devoured them al. The house of
holiness is filled with Carcases, rivers of blood ran out of the heaps of
dead men* so that the waters of Tyber were changed into the coulor of blood,
the Cardinals were tied in chains and ropes hanged about their necks and the
Pope taken prisoner. For this fact against himself, the Pope could call him a
wicked, a bloody, a false man: for this he cursed him, and in a council of
Bishops his privileges given him before, were named prauileges, and taken from
him: but the child depriving his father of crown and life was by the same
Pope accounted his white son. Jn Henr. 4.
But Cuspinian cries out against this son: O wicked child, which for
greedines of a Kingdom does persecute, and prosecute with hatred and sword
him, by who^ he has received both life and roial dignity. So he was cursed on
every side, Helmoldus cap. 60.61.
at al hauds, and of the Pope forspoke^, that, He should never thrive after,
nor see peace in his days, nor get a child to sit in his throne after him.

But this horrible sin of treason and rebellion, I have proved to be in all
places, by all laws, of al Kings condemned: to which I ad here these proofs
for a further fortification. Treason de tested by Jews.
The Jews detested it as David in this place, and in others before rehearsed,
and besides he curses Ioab for the death of Abner, 2. Sam. (...).
and caused the people to rent their clothes, and put on sackcloth, and he
followed himself the bear, and wept, and said to his servants: Know ye not
that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel? If Abner be
so lamented, how much more lamentable had been the death of David? Banaah and
Rechab did stay Ishbosheth ye son of Saul, 2. Sam. 4.
brought his head to David, thinking it had been glad tidings to him to see his
enemy dead, but David caused their heads to be cut off, with their feet, and
to be hanged over the poole in Hebron. Romans.
The Romans could not abide treachery, as by many examples was showed before.
Lucius Sylla would feign have Sulpitius Rufus destroyed: but when he perceived
upon his proclamation that he was hid in a village, and betrayed by his own
servant, he gave this parricide freedo^, according to promise in his Edict,
Valerius lib. 6.
but with all by and by he commanded him to be cast down headlong from the top
of the tower Tarpeia with his cap of freedom upon his head, which he had
unhonestly gotten with such treachery. In the battle of Licinius against
Constantine, God showed out his judgment against all the Licinians and
rebels, Eusebius li. 2. de vita Constant.
so that some of them, casting away their weapons fell down at the Emperors
foot, others were slain, others running and rushing together did fall upon
their own swords, as Eusebius testifies. What shall I say of the Graecians,
Graecians.
who all with one consent would declare their hatred against Traitors:
Cillicon betrayed Samos or Mile^us to the Prienians, which treason made him
rich, but od^^^^e to every mean man. Afterward when he came to buy flesh of
Theagenes, Suidas i^ ver^^ Cillicon.
he bids him show him what piece he would have cut, and stretching out his
hand pointed to it, and the other cut it off, saying, (...). With this hand
thou shall not betray an other City. The same Suidas tells of another
perfidious and treacherous man Aristocrates, who being chosen a captain for
the Rodians deceived them: Jd^^
for coming to the action and to the point of service, as to the sier to be
tried, he was found false and counterfeit coin. Plutsarch de sera N^^minis
vi^^dicta.
Another Aristocrates when he had betrayed the Missenians in bat^le, he waxed
so wealthy, and so mighty, that he was made ruler over the Arcadians but by
Gods providence after twenty years, he was found out, and punished for his
treason. So much was it detested among them, that in all time they would not
forget it, nor forgive it.

I spoke before of France, of Flaunders, and of others. Hungarians.
The Hungarians abhor this vice. Bela successor unto Stephen, was a blind
man, yet a good. King and yet indaungered by Traitors, which thing being
understood, the Queen Helena in a great assembly made an oration against those
rebels, Queen Helena an enemy to ^raitours. Bonfin. rerum Hung. decad. (...).
^^br. 6.
that this fact was not to be forgiven, that kings were to be spared for that
they should be reputed as gods: whereupon they were al judged to die, and one
Sampson that had called the King blind thief and most vile dog, was punished
by the Peers, and flying away was followed and driven headelong into a river,
and had many wounds, and being Ioded with his ha^neisc was drowned. It was
showed before of Canutus King of the Danes, Danes.
how he was contented to remit a certain exaction and tribute, so that they
would pay their tithes to the Priests Among them one Blacco most Judasly dealt
with his King, being sent an Ambassador to the people, was of a mediator
become a traitor, and did not pacify the people, but stirred them up against
him. The King being at his prayers, in Saint Albons Church, seeing the violence
and fury of the people, continued still at his devotion, making his confession
unto God: and by the thrust of a sword, and by shedding his innocent blood,
was made pium morris sacrificium, a sacrifice and a Martyr to God. But Blacco
the Captain that first rushed into the Church, and made the people in that
holy place to shed blood, even in the first entrance of the Church was first
of al murdered, as a sacrilegious man toward God, and a Parricide toward his
King: the people afterward repented them of their rashness, took this Canutus
to be a Saint. What should I speak of others rather wolves, and vipers, and
dogs, then men, who thus brutishly devise, say, and do against the Lords
anointed? Is not this woluish and foxy generation yet alive? Have they not,
do they not, still practice against our Soueraign, notwithstanding the examples
of Gods severity in all times and countries, neither looking backward toward the
punishment passed in Jury, in Italy, in Greece, in Flanders, in France, in
Hungary, in Denmark, and here in England: neither looking for-ward on the
judgments to come: And what is the cause: Only this in Tertullian, Bonus vir
Caius Seius, Ju Apo^^
sed malus ^antum, quia Christianus. Item alius, Ego Luciune sapientem virum
repent Christia^um factum defero. Caius Seius is a good man, but he is an il
man, only because he is a Christian man. And another says, and confesses
Lucius to be a wise man, but suddenly made a Christian man: the one they cannot
but praise, the other they tell as news, of dispraise. I say with Tertullian:
They praise chose things that they know, they dispraise those things that they
know not, and that thing which they do know because they know not, they do
corrupt and man: Our Religion is forsooth a cause of their rebellion: therefore
our Countrymen at home are our enemies. Is this news to you? You know, my
Brethren, that it is an old grudge, an ancient offense, and scandal. You
know, many shall be Offended with Christ. Matthew. 10.1. Pet. 2. Matthew. 21. Luc. 2.
You know the Scriptures, Christ shall be the stone of offense, and the rock
of scandal. The stone cast away of the builders and Priests, set to be the
ruin and resurrection of many. Christ, and Christ's anointed have this
portion, the inheritance of the Cross, even for Christ's Cross sake. The
Kings of the earth band themselves, Psalm. 2.
and the Princes are assembled together against the Lord, and against his
Christ. Psalm. 3.
And again: How many rise against me? The Prince and the Prophet have this
lot: King Cyrus had displeasure of the Babylonians for defending Daniel, and
his religion. They say, the King is become a Jew, he has abolished Bell,
killed the dragon, slain Priests, and they flock together to the King, saying:
Give us Daniel, or woe will kill thee with all thy house. In Histor. Bell.
Daniel likewise is laid wait for by the Princes, and nobles, he is
complained of to Darius, because they found him making prayers and suppl^cation
to his God. As Daniel, so the rest of the Apostles and Prophets, and why?
Serpens hostis est, contrarius veritati, Daniel. 6. In Eze^^ Hom^. Actor^^
as Origin replieth. The Serpent is an enemy, contrary to the truth. Which of
the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted, smd^ blessed Stephen, and
therefore was stoned: The Propher Icremy was mocked continually, stricken of
the Priest Pashur, Cap. ^0. Dorothe^^^ in synopsi. Origin. in Matthew cap. 13.
and in the end murdered, and in Egypt stoned by the people. Esaias for the
truth was cut in pieces by his countrymen. Zachary for the truth was slain,
between the Temple and the Altar. The Thessalonians for the truth suffered
even of their own countrymen. 1. Thessal. cap. 2.
And Origin makes this conjecture, that Paul preaching every where, yet he
prenched not at Tharsis in his coutry: Sciens Propheram experte^ esse honoris
inpropria patria, because Paul did know that a Prophet was not honored in his
own country^^^ (...) for this cause the Apostle forsook Israel; and said:
Act. c^^^ ^.
Because you cast us out, and judge your selves un worthy of euenlasting life,
behold we turn to the Gentiles. The Gospel could have no place, miracles could
take no effect, in Christ's country, whereof he complains in his
Euangelisles, Mat. 13 Math. 6. Luc. 4.
Matthe we, Mark, and Luke. I speak not this of you, dearly beloved, whose
zeal in Religion is known, and I hope will continue, and increase more and
more: but I speak it with grief of mind, by this common practice and
experience oftimes, fearing our countrymen that even now begin to revolt in
heart, and a great number in body, who withdraw themselves from our Church,
from our Sermons and Service, and Sacraments; and from their obedience t^ God
and their Prince, and from all pierie towar^s their P^^ia^^ and Country, Christ
banished.
daily conspiring, and all for Christ and his Gospel, whom they would banish,
and like Herodians extinguish among us (...) but if he be banished, it is no
sh^^le for us to be banished with him. It is he to who^ we must clean^, by life
or by death: It is his cause, her is able and willing to defend it: He is our
friend and Protector, against at traitors and enemsies, whereof now by order I
must speak, as follows in the Text.

As Dauld hither to has made a prohibitio^ to Abishai, The third part of D.
politic Resolution.
and also has protested for himself saying: The Lord keep me for laying mine
hands upon the Lords anointed: So now he goes forward with his politic and
provident resolution, beginning here.

I pray thee take now the spear that is at his head, and the pot of water, and
let us go hence, and so forth, as you may see in the eleventh and twelfth
verses: and this is the third part of David's answer, and of my division.

In which part as many good notes may be made, and many points of doctrine may
be gathered: as David's humble request to Abishai, and his poliey, in taking
away the spear and the pot, for considerations, and the drowsines of the
enemies: so I rest only upon this common place, the Providence of God, and that
threefold, taken out of the circumstances, First out of the person of Saul:
Secondly out of the person of David and Abishai: A triple providence of God.
Thirdly out of the circumstaunce of the place, where they were, and of the
state they were in, at this time.

Saul's person ministers occasion to entreat of the protection of Princes, and
of the singular providence of God, which is a reason forcible to penswade all
evil and ob^^inate men, Gods singular providence and care of Princes.
that they intermeddle not against them of whom the Lord has fueh an
extraordinary and special care s^nd it is a wonder to see and to hear, bow
man not regarding this careful and watchfuley of the Lord, ouerlooking all
their actions, nor fearing the haude of the Lord striking al such actours,
dare in this manner adventure any thing against the^, so guarded and arms with
his protection. And yet always there have bin such murmurers. There were that
mu^bled against Moses, Exodus (...)
Who made thee Prince and judge over us? There was a wicked Belial Sheba that
blewe a Trumpet to stir the people, We have no part in David, neither have
inheriance in the son of Ishai. ^. Sam. 20.
There were that murmured against the servant of God sent unto them, and beat
some, and killed others, and stoned some others, yea they said, Mat. 21.
Let us kill the heir.

All this wind shakes no corn, Triticum non rapit ventus, Cyprian de
simplicitate Praelatorum.
the wind carries not away the wheat. The anointed of the Lord remai^ neth
steadfast: be he good, or be he had, either he tarieth in his good pleasure, or
he is taken away in his displeasure. Saul is a sleep, and yet he is saved,
and God s^ ruled David and so bridles Abishai, that the one would not, and the
other could not set upon him being at his head. O maru^^^ oa^^ ful^iesse of
our God over the gods of the earth! yea ^^godly gods. With what pro^^^e^ce was
Moses pres^rued, kept close for three mouths; Exo. 2.
thrown into the water, and yet drawn out, ^^t^d by Pharaoh, and yet fostered
by his daughter^ oftentimes ass^^lted by Is^^^lit^^, ever ready to stone him,
oftentimes murmured at, and entried by Egyptians, Exo. 15.16. Number. 11.12.16.
by Israelites, and somewhat by his own sister, as we may read in the book
of Exodus, and in the book of Numbers? Our David standing now in reuersion,
but afterward put in possession, was evermore both a private and public person
kept safe, because the Lord would have it so. The Lord, says he, Psalm. 18.
Psalm. 38.
is my rock and my fortress. They have spread a net, and they have sought my
life, and yet this dead dog, this little flea has gods passeport and warrant
for himself. Psalm. 89.
I have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him,
therefore mine hand shall help him, and mine arm shall strengthen him: the
enemy shall not oppress him, nor the wicked hurt him. This comfortable warrant
reaches unto all Princes that fear God. It is recorded in an oration made at
the request of Queen Elizabeth, in Bonsinius his story of Hu^gary: Dec. 3. lib.
4.
We must undoubtedly believe that al power is given to men of God and who can
withstand the will of God? Cyrus an infant was cast out of doors. Romulus with
Rhemus was cast into Tyber. Seruius Tullius was borne of a servant and captive
mother; and yet they could not be stayed or stopped by any violence, but that
they must obtain those Kingdoms, to the which they were borne and
predestined. The providence and predestination of God are unchangeable and
immovable both for coming to Principalities, and for keeping their holds:
which is so certain, that neither force nor frand, neither ^^iue action of
Devils, nor conspiration of men can break or interrupt this appointed course
of God. Constantine the Great writes unto Sapor the King of the Persianes to
be favorable to Christians, So^. lib. 2. cap. 15.
assuring hin that God would be therefore merciful unto him, and that he
himself ha^ for his faith by the help of God subdued and subjected unto
himself the whole Empire of the Romans. Vulcatius Gallicanus.
God spoke sometimes in the mouth of the heathen, as of Antonine the Emperor,
saying: We do not so worship God, nor so live, that Cassius a Traitor should
overcome us.

The assurance that was made unto Vespasian in this doctrine of Providence was
wonderful, when two noble men were conuiceed for conspiracy against him,
aspiring to the Empire: he did nothing else but warn them; that they should
surcease, affirming, Principatum Fato dari: Principality to be given by the
decree of God. These men he did not only famliarly admicte to his Supper, but
also the next day in the show, and play of Fensers or sword-plaiers, he set
them for the ^once about him, Sueton in Tit. Vesp.
and the or namentes and weapons offered unto him by the fighters, he gave to
these adversaries, to be looked upon and handled of them: no doube but
assuring himself, that they could not, ne durst strike. Saxo Grammaticus
declares how Canutus and Charles, and diverse others went about to kill the King
of Danes, Waldemarus, who both with others their accomplices being familiar in
the court, and near unto the King a person, and one of them alone sometime
with him attending upon his chariot, A nesa^^^ confession of Gods pro^^dence
its prese^^^in^ Princes.
and many times having a coat of maile, might have suddenly dispatched him, but
he by Gods providence always by one means or other was preserved, and (as
one of the conspiratours called Magnus in his examination confesses) that it
was, Non sort humana, sed diuina opera, by no luck or cunning of man, but by
the work of God: and wo^dreth how he did escape, being so many times and by so
many ways intrapped. And when the King asked him, Sarc. (...) Danie. l. 1^.
whether he did mean indeed to set upon him and oppress him, he answered
stoutely, Nec animum sibi nec arma, ^ihilque quod tanto f^einori attinuit,
excepth. Deinutu defursse: That there wanted nothing to him, neither intent,
nor courage, nor weapons, nor any thing that pertained to such a wicked not,
but only gods beck and assent. In Flanders. Count Lodowick Maleanus distressed
by a rebel Arteualda (of whose end I spoke of before) and by some soldiers
of Gaunt being of that conspiracy, sought for, he was hid by a woman in a poor
bed, where her little children did ly: This woman was wont to sit at the
Count his gate, for au alms: one of the soldiers took a candle, and looked
narrowely in every corner, and after his search returns to his fellows, and
says: Let us go, we leese time, here is none, besides her little ones: so as
the author writes, this woman as another Rahab saved the Earl: Ita sola
voluntate Numinis seruatus Comes, qui haec omnia nudiuit verba, so by the only
will of God the Earl was saved, Jac. Meyer lib. 13. Annal. Fland. Chr. li. 20.
and heard al these words. God did also provide marueilously for Charles the
fifth, as Massae us witnesses. It is well known, his own courtiours sometimes
by poison, sometimes by other treason went about to destroy him but the Lord
presented him. King Henry the fourth him many conspiratours, and this one
^aspitu^y was most notable. Hen. 4 King of England
In the night when he should go to bed, the enemies had laid there in the
straw a galthrop which had, Th. Wall.
three long sharp pikes, that when he should suddenly ^y down, he might be
destroyed, but as God would he felt it and perceived it before, and so avoided
the peril. There is nothing can annoy the godly Magistrate, but all shall
work for the best. There have been in all ages, and specially in these
latter times many fetches and devises to circumuent and to catch in a snare the
Lords anointed, but the providence of god has confounded the wisdom of man,
for he gives life, he is the life and length of their days, Deuteronomy. 30. Psalm.
103.
he delivers their life from death: who can then take it away, or abridge it?
He that is above bears stroke in the Kingdom of men, Daniel. (...).
and he bestows upon whom he will, and who is he that dare take upon him to
dispose it otherwise then is appointed: As Austin says of the greatues of the
Empire of Rome, The cause thereof is: because it is not ruled by fortune or
destiny: so I say of the state and prosperity of England, and of the
preservation of our Prince: It is not by chance, nor by our cunning, nor our
policy, but only by the merciful protection of God. Austin de ciuit. Deil 5.
cap. 1.
Prorsus Diunina prouidentia regna constituuntur humana. The Kingdoms earthly
and humane are constituted and stablished altogether by the providence of God.
The ship (says Chrysostom) can never pass the waves of the sea without a
governor: a soldier can do no great exploite without the conduct of a
captain, and house is not built, unless there be one to build it: and can
this large and unmeasureable world, can the ornaments of these elements be
moved casually or rashly? Is there none that can moderate them, and knows by
his wisdom to keep and preserve them? Whereupon I gather this conclusion: He
that rules, and v^doeth these superior and iuferiour things, he that makes
the world, and makes an end thereof, must make and mar the Mouarches of the
world, and therefore bold fools are they, that go about to rule, or ouerrule,
or vnrule them.

The providence of God appears also in the person of David, The 2 providence
of God over his Elect.
and Abishai, who came into the centes of Saul, and took away the spear, and
pot from him, and yet no man sees nor marketh, neither did any awake, and so
they went away through the whole army, unwounded, untouched, unseen: for God
had cast the enemies into a dead sleep. This part of gods providence is also
the more to be considered, because even the godly seeing their own afflicted
state in this world, and the prosperity of the wicked, In praefat. Abacuc.
begin, as Theophylact faith, to doubt, whether God be touched with the care of
worldly things. In this point David's feet began to slip. Psalm. 73. Cap. 1.
And Abacuc cries, O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? And
Icremy, Why happens that the way of the wicked does prosper? Cap. 12.
And Jonas: Lord take my life from me. Cap. 4.
So Job: What profit shall we have, Cap. 21.
if we serve and pray to him? So Malachie also, Cap. 3.
where God answers that he has a book of remembrance for them that fear
him, and bids these murmurers consider what a difference there is between
the just and the wicked. So, dearly beloved, let us consider though David here
be banished, yet he comes into the host, and neither king, nor captain, nor
souldior says any thing to him, nor sees him. This is a general care that God
has of his Church, and of all the members, his elect, by one means or other to
deliver them. The mean here set down for the deliverance of David, is
Tardemah, a sound sleep, slumber and drousines of Saul and his camp. While Adam
sleeps, Eua is created, and so many times the Church is preserved, even as
Joseph in his sleep was warned to fly into Egypt with Jesus and Mary his
Mother. Marth. 1.
Judith conquered Holofernes, because God had cast him into a sleep. Judith.
13.
Gideon overcame the Midianites drousing and lying in the valley like
grasse-hoppers, Iudic. 7.
and was en couraged thereunto by a dream; that one told unto his neighbor.
As this is one mean, so we may consider all other means ordinary and
extraordinary, by which he overcomes and dau^teth the adversaries of his
church, sometimes by frindes, sometimes by foes: by friends, in procuring them
and in strengthening them: by foes, in confounding their devises, and in
bridling their furious affections, as well it is expressed by Origin. Duobus ex
modis constat in omnem creaturam Christi domination. Lib. 9. ad Romanos.
The Lordship and sovereignty of Christ is two ways showed: by his majesty,
and power subdiung: all things and al creatures: first bowing, and bending the
holy minds and spirits to his pleasure, secondly commanding and forcing the
wiched, and reprobate to the excrution of his purposes. God in his dominion
does so excel, that all his creatures, good and bad, yea the devil himself
cannot annoy those whom he loves. The Devil goes no farther then his
chain, wherewith he is tied as a dog. He could not hurt Job but by a License,
Job. 2. Mat. 8.
nor enter into Hogs, but by leave. Sometimes God makes enemies frindes.
When the soldiers of Julian, for fear had sworn to him: only Nebridius
withstoode it, saying, that he could not be tied by an oath against
Constantius, Marcellinus. lib. 21.
to whom he was by many and often benefits bound and beholding: which when the
soldiers heard, they were inflamed, and ready to kill him: and then^uen Julian
his enemy seeing him falling down upon his knees, covered him with his coat of
armor and gave him a protection of security: Hind quo libet abi securus. Go
thy way front hence whither thou will safe and secure. It is not amiss that is
said of Thomas Aquine, defining Providence after this sort: Providence is,
which to things foreknown by God and in his wisdom ordained ministers that
thing, In tractatri de Praedest.
which may keep and uphold that order, and remoueth away al disorder or
inordinatio^, that is, takes away all that may hinder it, and so directs al
things, that the last end proposed by him, may be archiued. Whereby the Princes
come to their Kingdoms, and continue all the prefixed time without hinderaunce,
and the Preachers run their race, and keep on their course without
interruption of man or devil. Esaias the Prophet continued in spite of his
enemies, about fourscore years: Polycarpus fourscore and six. Polycarpos
Jeremy was threatened of the Jews, Let us, say they, destroy the tree with the
fruit thereof, Ierem. 11.
and cut him out of the land of the living: but yet Gods decree was otherwise:
that the me^ of Anathoth should dye with the sword, and they that sought his
life, and would not hear his prophecy in the name of the Lord, Ieremi^^
should be plagued in the day of the visitation: but to Jeremy he said
comfortably: Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee. Daniel was cast
by the Babylonians into the den of Lions, and yet he taught mo then seventy
years. Act. 1^
Peter a captive was appointed by Herod to death, but Gods appointment was, by
an Angel to deliver him: Paul says: All men have forsaken me, but the Lord
assisted me, and strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be fully known,
2. Tim. 4.
and that all the Gentiles should hear and I was delivered out of the mouth of
the Lion. He never left preaching from Jerusalem to Illyricu^, Spain and Italy,
and was never offered to death, til ye time of his dissoluing came, and then he
did worthily say of himself: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith. Be therefore of good comfort my brethren,
Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long suffering and doctrine, for the times are come that he
tells of, that man will not suffer wholesome doctrine, yet nothing can hurt or
stay you, until you come to your iourneies end, not only you, but all other
godly of this realm. This Church of England, is as mount Sion immovable, it
shall have the Queen to be her Nurse, the gooly governors, the faithful
ministers during the time set down in God his decree. Though Sion say, the Lord
has forsaken me, Esai. 49.
yet the lord will be more tender the^ a woman over her child, nay he assures
us that he has graven us upon the palm of his hands, and that our walls are
ever in his sight, though ye devil watches for us, seeking, and running about
like a roaring Lion, Psalm. 1.25.
yet God ouerwatcheth him. He neither sleeps nor stu^breth that keeps
Israel. The wild bore of Rome would enter into this vineyard, but the Lord
does keep him out. Ipse faecundat, says Bernard, He does make it fruitful,
he increases it, Bernard. super Cat^^^ sermo. 30.
cutteth it, purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: for how can he
leave it destitute of his care, and travel, seeing that his right hand has
planted it? Only let us see that it be not barren by our negligence, and then
leave all the rest to his providence.

The third kind of Providence may appear by the circumstance of the place. 3.
Providence in temporal things.
In wilderness David and his army are fed and maintained. This temporal
providence also must be learned against those murmurers, that say, O that we
had bin dead in Egypt when we sat at the fleshpots, when we eat bread our
bellies full, now you have brought us into this wilderness, to kill this whole
congregation with famine and hunger. Are there not in England, Exo. 16.17.
murmuring Israelites this day, who for a little pinching of penury, for lack
of corn, cry out against God, and his word, not mindful of the Manna, of the
dew of heaven, of the fat of the earth, ministered plentifully unto them these
many years, In the ye^ 1586. was that dearth
in this blessed reign of the Queens majesty: And even in this time of this
small dearth, there is charitable order taken by her Majesty, and the honorable
counsel. Plenty never more in Popery then in the year 1587.
The cause of this lack is not so much for lack of grain, but for lack of
faith and religion in some of us toward our God, for lack of charity toward
the poor in some: in lack of obedience toward the Prince in some others, for
lack of thankfulness in us all: which vices being reformed in us, we shall have
enough. Our forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in strange places found a
strange goodness of God for their provision, which is not unknown unto you.
Jerome expounds a proverb among the Hebrews: In monte dominus videbit. i.
prouidebit. God will in the mount provide for his, In quaest. seu trad. Heb. in
Genes.
even as he provided for Isaac a Ram in steed of Isaac. As God had mercy upon
Abraham, so he will have mercy upon us. And therefore in sign of this Ram
given, the Jews are wont even this day to blow their horn. He that provided
for Agar, and for Ismael the boy, and cast away for lack of help of man, in
wilderness: He that fed Elias by crows, by a widow, by Angels: and Daniel by
Abacuc: He that was able by Elizeus to heal the waters infected: He that saved
Jonas in the whales belly: He that with a few loaves and fishes satisfied such
a multitude: he has not, he will not forsake you that profess his word and
practice accordingly, any Egypt shall be scourged, Exodus 9.
when Israel shall be preserved in Goshen: God will rather transubstantiate al
his creatures, and make stones bread, and water wine, and cause rocks yield
water, rather then you that fear God and love his word, should vanish or perish.

But here I pray you mark, He that gives food to cattle, and to the young
Ravens meat, he gives it to them in their manner calling upon him, Psalm. 147.
and the same Lord delights only in the^ that fear him. Ose. 7.
For the strength of Israel is the Law, and all the safeguard of our Israel is
the keeping and observing of the word of God. Origin has, Hijs quiin Agone
pietatis positi sunt, Ho^^il. 19. in li^ Number cap. ^4.
conteret sathanam Deus sub pedibus. God will tread satan, under the feet of
them that strive for piety, and godliness. The same Origin gives us good
comfort, but co^ditional. Jbid. ca. 25. Hom. 20.
If we want not weapons wherewith the Apostle wills us to be armed, all other
darts cannot pearce us. If we have the armor of God, Ephesians. 6.
the breast plate of righteousness, the sword of the spirit, and above all the
shield of faith. Basil says, No munition, or Martial puislaunce, In Psalm. 32.
no walls of cities, no army of horse men, nor power of foot men, no
preparation of ships save a King: for God does appoint Kings and disappoint and
depose. Exalt not your horn, Psalm. 75.
speak not with a stiff neck, for promotion comes, neither from the east,
nor from the west, nor fru^, the south, because God is judge, abasing one and
exalting another. And therefore while David is godly, and does not transgress,
while the people and all live within their compass, Providence of God
specially belongs to the good Dauidians.
there is no doubt but both in plenty and poverty, dearth and death, God shall,
and will give safe conduict. Religion and Piety, must be our only safety and
preservation: for against the godly man, neither malignant devil, neither any
destiny can prevail. So writes an ancient author Mercury Trismegistus in
Lactantius. Dearly beloved, let us be only religious, and god alone will
succor and shield us, because David here feared God, reverenced the person of
Saul, because Abishai being better advised, was content to be ruled with a
word of David: you see how the Lord did provide for them. Be he Frenchman,
or Spaniard, Jew or Turk, he cannot hurt or harm us in this case, Bonfin. deca
3. lib. 5.
Mimmo digito Turcas omnes, si voluerit, illico conteret Deus noster. Our God
can out of hand, if he will, burst and break with his little finger, al
Turks, al our enemies.

But now, my Brethren, as on Gods part al is certain and sure, Esa. e. 59. The
stop of Gods providence our sin.
For neither his hand is shortened that he cannot save, neither his ear heavy
that it cannot hear: so on our side all the danger is to be feared. Your sins
have separated becween you and your god, says the same Prophet. Sin makes
this division: Genesis 3.
Adam sin ning lost Paradise, for himself and for us. The world sinning was
drowned: Genesis 6. Ios. 7.
One Acha^ sinning was the plague of al Israel: One Jonas sinning endangered
the whole ship: Sin brought fire and brimstone from heaven upon Sodom, Genesis
19. Act. c. 27.
who^ ten good men might have saved: as one Paul saved himself and al his
company in the ship. It is a true saying of Achior the Ammonite to Holofernes:
If there be any fault in this people, so that they have sinned against their
God, this shall be their ruin. Judith. 5.
Let us go up and we shall overcome: but if there be none iniquity in this
people, let my Lord pass by, least their Lord defend them, and we become a
reproach. Al evil men and sinners, al sinful Kingdoms and nations though planted
by him, yet shall be plucked up by him, and they shall be all out of Gods
protection, as it is written: Jeremy. 18.
I will speak suddenly concerning a nation, and concerning a Kingdom to build it
and to plant it, but if it do evil in my sight, and hear not my voice, I will
repent of the good that I meant to the^. Ies. 7.
Therefore if any commotion or wars be raised, it is because the Lord has
hissed for the Fly, and the Be out of the uttermost part of the world, and
has mustered those enemies against us for our sins: if any evil come, it is
because we are evil. Chrysostom upon the words of Esaias, I saw the lord, Cap. 6.
Hom. 1.
makes this question: What is the cause, that matters of the common weal do
not go forward well? that they are not in a better case? The people answer, by
the oversight and carelesnes of Magistrates, that bear office, but Chrysostom
replieth: It is not the carelesnes of Princes, but ourvnrighteousnes,
punishment is exacted for our sins, those sins do turn and tu^ble al things
vpside-down. They have brought in all calamities whatsoever, they have armed
enemies: And a little after he demands thus: Why so? If the Prince be a
tra^sgressor of Laws, our rashness and rudenes, our offenses have procured this
plague. And again: Although the Prince be just, yea as just and as virtuous as
Moses: yet could not the righteousness of that one man cover the manifold sins
of so many rebels, Exodus 32.
neither could the prayer of Moses change the just sentence of God. O that we
were pure in Gods sight, as our religion is pure out of his word! Such were the
old Christians our cuntrymen in the time of Constantine, of whom he gives this
report: Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Nihil in moribus religionis huius est, quod reprehendi debeat: There is
nothing, in the manners and conversation of this religion, which ought to be
blamed, for these christians are contented only with the unbloody vows or
prayers to pacify God, who is delighted not with shedding of blood, but
reioiceth only in a mind pure and clean, in the contemplation of virtue and
godliness. Of these Christians reports Pliny the^ Lieuetenant unto Traian the
Emperor, that he found nothing in the^ that was wicked, but that they would
not worship Images, Ensebius. l. 3. cap. 3^. Teriul. in Apol.
and that they rise betime in the morning to praise christ as god, and that
they kept their discipsine, as Eusebius alleges out of Tertullian. Now if
this doctrine be true, Alaior.
that Realms and Kingdoms stand or fall by their religion or by the coutempt
thereof: and if it be as true, Minor.
that we al are sinners, and contemners, and not answerable to the former
pureness of our forefathers: Conclusion*
then what must be the conclusion upon us, but misery, plagues and scourges of
God for our iniquities?

I come not hither to be Momus, or to wish a window into every man's heart and
conscience, to see every man's secret faults. I would there were not too many,
too open in the sight of the world, to the great displeasure of Almighty God:
of which give me leave to speak a little, that we may not loose the sweetness
of this doctrine, and the favor of our God, and the protection of this Realm.

But we must needs loose it, if we do not hereafter repent us: and every man
in his calling walk accordingly. Though man wincke, Yet God sees, and will
visit the sins of this land, which draw on with cartropes our speedy
destruction. In the beginning of the world, at the first fall of Ada^ God
steppeth out to judgment, and iudicially proceeds against him, and his wife,
and the serpent: and will he not now in the end of the world serve the same
process against us: Will he not say to every one of us, Adam, where art thou?
Genesis 3.
will he not cite Prince, Peers, and people? Yes verily, and that shortly,
without speedy and hearty repentance. A particular citation of God against
sinners of this Land. To Magistrates and Judges.
He will cite rulers, Judges, Nobles and Magistrates of this land, of who^ he
requires justice, that the innocent may be defended and cherished, that the
wicked be not justified, and maintained, but condemned and punished. You
Honorable and Worshipful shall find, or if you will not, he will find two kinds of
these wicked men specially in this land, godless Atheists irreligious, others
too religious or superstiously religious, favorers rather of the Popish myter,
the^ of the Princely crown. Let justice be done against both, Currat Lex, and
vinat Rex: Let not your Laws be cobwebs, to catch the little flies, and to
let the great ones break out. Anacharsis.
If you Judges of the earth will have God prouidently to care for you, you must
zealously care for him. You know what underminers, and pioners have crept in,
what pirates have joined themselves with the governors and true mariners of this
english ship, seminary me^, like unto one John Abbot, a professor of Physic,
more presu^ptuous then cunning. He promised unto Waldemarus King of Denmark
present help, he commands all to depart out of the chamber, he ministers
unto him a refection, or confection, or rather an infection, Saxo Gran^^ lib.
16. His^. Danicae.
and wills him to sleep, but it was worse then Tardemah, the deadly sleep
of Saul, for they returning in again found him to be sine voce, speachlesse and
dead: Semblably, Jesuits murdering Phisicians.
these Jesuits have promised unto the people of England (in secret corners,
shutting us out of dozes,) sospitate^, al health of body and soul, but it was
sospitate that Popish illusio, that not only picked our purses, but is able to
kill our souls: and shall these be nourished amu^g us, by who^ the people have
bin bewitched, the realm of many a subject robbed, the church troubled, the
state indaungered, our gracious Queen hazarded? I am no perswader of crueley,
but of severity, reasonable, and requisite in such a case, that England may be
rid of them. You may remember the general Laws of Emperors against those that
do not communicate, Aug. cont. epist. Parmenian. c. 7. lib. 1.
with the catholic church, but are gathered together in secret and several
co^uenticles. We have by these meetings and conferences many Nouices made in
seminaries beyond the sea, and many mo in od Seminaries at home, where they
have learned a new Catechism, a new religion, new lessons of rebelling, of
poisoning, and other new kinds of murdering. These younglings of the Pope will
prove to be whelps of the Woolfe. Let them not grow, for such wolves cannot
agree with the sheep of Christ. You are the Pastors of our flock, mark the
complaint of a seely sheep in the greek Epigram, I give milk with my vdders to
a woolfe against my will, the folly of the sheepherd compels me, but after
he has been fed up, and grown big by me, he will first turn against me, his
nature cannot be changed by any courtesies. Therefore before this Citation
come, be zealous for your God and for his law, otherwise the day of the lord
will come upon all the Cedars of Libano^, be they never so high, Esai. 2.
upon all the Oaks of Bashan, be they never so strong, upon ye mou^tains, and
towers: I mean with the Prophet, the greatest, the strongest, the highest,
shall be shaken in that day.

This Citation shall be set upon the doors of all Clergy men, that enter in by
Simon Magus: ^o Ckeargie ^en.
either be idle bellies, that will not: either be ignorant and cannot preach
the word of God: either so covetous, that with Balaam had as leiue curse as
bless our Israel. But these sinners, as untouched in my Text, I pass over:
and yet it will hasten Gods Citation.

This Citation will reach to all the people of this Land: where shall be laid to
their charge many things, many articles, To the people and to all.
but I will touch that only which may be gathered out of this Text. A general
sleep, A general slumber^ and security.
a drowsines and dronke^nes of the land. For as here not only Saul, but Abner
and his whole host are in a sleep: Even so we al from the greatest unto the
lowest live in security, which I fear will be our vain. A foul fault in rulers
or captains in this our life which is a continual warfare. It is not for
Agame^no^ or ye ruler to sleep the whole night: Homer J^liadae. Plutarch. ad
Principem indoctum.
Epaminondas alone was in watch and ward upon the walls, when the Thebans were
feasting. If the King of Persia had every morning his chamberlain saying: O
King rise, and have care of thy business, which Mesoro-Masdes wills thee:
much more ought our governors be careful in public affairs of the church and
the common weal, and in such things as our God has commanded. The law of
Canutus was, that if the souldior appointed to watch and to keep his standing,
did so sleep, Saxo. Hist Dan. li. 10
that a man might take his weapon or apparel from him sleeping, he had
discipline, and punishment for it, and was thought unworthy to be in the Kings
service. Many Princes and Kings, yea and Kingdoms were taken and destroyed by
security. Isbosheth sleeping in his bed at Noon, 2. Sam. 4. Iudic. 5.
by the sons of Rimnon was smitten in the fifth rib, and Sisera by Iael: and
Scipio Affricanus and others. What realm has not bin by security conquered?
Gravely Cato, as Austine alleges out of Salust against Catiline, De Ciuit.
Dei lib. 5. cap. 12.
amongst other vices of the Romans, as riot, covetousness, ambition, has these
words: We follow idsenes and pleasures at home, and hunt after money and favor of
men, and therefore infers: Eo sit, vt impetus fiat in vacuam Remp. hence
comes it, that every man may enter into the country, as void, and open for
every man. Balthazar at a feast rioting with his Nobles and concubines, Dan. 5.
lost his Kingdom, which passed from the Chaldeians to the Medes and
Persianes. Troia being drowned, and buried in wine and sleep, was taken and
spoiled. Saxo Gra^maticus writes, that there is nothing more pernicious and
hurtful in war, then careless quietness, dissolute negligence, and bold and
presumptuous confidence. So Frotho a captain besieging the City Peltisca, by
munition invincible, by this policy took it. For he fained himself to be dead,
and in token thereof his funerals were solemnised: Saxo. Hist. Dan. lib. 1.
whereupon Vespasius the King persuaded, that this was true, in his security,
sports and plays was slain. So we read of Hannibal, and his soldiers, as by
manhood and pains they overcame the Romans at Cannae, so they lost the
victory by their effeminat and loose behavior afterward. So Britany or England
was this way conquered by Julius Caesar, Saxo. li. 1^
as before I touched, and in England Herald son of Godwine caused the army of
the Danes to be slain in the night, when they were fast asleep. In sum, that
which Bernard said of a Monk Dormientem Monachum Deo mortuum esse, Marullus.
lib. 1. ca. 1^^
nec sibinec vlli vtilem: so generally we may say, A man sleepy and drowsy is a
dead man, nether profitable to himself, nor to others. I omit other
transgressions of the Land, as perjury, discord, dissentions, hypocrisy in all
estates, and other sins, because they are not touched in my Text. These and
such like sins abound and reign in this Land. The whole body is thus diseased
and sick from the sole of the foot to the head, as Esaias complains full of
wounds and sores and botches. Esai. 1.
God forbid that we should not recover out of this malady. If we be
incurable, then must the Prophets Text conclude upon us as upon Jews, Your
Land is wast, your cities are burnt, strangers devour your Land, you shall
creep out of corners like worms out of their holes, Mich. 7.
you shall be trodden down like mire in the streets.

Now, dearly beloved, what remedy have we to cure our selves from these
imminent dangers? Judah can have no help from Egypt, if God be displeased,
there are but two ways proposed by God, Deuteronomy. 30.
either the right hand or the left, either life or death, good or evil. If you
heap sin upon sin, if you turn to the left hand, you die: if you repent, and
keep the right hand, you live. There must be the best way devised. Serpents
and Eagles know many remedies to take away poison, and to drive away their
evils, says Orige^. And again in the same place: Serpents use fenel to sharpen
and quicken their sight: Origin contra Celsum lib. 4.
the Eagles take ye stone Aetites found out for the preservation of their young
ones, and carry it to their nest. And is there no help nor remedy for us? Yes,
dearly beloved, to return to him by repentance, from who^ we have by sin
departed: Quisquis Deum offenderit, whosoever shall offend god, Thoeph. in Ose.
c. 5.
he has this only hope and help left, to be reconciled to him again. Walk
therefore sincerely in a single heart before God, let rebels be subjects, let
Papists with the Ephesian exorcists burn their magical masse-books: let
superiors oppress no more, let the cold be inflamed with zeal of Justice and
religion, let the drowsy sluggards be watchful against the evil day. Take
heed al, that Saul wake not again. He has hitherto bin cast into a deadly
sleep by God. It is he that must continue him in that slu^ber. If we will
repent, he will have mercy upon ye house of Judah, and will save England, yea the
Lord will save, not by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, nor by horses, Ose. 1.
nor by horsemen, but by himself: which God grant: To whom etc.


