THE ANCIENT, Honorable, Famous, and delightful History of Huon of Bourdeaux,
one of the Peers of France, and Duke of Guyenne.

Enterlaced with the love of many Ladies, as also the fortunes and adventures
of Knights errant, their amorous Servants.

Being now the Third time imprinted, and the rude English corrected and amended.



LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot, and are to be sold by Edward White, at his
shop at the little North door of Poules at the sign of the Gunne. 1601.

The Printer to the History ensuing.
THe foundation of all true fame and repute, which in this world is most to be
reckoned of and esteemed, (according to the opinion of all Writers both ancient
and modern) consists in bold, honorable, and heroycall resolution, which
enflames the soul with a continual thirsting desire, of pursuing brave and
generous purposes, perfourming of high and aduenturous ac^^ons, which (when
their bodies are mantled up in the ob^cure moulde of the earth) leaves their
names cannonized in Fames aeternall Calendar, and renownes them as rare
presidents to all following Posterities. And from so perfect ground of good and
laudable example, the young infant spirits of latter grow'th, raking up the
embers of their worthy proceedings, the spark of glorious imitation catches
hold of their warm and forward desires, and so enkindling further till it
break forth into a flame: burns up and consumes all conceits of cowardice,
and as an enlightened Beacon on a Promontorie top, calls and inuites them to
the like honorable atchieuements. Hence ensued that desertfull and well worthy
to be remembered purpose, of Sir John Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, when not
only in this work of Huon of Bourdeaux, but many other famous Translations
of like consequence by him performed, he gave witness to the world of so
labourious an endeavor, and (as it were) squared out an excellent platfourme
for generous imitation. But let me not herewithall forget, that the right noble
Earl of Huntingdon Lord Hastings, was a continual spur to him in the
pursuit of such pains, and likewise a cheerful encourager of me in the
imprinting, assisting ever both with his purse and honorable countenance, the
travail that sorted to so good example. Which being now finished and made
complete, with better ability of will, then other perfourmance: we leave to
the gentle acceptance of such, as know how rightly to judge, and kindly to
entertain: to others our pains are not imparted.

FINIS.
The Table.
HOw the Emperor Charlemaine required his Barons that they would choose one
among them to govern his Empire. Chap. 1. The conclusion and answer that the
Barons made. And what counsel the dishonorable Lord Earl Amerie gave to the
King, against the two Sons of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux: whereby great
mischief afterward ensued. And of the good advice that Duke Naymes gave to the
Emperor. Chap. 2. How Charlemaine sent two Knights to the Duchess of
Bourdeaux, to command her to send her two Sons to his Court. Chap. 3. The
answer that the Duchess of Bourdeaux made to the Emperors Messengers. Chap.
4. How the Emperor was content with the report of the two Knights: and how
the Traitor Earl Amerie went and complained to Charlot the Kings Son.
Chap. 5. How the two Sons of Duke Seuin took leave of the Duchess their
Mother, and how in their way they ouer-tooke the Abbot of Cluny their Uncle,
going toward Paris to the Emperor Charlemaine. Chap. 6. How by the counsel
of Earl Amerie they ran first at Gerardin Brother to Huon, and bare him to the
earth, and sore wounded him, whereof Huon was right sorrowful. Chap. 7. How
Huon of Bourdeaux was sorrowful when he saw his Brother Gerard so sore
wounded, and how he slew Charlot: and how he came before the King at Paris and
appeached him of Treason. Chap. 8. How the King was sore displeased with Huon,
because he had appeached him of treason: and how Huon showed all the manner why
he slew the Knight that wounded his Brother. Chap. 9. How Charlot the Kings Son
was brought before him dead, and of the great sorrow that he made: and how
Earl Amerie appeached Huon for the death of Charlot, and how the King would
have run upon Huon, and of the good counsel that Duke Naymes gave to the
King. Chap. 10. How the Traitor Earl Amerie charged Huon before the Emperor,
that he traitorously with treason pretended, had slain the Kings Son, and in
that quarrel he appealed Huon to Battle. Chap. 11. How the Abbot of Cluny
would prove, that the saying of Earl Amerie was false and untrue: and how
the Earl did cast his Gage against Huon, who took it up. Chap. 12. How those
two Champions came into the field whereas they should ^ight, accompanied with
their friends. Chap. 13. How the two Champions made their Oaths upon the
Relics, that their sayings were true, and what the king said. chap. 14. How
Huon of Bourdeaux and Earl Amerie fought together before king Charlemaine:
and how the Traitor Amerie was slain by the noble Prowess and chivalry of
Huon. chap. 15. How after the Emperor Charlemaine had seen Earl Amerie was
slain, he commanded expressly, that Huon should avoid the Realm and Empire,
and to be banished from thence for ever. chap. 16. How king Charlemaine sent
Huon to do a Message in Babylon to the Admiral Gaudise. chap. 17. How the
noble Duke Huon of Bourdeaux took leave of the King, and of all the Lords and
Barons, and road with the good Abbot to Cluney. chap. 18. How Huon came to
Rome, and was confessed of the Pope who was his Uncle, and of his departing:
and how he came to Brandis, where he found his Uncle Garyn of St. Omers, who
for the love of Huon passed the Sea with him. Chap. 19. How Huon of Bourdeaux
departed from Brandis, and Garyn his Uncle with him: and how he came to
Jerusalem, and from thence into the Deser^^, whereas he found Gerames, and of
their conference. chap. 20. How Gerames went with Huon and his company, and so
came into the wood, whereas they found king Oberon, who coniured them to speak
unto him. chap. 21. How King Oberon was sore displeased, in that Huon would not
speak: and of the great fear that he put Huon and his company in. chap. 22.
How King Oberon Dwarf of the Fayrey pursued so much Huon, that he constrained
him to speak to him at last. chap. 23. Of the great maruailes that Oberon
showed unto Huon, and of the (...) that fell. chap. 24. Of the great gifts that
Oberon gave to Huon, as his Horn of Iuorie, and his Cup, the which were of
great virtues: and how Huon after thought to prove the virtue of them, whereby
he was in peril of death. chap. 25. How Huon arri^ed at Tormont, and found a
man at a gate, who brought him to lodge at the Prouosts house in the Town.
chap. 26. How Huon gave a Suppper to all the poor men of the City, and how
the Duke was Uncle to Huon: and how the Duke had Huon into his Castle. chap.
27. How the Duke thought to have murdered Huon his own Nephewe, whiles he sat
at the Table. chap. 28. How by the aid of Greffrey and of the Prisoners, Huon
was succored, and slew all the Paynims, and the Duke fled, and after besieged
the Castle. chap. 29. How King Oberon came and succored Huon, and slew all
the Paynims, except such as would be christened: And how Huon slew the Duke
his Uncle. chap. 30. How king Oberon forbad Huon, that he should not go by
the Tower of the Giant, to the which Huon would not accord, but went thither,
whereby he was in great danger of death. And of the Damsel that he found
there, who was his own cozen borne in France. chap. 31. How the Damsel cozen
to Huon, showed him the Chamber whereas the Giant slept, and how he went and
awaked him: and of the good armor that the Giant delivered to Huon. chap. 32.
How Huon slew the great Giant, and how he called Gerames and his company to
him, and of the joy that they made for the death of the Giant. chap. 33. How
Huon departed from the Castle of the Giant, and took leave of his company,
and went alone afoote to the Seaside, whereas he found Mallabron of the
Fairey, on whom he mounted to pass the sea. chap. 34. How Huon passed the Sea
upon Mallabron, who bare him to Babylon: and how Huon came to the first gate,
and so to the second. chap. 35. How Huon passed the Fourth gate, and how he
came into the Garden whereas the Fountain was, and of that which he did there.
chap. 36. How Huon came into the Pallaice, and did his message to the
Admiral, and how he slew many Paynims, and was afterward taken, and put in
prison. chap. 37. Of the great complaints that Huon made being in prison, and
how the Admirals Daughter came to comfort him, and how she departed not well
content with Huon. Chap. 38. How Huon made great complaints for the famine
that he endured, and how the fair Esclaremond came again to comfort him,
conditionally that Huon would fulfill her desire. Chap. 39. How Gerames and his
company departed from the Tower and the Damsel with him, and came to Babylon:
and of the manner that Gerames used to know some news of Huon. Chap. 40. How
Gerames and the fair Escleremond went to the Prison to comfort Huon and the
other Prisoners. Chap. 41. How the great Giant Agrapart, eldest Brother to
Angolofer whom Huon slew, assembled his people and came to Babylon, to have
the Tribute of the Admiral as his brother had: and of Battle hand to hand
that he desired of the Admiral Gaudise, the which was agreed to. Chap. 42. How
the Admiral Gaudise took Huon out of prison, and armed him to fight with the
Giant Agrapart. Chap. 43. How Huon fought with Agrapart the Giant, and
discomfited him, and delivered him to the Admiral, who had great joy thereof.
Chap. 44. How the Giant Agrapart cried mercy to the Admiral: and how Huon
desired the Admiral Gaudise to leave his law, and to be christened. Chap. 45.
How Huon seeing that the Admiral would not forsake his belief, blew his Horn,
whereby Oberon came to him, and how the Admiral was slain and all his men. And
how Huon and the fair Escleremond were in peril of drowning, by reason that
he brake the commandment of King Oberon. chap. 46. How Huon and Escleremond
arrived in an Isle all naked, and how the Pirates of the Sea took Escleremond
and left Huon alone, and bound his hands, feet, and eyes. Chap. 47. How the
fair Escleremond was led away by the Pirates of the Sea: and how the Admiral
Galaffer of Anfalerne delivered her out of their hands. chap. 48. How the
Pirate fled to Mombrance to Iuoryn, and how he sent to (...) the Admiral
Galaffer of Anfalerne, and of the answer that he had (...). chap. 49. How
King Oberon at the request of two Knights of the Fayrey, called (...) and
Mallabron the monster of the Sea, went and succored Huon* and carried him out
of the Isle of Noysant. chap. 50. How Huon found a Minstrell, who gave him
clothing and meat, and took Huon with him as his Varler, and went to
Mombrance. chap. 51. How Huon and his Master Mouflet arrived at Mombrance, and
how (...) spoke with King Iuoryn. chap. 52. How King Iuoryn caused his Daughter
to play at the Chesse with Huon, upon condition that if he were mated, he
should then loose his head: and if she were mated, Huon should have her love:
and how Huon won the game. Chap. 53. How Huon was armed, and mounted on a poor
horse, and went after the Army to Anfalerne. Chap. 54. How Huon fought with
Sorbryn and slew him, and wanne the good horse Blanchardyn, whereon he mounted
and wanne the Battle, and was brought with great triumph to Mombrance. chap.
55. How Huon was had in great honor, and sat at the Table with King Iuoryn of
Mombrance. chap. 56. How the old Gerames arrived at Anfalerne by fortune, and
the Admiral Gallaffer entertained him to maintain his war: And how the
fair Escleremond spoke with him. Chap. 57. How King Iuoryn came again before
Anfalerne, and how Gerames and Huon fought together, and at last they knew
each other. And how they entered into Anfalerne, and shut the Admiral
Gallaffer without. Chap. 58. How Iuoryn caused Mouflet the old Minstrell, to
be brought to the gibet to have been hanged: and how he was rescued by Huon.
chap. 59. How the good Provost Guyer, Brother to Gerames, arrived at the Port
of Anfalerne. Chap. 60. How Huon and Gerames, and all their company, with the
fair Lady Escleremond, departed from the Castle of Anfalerne, and sailed
thence on the Sea. Chap. 61. How Huon and his company arrived at the Port of
Brandis, and from thence went to Rome to the Pope, who wedded together Huon and
the fair Escleremond, and of their departing from thence. chap. 62. How Huon
and his company arrived at the Abbey of Maurise, where he was received by the
Abbot and Covent, with great reverence. chap. 63. How the good Abbot sent word
to Duke Gerard of Bourdeaux, how his Brother Huon was in the Abbey of Maurise.
Chap. 64. How Gybouars of Beam and Gerard practiced Huons death: and how the
Traitor Gerard came to see his Brother Huon, who with great joy received him.
chap. 65. How these two Brethren departed from the Abbey about midnight, and
how the Traitor Gerard began to fall at rude words with Huon, when they
approached near the wood whereas Gybouars lay in ambush. chap. 66. How these
Traitors slew all Duke Huons company, except Gerames, and Escleremond, and
Huon himself, the which all three were fast bound hands and feet, and
blindfold, and so brought to Bourdeaux and were put in prison. Chap. 67. How
the Traitors returned to the Abbey of Saint Maurise, and slew the good Abbot,
and took away all the Treasure that Huon had left there. Chap. 68. How the
Traitor Gerard showed to King Charlemaine, how his Brother Huon was returned
to Bourdeaux wthout doing of his Message to the Admiral Gaudise. Chap. 69.
How the King commanded that Huon should be sent for from Bourdeaux, to the
intent that he should die. Chap. 70. How the Emperor Charlemaine went himself
to Bourdeaux, to cause Huon to be slain, for the great ill will that he bare
to him. Chap. 71. How the Twelve Peers drew to counsel, to give sentence
upon Huon, either with him or against him. Chap. 72. How the Peers laid all
the deed upon Duke Naymes, to give the iudgem^nt upon him: But for all that
ever he could say or do, the king ^^dged Huon to die. chap. 73. How King
Oberon came to succor Huon, and made Gerard to confess all the treason that
he had purchased against Huon. Chap. 74. How King Oberon caused to be hanged
the Four Traitors, Gerard, Gybouars, and the two Monks, for their false
witness: and of the Peace made between Huon and Charlemaine: And how King
Oberon gave to Huon his Realm of the Fayrey. chap. 75. How King Oberon
departed, and took leave of King Charlemaine, and (...) Huon and Escleremond:
and also how King Charlemaine departed from ^ourdeaux. Chap. 76. How King
Oberon devised with his Knights, in the City of Momur in the Fayrey, of the
deeds of Huon of Bourdeaux, and of that which should happen after to him. Chap.
77. How Huon took homage of his men, and chasticed his Rebels, and of three
Pilgrims, by whom much ill fell after, as ye shall hear. chap. 78. How Duke
Raoul of Austrich, by the report of the Pilgrims, was enamoured of the fair
Escleremond, and of the Yourney that was proclaimed, to the intent to have
slain Huon. Chap. 79. How after that Duke Raoul had been at Bourdeaux in the
guise of a Pilgrim, to see the fair Lady Escleremond, he then returned
again to Vyennae. Chap. 80. How Duke Huon took leave of the Duchess his
Wife, and how he arrived at Mayence, and went to the Pallaice. chap. 81. How
Huon slew Duke Raoul in the presence of the Emperor, sitting at his Table,
and of the maruailes that he did: And how in the chase that was made after him,
he struck down the Emperor, and wan his good horse. chap. 82* How Huon
after that he was mounted upon the Emperors good horse, he arrived at
Colleyne, where he found his men: and how he departed thence. And of the
Emperor who lay enambushed in a wood, abiding there to have slain Huon. chap.
83. Of the great Battle within two Leagues of Coleyn, between the Emperor of
Almaine and Huon of Bourdeaux, and of the Tru^e that was taken between them.
chap. 84. How Huon granted the Truce to the Emperor, and how the Provost of
Coleyne came and assailed Huon, not knowing of any Peace taken between them.
Chap. 85. How Huon arrived at Bourdeaux, and of the counsel of the fair
Escleremond his wife, the which he would not believe nor follow. chap. 86. How
Huon had great joy for the birth of the fair Clar^et his Daughter. chap. 87.
How the Emperor assembled a great Host and came before the City of
Bourdeaux. chap. 88. How the Emperor of Almaine besieged the City of
Bourdeaux: and how Huon made him ready to fight with his enemies. chap. 89. Of
the great Battle that was before Bourdeaux, whereas Huon had great loss,
and the old Gerames taken. Chap. 90. How the Emperor raised up a pare of
Gallows, to hang up the old Gerames, and all the Bourdeloyes that were taken
Prisoners. Chap. 91. How Huon issued out of Bourdeaux, and rescued the old
Gerames and his company, whom the Emperor would have hanged. Chap. 92. How
the Emperor assailed the City of Bourdeaux two times, whereas he lost many of
his men. Chap. 93. How Huon sent Habourey his Messenger to the Emperor, to
require peace, and of his answer. chap. 94. How Huon issued out of Bourdeaux,
and came to the Tents, and fought with the Emperor. chap. 95. How Huon made
another issue out of Bourdeaux, and took away all the beasts that were in the
pastures without the Town, pertaining to the Emperors host. Chap. 96. How
Huon of Bourdeaux made him ready to go to seek for some succor: And of the
sorrow that the Duchess his wife made. Chap. 97. How Huon departed from the
City of Bourdeaux, and sailed until he came into the hye Sea, and had many
great fortunes. Chap. 98. How Huon arrived on the perilous Gulf, whereas he
spoke with Judas: And how ^e arrived at the Port of the Adamant. chap. 99. How
Huon devised with his Patron, in regarding of the Castle of the Adamant. Chap.
100. How a Galley with Sarazins came and assailed Huon, who were all slain,
and also all Huons men, and how Huon went to the Castle of the Adamant and
slew the great Serpent, and of the maruailes that he found there. Chap. 101.
How Huon of Bourdeaux fought with the horrible Serpent, and slew him within
the Castle of the Adamant. Chap. 102. How after that Huon was departed from
Bourdeaux, the Emperor made diverse assaults to the City, but he could not win
it, for the defense of the good chivalry that was within it, and of the
ambushment that was laid by the counsel of Duke Sauary, whereby the City
was taken and won. chap. 103. Of the death of the old Gerames, and of the
taking of the City of Bourdeaux, and of the coming of the Duchess with the
Emperor: and of the delivering up of the Castle to the Emperor. Chap. 104.
How the Duchess Escleremond delivered her Daughter Clariet to (...) unto the
Abbot of Cluny, of whom the Abbot was right ^^^full. Chap. 105. How the noble
Duchess Escleremond yielded up the Castle ^o the Emperor, and how she and her
company were Prisoners in the City of Ma^ence. chap. 106. How there arrived
at the Castle of the Adamant a Ship full of Sara^^ns, wherein was the Bishop
of Millaine: and how Huon caused them to be christened, and then he brought
them into the Castle, whereas they (...) great store and plenty of victuals.
chap. 107. How Huon saw a Ship arrive at the Port of the Castle of the
Adamant. chap. 108. How Huon (...) by a Griffen out of the Castle of the
Adamant, and how he slew the Griffen, (...) other young Griffens: And of the
Fountain of the fair Garden: and of the fruit of the Tree near to the
Fountain. chap. 109. How Huon fought with the great Griffen, and slew her.
chap. 110. How an Angel appeared unto Huon, and commanded him to gather three
Apples of the Tree by the Fountain, and no more: And how the Angel showed
him tidinges of his wife the fair Escleremond, and of his Daughter Clariet,
and showed him the way that he should go from thence. chap. 111. How Huon of
Bourdeaux sailed in a rich Ship, and of the perilous Gulf that he passed
by: and how he arrived at the Port of the great City of Thauris in Persia.
chap. 112. How Sir Barnard departed from the Abbey of Cluny, and went to seek
for Huon his Cozen, whom he found at the Port of the great City of Thauris.
chap. 113. How Huon of Bourdeaux and Barnard his Cozen, acknowledged themselves
each to other, and showed the discourse of their adventures. chap. 114. How
the Admiral of Persia did great honor to Huon of Bourdeaux, and led him into
his Pallaice, whereas he was received with great joy and triumph. chap. 115.
How the Admiral, by reason of the Apple that Huon gave him to eat, he became
of the age of Thirty years, whereby he and all the people of Persia and Media
were christened, and of the great honor that the Admiral made unto Huon. chap.
116. Of the complaints that Huon made to the Admiral of Persia upon the
Emperor of Almaine, and of the succors that the Admiral promised to Huon.
chap. 117. How the Admiral of Persia assembled much people, and he and Huon
with all their Army, took the Sea and came to the Port before the City of
Angory, whereas they found a great number of Paynims and Sarazins, ready to
defend the Port. chap. 118. How the Admiral and Huon took the Port, and
fought with the Admiral of Angory, and discomfited him and took the City,
and how afterward Duke Huon went into the Deserts of Abillant, to search
adventures. chap. 119. How Huon went so long in this Desert, that he found
Cain, and spoke with him a long season: and how he beguiled Cain and depar^^d.
chap. 1^0* How Huon departed from Cain, and passed the Sea in a Vess^^ guided
by the Devil, who believed it had been Cain, and Huon arrived at a City
called Colanders, whereas he found the Admiral of Persia and Barnard his
Cozen, who had laid siege to the City. Chap. 121. How Huon of Bourdeaux had
great joy, when he saw the Admiral of Persia before Colanders, where he fought
with the Sarazins. chap. 122. How the City of Colanders was taken by the
Admiral of Persia, after he had won the Battle, and of the great joy that
was made unto Huon, when he was known by the Admiral of Persia and Barnard
his Cozen,. chap. 123. How the Admiral of Persia and Huon of Bourdeaux, and
all their host passed by Antioch, and by Damas, and came to the City of
Jerusalem to the holy Sepulcher, and was nobly received by the King of
Jerusalem: and how the Souldans Messenger came and defied the Admiral of
Persia. chap. 124, Of the answer that the Admiral of Persia made unto the
Souldans Messenger, and of the report that he made to his Master. chap. 125.
How the Admiral of Persia sent for his men that lay at Napelous, and caused
them to withdraw toward Rames, and how they departed from Jerusalem: and how
he went to fight with his enemies. chap. 126. Now speak we of the great
Battle that was in the plains of Rames, between the Souldan of Babylon and
the Admiral of Persia, the which was discomfited by the Prowess of Huon of
Bourdeaux. Chap. 127. How the Admiral of Persia and Media found Huon, whereas
he had fought with forty men Sarazins, and how the Souldan fled to Acres, and
how the Admiral of Persia and Media besieged him there, and of the strange
Vision that Huon had in the night, chap. 128. How Huon counseled the Admiral
of Persia, to raise up his siege before Acres for diverse reasons, and to
return into Persia. chap. 129. How the Admiral of Persia a greede to the
counsel of Duke Huon, and prais^ed his saying: and of the fair offer that
the Admiral of Persia (...) unto Duke Huon of Bordeaux, chap. 130. How Duke
Huon of Bourdeaux took his leave of the Admiral and of all the other Lords
of Per^sa, and went and took shipping at the Port of Thes^r^e, and how he
arrived at Marsellis, without finding of any strange adventure. Chap. 131. How
the good Abbot of Cluny laid an ambushment of men, between Mascon and Tournous,
against the Emperor of Almaines Nephewe, who was there slain and all his men,
whereof the Emperor was so sore vexed and troubled, that he took the Duchess
Escleremond out of prison to have burnt her, and the three Hundred prisoners of
Bourdeaux, to have hanged them all. chap. 132. Haw King Oberon sent two of his
Knights of the Fayrie, that is to say Mallabron and Gloriant, to deliver the
fair Escleremond, who should have been burnt, and the three Hundred Prisoners
that should have been hanged, who were all delivered by the before said
Knights* chap. 133. How the Emperor Tirrey made the noble Lady Escleremond to
be well served and apparelled, and all the other Prisoners, but about three
weeks after, he made the Lady and the prisoners to be put again into
prison, whereas they were in great misery. chap. 134. How Huon departed from
Marsellis, and came to his Uncle the Abbot of Cluny in habit disguised, and
unto him discovered himself, whereof the abbot had great joy, and so had
Clariet his Daughter. Chap. 135. How Duke Huon showed to his Uncle the Abbot of
Cluny, all the adventures that he had, since he departed from the City of
Bourdeaux: and how he gave the Abbot the Apple of youth, whereby the abbot
became again to his beauty, that he had when he was but of Thirty years
of age. chap. 136. How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Cluny, and went to the
City of Mayence upon Friday: and how he came nere unto the Emperors
Oratorie. chap. 137. How Huon did so much with the Emperor Tirrey, that he had
peace with him, and his wife rendered unto him, and all his Lands and
Signiories: and how the Emperor brought him unto the abbey of Cluny, whereas
they found the Abbot in armor, not knowing any thing of the peace that was
made. chap. 138. How the Emperor made good chere unto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux.
Chap. 139 How the Emperor arrived at Cluny, and how the abbot set upon him,
and of the peace that was made, and how the Emperor conveyed Huon to Bordeaux,
and rendered up all his Lands and of the parting of the Emperor, and how Huon
made provision to go to king Oberon. chap. 140. How Huon devised with the
Duchess his Wife of his departing, and how she would, go with him: And how
he left his Daughter and Land and Signiories in the keeping of his Uncle the
Abbot of Cluny and with Barnard his Cousin, chap. 141. How Huon took leave of
his Daughter, and of the good Abbot his Uncle, and of Barnard his cousin, and
entered into the River of Gerone the Duches with him: and of the strange
Fortunes that they had. chap. 142. How Huon lost all his men, and the Ship
brake in pieces: and how he and the Duchess saved them selves upon a board,
and came and arrived at the Castle of the Monks. chap. 143. How Duke Huon made
semblance to have slain the Monk, holding him fast with the stole, to the
intent that he should show unto him the troth. chap. 144. How the Monk bare
Huon and Escleremond over hills and Valleys in the air, until he came into the
country of King Oberon. chap. 145. How King Oberon crowned Huon and
Escleremond, and gave them all his Realm and dignity that he had in the Land
of the Fayrie, and made the Peace between Huon and King Arthur. chap. 146. Of
the Ordinances that the noble King Oberon made before he dyed. chap. 147. How
the King of Hungary, and the King of England, and Florence Son unto the
King of Aragon, desired to have in marriage the fair Lady Clariet, and how
she was betrayed by Brohart, and how Barnard was drowned, and of the evils
that the Traitor Brohart did unto the Lady Clariet, and how he dyed at the
last. chap. 148. When the Traitor Brohart drowned Barnard, and of their
adventures, and how Brohart was slain. chap. 149. Of the great sorrow that was
made at Blay, by the abbot of Cluny, and by the Princes of the noble City of
Bourdeaux, for the fair Lady Clariet that was stolen away: and of the sorrow
that was made, when they saw Barnard brought in dead by Six men. And of the
punishment that was done to the Lineage of the Traitor Brohart. chap. 150. How
the Lady Clariet al alone came to the Seaside, whereas arrived the King of
Granado in a Ship, who took away Clariet, and of other matters. chap. 151. How
the King forbad his Son Florence, that he should not be so har^^ as to fall
acquainted with the fair Lady Clariet, and how Florence promised the King his
Father, to deliver into his hands the King of Na^arre prisoner, in case that he
would be content at his return, that he might have the new found Damsel, the
which the King granted, but he did it not, for he had drowned her, if Peter of
Aragon had not been, who rescued and saved her from the death. chap. 152. How
Florence went to fight with his enemies: and how Sir Peter of Aragon returned
toward the Town, to bring thither Prisoners: and how he rescued the fair
Damsel Clariet from drowning, and how afterward King Garin caused the Damsel
to be closed up in a Prison. chap. 153. How Florence discomfited his enemies,
and took the King of Nauar, and led him into the Town, and delivered him to
the King his Father: and how Florence delivered him again quit, because that
his Father showed unto him, that the fair Damsel was drowned. Chap. 154. How
king Garyn put his Son Florence into a Tower in prison: And how the Damsel
escaped out of the Tower, and spoke with Florence her Lover at an arch upon
the Garden-side, and how they were espied: and how she thought to have drowned
herself. Chap. 155. How the first Watchman found out the Damsel, and led
her into a great wood there by, and afterward the same Watchman delivered
Florence out of prison, and showed him the place where the Damsel was: and how
Florence and Clariet entered into the Sea: and how the king went after his
Son, and the Watchman taken. Chap. 156. Of the great debate that was in the
Pallaice for the Watchmans sake, whom the king would have had to be hanged: and
how the king of Navarre took the City of Courtoys, and how he departed
thence. chap. 157. How the Ship wherein Florence was and his Love, was taken
by the Sarazins, and all their company taken and slain, and led to the Castle
of Anfalerne. Chap. 158. How Sorbarre the captain comforted Florence and
Clariet: and how there arrived Four Ships with Christian men by fortune of the
Sea, and how Florence was known by them. Chap. 159. How Sorbarre and Florence
and their company went into the Town, and robbed and spoiled it, and so took
the Sea with great joy and triumph, and the fair Lady Clariet with them, and
took their course to sail toward the Realm of Aragon. chap. 160. How king
Huon King of the Fayrey, sent two of his knights to the two Kings: And how he
appeared between them with a great number and of the Peace that he made between
them. chap. 16^. How Florence and Clariet arrived there with their company,
and came to king Huon: and of the great joy that was made at their coming, and
how there they were wedded together: and the Peace confirmed between the two
Kings. chap. 162. How king Huon and Queen Escleremond departed, and how he
gave great rich gifts unto the two Kings, and to all other Lords, Ladies and
Damsels: And of the sorrow that was between the Mother and the Daughter, at
their departing. chap. 163. How Queen Clariet was brought to bed of a
Daughter, at which deliverance the Queen dyed: and how when the young Damsel
came to the age of Fifteen years, the King her Father would have had her in
marriage, wherewith all his Lords were sore troubled. chap. 164. Of the great
sorrow that the Damsel I Would made, when she heard her Father, how he would
have her in marriage: And how by the means of a noble Lady and Sorbarre she
departed at midnight, and went at the adventure that God would send her. Chap.
165. How King Florence was sorrowful, when he was aduertized of his
Daughters departing, who was apparelled like a man: and how she came into
Almaine* and how she found certain Thieves in a Forest, and how she came to
Rome to the Emperor like a Squier. chap. 166. How the Damsel I Would was
entertained with the Emperor of Room, and how the Lady Olive his Daughter
was enamoured of I Would, weening she had been a man: and how the King of Spain
came before the City of Room: And how the Damsel I Would took the King of
Spain in Battle, and discomfited him. Chap 167. How the Emperor of Rome
highly received the noble Damsel I Would, and of the honor that was made unto
her: and how the Emperor made her Constable of his Empire. And how the King of
Spain was delivered out of prison, and made homage to the Emperor. Chap. 168.
How the Emperor gave his Daughter in marriage to the Damsel I Would, knowing none
other but that she had been a man, and how she was appeached by a Varlet, that
heard their devises whiles they were in bed together, whereby the Emperor would
have burnt the Damsel. chap 169. How God made great miracles for I Would, for he
made her to change from the nature of a woman and to become a perfect man,
whereof the Emperor and Olive had great joy and so I Would and Olive lay together,
and engendered a Son named after Croissant: and of the death of the Emperor.
chap. 170. How King Florence sent two Knights to Rome to the Emperor his
Son, desiring him to come and see him, and to leave the Empire of Rome to his
Son Croissant, and to set noble men about him to guide him: and also to bring
with him the Empress, the fair Olive. Chap. 171. How the Emperor I Would and the
Empress Olive gave good instructions to their Son, when they departed from
Rome, and how they arrived at Courtoys, and came to Florence, who with great
joy received them as his Children. Chap. 172. How Croissant was so bountiful
and so liberal, that he gave away all the Treasure that his Father had left
him, so that at last he had no more to give, and so was constrained to go
seek his adventure, he and a Varlet alonely. chap. 173. How they of Rome
sent to King Guymart of Puille, to the intent that he should come and govern
that Country, and to be their Lord, because Croissant was a child, and had
given and wasted all that he had: and how Guymart came thither, and was
received as Lord. chap. 174. How Croissant arrived at Nise in Prouaunce, and
came to the Earl Remon, who was besieged by the Sarazins: and of the honor
that the Earl Remon did to Croissant, and how he gave him his banner to
bear, and made him Knight: And of the great envy that the Earls Son had at
Croissant. Chap. 175. How Croissant did maruailes in the Battle, by whom the
Sarazins were discomfited and slain, whereof the Earl Remon and the Duke of
Callaber were right joyful. Chap 176. Of the great honor that the Earl Remon
did to Croissant: and how he would have given him his Daughter in marriage,
whereof the Earls Son was sore envious, and thought the same night to have
murdered the noble Croissant in his bed, but he failed, for the noble Croissant
slew him, and afterward fled away as fast as he might. Chap. 177. How Croissant
departed from Nise with his Sword in his hand: And how the Earl Remon was
sorrowful for the death of his Son, and chased after Croissant, but he could
not be found. Chap. 178. How Croissant arrived in the Subburbs of a little
Town called Florencolle, and lodged among Ruffians and Villaynes, and how they
fell at strife* and how Croissant slew them and fled, and was in great
danger. And how he came into the City of Rome, whereas there was no man that
would give him one morsel of bread: and how he went into an old Pallaice and
lay upon a burden of straw. chap. 179. How the Emperor Guymart spoke and
rebuked the Burgess that spoke ill of the noble Croissant: and how the
Emperor bare me^te and drink to the place whereas Croissant slept. And of the
maruailous great Treasure that he found in a Chamber in the said old
Pallaice* and of that which was showed and declared to him by two Knights
whom he found there. Chap. 180. How the two Knights that kept this Treasure,
spoke with the Emperor Guymart, and showed him the manner how he should know
Croissant. And of the marvel that Croissant had when he awoake, and saw the
meat and drink by him. Chap. 181. The proof that the Emperor Guymart made to
know Croissant, unto whom he gave his fair Daughter in marriage, and
delivered him all his Signiorie and Inheritance, whereof great joy was made at
Rome. Chap. 182. How the Emperor Guymart promised Croissant, that within three
days he should have his Daughter in marriage: And how the Emperor Guymart led
Croissant to the old Pallaice, and showed him the great Treasure that the two
Knights kept for him. Chap. 183. Of the great Treasure that they had, and how
Croissant wedded the noble Damsel, daughter to King Guymart: and of the Feast
that was there made. Chap. 184.
FINIS.
THE ANCIENT, Honorable, and famous History, of Huon of Bourdeaux, a Peer of
France, and Duke of Guyenne. etc.
Chap. I.
How the Emperor Charlemaine required his Barons that they would choose one
among them to govern his Empire.

IN the time, by computation called ye year of grace, which was Seven
Hundred, Fifty and Six years after our Sauiors sufferings: Charles the Great,
more vulgarly known by the name of Charlemaine, a right royal, religious and
warlike Prince, rained as KING in France, and Emperor of Room. Whose course
of time was applied to many high and heroycall enterprises, wherein the favor
of heaven was evermore so assistant to him, as his own heart and good hopes
crowned him with the honor of many succesfull Victories: enabling all his
endeauours with the aid of diverse noble Princes and Barons, whose Chivalry and
right knightly perfourmances, entitled him to the conquest of Almaigne,
Sclauonia, Spain, Saxony, and a great part of Affrike, in all which attempts
it is not to be doubted, but both he and they had their hands full of busy
employments. But let it suffice, God was their guide, Religion the cause,
Honor the object, and perpetual Fame the reward, which both led him and his
train to these worthy attempts, and still brought them back with the due to
their valorous Enterprises: extending both his and their renown to all parts
of the world, and registring their names in the Calendar of never dying memory.

AFter that this right noble Emperor Charlemaine had lost his dear Nephews
Rowland and Oliver, and diverse other Barons and Knights in the unfortunate and
dolorous Battle that was at Rownseuall, where was so great and lamentable a
loss, as all the twelve Peers of France were there slain, except the good
Duke Naimes of Bauier: On a day the Noble Emperor held open Court at his
chief City of Paris, where were assembled many Dukes, Earls, and Barons,
being the Sons, Nephews, and kindred to the Noble Princes before slain and
dead in the foresaid Battle, by the falsehood and great treason done and
contrived by Duke Ganelon, the Noble Emperor being ever after in grief and
heaviness, by reason of the great annoyance and displeasure that he had by
his said loss, and also because he was grown very feeble, through the great
age that now was stolen upon him. Thus when the King, Princes, and Barons
were there assembled, the Emperor called his Lord* before him, and seating
himself in his royal Chair of Estate, his Barons, Lords and Knights
likewise placed in their several degrees, he called forth Duke Naymes, and
thus began.

Honorable old Naymes, and all you my Barons hither summoned by our royal
commandment, I shall not need to tell ye, because it is to you all most
apparent, how long I have governed this Kingdom of France, and likewise
swayed the imperial Diadem of Room: In all which time I have found your duty
and service so agreeable, as I cannot but thank Heaven for so gracious good
fortune. And now because I know certainly, yt my life by course of nature
cannot long endure, for this reason principally I have caused you all to be
assembled here together, to declare to you my pleasure and will, wherein I
require and heartily desire you, that ye will counsel together and take
advice, which of you best may and will undertake the Governance of my Realm,
for I can no longer bear the travail and pain belonging to the ruling
thereof, but will from henceforth live the residue of mine age in peace and
service of my Lord God: Wherefore as much as I may I desire you all to advise
me which of you all shall be thereunto thought most able. Ye all know, that I
have two Sons, that is to say, Jews who is too young, and Charlot whom I
love well, and he is of age sufficient to rule: but his manners and conditions
are not meet to have the governance of such two Noble States as the Realm of
France, and the holy Empire of Room, for ye know well in days past, by
reason of his pride, my Realm was likely to have been destroyed, and I to have
had war against you all, when by his rashness he slew Baldwin, son to the
good Duke Ogier the Dane, whereon so many mishaps ensued, that it will never be
raced out of remembrance. Therefore so long as I live I will not consent that
he shall have the government, though he be rightful inheritor, and that after
me he ought to have the Signiorie: but instantly I entreat your noble opinions,
what in this case I were best to do.

Chap. II.
The conclusion and answer that the Barons made* And what counsel the
dishonorable Lord Earl Amerie gave to the King, against the two Sons of
Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux: whereby great mischief afterward ensued. And of the
good advice that Duke Naymes gave to the Emperor.

WHen Duke Naymes, and all the Barons being assembled together in a private
part of the Pallaice, there they were somewhat long together: but at last they
all concluded, that to Charlot the Kings eldest Son appertayned the
governing of the said Realms. Then they returned to the King, and showed him
the conclusion whereupon they were agreed, of which the Emperor was right
joyful. Then he called before him his Son, and showed him many fair reasons
before all his Barons, but therewith stepped forth a fellon Traitor, who had
too much secrecy with the Emperor, and likewise had the governance of Charlot
the Kings Son, who did nothing but by his direction: this Knight was called
Earl Amerie, and was Son to one of the Nephews of the Traitor Ganelon: In
this manner then he spoke to the King. Right royal Emperor, whence proceeds
it, that you are so forward in deliverance of your Kingdom, to the weak
governing of Charlot your Son? forbear this hastiness: and first for a
proof of his ableness in such a case, give him a Land that ought to be yours,
and as yet is not, and where you have as yet neither fealty nor service. This
Land is in the possession of two proud Boys, who these Seven years passed
would not serve you, nor since their Father Duke Seuin dyed, would do you any
obeisance: the eldest is named Huon, and the other Gerard, they keep Bourdeaux
and all the Land of Aquitaine, and think great scorn to hold their Lands of
you. But my Lord, if you will give me men and authority, I will bring them as
Prisoners into your Palace, where you may do your will with them, and then
the Land that they hold you may give to Charlot your Son. Amerie (quoth the
Emperor) I give you great thanks that you have advertised me of this matter:
I will that you take of your best friends, and beside them you shall have of
me three Thousand Knights, well chosen and proved men of war, and I will
that you bring to me the two Sons of Duke Seuin, that is to say, Huon and
Gerard who in their pride set nothing by me.

When Duke Naymes (being there present,) heard the words of Amerie, and saw
how the Emperor consented to his desire he stepped forth boldly, and beholding
Amerie stearnly, thus spoke. My Sovereign Lord, the ill is great, but the
sin far greater, when men of no truth or certainty are so highly listened
unto. As for Duke Seuin, is it not well known my Lord, what true and honorable
service all his days he did you? and can you then be so easilye woone to
disenherite his Children? Consider good my Lord, that the reason why as yet
they have not tendered their duty in your presence, is nothing else but their
want of years for such allegiance, and their Mother likewise dearly respecting
them, is loath to leave their company so young. And would your Highness but be
advised by me, you should not so rashly deprive them of their Lands: but
rather, as best becomes a virtuous Prince, and in some regard of their
Fathers good Service, first send two of your Knights to the Duchess, and let
them in your name command her Sons personal appearance at your Court, in
case of service and dutiful homage: which if she or they shall refuse to do,
then may you justly proceed otherwise against them. But I dare (my Lord)
engage mine honor, that send them she will, and that only a Mothers love and
care of her Children, has been the reason of their absence all this while.

Chap. III.
How the Emperor Charlemaine sent two Knights to the Duchess of Bourdeaux,
to command her to send her two Sons to his Court.

WHEN the Emperor Charles had heard Duke Naymes speak, he said: My Lord, I
know for certainty yt Duke Seuin has always served us truly, and the reasons
that you have showed are just: Therefore I grant that it shall be as you have
advised. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I most humbly thank your grace. Then
incontinent the king sent for two knights, and gave them in charge to go to
Bourdeaux to do his Message to the Duchess, and to the Sons of Duke (...)
the which they did and so departed from Paris, without resting past one night
in a place, until they arrived at Bourdeaux, and then incontinent they went to
the Palace, whereas they found the Duchess, who was as then but newly risen
from dinner: and when she was advertised of their coming, she came in have to
meet them, accompanied with Huon her Son who was by her, and Gerard came
after with a Sparrow-hawke on his fist. When the Messengers saw the Duchess
and her two goodly Sons, they kneeled down, and saluted both her, and her
two Sons from King Charlemaine, saying: Lady, to you we be sent from our
Emperor Charles, who by us sends unto you his salutations of honor and
amity. When the Noble Lady understood that they were Messengers sent from ye
great Emperor Charles, she arose and embraced them, and said, that they were
right welcome unto her. Madame, (quoth they) our Emperor has sent us unto
you, and commands you to send your two Sons to serve him in his Court,
for there are very few in his Realm, but they are come to his service, except
your Sons. And Lady, since you know right well, that the Lands you enjoy
appertaining to your Sons, is holden of the Emperor Charles, by reason of
his royal prerogative in France, great marvel is in many that you have not
sent them ere this time to do him service, as other Dukes and Princes in like
case have done. In this respect he commands you, both for your own good and
conservation of their Lands, that you send them unto him: or if you do not,
know then for certain, that he will take from you those Lands you hold, and
give them to the Prince Charlot his Son: This is the sum of our Message,
and we attend your answer.

Chap. IIII.
The answer that the Duchess of Bourdeaux made to the Emperors Messengers.

WHen the good Lady had well understood the Messengers, she answered them
gently in this manner. My Lords and honorable Friends, the reason why I have
not sent my Sons to the Court before this time, to serve my Lord the King as
duty required, was in regard of their tender years, and some respect of love
to Duke Seuin their Father, and because I knew certainlye, that my rightful
Lord the Emperor Charlemaine loved always Duke Seuin, I never feared that he
would take displeasure with his Children, these things have been the
principal cause why I have not sent them all this while to serve the King.
Therefore let my entreats prevail so much with you, as to be a means to the
Emperor and al ye other Barons, to hold me and my Children excused in this
case, for the fault is only mine, and not in them. Then Huon stepped forth
before his mother and said, Madame if it had been your pleasure, you might
have sent us before this time: that is true (quoth Gerardine) for we are old
enough to have our knighthood. The Lady heheld her two Sons, and weeping
said to the Messengers: Sirs, you may return to the King, howbeit you shall
rest you this night in my house and to morrow depart at your pleasure, and you
shall recommend me and my Sons to the Kings good grace, and to the other
Barons and Knights, and among other salute Duke Naymes, who is near kinsman
to my Sons, and desire him for the love of Duke Seuin, to stand a continual
friend unto them. Madame (quoth the Messengers) have you no doubt of that, for
Duke Naymes is a noble Man and a true Knight, nor will he at any time be in
place where any ill opinion shall pass against them. Then the Duchess
commanded her Sons, that they should make ye Kings Messengers good cheer,
and to bring them into their Chamber to rest them, the which they did, and were
served and feasted as appertained to their worth. Then the next morning they
returned to the Palace, whereas they found the Duchess and her two Sons,
and they humbly saluted the Lady. When the Duchess saw them, she called Huon
and Gerardin and said: My Sons, here in the presence of these two Knights, I
say that at Easter you shall go to our Sovereign Lord the Emperor
Charlemaine, and when you be in the Court, serve your Sovereign Lord well and
truly as subjects ought to do, be diligent at all times to serve him
faithfully, and keep company with Noble men, such as you see to be of good
and virtuous conditions, be not in place where ill words be spoken, or ill
counsalie given, fly from the company of them that love not honor and troth,
open not your ears to here Liars, or false Reporters, or Flatteres, haunt
often the Church, and give largly for Gods sake, be liberal and courteous, and
give to poor Knights, fly the company of Ianglers, and all goodness shall
follow thereby. I will there be given to each of these Knights a Courser and a
rich Gown, as it appertains to the Messengers of so noble an Emperor as
Charlemaine is, and also each of them to have a hundred Florents. Madame,
(quoth Huon) your pleasure shall be accomplished: then the two Sons caused to
be brought before the Palace two goodly Horses, and presented them to the two
Knights, and gave each of them a rich Gown, and a hundred Florents. Whereof
the Messengers were joyful and thanked the Duchess and her two Sons, and
said that their courtesy should be remembered in time to come, howbeit they
knew well it was done for the honor of the King: then they took leave of the
Duchess and of her two Sons, and so departed, and road without let until
they came to Paris, whereas they found the Emperor in his Palace sitting
among his Barons: the King perceived them, and incontinent called them to his
presence, and ere they had leisure to speak, the King had them welcome home,
and demanded of them if they had been at Bourdeaux, and spoken with the
Duchess and the two Sons of Duke Seuin, and whether they would come and
serve him in his Court or not? Dread Lord (quoth they) we have been at
Bourdeaux, and done your message to the Duchess, who right humbly received us,
and gave us gentle entertainment: when she had heard us speak, and knew that
we were your Messengers, she made us the best cheer that she could devise,
and said that the cause why she had not sent her Sons to your Court before
this time, was by reason of their young age, and she humbly requires your
grace, to hold both her and her two Sons excused, and that at this next
Easter she will send them to your Court. As for her Sons, trust me my Lord,
they are two such lovely Gentlemen, as we took great delight in beholding
them, especially Huon the eldest, he is so fair and so well fourmed, that
nature cannot amend him. Also my Lord, for the love of you, she has given
each of us a goodly Horse, and a rich Gown, and a hundred Florents of gould.
My Lord, the goodness, the valor, and the courtesy that is in the Duchess,
and in her Sons cannot be recounted: and on their behalf are we to entreat
your Majesty, to retain them always in your favor and good grace, and to
pardon the fault of their long absence.

Chap. V.
How the Emperor was content with the report of the two Knights, and how the
Traitor Earl Amerie went and complained to Charlot the Kings Son.

WHen the Emperor had heard the Messengers speak, he was right joyful and
said: I have always heard say, yt a good Tree brings forth good fruit, I
speak it in the behalf of Duke Seuin, who in his time was a valiant and true
Knight, and by that I see that ye two Children resemble their good Father. I
perceive they have received my Messengers right honorably, and with great
reverence have given the^ no mean gifts, which shall be unto them auailable in
time to come, for they shall no sooner be come into my Court: but in despite
of any that shall speak against them, I will do for them in such wise, that
it shall be an example to all other to do well, for I will make them (for
love I bare to their Father, of my privy Counsel) and turning then to old
Duke Naymes, said: My Lord, always your kindred have been good and true, and
therefore I will, that Amerie be banished from my Court, for he nor ever any
of his lineage, gave as yet any good counsel. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I
knew well the long absence of Duke Seuins Sons, was for none other cause but
by reason of their youth. When Earl Amerie heard the King speak, and saw
beside how he was offended against him, he was sorrowful, and so departed
secretly from the Court, and swear that he would provide for the two Sons of
Duke Seuin such a train, as should cost both their lives, and hazard the
heaviness and trouble of all France beside. So he went to his lodging
sorrowful and in great displeasure, and then he imagined and studied on the
matter, and how to bring about his Enterprise, then he departed from his
lodging, and went unto Charlot the Kings Son, with whom he was right privy,
he found him sitting on a rich bed, communing with a young Knight, then Amerie
showing a very sad countenance, the tears in his eyes and treachery in his
heart, kneeling down before Charlot, who had of him great pity to see him in
that case: the Prince took him up, and demanded wherefore he made that
sorrow, and whether any man had displeased him. My Lord, (quoth Amerie) my
grief is not without great cause, for ye two Sons of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux
shall come to the Court, and (as I have heard say) the King has promised that
at their coming they shall be made of his privy council, so that none other
about the King but they, shall have any honor or reckoning made of them. And
assure your self my Lord, that if the State be thus advanced: they that now
are greatest about his Majesty, shall then scarce have a look, or any
countenance at all. So that within short while, the best parts in your Fathers
Kingdom will they be Lords of, and you your self if you suffer this, will
hold no grace or favor with the Emperor. Therefore my Lord I require you to
help me now in this business, for in time past, Duke Seuin their Father by
great wrong and treason, took from me a strong Castle of mine own, and I
never did him displeasure, therefore you ought to aid me in this serious
matter, for I am of your lineage, derived of the Noble Queen your Mother.

When Charlot had well understood Earl Amerie, he demanded in what manner he
might aid him. Sir, (quoth he) I will show you, I shall assemble the best of my
lineage, and you shall let me have of yours threescore Knights well armed, and I
shall lie in the way to meet with the two Boys, and I shall lay the
ambushment in a little wood, a league from Montleherry on the way to Orleance,
by ye which way they must needs come, and there we shall set on them and slay
them, so that none shall dare to speak thereof, and if it be known after, who
dare speak against you, or wear any healme in feeld against you? Sir (quoth
Charlot) qualify and appease your sorrow, for I shall never have joy in my
heart until I be revenged of those two Boys, go and make ready your men,
and I shall prepare mine, and I will go my self with you, the sooner to make
an end of this business. When Amerie heard Charlot so liberally to offer
himself to go in his aid: he thanked him, and embraced his Leg, and
Sicophant-like would have kissed his Shoe, but Charlot would not suffer him:
but took him up, and said. Sir have you, and now be diligent, that this
business may come to a good end. Amerie departed from Charlot right joyful,
and at the day appointed he ceased not day, nor night, to assemble his men and
his nearest friends, and in the Evening before he came to Charlot, who was as
then also ready with his men, and as secretly as they might they departed
about the hour of midnight out of Paris all armed, and they stayed not until
they came to the place appointed, to tarry the coming of the two Sons of
Duke Seuin. Now I will leave to speak of them, and return to the two Sons
of Duke Seuin, Huon, and Gerardin.

Chap. VI.
How the two Sons of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux took leave of the Duchess
their Mother, and how in their way they ouer-tooke the good Abbot of Cluny
their Uncle, going toward Paris to the Emperor Charlemaine.

YOu have heard here before how ye Kings Messengers departed from Bourdeaux,
then the two Sons made them ready to go to the Court, richly apparelled, and
well fournished of every thing needful, as well of gold and silver and other
apparel of silk as to their state appertained: then there assembled the
Barons of ye Country, to whom they recommended their Lands and Signiories, and
did choose out ten Knights and four Counselors to ride with them, to aid and
to govern their business. Then they sent for the provost of Gerone called Sir
Guyre, to whom they recommended all the affairs of Justice. Then when Huon and
his Brother had chosen them that should go in their company: they took their
leave of the Duchess their Mother, and of the Barons of ye Country, who sore
did weep because of their departure, for the which they had good occasion so
to do, and more if they had known the hapless adventure, that afterward
befell them on the way. Or had the good Duchess but dreamed thereof: she
would never have suffered them to depart from her, for after there fell such
mischief, that it is a lamentable thing to recount it. Thus the two Brethren
departed and kissed their Mother sore weeping. Then they took their Horses and
their company, and in passing by the Streets of the Town, the people made
great sorrow for their departing, and sore weeping, prayed to God to be their
guide and conduct. The weepings and lamentations were so extreme, that the
two Brethren could not have so firm courage: but that they gave many a sore
sigh at the departing out of the Town, and when they had ridden a certain
space, and that their sorrow was somewhat appeased, then Huon called his
Brother Gerard and said: Brother we go to the Court to serve the King,
wherefore we have cause to be joyful: therefore let us two sing a song to
refresh us. Brother (quoth Gerard) my heart is not very joyful, to sing or
make any sport at all, for this night I dreamed a maruailous dream, me
thought three Leopardes assailed me, and drew my heart out of my body: but
me thought you esaped safe and sound, and returned back. Wherefore dear
Brother, if so it be your pleasure, to withstand my dream, which makes me
dread our journey to be dangerous: might I prevail with you, we would ride
back again to Bourdeaux to our Mother, who will be joyful of our return.
Brother (quoth Huon) and God will, we shall not return for fear of a dream,
it should be forever to our reproach and shame, I will not return to Bourdeaux
until I have seen the King. Therefore sweet Brother dismay you not, but
rather make good cheer, our Lord Jesus Christ shall guide and conduct us in
sauegard. Thus these two Brethren road night and day, so long until they
perceived before them ye Abbot of Cluny with a thirty Horse in his company,
as he was going to the Kings Court.

When Huon perceived that company, he called his Brother Gerardin and said:
Lo yonder I see men of religion holding the way to Paris, and you know well
when we departed from the Duchess our mother* she charged us that we should
always company with good people, therefore it is good that we make have to
overtake them. Brother quoth Gerardin, your pleasure he fulfilled, so they rode
so long that they ouertooke the Abbot who regarded on the right side, and saw
the two Brethren coming to overtake him. Then he steed still and saw Huon,
who came riding on before, Huon saluted him humbly, and the Abbot in like
manner to him, and demanded whether he r^ad so hastily, and from whence he
came, and what he was, and who was his Father. Sir (quoth Huon) since it is
your pleasure to know, Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux was our Father, it is Seven
years since he departed this life. And Sir behold here my Brother, who is
younger then I, and we are going to noble King Charlemaines Court, to relieve
of him our Lands and Country, for he has sent for us by two noble Knights,
and Sir we are in doubt of some trouble by ye way: when the good Abbot
understood that they were Sons to Duke Seuin, he was right joyful, and in
token of true amity he embraced them one afte^ another, and said: Dear
friends have no doubt, for by the grace of Jesus Christ I shall conducte you
safely to Paris, for Duke Seuin your Father was my Coozen German, therefore I
am bound to aid you, and know for troth, that I am sworn of the great council
with King Charlemaine, and if there be any that will move or stirr^ against
you, I shall aid you to my power, wherefore you may ride surely in my company
without any doubt. Sir (quoth Huon) I thank you: thus they road talking with
the Abbot their kinsman, and that night they came to Montleherry. Then the next
day they arose beetimes and heard Mass, and afterward took their Horses, and
they were in all a fourscore Horses, and they road so long, until they came to
a little wood-side, whereas Charlot and Earl Amerie lay closely ambushed,
there they espied Huon and Gerard riding before, whereof they were joyful.
Then Amerie said to Charlot: Sir, now is the time come, to be revenged of the
damage that Duke Seuin did to me, yonder I see his two Sons coming, if
they be not incontinent slain by us, we are not worthy to have any Land or
life: And Sir, by their death you shall be Lord of Bourdeaux, and of all the
Duchy of Aquitaine.

Chap. VII.
How by the council of Earl Amerie they ran first at Gerardin Brother to
Huon, and bare him to the earth, and sore wounded him, whereof Huon was right
sorrowful.

WHen that Charlot understood Earl Amerie, he stretched him in his stirrops,
and took a spear with a sharp head, and issued alone out of the wood: when
Amerie saw that Charlot went out of the wood alone, he drew a little out of
the way, and said to his men: suffer Charlot alone, there need none go to aid
him. This said the false Traitor, because he desired nothing else: but that
one of the Sons of Duke Seuin might slay Charlot, and so himself detecting
them of the murder, by this means he might compass his damnable intent.
Charlot came against these two Brethren, the Abbot of Cluny saw Charlot
coming all armed, and saw in the wood a great number of armed men more, then
he stood still, and called Huon and Gerard, and said: Dear Nephews, I
perceive in yonder wood a Knight all armed, and the wood full of horsemen, I
cannot tell what they mean. Have you done any wrong to any man? if you have
done, or hold any thing that is not your own, step forth and offer him
reason, and promise to make amends. Sir, (quoth Huon) I know no man living
that I or my Brother have done unto him any displeasure, nor we know not that
any creature does hate us. Then Huon said to his brother: Brother ride on
before, and meet with yonder Knight, and demand what is his pleasure. Gerard
road forth and met with Charlot, and demanded what his pleasure was to have,
or whether he was keeper of that passage or not, and demanded any tribute or
not, if he did he was ready to pay it. Charlot answered him fiercely and
said: What art thou? Gerard answered and said: Sir, I am of the City of
Bourdeaux, and Son to Duke Seuin, whom God pardon, and here after comes
Huon mine elder Brother, and we are going to Paris to the Kings Court, to
relieve our Lands and our Fees, and to serve him, and if there be any that will
any thing with us, let him come to Paris and we shall do him reason. Hold thy
tongue, (quoth Charlot) whether thou will or not I will have reason for some
wrongs done me by thy Father Duke Seuin, for he took three of my Castles from
me, and I could never know the reason thereof. But now since thou art here, I
will be revenged of the wrong that thy Father did to me, for as long as thou
and thy Brother be alive, I shall never have joy in my heart: therefore stand
on thy ground, for before it be night I shall make thy life depart from thy
body. Sir, (quoth Gerard) have pity of me, you may see I am but naked without
armor. It shall be greatly to your shame and reproach, if I be thus slain by
you, it never comes of a gentle courage, or a Knight to assail any person
without armor or weapon: howbeit Sir I cry you mercy, well you see that I
have neither Sword, Sheeld, nor Spear, to defend me withal, you may see
yonder coming my elder Brother, who shall be ready to make you amends if any
harm has been done unto you. Peace, quoth Charlot) there is as now nothing so
dear unto me, as can move me contrary But that shamfully I shall put thee
to death, beware of me. Gerard who was but young, was in great fear, and
called upon our Lord God, and turned his Horse to come again to his Brother.
But Charlot who was in his desperate mood, ^ouched his Spear, ran after
Gerard, and struck him on the side with such force, that the Spear ran
through part of his body, and so bare him to the earth, weening he had been
slain: howbeit the stroke was not mortal, although insooth very dangerous,
for he was so sore ^urt, that he could not remove for pain that he felt. The
good Abbot of Cluny beheld Gerard in such sort borne to the ground, (overcome
with great grief) he said unto Huon: Ah Coozen, I see yonder your Brother
Gerard slain, the fight whereof slays my poor heart. Alas Sir, (quoth Huon)
for Gods sake council me in this heavy case, what will the Duchess our
Mother say, when she knows that my Brother is slain, who so lovingly has
nourished us both. Ah my dear Brother Gerard, now I see well your dream is
too true. Alas that I had believed it, for if I had, this had not happened. Ah
Sir, (quoth Huon) to the Abbot, I desire you to assist me, for if I should
likewise be slain, yet I will go and demand of yonder Knight, for what
occasion he has slain my Brother, nor I shall never return until I have
slain him, or he me. Ah fair Nephew, (quoth the Abbot,) beware what you do,
have no trust to be succored by me, for you know well in this case, that I
cannot aid you, I am a Priest, and therefore may not be where any man is
slain. Sir, (quoth Huon) of such company as yours is, we might well forbear.
Then Huon beheld heavily the Ten Knights that came with him from Bourdeaux, and
said: Sirs, you that are come hither with me, and have been nourished in my
house: how say you, will you aid me to revenge the death of my Brother, and to
succor me against these false murderers that has lain in wait and slain my
Brother Gerard? Sir, (quoth they) were we sure to dye in the quarrel, yet we
should aid and succor you, therefore go forth and have no doubt: and then
they road forth with such small defense as they had. Then Huon spurred forth
his Horse with such fierceness, that he made the earth to tremble under him,
and his Knights followed him with hardy courage, determining to do valiantly.
When the good Abbot saw his Nephew depart and his company, he had great pity
on him, and prayed our Lord God to defend them from death. And the Abbot with
his company followed softly after Huon to see what end the matter should came
unto. Huon road so long until he came whereas his Brother lay sore wounded.
Then he cried aloud: my right dear Brother, if there be any life in your body
answer me and show me how you feel your self? Brother (quoth Gerard) I am
sore wounded, I cannot tell if I may escape alive, think on your self, it is
no loss of me, fly you away, yonder you may see how the wood is full of armed
men, and they (...) for nothing but to slay you as they have done me.

Chap. VIII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux was sorrowful when he saw his Brother Gerard so sore
wounded, and how he slew Charlot: and how he came before the King at Paris and
appeached him of treason.

WHen Huon heard his Brother, he was very sorrowful, and said: that he had
rather dye then depart without revenging of him, and God will I shall not depart
till I have slain him that has brought you into this peril: then he spurred
his Horse and followed after Charlot, who was returning to the wood to his
company: but when Charlot perceived how Huon followed him, he turned his Horse
and beheld him fiercely. Then Huon cried with a hye voice, and said: Villain,
what art thou that have slain my Brother, where were thou borne? Charlot
answered and said: I was borne in Almaine, and I am Son to Duke Thy^rey:
Huon believed he had said troth, for Charlot had a disguised Sheeld, because he
would not be known. Ah, (quoth Huon) God give thee shame for ye fact, why
have thou slain my Brother? Then Charlot answered boldly and said, thy Father
Duke Seuin took from me three Castles and would never do my right: therefore
I have slain thy Brother, and in likewise so shall I thee.

Then Huon in great rage said, false, untrue Knight and murderer, before it be
night I shall quittance this wrong upon thine own head. Then Charlot said,
beware thee of me, for I defy thee. Huon who had no armor to defend him,
took his Cloak of scarlet and wrapped it about his arm, and drew his Sword,
and spurred his horse, and came against Charlot with his Sword in his hand, and
Charlot on the other part came against him with his Spear in the rest, and
struck Huon about the right arm, so that the stroke passed through the
doubleness of his Cloak, and through his Gown and Shert, and mist his flesh.
Thus Huon escaped that stroke and thanked God thereof: then he lifted up his
sword with both his hands, and let the bridell of his horse go, and so with
all his might and virtue, he stroke Charlot on the healme in such wise, that
the cirkle nor coft of steel could not defend him: but that ye sword went into
his brayn, and so he fell to the earth and never arose after: thus Charlot was
slain miserably. Then the Traitor Amerie being in the wood, perceived well
how Charlot was slain, whereof he thanked God and said, Charlot is dead God
be thanked, for by that stroke I shall bring France into such a trouble,
that I shall attain to all my desires. Then Huon seeing Gharlot dead, returned
to Gerard his Brother lying still on the earth, brought him Charlots horse, and
demanded if he might ride or not. Brother, (quoth Gerard) I think yes, if my
wound were bound fast I would assay.

Then Huon alighted, and took a piece of his sheart, and therewith bound his
brothers wound, and then Huons knights came unto him, and help to set Gerard
upon his horse: but for the pain that he suffered he swounded twice, then when
he came again to himself, they set him upon an amblinge Palfray, and a Knight
behind him to sustain him up right. Then he said unto Huon: Brother I desire
you let us depart from hence, without going any further forward, rather let us
return to Bourdeaux to the Duchess our Mother, for I doubt if we go any
further, that some great ill shall come unto us: I promise you if we be
perceived by them that be in the wood, and that they know that you have
slain him that hurt me: I fear me they will slay us all. Brother, (quoth
Huon,) by the grace of God I shall not return for fear of death, until I
have seen the King to appeach him of treason, when under his conduct and
commandment we be thus betrayed, and watched by the way to murder us. Brother,
(quoth Gerard) as your pleasure is, so be it. Then they road forth the way to
Paris fair and easily, because of Gerard who was sore hurt. Then the Knights
that were ambushed in the wood, said to sir Amerie: Sir, what shall we do? see
Charlot is slain and lies in the plain, and if we shall go after them that
has done this deed, it shall be ill done of us if they escape away alive.
Then sir Amerie answered and said: Let them go, God curse them, let us follow
them a far off, until they come to Paris, and let us ^arie with us the body
of Charlot, and bring it to the King, and there you shall see what I shall say,
and if you will agree to bear witness of that I shall say to the King, I will
make you all so rich that ye shall never be poor after. They answered, they
would fulfill his pleasure, then they went out of the wood, and came there as
Charlot lay dead, then they took him up and laid him before Earl Amerie on
his horse neck, and so road forth: but mischief and mishap follow them, for
as much as in them lay, they labored to have Huon judged to death. Thus they
road the hye way to Paris, and the Abbot of Cluny, who was ridden on before,
looked behind him, and saw the two Brethren coming after him, then he tarried,
and demanded of Huon what adventure he had found. Sir, (quoth he) I have
slain him that has sore hurt my Brother, where he thought to have slain me,
but thanked be God. I have left him dead in the place. Fair Nephew (quoth the
Abbot) I am sorry thereof, but seeing it is done, if any hurt come thereby,
and that you be accused before the King, I shall aid you with all my power.
Sir, (quoth Huon) of that I thank you, then Huon looked behind him, and saw
where Earl Amerie with all his power came fair and easily after him,
therewith his heart trembled. Then he said unto the Abbot: Sir, what shall I
do? yonder I see them approach that desire my death, they be the same that
lay in the wood watching for us. Fair Nephew (quoth the Abbot) have no doubt,
for they that come after us come but a soft pace, they make no semblance to
overtake you, let us ride on a good pace, we shall be anon at Paris, it is now
but two miles thither. Then they road on, and rested not until they came to
the Pallaice, and being there alighted, Huon went up, holding his Brother by
the one hand, and the Abbot by the other hand. There they saw the King sitting
among his Barons, then Huon saluted Duke Naymes and all the other Barons and
said: Health and fair hap to all these noble Lords, but shame and dishonor to
my Lord the King, for there was never heard of a fowler treason, then the King
has practiced against us, seeing that by his Messengers and his Letters
Patents he has sent for us to do him service, the which commandment we have
in all duty obayed as to our Sovereign Lord, but by false treason weight has
been laid secretly for us, and a close ambush to have murdered us by the way,
first they assailed my brother here present, and by them he was brought into
such danger, that they left him for dead, and afterward they set upon me to
have slain me, but by the aid of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with my Sword I
so defended me, that he that thought to have slain us, I have slain him.

Chap. IX.
How the King was sore displeased with Huon, because he had appeached him of
treason: and how Huon showed all the manner why he slew the Knight that
wounded his Brother.

WHEN the King had heard Huon, he said: Knight beware, and think well what
thou have said here before all my Barons, for never in all my life did I
either act, or give my consent to any treason. But by the faith that I owe unto
my maker, and by my beard, if it be so that thou can not prove this that
thou layest to my charge: I shall cause both thee and thy Brother to dye an
evil death. When Huon heard the King how he took his words, he stepped forth
and said: Great King, behold here my Brother, who by thy means is sore hurt
and in ieopardie of his life: And so did take off his Brothers Gown and his
Dublet to his shyrt, and he did open the great wound, so that the blood ran out
abundantly, even that it enforced Gerardin to fall in a swound before the King
and his Barons, through the great anguishe that he felt: whereof the Emperor
took such compassion, that he could not choose but much bemone him. And
therefore immediately sent for his Surgeons, causing the^ to search his wounds,
demanding if they could save his life or no, and when they had thoroughly
searched the wound, they said: Sir, by the help of God within this month he
shall be whole and sound. The King was glad of that answer, and beholding Huon
said: Since thou layest this deed to my charge, thou must think, that thou
have touched the royal reputation of a King, and that in such sort, as very
hardly may the condition of Majesty endure it. But by my Countries honor, and
by the Crown that I justly bear upon my head, if I may know who has done
this heinous offense: I shall do both thy Brother and thee such right and
justice, as it shall remain for a perpetual memory of due honor, and that
your selves shall report, you have no cause to complain. My Lord, answered
Huon, I humbly thank you, for through obaying your commandment this
mischief is fallen unto us. I cannot think nor know that any time of our life
either I or my Brother did ever wrong or trespass to any creature: but thus
(by your Kingly patience) the case happened. After we departed from Bourdeaux,
we found no adventure, but when we came within a League of Montleherry, we
met with our Uncle the Abbot of Cluny, and so fell in company with him, to
conduct us to the Court, and so we road together until we came on this side
Montleherry, then we saw a little wood, and by the brightness of the Son we
saw the healmes, and spears, and sheelds of them that were ambushed in the
wood, and that one came out of the wood all armed his spear in his hand, and
sheeld about his neck, and he came a soft pace toward us, then all we stood
still, and sent my brother to the knight to know whether they were Spies or men
to keep the passage, to the intent, that if they demanded any Tribute, they
should have right of us, if they would have any of us. When my brother came
near to ye Knight, he demanded what we were, and my brother said how we were
the Children of the Duke of Bourdeaux, and were coming by your commandment
to your Court to relieve our Lands and Fees of your grace: then the Knight
said, how we were the same persons that he sought for, and said how that a
Seven years passed, Duke Seuin our Father had taken from him three Castles,
the which was never so: then my brother offered him, that if he would come to
Paris before you and your Barons, he should have right done to him if he had
any wrong done to him. Then the Knighte answered, that he would not do so,
and therewith suddenly couched his spear, and stroke my brother as you see,
he being unarmed, so that he fell to the earth, weening he had been slain, and
then he road again fair and easily toward the wood. When I saw my brother
borne to the earth, I had such sorrow at my heart, that I could tarry no longer
to be avenged, then I demanded of mine Uncle if he would aid me, he^
answered and said no, because he was a Priest, so he and all his Monks
departed and left me alone, then I took the Ten Knights that came with me out
of my Country, and so I road as fast as I could, to the intent that he should
not escape that had so wounded my brother, and as soon as he saw that I
followed him, he returned against me, then I demanded of him what he was, he
said, he appertained unto Duke Terrey of Arden, then I demanded why he had
slain my brother, he answered and said, in likewise he would^ serve me, and
therewith he couched his spear, and stroke me on the side through my Gown
and Dublet, and hurt not my flesh, as it was the pleasure of God: then I
wrapped my Mantle about mine arm, and drew out my Sword, and with both my
hands as he passed by me, I gave him such a stroke that I cloue his head near
to the teeth, and so he fell down to the earth dead. I know not what he is,
but whatsoever he be, I have slain him, and if there be any that will demand
right in this cause, let him come into your royal Court before all your
Peers, and I shall do him reason, if it be found that I have done any wrong.
When I had slain him, I laid my Brother upon the dead Knights horse, and
ouertooke the Abbot mine Uncle. Then as I road and looked behind me, I saw
them that were ambushed in the wood come ryding after, and one Knight came
before the rest, bringing upon his horse the said dead Knighte, I know well if
they be not come, they will soon be here. When King Charlemaine understood
Huon, he had great marvel what Knight it was that was slain, and said unto
Huon, know for troth I shall do you reason, for I know none so great in my
Realm whosoever it be, but if I can prove on him any point of treason, I
shall cause him to dye an evil death, for the matter touches me right near,
seeing under mine assurance and by my commandment you are come hither. Then
the King commanded that Gerard should be had to a goodly Chamber, and well
looked unto, the which was done.

Chap. X.
How Charlot the Kings Son was brought before him dead, and of the great sorrow
that he made, and how Earl Amerie appeached Huon for the death of Charlot, and
how the King would have run upon Huon, and of the good counsel that Duke
Naymes of Bauier gave to the King.

WHEN Huon of Bourdeaux and the Abbot of Cluny his Uncle heard the good will
of the King, and the offer that he made, they kneeled down to have kissed his
foot, and thanked him of his courtesy, but the King took the^ up, then the
Abbot said, My Lord, all that my Nephew Huon has said is true, the King said,
I believe you well, the King did to them great honor, and feasted them in his
Pallaice royally: but he had great desire to know the troth of this case, and
said: Huon, and you the Abbot of Cluny, know for certainty, I have a Son
whom I love entirely, if you have slain him in doing such a villainous deed
as to break my assurance, I do pardon you, so that it be as you say. My Lord,
(quoth Huon) for that I thank your grace, and surely the truth is as I have
showed you. Then the King sent for Charlot his Son, so he was searched for in
his lodging, and news were returned, how he was departed out of the Town the
night before, so the Messenger departed, and when they came into the street,
they saw where Earl Amerie came ryding with Charlot dead on his horse neck,
and they heard in the Streets Lords, Knights, Ladies, and Damsels making great
cries, and pitious complaints for Charlot the Kings Son whom^ they saw dead.
The Messengers were amazed at these exclamations, but at last they perceived it
was for the death of Charlot, then they returned to the Pallaice, But by reason
of the outcries and pityous moan the people made, with often repetition of
Charlots name, (all which the Emperor leaning at a window confusedly heard)
his heart waxed woondrous heavy, saying: Me thinks I hear such sorrow as
has not been usual, and my Son Charlots name is tossed too and fro in this
outcry, it makes me fear that it is my Son whom Huon has slain. Then
calling Duke Naymes unto him, requested him to go forth, and resolve him in
this matter.

Then Duke Naymes departed, and incontinent he encountered Charlot borne dead
between four Knights upon a Sheeld, when he saw that, he was right
sorrowful, so that he could not speak one word, then the unhappy Earl^
Amerie went up into the Hall, and came before the King and all his Barons, and
there he laid down Charlot. When Charles saw his Son so slain, the dolor
and sorrow^ that he made was unspeakable, it was pity to see him, and Duke
Naymes was as sorrowful as any other seeing the pityfull adventure, and also
the moan that the Lords made: then he came to the King and said. Good my Lord,
comfort your self in this misaduenture, for by ouer-greeuing at this ill hap,
you can win nothing, nor recover your Child again, you know right well, that
my Coozen Ogier the Dane slew my Son Bertrand, who bare your Message of
defiance to ye king of Pauey, yet I did suffer it without any great sorrow
making, because I knew well sorrow could not recover him again. Naymes (quoth
the king) I cannot forget this, I have great desire to know the cause of this
deed. Then Duke Naymes said to Duke Amerie: Sir, know you who has slain
Charlot, and for what cause? Then Earl Amerie stepped forth and said with a
loud voice; Great King Charlemaine, why demand you any further, when you have
him before you that has slain your Son? and that is Huon of Bourdeaux, who
stands here in your presence. When the King heard what Earl Amerie had
said, he looked fiercely upon Huon, and had stroke^ him with his Scepter, but
for Duke Naymes, who blamed the King and said: Forbear my Lord, what mean you
to do this day? to receive the Children of Duke Seuin into your Court, and
has promised to do them right and reason, and n^w would slay them? so may all
such as shall hear of the matter say, that you have sent for them to no other
end but to murder them, and that you sent your Son to lie in weight for them,
to have slain them. By this may be discerned, that you forget (...) Majesty
of a King, and express actions unseeming Charlemaine: demand of Earl Amerie
the cause why he had forth Charlot your Son, and why that he assailed the
two Brethren. Huon being there in presence, was greatly abashed at the Kings
fury, receiving him first so kindly, and now would kill him, he was in great
fear, and as much as he might he drew back from the King, and was greatly
agreeued for that he had slain the Kings Son not knowing him. And blame him
not to be much troubled in mind, when he saw no man that appertained to him,
to aid him, or to maintain his right, but only the good Abbot of Cluny his
Uncle, who could give him none other aid but with his words: yet he took on
him courage, and right humbly said to the King. My Lord, I require your grace
touch me not, but know for troth, he that lies there dead before you, I slew
him in my defense, and not knowing that he was your Son Charlot, for if I had
known him, I would in no wise have touched him, and you may well know my Lord,
if I had known that it had been he, I would not have come to you for rescue,
I would rather have fled away so far that no man should have heard any
tidings of me: therefore for Gods sake I require you as heartily as I can, let
me have right, I submit my body to abide the judgment of your noble Peers,
and if it can be proved that I slew Charlot knowing him to be your Son, then
my Lord, let me have a shamfull death: then all the Peers and Barons being
there, said with a hye voice, how he had spoken reasonably, and that if Earl
Amerie would any thing say to the contrary, it was time then to speak and to
show it.

Chap. XI.
How the Traitor Earl Amerie charged Huon before the Emperor, that he
traitorously with treason pretended had slain the Kings Son, and in that
quarrel he appealed Huon to battle.

WHEN the King had heard Huon speak, he beheld Duke Naymes, and desired him to
give his advice. My Lord, (quoth ye Duke) I can say none other thing unto you
but as I said before: demand Earl Amerie why he led forth your Son all
armed, and kept the ambushment in the wood to set upon the two Brethren, or
else what was it that he sought for there. Then Earl Amerie said: My Lord, I
shall show you the troth, and if I do otherwise, let me dye a shameful death.
True it is, this night passed your Son sent for me, desiring me to ride with
him on hawking, and I desired him to abide until the morning, but he said that
he would needs go before night, then I granted to go with him, so that he
would ride armed, for I doubted the men of Arden, to the intent that if we met
with any of them, we might be able to resist them, and so we did, thus we road
out of this town and came into a little wood, and there we cast off our
Hawks, and there we lost one of them, and therewith the same way came the
Children of Duke Seuin, and there we saw Huon the eldest who is here present,
who had taken up our Hawk, and your Son came in courteous manner unto him,
and desired him to render again his Hawk, but the Traitor would not in no
wise, then Gerard the younger brother came to your Son, and they strove so
together that your Son stroke him, then Huon without any word speaking,
lifted up his sword and so villaynously slew your Son: then he and his
Brother ran away so fast, that we could not ouer-take them, whereof we were
sorry. Thus he knew well your Son, and he slew him, and if he will say to the
contrary, here is my Gage, which I present here before you, and if he be so
hardy as to take it up, I shall make him confess ere it be night, that it is
true that I have said: and this I will prove with my body against his.

Chap. XII.
How the Abbot of Cluny would prove that the saying of Earl Amerie was false
and untrue: and how the Earl did cast his Gage against Huon, who took it up.

AFter that Earl Amerie had ended his tale, the Abbot of Cluny stepped forth and
said to the King: My Lord, you never heard so false a tale before as this
Traitor Amerie has said, for I and four more of my Monks being Priests here
present, are ready to swear and take our solemn oaths, that the saying of
this Traitor is false, and therefore there ought no Gage to be laid in that
cause, seeing there is true witness of the matter. Abbot (quoth the King) the
witness is to be believed: Sir Amerie how say you thereto? My Lord, (quoth he)
I would be loath to speak against the Abbot, but the troth is as I have said,
the Abbot may say as it please him: but if Huon be so hardy to deny this that
I have said before you, let him come into the field against me, and before it
be night, I shall cause him to confess it openly. When the Abbot heard this,
he grew offended, and looking stearnly upon Huon, said: Fair Nephew offer your
gage, for the right is with thee, and if thou be vanquished in this quarrel, if
ever I return into mine Abbey, there is no Saint in my Church, but I shall
with a staff beat and break them al^ to pieces, for if God will suffer such a
wrong, I shall give such str^akes upon the shryne of Saint Peter, that I shall
leave neither gould nor precious stone whole together. Uncle, (quoth Huon) and
God will, I shall not let to take up his gage, for I shall prove that falsely
and untruly, Sir Amerie lies, as an evil and a false Traitor, and shall make
him to confess, that I never knew that he that I flew was the Kings Son.
Then the King said, that Huon must give hostage. My Lord, (quoth Huon) you
shall have my Brother, I cannot deliver you any that is so near or dear to me
as he is, for here I have neither Coozen nor Kinsman that will lay in hostage
for me. Fair Nephew (quoth the Abbot) say not so, for I and my Monks will be
pledges for you, and if any thing should fall unto you otherwise then well,
which God forbid, then shame have King Charlemaine, without he hang upon
gallows both me and all my Monks. Go too Abbot (quoth the King) you say ill,
for I would never do that: then said the King to Amerie, bring in pledges for
your part. The Traitor answered: My Lord, here be two of my Nephews shall
be pledges for me. I am content (quoth the King) upon this condition, that if
thou be vanquished or discomfited, I shall cause them to dye an evil death.
Then the pledges said, that they would be no pledges upon that condition, let
other be pledges who would: but they said, if the king would take them on the
loosing of their Lands, they were content, and the King granted them.

Chap. XIII.
How those two Champions came into the feeld whereas they should fight,
accompanied with their friends.

THus as ye have heard, both parties delivered pledges, then the King to be in
the more suertie, put them both in a Tower until the day of the Battle: then
the feeld was ordained, for the King had sworn that his Son should not be
buried, until he that were vanquished were hanged, if he were not slain in
the feeld. Then he commanded Duke Naymes to be ready with an hundred Knights to
keep the feeld, and to see that no treason should be done: for he said, he had
rather loose the best City of his Realm. My Lord (quoth Duke Naymes) by the
grace of God the matter shall be so ordered for the suertie of both parties, that
none shall have wrong: the which thing was done so diligently, that every
thing was ready, so both parties were brought into the Church of our Lady in
Paris, accompanied with their friends, as such a case requires: with Amerie
was his next friends, all issued of ye genealogy of Ganelon, and when they
both had heard Mass, each took a draught of wine, and then they were richly
armed and mounted upon good Horses, and so took the way to the feeld, the
Stages were filled, and the King and his Barons there present, abiding for the
two Champions, who came one after another through the Streets. First came Earl
Amerie, and he road until he came into the feeld, and then he alighted and
saluted the King and all his Barons. Then Huon came anon after, accompanied
with a goodly sort, there were leaning in the windows Ladies and Damsels a
great number, all who prayed our Lord Jesus Christ to aid and defend Huon from
the Traitor Amerie. The people complained, and thought it impossible that Huon
should resist against Earl Amerie, because Huon was so fair and young, but of
the age of four and twenty years. But as he was fair, so was he well made
of body, no Knight more gallant and seemly, nor none more repleat with
virtue: therefore he was much bemoned both of men and women that saw him
pass by. And because Earl Amerie was a big boned man, a valiant and an expert
Knight in arms, none stronger in all the Kings Court, he was inward with the
King and wel-beloued: every one greatly pityed that he was such a traitor,
for a worse could not be found in any Realm, he had great trust in his own
strength, and little regarded Huon of Bourdeaux, thinking he should not long
endure against him. But there is a common proverb, which has beguiled many a
man, it is said, that a small rain abateth a great wind, for if our Lord Jesus
Christ will save Huon, the force and puissance of Earl Amerie shall do Huon
but little hurt, for the right excellent parts and great courage that was in
Huon, defended him, as you shall hear hereafter.

Chap. XIIII.
How the two Champions made their oaths upon the relics, that their saying
was true, and what the King said.

THus Huon road until he came into the feelde, where he saluted the King and
all the Barons right humbly, then he approached to the relikes, and there made
his solemn oathe in the presence of Duke Naymes of Bauier, who was keeper of
the feeld, affirming that when he slew Charlot, he knew him not to be the Kings
Son, and that as he was true Knight, and loyal liegeman to the Emperor,
whatsoever Earl Amerie had said was false and untrue, and that he lied like a
false Traitor, and so kissed the Relics. When Huon had thus taken his oath,
Earl Amerie stepped forth all afraid, and swoore that Huons oath was false, and
that surely he knew it was Charlot when he slew him, because he claymed his
Hawk, the which Huon had taken up, and that he would cause him to confess ere
it were night. When he had sworn, he thought to have returned to his Horse,
but stumbled so, that he had near hand fallen to the earth. All that saw it,
took it for an ill sin, and judged in their minds, that the matter was
likely to go evil against Earl Amerie. When both these Champions had taken
their oaths, and that Duke Naymes had caused the feeld to be avoided, having
set the Keepers of the feeld in due order as appertained thereto: then the two
Champions leapt upon their Horses, their Spears in their hands, and their
sheelds about their necks, the^ a cry was made, that none should be so hardy
to move or to make any token unto any of the parts upon pain of death. After
this cry made, the noble Emperor Charlemaine being full of ire and
displeasure, caused again to be proclaimed, that if it fortuned that the
vanquisher should slay his enemy in the feelde, before he confess the treason
for the death of his Son: that then the vanquisher should loose all his
Lands, and himself to be banished out of the Realm of France, and out of
the Empire of Room, forever. After proclamation was ended, Duke Naymes and the
other Barons and Peers came to the King and said: Alas my Lord, what will you
do? this that you have proclaimed, is against all the Statutes of the noble
Realm of France and Empire of Room, for often times it happens, that one
of the Champions is slain, and have no power to speak, shall therefore the
conqueror be so much iniuried? for the great renown which so long time has
been spread abroad of you, let it not now be wronged and blemished? let it not
be said, that you who have lived in so great dignity all the days of your
life, that now in your latter days you should become weaker then a Child: of
the which words the King took small regard.

Chap. XV.
How Huon of Bourdeaux and the Earl Amerie fought together before King
Charlemaine: and how the Traitor Amerie was slain by the noble prowess and
chivalry of Huon.

WHen King Charlemaine had heard Duke Naymes, he swoore by Saint Denis of
France, and by his crown and beard, that it should be as he had said, nor
otherwise he would not do it. Then the noble Barons were sorry and sore
displeased, and they departed from the King and said: that by all likelihood
from thence forward Right should have no place in his Court. Many noble Princes
and Barons murmoured sore at the Proclamation that was made, and the two
Champions drew apart and each of them fiercely regarded other. Then Earl
Amerie spoke aloud and said: thou Huon of Bourdeaux false traiterous Knight,
this day I shall cause thee to confess thy falsenesse, howbeit I have great
pity of thee, in regard of thy youth, if therefore thou will confess this
murder that thou have done, I shall desire King Charlemaine to have compassion
upon thee. When Huon heard the Traitor so speak, for anger he blushed red and
said: Ah thou false and most disloyal Knight, thy venomous words so full of
bitterness do nothing at all abash me, for that good right that I am in shall
aid me by the help of our Lord Jesus Christ, and I shall so punish thy
trespass, that this day I shall make thee to confess thy falsenesse, have
thereof no doubt. Therewith ^ouched their Spears, and gave such carrier to
their horses, that it seemed the thunder had fallen from heaven, and with their
sharp Spears they encountered in such wise, that their Spears brake to their
hands, so that the shiuers flew up high into the air and into the Kings Stage,
and both their Horses fell to the earth, and the Knights sore astonished with
their falling. Then very boldly they relieved themselves with their Swords in
their hands, and so approached each to other, and fought each with other so
long while, that Huons Horse strangled sir Ameries Horse, who when he saw his
horse slain, stoutly stepped to Huon for to have slain him: but Huon met him
valiantly, and lifting up his Sword, gave the Earl such a stroke that he was
astonished therewith, and staggred back more then two paces and a half, hardly
holding himself from falling to the earth, so that all that saw^ them, had
marvel of Huons virtue and force, seeing the great strength yt was in sir
Amerie. Then when Earl Amerie felt himself in such peril, he began to
despise the name of God, and of the glorious Virgin Marie: howbeit as well as
he might he approached to Huon, and with his Sword gave Huon such a stroke
on the helmet, that all the flowers and precious stones there flew abroad in
the feeld, and the cirkle of the helmet all to broken, and the stroke was so
puissant that Huon was therewith sore astonished, and perforce was feign to fall
on one of his knees to the earth, the other Leg but weakly supporting him.
There was present in the feeld Lords and Knights, and one of the Abbot of
Clunyes servants, who when he saw the great stroke that Huon had received, he
departed out of the feeld, and went into the church whereas he found his
master the Abbot at his prayers for the good speed of Huon his Nephew, to
whom the servant said. Ah my Lord, pray heartily to our Lord Jesus Christ to
succor your Nephew, for I saw him feign to kneel upon one of his knees, in
great doubt of death. Then the good Abbot without any answer, lifted up his
hands toward Heaven devoutly, and weeping, prayed to God to aid and defend the
honor of his Nephew, and to maintain his right. Thus Huon being in the feeld
in great doubt of his life, feeling the sturdie strength of Earl Amerie:
called with a good heart to our Lord Jesus Christ, requiring him to aid his
right, the which he knew to be most true. When Earl Amerie saw that Huon had
received of him such a heavy stroke, he said: Huon I believe thou will not
endure long, better it were that thou confess the deed before I slay thee,
for ere it be night I shall cause thee to wave in the wind. Hold thy tongue
thou false Traitor (quoth Huon) thine illness shall not aid thee, for I shall
bring thee to that point, that all thy friends shall have shame of thee. Then
Huon advanced him and made semblance to have stricken Amerie on ye helmet, and
Amerie lifted up his Sheeld to have received the stroke, but when Huon saw
that, he turned his stroke to a reuerse, and stroke Amerie under the arm
with his sharp Sword, so that he stroke off his arm, the which fell down in
the feeld Sheeld and all.

When Earl Amerie saw and felt that maruailous stroke, and that he had lost
his left arm, and saw it lie in the feeld, he was full of pain and sorrow,
and advised himself of a great treason, then he spoke to Huon and said: Ah
Noble Knight have pity of me, for wrongfully and without cause I have
appeached thee of the death of Charlot the kings Son, for I know in troth you
knew him not, but he is dead by my means, for I brought him into the wood to
have murdered you and your Brother: I am ready to acknowledge this before the
King and all his Barons, and to discharge you thereof: therefore I pray you
kill me not, I yield me unto you, take here my Sword. Then Huon came unto him,
and put down his arm to have taken the Sword, but then the false Traitor
Amerie with a reuerse stroke, struck Huon upon the arm, thinking to have
stricken it off, but he failed: howbeit he gave him a great wound in the arm,
so that the blood ran down. When Huon saw this horrible treason, he said: O
thou untrue and false Traitor, thine ^^esse can no longer save thee, for thou
shall n^uer do treason more: then Huon lifted up his Sword, and gave the Earl
such a maruailous stroke between the healme and the shoulder, that he struck
off his head clean from the body, so that the healme and head fell one way,
and the body another way. Alas what hap was it to Huon, that he did not
remember before he slew Amerie, the Proclamation that the Emperor had made
before, for afterward Huon suffered so much wrong and injury, as might move
the very hardest heart to compassionate his case, and as you shall more at
large understand in the following discourse.

Chap. XVI.
How after the Emperor Charlemaine had seen Earl Amerie was slain, he
commanded expressly, that Huon should avoid the Realm and Empire, and to be
banished thence for ever.

WHen that Duke Naymes, who kept the feeld, saw how by Huon the Earl was
slain, he was right joyful, and came to Huon and demanded how he did. Sir,
(quoth he) thanked be God I feel no dolor nor grief: then they brought him
to the Pallaice to the King, who was departed out of the feeld. When he saw the
Earl slain, and was thereof right sorrowful, then he demanded of Huon and of
Duke Naymes, if they had heard Earl Amerie confess the treason that he had
laid to Huon for the death of Charlot his Son. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I
think he did confess it, but I heard it not, for Huon pressed so sore upon
him, that he had no leisure to do it. Then Charlemaine said: Ah Earl Amerie,
I know certainly thou did never that treason, nor never thought it:
wherefore thou art slain wrongfully and without cause, for there was never a
truer Knight the^ thou were, and I am sure if thou had done it, thou would
have confessed it before me. Then the King said unto Huon, I charg thee
incontinent to avoid my Realm, out of the which I banish thee forever, nor
shall thou ever enjoy one foot of Land in Bourdeaux nor in Aquitaine, and also
I forbid thee that thou never be so hardy as to go to Bourdeaux, for by my
honor and crown, if I may know that thou go thither, I shall make thee to
die an evil death, nor there is no man living, though he be never so near a
friend unto me, but if he make any request for thee, I shall never love him,
nor he shall never after come in my sight. Then Huon said, Alas my Lord, what
justice is this? have I done any more then knighthood bound me too? have not
you and your Barons seen him discomfited in plain Battle, that has brought
you into all this trouble? undoubtedly my Lord, if you do to me as you say,
God in heaven be my witness, that never more wrong was done to any noble man.
This is but bad remembrance of the good service that the noble Duke Seuin my
Father has done unto you, for by this you show great example to all your noble
Barons and Knights, for them to be well advised, how from henceforth they order
themselves, and how to trust in you, when that by your own obstinate opinion,
founded upon an evil ground, and against all Statutes royal and imperial,
thus to execute your own unreasonable will. Certainly if it were any other
Prince beside you, that should do me this great wrong: ere I would consent so
to be dealt withal, many a Castle and many a good town should be destroyed
and brought to ruin, and many poor men more impouerished and disenherited,
and many a good Knight brought to death.

When Huon had thus spoken to the King, Duke Naymes stepped forth and said to
the King: My Lord, what mean you to do? you have seen that Huon has done no
more then his duty, having brought his enemy to confusion and slain him, you
may well think that it was the work of God, that such a Child should bring to
shame and discomfite such a puissant Knight as was Earl Amerie. Therefore my
Lord, if you do as you have said, neither I nor any other man shall ever trust
you, but every one far and near that shall hear of this cruelty, will
report that in the end of your days you are become senseless, and more like a
Tyrant then a wise Prince. Then Huon desired* all the Barons that were there
present, that they would all require the King to have more respect of him,
seeing they were all bound so to do, in that he was one of the Peers of the
Realm. Then all the Princes and Barons (holding Huon by the hand) kneeled down
before the King, and Huon said: Seeing it is so my Lord, that your displeasure
is such against me as you have expressed: Let your Barons and my self obtain
but this favor at your hands, that I may be confined to my own native
Country for ever, there to lead a poor and private life, never to be admitted
to your presence again, and for this grace we shall all right humbly thank
you.

Chap. XVII.
How King Charlemaine sent Huon to do a message in Babylon to the Admiral
Gaudise.

WHEN the Emperor had heard Huon speak, he said incontinent: avoid out of my
sight, for when I remember my Son Charlot whom thou have s^aine, I have no
part of me but it trembles for the displeasure I have to thee, and I charge
all my Barons here present that they never speak to me more for thee. When
Duke Naymes heard the King say so, he said unto all the Barons: My Lords, you
that he here present, have well heard the great unreasonableness that ye King
offers to one of our Peers, ye which as ye know well it is against right and
reason, and a thing not to be suffered. But because we know certainly the King
is our Sovereign Lord, we must suffer his pleasure: but from henceforth,
since he will use himself so, and do things against all reason and honor: I
will never abide an hour longer with him, but will depart and never return
again into the place, whereas such extremity and unreasonableness is used: I
will go into my Country of Bauier, and let the King do from henceforth as
he list. Then all the Barons departed with the Duke from the King, without
speaking any one word, and so left the King alone in his Pallaice.

When the King saw the Duke depart and his other Lords, he was right
sorrowful and in great displeasure, and said to the young Knights that were
left about him, how that he ought in nature to take heauylie the death of his
Son who was slain so disloyally, and could not likewise but grieve, to see
how his Barons had abandoned him and left him alone: therefore there is no
remedy I see well, but I must be forced somewhat to follow their wills, and
therewith he wept pitiously, and incontinent went forth and followed them,
saying: Duke Naymes and all you my Barons I desire you to return again, for
of force I must grant your requests, although it be against that promise yt I
made before. Then the Duke and all the rest returned to the Pallaice with the
King, who sat down on a bench of gould and his Barons about him. Then he sent
for Huon, who kneeled down before the King, requiring him humbly of mercy and
pity, to whom the King said: Huon, seeing thou would be at peace with me,
it is requisite that thou perform whatsoever I enjoin thee. Else my Lord,
(said Huon) God forbid, there is no man in the world owes you more obedience
then I do, or shall more gladly undertake whatsoever your highness shall
please to command me, dreadlesse of death or any danger, be it to go to Hell
gates, to fight with the fiendes there as sometime did Hercules, if I may
thereby be reconciled to your grace. Huon (quoth the King) I think to send
thee into a worse place, for of fifteen Messengers that I have sent, there was
never any returned again: I shall show thee whether thou shall go, seeing
thou will that I shall have mercy of thee. Thou must go to the City of
Babylon, to the Admiral Gaudise, and there do as I shall appoint thee, but
beware on pain of thy life that thou fail not to do it. When thou come
thither, mount up into his Pallaice, and there tarry until he be at his
dinner, and when thou see him sit at the table, then thou to be armed with
thy sword naked in thy hand, and the very greatest Lord that thou seeest sit
at his Table, whether he be King or Admiral, thou shall strike off his head:
and after that, enquire for fair Escleremond Daughter to the Admiral, and
kiss her there openly in his presence and before all other there present, for
I give thee to understand she is the fairest maid that is now living, this
being done, thou shall say to the Admiral Gaudise, that I command him to send
me, a thousand Hawks, a thousand Bears, and a thousand Waighters all chained,
and a thousand young Varlets, and a thousand of the fairest maidens in his
realm. And also thou to bring me thy handful of the hear of his beard, and
four of his greatest teeth. Alas my Lord, (quoth the Barons) we see well you
desire greatly his death, when you charge him with such a Message. That is
true, (quoth the King) for without I have his beard and his great teeth brought
me hither unfeignedly: Let him never return into France, nor come into my
presence, for if he do, he shall be hanged and drawn. My Lord, (quoth Huon)
have you showed me all your pleasure? Yea, (quoth the King) my will is as I
have said, if thou will have peace with me. My Sovereign Lord, (quoth Huon) by
the grace of God I shall finish your message, the fear of death shall not let
me to do it. Huon (quoth the King) if God of his grace will suffer thee to
return again into France, I charge thee be not so hardy to come unto
Bourdeaux* nor to any part of thy Country until thou have spoken with me, if
I find thee doing contrary, I shall cause thee to die an ill death, and upon
this, I will thou layest unto me good hostages. My Lord, (quoth Huon) here be
Ten Knights, whom I shall leave with you for suerty, to the intent that you
shall be content with me: howbeit my Lord, I require your grace to suffer the
Knights that came with me from Bourdeaux to go with me to the holy Sepulcher.
I am content (quoth the King) that they go with thee thither or elsewhere. My
Lord (quoth Huon) I thank your grace. Then Huon made him ready to fournish
his voyage.

Chap. XVIII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux took leave of the King and of the Barons, and rode with
the good Abbot to Cluny.

AFter that King Charlemaine had given Huon the charge of his message: the
King called before him Gerardine Brother to Huon, and delivered to him the
governance of all his Brothers Lands in his absence until his return. And
thus when Huon was ready, he came to the King and to the Barons, to take his
leave of them and the Abbot of Cluny, who said they would go with him part of
his way, so likewise did Twelve of the greatest Princes and Ladies accompany
him for two days journey: and when they came to the town of Troy in
Champaine, Duke Naymes took leave of his Coozen Huon, and gave him a Summer
charged with gould, and kissed him at their departing. Then Gerard his Brother
took his leave and also kissed him: but know for troth the kiss that he gave
him, was like to the kiss that Judas gave to his Master, the which was
dearly bought as hereafter ye shall hear. Thus Duke Naymes and Gerard
departed and took their way to Paris, but the Abbot and Huon rested not until
they came to the Abbie of Cluny, where they were received with great joy and
well feasted. Then the next morning Huon departed, and took leave of his Uncle
sore weeping, desiring him to recommend him unto his Mother the Duchess and to
Gerard his Brother: the Abbot promised so to do, and gave Huon his Nephew a
Mulet charged with money current in France: thus he departed and took the way
to Room. Now leave we to speak of Huon, and show of Duke Naymes and Gerard,
who returned to Paris, where Gerard required the King, that it would please him
to receive his homage for the Lands of Bourdeaux, to the intent that he might
be advanced, and to be in the State of one of the Peers of France, the which
thing Duke Naymes would not consent nor agree unto, but said to the King: My
Lord, you ought not to suffer that Huon should be disenherited, whereof Gerard
was not content, but Duke Naymes set little thereby, for he loved Huon entirely,
so this homage was delayed. Then Gerard returned to Bourdeaux, where he was
well received: but when the Duchess saw him and not Huon to return, she was
sorrowful in her heart, and then she demanded of Gerard, why that Huon his
brother was not returned with him? Then Gerard showed her all the whole matter
and adventure, and of the departing of Huon, and of the manner of his voyage,
whereof the Duchess had such sorrow, that she fell sick, and so lay nine and
Twenty days, and on the Thirtieth day she dyed, and rendered up her Soul unto
God: whereof all the Country was sorrowful. Gerard nobly buried her in the
Church of Saint Seueryn by ye Duke her husband. Amon after married him to the
Daughter of Duke Gilberd of Cecill, who was the greatest Traitor and most
cruel that might be heard of. And Gerard Amons Son in law learned his ways,
and followed his condition, for he dealt so ill with the town of Bourdeaux,
and with the Country about, that pity it was to hear the poor people, to
weep for the loss of Duke Seuin and of the Duchess, and prayed to God for
the good return of their Lord Huon: Now we shall leave to speak of them and
return unto Huon.

Chap. XIX.
How Huon of Bourdeaux came to Room, and was confessed of the Pope who was his
Uncle, and of his departing, and how he came to Brandis, where he found his
Uncle Garyn of Saint Omers, who for love of Huon passed the Sea with him.

Here before you have heard, how Huon departed from his Uncle ye Abbot of
Cluny, and so long he road with his Knights, that he came to the City of
Room: where he was lodged in a good Hostrey. Then Huon arose in the morning,
accompanied with Guichard whom he loved well, and with the other Knights that
came thither with him, and went to the Church of Saint Peter and heard Service,
and when that Service was done, the Pope came out of his Oratorie: then Huon
came unto him and humbly saluted him, the Pope beheld him and demanded what he
was? Sir, (quoth he) my Father was Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, who is deceased:
then the Pope stepped unto him and embraced him, and said. Fair Nephew you are
welcome, I pray you show me how does my Sister the Duchess your Mother, and
what adventure has brought you hither? Sir, (quoth he) I desire your
holiness, that you will hear my confession a part, for I have great need
thereof. Fair Nephewe (quoth the Pope) it pleases me right well to here you:
then the Pope took him by the hand, and went with him into his Oratorie, and
there Huon showed him all the adventure that he had since he came from
Bourdeaux, and of the voyage that Charlemaine had set him to do, and what he
had to say to the Admiral Gaudise: all which being declared and done, he
required pardon and penance for his sins. The Pope said, he would assign
him no penance, for the Emperor Charles had done that already, and which was
so great, that no humane body could suffer it, nor durst undertake to do it.
Then the Pope gave him absolution of all his sins, and lovingly led him into
his Pallaice, where he was honorably received with great joy.

After they had dyned and devised together a great space, the Pope said unto
Huon: Fair Nephew the way that you must go, is to go to the Port of
Brandis, there shall you find my Brother Garyn of Saint Omers, who is your
Uncle, to whom I shall write a Letter, to the intent that he shall have
knowledge of you, for I know well he will have great joy of you, he has the
keeping of the Oriental Sea, he shall adresse you, and deliver you Ship or
Galley such as shall be necessary for you. Most holy Father, (quoth Huon) of
this I thank you. Well (quoth the Pope) this night you shall abide h^ere with
me. Sir, (quoth he) I require you to let me depart, for greatly I desire to see
mine Uncle Garyn. When the Pope saw that he would needs depart, he delivered
him his Letter, and said: Fair Nephew, salute from me my Brother Garyn your
Uncle. Sir, (quoth he) I shall do your commandment: then the Pope gave to
Huon great and rich presents, and to all them that were with him, and he
kissed his Nephew at his departing, Huon took leave of the^ all weeping, and
so departed, and entered into the River of Tiber in a rich Ship, the which the
Pope had well garnished for him.

Thus he had good wind, so that anon they arrived at Brandis, but whiles he
was on the water, he wept sore and pityously complained, in that he was so
departed out of his Country: then his men comforted him, and showed many fair
examples to comfort him. Sir, (quoth Guichard) leave your sorrow, for grief
and sadness cannot avail you, you must put all to the mercy of our Lord God,
who never forgets them that love him: show your self a man and no Child, to
the intent that we that be with you may be rejoiced, for the sorrow that we see
you in, does sore trouble us. Dear friend (quoth Huon) since it is so, I shall
follow your will: and thus they arrived at the Port of Brandis. Then they
issued out of their Ship, and took out their Horses, and there they saw
Garyn sitting before the Port, in a lodge (well and richly hanged) in a goodly
Chair. When Huon saw him sitting, he saluted him, thinking that he was Lord of
that Country: then Garyn beheld Huon and began to weep, and said. Sir, it
does not appertain unto me, that you should do me so great honor as you do:
for by that I see in you, I am constrained to weep, because you resemble so
much to a Prince of the Realm of France, called Duke Seuin, who was Lord of
the City of Bourdeaux, the great love that ever I bare unto him, caused me to
weep: therefore I require you tell me, where you were borne, and who be your
Parents and friends? for Duke Seuin wedded my Sister the Duchess Aclis. Sir,
(quoth Huon) seeing you will needs know what I am, I may well show it unto
you, for that Duke was my Father, and the Duchess Aclis is my Mother, we are
two brethren, I am the eldest, and the younger is still at Bourdeaux to keep
our Land. When Garyn understood that Huon was Son to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux,
the joy that he had could not be expressed, then he embraced Huon all weeping
and said: Right dear Nephew, your coming is to me the greatest joy in this
world, so he kneeled down and would have kissed Huons feet: but Huon relieved
him incontinent. The joy that was between them two was so great, that all that
saw it had marvel thereof. Then Garyn demanded of Huon and said: Fair
Nephew, what adventure has brought you into these parts? Then Huon showed him
from point to point all his business, and the cause why he was entered into
that Enterprise.

When Garyn had heard all, he began to weep, and yet to comfort his Nephew, he
said: Fair Huon, whereas lies great perils, there lies great honor, God aid
you to eschew and to finish this great business, all is possible to God, and
to man by means of his grace, a man ought never to b^ abashed for worldly
matters. Then Huon delivered his Letters to his Uncle Garyn, who gladly
received them, and read the contents thereof at large. Then he said, Fair
Nephew, there need none other recommendations but the sight of your presence,
for it appears well by your countenance, that you be the same person that our
holy Father makes mention of, surely your coming seems to me fair and
good, and you be arrived at a good Port, for I promise you faithfully, I love
well my Wife and my Children: but the great love that I have unto you for the
love of your Father Duke Seuin, and the Duchess your Mother, who was mine own
dear Sister, I abandon all that I have to serve you and keep you company,
both with my body and all that I have. Know for truth, I have three good
Galleys and three great Ships, well fournished of every thing for the war,
the which I shall lead with you, for as long as life abides in my body, I
shall not abandon you: but I shall aid you in all your Enterprises. Fair
Uncle, (quoth Huon) for the great courtesy that you offer me, I can but
thank you: then Garyn took Huon by the hand, and led him into his Castle,
whereas he was richly received. Garyns Wife and four of her Sons came unto
Huon, and he full courteously kissed the Lady and her four Children his
Coozens, great joy was made there in the Hall, and the Tables set for Supper.
Then Garyn called his Wife and said, Madame, this young Knight that you see
here, is my Nephew and Coozen to your Children, who is come hither for refuge,
to have counsel and aid of me in a Voyage and Enterprise that he has to do,
and by the grace of God, I shall go with him to aid and to conduct him:
wherefore I pray and command, that you take in rule all my affairs and keep
your Children. Sir, (quoth she) seeing it is your pleasure thus to do, and
that you will go with him, your will let be fulfilled: howbeit I had rather
you abode then went, this she spoke sore weeping.

The next day in the morning, Garyn (who had great will to serve and please his
Nephew) ordained a great Ship to be made ready well fournished with Biscuit,
Wines and flesh, and all other manner of victuals, and with munition of war
as it appertained, and put therein their horses and armor, gould and silver,
and other riches necessary for them: then they took leave of the Lady, and
so lest her sore weeping. Thus Garyn and Huon entered into their Ship and all
their company, there were Thirteen Knights and Two Varlets to serve them,
for they would have no greater number.

Chap. XX.
How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Brandis, and Garyn his Uncle with him: and
how he came to Jerusalem, and from thence into the Deserts, whereas he found
Gerames, and of their conference.

WHen Huon and Garyn were entered into their Ship, they hoysed up their Sails,
and sailed night and day, so that at last they arrived safely at the Port of
Iaffe, where they took landing and drew out their horses, and road forth so
the same day, that they came to Rames, and the next day to the City of
Jerusalem: that night they rested, and the next day they did their Pilgrimage
to the holy Sepulcher, and there devoutly heard Service, and offered according
to their devotion. When Huon came before the holy Sepulcher, he kneeled down
upon his bare knees, and all weeping made his prayers to our Lord God,
requiring him to aid and comfort him in his voyage, so that he might return
again into France, and to have peace with King Charlemaine. And when they all
had made their prayers and offered, Huon and Garyn went into a little Chapel
upon the mount of Caluerye, whereas now lies the bodies of Godfrey of Bullen,
and Bauldwin his Brother: there Huon called unto him all those that came with
him out of France, and said. Sirs, you that for the love of me, have left
your Fathers and Mothers, Wives and Children, Lands and Signiories, for this
courtesy that you have showed me, I thank you. Now you may return into
France again, and humbly recommend me to the Kings good grace, and unto all
the other Barons: and when you come to Bourdeaux, do my duty to the Duchess
my Mother, and to Gerard my Brother, and unto the Lords of my Country. Then
Guichard and all the other Knights answered Huon, and said: Sir as yet we will
not leave you, neither for death nor life, until we have brought you unto the
red Sea: why then (quoth Huon) for the great service and courtesy that you
offer me, I thank you. Then Garyn called two of his servants, and commanded
them to return unto his wife, and to desire her to be of good cheer, and that
shortly he would return, the which thing they did, and returned and did their
message.

When Huon understood that his Uncle Garyn was disposed to abide with him he
said: Fair Uncle, you shall not need to travail so much, I would council
you to return unto your Wife and Children. Sir, (quoth Garyn) and God will I
shall not leave you no day, until you return your self. Uncle, (quoth Huon)
I thank you of your courtesy: then they went to their lodging and dyned, and
after dinner took their horses, and so road by Hills and Dales, so that if I
should recount all the adventures that they found in their way, it should be
too long a process to show it: but as the true History witnesses, they
suffered much pain and travail, for they passed such Deserts, whereas they
found but small sustenance, whereof Huon was right sorrowful, for the love of
them that were with him, and began to weep, and to remember his own Country,
saying: Alas noble King of France, great wrong and great sin you have done
me, thus to drive me out of my Country, and to send me into a strange Land,
to the intent to shorten my days: I pray God to pardon you therefore, then
Garyn and the other Knights comforted him, and said: Alas Sir, dismay you not
for us, God is puissant enough to aid us, he never fails them that loves
him.

Thus they road forth in the Desert so long, until at last they saw a little
Cottage, before the which sat an old ancient man with a long white beard, and
his hear hanging over his shoulders: when Huon perceived him, he drew thither,
and saluted the old man in the name of God and of the blessed Virgin Marie:
then the ancient man lifted up his eyes and beheld Huon, and had great
marvel, for of a long season before he had seen no man that spoke of God,
then he beheld Huon in the face, and began sore to weep, and stepping unto
Huon, took him by the Leg and kissed it more then twenty times. Friend (quoth
Huon) I desire you show me why you make this sorrow? Sir, (quoth he) about
thirty years passed I came hither, and since that time I never saw man
believing on the Christian faith, and now the regarding of ^our visage, causes
me to remember a noble Prince that I have seen in France, who was called Duke
Seuin of Bourdeaux: therefore I require you show me if ever you saw him, I pray
you hide it not from me. Friend (quoth Huon) I pray you show me where you were
borne, and of what lineage and Country you be of? Nay sir, (quoth he) that
will I not do, first you shall show me what you be and where you were borne,
and why you come hither? Friend (quoth Huon) seeing it pleases you to know I
shall show you: then Huon and all his company alighted, and tied their Horses
to Trees.

When Huon was alighted, he sat down by the old man and said. Friend, since
you will needs know my business, I shall show you: know for troth, I was
borne in the City of Bourdeaux, and am Son to Duke Seuin, and Huon showed him
all his whole case and Enterprise, and of the death of Charlot, and how he
discomfited Earl Amerie, and how that Charlemaine had chaced him out of
France, and of the Message that he was charged to say unto the Admiral
Gaudise, affirming all to be for certainty. When the oulde man had well
heard Huon, he began sore to weep. Sir, (quoth Huon) since it pleases you to
know of my sorrow, Duke Seuin my Father is dead seven years past, my Mother
I trust be alive, and a Brother of mine whom I have left with her. And now
sir seeing you have heard of mine affairs, I require you give me your
counsel and advice, and also if it please you, to show me what you be, and of
what Country, and how you came into these parts? Sir, (quoth the old man) know
for troth, I was borne in Geron^ill, and am brother to the good Provost Guyer:
and when I departed thence I was a young Knight, and haunted the Iustes and
Tourneys, so that on a day it fortuned at a Tourney that was made at Poytiers,
I slew a Knight of a noble blood, wherefore I was banished out of ye Realm of
France. But my brother the Provost made such a request to Duke Seuin your
Father, that by his means my peace was made with the King, and my land saved,
upon condition that I should go to the holy Sepulcher, to punish my body for
the Knight that I flew, and to forgive my faults. Thus I departed out of my
country, and when I had done my voyage, I thought to have returned, but as I
departed out of the City of Jerusalem, to take the way to Acres, passing by a
wood between Jerusalem and Naples, there came upon me ten Sarazins, who took
me and brought me to the City of Babylon, whereas I was in prison two years
complet, whereas I suffered much poverty and misery: but our Lord God, who
never fails them that serves him, and have in him full affiance, he sent me
the grace, that by the means of a right noble Lady I was brought out of
prison in a night, and so I fled into this Forest, whereas I have been this
thirty years, and in all this space I never saw nor heard man believing in
Jesus Christ: thus I have showed you all mine affairs.

When Huon had heard the Knights tale, he had great joy, and embraced him and
said, how often times he had seen Guyre his Brother the Provost weep for
him, and when I departed from Bourdeaux, (quoth he) I delivered unto him all my
Lands to govern: wherefore I require you show me your name? Sir, (quoth he)
I am called Gerames, and now I pray you show me your name? Sir, (quoth he) I am
named Huon, and my younger Brother is called Gerard. But sir, I pray you show
me how you have so long lived here, and what sustenance you have had? Sir,
(quoth Gerames) I have eaten none other thing but roots and fruits that I
have found in the wood: then Huon demanded of him if he could speak the
language Sarazin? Yes sir, quoth he) as well or better then any Sarazin in the
Country, nor there is no way but that I know it.

When Huon had heard Gerames, then he demanded further of him, if he could go
to Babylon? Yes sir, (quoth Gerames) I can go thither by two ways, the most
surest way is hence about forty days journey, and the other is but fifteen
days journey: but I council you to take the long way, for if you take the
shorter way, you must pass through a wood about sixteen Leagues of length, but
the way is so full of the Fayryes and s^rang things, that such as pass that
way are lost, for in that wood abides a King of the Fayryes named Oberon, he
is of height but of three foot, and crooked shouldered, but yet he has an
Angell-like visage, so that there is no mortal man that sees him, but that
takes great pleasure to behold his face, and you shall no sooner be entered
into that wood, if you go that way, but he will find ye means to speak with
you, and if you speak unto him, you are lost for ever, and you shall ever find
him before you, so that it shall be in manner impossible that you can escape
from him, without speaking to him, for his words be so pleasant to hear, that
there is no mortal man yt can well escape without speaking unto him. And if he
see that you will not speak a word unto him: then he will be sore displeased
with you, and before you can get out of the wood, he will cause rain and wind,
hayle and snow, and will make marvelous tempests, with thunder and
lightenings, so that it shall seem unto you that all the world should perish,
and he will make to seem before you a great running River black and deep:
but you may pass it at your ease, and it shall not wet the feet of your horse,
for all is but fantasy and enchauntments that the Dwarf shall make, to the
intent to have you with him, and if you can keep your self without speaking
unto him, you may then well escape. But Sir to eschew all perils, I council
you to take the longer way, for I think you cannot escape from him: and then
you be lost for ever.

When Huon had well heard Gerames, he had great marvel, and he had great
desire in himself to see that Dwarf King of the Fayryes, and the strange
adventures that were in that wood: then he said unto Gerames, that for fear of
any death he would not leave to pass that way, seeinge he might come to
Babylon in fifteen days, for in taking ye longer way he might perchance
find more adventures, and since he was advertised, that with keeping his tongue
from speaking, he might abridge his journey: he said, that surely he would take
that way whatsoever chance befell. Sir, (quoth Gerames) you shall do your own
pleasure, for which way soever you take, it shall not be without me, I shall
bring you to Babylon to the Admiral Gaudise, I know him right well, and when
you be come thither, you shall see there a Damsel, (as I have heard say) the
most fairest creature in all Inde, and the only and most sweetest, and most
courteous that ever was borne, and it is she that you seek, for she is
Daughter to the Admiral Gaudise.

Chap. XXI.
How Gerames went with Huon and his company, and so came into the wood,
whereas they found King Oberon, who coniured them to speak unto him.

WHen Huon had well heard Gerames, how he was minded to go along with him: he
was thereof right joyful, and thanked him of his courtesy and service, and
gave him a goodly horse, whereon he mounted, and so road forth together, so
long that they came into the wood whereas King Oberon haunted most. Then Huon
who was weary of travail, and what for famine and for heat, the which he and
his company had endured two days without bread or meat, so that he was so
feeble that he could ride no further, and then he began pityously to weep, and
complained of the great wrong that King Charlemaine had done unto him, and
then Garyn and Gerames comforted him, and had great pity of him, and they knew
well by the reason of his youth, hunger oppressed him more then it did to them
of greater age. Then they alighted under a great Oak, to the intent to search
for some fruit to eat, they glad thereof let their horses go to pasture. When
they were thus alighted, the Dwarf of the Fayry King Oberon came ryding by,
and had on a Gown so rich, that it were marvel to recount the riches and
fashion thereof, and it was so garnished with precious stones, that the
clearness of them shined like the Son. Also he had a goodly bow in his
hand, so rich that it could not be esteemed, and his arrows after the same
sort, and they were of such a nature or quality, that any beast in the world
that he would wish for, the arrowe would arrest him. Also he had about his
neck a rich Horn hanging by two Laces of gold, the Horn was so rich and
fair, that there was never seen any such, it was made by four Ladies of ye
Fayries in the Isle of Chafalone, one of them gave to ye horn such a
property, that whosoever heard the sound thereof, if he were in the greatest
sickness in the world, he should incontinent be whole and sound: the Lady
that gave this gift to the Horn, was named Glorianda. The second Lady was
named Translyna, she gave to this Horn another property, and that was,
whosoever heard this Horn, if he were in the greatest famine of the world, he
should be satisfied as well, as though he had eaten all that he would wish
for, and so likewise for drink as well, as though he had droonke his fill of
the best wine in all the world. The third Lady named Margala gave to this Horn
yet a greater gift, and that was, whosoever heard this Horn, though he were
never so poor or feeble by sickness, he should have such joy in his heart,
that he should singe and dance. The fourth Lady named Lempatrix, gave to this
Horn such a gift, that whosoever heard it, if he were an hundred days
iourneys of, he should come at the pleasure of him that blew it far or near.

Then King Oberon, who knew well, and had seen the fourteen Companions, he
set his Horn to his mouth, and blew so melodious a blast, that the fourteen
Companions being under the Tree had so persit a joy at their hearts, that they
al rose up and began to sing and dance. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) what
fortune is come unto us? me think we be in Paradise, right now I could not
sustain my self for lack of meat and drink, and now I feel my self
neither hungry nor thirsty, from whence may this come? Sir, (quoth Gerames)
know for troth, this is done by the Dwarf of the Fayrye, whom you shall
soon see pass by you. But Sir, I require you on ieopardie of loosing of your
life, that you speak to him no word, without you purpose to abide ever with
him. Sir, (quoth Huon) have no doubt of me, seeing I know the ieopardie.
Therewith the Dwarf began to cry aloude and said: Ye fourteen men that
pass by my wood, God keep you all, and I desire you speak with me, and I
conjure you thereto by God almighty, and by the christendom that you have
received, and by all that God has made: answer me.

Chap. XXII.
How King Oberon was right sorrowful and sore displeased, in that Huon would
not speak: and of the great fear that he put Huon and his company in.

WHEN that Huon and his company heard the Dwarf speak, they mounted on their
Horses, and road away as fast as they might, without speaking of any word, and
the Dwarf seeing how that they road away and would not speak, he was
sorrowful and angry. Then he set one of his fingers on his Horn, out of the
which issued such a wind and tempest so horrible to hear, that it bare down
Trees, and therewith came such a rain and hayle, that it seemed that heaven
and the earth had fought together, and that the world should have ended, the
beasts in the woods brayed and cried, and the fowls of the air fell down dead
for ye fear that they were in, there was no creature but he would have been
afraid of that tempest. Then suddenly appeared before them a great River, that
ran swifter then the birds did fly, and the water was so black and so
perilous, and made such a noise, that it might be heard ten Leagues of. Alas
(quoth Huon) I see well now we be all lost, we shall here be oppressed
without God have pity of us, I repent me that ever I entered into this wood, I
had been better to have travailed a whole year, then to have come hither. Sir,
(quoth Gerames) dismay you not, for all this is done by the Dwarf of the
Fayrye. Well, (quoth Huon) I think it best to alight from our horses, for I
think we shall never escape from hence, but that we shall be all oppressed. Then
Garyn and the other Companions had great marvel, and were in great fear; Ah
Gerames, (quoth Huon) you showed me well, that it was great peril to pass
this wood, I repent me now that I had not believed you.

Then they saw on the other side of the River a fair Castle, enuyroned with
fourteen great Towers, and on every Tower a clocher of fine gould by seeming,
the which they long regarded, and by that time they had gone a little by the
River side, they lost the sight of the Castle, it was clean vanished away:
whereof Huon and his company were sore abashed. Huon, (quoth Gerames) of all
this that you see dismay you not, for all this is done by the crooked Dwarf of
the Fayrye, and all to beguile you, but he cannot grieve you, so you speak no
word: howbeit ere we depart from him, he will make us all abashed, for anon he
will come after us like a mad man, because you will not speak unto him: but
sir I require you as in Gods name, be nothing afraid, but ride forth surely,
and ever beware that you speak unto him no word. Sir, (quoth Huon) have no
doubt thereof, for I had rather he were destroyed, then I should speak one
word unto him, then they road to pass the River, and they found there nothing
to let them, and so road about five Leagues. Sir, (quoth Huon) we may well
thank God that we be thus escaped this Dwarf, who thought to have deceived
us, I was never in such fear during my life god confound him: thus they road
devising of the little Dwarf, who had done them so much trouble.

Chap. XXIII.
How King Oberon* Dwarf of the Fayry pursued so much Huon, that he
constrained him to speak to him at last.

WHen Gerames understood the company, how they thought they were escaped from
the Dwarf, he began to smile, and said: Sirs, make no braging that you be out
of this danger, for I believe you shall soon see him again, and as soon as
Gerames had spoke the same words, they saw before them a bridge the which they
must pass, and they saw the Dwarf on the other part, Huon saw him first and
said, I see that Devil who has done us so much trouble. Oberon heard him and
said: Friend thou do me injury without cause, for I was never Devil nor
ill creature, I am as other be, but I conjure thee by the divine puissance, to
speak unto me. Then Gerames said: Sirs, for Gods sake let him alone, nor
speak no word to him, for by his fair language he may deceive us all, as he
has done many other, it is pity that he has lived so long. Then they road
forth a good pace, and left the Dwarf alone sore displeased, in that they
would not speak to him: then he took his Horn and set it to his mouth and
blew it. When Huon and his company heard it, they had no power to ride any
further, but they began all to sing. Then Oberon the Dwarf said, yonder
company are fools and proud, that for any salutation that I can give them,
they disdain to answer me: but by the God that made me, before they es^ape
me, the refusal of my words shall be dear bought. Then he took again his
Horn, and struck it three times on his bow, and cried out aloud and said:
Ye my men, come and appear before me. Then there came to him about four
hundred men of arms, and demanded of Oberon what was his pleasure, and who
had displeased him? Sirs, (quoth Oberon) I shall show you: howbeit I am grieved
to show it, here in this wood there passed fourteen Knights, who disdain
to speak unto me: but to the intent that they shall not mock me, they shall
dearly buy the refusing of their answer: Wherefore I will you go after
them, and slay them all, let none escape. Then one of his Knights said: Sir,
for Gods sake have pity of them. Certainly (quoth Oberon) mine honor saved, I
cannot spare them, since they disdain to speak unto me. Sir, (quoth
Glorianda) for Gods sake do not as you say: but sir work by my counsel, and
after do as it pleases you. Sir, I counsel you yet once again go after
them, then if they do not speak, we shall slay them all: for surely Sir, if
they see you return again to them so shortly, they will be in great fear.
Friend (quoth Oberon) I shall do as you have counseled me. Thus Huon and his
company road forth a great pace, and Huon said: Sirs, we are now from the
Dwarf about five Leagues, I never saw in my life so fair a creature in the
visage, I have great marvel how he can speak of almighty God, for I think
he be a Devil of hell, and since he speaks of God, me thinks we ought to
speak to him, for I think such a creature can have no power to do us any
evil, I think he be not past the age of five years. Sir, (quoth Gerames) as
little as he seems, and that you take him for a Child, he was borne forty
years before the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Surely (quoth Huon) I
care not what age he be of, but if he come again, ill hap come to me if I
keep my words and speech from him, I pray you be not displeased.

And thus as they road devising fifteen days, suddenly Oberon appeared unto
them, and said: Sirs, are you not yet advised to speak unto me? yet again I
am come to salute you in the name of the God that made and fourmed us, and I
conjure you by the puissance that he has given me, that you speak to me, for
I repute you for fools, to think thus to pass through my wood, and disdain
to speak to me. Ah Huon, I know thee well enough, and whether thou would
go, I know all thy deeds, how thou slewest Charlot, and after discomfited
Amerie, and I know the Message that Charlemaine has charged thee to say to
ye Admiral Gaudise* the which thing is impossible to be done without mine aid:
^or without me thou shall never accomplish this Enterprise. Speak to me, and I
shall do thee that courtesy, that I shall cause thee to atchiue thine
Enterprise, the which is else impossible without me, and when thou have
atchiued thy Message, I shall bring thee again into France in safeguard. I
know the cause that thou will not speak to me, it is by reason of old Gerames
who is there with thee: therefore Huon beware of thy self, go no further, for
I know well it is three days passed since thou did eat any meat to
profit thee, if thou will believe me, thou shall have enough of such sustenance
as thou will wish for: and as soon as thou have dyned, I will give thee leave
to depart, if it be thy pleasure, of this have no doubt. Sir, (quoth Huon) you
be welcome. Ah (quoth Oberon) thy salutation shall be well rewarded, know for
truth, thou never did salutation so profitable for thy self, thou may
thank God, that he has sent thee that grace.

Chap. XXIIII.
Of the great maruailes that Oberon showed unto Huon, and of the adventures
that fell.

WHen Huon had well heard Oberon, he had great marvel, and demanded if it
were true that he had said? Yes truly (quoth Oberon) of that make no doubt.
Sir, (quoth Huon) I have great marvel for what cause you have always pursued
us. Huon (quoth Oberon) know that I love thee well, because of the truth that
is in thee, and therefore naturally I love thee, and if thou will know who I
am, I shall show thee. True it is, Julius Caesar engendered me on the Lady of
the secret Isle, who was sometime well beloved of the fair Florimont, of
Albania. But because that Florimont who as then was young, and he had a Mother
who did so much, that she saw my Mother and Florimont together in a solitary
place on the Sea side: when my Mother perceived that she was espied by
Florimonts mother, she departed and left Florimont her lover in great weeping
and lamentations, and never saw him after. And then she returned into her own
Country of the secret Isle, the which now is named Chafalone, whereas she
married after, and had a Son who in his time after was King of Eg^pt, named
Nactanabus, it was he as it is said that engendered Alexander the great, who
after caused him to die. Then after a Seven years, Caesar passed by the Sea
as he went unto the place whereas he fought with Pompey, in his way he passed
by Chafalone, where my Mother fetched him, and he fell in love with her,
because she showed him that he should discomfite Pompey, as he did. Thus I have
showed you who was my Father, at my birth there was many Princes and Barons of
the Fayry, and many a noble Lady that came to see my Mother whiles she
travailed of me, and among them there was one was not content, because she
was not sent for as well as the other, and when I was borne, she gave me a
gift, the which was, that when I should pass three years of age, I should
grow no more, but thus as you see me now, and when she had thus done, and
saw that she had thus served me by her words, she repented her self, and
would recompense me another way. Then she gave me another gift, and that was,
that I should be the fairest creature that ever nature fourmed, as thou may
s^^ me now: and another Lady of the Fayry named Transtyna, gave me another
gift, and that was, all that ever any man can know or think good or ill I
should know it. The third Lady to do more for me, and to please my Mother
the better, she gave me, that there is not so far a Country, but that if I
will wish my self there, I shall be there incontinent with what number of men as
I list, and moreover if I will have a Castle or a Pallaice at mine own device,
incontinent it shall be made, and as soon gone again when I list, and what
meat or wine that I would wish for, I should have it incontinent, and also I am
King of Momur the which is about four hundred Leagues from hence, and if I
li^t incontinent I can be there. Know for troth that thou art arrived at a good
Port, I know well thou have great need of meat, for this three days thou have
had but small sustenance, but I shall cause thee to have enough, I demand of
thee whether thou will have meat and drink here in this meadow, or in a
Pallaice, or in a Hall, command whereas thou will, and thou shall have it for
thee and thy company. Sir, (quoth Huon) I will follow your pleasure, and never
do nor think the contrary. Huon (quoth he) as yet I have not showed all the
gifts that were given me at my birth. The fourth Lady gave me, that there is
no bird, nor beast be they never so cruel, but if I will have them, I may take
them with my hand, and also I shall never beseem elder then thou seeest me
now, and when I shall depart out of this world, my place is appointed in
Paradise, for I know that all things created in this mortal world, must needs
have an end. Sir, (quoth Huon) such a gift ought to be well kept. Huon (quoth
Oberon) well you were counseled when you spoke to me, you had never before so
fair adventure, show me by thy faith, if thou will eat, and what meat thou will have, and what wine thou will drink? Sir, (quoth Huon) so that I had
meat and drink I care not what it were, so that I and my company were filled
and rid from our famine. Then Oberon laughed at him and said: Sirs, all you sit
down here in the meadowe, and have no doubt but all that I will do is done by
the puissance of our Lord God: then Oberon began to wish, and said unto Huon
and his company: Sirs arise up quickly, the which they did, then they looked
before them, and saw a fair and a rich Pallaice garnished with Chambers and
Halles, hanged and bedded with rich clothes of silk beaten with gold, and
Tables ready set full of meat. When Huon and his company saw the rich Pallaice
before them, they had great marvel, and Oberon took Huon by the hand, and
with him mounted up into the Pallaice: when they came there, they found
servants there ready, bringing unto them Basins of gould garnished with
precious stones, they gave water to Huon, and he sat down at the Table, the
which was furnished with all manner of meat and drink that man could wish.

Oberon sat at the tables end upon a bench of Iuorie, richly garnished with
gould and precious stones, the which seat had such virtue given unto it by the
Fayrie, that whosoever by any subtle means would poison him that should sit
thereon: as soon as he should approach near to the seat he should fall down
stark dead. King Oberon sat thereon richly apparelled, and Huon who sat near
unto him began to eat a great pace, but Gerames had small appetite to eat,
for he believed that they should never depart thence: when Oberon saw him he
said, Gerames eat thy meat and drink, for as soon as thou have eaten, thou
shall have leave to go when thou list. When Gerames heard that, he was
joyful, then he began to eat and drink, for he knew well that Oberon would
not do against his assurance. All the company did well eat and drink, they
were served with all things that they could wish for. When Huon saw how they
were all satisfied and repleat, and had well dyned, he said to King Oberon.
Sir, when it shall be your pleasure, I would you should give us leave to
depart. Huon, (quoth Oberon) I am right well content so to do, but first I
will show you my jewels: then he called Clariand a Knight of the Fayrey, and
said, Friend go and fetch to me my Cup, he did his commandment, and when
Oberon had the Cup in his hand, he said unto Huon, Sir, behold well, you see
that this Cup is now void and empty: that is true Sir, (quoth Huon.) Then
Oberon set the Cup on the Table, and said unto Huon: Sir, behold the great
power that God has given me, and that in the Fayrie I may do what is my
pleasure: then he made over the Cup the sign of a Cross three times, and
incontinent the Cup was full of wine, and then he said. Behold Sirs, you may
well see that this is done by the gace of God, yet I shall show you the great
virtue that is in this Cup, for if all the men in the world were here
assembled together, and that the Cup were in the hands of any man, being out
of deadly sin, he might drink thereof his fill: but whosoever offers his
hand to take it, being in deadly sin, the Cup does loose his virtue, and if
thou may drink thereof, I offer to give thee the Cup. Sir, (quoth Huon) I
thank you, but I am in doubt that I am not worthy, nor of valor to drink
thereof, nor to touch the Cup, I never heard of such dignity as this Cup is
of: but Sir, know for truth, I have been confessed of all my sins, and I am
repentant and sorrowful for that I have done, and I do pardon and forgive all
the men in the world, whatsoever injury has been done unto me, and I know
not that I have done wrong to any creature, nor I hate no man: and so he
took the Cup in both his hands, and set it to his mouth, and droonke of the
good wine that was therein at his pleasure.

Chap. XXV.
Of the great gifts that Oberon gave unto Huon, as his Horn of Iuorie, and his
Cup, the which were of great virtues, and how Huon after thought to prove the
virtue of the^, whereby he was in great peril of death.

WHen Oberon saw that, he was right glad, and came and embraced Huon, saying
that he was a noble man, and I give thee (quoth he) this Cup as it is, in the
manner as I shall show, that in any wise for any thing for the dignity of the
Cup, be thou ever true and faithful, for if thou will work by my counsel, I
shall aid thee, and give thee succor in all thine affairs: but as soon as
thou make any lie, the virtue of the Cup will be lost and loose his bounty,
and beside that, thou shall loose my love and aid. Sir, (quoth Huon) I shall
right well beware thereof, and now Sir I require you suffer us to depart.
Abide yet, (quoth he to Huon) yet I have another jewel, the which I will give
thee, because I think there be truth and noblenes in thee: I will give thee a
rich Horn of Iuorie, the which is full of great virtue, and which thou shall
bear with thee, it is of so great virtue, that if thou be never so far from
me, as soon as thou blowest ye Horn, I shall hear thee, and shall be
incontinent with thee, with a hundred thousand men at arms for to succor and
aid thee. But one thing I command thee on the pain of loosing of my love,
and on ieopardie of thy life, that thou be not so hardy to sound the Horn,
without thou have great need thereof, for if thou do otherwise, I vow to God
that created me, I shall leave thee in as great poverty and misery as ever
man was, so that whosoever should see thee in that case, should have pity of
thee. Sir, (quoth Huon) I shall right well beware thereof, now I desire you let
me depart. I am content, (quoth Oberon) and God be thy guide. Then Huon took
leave of the King Oberon, and trussed up all his baggage, and did put his Cup
into his bosom, and the Horn about his neck: thus they all took their leave
of King Oberon, and all weeping embraced Huon, who had marvel why he wept and
said, Sir, why do you weep? Friend, (quoth Oberon) you may well know, you
have with you two things that I love dearly, God aid you, more I cannot speak
to you.

Thus the fourteen Knights departed, and so they road forth about fifteen
Leagues or more, then they saw before them a great deep River, and they could
find no guide nor passage to pass over, and so they wist not what to do,
then suddenly they saw pass by them a servant of King Oberon, bearing a rod
of gold in his hand, and so without speaking of any word, he entered into the
River, and took his rod and stroke the water therewith three times, then
incontinent ye water withdrew a both sides in such wise, that there was a path
that three men might ride a froont, and that done he departed again, without
speaking of any word. Then Huon and his company entered into the water, and so
passed through without any danger, and when they were past they looked behind
them, and saw the River close again, and ran after his old course. By my
faith, (quoth Huon) I think we be enchaunted, I believe surely King Oberon
has done this, but seeing we be thus escaped out of peril, I trust from
henceforth we shall have no more doubt. Thus they road forth together
singing, and oftentimes spoke of the great maruailes that they had seen King
Oberon do, and as they road, Huon beheld on his right hand, and saw a fair
meadowe well garnished with herbs and flowers, and in the midst thereof a
fair clear Fountain: then Huon road thither, and alighted, and let their
Horses go to pasture, then they spread a cloth on the green grass, and set
thereon such meat as King Oberon had given them at their departing, and there
they did eat, and drink such drink as they found in the Cup. By my faith
(quoth Huon) it was a fair adventure for us when we met Oberon, and that I
spoke to him, he has showed me great tokens of love, when he gave me such a
Cup, if I may return into France in sauegard, I shall give it to Charlemaine,
who will make great joy therewith, and if he cannot drink thereof, the Barons
of France will have great sport thereof. Then again he repented him of his
own words, and said, I am a fool to think or to say thus, for as yet I
cannot tell what end I shall come to, the Cup that I have is better worth then
two Cities, but as yet I cannot believe the virtue to be in the Horn as Oberon
ha^h showed, nor that he may here it so far off, but whatsoever fortune
fall, I will assay it if it has such virtue or not. Alas Sir (quoth Gerames)
beware what you do, you know well when we departed what charge he gave you,
certainly you and we both are lost if you trespass against his commandment.
Surely, (quoth Huon) whatsoever fortune fall, I will assay it, and so took the
Horn and set it to his mouth, and blewe it so loud that the wood rang: then
Gerames and all the other began to sing and to make great joy. Then Garyn said,
Fair Nephewe blow still, and so Huon blew still with such force, that Oberon
who was in his wood about fifteen Leagues of, heard him clearly, and said:
Alas my friends, I hear my friend blow, whom I love best of all the world,
alas what man is so hardy to do him any ill, I wish my self with him with a
hundred thousand men at arms, incontinent he was nere to Huon with a hundred
thousand men at arms. When Huon and his company heard the Host coming, and
saw Oberon come ryding on before them, they were afraid, and it was no
marvel, seeing the commandment that Oberon had given them before. Then Huon
said, alas Sirs, I have done ill, now I see well we cannot escape, but that
we are likely all to die, certainly (quoth Gerames) you have well deserved it,
houlde your peace, (quoth Huon) dismay you not, let me speak to him; therewith
Oberon came to them and said: Huon, what mea^eth this? where are they that
will do thee any ill? why have thou broken my commandment? Alas Sir, (quoth
Huon) I shall show you the truth, we were sitting right now in this meadowe,
and did eat of that you gave us, I believe I took too much drink out of the
Cup that you gave me, the virtue of the which we well assayed: then I thought
to try also the virtue of the rich Horn, to the intent that if I should have
any need, that I might be sure thereof, now I know for troth, that all is true
that you have showed me: wherefore Sir in the honor of God I require you to
pardon my trespass, else sir, here is my sword, strike off my head at your
pleasure, for ^ know well without your aid I shall never come to atchieue mine
enterprise. Huon quoth Oberon, the bounty and great troth that is in thee,
co^streyneth me to give thee pardon, but beware from henceforth, be not so
hardy as to break my commandment. Sir quod Huon I thank you: well quoth
Oberon, I know surely that thou have as yet much to suffer, for thou must
pass by a city named Tormont, wherein there is a Tyrant called Macayr, and
yet he is thine own Uncle, brother to thy father Duke Seuin: when he was in
France he had thought to have murdered king Charlemaine, but his treason was
known, and he had been slain if thy Father Duke Seuin had not been: so he was
sent to ye holy Sepulcher, to do his penance for the ill that he had d^ne, and
so afterward there he renounced the faith of our Lord God, and took upon him
the Paynims Law, the which he has kept ever since so strongly, that if he
hear any man speak of our lord god, he will pursue him to death, and look
what promise that he makes, he keeps none, therefore I advise thee trust
not on him, for surely he will put thee to death if he may, and thou can not
escape if thou go by that City: therefore I counsel thee take not that way
if thou be wise. Sir, (quoth Huon) of your courtesy love and good council I
thank you, but whatsoever fortune fall to me, I will go to mine Uncle, and if
he be such a one as you say, I shall make him to die an ill death, and if need
be I shall sound my Horn, and I am sure at my need you will aid me. Of that
you may be sure (quoth Oberon,) but of one thing I forbid thee, be not so hardy
to sound thy Horn without thou be hurt, for if thou do the contrary, I
shall so martyr thee, that thy body shall not endure it. Sir, (quoth Huon) be
assured your commandment I will not break: then Huon took leave of King
Oberon, who was sorry when Huon departed. Sir, (quoth Huon) I have marvel
why you weep, I pray you show me the cause why you do it? Huon (quoth
Oberon) the great love that I have to thee, is that causes me to do it, for
as yet hereafter thou shall suffer so much ill and travail, that no humane
tongue can tell it. Sir quoth Huon ye show me many things not greatly to my
profit: Sure quoth Oberon, and yet thou shall suffer more than I have spoken
of, and al by thine own folly.

Chap. XXVI.
How Huon arrived at Tormont, and found a man at a gate, who brought him to
lodge at the Prouosts house in the town.

AFter that Obero^ had showed Huon part of that should fall to him, and was
departed, Huon and his company the^ mounted on their horses, and so rode forth
so long, till they came to the city of Tormont. Gerames who had been there
before, when he saw the city, he said to Huon: Alas sir, we be ill arrived,
behold here we be in the way to suffer much trouble. Sir quoth Huon, be not
dismaide, for by the grace of god we shall right well escape, for who that God
will aid, no man can hurt. Then they entered into the City, as they came to
the gate, they met a man with a bow in his hand, who had been a sporting
without the City, Huon road foremost and saluted him in the name of God,
saying: Friend what call you this City? The man stood still, and had marvel
what men they were that spoke of God, he beheld them and said, Sirs, the God in
whose name you have saluted me, keep and defend you from incombrance:
howbeit, I desire you in as much as you love your lives, speak softly that you
be not heard, for if the Lord of this City know that you be christian men,
he will slay you all, sirs you may trust me, for I am christened, but I dare
not be known thereof, I have such fear of the Duke. Friend, (quoth Huon) I
pray thee show me who is Lord of this City, and what is his name? Sir, (quoth
he) he is a false Tyrant, when he was christened, he was named Macayr, but he
has renounced God, and he is so fierce and proud, that as now he hates
nothing so much, as them that believe in Jesus Christ: but Sir, I pray you
show me whether you will go? Friend, (quoth Huon) I would gladly go to the
red Sea, and from thence to Babylon, I would tarry this day in this City, for
I and my company are sore weary. Sir, (quoth he) and if you will believe me,
you shall not enter into this City to lodge, for if the Duke knew it, none
could save your lives, therefore if it be your pleasure, I shall lead you
another way beside the Town. Sir, (quoth Gerames) for Gods sake believe him
that counsaileth you so truly. Know for troth, (quoth Huon) I will not do
thus, I see well it is almost night, the Sun goes low, therefore I will lodge
this night here in this Town whatsoever befall, for a good Town should never
be forsaken. Sir, (quoth the strange man) seeing it is so, for the love of God
I shall bring you to a lodging, whereas you shall be well and honestly lodged, in
a good man's house that believes in God, named Gonder, he is Provost of the
City, and well beloved with the Duke. Friend, (quoth Huon) God reward thee, so
this man went on through the Town, until he came at the Prouosts house, whom
they found sitting at his gate. Huon that was a fair speaker, saluted him in
the name of God, and the Provost arose up, and beheld Huon and his company,
and he had great marvel what they were, seeing they saluted him in the name
of God: then he said. Sirs you be welcome, but a Gods name I desire you speak
softly that you be not heard, for if the Duke of this City knew this you
should utterly be lost: but if it please you to tarry this night here in my
house, for the love of God, all that I have in my house shall be yours to do
therewith at your pleasure, I abandon all to you, and Sir, I thank God I have
yt in my house, that if you abide here this two year, you shall not need to
buy any thing without. Sir, (quoth Huon) of this fair proffer I thank you,
and so he and his company alighted, and there were servants enough to take
their Horses and to set them up: then the Host took Huon and Gerames and the
other, and brought them to Chambers to dress them, then they came into the
hall whereas they found the Tables set and covered, and so sat down, and were
richly served with diverse meats. When they had done and were risen, Huon called
Gerames and said: Sir, go in have into the Town and get a crier, and cause to
be cried in every market place and street, that whosoever will come and sup
at the Prouosts house, as well noble, as vn^^^le men, women and children, rich
and poor, and all manner of people of what estate or degree soever they be:
shall come merrily and freely* and nothing pay neither for meat nor drink,
whereof they should have as they wished, and also he commanded Gerames, that
all the meat that he could get in the Town, he should buy it, and pay ready
money for ye same. Sir, (quoth Gerames) your pleasure shall be done. Sir,
(quoth the Host) you know well, all that is in my house, I have abandoned unto
you: therefore sir you shall not need to seek for any thing further, take of
my goods at your pleasure. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thank you, I have monney enough
to fournish all that need, and also Sir I have a Cup of great virtue, for if
all the people that be within this City were here present, they should have
drink enough by reason of my Cup, the which was made in Fayry Land. When the
Host heard Huon, he began to smile, and believed that those words had been
spoken but in jest. Then Huon, not well advised, took the Horn of Iuorie from
his neck, and took it to his Host to keep, saying: mine Host, I take you
this to keep, for it is a precious thing, therefore keep it surely, that I
may have it again when I demand it. Sir, (quoth he) I shall surely keep it,
and when it please you it shall be ready: and so took the Horn and laid it
up in a Coffer. But after fell such an hour, that Huon would have had it
rather then all the goods in ye world, as you shall hear more hereafter.

Chap. XXVII.
How Huon gave a supper unto all the poor men of the City, and how the Duke
was Uncle to Huon: and how the Duke had Huon into his Castle.

THVS when Gerames had this commandment of Huon, he went into the City, and
made to be cried in diverse places as he was commanded to do. When this cry was
made, there was no Beggar, Vacabound nor Ribauld, Iugler, Minstrell, old nor
young, but by great flocks they came all to the Prouosts house, in number more
then four hundred, and Gerames bought up bread, meat, flesh and other
victuals, all that he could find in the City, and paid for it: thus the
supper was dressed, and every man set at the Tables. Huon served them with his
Cup in his hand, and made every man to drink of that he put out of his Cup
into other pots, and yet ever the Cup was full. When the people had well eaten
and dronken the good wines, and were well chased in their brains, some began
to sing, and some to sleep at the Table, and some did beat their fysts upon
the boards, that it was marvel to see the life that they led: whereof Huon
had great joy. The same time the Dukes Steward came into the Town, to buy his
Masters Supper: but he could neither find bread nor flesh, nor no other
victuals, whereof he was sore displeased, and then he demanded the cause, why
he found no victuals as he was accustomed to do? Sir, (quoth the Butchers and
Bakers) in the house of Gonder the Provost is lodged a young man, who has made
to be cried in all the City, that al beggars and ribaulds should come to Supper
at his lodging, and he has bought up all the victuals that he could get in the
Town. Then the Paynim in great despite went to ye Pallaice unto the Duke, and
said. Sir, I can get nothing in the Town for your Supper, there is a young man
lodged in the Prouosts house, that has bought up all the victuals, to give a
Supper to all the beggars, vacabounds and ribaulds that can be found in the
Town.

When the Duke understood that, he was sore displeased, and swoore by Mahound,
that he would go see that Supper: then he commanded all his men to be ready
in harness to go with him, and as he was going out of his Pallaice, a Traitor
who had stolen privily out of the Prouosts house, whereas he had been at
supper with other, said to the Duke: sir know for troth, there is in your
Prouosts house a knight, who has given a Supper to all people that would come
thither, and so there is no beggar, no ribauld nor other that would sup, but
are come thither, and Sir, this Knight has a Cup Letter worth then all this
City, for if all the people between East and West should dye for lack of
drink, they should have all enough, for as often as you will empty the Cup,
it will be full again incontinent. When the Duke heard that, he had great
marvel, and said, such a Cup were good for him, and swoore by Mahound that
he would have that Cup: let us go thither, for my will is to have that Cup, and
all those Knights shall loose their horses and baggage, I will leave them
nothing.

Then he went forth with thirty Knights, and rested not until he came to the
Prouosts house, and found the gates open. When the Provost perceived him, he
came to Huon and said: Alas Sir you have done ill, here is come the Duke in
great displeasure, if God have not pity of you, I cannot see how you can
escape without death. Sir, (quoth Huon) dismay you not, for I shall speak so
fair, that he shall be content: then Huon with a merry cheer came to the
Duke, and said: Sir, you be welcome. Beware, (quoth the Duke) come not near
me, for no christian man may come into my City without my License, wherefore I
will thou know, that you shall all loose your heads, and all that you
brought hither. Sir, (quoth Huon) when you have slain us, you shall win
thereby but little, and it were great wrong for you so to do. I shall tell
thee, (quoth the Duke) why I will so do, it is because you be christian men,
therefore thou shall be the first, show me on thy faith, why have thou
assembled all this company here to Supper? Sir, (quoth Huon) I have done it
because I am going to the red Sea, and because these poor men will pray to God
for me, that I may safely return: Sir this is the cause that I have made them
to sup with me. Well, (quoth the Duke) great folly have thou spoken, for thou
shall never see fair day, you shall all loose your heads. Sir, (quoth Huon)
leave all this, I pray you and your comapanie sit down, and eat and drink at
your pleasure, and I shall serve you as well as I can, and then Sir if I have
done any wrong, I will make you amends in such wise that you shall be content:
for if you do me any hurt, it shall be to you but a small conquest. Sir, me
thinks if you will do nobly, you should somewhat forbear us, for as I have
heard say, you were once christened. Then the Duke said unto Huon, thou have
said well, I am content to sup, for as yet I have not supped. Then the Duke
commanded every man to be disarmed, and to sit down at the Table, the which
they did, and Huon and Gerames served them, and they were well served at that
supper: then Huon took his Cup and came to the Duke and said. Sir, see you not
here this Cup, the which is void and empty? I see well (quoth the Duke) there
is nothing therein. Then Huon made the sign of the cross over the Cup, and
incontinent it was full of wine, he took the Cup to the Duke, who had great
marvel thereof, and as soon as the Cup was in his hands, it was void
again. What, (quoth the Duke) thou have enchaunted me? Sir, (quoth Huon) I am
none Enchaunter, but it is for the sin that you be in, set it down, for you are
not worthy to hold it, you were borne in an evil hour. How art thou so hardy
(quoth the Duke) to speak thus unto me? I repute thee for a proud fool, thou
know well it lies in my power to destroy thee, there is no man dare say the
contrary, yet I pray thee tell me thy name, and where thou were borne? and
whether thou go? and of what kin thou art? Sir, (quoth Huon) for any
thing that may fall unto me, I will not hide my name nor kindred: therefore Sir,
know for troth, I was borne at Bourdeaux upon Gerone, and am Son to Duke
Seuin, who is dead seven years passed. When the Duke heard how Huon was his
Nephew, he said: The Son of my Brother? Nephew, why have thou taken in this
City any other lodging but mine? show me whether thou will go? Sir, (quoth
Huon) I am going to Babylon to the Admiral Gaudise, to do to him a Message
from King Charlemaine of France, because I slew his Son there: so he showed
his Uncle all his adventure, and how the king had taken away his Land, nor
should he have it again, until he had done his Message to the Admiral.
Fair Nephew, (quoth the Duke) in like wise I was banished the Realm of
France, and since I have denied the faith of Jesus Christ, and since I married
here in this Country a great Lady, by whom I have great Lands to govern,
whereof I am Lord: Nephew, I will that you shall go and lodge with me in my
Castle, and to morrow you shall have of my Barons to conduct you until you
come unto Babylon. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thank you, since it is your pleasure, I
will go with you to your Pallaice. Then Gerames privily said unto him, Sir, if
you go thither, you may perhaps repent your self: so it may well be, (quoth
Gonder the Provost.) Then Huon commanded to trusse up all their gear, and to
make ready their horses, and took with him his Cup, but he left still his
Horn with the Provost. Thus Huon went with his Uncle unto his Castle, and lay
there all night: the next morning Huon came unto his Uncle to take his leave.
Fair Nephew, (quoth the Duke) I require you to tarry until my Barons come,
that shall conduct you in your journey. Sir, (quoth Huon) seeing it pleases
you, I am content to abide, and so they sat them down to dinner.

Chap. XXVIII.
How the Duke thought to have murdered Huon his own Nephew, whiles he sat at
the Table.

WHen this Traitor Duke saw his Nephewe sit at the Table, he called to him a
Knight borne in France called Geffrey, who came out of France with the Duke,
and had in like manner denied the law of Christ, and he was secret with the
Duke, then the Duke privily said unto him. Friend, go and arm an Hundred or
Six score Paynims, and cause them to come hither, let them slay my Nephew, and
all that are come with him, for if one escape, you shall loose my favor. Sir,
(quoth Geffrey) your will shall be done, then Geffrey went into a Chamber,
whereas there was two Hundred Armours hanging, when he came thither, he said
within himself. Alas good Lord, this villain Traitor would slay the Son of
his Brother, who when I was in France did me once a great courtesy, for I had
been dead and slain if Duke Seuin his Father had not succored me: it is
reason for that he did then to me, to render again some reward unto his
Son, God confound me if he has any ill for me, but I shall rather cause the
false Duke to buy dearly the treason that he would do unto his Nephewe. The
same season there was in the Castle about Seauen-score Prisoners all
Frenchmen, who were taken upon the Sea, and the Duke kept them in prison, to
the intent to put them to death, he was so cruel against all christian men:
but God who never forgets his servants, sucoured them. This Geffrey went to
the Prison, and said to the prisoners: Sirs if you will save your lives, come
out and follow me. Then the prisoners incontinent issued out of the Prison, and
followed Geffrey, and he brought them into the Chamber whereas all the harness
hanged, and caused them all to be armed, and said: Sirs, if you have courage
and will to issue hence, it is time now you show your virtue. Sir, (quoth they)
to dye in the quarrel we shall do your commandment, to come out of bondage
into freedom. When Geffrey heard them, he was right joyful, and said: Sirs,
know surely, that there is here in this Pallaice at dinner ye Son of Duke
Seuin of Bourdeaux, and he is Nephewe to the Duke Lord of this house, who was
once christened, and has denied the faith of our Lord God, and he has
commanded me to cause Seauen-score Paynims to be armed, to come and to slay
his Nephewe and all his company. Thus when they were all armed, and Swords by
their sides, they followed Geffrey to the Pallaice: and when they entered, Huon
said to the Duke his Uncle. Sir, these men in harness that enter into this
hall, be they such as ye have commanded to come hither to conduct me in my
journey? No Huon quoth the Duke: it is otherwise then thou think, think
surely to die there is no remedy: thou shall never see fair day more. Then he
said: Sirs step forth, look that no christian man escape you, but let them all
be slain.

Chap. XXIX.
How by the aid of Geffrey and of the Prisoners, Huon was succored, and slew
all the Paynims, and the Duke fled, and after besieged the Castle.

WHen Huon saw the malice of his Uncle and his false treason: he was sore
abashed, and arose up suddenly, and put his helmet on his head, and took his
Sword in his hand. Then Geffrey came in, and cried Saint Denis you noble
Frenchmen, take heed that no Paynim escape alive, but slay them all with
sorrow. The Frenchmen drew out their Swords, and fought with the Paynims on
all parts, so that within a short time they were all slain. And when the Duke
saw how they were no Paynims that slew his men, he was in great fear of
his life, and so fled away into a secret Chamber. When Huon perceived that they
were Frenchmen that had thus succored him: he pursued the Duke with his Sword
in his hand, all bloody with the blood of the Paynims that he had slain, and
when the traiterous Duke saw that his Nephewe so followed him, he fled from
Chamber to Chamber, until he came to a window opening upon the Garden side,
and so leapt out thereat and ran away: whereof Huon and Geffrey and the other
Frenchmen were right sorrowful. Then they closed the gates, and lifted up the
bridges, to the intent that they should not be taken within, then they came
into the Hall, whereas one took acquaintance of another, whereof they had
great joy. But if God had not succored them, their joy had been turned to
sorrow, for the Duke who was escaped, when he came into ye town, he made a
cry, that as many as were able to bear armor, should come unto him, so that
he and all that he could make, came with him before the Pallaice, being more
then Ten Thousand persons, and they all swear the death of the christian men
within the Pallaice. When the Duke saw that he had such a number, he was
joyful, and then he commanded his Engines to be raised up, and Ladders on
every part, and there with Pikes and Mattockes they brake down a corner
Tower, and the christian men within defended them selves valiantly. But their
defense had little auailed them, if our Lord God had not mightily succored
them. When Huon knew the danger that they were in, he was sore displeased,
and said: Ah good Lord, I ought to be sore agreeued, when I see that we be
thus kept in by mine Uncle, I fear me we shall never see more days. Then
Gerames said: Sir, for the love of God blow now your Horn. Alas (quoth Huon)
it is not in my power to do it, for the Provost Gonder has it in keeping. Ah
Huon, (quoth Gerames) in an ill hour we were acquainted with you, for now by
your folly and pride, we are in the way of destruction. Thus as they were
devising, Gonder the Provost came to the Duke, and said: Sir, I have great
marvel that you will thus destroy your own Pallaice, great folly you do
therein, rather I would council you to leave this assault, and let there be a
peace made between you and your Nephew, upon condition to let him and his
company go safely away. Provost (quoth the Duke) I pray (...) go and do the
best that thou can, I will do as thou do counsel me. Then the Provost
came to the Pallaice, and said to Huon: Sir, for Gods sake speak to me. What
art thou quoth Huon? I am your Host the Provost, and I require you in as much
as you love your lives, keep well this Pallaice. Sir, (quoth Huon) for your
good counsel I thank you, and I desire you for the love that you bear me,
and in that you would help to save my life, as to deliver me again the Horn
of Iuorie that I took you to keep, for without that I cannot escape death.
Sir, (quoth the Provost) it is not far from me, and so took it out of his
bosom, and delivered it unto Huon in at a window upon the Garden side.

Chap. XXX.
How King Oberon came and succored Huon, and slew all the Paynims, except
such as would be christened: And how Huon slew the Duke his Uncle.

WHen Huon saw that he was possessed of his Horn of Iuorie, he was joyful,
the which was no marvel, for it was the only suertie of his life. Then he
set it to his mouth, and began to blow it: then Gerames said. Ah Sir, you
should never be so light to discover your secrets, for if this Provost had
been untrue, he might have discovered all you secrets to the Duke, whereby you
had been lost and dead, therefore never discover your secrets more: and also
Sir I require you as yet blow not your Horn, for you be not as yet hurt,
King Oberon commanded you so at his departing. Why (quoth Huon) will you then
that I tarrye until I be slain? surely I will blow it without any longer
tarying, and so he blewe it so sore that the blood came out of his mouth, so
that all that were in the Pallaice began to singe and to dance, and the Duke
and al such as were at the seege about the Pallaice, could not rest but fell to
singe and to dance. King Oberon, who as then was in his city of Momur, said
on high: Ah I hear my friend Huons Horn blow, whereby I know well he has
some business in hand, wherefore I wish my self there as the Horn was
blown, with an Hundred Thousand men well armed. He had made no sooner his
wish, but he was in the City of Tormont, whereas he and his men slew down
the Paynims, that it was marvel to see the blood run down the Streets like
a River. King Oberon made it to be cried, that as many as would receive
Baptism, their lives should be saved, so that thereby there were many that
were christened. Then King Oberon came to the Pallaice, when Huon saw him, he
went and thanked him of his succor at that time of need. Friend, (quoth
Oberon) as long as you believe and do my commandments, I shall never fail
to succor you in all your affairs.

Thus all that were in the Town and would not believe in God, were slain.
Then the Duke was taken and brought to the Pallaice unto Huon, when he saw his
Uncle taken, he was joyful, and then the Duke said: Fair Nephewe, I require
you have pity of me. Ah untrue Traitor, (quoth Huon) thou shall never depart
hence alive, I shall never respite thy death; then with his sword he struck
off his Uncles head, then he made his body to be hanged over ye walls of the
Town, that his illness might always be had in memory, and to be an example
to all other: thus that Country was delivered from that Traitor.

Chap. XXXI.
How King Oberon forbad Huon, that he should not go by the tower of the Giant,
to the which Huon would not accord, but went thither, whereby he was in great
danger of death. And of the Damsel that he found there, who was his own Cosen
borne in France.

YE have all heard how King Oberon came and succored Huon, and when all was
done, then he said unto Huon. My dear Friend, I will take my leave of thee,
for I shall never see thee again, until thou have suffered as much pain and
ill, and poverty and disease, that it will be hard to declare it, and all
through thine own folly. When Huon heard that, being affrayd, he said: Sir,
me thinks you say great wrong, for in all things to my power I will observe
your commandment. Friend, (quoth Oberon) seeing thou will do so, remember
then thy promise, and I charge thee upon pain of thy life, and loosing for
ever my love: that thou be not so hardy, as to take the way to the Tower of
Dunother, the which is a maruaylous great Tower standing on the Seaside.
Julius Caesar caused it to be made, and therein I was long time nourished,
thou never saw so fair a Tower, nor better garnished with Chambers and
glass windows, and within hanged with rich Tapestrie. At the Entry of the
gate there are two men of brass, each of them holding in their hands a ^layle
of iron, wherewith without cease day and night they beat by such a measure,
that when the one strikes with his ^layle, the other is lifted up ready to
strike, and they smite so suddenly, that a swallow flying cannot pass by
vnslayn. And within this Tower there is a Giant named Angolofer, he took from
me the Tower and a strong Armor of such virtue, that whosoever has it on
his body, cannot be hurt nor weary, nor he cannot be drowned in no water, nor
burned with fire. Therefore Huon, (my friend) I charge thee go not that way, as
much as thou fear my displeasure, for against that Giant thou can make no
resistance. Sir, (quoth Huon) know for troth, the day that I departed out of
France, I took upon me, that any adventure that might be heard of, though it
were never so perilous, that I would never eschew it for any fear of death:
and therefore Sir I ha^ rather die then to forsake to fight with yt Giant,
there is n^ man shall let me, and Sir I promise you ere I return again, to
conquer your said strong Armor, it shall do me good service hereafter, it
is a thing not to be forsaken, and if I need of your aid, I shall blow my
Horn and you will come and succor me. Huon (quoth Oberon) by the Lord that
saved me, if thou breakest the Horn in the blowing, thou shall have no succor
nor aid of me. Sir, (quoth Huon) you may do your pleasure, and I shall do
mine.

Then Oberon departed without more speaking, and Huon abode in the City, the
which he gave to Geffrey and to the Provost his Host, and all the Land that his
Uncle held. Then he made him ready, and took gould and silver plenty, and
took his leave of Geffrey and of his Host and of all other, and so he and his
company departed, and so road over Hills and Dals, night and day a certain
space without finding of any adventure worthy to be had in memory. At last he
came near to the Seaside, whereas the Tower of the Gyaunt was, when Huon saw
it, he said unto his company. Sirs, yonder I see a Tower, the which was
forbidden me by Oberon, but as God help me, before it be night I will see what
is within it, whatsoever come thereof. Then Gerames beheld the Tower, and began
to sorrow, and said: Ah Huon, he is a fool that agrees to the counsel of a
Child, Sir, for Gods sake beware that you break not the commandment of King
Oberon, for if you do, great ill is like to come unto you. Sir, (quoth Huon)
if all the men now living should forbid me to go thither, I would not obey
them, for you know well, I departed out of France for none other thing, but
to search the strangest adventures, and I demand nothing else but to find
adventures, therefore speak no more to the contrary, for ere I sleep I will
fight with the Giant, for though he be more harder then iron, yet I shall slay
him, or he me: and you Gerames and all the other, abide you here in this
meadowe until I return again. Sir, (quoth Gerames) in weeping, it sore
displeases me that it will be no better: therefore I recommende you unto the
sauegard of God.

Thus Huon departed and left his company heavily complaining. Huon armed
himself, and so took his way, and kissed all his men one after another, and
took with him his Horn and Cup, so all alone on foot he went forth, and
rested not until he came to the gate of the castle of Dunother, there he saw
the two men of Brass, that without ceasing beat with their ^layles, he
beheld them well, and thought it was in a manner impossible to enter without
death. Then he began to consider hereon with himself, how King Oberon had
showed him the troth, and thought without the aid of the grace of God, it were
impossible to enter, whereupon he beheld all about, if there were any other
place to enter, at last he saw near to a pillar of marble, a Basin of gould
fast tied with a chain, then he approached near thereto, and drew out his
sword, wherewith he struck three great strokes on the Basin, so that the sound
thereof might well be heard into the Castle. Within the Tower there was a
Damsel called Sibilla, when she heard the Basin sound, she had great marvel
thereat, then she went to a window, and looked out and saw that Huon would
enter, whereupon she went back again and said, ah good Lord, what knight is
yonder without that would enter? if the Giant awake, anon he will be slain,
for if there were a Thousand Knights together, they should all soon be
destroyed: surely I have great desire to know what he is, and where he was
borne, for as me seems he should be of France, to know the troth I will go
to the window again, to see if I may have of him any knowledge. Then she went
out of her chamber, and went to a window near to the gate, and looked out and
saw Huon all armed abiding at the gate, then she beheld the blazure of his
shield, wherein was portrayed three crosses of gould, whereby she knew well he
was of France. Alas quod she, I am but lost if the Giant know that I have
been here, then she returned again in have, and went to the Chamber door
whereas the Giant lay and slept, and she perceived he was yet a sleep, for he
rowted that it was marvel to here. Then she returned again quickly to the
gate, and opened a wicket, out of the which there issued such a wind, that if
caused the two men with their flayles to stand still in rest, when she had
opened the wicket, hastily she returned into her Chamber, and when Huon saw
the little wicket open, he advanced himself and entered, for the two men with
their flayles were in rest, then he went further thinking to find them that
had opened the wicket: but he was sore abashed when he could find no
creature, there were so many Chambers, that he wist not whether to go to find
that he sought for. Thus he searched all about, and at last he saw about a
Pillar fourteen men lie dead, whereof he had great marvel, and said, that
he would return back again, then he went out of the Hall and came to the
gate, weening to have found it open: but it was closed by it self, and the men
again did beat with their flayles. Alas, (quoth Huon) now I see well I cannot
escape from hence, then he returned into the Castle, and hearkened about, and
as he went searching carefully, he heard the voice of a Damsel pitiously
weeping. He came there as she was, and humbly saluted her, and said: Fair
Damsel, I cannot tell if you can understand my language or not, know of you I
would, wherefore you make this great sorrow? Sir, (quoth she) I weep because
I have of you great pity, for if the Giant hear within (who is yet a sleep)
hap to awake, you are but dead and lost. Fair Lady, (quoth Huon) I pray you
show me what you be, and where you were borne? Sir, (quoth she) I am Daughter
to Guinemer, who in his time was Earl of Saint Omers, and am Niece to Duke
Seuin of Bourdeaux.

When Huon heard that, right humbly he kissed her, and said. Madame, know for
troth, that you are my near Kinsewoman, for I am Son to Duke Seuin: I pray
you show me what adventure has brought you into this Castle. Sir, (quoth she)
my Father had devotion to see the holy Sepulcher, and he loved me so well, that
he would not leave me behind him, and as we were on the Sea near to the City
of Escalone in Surry, there arose a great tempest upon the Sea, that the wind
brought us near unto this Castle, and the Giant being in his Tower, saw us in
great danger of drowning, and that we were driven into this Port, he came down
out of his Pallaice, and slew my Father, and all them that were with him
except my self, and so brought me into this Tower, whereas I have been these
Seven years in great distress and misery. And now Coozen, I pray you what
adventure has brought you hither into this strange Country? Coozen, (quoth he)
seeing you will know of my adventures, I shall show you the troth, King
Charlemaine has sent me in message to the Admiral Gaudise in Babylon, I
bear him a Message by mouth and by Letters, and as my way lay, I am come by
this Tower, and I demanded of a Paynim who was within this Tower, and he
answered me and said, how here should be a great and an horrible Giant, who
has done much evil to them that have passed this way. And I thought to pass
this way, to fight with him and destroy him, and to deliver the Country of
him, and I have left my company here by in a Valley to tarry for me. Dear
Coozen, (quoth she) I have great marvel that you would take on you such a
folly, for if ye were Five hundred men together well armed, ye durst not all
abide him if he were armed with his armor, for none can endure against him,
therefore Cousin I counsel you to return back again ere he do awake, and I
shall open you the wicket, so that you shall pass out without any danger.

Chap. XXXII.
How the Damsel cosen to Huon, showed him the chamber whereas the Giant slept,
and how he went and waked him, and of the good armor that the Giant delivered
to Huon.

WHen Huon had well understood the Damsel, he said, Cosen know for troth, ere
I depart hence, I will see what man he is, it shall never be said (to my
reproach) in the court of any Prince, that for fear of any miscreant I should
be of so faint a courage, that I durst not abide him, certainly I had rather
die than such a fault should come to me. Ah Cosen quoth she, then I see well
both you and I are destroyed, but seeing it is thus, I shall show you the
chamber whereas he sleeps, and when ye have seen him, yet then ye may
return. First go into this chamber that you see here before you, wherein ye
shall find bread and wine and other victuals, and in the next you shall find
clothes of silk, and many rich jewels, then in the third chamber ye shall
find the four Gods of the Paynims, they be all of fine massy gould, and in
the fourth ye shall find ye Giant lying a sleep on a rich bed: then sir if ye
were of my mind, I would counsel you to strike of his head sleeping, for if he
awake, you cannot escape without death. Lady quoth Huon, and god will, it
shall never be said to my disgrace, that I should strike any man without his
knowledge. Then Huon departed from the Lady, his sword being in his hand and
his helmet on his head, and his shield about his neck, and so entered into the
first chamber, and then into the second and third, whereas he saw the four
Gods: when he had well regarded them, he gave each of the^ a stroke with his
sword, and then he entered into the chamber whereas the Giant lay sleeping, Huon
noted him advisedly, and the bed that he lay on, the which was so rich, that
the value thereof could not be prized, the curtains, couerings, and pillowes
were of such riches, that it was great beauty to behold them. Also the
chamber was hanged with rich clothes, and the floare covered with carpets, when
Huon had well regarded all this, and well considered of the Giant, who was
xvij. foot of length, and his body fournished thereafter and all his other
members, but a more fowler and hideous creature was never seen, with a great
head, great ears, and a camelled nose and eyes burning like a candle. Ah good
Lord (quoth Huon) I would King Charlemaine were here to see us two fight, for
I am sure then ere he departed, my peace should be made with him. Lord god, I
humbly require thee to be my succor against this enemy, for if it be not thy
good pleasure, against him I can no while endure. Then Huon fiercely advanced
forth, and made the sign of the Cross, casting in his mind what he might
do, for he thought if he slew him sleeping, it should be a great reproach to
him, and it would be said that he had slain a man dead, whereupon he said to
himself: shame have I if I touch him ere I have defied him, then Huon cried
out aloud and said: Arise thou heathen hound, or else I shall strike off thy
head. When the Giant heard Huon speak, he awaked fiercely, and beheld Huon,
and rose up so quickly, that in rising he brake the bedsted that he lay upon,
then he said to Huon. Friend, they that sent thee hither, loved thee but little,
nor doubted not me. And when Huon heard the Giant speak french, he had great
marvel and said, I am come hither to see thee, and it may be so, that I have
done it unadvisedly. Then the Giant said, thou say troth, for if I were
armed as thou art, Five hundred men such as thou art could not endure me, but
yt they should all die, but thou see I am naked, without sword or weapon, yet
for all that I doubt thee not. Then Huon thought in himself, that it would be
a great shame to him, to assail a man without armor or weapon, wherefore he
said: Go and arm thee, or incontinent I shall slay thee. Friend quoth the
Giant, this that thou say, proceeds of a good courage and of courtesy.
Then he armed him, and took in his hand a great fawchin, and Huon was
withdrawn into the Pallaice abiding for the Giant, who tarried not long but
came to Huon, and said: where art thou, behold me here ready to destroy thee,
without thou make good defense? yet I desire thee tell me what thou art, to
the intent that I may (when I have slain thee) tell how I have slain such a
one, that by his folly came to assail me in mine own Pallaice. Great pride it
was in thee, that thou would not strike me ere I was armed, but whosoever
thou art, thou seem son to a noble man: I pray thee show me whether thou
would go, and what moved thee to come hither, to the intent that I might
know the troth of thine enterprise, that when I have slain thee; I may make my
vaunt to my men, that I have slain such a man, that thought scorn and
disdain to strike me ere I was armed. Paynim quoth Huon, thou art in a great
folly, when thou so rashly reputest me for dead: But seeing thou would know
the troth, I am a poor knight, from whom king Charlemaine has taken my
Lands, and banished me out of the Realm of France, and has sent me for to
do a message to the Admiral Gaudise at Babylon, and my name is Huon, Son
to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux. Now I have showed all the troth of mine enterprise,
and now I pray thee tell me where thou were borne, and who engendered thee, to
the intent that when I have slain thee, I may make mine auaunt in king Charles
Court, and before all my friends: that I have slain such a maruaylous great
Giant as thou art. Then ye Giant said, if thou slay me, thou may well make
thy vaunt, that thou have slain Angolofer the Giant, who has xvij. brethren,
of whom I am the youngest. Also thou may say, that unto the dry tree and to
the red sea, there is no man but is tributarie to me. I have chaced the
Admiral Gaudise, to whom thou say thou go, and have taken from him by
puissance diverse of his Cities, and he does me yearly seruage, by the tender
of a Ring of gould, to buy his head withal. Also I took from Oberon the
Fayrie King, this puissant Tower, who for all his enchaunting and Fayries could
not resist me, and also I took from him a rich Armor, thou never heardst of
such another, for it has such virtue, that whosoever can put it on, can never
be weary nor disco^fited. But there is in it, another especial virtue, for he
that must wear that armor, must be without spot of deadly sin, and also his
mother must be without carnal copulation with any man, except with her own
husband, I believe there cannot be found any man that may wear this Armor.
Also it is of such virtue, that whosoever has it on his body, cannot be
grieved neither with fire nor water. By Mahou^d I have proved it, and because
I have found such courtesy in thee, that thou gave me leave to arm me: I
will give thee leave to assay if thou can put on that Armor, in regard I
know, that neither thou, nor any knight else can be able to do it. Then the
Giant went to his coffer, and took out the Armor, and came to Huon and said:
See, here is the good armor, I give thee leave to assay to put it on thy
body. Then Huon took the Armor and went back a little, and put off his own
armor, and took that belonging to ye Giant, and incontinent did it on his
body, then hastily he put on his helmet, and took his sheeld and sword in his
hand, and devoutly thanked our Lord God of this great grace. Then the Giant
said, by Mahound, I had little thought thou had been such a man, that Armor
becomes thee exceeding well, now I have quit the courtesy that thou
shewedst me, therefore I pray thee put off the Armor, and deliver it me
again. Not so sir by your leave, answered Huon, this Armor is meeter for me,
than such a Helhound as thou art, therefore know for troth, I will not render
it again for xiiij. of the best Cities between this and Paris. Friend quoth
the Giant, seeing thou will not render me again the Armor, I am content to let
thee depart hence without any hurt or damage, and also I will give thee my Ring
of gould, the which the Admiral Gaudise gave me, for I know well it will stand
thee in good stead, if thou think to fournish thy message, for when thou
come to the gate of his Pallaice, and say how thou art a messenger sent
from king Charles, thou shall find four gates, and at every gate four
Porters, so that at the first gate, if it be known thou be a frenchman: one of
thy hands shall be cut of, and at the second gate thy other hand, and at the
third gate one of thy feet, and at the fourth the other foot, and then shall
thou be brought before the Admiral, and there thy head stricken off. And
therefore to escape these perils, and furnish thy message, and to the intent that
thou may surely return, give me again my Armor and I shall give the my
ring of gold, the which when thou but show it, thou shall be received with
great honor at every gate, and then thou may go and return surely into the
Pallaice at thy pleasure, and no man to let thee, for if thou had slain Five
hundred men, there shall be none so hardy as to touch thee, nor to do thee any
ill if thou have this Ring about thee, for when I have need of men or money, I
cannot lack if I send this ring for a token, therefore I pray thee let me have
again my Armor.

Chap. XXXIII.
How Huon slew the great Giant, and how he called Gerames and his company to
him, and of the joy that they made for the death of the Giant.

WHen Huon understood the Paynim, he said. Ah thou fell and false deceiuer,
know for troth, if all the Preachers between the east and west preached to me a
whole year, and that thou would give me all that thou have, and thy Ring
therewith: I would not render again the good Armor that is now on my body,
first I slay thee, and then, as for thy Ring that thou praisest so much: I will
likewise have it whether thou will or not. When the Giant had well heard Huon,
and saw that in no wise he could get again his Armor: he was then sorrowful,
and because he saw how Huon reproved him, therewith he was so sore displeased,
that his eyes seemed like two burning candels, then he yet demanded of Huon,
if he would do none otherwise. No truly quoth Huon, though thou be great and
strong, I have no fear of thee, seeing I have on this good Armor: therefore in
the name of god and of his divine puissance I defy thee. And I thee quoth the
Giant, for all the Armor thou can not endure against me. Then the Giant
approached to Huon, and lift up his fawchin thinking to have stricken him, but he
failed, for the stroke glent, and the fawchin light upon a pillar, and entered
into it more then two foot, then Huon (who was quick and light) behoulding
the maruaylous stroke, quickly stepped forth with his good sword in his hand,
and seeing how the Giant had his fawchin sticking fast in the pillar, he struck
the Giant on both ye arms near to his hands in such wise, that he struck off
both his hands, so that they with the fawchin fell down to the earth. When the
Giant felt himself so sore hurt, with pain thereof he gave a maruaylous cry,
so horrible, as though all the Tower had fallen to the earth: whereat the
Damsel Sibylla being in her chamber, was sore abashed, she went out of her
chamber and found a staff by the way, she took it up in her hands, and came
to the Pallaice whereas she heard the cry, and met the Giant flying away to
save himself, but the Damsel well advised, when she saw that he fled, she
cast the staff between his legs, so that thereby he fell to the earth, and
Huon who came after him with his sword in his hand, he hasted him, and gave the
Giant many a great stroke, and the Giant cried out so high, that it was very
terrible to hear him. Then Huon lift up his sword, and gave him such a stroke
in the neck, that his head flew to the earth, then Huon wiped his sword, and
put it up into the sheath, and he came to the head thinking to have taken it
up, and to have set it on the height of the Tower, but the head was so great
and heavy, that he could not remove it nor turn the body, then he smiled
and said. Ah good Lord, I thank thee of thy grace, that thou have given me the
puissance to slay such a creature, would to god that this body and head were
now in the Pallaice of Paris, before Charlemaine King of France, so that he
knew that I have slain him. Then Huon went to a window and looked out, and
saw where his company were, than said he to them on hie. Sirs come up hither,
ye may do it surely, for this Pallaice is woonne, and the Giant slain. When
Gerames, Garyn, and the other heard that, they were joyful and thanked our
lord god, then they came to the gate, and Sybilla the Damsel went and opened
the wicket, whereby the enchantment failed, then they entered and followed the
Damsel, who brought them into the Pallaice to Huon, and when they saw him,
they all wept for joy, and embraced and kissed him, and demanded if he had any
hurt. Sirs quoth Huon, I thank god I feel no hurt, and then he brought them
where as the Giant lay dead, when they saw him, they had marvel how he could
be slain by Huon, they were afraid to see him lie dead. Then Gerames demanded
of Huon, what was the Damsel that was there, and Huon showed how she was his
coozen, and showed the^ all the manner how she came thither: whereof they had
great joy and embraced her, then they all unarmed themselves, and went to
supper, and eat and drank at their pleasure, but their joy endured not long,
as ye shall hear hereafter.

Chap. XXXIIII.
How Huon departed from the castle of the Giant, and took leave of his
company, and went alone a foot to the seaside, whereas he found Mallaborn of
the Fayrie, on whom he mounted to pass the Sea.

YE have heard here before, how Huon conquered the Giant, the which was great
joy to all his company, then the next day Huon called them all together, and
said. Sirs, ye know well the enterprise that I have taken on me to do,
touching the Admyrall Gaudise* therefore it is convenient, that as shortly as I
can, to do my message that I am charged by king Charles to do to the
Admiral Gaudise: wherefore I desire you all, to keep good and true company
with this noble Damsel, and also I require you to tarry here xv. days, and
then if I return not, go you all into France, and take this noble Damsel
with you, and salute from me king Charlemaine and all the Peers of France,
and show them the hard adventures that I have had, and how I am gone to
perform his message. When his company understood that he would depart, they
were sorrowful and said. Sir, ye desire us to tarry here xv. days, know
for troth, we shall tarry here for you an whole year. Sirs quoth he I
thank you, then he made him ready to depart, and armed him, and took his
Cup and Horn, and also the Giants Ring, the which he did put about his arm,
and then he kissed his Coosen and all the others, and they all made great
lamentation for his departing. Then they went up into the Pallaice, and looked
out at the windows after Huon as long as they might see him: Huon went forth
till he came to the seaside, the which was not far from the Castle, and
there was a little Haven, whereas always was wont to lie some manner of ship
or vessel to pass over the Sea. And when Huon came thither, though now at
this instant there was none at all, finding no means for passage, he said. Ah
good Lord, what shall I do, that I can find here no boat or vessel to
pass in? alas in an ill hour I slew Charlot, whereby I am thus still in
danger, howbeit I did it in mine own defense: great wrong therefore king
Charles has done, to banish me out of mine own Country. These and the like
complaints made Huon there being alone, and began sore to lament, but suddenly
on his right hand he saw a great beast come swimming toward him, like a Bear,
Huon beheld him, and made on himself a sign of the Cross, and drew out his
sword to defend himself, as thinking the Beast would have assailed him: but
he did not, but went a little off from Huon, and shook himself in such wise,
that his skin fell off, and then he was as fair a man and as well fourmed as
could be seen. Then Huon had great fear and marvel, when he saw that this
Beast was become a man, yet he approached near to him, and demanded what he
was, and whether he were an humane creature, or else an ill spirit that was
come thither to tempt him, and said, right now thou did swim in the sea,
and trauersed the great waves in guise of a maruailous beast: I charge thee in
the name of God thou do me no hurt, but show me what thou art, for I believe
thou art of king Oberons company: Huon quoth he, dismay thou not, I know thee
right well, thou art Son to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, Royal king Oberon has
sent me to thee: once it happened me to break his commaundment, wherefore he
has condemned me to be this xxx. years like a beast in the Sea. Friend quoth
Huon, by the Lord that fourmed me, I will trust thee till I be past the red
sea. Huon quoth Mallaborn, know for troth, I am sent hither for no other cause,
but to bear thee whether thou will, therefore make thee ready, and recommend
thy self to the sauegard of our Lord Jesus Christ, and than let me alone. Than
Mallaborn entered again into the Beasts skin, and said to Huon. Sir mount
upon my back.

Chap. XXXV.
How Huon passed the Sea upon Mallaborn, who bare him to Babylon, and how Huon
came to the first gate, and so to the second.

WHen Huon saw the Beast enter again into his skin, and that he tarried
for him, he made the sign of ye cross, and prayed god to save and conduct
him, and so leapt upon him, and the Beast entered into ye Sea, and swamme as
fast as though a bird had slowen, so that within a short space he trauersed the
great River of Nyle, the which comes from Paradise, and which is a dangerous
River, for the multitude of Serpents and Crocodilles that be therein: howbeit,
there were none that did him any trouble. Then when they came to land, Huon was
joyful, and Mallaborn said: Right dearly shall I aby the time that thou were
borne, or that ever I knew thee, for the intent to do thee pleasure, I shall
endure yet x. years like a Beast in the Sea, and xxx. years I have been so
already, so that my time is in all xl. years. I have great pity of thee, for
there is no man borne of a woman, that knows the ill and poverty that shall
fall hereafter to thee, and I shall suffer much for ye love that I have to
thee: howbeit, I shall take it in patience. Yonder thou may see the city
whether thou would go, moreover, thou know what has been commanded
thee, and what thou have to do, and yet whatsoever fall, break not the
commandment of king Oberon, and always be true and say the troth, for
as soon as thou make any lie, thou shall loose the love of king Oberon: thus
God be with thee, for I may no longer tarry. So he went again into the Sea,
and Huon tarried there alone, recommending himself to our lord god, and so
took the way to the City, and there entered in without let of any man. So
soon as he was entered, he met a M. Paynims going a hawking, another M. coming
homeward, and a M. horses led to be new shod, and a M. coming from shooing,
than he saw a M. men playing at the Chesse, and another M. that had played and
been mated, and another M. talking and devising with Damsels, and another M.
coming from drinking of the Admirals wine, and another M. going thither. When
Huon all armed had gone a great space in the City, he had great marvel of
that he had seen, and that he had met such multitude of people. And he studied
thereon so much, that he forgot the Giants Ryng on his arm, and the men that
he met had great marvel of him to see him go all armed a foot, and yet he
went still forward. Alas poor unhappy Huon, that could not remember the
Giants Ring about his arm, for lack of remembrance thereof, he suffered after
so much trouble, that there is no humane tongue can tell it, as ye shall hear
hereafter. At last he came into a great place before the first gate of the
Pallaice, whereas there stood a great Vine tree set upon brick pillars of
diverse colors, under the which the Admiral Gaudise one day in the week would
come thither, and used to give audience to all Suitors. When Huon had regarded
all this, he came to the first gate of the Pallaice, and there he cried to the
Porter and said. Friend, I pray you open the gate, and the Porter said, with a
good will, if thou be a Sarazin thou shall enter. Then Huon (as unadvised, and
forgetting himself, and not once thinking on king Oberons commandment, or of
the Giants Ring about his arm, the which if he had showed forth, he should
not have needed to have made any lie) when he had heard the Paynim demand
whether he were a Sarazin or no: he said yes, than the Porter said, than may
you surely enter. So Huon passed the first bridge and gate, and when he came to
the second, he remembered himself how he had broken king Oberons commandment,
wherewith he was so sorrowful at his heart, that he wist not what to do, and
swear the^ that he would never lie more. Then he took the Ring in his hand,
and came to the second gate, and said to the Porter: Thou villain, he that
died on the cross, confound thee, open this gate, for I must enter. When the
Porter heard him speak so fiercely, he said, who is it, that the first Porter
was so hardy to suffer to enter in at ye first gate? I shall show thee quoth
Huon, see not thou this Ring, the which is a token that I may pass and go
whereas me list. When the Porter heard him and saw the Ring, he knew it well,
and said: Sir, ye be welcome, how fares the Lord ye ye come from? Huon, who
would not lie, passed the bridge and gave no answer, and so came to the third
gate: where the Porter came to him, and Huon showed him the Ring, then the
Porter let down the bridge, and opened the gate, and with great reverence
saluted Huon, and suffered him to pass. When Huon was thus passed the three
bridges, then he remembered how he had made a lie at the first bridge, and said
to himself. Alas, what shall become of me, seeing I have so lightly broken my
promise to him that has done so much for me? alas, I forgot the Ring that was
about mine arm, how be it, I trust that Oberon will not be displeased for it,
seeing I did it not wilfully, but that I forgot it: I trust he will take no
more regard to this deed, then he did when I blew ye Horn without any cause,
thus Huon passed the three gates of the Pallaice.

Chap. XXXVI.
How Huon passed the fourth Gate, and how he came into the garden whereas the
Fountain was, and of that which he did there.

WHen Huon saw that he had passed the three gates, he went on to the fourth
gate, with the Ring in his hand, for he met with no man, but that still did him
honor when they saw the Ring: then he said to ye fourth Porter, thou villain
Porter, I charge thee forthwith open the gate. When the Porter heard him he
had great marvel, and said, what art thou that art armed, and speak so
fiercesly to me? lay away thine armor, and then show me what thou art and
whether thou will go, for armed as thou art it is not possible for to enter,
show me by thy faith how thou have passed the three other bridges. Than Huon
said, hold thy peace Paynim, I am a Messenger sent from noble king
Charlemaine, and whether thou will or not I will pass this way and go to the
Pallaice to the Admiral Gaudise: there is neither thou nor any other shall
let me, behold this token that I show thee. The Paynim knew it anon, and let
down the bridge, and opened the gate, and kneeled down and kissed and
embrabraced his leg, desiring pardon of him in that he had caused him to tarry
so long: Paynim quoth Huon, good day may thou have. Sir quoth the Porter, ye
may go to the Admiral, who will make you good cheer and great honor, for
there is nothing that ye can desire, but it shall be granted unto you, yea and
if it be his only Daughter, for love of the Lord from whom ye bring this Ring
for a token: and sir, I require you how does the Lord Angolofer* comes he
hither or not? Porter quoth Huon, if he come hither, all the Devils of hell
must bring him hither, and therewith he passed forth without any more
words, but he said to himself. Ah good Lord Jesus Christ, help and aid me in
all my business, I was tempted with an evil spirit, when I made the lie at the
first gate, I did it by lightness of courage and for lack of remembrance,
whereof I am right sorry. Huon thus being in displeasure with himself for the
lie that he had made, went forth till he came to the Pallaice, and entered into
a fair garden, wherein the Admiral took oftentimes his pastime, for there
could no tree, fruit, nor flower be wished for, but there they might be found
both in so^mer and winter. And in the midst of this garden there was a fair
Fountain coming out of the River of Nyle that comes from Paradise, the
which fountain as then was of such virtue, that if any sick man did drink
thereof, or washed his hands and face therein, incontinent he should be whole,
and also if a man had been of great age, he should return again to the age
of xxx. years, and old women to become as fresh and lusty as a maid of xv.
years. This Fountain had that virtue by the space of lx. years, but x.
years after that Huon had been there, it was destroyed and broken by the
Egiptians, who made war on the Admyrall that was as then in Babylon. And when
Huon had washed his hands and face in the Fountain, and drunk of the water,
he beheld ye Pallaice, and thought it maruaylous fair, and when he had well
regard it, he saw a little beside the fountain a great Serpent, who kept the
Fountain, to the intent that none should be so hardy as to drink or touch ye
Fountain: for if a traitor, or any man that had falsefied his faith did touch
it, he could not escape without death. But when the Serpent saw Huon, he
inclined himself, without making of semblance to do him any ill. Huon sat down
by the Fountain, and began greeuouslye to lament, and said. Ah good Lord,
without thy succor it is impossible for me to depart hence alive. Ah noble
king Oberon, forsake me not now in this need, for the trespass that I have
done ought to be forgiven me, seeing I did it negligently for lack of
remembrance, certainly I will know, if for so small a cause ye will leave me,
wherefore whatsoever fall, I shall prove and assay to know the troth, then he
took his Horn and blew it so fiercely, that king Oberon heard it being in his
Forest, and when he heard it, he said. Ah good Lord I hear the false Knight
blow his Horn, who sets so little by me, for at ye first gate that he
passed by, he made a false lie: by the Lord that fourmed me, if he blow till
the veins of his neck bur^^ in sunder, he shall not be succored for me, nor
for any manner of mischief that may fall to him. Then Huon being in the garden
blew so loud, that the Admiral, who was set at his dinner, arose from the
board with all his Lords, and all other ladies and Damsels, knights and
squiers, boys, and scullions of the kitchen, and all other came into the
Pallaice to the Admiral, and began to dance and singe, and made great joy,
the more that Huon blew his Horn, ye more they daunced and sang. And when Huon
left blowing, than the Admiral called his Barons, and commanded them to be
armed, and said. Sirs go into this garden, for surely there is some
Enchaunter, therefore take heed that he escape not, but bring him alive to me,
for I will know of him the cause why he has done this deed, for if he escape,
he will do us more ill. When Huon had blown a long space, and saw no body
come to him, he was sore abashed, and tha^ he began to lament and said. Ah good
Lord god, now I see well mine end approaches, when king Oberon fails me, in
whom I have all my trust in life and death. Ah dear Lady Mother and brother
Gerardine, I shall never see you more. Ah noble king Charlemaine, great wrong
have ye done to me, thus to banish me without desert, for that that I did was
in my defense, god forgive it you. Ah king Oberon, well maye^st thou be reputed
for an unkind creature, thus to leave me for one small fault, certainly if thou
be a noble man, I hope thou will pardon me, at least, I put all to god, and to
him I submit me. And whatsoever fall, I will enter into the Pallaice, and do
my Message that king Charlemaine has commanded me to do. So he made him
ready, and departed from the Fountain, thinking he should find the Admiral
at dinner at that time.

Chap. XXXVII.
How Huon came into the Pallaice, and did his message to the Admiral, and how
he slew many Paynims, and was afterward taken, and put in Prison.

WHen Huon had been a certain space at the fountain, he departed all armed, and
mounted up the degrees of the Pallaice, the same time the Admiral had caused
two of his principal gods to be set in the midst of the Pallaice, richly
adorned, and before the^ two great torches burning, so that no Sarazin passed
by them, but made to them great reverence, but Huon passed by them, and would
not once look on them, nor speak to no man that he met, whereof they had all
great marvel and said one to another, so that Huon easily heard them. I
believe this man, who thus entered into ye Pallaice all armed, is some messenger
sent from some great Prince to the Admyrall, and then Huon saw a Paynim King
speaking to the Admyrall, who was newly come to the Admiral, because the same
day the Admiral Gaudise should have delivered to him his Daughter the fair
Escleremond in marriage, and Huon saw well, how he was the greatest Prince
that as then was there with the Admiral, then Huon said to himself. Ah good
Lord, if I acquit my self truly to King Charlemaine, I must slay this Paynim
king, I think it be he that I look for, seeing he sits so near to the
Admiral, god confound me* but incontinent I will strike of his head, and then
let our Lord Jesus Christ do with me at his pleasure. Then Huon came nere to
the table, and drew out his sword, and therewith gave the said King such a
stroke, that his head fell on the table, so that ye Admyrall was therewith all
bloody. Then Huon with a hye voice said. Ah good Lord, what a good beginning is
this, the rest I remit to our Lord Jesus Christ whom I require to aid me to
perform the rest of mine enterprise, in this point I have nere quit my self
against king Charlemaine. Then the Admiral said to his Barons, take this man
that has done me this offense, as to murder this king ^itting at my table, if
he escape, look me never in the face. The^ the Paynims assailed Huon on all
sides, and cast at him darts and swords to have slain him. But his good Armor
saved him from the death, and with his sword he slew many a bold Paynim, so
that none durst approach near him. When he saw that he was sore oppressed, he
took his Ring from off his arm, and cast it on the table before the Admiral
and said. Sir Admiral, beware on pain of thy life, of doing to me any hurt or
damage, by this token that I show thee. When the Admiral saw the Ring, he
knew it well, then he began to cry, that no man should be so hardye as to
touch him that has slain the Paynim King, and every man let Huon in rest,
whereof he was right joyful, than he said to the Admiral, Sir, I will from
hence forth that thou do as I command thee. Friend quoth the Admiral, thou
may do in my Pallaice what thou will, whatsoever thou command shall be done,
no man shall say the contrary. Than Huon saw where his daughter the fair
Escleremond sat by her Father, and Huon went to her, and kissed her iij. times
before her Father, whereat the Damsel was much abashed, but she saw him so
fair, and felt his mouth so sweet, that she thought without she might have him
to her Lover, she should dye for sorrow, so that she changed color, and blushed
as ruddie as a rose. When Huon had kissed the lady, than he went to the
Admiral and said. Sir Admiral, know for troth that I am christened, and am a
Messenger sent from noble king Charlemaine to thee, because there is no Prince
christian nor heathen, but that obeys his commandment, except thy self:
therefore by me he sends thee word, that since the dolorous day of battle
at Ronceuaux, whereas he lost his two Nephews, Rowland and Oliver, he never
since assembled so much people, as he will do this next summer to come upon
thee both by water and by land, without thou will believe in the law of Jesus
Christ, therefore if thou will believe me, be christened, or else this
mischief will fall upon thee. Speak no more of that quoth the Admiral, for I
had rather be hewn and slain, then to leave my law and believe upon thy god.
Sir Admiral quoth Huon, moreover king Charles commands thee to send him a
M. Sparhawkes, a M. Goshawkes, a M. Bears, and a M. wayters chayned together,
a M. young Varlets, a M. fair Damsels, and also a handful of thy beard, and
Four of thy great teeth. Ha quoth the Admiral, I see thou art hardy and
outrageous, to demand of me this that thou have said. And also I have great
marvel of thy Master, that he is so foolish as to command me by thee, to
send him my beard and great teeth, before this time he has sent me more than
xv. Messengers, and has demanded part of this that thou speak of, but all
xv. have been hanged, and now thou art come by thy folly to make up the xvj.
But by reason of the Ring that thou bear, we dare not touch thee: I pray
thee therefore by the faith and law that thou art of, show me what Devil
has given thee that Ring. Than Huon sore abashed, as he that durst not make a
lie, for fear of king Oberon, said. Sir, not for doubt of thee, or of any
Paynim here, I will not spare to show thee the troth, know then that with this
good sword I have slain the Lord Angolofer the Giant. When ye Admiral heard
that, he said to his Lords. Sirs look that this Villain escape not, for by
all the Gods that I believe on, I shall never have joy in my heart until I see
him taken. Then Paynims and Sarazins on all parts assailed Huon, when he saw
that, he commended himself to our Lord god, and thought he should never see
fair day more, and so with his sword in both his hands he defended himself
nobly, in slaying and cutting off hands, and feet of the Sarazins, and of
many he made the brains to fly abroad on ye pauement, great terror it was to
behold, for by reason of his good Armor, there was no Paynim could do him any
damage, but they gave him way, and durst not approach near him. Huon being full
of ire as he fought, he saw on the one side of the Pallaice an Arch in the
wall, and so ever still fighting he drew thither, and set his back to the
arch, to the intent that none should come behind him. There he fared like a wild
Boar in the wood* and defended himlelfe in such wise, that whom soever he
touched with a full stroke, had no need after of any surgeon, thus a long
space Huon endured, and had no great harm. But the force of the Paynims was so
great, that it was not possible for him to sustain long, for he waxed so
weary, that his strokes feebled, oftentimes he called upon god, and on the
other part the Admiral cried to his men and said. Ah ye fainte hearted slaves,
great shame is to you all, that one man shall so long endure against you, that
ye can neither take him nor slay him. Then the Paynims when they heard the
Admiral so dispraise them, they came in a great rage all at once upon Huon,
whereas he was alone under the arch, and a Paynim who was Nephew to the
Admiral, came upon Huon, but when Huon saw him approach, he lifted up his
sword, and gave the Paynim such a stroke on the helmet, that he claue his head
to the breast, and therewith his sword fell out of his hands, and another
Sarazin took it up, then all the Sarazins at once ran upon Huon and took
him, and then took from him his Horn and his Cup, and put off his armor:
when he was unarmed, the Sarazins beheld him well, and many said, how they
never saw so fair a man before, affirming, that if all Frenchmen were such as
he, there were no King able to resist them.

Chap. XXXVIII.
Of the great complaints that Huon made being in prison, and how the Admirals
Daughter came to comfort him, and how she departed not well content with Huon.

WHen Huon was disarmed, the Paynims took and brought him before the Admiral,
who was right joyful when he saw Huon, and called his Barons and demanded of
them, what death the Caytiffe should die that had done them such damage, as to
slay one of his most puissant Kings, and also his Nephew, beside many others.
Then they all answered with one voice, that he should be slain alive
incontinent. Then stepped forth an old ancient Admiral of Six score years of
age, who was of ye Admirals privy counsel, and he said. Sir Admiral, ye may
not do thus, for the love of this good day, the which is the feast of Saint
John, according to our law, there is none ought to die on that day, but Sir,
respite his life for a whole year, and then shall be the feast of your Gods, on
that day ye ought to deliver xj. Champions, to do with them you Sacrifice: let
this man be one, and another may come by that time, and which of the two
Champions be overcome, ye shall make your sacrifice to your Gods of him. Thus
ye promised your Gods to do, the first day that ye took on you the Signiorie
of Babylon, and Sir, if it were not for that this man has slain one of your
Kings, and your Nephew, ye ought not to slay him, but rather to thank him, for
by him, the man that you ought most to hate in the world, is slain, that is
Angolofer, and now by his death ye are out of all servitude and bondage, and
by this man set at liberty. When the Admiral Gaudise had well heard the
Paynim, he said, seeing it is so that ye give me this counsel, and that of
right mine Ancestors have ever accustomed the same: I will not do the
contrary, but it shall be as ye have said. Then was Huon led with iiij.
Paynims to a dark prison, and the Iaylor was commanded to give him meat and
drink suffitient. When Huon saw how he was in prison, he was right sorrowful
and began to remember ye noble Duches his Mother, and Gerard his brother, and
said. Ah Oberon, how is it that art so unkind and outrageous to me, for so
little an offense to suffer me to endure this great misery? for I know well it
is not unknown to thee, that the offense that I have done, was but only by
forgetfulness.

Now let us leave speaking of Huon, and say somewhat of fair Escleremond
Daughter to the Admiral: when she saw that it was night, and she all alone
in her bed, she remembered the French knight, who had kissed her iij. times in
the presence of her Father, and she was in great sorrow because he was put in
prison, and said to her self: Without he were a Knight of great enterprise, he
would never have been so hardy to have done as he has done this day in diverse
manners. Wherefore she said, he was well worthy to be beloved and succored.
Then incontinent she arose and made her ready, and privily she took a torch
of wax in her hand, and lighted it, and issued out of her chamber as priuilye
as she could. It was about midnight, and every man was a sleep in the
Pallaice, she went strait to the prison, and came at so good a time that she
found the Iaylor fast a sleep, then she stole away the keys, and went and
opened the prison door. But when Huon saw the torch light, and the door of ye
prison open, he was in great fear, least they would take him out to put him to
death, or to do him some other displeasure, whereupon he began to make
pitiful complaints, The Lady who could well speak french, understood all
Huons complaints, and remembered his name, because the day before she had heard
himself show her Father his name, then she said. Huon, dismay not, I am
Escleremond Daughter to the Admiral, whom this day passed thou did kiss
iij. times in the presence of my Father, if it be so that thou will fulfill my
will, I shall put to my endeavor to deliver thee out of prison, for I am so
affectionate toward thee, that ever since thou did kiss me, I have none
other thought nor immagination but only on thee, and how to bring thee out of
the danger that thou art in. Madame quoth Huon, god reward you for your great
courtesy that ye would do unto me, but fair Lady Escleremond, you are a
Sarazin, and I am christened: True it is, that I did kiss you, but that was by
the commandment of king Charlemaine, who sent me hither so to do, but else I
had rather to have been here in perpetual prison, than to have touched any
part of your body or mouth so long as ye be a Sarazyn. Huon quoth ye Lady,
seeing thou art of that mind, thou shall end thy days here in prison
miserably, and never trust me, but if I can, I shall cause thee dearly to aby
the refusal that thou have made me. Then the Lady Escleremond parted from the
prison, and came to the Iaylor and awaked him, and said: Friend, I charge thee
on pain of thy life, that to this french Prisoner within thy keeping, for
these iij. days and iij. nights thou give him neither meat nor drink.
Madame quoth the Iaylor, your commandment shall be fulfilled. Then the Lady in
this displeasure went again to her bed, right pensive and full of fantasies,
and Huon was iij. days and iij. nights without meat or drink, and on the
iiij. day he said all sorowing. Ah good Lord, I see well I must here die for
hunger, I humbly require thee to aid and succor me, and grant me thy grace,
that I neither consent nor do any thing that shall be against thy pleasure or
against thy holy law, for any tribulation that can come to me. Thus noble Huon
complained all sorowing, and there was no creature that had heard him, but he
would have been partaker of his great sorrows.

Chap. XXXIX.
How Huon made great complaints for the famine that he endured, and how the
fair Escleremond came again to comfort him, conditionally that Huon would
fulfill her desire.

Thus (as have ye have heard before) Huon complained pitiously, for he had been
iij. days and iij. nights without sustenance, and the Lady Escleremond who
caused it, came every morning and evening to the prison to hear what Huon
would say, and ever she would demand of Huon, if he were any otherwise
advised to answer her or not, and ever she found him at one point. But at the
last, when she saw that he still continued in that mind, then she demanded of
him, that if she delivered him out of prison, whether he would then promise her
to lead her with him into France, and take her to his wife when he came
there, if thou will promise me this (quoth she) thou shall have meat and
drink sufficient at thy pleasure.

Madame quoth Huon, I promise you faithfully, that upon your forsaking
Paganism, and conversion to our christian faith: I shall do your pleasure,
whatsoever happen to me thereby. Then know for troth quoth the Lady, that for
the love of thee I will become christened, and believe in ye law of the Lord
Jesus Christ so soon as we come into any place whereas it may be done. Huon
thanked her, and then she caused him to have meat and drink, whereof he was
joyful, and she called the Iaylor and said. Go thy way in have to the
Admiral my Father, and tell him that the french knight is dead iij. days
past, through feeblenes and hunger. Lady quoth the Iaylor, I am ready to do
your commandment, and so he went to the Admiral and said. Sir, the french
Knight that was in my keeping, is dead by famine iij. days past. Alas quoth
the Admiral, I am sorry therefore, but seeing it will none otherwise be, I must
pass it over as I may, but I had rather that he were alive. And thus as ye
have heard, Huon was delivered from death, for it is a common, but a very true
saying, that one day of deliverance, is worth a hundred years of endurance.
Then the Iaylor returned to the prison unto the Lady, and showed her what he
had said to the Admiral. Well fri^nd quoth the Lady, if thou will be secret,
I shall make thee rich for ever, helping to aid me in such things as I would
have thee. Madame quoth he, to die in the quarrel, I shall do you service
such as you command me, the fear of death shall not let me to do it.

Now let us leave speaking of Huon, who was oftentimes visited with the Iaylor,
and had all things as he desired, and was well lodged at his pleasure. And let
us now speak of Gerames, and of them that were with him in the Castle of the
Giant.

Chap. XL.
How Gerames and his company departed from the Tower and the Damsel with them,
and came to Babylon, and of the manner that Gerames used to know some news of
Huon.

WE have heard here before, how Huon departed from the Tower of the Giant, and
left there Gerames and all his company with ye Damsel his Coozen: they tarried
there iij. months, and never heard any thing of Huon, whereof they were
sorrowful. They went forth one morning, and came to the Seaside, to see if
they might hear any news of their Lord Huon, and as they looked upon the Sea,
they espied a ship charged with xxx. Paynims and great riches, and Gerames
saw how the ship was coming to that Port, wherefore he said to his company:
Sirs, let us go and see if we can learn any tiding^ of Huon by them. Then they
went to the Port, and by that time that the Maryners had cast their anchor,
then Gerames demanded of them whence they were, and whither they would go. Sir
quoth they, we would go to Mesque, to pay to Angolofer the great Giant, a
Tribute that we are bound every year to pay, therefore Sir we desire you to
show us where we might find him. And when Gerames saw that they were all a land
out of the ship, he said, Ah ye unhappy Paynims, ye shall never depart hence,
for he that ye demand for is dead, and all ye shall bear him company*

Then Gerames said to his company, sirs let all these Paynims be slain, and
then incontinent they set upon the^, so that all the Paynims were slain, not
one escaped alive, for the christian men were armed, and the Paynims without
armor or any weapon, for otherwise they durst not come on land for fear of
the Giant. Then Gerames entered into the ship, and took all that they found
there and bare it into the Tower, and then they went to dinner and made great
joy for that adventure, and after dinner Gerames said. Sirs if we were now in
France, and that king Charlemaine should demand of us what is become of Huon:
ye know well there is none of us can tell whether he be alive or dead, for if we
should say that he is dead, and he afterward return home, then we should be
reputed for false men ever after both we and our children, for a man may be a
Prisoner xiiij. or xv. years, and yet come home again at the last safe and
sound. But sirs if ye will be ruled by me, we shall do like true men: we have
as now in this port a good ship well fournished with every thing, and we have
here gould and silver plenty, and we shall soon vittaile our ship, and then
let us take the Sea, and never rest sailing until we hear some news of our
Lord Huon, and if we do thus, then we do as true men ought to do, and I
desire you all every man show his advice herein. Then without taking of any
longer respite, they answered all with one voice, that they were ready to
accomplish all that he had devised. So they took gould and silver and all
their riches, and bare it into the ship, and fournished it with wine, biscuit,
salt flesh, and artillery, and when their ship was garnished, they put in
their horses and their armor, and they all xiij. Companions entered into the
ship, and the Damsel with the^, then they wayed up their anchors, and hoysed
up their sails, and so left the Tower of the Giant all void and no man
therein. And thus they sailed along the coast, until they came into the high
sea, and so long they sailed till they came to Damieta, and there they entered
into the River of Nyle, and so long they sailed therein, that they arrived at
Babylon, and came to the Port, and took out their horses.

Gerames that knew well the language, and the manner of the entering into all
the iiij. gates, said to his company. Sirs lets us mount on our horses, and
let us enter into the City, to see if we may hear any news of our Master
Huon. Thus they road forth and entered into the City, and then Gerames said.
Sirs, we will go to the Pallaice, but when we come there, ^ould you all your
peace, and suffer me to speak, wherein it is convenient that ye all agree to
my words, and say not the contrary. They answered and said, they were content
so to do, and thus they road together through the town, Ah good Lord quoth
Gerames, I beseech thee of thy grace to grant us, that we may hear some good
tidings of our master Huon of Bourdeaux, for whom we be here in ieoperdie of
death, so they passed all the iiij. bridges and gates, by reason that Gerames
showed forth such reasons that the Porters were content. Then they came
before the great hall, and there they alighted and mounted up all xiij. and the
Damsel with them, and when they were in ye hall, they saw the Admiral Gaudise
sitting on a rich chair garnished with gould and precious stones, and Gerames
that could well speak the Sarazine language, came before the Admiral and said.

The same god that causes the wine and corn to grow, save and keep the
Admiral Gaudise, whom I see there ^itting among his Barons. Friend quoth the
Admiral, thou art welcome, I pray thee show me what thou art, and whither thou
would go? Sir (quoth Gerames) to tell you plainly, I am come from the good
city of Mombrance, and am Son to king Iuoryn. When the Admyrall heard that,
he rose up on his feet and said: Thou art welcome the son of my brother, fair
Nephew, I pray you show me how does my brother Iuoryn? Sir (quoth Gerames) when
I departed from him, I left him in good health, and he saluteth you by me, and
has sent here to you xij. french men by me, the which were taken upon the
sea, as they were going on Pilgrimage to the holy Sepulcher of Christ in
Jerusalem, and he desires you to put them in prison, until the day of Saint
John the Baptist, at which day you must make the feast of your Gods, and then
to bring them into the meadow here without, and there tie and bind the^ to
stakes, and let your Archers shoot at them, to the intent to know who shoots
best. As for this Damsel that is here with me, she is to be put to your
Daughter, to teach her to speak perfectly the french language. Fair Nephew
(quoth the Admiral) as he has appointed it shall be done, and I give you power
to command every thing in this house at your pleasure, and I pray you show me
what is your name? Sir quoth he, I am called Ieracle. Well (quoth the Admiral)
from hence forth I retain you to be as my chief Chamberlain, and I will
that ye have the key of the prison in your keeping, and therein to put these
Captives, and do with them at your pleasure, extend unto the^ what kindness
you please, but let them have meat and drink suffitient, that they die not
with famine, as but lately died a French man that was sent to me by king
Charles of France, who was called Huon of Bourdeaux, the which was a right
fair young man.

When Gerames heard that, he had never before greater sorrow at his heart, for
then (hearing of the death of Huon) his displeasure and anger was so great,
that he had near hand run upon the Admiral, and he was so vexed in his
mind, that he took up a staff that lay by him, and gave each of the French
men such strokes on their heads, that the blood ran down: but they suffered
it and durst not stir, they were in such fear of the Admiral, but they
cursed Gerames for his strokes, who did it for the nonst. And when the
Admiral saw how he had well beaten the frenchmen, he said: Fair Nephew, it
seems well by you that you love these christian men but little. Sir quoth he,
I hate these christian men more then any men in the world, for Sir all the way
that I have come, I have thus beaten them three times in every day, in the
honor of my God Mahound, and in despite of their law and God on whom they
believe. Thus then Gerames departed from the Admiral, and led with him the
xij. french prisoners, beating them till he came to ye prison, and none of them
durst speak one word, but to themselves they cursed Gerames. And as they went
toward the prison they met with the Lady Escleremond, and she said, Cousin, I
am right joyful of your coming, but if I durst trust you, I would show you a
secret matter, so that you promise not to discover me. Cousin quoth Gerames, by
the faith that I owe to my god Mahound, ye may well show me your will and
pleasure, for if mine eyes were to be drawn out, I shall never discover you.
And when the Damsel heard that promise, she said. Dear Cousin, it is a v.
months passed since there came to my Father the Admiral a french knight, with
a message from king Charlemaine, who called himself Huon of Bourdeaux, who
when he had done his message, he slew a Paynim king as he sat at the table by
my Father, and after came and kissed me three times before my Fathers face, and
after that slew many Sarazins, wherefore at last he was taken Prisoner, and
put in prison whereas he is yet, howbeit I made my Father believe that he is
dead with famine, yet dear cousin he is as yet alive, and as well served of
meat and drink as my father is. When Gerames understood the Damsel
Escleremond, he was both sorrowful and angry, for he thought that the Damsel
did it to deceive him, and to cause him to show forth the secretnes of his
mind, and because he was in doubt thereof, he passed forth and made no manner
of answer to the Damsel, but came to the prison, and put in the Prisoners
rudely, and the Damsel returned right sorrowful in that she had showed so much
of her mind to Gerames whom she took for her Cousin. When Gerames had put
the xij. Frenchmen in prison, he returned right sorrowful, and Huon being in
the prison, had great marvel what prisoners they were that were let down
into the prison, for he could not see the^ the prison was so dark, then he
drew near to them to hear them speak, and at last one of them began to make
his complaint, and said. Ah good Lord Jesus Christ succor us, for thou know
well, this that we suffer we have not deserved, but it is for the love of our
young Lord Huon of Bourdeaux, we have loved him so well, that now we be lost
for ^uer, except dear Lord thou have mercy upon us. When Huon had heard what
they said, then he knew well that they were christened and frenchmen, and then
he coueted much to know what they were, and so approached near to them and
said. Sirs, ye that be here, I pray you show me what ye be, and how ye be
come hither?

Sir quoth one of them, true it is that v. months passed, there departed from
us a young knight, with whom we came out of the Realm of France, and he was
borne in France, and son to a noble Duke, called Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux,
this Knight slew Charlot son to King Charlemaine by misaduenture, wherefore
he was banished out of the Realm of France, and sent by king Charlemaine to
do a message to the Admiral Gaudise, and he is dead in prison as it is showed
us, and sir we came to seek for him, and are betrayed by one of our own
company.

When Huon heard him speak, he knew him well, and said. Sirs, be of good
comfort and make good cheer, for I am Huon, safe and in good health, thanked
be god and the Admirals daughter, who is so enamoured of me, that she has
saved my life, ye shall see soon how she will come and visit me. But I pray
you sirs what is become of old Gerames, whether he be left behind to keep ye
Tower, with the Dammy cousin whom I left in your keeping? Sir quoth they, a
worse creature or more false Traitor was never borne, for he has betrayed us,
and has beaten and put us in prison: and as for the Damsel, she is with the
Admiralls Daughter. When Huon perceived that all they were of his company, he
went and embraced them and said. Sirs know of a surety, that all that Gerames
has done, is done to the intent to deliver us all out of prison, I do so well
know the troth of Gerames. Sirs make good cheer, for as soon as night comes,
we shall be visited with great joy. Sir quoth they, surely we believed that
Gerames had forsaken the faith of Christ, and was become a Sarazin, for he has
made the Admiral believe, that he is son to his brother king Iuoryn of
Mombrance. When Huon heard that, he had great joy at his heart and said. Ah
good Lord, the troth of Gerames and love that he has always showed to me,
shall be to us right profitable, in the despite of king Oberon, who has
forsaken me for a small offense, by Gerames we shall be delivered out of this
poverty and danger. Now leaves the History to speak of Huon and his
company being in prison, and returns to the old Gerames, who studied and
practiced for the deliverance of Huon and his company.

Chap. XLI.
How Gerames and the fair Escleremond went to the Prison to comfort Huon and
the other Prisoners.

NOw shows the History, that when Gerames was returned to the Admiral, he
said. Sir the French men that I brought, are fast in prison and well beaten.
Fair Nephew quoth the Admiral, they have had but an evil neighbor of you.
Then Gerames went into his chamber, and studied how he might fournish the
Prisoners with vittailes, and did so much that he had sufficient, and when
night came, he went with his vittailes to ye prison, for he might do there what
he listed, for every man was ready to do him any service. When he came to the
prison door, he sent every man away and tarried there alone, and he had not been
there long, but that the Admirals daughter came thither. When Gerames saw her,
he wist not what to think, but said. Fair cousin, I pray you show me what you
do hear at this hour? Dear cousin quoth she, the great trust that I have
in you, has made me to come hither, because to day I discovered to you all my
secrets, and what I am intended to do. Therefore let me entreat you, that you
would leave the law of Mahdund, and receive the christian faith, and then to
go with me into France together with these Prisoners, and we shall well find
the manner how to depart, and we will take with us all the prisoners that ye
have put in prison.

When Gerames had heard the Lady, he was right joyful, for then he knew well
that she went not about to descrie him, but that she did it of good heart and
good will that she bare to Huon, howbeit, he thought that he would not
discover himself to her, until the time he knew the troth of Huon, wherefore
he answered the Damsel angerly and said. O thou false and untrue maid, how
art thou so hardy as to speak or think thus? surely the Admiral thy Father
shall know it as soon as he comes out of his chamber, and then shall thou be
burned and the Frenchmen hanged. Alas Sir quoth she, yet I pray you let me
go into the prison with you, to the intent yt I may see Huon once yet before I
die, for the love of whom I am content to die, for if he die I will not live
one day after, therefore let me once take my leave of him. Well quoth Gerames,
for this time I am content that ye go with me, then Gerames took a torch in
his hand, and opened the door and entered, he was no sooner entered, but Huon
knew him, and went and embraced him, and said. Ah my true lover, blessed be the
hour that I found you, then they all clipped and embraced him, when the Lady
saw their manner of saluting she was joyful, for then she saw well, that her
intent should be more surely compassed, and then she came to Huon, and
demanded if they were his servants that made so great love together? Madame
quoth Huon, surely all these that be here be my men, boldly ye may trust them,
for there is none of them but that they shall do your commaundment. Huon quoth
the Damsel, their coming pleases me right well, then Huon said to his
company. Gentlemen and my dear friends, forbear this extremity of kindness
to me, and bestow it upon this noble Lady, for by her we shall be delivered,
and it is she that has saved my life, the^ they all together humbly thanked
her.

Sirs quoth she, if ye will work by my council, I shall show you how I may
aid you to deliver you from hence. First let me unfeignedly persuade ye that I
do firmly believe in Jesus Christ, and at this day there is no man that I
more hate than the Admiral Gaudise my Father, because he believes not in our
Lord Jesus Christ, for he hates so the christian men, that he cannot abide to
hear any speaking of them, for he believes but upon Mahound and his Idols,
therefore my heart cannot love him, if he did otherwise, I would purchase to him
none ill for all the good in the world, but I shall show you what ye must
do. When it is the hour of midnight, I shall bring you all into my chamber,
whereas I will provide Armor for you all, and there ye shall all be armed,
then I shall bring you into the Admiral my Fathers chamber, whom ye shall
find sleeping, and there ye may slay him, and as for me, I will be the first
that shall strike him, and when he is slain, then shall we depart surely.

When Huon had understood her, he said, Madame, and god will your Father shall
not be so slain, ye day shall come that ye shall otherwise deliver us, we
thank you that ye so much desire our deliverance, but I think it good that
you and Gerames depart hence for this time, for it is near hand day, to
the intent that our business be not perceived. Then the Lady and Gerames departed,
and closed again the prison door, and went up into the Pallaice, as if they
had not been there at all. And thus every day Gerames and the Lady went to
visit the Prisoners, and bare them every thing that was needful for them.
Gerames was always with the Admiral, and did what he would, for there was not
any Paynim that durst do contrary to his commaundment. Now leave we to speak
of the Admiral, of Gerames and of Huon and of all them that were in prison,
until such time as we may return to them again.

Chap. XLII.
How the great Giant Agrapart, eldest brother to Angolofer whom Huon slew,
assembled his people and came to Babylon, to have the tribute of the Admiral
as his brother had, and of the battle hand to hand that he desired of the
Admiral Gaudis, the which was agreed unto.

IT has been sufficiently declared here before, how Huon slew the Giant
Angolofer, the which Giant had Seauenteene Brethren, all elder than himself,
who lived distant from him in diverse several places. It was no long while
after, but that his elder Brother named Agrapart, was advertised of the death
of his Brother, which he took to his heart exceeding heavily. Now you must
understand, that he was in all respects of as huge stature as his brother, for
he was xvij. foot of length, and in bigness he was made thereafter, he was a
foot between ye brows, and his eyes more redder and burning than a brand of
fire, and the gristle of his nose as great as the nostrill of an ox, and he
had two teeth issuing out of his mouth more than a foot long each of them: but
if I should describe his foul figure at the full, it would annoy all the
hearers thereof, therefore ye may well believe when he was in his displeasure,
that he had a fearful countenance to look upon, for then his two eyes
seemed like two burning torches. When he was certainly advertised of the death
of his brother, he sent over all his country, that every man should come to
him in armor, and so they did, and when they were come, he declared to them ye
death of his brother Angolofer, and said how it was his mind to go to Babylon
to ye Admiral Gaudise, there to take possession of the lands and signiories
that were his brothers, and also to have the tribute that was due by the
Admiral, then all his L^^ds said, Sir, command at your pleasure, and we
shall obey it. Well sirs (quoth he) then I will that every man mount on their
horses to go toward Babylon, and so they all obayed, and got on their horses
and departed, and rode so long, that they came into a plain near to the city
of Babylon, there were about Ten Thousand men together, and Agrapart said, Sirs
tarry ye all here till I come again, for I will go all alone and speak
with the Admiral Gaudise. Then he armed himself, and took a great fawchin in
his hand, and departed all alone, and so went and entered into the city of
Babylon, and so past the Four gates, there was no Paynim that durst say him
nay, and he rested not until he came to the Pallaice, the same time as the
Admiral was sitting at dinner and Gerames with him, then the Giant came to the
table, and said. The same god Mahound under whom we live, confound the
Admiral Gaudise, as an ill caytiffe and a false Traitor. When the Admiral
heard himself so highly abused, he said to Agrapart, in this that thou have
said, thou lie falsely, thus shamefully to rebuke me in mine own Court
before all my Lords: therefore show me the ^ause why thou do me this
injury? Admiral quoth he, it is because there is come into thy Court he that
has slain my Brother, whom incontinent thou ought to have slain likewise,
wherefore if it were not for mine own honor, with my fist I would strike thee
on the face, thou have put him in prison, without any more hurt doing unto
him, therefore thou traitor thief, by Mahound be thou cursed, thou art not
worthy to sit in a seat royal, therefore arise up, it is not mee^e for thee
to sit there. And therewith he drew the Admiral so rudely out of his chair,
that his hat and Crown fell down to the earth, whereat the Admiral was sore
abashed.

Then Agrapart sat down in his chair and said, thou false Traitor, my
Brother is dead, therefore from henceforth thou shall be my Subject, for it
appertains to me to have the Lands that my Brother had, and the Tribute that
thou were wont to pay unto my Brother, or else I shall strike off thy head:
howbeit I will not do against right, for if thou will prove the contrary, or
find two Champions to be so hardy, that for thy love they dare or will fight
with me in plain battle, I shall fight with them, or more if thou will send
the^ to me. And if it be so, that I be overcome and discomfited by any of the^,
I am content that from hence forth thou shall hold thy lands frank and
free, without any tribute paying. But if it fall out so that I conquer the^
both, then thou to be my subject, and to pay me tribute for ever, and also to
pay me for a due tax every year Four Ducates of gould as thy head money.
Agrapart quoth the Admiral, I am content thus to do, and to appoint two of my
men to fight with thee.

Chap. XLIII.
How the Admiral Gaudis took Huon out of prison, and armed him to fight with
the Giant Agrapart.

WHen the Admiral had heard the great Giant, he said alowd: where be the two
gentle knights, that will for ever be my friends? now is the time come, that
all the goodness and great gifts that I have given among you, is now to be
rewarded. If there be any of you that will fight against this Giant, I shall
give him my Daughter Escleremond in marriage, and after my death to have my
Heritage, no man shall be so bold as to say nay thereto. But for any fair
words or promises that the Admiral could make, there was no Paynim so hardye
to undertake it: whereupon the Admiral made great sorrow, and began to lament,
and when the Giant Agrapart saw him, he said. Thy lamenting cannot avail
thee, for whether thou will or not, it must beheeue thee to pay these iiij.
pieces of gold yearly, for I am sure there is no Paynim that dare fight against
me.

When the fair Lady Escleremond saw her Father weep, it sore grieved her
heart, and she said, O my Father, if I knew that it should not displease you, I
would show you one thing which should bring you out of this doubt. Daughter
quoth he, I swear by Mahound, I will not be displeased whatsoever thou say.
Sir (quoth she) I did once delude you, in telling you that the Frenchman that
brought you the Message from king Charlemaine, was dead in prison: but sir
credit me he is as yet alive, if it please you I shall fetch him to you, and
without doubt I dare warrant you, that he will take on him this Battle
against the Giant, for he showed you how he slew the other Giant Angolofer,
therefore I have hope by the aid of Mahound, in likewise he shall slay his
brother this Giant Agrapart. Daughter (quoth the Admiral) it is my pleasure
that ye shall fetch the Prisoner to me, for if he can discomfite this Giant, I
am content that he and all his company, shall depart frank and free at their
pleasure. Then the Lady and Gerames went to the prison, and took out Huon and
all his company, and brought them before the Admiral. Then the Admiral
earnestly beheld Huon, and had great marvel that he was in so good case, yet
his color was somewhat pale, by reason of lying so long in prison, then the
Admiral said. Friend it seems by thy looks, that thou have had no ill
imprisonment. Sir quoth Huon, I thank your Daughter therefore, but I pray you
show me for what cause ye have as now sent for me?

Friend (quoth the Admiral) I shall show thee, behold yonder Sarazin that is
armed, who has challenged to fight with me hand to hand, or against two of
the best men that I have, and I can find none so hardy that dare fight against
this Paynim: but if it be so that thou will take upon thee this enterprise for
me, I shall then deliver thee and all thy company, quite to go into thy
country at thy pleasure, and safely to conduct thee to the City of Acre. And
also I will give thee a Summer with gould, the which thou shall present from me
to king Charlemaine, and every year from henceforth to send him like present
as for my head money, and to make such assurance as his council can devise.
Also if he have any war, I shall send him two M. men of arms paid for a
whole year before hand, and if it be so that he desire mine own person, I will
then pass the sea with a C.M. Paynims to serve him: for I had rather to be in
servitude there, than to pay iiij. d. to this Giant. And moreover, if thou will
abide here with me, I shall give thee my daughter Escleremond in marriage, and
the half of my Realm to maintain thine estate. Sir quoth Huon, I am content
this to do, so that I may have mine own Armor, and my rich Horn of Iuory
and my cup, the which were taken from me when I was yielded Prisoner. Friend
quoth the Admiral, all shall be delivered to thee, thou shall not loose the
value of one penny. Then the Admiral sent for the Horn, Armor and Cup, and
delivered them to Huon, whereof he had great joy, but when Agrapart saw and
knew, that the Admiral had found a Champion to fight with him, he said to
the Admiral. Sir, I will go out and speak with my Knights, and in the mean
time let thy Champio^ be ready apparelled, for I shall not tarry long, beside, I
shall never have joy at my heart, till I have torn his heart out of his body:
therewith he departed and went to his men, and Huon put on his coat of mayle,
and then he took Gerames his horn of Iuory, and said: Friend, I pray you
keep my Horn till I return again. Then he went and prayed to our Lord, to
forgive him his sins, and to succor and aid him to discomfite that foul
^^end the Giant, and when he had made his prayers to god, he put on his armor
as quickly as though he had never been in prison, whereby he knew well that god
was pleased with him, and then he said.

Ah noble king Oberon, I pray thee seeing God is pleased with me, put away thy
displeasure and pardon me, for the breaking of thy commandment I have been
sore punished, and I pray thee be not displeased if I spoke any hasty word
being in prison, for famine caused me to do it. In the breaking of thy
commandment, I confess I did ill therein: yet it was but by negligence and
forgetting. Alas Sir, remember but what courtesy ye showed me, when ye found
me in the wood, and gave me your rich Horn and Cup, by the which often times I
have been succored: therefore sir now I require thee to pardon me all my
trespasses, and help me at my need, for I see well, without it be by ye grace
of god and your help, there is nothing can save my life, thus he besought god
of pardon, and to give him grace to destroy his enemy, who was so horrible to
behold. And when he had made his prayer, there came a Sarazin to Huon and
said, Sir here is your own sword that ye lost when ye were taken. Friend
quoth Huon, ye do me great courtesy, God give me grace to reward thee. Then
he did on his helmet and girt on his sword, and the Admiral sent him a good
horse the best in all his Court, for he was not so fair, but he was in goodness
above all other. When Huon saw him, he was right joyful and thanked the
Admiral. As for his rich fourniture I make no mention thereof, the saddle,
harnesie, and bridle were so rich, that the value thereof could not be
esteemed. Then Huon made the sign of the cross, and mounted on his horse
armed at all points, and so rode out of the Pallaice into a fair meadow, and
there made a course to assay his horse, and then he rested him before ye
Admiral, who leaned in a window in his Pallaice, and when he beheld Huon, he
said to his Lords. Trust me these Frenchmen are to be doubted and feared, for
Huon is a goodly young man, and great wrong it had been if he had been slain.
The Admiral commanded the field to be kept with a Thousand Sarazins, to
the intent that no treason should be done, or any injury offered to his fair
seeming Champion.

Chap. XLIIII.
How Huon fought with Agrapart the Giant, and discomfited him, and delivered
him to the Admiral, who had great joy thereof.

WHen Huon had made his course, he came into the field whereas his enemy was
ready, and when Agrapart saw Huon, he said. Thou that art of so great courage
as to fight against me, how near of kin art thou to the Admiral, seeing
that for the love of him thou will put thy self in adventure of death? Paynim
quoth Huon, know for troth, that I am nothing of kin to the Admiral, but I
was borne in the Realm of France, and if thou desire to know what I am, I say
unto thee, that I am he that slew thy Brother. For that (quoth the Paynim) I am
the more sorrowful, and yet again joyful, in that Mahound has done me the
grace, to have power to revenge his death: but if thou will believe and worship
my God Mahound, and forsake thy belief and go with me into my country I
shall make thee so great a Lord, that of all thy kin there was never any
such. And I shall give thee my sister in marriage, who is a foot greater than I
am, and is as black as a cole. Paynim quoth Huon, I care neither for thy land
nor for thy sister, but all the devils in hell keep them both: beware thou of
me, for I shall never joy in my heart, until the time that I have slain thee
as I have done thy brother: I defy thee in the name of god, and I thee quoth
the Giant, in the name of Mahound.

Then they went a sunder to take their courses, and they ran each at other and
met so fiersly, that their spears brake in pieces, and the encounter was so
rude, that by force of the shocke both the horses fell to the earth, but the
Champions quickly recovered, and came each upon other. Agrapart took up his
fawchin to have stricken Huon, but he stepped a little on the one side, whereby the
Paynim missed his stroke, and Huon lifted up his sword and struck the Giant on
the helmet so maruailous a stroke, that he struck of a quarter thereof, and
wounded him sore, and the stroke descended down and cut of his ear, so that
the black blood ran down to the ground. Then Huon said, Paynim thou were
unhappy when thou came hither, thou might have been content with ye death
of thy Brother, and not to come hither to have as much thy self, for thou
shall never see fair day more.

When the Giant saw him self hurt, he had great fear and said: Cursed be he
of Mahound that forged thy sword, I had rather I had been bound to have paid
a great sum of money to have saved my life, than to be slain here: therefore
I yield my self to thee, take here my sword, I pray thee do me no hurt.
Paynim quoth Huon, have no doubt, seeing thou do yield thee to me, there is
none so hardy that shall do thee any displeasure. Then Huon took the Paynim
by the arm and brought him into the City, whereof the Admiral and all his
Lords had great joy: but the inward content that Escleremond had, passed all
other. When Gerames saw how the Giant was overcome, he came to the Admiral and
said. Sir Admiral, know for troth that I am christened, and I am not your
Nephew: I came hither but only to search for my Lord Huon, and the better to
know the troth, I said I was son to Iuoryn of Mombrance your brother, thereby
to know the certentie what was become of Huon, for I knew well he was sent to
you from king Charlemaine on a Message.

Chap. XLV.
How Agrapart the Giant cried mercy to the Admiral, and how Huon desired the
Admiral Gaudise to leave his law, and to be christened.

WHEN the Admiral heard Gerames, he had great marvel and said, it is hard
for any man to beware of the craft and subtlety that is in a Frenchman. Then
the Admiral saw where Huon was coming up the steps, and bringing with him
the Giant, whereon the Admiral and all his Lords came and met him, and Gerames
and his company with him, who were right joyful when they saw him come. When
Huon saw the Admiral, he took Agrapart by the hand and said to the Admiral.
Sir, I deliver him into your hands, that this day did you so great injury,
even he that drew you out of your chair, I deliver to you, to do with him at
your pleasure. When Agrapart saw that, he kneeled and said, Sir Admiral, he
has much to do that foolishly thinks, I say this by my self, for to day
when I came to you, I thought my self the most puissant man that reigned on
the earth, and thought that ye were not sufficient nor worthy to serve me: but
often times rash believing deceaueth his master, for I thought that for x. men
I would not once turn my chair to have regarded them, but otherwise is fallen
to me, for I am discomfited alonely by one man, and am taken and brough^ into
your hands, therefore ye may do with me at your pleasure, yet sir I require you
have pity on me, and pardon the outrage that I have done unto you.

Then the Admiral answered and said, how he would par^on him on the condition,
that he should never after trespass him nor any man in his country, and beside
that, to become his man, and to do him homage before all them that were there
present. Sir quoth Agrapart, I am ready to fulfi^l your pleasure, and then he
did homage to the Admiral in the presence of all the^ that were there, and in
joy they sat all down to dinner. The Admiral made great honor to Huon, and
caused him to sit by him, then Agrapart and Gerames, and all the other Frenchmen
sat down. As for their service, and many dishes of sondrie sorts of meats, I
leave speaking of them. Huon, who had great desire to accomplish his enterprise
drew out his Cup, the which Gerames had before delivered to him with his Horn
of Iuory, and then said to the Admiral. Sir ye may see here this rich Cup in
my hand, the which ye see is all empty. Sir quoth the Admiral, I see well
there is nothing therein. Now Sir quoth Huon, I shall show you how our Law is
holy and divine, then Huon made the sign of the cross three times over the
Cup, the which incontinent was full of wine, whereat the Admiral had great
marvel. Sir quoth Huon, I present you this Cup, that ye may drink
thereof, and then shall ye taste the goodness of the wine. The Admiral took it
in his hand, and incontinent the Cup was void and the wine vanished away,
whereat the Admiral had great marvel and said, Huon ye have enchaunted me.
Not so Sir quoth Huon, I am no Enchaunter, but it is because ye be full of
sin, for the law that ye hold is of no worth, the great virtue that god
has put in this cup, is by reason of the sign of the cross that I made,
whereby ye may perceive that my saying is true. Huon quoth ye Admiral, ye
need not to trouble your self to speak to me to forsake my belief and to
take yours, but I would know of you, whether you will abide here with me, or
else go into France, for that I have promised you I shall fulfill it. Ah Sir
Admiral quoth Huon, I know well you will keep covenant with me in that ye
have promised me: but Sir above all other matters, I pray you have pity on
your own soul, the which shall be damned in hell without ye leave your
belief, in that it is neither good nor just, without ye do thus, I swear by
my faith, that I shall call hither many men of arms, that all ye houses in
your Pallaice and City shall be full. When the Admiral heard Huon say so, he
beheld his own men and said. Sirs, here ye may well hear the pride that is
in this Frenchman, who has been more than half a year in my prison, and now
he threateneth to slay me, because I will not take on me his law and leave
mine own. I have great marvel where he should find such store of men as he
has said, or what lets me to slay him at my pleasure? Sir quoth Huon, yet I
demand once more of you if ye will do as I have said. Huon quoth the
Admiral, beware on pain of your eyes, and as much as you love your life, that
ye speak no more to me of this matter, for by the faith that I owe to Mahound,
if all King Charlemaines Host were here assembled, it should not lie in their
power to save your life. Admiral quoth Huon, I am in doubt that too late ye
will repent you.

Chap. XLVI.
How Huon seeing that the Admiral would not forsake his belief, blew his
Horn, whereby Oberon came to him, and how the Admiral was slain and all his
men. And how Huon and the fair Escleremond were in peril of drowning, by
reason that he brake the commandment of king Oberon.

WHen Huon saw that the Admiral would not leave his Law to receive
christendom, he set his Horn to his mouth, and blew it with such violence,
that the blood issued out at his mouth, so that the Admiral and all other that
were there put the tables from them, and rose and all that were in the Pallaice
began to sing and dance. The same time king Oberon was in his wood, and
hearing the Horn blow, said. Ah good Lord, I know surely that my friend Huon
has great need of me, I pardon him of all his trespasses, for he has been
sufficiently punished, and now I wish my self with him with an C.M. men well
armed, for there is not in all the world so noble a man as Huon, it is great
pity that his heart is so light and mutable. Then incontinent he with all his
company were in the City of Babylon, whereas they began to slay all such as
would not believe on Jesus Christ, and then Oberon went to the Pallaice with
all his Chivalry, and every man with his sword naked in his hand. When Huon
saw Oberon, he embraced him and said, I ought greatly to thank God and you,
that ye be come so far off to aid me in all my business.

Huon quoth Oberon, as ye believe me, and work by my council, I shall not
fail you: then on all sides they slew the Paynims, men, women, and children,
except such as would be christened. Oberon came to the Admiral and took him,
and delivered him into the hands of Huon who had thereof great joy, and then
Huon demanded of the Admiral what he was minded to do, if he would leave the
law of Mahound, and take christendom. Huon quoth the Admiral, I had rather
be hewn all to pieces, then to take your law and forsake mine own. Oberon
then said to Huon, why do ye tarry to put him to death, whereupon Huon
lifted up his sword and therewith struck the Admiral, that his head flew from
his shoulders, and Oberon said to Huon. Now it lies well in thy power to be
quit with king Charlemaine: then Huon took the Admirals head, and opened his
mouth, and took out his four great teeth, and then cut off his beard, and
took thereof as much as pleased him, then Oberon said. Now thou have in thy
hands the Admirals teeth and beard, look as well as thou love thy life, that
thou keep them well. O Sir quoth Huon, I require you to put them in such a
place, where they may be well kept, and so that I may have them again in time
of need, for I feel my self that my heart is so light, as either I shall
forget the^, or else loo^e them. Of this that thou say quoth Oberon, I
think thou speak wisely, therefore I do wish them in Gerames side, in such
manner that they shall do him no hurt. He had no sooner spoken the word, but
by the will of God, and ye power that he had by the Fayrie, they were closed in
Gerames side in such wise, that no man could see them, then he said to Huon.
Friend I must go to my Castle of Momur, I desire you to do well, ye shall
take with you Escleremond daughter to the Admiral. But I charge you on pain
of your life, and in as much as ye fear to displease me: that ye be not so
hardy as to company with her bodily, until ye ^e married together in the
city of Room, for if thou do the contrary, thou shall find such poverty
and misery, that though thou had double the mischief that thou have had
^^nce thou came out of France, yet can it be nothing in regard of that, that
shall fall to thee hereafter if thou break my commandment. Sir quoth Huon,
by the pleasure of our Lord Jesus Christ, I shall well beware of doing of any
thing against your pleasure.

Then Oberon apparelled a rich ship, well garnished with chambers, and hanged
so richly, that it was incredible to be heard or seen, there was no cord, but
it was of gould and silk, if I should show you the beauty and riches of this
ship, it would be over long to recite it. When the ship was fournished with
vittailes, then he put therein his horses, and Oberon took leave of Huon, and
kissed and embraced him greatly lamenting. When Huon saw him weep, he had
great marvel and said Dear Sir, for what cause do you weep? Huon (quoth
he) the thing that moves me thus to do, is because I have great pity of
thee. For if thou knew the poverty and misery that thou shall endure,
there is no member that thou have but it would tremble for fear: for I know
for certain, that thou have so much to suffer, that no humane tongue can
rehearse it, and then Oberon departed without more speaking. When Huon saw
Oberon depart, he was right pensive, but his sweetness of youth put him out of
his sorrow. Then he made his ordinance in the city, and christened the fair
Lady Escleremond, and afterward did marry his Cousin Sibilla to an Admiral
of the country who was newly christened, and Huon gave to the^ the City of
Babylon, and all that longed thereto. Then he made and ordained a little ship,
to go with his own ship, to the intent to send a land for vittailes when need
should require. Then he and his company went into his great ship, and so took
his leave of his cousin that was newly married, who was right sorrowful for his
departing.

Then they set up their sails, and had a good fair wind, and so sailed till
they were out of the river of Nyle, and so passed by Damieta, and came into the
high sea and had wind at will. And on a day as they sat at dinner and made good
cheer, for by reason of his Cup they had wine at their pleasure: Ah good Lord
quoth Huon, I am greatly bound to thank king Oberon, that I have such a Cup
and Horn and Armor, for whenever I shall blow my Horn, I can have men
enough to come to aid me, and also I have the Admirals ^eard and great teeth,
but specially the fair Lady Escleremond, whom I love so perfectly, and am so
enamoured with her fair body, that I can no longer endure it. How be it, the
Dwarffe Oberon to mock me, has forbidden me strictly, that I should not touch
her in any wise. But I will that he well know, that in this case I will not
obey him, for she is mine own, therefore I will do with her at my pleasure. When
Gerames heard him, he said. Alas sir, what will ye do? Ye know well Oberon
never as yet made any lie, but always ye have found him true, for if he had
not been so, both you and we all had been lost before this time. And now
again you would break his commandment, if ye touch this Lady ere the time
come that he has set you, great misfortune shall f^ll thereby. Gerames quoth
Huon, for you nor for any other will I forbear, but ere I depart I will have
of her my pleasure, and if any of you be afraid, I am content he shall depart
in this little ship, and go where he list, and take vittaile into it for his
provision. Sir quoth Gerames seeing ye will do none otherwise, I am right
sorrowful, and I will depart, and so will all our other company.

Then Gerames departed out of the great ship, and entered into the little
ship, with the xiij. in his company, and Huon tarried still with the Lady,
and when he saw that all his company was departed, he went and made ready a
bed, and said to the Lady. Madame surely I must now have my pleasure of you,
when she heard Huon, she fell down sore weeping, and humbly desired Huon
that he would forbear her company until ^he time that they should be married
together, according to the promise that he had made to king Oberon. Fair Lady
quoth Huon* no excuses can avail, for it must be thus, then he took the
Lady, and made her go to bed, and there they took together their pleasures.
He had no sooner accomplished his will, but there arose such a maruailous
tempest, that the waves of the sea seemed so great and high as mountains, and
therewith it blew and thundered and lightened, that it was very fearful to
behold the sea, and the ship was so sore tormented, that it burst all to
pieces, so that there remained but one piece of timber, whereupon Huon and the
Lady were. And it happened so well for them, that they were near to an Isle,
and thither the wind drove them, and when they saw that they were there
arrived, and that they were on the land: they both kneeled down, and thanked
our Lord Jesus Christ, that they were so well escaped the peril of drowning.
The other company that were in the little ship, drove at adventure in the
sea, and they cried to our Lord Jesus Christ to save them from drowning, for
they had seen well how the ship with Huon and the Lady was broken in the
sea: wherefore they thought surely that Huon and the Lady were perished. Now
let us leave speaking of them, returning again to Huon of Bourdeaux and the
fair Escleremond.

Chap. XLVII.
How Huon and Escleremond arrived in an Isle all naked, and how the Pirates of
the sea took Escleremond and left Huon alone, and bound his hands, feet, and
eyes.

WHEN Huon and Escleremond saw how they were driven a land al naked, pitiously
weeping they entered into ^he Isle, whereas there dwelt neither man nor woman,
but the earth was so fair and green, that great joy it was to see it, it was
likewise so fair and hot, that they hid them selves in the green grass, to
the intent they should not be perceived, still the Lady wept pitiously, and Huon
said unto her. Lady be not abashed, for if we dye for love, we shall not be
the first, for Tristram died for the love of the fair Isoluda, and she for
him, and so all weeping they clipped and kissed each other. And as they lay
wrapped in the green grass, there arrived Ten Sarazins in a little vessel,
who entered into the Isle to take fresh water and other things that they needed,
then they said each to other, let us go forth into this Isle, and see if we
can find any adventure: these men were Pirates of the sea, and had served
before the Admiral Gaudise Father to Escleremond. Huon (who was with his Lover
in the green grass) heard how near to them people was coming, he thought to
go to them to see if he might get any meat. Dear Lover quoth Huon, I pray you
go not hence till I return. Sir quoth she, God be your guide, but I require
you to return again shortly. Then he departed all as naked as he was borne,
and so came to the^ before they had dyned, where he saluted them and desired
them humbly for the love of God to give him some bread. One of them answered
and said, Friend, thou shall have enough, but we pray thee show us what
adventure has brought thee hither? Sir quoth Huon, the tempest of the sea has
brought me hither, for the ship that I was in is perished and all my company.

When they heard him, they had great pity, and gave him two loaves of bread.
Huon took them and departed, and thanking them went back to his Love, and
gave her part of the bread, whereof she was not a little glad. Then the
Pirates that had given Huon the bread, said one to another, this man that is
thus gone from us, surely it can not be but yt he has some other company,
therefore let us go presently after him, and peradventure we shall find out
his company, for me thinks if he were alone, he would not so have come to
us. Let us go and see quoth all the other, and not return till we know the
troth. Than they went all together, and followed Huon as privily as they
could, and when they came near whereas he was, they saw him and the Lady
hard by him eating of the bread that they had given him, there they stood still
and advised them, to see if they could have any knowledge of him or of the Lady.

Now among them there was one that said: Sirs, never believe me, but this Lady
is the fair Escleremond daughter to the Admiral Gaudise, and he that is with
her, is the same Frenchma^ that fought with Agrapart and slew him, and also the
Admiral, it is happy that we have found them and specially that he is naked
without armor, for if that he were armed, our lives were but short. When they
knew certainly that it was Escleremond daughter to the Admiral Gaudise, then
they approached near to them, and cried aloude and said. Madame Escleremond,
your flying away avails you nothing, for by you and your means, your father
has been slain by the thief that sits there by you, therefore we shall
bring you to your Uncle Iuoryn of Mombrance, who shall take of you such
correction, that ye shall be an example to all other, and the leachour that is by
you, shall be there slain before your face. When the Lady saw these Paynims,
she^ was right sorrowful and sore discomforted, then she kneled down and held
up her hands, and prayed them humbly, that they would have pity on the
frenchman, and as for her own life, she did put it to their own pleasures,
either to slay her or to drown her, or else to bring her to her Uncle. And
sirs (quoth she) I swear by Mahound, that if ye will grant my request, if I
can be agreed with mine Uncle Iuorin, I shall do you all such pleasures, that
ye and all yours shall be rich for ever after, for little shall ye win by
the death of one poor man.

Lady quoth they, we are well content to leave him here, but we shall do
him all the shame and rebuke that we can, that he may remember it for ever
after. Then they took Huon, and laid him on the grene grass, and did blind
his eyes, and bind his hands and feet, so that the blood burst out at his
nails, whereby he was in such distres, that he swonded three times, and
pitiously called on our lord god* to have pity of him and to forgive him his
sins. When the sweet Escleremond saw her Lover Huon so handled, and that she
should depart from him: to show the pitiful complaints that she made, it
were impossible. Also Huon made pitious complain^s when his Love Escleremond
departed, the which grieved him more then his own pain that he suffered. Now
we shall leave speaking of him, and say what happened afterward to the fair
Escleremond.*

Chap. XLVIII.
How the fair Escleremond was led away with the Pirates of the sea, and how
the Admiral Galaffer of Anfalerne delivered her out of their hands.

NOw shows the History, how that when these thieves had taken and bound
Huons hands, feet and eyes, they left him alone in the Isle, and took the
fair Escleremond and brought her into their ship. Then they gave her a gown
and a mantell furred with ermyns, for they were Robbers of the sea, and had
much goods in their ship, then they sailed forth night and day, at last a
wind took them, that whether they would or not, they arrived at the Port of
Anfalerne, and at the same time the Admiral there was newly risen from his
dinner, and stood leaning out at a window in his Pallaice, and when he
perceived the ship that lay at anchor in the haven, and saw the banners and
streamers wauing with the wind, thereby he well perceived, that the ship
pertayned to King Iuoryn of Mombrance, whereupon he with his Lords went
down to the haven. Then he cried out aloude, and said. Sirs what merchandise
have ye brought? Sir quoth they, we have brought sendals and clothes of silk,
wherefore sir if we shall pay any Tribute or custom, we are ready to pay it
at your pleasure. Then Galaffer the Admiral said, I know well enough if ye
should pay any tribute, ye should not choose but do it: But sirs I pray you
tell me, what Damsel is that which I see in your ship sore weeping. Sir
quoth they, it is a slave a Christian woman whom we bought at Damieta.

The Lady heard well how the Admiral demanded for her, and likewise what
answer the Mariners had made, then she cried out aloud and said. Alas Sir
Admiral, for the love and honor of Mahound, I pray you have pity on me: for
I am no slave, but I am Daughter to the Admiral Gaudise of Babylon, who is
dead and slain by a Frenchman, the Mariners here have taken me, and would
carry me to mine Uncle king Iuoryn of Mombrance: and I know surely that if he
had me, he would burn me. Fair Lady (quoth the Admiral, dismay you not, for
ye shall abide with me whether they will or not, then he commanded the
Mariners to bring the Lady to him, but they answered that they would not so
do, then the Admiral commanded to take her from them perforce, and then they
of the ship began to make defense: But anon they were all slain, and the
Lady taken and brought to the Admiral, who had great joy thereof, howbeit he
was sorry, because one of them that were in the ship escaped away and fled to
Mombrance, notwithstanding the Admiral cared not greatly for it seeing he had
the Lady, whom he brought into his Pallaice.

When the Admiral saw her so exceeding fair, he was taken in her love, so
that incontinent he would have married her after the Sarazins law, whereof she
was right sorrowful and said. Sir, reason it is that I do your pleasure,
seeing ye have rid me out of the hands of these Pirates of the sea. But sir I
require you for the love that ye bear me, that ye will forbear your pleasure
at this present time, for Sir I have made a faithful vow and promise, that for
a year and a day from henceforth, I will not lie with nor touch any man
boldly, for the which vow sir I am now sorry, eue^ for the love that I bear to
you, but Sir I am right joyful that ye will do me so much honor, as to have
me to your wife, our great god Mahound reward you. Now sir, for the love of him
I pray you be content, until my vow be accomplished. Fair Lady quoth he,
know for troth, that for the honor of my God Mahound, but more for the love of
you, I am content to tarry this year, yea and if it were Twenty years, to
be sure of your love then. Sir quoth she, Mahound reward you, but she said to
her self. Ah dear Lord god Jesus Christ, I humbly require thee to give me that
grace, to keep my troth to my Lover Huon: for ere I shall do the contrary, I
shall suffer as much pain and grief as ever woman did, and I will never
break my troth for fear of death. Now leave we to speak of her, and say
somewhat of the thief that escaped out of the ship.

Chap. XLIX.
How the Pyrate fled to Mombrance to Iuoryn, and how he sent to defy the
Admiral Galaffer of Anfalerne, and of the answer that he had there.

YE have heard here before, how the fair Escleremond was received by the
Admiral Galaffer, and of the manner yt she found to keep her self true to
Huon, and how one of the Mariners escaped away and fled by land till at last
he came to the City of Mombrance, where he found Iuoryn, to whom he showed
all the whole matter as ye have heard, and how his brother the Admiral Gaudise
was slain by a young french knight, and how he and his company found the said
knight and his Niece the fair Escleremond, whom they had thought to have
brought to him. But (quoth he) the Admiral Galaffer has taken them from us by
force, and has taken our ship, and slain all your men that were within it,
so that none escaped but I alone. When king Iuoryn understood the Mariner, he
said. Ah mighty Mahound, how have thou suffered that my brother Gaudise has
thus pitiously been slain, and also my Niece his Daughter to consent thereto?
certainly the grief that I feel at my heart, constrains me rather to
desire death than life. And also moreover, to see him that is mine own Subject
and houldeth his lands of me, to keep my Niece, and thus to slay my men.
Alas, I cannot well say what I should do therein, a little thing would cause
me to slay my self. Then in great displeasure he called his Lords and caused
the Mariner to come before them, and there he made him to show again all the
matter before them, both how his brother the Admiral Gaudise was slain, and
also how the Admiral Galaffer held his Niece by force, and how he had slain
his men, which when the Lords had heard, they said thus to Iuoryn.

Sir, our advice is, that ye should send one of your secret messengers to the
Admiral Galaffer, and command him incontinent to send you your Niece, and to
make amends for that he has slain your men, and that he send you word by
writing, what cause has moved him thus to do, and if it be so, that pride
does so surmount in him, that he will not obey your commandments, then by a
just quarrel ye may go and make war upon him, and take from him all his
lands that he houldeth of you. When Iuoryn understood his Lords, he said, Sirs
I perceive well your opinion is good, and then a Messenger was appointed, and
his charge given him, and so he departed and rode so long till he came to
Anfalerne where he found the Admiral Galaffer, whom he saluted in the name of
Mahound, and then he declared his Message at length, but as soon as Galaffer
had heard his message, he said. Friend, go and say to king Iuoryn, that as
for the deliverance of his Niece, I will not do it, and as for his men that
are slain, it was through their own folly, and as touching that I should come
to him, I will not come to him, let him do what he can, but if he come to
assail me, I shall defend as well as I can. When the Messenger heard that, he
said. Sir Admiral, seeing ye will do none otherwise, in the name of our god
Mahound, and in the name of great king Iuoryn, here I defy you, and he
sends you word by me, that he will leave you neither City, Town, nor
Castle, but he will put them all to flame and fire, nor leave you one foot of
land, but also if he may take you, ye shall die a shameful death.

When the Admiral saw how he was defied, he was more inflamed then a burning
firebrand, and said to the messenger. Go and say to thy Lord, that I set
nothing by his threatening, and if I may know when he comes, I shall do him
that honor, that I will not abide till he enter into my country, but I will
meet with him before, and say unto him from me, that if I can take him, I
shall soon ryd his soul out of his body. So the messenger departed, and came
to Mombrance, where when Iuoryn saw him, he said* Friend, what says Galaffer?
will he send me my Niece? Sir quoth the messenger, he will not do it, he
says he doubts you nothing, and if ye be so hardy as to come and assail
him, then he will meet with you before, and fight with you: and I heard him
swear, that if he may take you, he will slay you without mercy. When Iuoryn
heard that, he swet for anger, and was in that case that he could not speak
one word of a long space, but when he had somewhat assuaged his ire, he swear
by his God Mahound, that he should never have joy nor mirth at his heart, till
he had destroyed the town of Anfalerne, and slain the Admiral Galaffer.

Then in have he sent for all his Lords, and with them concluded to send for
all his men of war, and gave them day to be with him within xv. days before
Mombrance, the which thing was done, for at that day they were all assembled as
ye shall hear hereafter. Now leaves the History to speak of them, and
returns again to speak of King Oberon.

Chap. L.
How king Oberon at the request of two Knights of the Fayrie, called Gloriant
and Mallaborn the monster of the Sea, went and succored Huon, and carried him
out of the Isle of Noysant.

NOw the History shows, that King Oberon (the same time that Huon was in the
Isle of Noysant) was in his wood, where for the most part he was accustomed to
be conversant, because ye place was very much delectable and far from people,
there he sat him down under a fair oak, and he began to weep and
complain. When Gloriant a knight of the Fairie, saw him, he had great
marvel, and demanded of him why he lamented so much? Gloriant quoth king
Oberon, the perjured Huon of Bourdeaux causes me thus to do, whom I have
always perfectly loved, and yet he still trespasseth my commandments, for
when I departed from him, I caused him to have the Admiral Gaudise at his
pleasure, and also I made him to have the fair Escleremond the Admirals
Daughter, and also I have given him my rich Horn of Iuorie and my good Cup,
the which he has lost by his pride and folly and therefore he has been
punished, and now he lies all naked bound hands and feet, and his eyes
blindfolded in an Isle, in the which place I will suffer him to die most
miserably. Not so Sir, (quoth Gloriant) for the honor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, call to your remembrance, how that by Gods own mouth, Adam and Eve
were forbidden from the eating of the fruit that was in Paradise, yet they by
their fragilitie brake Gods commandment, howbeit our Lord God had great pity
of them. And therefore Sir, I pray you have pity of Huon, then Mallaborn stepped
forth and said. Alas Sir, for the honor and reverence of our Lord God, I
desire you to grant me this one time, that I may go and aid him.

When Oberon saw he was so earnestly desired of Glorian^ and Mallaborn, he was
sore displeased, and answearing, said. Mallaborn, it pleases me so well, that
this Caytiffe Huon who endures so much pain be visited by thee: therefore I
condemn thee to be xxviij. years a Monster in the Sea, beside xxx. years
that thou art enjoined too already. Now I will that thou give him none other
counsel nor aid, but alonely to bear him out of the Isle that he is in, and
to set him on the maine Land, then let him go whether he will, for I desire
never more to see him. Also I will that thou bring again unto me, my rich
Horn of Iuorie, and my rich Cup, and my Armor, fetch them there as he has
lost them. Alas Sir, (quoth Mallaborn) great pain you put him unto, when for
so small an offense you are so sore displeased with Huon. And as for ye Armor
that you would have again, you know well how Huon of Bourdeaux did conquer it,
and he had been lost if it had not been, great ill you shall do if you cause
him not to have it again. But Sir, since I have License to bring him out of
the Isle, I pray you show me in what place is the Isle whereas he is. Then
Gloriant said, Brother Mallaborn, this Isle is near unto Hell, and it is
called the Isle Noysant. Well, (quoth Mallaborn) then I commend you all to our
Lord Jesus Christ, and so he departed and came to the seaside, and when he
came there, he leapt into the Sea, and began to swim as fast as the bird flies
in the air, and so arrived in the Isle Noysaunt, and so came unto Huon whom
he found sore weeping, and said. Sir Huon, I pray our Lord Jesus Christ to
succor and aid thee. Ah dear God, (quoth Huon) who is that that speaks
unto me? Huon, (quoth he) I am a man who loves thee, and am called Mallaborn,
and am a beast of the Sea, who has before this time borne thee over the salt
water to Babylon.

Ah Mallaborn dear Brother, (quoth Huon) I require thee unbind me, and bring
me out of this dolorous pain. With a right good will, (quoth Mallaborn) then
he did unbind him and opened his eyes. When Huon saw that, he was right
joyful, and demanded who sent him thither. Huon, (quoth he) know for troth,
that it was King Oberon, and whereas I was condemned before to be a beast of
the Sea Thirty years, now for thy sake I must endure so eight and Twenty
years more, yet I care not for the pain, for the love that I bear unto thee,
there is no pain impossible unto me to bear: but I must carry again unto
Oberon the rich Horn and Cup and Armor, for so I have promised King Oberon to
do. Ah, (quoth Huon) I pray to our Lord Jesus Christ to confound the Dwarf,
who has caused me to endure all these pains for so small an occasion. Huon,
(quoth Mallaborn) you do ill to say so, for you have no sooner spoken it, but
that King Oberon does know it. Certainly, (quoth Huon) I care not what he can
do, he has done me so much ill, that I can never love him: but Sir, I pray
thee tell me, if thou will bear me hence, or else whether that I must abide
here for ever. Friend, (quoth Mallaborn) I will bear thee out of this Isle,
and set thee on the maine Land, other aid may I not do thee, and then
Mallaborn took upon him again his beasts skin, and said: Sir, leap upon
me, then Huon leapt upon his back as naked as ever he was borne, and
Mallaborn leapt into the Sea, and began to swim, and came to the main Land,
and said. Friend Huon, more service can I not do unto thee at this time, but I
recommend thee to the keeping of our Lord God, who send thee comfort, I now
must go and seek for the Horn, Cup, and Armor, the which thou were wont to
have and enjoy, and I am to bear them unto King Oberon, for thus have I
promised to do.

Now Huon was there all alone and naked, pitiously complaining and said. Ah
good Lord, I require thee to aid me, I know not where I am, nor whether I may
go, yet if I had clothes to cover my naked skin, I should have some
comfort, for then I might go and seek some adventure: greatly I ought to hate
the crooked Dwarf Oberon, who has brought me into all this pain, but by the
faith yt I owe unto God, seeing he has left me thus, from henceforth to do
him the more spite, I shall make lies enough, I shall not leave for him, whom I
recommend now to a hundred Thousand Devils. When he had been there a certain
space all alone, he arose and looked all about him, to see if he might
perceive any man pass by, from whom he might have any succor, for he was
near famished for lack of sustenance: howbeit, he thought to depart thence to
seek some adventure, so he went on his way, and he went so far, that he found
an adventure such as you shall hear, for our Lord Jesus Christ never
forgets his Servants.

Chap. LI.
How Huon found a Minstrell, who gave him clothing and meat, and took Huon
with him as his Varlet, and went to Mombrance.

WHen Huon had gone a great way, he beheld on his right hand, and saw near
him a little wood by a fair meadow-side, and therein was standing a great Dake
full of leaves, and there beside was a clear Fountain, and there he saw an
ancient man with white hairs sitting under the Dake, and before him he had a
little cloth spread abroad on the grass, and thereon flesh and bread and wine
in a Bottell. When Huon saw the old man, he came unto him, and the ancient man
said. Ah thou wild man, I pray thee for the love of Mahound do me no hurt, but
take meat and drink at thy pleasure. When Huon saw him, he espied lying
beside him a Harp and a Vyoll, whereon he could well play, for in all Pagany
there was no Minstrell like him. Friend, (quoth Huon) thou have named me right,
for a more unhappy man then I am, there is none living. Friend, (quoth the
Minstrell) go to yonder Male and open it, and take what thou likest best to
cover thy naked skin, then come to me and eat at thy pleasure. Sir, (quoth
Huon) good adventure is come unto me thus to find you, Mahound reward you.
Sir, (quoth the Minstrell) I pray you come and eat with me, and keep me
company, for you shall not find a more sorrowful man then I am. By my faith,
(quoth Huon) a companion of your own sort have you found, for there was never
man that suffered so much poverty as I have, praise be unto him that fourmed
me, but seeing I have found meat to eat, blessed be the hour that I have found
you, for you seem to be a good man. Then Huon went to the Male and took
clothes, and then came unto the Minstrell, and sat down, and did eat and
drink as much as pleased him. The Minstrell beheld Huon, and saw that he was
a fair young man and a courteous, and then he demanded of him, where he was
borne, and by what adventure he was arrived there in that case that he was in.

When Huon heard how the Minstrell demanded of his estate, he began to study
in himself, whether he should show the troth or else to lie, then he called to
our Lord God, and said. Ah good Lord, if I show to this man the troth of mine
adventure, I am but dead: and King Oberon, for a small offense thou have left
me in this case, now if I show the troth of my life to this man, I am but
dead, I shall never trust thee more, but I will now put all my trust in God,
for the love that I have to my Love, thou have me in hate, but seeing it is
so, as often as I have need I shall ly, nor I shall not leave it for fear of
thee, but rather do it in despite of thee: then Huon said to the Minstrell.
Sir, you have demanded of mine estate, and as yet I have made you none
answer, the troth is, I find my self so well at mine ease, that I forgot to
answer you, but I shall now show you seeing you would know it. Sir, of
certain I was borne in the country of Affricke, and fell in company with
diverse Merchants by the Sea in a Ship, thinking to have sailed to Damieta,
but a great misfortune fell upon us, there arose such an horrible tempest,
that our Ship perished and all that were within it, none escaped but I, and I
thank Mahound that I am escaped alive: therefore I desire you now to show me
your adventure, as I have showed you mine. Friend (quoth the Minstrell) seeing
you will know it, know for troth, I am named Mouflet, I am a Minstrell as
thou see here by mine Instruments, and I say unto thee, that from hence to
the red Sea, there is none so cunning in all Instruments as I am, and I can do
many other things, and the dolor that thou see me make, is because of late
I have lost my good Lord and Master the Admiral Gaudise, who was slain
miserably by a Vacabond of France called Huon, that Mahound shame him, and
bring him to an ill death, for by him I am fallen into poverty and misery, I
pray thee tell me thy name? Sir, (quoth Huon) my name is Solater. Well, (quoth
the Minstrell) Solater, dismay thee not, for the great pouerties that thou have
suffered, thou see what adventure Mahound has sent thee, thou art now
better arrayed then thou were, if thou will follow my counsel thou shall have no
need, thou art fair and young, thou ought not to be dismayed, but I that am
old and ancient have cause to be discomforted, seeing in mine old days I have
lost my Lord and Master the Admiral Gaudise, who did me so much good and
profit, I would it pleased Mahound, that he that slew him were in my power.

When Huon heard that, he spoke no word but cast down his head. Solater, (quoth
the Minstrell) seeing my Lord is dead, I will go to Mombrance to King Iuoryn,
to show him the death of his Brother the Admiral Gaudise, and if thou will
abide with me, so that thou will bear my Fardell and harp a foot, ere it be
half a year past, I warrant thee thou shall have a Horse, for whensoseuer
thou shall hear me play upon my instruments, all the hearers shall take
therein such pleasure, that they shall give me both Gowns and Mantles, so
that thou shall have much ado to trusse them in my Male. Well Sir, (quoth
Huon) I am content to serve you, and to do all your Commandments. Then Huon
took the Male on his neck and the Harp in his hand, and Mouflet his Master
bare the Vyoll, and thus the master and the servant went on their way to go
to Mombrance. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) my heart ought to be sorrowful when
I see my self in this case, that now I must become a Minstrels Varlet: Gods
curse have Oberon the Dwarf, who has done me all this trouble. Alas if I had
now my good Armor, my Horn, and my Cup, I would reckon all the sorrow that I
have endured as nothing. But when I had xiij. Knights to serve me, how is this
chance now turned, that I my self must serve a poor Minstrell?

When Mouflet heard Huon make such sorrow within him self, he said. Dear
brother Solater take good comfort, for before to morrow at night, thou shall see
the good cheer that shall be made to me, whereof thou shall have part, and of
all the goods that I can get. Master quoth Huon, Mahound reward you for the
goodness that ye have showed me, and shall do, thus the master and the servant
went forth together devising, at last Huon espied behind them coming certain
men of arms, houlding the way to Mombrance. Master quoth Huon, here behind
us are coming men in armor, I know not whether they will do us any hurt or
not. Solater quoth Mouflet, be not abashed, we will abide here, and know
whether they will go, and within a while the man of war came to them, who were
in number Five.C. persons, the minstrell saluted them and said. Sirs, I pray
you show me whether ye will go. Friend quoth one of them, because we see that
ye be a gentle minstrell, I shall show you, we are going to king Iuoryn of
Mombrance, who will needs go and make war upon the Admiral Galaffer,
because that now of late, the Damsel Escleremond daughter to the Admiral
Gaudise, passed by Anfalerne, who should have been brought to her Uncle king
Iuoryn of Mombrance, but the Admiral Galaffer took her by force, and slew all
them that led her, and has married the fair Escleremond, whereof King Iuoryn
is as sorrowful as may be, and for that cause we be sent for by king Iuoryn,
who is minded to assemble all his power, to go and destroy the Admiral
Galaffer. Now I have showed you the cause of our going to the City of
Mombrance.

Chap. LII.
How Huon and his Master Mouflet arrived at Mombrance, and how Huon spoke with
king Iuoryn.

WHen Huon of Bourdeaux understood the Paynims, how they were going where the
Lady Escleremond was, he was surprised with joy, and said to his Master. Sir,
I require you let us go to the wars with them. Solater quoth Mouflet,
beware what thou say, for where as war is, I would not come there for any
thing. Thus they went forth until they came to Mombrance, and went straight
to the Pallaice, whereas they found King Iuoryn and all his Barons, when the
Minstrell saw him, he saluted him in the name of Mahound, and said. Sir, I am
right dolorous for the news that I bring you, for Sir, your Brother my Lord
and Master the Admiral Gaudise is pitiously slain. Mouflet, (quoth Iuoryn)
these news has been brought unto me before this time, whereof I am much
agreeued, and also I am sorry for my Niece the fair Escleremond, who is kept
from me by the Admiral Galaffer, and for any Message that I can send to him,
he will not send her back to me. But by ye faith that I owe to my God
Mahound, I shall make him such war, that the memory thereof shall be had an
Hundred years hereafter. For I shall leave him never a foot of Land, but I
shall bring all into fire and flame, and clean destroy him, and in the despite
of his teeth, I will see my Niece Escleremond, and if I may get her, I shall
cause her to be stricken al to pieces, and burn her into ashes, for my Brother
is dead by a Villain of France, upon whom she was amourous.

When Huon heard him speak of his Lady, his heart rose, and made promise in
himself, that ere the month was past, he would go and see her, and find the
means how to speak with her. Then King Iuoryn called Mouflet the Minstrell,
and said: Friend, I pray thee do some thing to make me merry, for by reason
of the displeasure that I have had, my joy is lost therefore it were better for
me to take some mirth, then to be long in sorrow. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) I am
ready to do your pleasure, then he took his Vyoll, and played thereof in
such wise, that it was great melody to hear it, for all the Paynims that were
there had great joy and mirth, and made great feasting, when Huon heard it, he
said. Good Lord I require thee, that this great joy may turn to me, as to
hear some good news of her who I desire so sore to see. When the Minstrell
had finished his song, the Paynims did of their clothes, and some gave him
their Gowns, and some their Mantles, he thought himself right well happy
that could give the Minstrell any thing. Huon had enough to do to gather
together the clothes that were given him, and he put them into his Male,
whereof Huon was joyful, because he should have the one half.

King Iuoryn beheld Huon, and said unto them that were about him, great damage
it is that so fair a young man should serve a Minstrell. Sir, (quoth Mouflet)
be not abashed though this young man do serve me, he has cause so to do,
for when your Brother was dead, I departed from thence to come hither, and by
the way I found a great Dake, under the which I sat down to rest me, and there
by was a great Fountain fair and clear, there I spread abroad a Towell on
the grass, and set thereon bread and such meat and drink as I had, and the
same time this young man arrived and came unto me all naked, and prayed me for
the love of Mahound to give him some of my bread, and so I did and clothed him
as you see, and I did so much for him, that he promised to serve me, and to
bear my Fardell and my Harp, and moreover, when I came to any passage of
water, he would cast me in his neck as light as though I had been nothing,
(he is so strong) and bear me over. Ah poor Catiffe, (quoth King Iuoryn) have
thou lived so long, and cannot perceive why he does it? he abides until thou
have gotten some riches, and then he will cut thy threat and cast thee into the
River, and then go away with all thy riches, cause him to come and speak with
me. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) he shall come to you, and so he called Huon, and
brought him to King Iuoryn.

My friend, (quoth the King) I pray thee show me where thou were borne? for I
have pity of thee, to see thee in so low estate, as to be Varlet to a
Minstrell, it were better for thee to serve some Prince, or help to keep a
Town or a Castle, rather then thus to loose thy time. I wot not what I should
think therein, but that it seems to me that thou art of a faint courage,
what has moved thee thus to do? thou seeest thy Master has nothing, but
that he gets with his Vyoll, can thou find none other means to live by
more honestly? Sir, (quoth Huon) I can Crafts ynow, the which I shall name unto
you if you will hear me. Say on, (quoth Iuoryn) for I have great desire to
know what thou can do: but of one thing I advise thee, make no vaunt of any
thing, without thou can do it indeed, for in every thing I will prove
thee. Sir, (quoth Huon) I can mew a Sparrow-Hauke, and I can chase the Heart and
the wild Boar, and blow the prize, and serve the hounds of their rights, and
I can serve at the table before a great Prince, and I can play at Chesse and
Tables as well as any other can do, and I never found man could win of me if
I list.

Chap. LIII.
How king Iuoryn caused his Daughter to play at the Chesse with Huon, upon
condition, that if he were mated, he should loose his head: and if she were
mated, Huon should have her love, and how Huon won the game.

WHEN king IVORIN heard Huon, he said, hold thee to this, for I shall prove
whether it be true that thou say or not. Yet Sir (quoth Huon) I pray you let
me show farther what I can do, and then assay me at your pleasure. By
Mahound quoth the king, I am content that thou shall show all that thou can
do. Sir quoth Huon, I can right well arm me, and set the helmet on my head,
and bear a shield and spear, and run and gallop a horse, and when it
comes to the point where strokes should be given, ye may well send forth a
worse than I. Also Sir, I can right well enter into Ladies chambers, to embrace
and kiss them, and to do them any service. Friend quoth Iuoryn, by that which
I hear by thee, thou can do more things than should turn to good, but to
prove thee, I shall cause thee to be assayed at the play of the Chesse: I have
a fair Daughter, with whom I will that thou shall play, upon condition, that
if she win, then thou shall loose thy head, but if thou can mate her, then
I promise thee that thou shall have her to thy wife, to repose with her at thy
pleasure, and a C. marks of money therewith. Sir quoth Huon, if it were your
pleasure* I would be glad to forbear that enterprise. By Mahound quoth the
king, it shall be none otherwise, come thereof what will.

In the mean season that this Bargain was making, a Paynim went into the
Ladies chamber, and showed her how there was with the king her father a young
man, who had made promise, how he should play at the Chesse with her upon
condition, that if he lost the game, he should then loose his head, and if he
chanced to win, then he to have you to his wedded wife, and a C. Marks of
money. But Madame quoth he, I assure you he that shall play against you, is the
fairest man that ever I saw, pity it is that he should be a varlet to a
Minstrell as he is. By Mahound quoth the Lady, I hold my Father a fool, when
he thinks that I should suffer a man to die for winning of a game at Chesse.
Then Iuoryn sent for his Daughter by two Kings, who brought her to ye King her
Father, then Iuoryn said. Daughter, thou must play at Chesse with this young
Varlet that thou see here, so that if thou win, then he shall loose his
head, and if he win, then I will that he shall be thy husband, to do with
thee at his pleasure. Father quoth the Lady, seeing this is your pleasure, it
is reason that I do it whether I will or not. Then she beheld Huon, whom
she saw to be right fair, and said to her self. By Mahound, for the great
beauty that I see in this young man, I would this game were at an end, so that
I were his wedded wife.

When then Lady was come, their places were made ready, then she and Huon sat
down, and king Iuoryn and all his Barons sat down about them to see them
play, then Huon said to the King. Sir I require you, that you nor none other
do speak in our game, neither for the one party nor for the other. Friend
quoth the King, have no doubt thereof, and for more surety, the King caused to
be proclaimed through out all his Pallaice, that none should be so hardy as to
speak one word upon pain of death. Then the Chesse were made ready, and Huon
said: Lady, what game will ye play at? Friend quoth she, at the game
accustomed, that is to be mated in the corner, then they both began to study
for the first draught, there were Paynims that beheld Huon, but he cared not
for any of them, but studied on his game, the which they had begun so, that
Huon had lost most part of his Pawnes, wherewith he changed color and blushed
as red as a rose. The Damsel perceived him, and said, Friend, whereon do
ye think? ye are almost mated, anon my Father will strike of your head.
Madame quoth he, as yet the game is not done, great shame shall your Father
have, when ye shall lie all night in mine arms, and I being but a servant to
a poor Minstrell.

When the Barons heard Huon say so, they began all to laugh, and the Lady, who
was so surprised with the love of Huon, (in regard of the great beauty that
she saw in him) that she forgot all her play to think of him, whereby she lost
the game, whereof Huon was right joyful, and called the King and said. Sir,
now may ye see how I can play, but if I would study but a little more, I
could mate your Daughter whereas I list. When the King saw that, he said to his
Daughter. Arise, cursed be the hour that I begat thee, for great dishonor
have thou now done to me, that heretofore have mated so many great men, and now
I see here before my face, that a Minstrels varlet has mated thee. Sir quoth
Huon, trouble not your self for that cause, as for the wager that I should
win thereby, I am content to release it quite, let your Daughter go into her
chamber, and sport her with her Damsels at her pleasure, and I shall go and
serve my Master the Minstrell. Friend quoth the King, if thou will show me
this courtesy, I shall give thee an hundred Marks in money.

Sir quoth Huon, I am content with your pleasure, and the Lady went her way
sorrowful, and said to her self. Ah false sainted heart, Mahound confound
thee, for if I had known that thou would thus have refused my company, I
would have mated thee, and then thou had lost thy head. Thus the matter
passed till the next day, then king Iuorin made proclamation through out all
the city, that every man should be armed and mounted on their horses, and
that it was his mind to set forward toward his enemies. Then every man armed
them and mounted on their horses, many helmets glittered against the sun, and
many trompets and drums began to sound, such brute was made within the city
that it was marvel to hear it.

Chap. LIIII.
How Huon was armed, and mounted on a poor horse, and went after the army to
Anfalerne.

WHen Huon saw how he had not wherewith to arm him, his heart mourned right
sore, for gladly he would have gone forth with other, if he might have had
any horse to have ridden on, wherefore he came to king Iuoryn and said. Sir I
require you to let me have a horse and armor, that I may go with you to the
Battle, and then shall ye see how I can aid you. Friend quoth Iuoryn, I am
content that ye go with me. Then the King commanded one of his Chamberlaines
to deliver him a horse and armor, and the Chamberlain said. Sir, beware what
ye do, for oftentimes such flying vagabounds are of a light courage, if he
have a horse and armor, he may as soon go to your enemies part, as to keep
with you, and never trust me, but he is some counterfeit varlet. When the King
heard him say so, he said, it may well be, yet let him have a good armor,
and helmet and sheeld, and let his horse be but of a small value, to the intent
that he shall not go far of though he would.

The same time there was a Paynim, that heard the king grant, how Huon should
have armor, he went to his house, and took out of his coffer an old rusty
sword, and brought it to Huon, and said Friend, I see weell ye have no sword to
aid your self withal, and therefore I give you this sword, the which I have
long kept in my coffer: the Paynim did give it to Huon in a mockery, for he
thought the sword to be but of a small value. Huon took the sword, and drew it
out of the sheath, and saw letters written thereon in french, saying, how this
sword was forged by Galams, who in his days forged three swords, and that same
sword was one of the three, and the second was called Durandell, and the third
Courtayn. When Huon had read the letters, he was right joyful, and said to the
Paynim. Friend, for this good sword that ye have given me, I thank you, and
I promis you if I may live long, I shall reward you with the double value
thereof. After that Huon had this sword there was brought unto him a good
Armor, helmet, sheeld, and spear with a rusty head, Huon cared little for it,
by reason of the great desire that he had to come to ye place whereas he
might show his strength and virtue, the^ there was brought to him a lean horse
pilled, with a long neck and a great head. When Huon saw that horse, he took
him by the bridle, and leapt upon him without any foot in the stirrup, in the
sight of a M. Paynims that were there present, and some said it was not well
done to give him a horse, the which could not serve nor aid him in time of
need. When Huon was mounted on his lean feeble horse, he was sorrowful, for
well he perceived how they mocked him, and said softly to him self, Ah ye
false Paynims, if I may live a year, I shall quitte your mockes.

Then Huon rode forth with others, but for all that he could do with his
spurs, the horse would go but his own soft pace, whereat diverse Paynims
mocked him. Thus king Iuoryn departed from Mombrance with his great army, and
tarried in the fields for his men, and when they were all assembled together,
then he departed and took the way to Anfalerne, the which was distant of but
four leagues, and when they came there, they ran before the city, and drove
away all the beasts, beeues and muttons, and sent them to Mombrance. Then when
the Admiral Galaffer saw king Iuoryn before his city, and had driven away all
the pray about the town, he was so sorrowful that he was near hand out of
his wit, and then he saw the fair Escleremond before him and said. Madame,
the great love that I have set on you, is this day derely bought, for by your
occasion I see my country destroyed, and my men slain and led in servitude.
Sir quoth she, I am sorry thereof, it lies in you to amend it, seeing this ill
is come to you by me, then it is in you to render me to king Iuoryn, and
thereby ye and your country shall be in rest and peace. Fair Lady quoth
Galaffer, by the grace of Mahound, for any fear that I have of Iuoryn your
Uncle, I will not render you into his hands, until I have had of you my
pleasure. Sir, (quoth she) you may do with me as it shall please you, after
that the two years be past for the accomplishing of my vow. Madame quoth
Galaffer, before I will render you to your Uncle Iuoryn, I shall have never a
foot of land, for first it shall be clean distroyed.

Chap. LV.
How Huon fought with Sorbryn and slew him, and wanne the good Horse
Blanchardyn, whereon he mounted and wan the Battle, and was brought with
great triumph to Mombrance.

WHen Sorbryn (Nephew to the Admiral Galaffer) heard his Uncle make such sorrow,
he said to him. Fair Uncle, be not dismayed, though Iuoryn has taken and
slain some of your men, and driven away your beasts: for each one of yours,
if I live, I shall render again to you four, I shall tell you how, I will go
and arm me and issue out, and show to Iuoryn, that if he will set one or two
of the hardiest men of all his host to fight with me, and that if it be so
that I be overcome, then you to render his fair Niece Escleremond to him, to
do with her at his pleasure: and that if I discomfite his men, then let him
depart, so that for all the damage that he has done to you in this war, he
will render again to you the double thereof, for better it were that this
war should end by two men, rather then so much people should be destroyed.
Fair Nephew quoth Galaffer, I never heard a better word, I am well content if
ye will have it thus.

Then Sorbryn went and armed him self, he was a goodly knight, for in all ye
Paynims lands there was not his Peer, nor none that approached near to his
valiantnes. When he was armed, then Blanchardyn his good horse was brought to
him, the goodness of this horse exceeded all other, and of beauty there was
none like him, he was as white as snow, the freshnes of his apparel, it was
so rich and goodly, that I cannot make due mention thereof, for no man could
esteem the value of the riches of the bridle, saddle, and harness. Then
Sorbryn leapt upon his horse without any stirroppe, and took a great spear,
and so rode out of the City, and when he saw king Iuoryn a far of, he
cried aloud and said. Ah thou Iuoryn of Mombrance, the Admiral Galaffer has
sent me to thee, and wills that thou do arm one of thy valiantest men of
thy Court, and let him come against me, and if he can vanquish me, then he
shall deliver to thee thy Niece Escleremond: but if I overcome thy man, then
thou to return to thy City, and suffer thy Niece to remain still with him,
and also thou to restore all the damages that thou have done to him and his in
this war. When Iuoryn heard the Paynim, he looked about him, to see if any of
his men would take on him this enterprise to fight with Sorbryn, but there was
no Paynim that durst speak one word, for they feared Sorbryn for the fiercenes
that was in him, and they said among themselves, that whosoever did fight
against him, was like miserably to finish his days.

The same time that Iuorin spoke with Sorbrin, Huon was among the other
Paynims, and heard what Sorbryn had said, and also he saw yt no man durst go
against Sorbryn, then as well as he might, he got himself out of the press
upon his lean horse, and struck him with his spurs, but for all that he
could do the horse would neither trot nor gallop, but go still his own pace.
The old Minstrell beheld Huon his Varlet, who made him ready to fight against
the Paynim, and saw that he was so ill horsed, he cried on hye and said. Sir
King Iuoryn, it shall be unto you great dishonor, when such a Horse that is
nothing worth you have delivered unto my Varlet, who gooth for your sake to
fight with Sorbryn, with whom none of your other men dare fight, great sin
it is that he has not a better Horse. Then Huon said unto Sorbryn: Sarazin, I
pray thee speak with me. Friend, (quoth Sorbryn) what will thou with me?
Paynim, (quoth Huon) I require thee to prove thy virtue against me. Then
(quoth Sorbryn) tell me, art thou a Paynim or a Sarazin? Friend, (quoth Huon)
I am neither Paynim nor Sarazin, but I am christened, believing in ye law of
Jesus Christ, and though thou see me but poorly apparelled, despise me not,
for I am come of a noble extraction, wherefore I require thee on thy law that
thou beleeuest on, let me not go without battle. Friend, (quoth Sorbryn) in
this request thou do great folly, for thou desire thy death, I have pity
of thee, and therefore I council thee to return back. Paynim, (quoth Huon) I
had rather die then to return ere I have iusted with thee. Then they went each
from other to take their course, but for all that ever Huon could do, his
horse would not advance forth, whereof Huon was sore displeased, and said: Ah
very God and man, I desire thee to give me the grace, that I may win this
Horse that this Paynim does ride upon.

When Huon saw that his horse would neither go forward nor backwarde, he set
his Sheeld against his enemy, and Sorbryn came running like the Tempest, and
with his Spear struck in Huons Sheeld such a stroke, that the buckles nor
any thing else could resist the stroke, but the Sheeld was peirced
through-out, but the good armor saved Huon from all hurts, and he removed no
more for the stroke then if it had been a strong wall, whereof Iuoryn and all
other had great marvel, and said one to another, how they had never seen
before so great a stroke, nor a goodlyer receipt thereof without falling to the
earth, every man praised greatly Huon that he held himself so firmly. By
Mahound, (quoth Iuoryn) our man is fierce and of great hardynesse, I would he
were mounted now upon my horse. And Huon who had received the great stroke, in
great ire cast down his Spear, and took his Sword with both his hands, and
gave therewith the Paynim a great stroke as he passed by him a hye upon his
healme, the stroke was so puissant, that neither the healme nor coiffe of
steel could resist the stroke, but that his head was cloven to the shoulders,
and so he fell down dead in the feeld.

Then Huon who was quick and light, took yt good horse Blanchardine by the
reyne, and alighted from his own horse without feet in the stirrup, leapt upon
the Paynims horse, and left his own in the feeld, and when he saw himself on
Blanchardine, he smoat him with his spurs to prove him, when the horse felt
the spurs, he began to leap and gambould, and gallop as it had been the
thunder, and the Paynims had marvel that he had not fallen to the earth, so
when he had well proved him and turned him in and out, he thought he would
not give him for the value of a Realm, then he came unto King Iuoryn with
twenty gan^^^ulds. By Mahound, (quoth Iuoryn) this Varlet seems rather Son
to a King or Prince, then to be a Varlet to a Minstrell, then he came unto Huon
and embraced him, and made him great respect, and the Paynims that were within
Anfalerne, with the Admiral Galaffer issued out of the City, and when
Galaffer saw his Nephew slain, he road about him three times, and made a
pitious complaint, and said. Ah right dear Nephewe, I may well complain, by
reason of your youth, when I see you thus pitiously slain, certainly, if I
live long, your death shall dearly be bought, so he caused the dead body to
be carried into the City with great lamentations, and then he and his men
entered into the Battle, where was great slaughter made on both parts, but
among all other Huon did maruailes, he slew and beat down, and tare of
helmets, and struck out brains with the pummell of his Sword, he slew and
beat down all that came within his stroke, his prowess was such that no
Paynim durst abide him, but fled as the Sheep does from the Woolues, he did so
much by virtue of his arms, that within short space he brought all his
enemies to plain discomfiture, so that the Admiral Galaffer with much pain
fled and entered into the City, right sorrowful for the loss that he had
received that day, for the third part of his men were slain in the Battle,
and all by the valiantness of Huon, the which was so great, that King Iuoryn
and his Barons stood still to behold his valyant deeds.

And as Huon fought, he spyed out the Paynim that had given him his Sword,
then he remembered the promise that he had made him, and he lifted up his
Sword, and struck another Paynim therewith, so that he claue his head to the
breast, and so he fell down dead, and Huon took the Paynims horse, and gave
the horse to him that had given him the good Sword, and said. Friend, take well
in worth ye gift of this horse, f^r a reward for the good Sword that you gave
me. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I thank you. In brief, Huon did so much, that
there was no Paynim that durst abide him, but fled and entered into the City of
Anfalerne, then they closed their gates and lifted up their bridges, and King
Iuoryns men departed with the booty that they had won: then with great
triumph Huon was conuayed, riding cheek by cheek by King Iuoryn, and so
brought to Mombrance, whereas they were received with great joy, and the
Admiral Galaffer was entered into Anfalerne, in great sorrow for Sorbryn his
Nephew who was dead, and also for his men that he had lost in battle, and
when he was unarmed, he caused his Nephew to be buried with sore weepings and
lamentations. Now let us leave speaking of them, until we have occasion to
return unto them again.

Chap. LVI.
How Huon was had in great honor, and sat at the Table with King Iuoryn of
Mombrance.

WHen Iuoryn was entered into Mombrance, he went and unarmed him, and his
Daughter came unto him to make him reverence, and when he saw his Daughter,
he kissed her and said. Dear Daughter, thou were mated in a good hour by the
Minstrels Varlet, for in the day of battle that we have had against the
Admiral Galaffer, he was discomfited by the only prowess of this Varlet by
whom thou were mated, thanked be my God Mahound, for by him I have overcome
mine enemies, and beside that, he fought hand to hand against Sorbryn Nephew to
the Admiral Galaffer, and he slew him, but if I may live one year, the great
service that he has done unto me, shall be even right well rewarded: Father,
(quoth the Lady) you are bound so to do.

Then King Iuoryn went up into his Pallaice, and his Daughter with him, and
Huon went to the lodging where as the Minstrell was lodged, where he unarmed
him, and went with his Master to the Pallaice, but when King Iuoryn saw them,
the King advanced forth, and took Huon by the hand, and said. Friend, you
shall go with me and sit at my Table, for I cannot do you too much honor,
for the good service that you have done unto me, I abandon unto you all my
house, to do therein at your pleasure, take all my gould and silver, and
jewels, and give thereof at your pleasure: I ordain and will, that all that
you command shall be done, all that is here I abandon unto you, yea in the
Ladies chambers take there your pleasure as you list, and when I go out, you
shall go with me. Sir, (quoth Huon) of the great honor that you have done to
me, I thank you, then they sat down at the Table, and when they had dyned,
the King and Huon sat together upon the rich Carpets. Then Mouflet the
Minstrell opened his Vyoll, and played so melodiously, that the Paynims that
heard him had great marvel thereof, for the Vyoll made so sweet a sound, that
it seemed to be the Mermaides of the Sea, and King Iuoryn and all his Lords
had so great joy, that it seemed unto them that they were in the glory of
Paradise, so yt there was no Paynim, but that gave him Gowns and Mantles and
other jewels. The Minstrell saw Huon sit by the King, he said: Friend,
yesterday I was your Master, and now I am become your Minstrell, I think
now you have little care for me, yet I pray you come unto me and gather
together these clothes, and put them into my Male as you have done ere this.
When the King and his Lords heard that, they began to laugh. Now let us leave
speaking of them, and say somewhat of the old Gerames.

Chap. LVII.
How the old Gerames arrived at Anfalerne by fortune, and the Admiral Galaffer
retained him to mainetaine his war: And how the fair Escleremond spoke with
him,

YE have heard here before the Adventures that have fallen to Huon, and how
the old Gerames and xiij. with him* departed and left Huon, because he would
not believe them whereby fell to him such adventures as ye have since heard,
and how Gerames and his companyons that were in the little ship, sailed forth
in the tempest, without any knowledge what was become of Huon, but they thought
rather he had been dead then alive and so within a month after, they were
driven by another tempest to the port of Anfalerne.

When Gerames saw how they were arrived there, he said to his company. Sirs we
be not arrived at a good Port* in this City dwells a Paynim king who believes
not in our god, a more fierce Paynim cannot be found from hence to the red Sea,
he is called the admiral Galaffer, without god have pity of us, I cannot see
but we are like to die, and we cannot return back. The same time the Admiral
Galaffer was risen from dinner, and looked out at a window, and beheld the
seaside, and then he perceived the little Ship, where Gerames and his
company were in, when he saw it, he went down with some of his men, desiring
to knew what they were that there arrived: then he approached to the Ship,
and said. Sirs, what men be you that are thus arrived at my Port? Sir, (quoth
Gerames) we be Frenchmen, Pilgrims, and are going to offer at the holy
Sepulcher, the fortune of the Sea has brought us hither, and therefore Sir, if
there be any Tribute that we ought to pay, we are ready to do your pleasure.
Sirs, (quoth the Admiral) have no doubt, that by me or any of mine you shall
have any displeasure, for if ye will abide with me, you are well arrived. Sir,
(quoth Gerames) I would it might please you to show us the cause why: Why,
(quoth the Admiral) that I shall show you. True it is, here near me
dwells King Iuoryn of Mombrance, who makes upon me great war, he
slays my men, and destroys my Country, whereof I have great sorrow in my
heart. Sir, (quoth Gerames) if your quarrel be just and rightful, we shall be
all ready to aid you truly, for Sir, without your quarrel be good, we will
not abide with you.

Sirs, (quoth the Admiral) I shall show you the troth, so it was, upon a day
I stood in a window, and looked down to ye seaside, (as I did now when you
arrived at this Port) and then I saw a Ship coming, which took anchor there
as you be now, and in the Ship there was a Damsel and Ten Mariners, who
thought to have led her unto King Iuoryn of Mombrance, I cannot tell where
they had taken her, but she was Daughter to the Admiral Gaudise, that Mahound
take his soul, and I knew for certain, that if King Iuoryn might have the
Damsel, he would have burnt her, because it has been showed him, that she
was the cause of the death of her Father the Admiral Gaudise, who was Brother
to King Iuoryn, and so he is Uncle to the Damsel, and when I was advertised,
that the ten Mariners would have delivered her into the hands of her Uncle
Iuoryn, I took her from them, and slew them all, because they would not
deliver her to me with entreatie, and thus I have wedded the Damsel. When
Iuoryn heard this, he made me war, and was here before my City with all his
puissance, and has slain my men, and led away all my beasts and provision,
and has burnt and destroyed my Country, and every day he comes and
ouer-runnes all the Country, and he has with him a young man, I know not of
what country he is of, but this last day he slew a Nephewe of mine, whom I
right dearly loved, and who was called Sorbryn, he was Son to my Sister,
for whom I have such sorrow at my heart, that it cannot be appeased, and he
has led away his Horse called Blanchardyn, the which is the best horse in ten
Realms, his like is not in all the world, wherefore I desire you (as I may
deserve your service) to abide with me, and to do so much, that I might have
the said young man taken Prisoner, and the horse again to me restored, and
if you can this do, I shall so reward you, that you shall always be rich, and
all those in your company.

Sir, (quoth Gerames) if he come any more hither, and that you show me him,
I shall do my best to bring him, and the Horse also unto you. Friend, (quoth
the Admiral) if you will show me this courtesy, I shall abandon all my Realm
to be at your pleasure and commandment. With these words the old Gerames
issued out of the Ship and all his company, and entered into the City of
Anfalerne with the Admiral Galaffer, and when they came to the Pallaice,
Gerames said. Sir, I and my company require you to show us the Damsel, for
whose sake you maintain this war. Friend, (quoth the Admiral) if you were a
young man, I would not show her unto you, but I see well you be old and
ancient, wherefore no young Lady will set any thing by you: then the Admiral
took Gerames by the hand, and led him into the Chamber whereas Escleremond
was, as soon as the Lady saw Gerames, she knew him, wherewith she began to
chang color, and fell down in a swound in the Chamber, making a great
out-crie. When the Admiral Galaffer saw that, he was right sorrowful, and
said: Fair Lady, why do you make this sorrow? are you troubled at the sight
of this old man that I have brought hither? Nay surely Sir, (quoth she) it is
for a pain that has taken me in the right side whereby I have often times
great annoyance: but Sir, if it were your pleasure, I would gladly speak with
this french Knight, for customably they know many things, and peradventure he
may show me such things as shall be for my health, for Frenchmen are right
discreet in giving of good counsel. Madame, quoth the Admiral) it pleases me
well that you speak with him secretly. Then the Lady called Gerames, and
said: Friend, I pray thee give me some good counsel, that I may be eased of
the pain that I endure. Madame, (quoth Gerames) for the honor of you and of
the Admiral that is here present, I shall aid you in such wise, that you
shall be eased of the pain that you endure.

Then Gerames who was subtle, well perceived the mind of the Lady, then he
approached near unto her, and they sat down together on a Couch there by.
Gerames, (quoth the Lady) I pray you what adventure has brought you hither?
Madame, (quoth he) we be come hither by reason of tempest of the Sea, but
Lady, (quoth he) I pray you what is become of Huon? By my faith, (quoth she) I
believe he is dead, for when you departed from us, such a marvelous tempest
rose on the Sea, that all that were in our Ship were perished, and the ship
drowned and broken in small pieces, except Huon and I, we saved us on a Table
of wood, whereupon we arrived in an Isle that was near us, and when we were
on the Land, there came unto us Ten Mariners, and they took me from thence,
and ^^it Huon there blindfold, his hands and feet fast bound, so that he had no
power to relieve himself, and those Ten Mariners brought me hither, and the
Admiral Galaffer has slain them al, therefore I think surely that Huon is
dead, Jesus have mercy upon him, and thus I am here with this Admiral, who
has assured me to wed me, but as yet he never meddled with me bodily, but I
have made him to believe, that I made a vow to Mahound for two years to
come, that no man should have use of my body, and that is for the love of Huon,
whom I cannot forget, the Admiral has believed me, and for as long as I live
I shall never forget Huon, and shall always be ready to die, in the pain to
keep me from the bodily company of any man living. Ah Sir Gerames, if you
might do so much, that I might escape from hence with you, you should do me a
great courtesy, for if I might escape from hence and come into a christian
Realm, I would yield my self into some Abbie of Nuns, to the intent that
the reasidue of my life, I might pray for the Soul of my Lover Huon. Madam,
(quoth Gerames) be not dismayed, for if I can escape from hence, whatsoever
come to me thereof, I shall carry you with me. Then the Admiral came unto
them, and said: Friend, you hold ouer-long talking with the Damsel, come away,
you have tarried there long enough; then Gerames departed from Escleremond,
strayning her by the hand, and the Admiral Galaffer took Gerames by the arm,
and brought him into the Hall to Supper, and after Supper they communed of the
Feats of the war. Now let us leave speaking of them, and return to King
Inoryn of Mombran^e, and noble Huon who was with him.

Chap. LVIII.
How King Iuoryn came again before Anfalerne, and how Gerames and Huon fought
together, and at last they knew each other. And how they entered into
Anfalerne, and shut the Admiral without.

NOw shows the History, that about two days after King Iuoryn had made his
course before Anfalerne, then Huon came unto Iuoryn and said. Sir, cause your
men to be armed, and let us go visit the Admiral Galaffer, for a man that is
in war ought never to lie still, until he has brought his enemy to utter
ruin, for it seems that he sets but little by you, when he keeps still
your Niece against your will, he being your Subject, and one that holds his
Lands of you. Friend, (quoth Iuoryn) you say truly, I shall do by your
counsel, then he made to be cried through the City, that every man should
make him ready, to go with the King before Anfalerne. Huon who was desirous to
have battle, armed him, and took Blanchardyn his good Horse, mounted on him
without any stirrup, and took a great Spear in his hand with a good sharp
head.

Now the same time as Huon was in the Pallaice, king Iuorins daughter was
leaning in a window in her chamber, accompanied with diverse Ladies and Damsels,
she beheld Huon and she said. By Mahound, it is a goodly sight to behold
yonder young man sitting on the horse Blanchardyn, how well he becomes his
armor, a goodlier man cannot be found, nor a more hardy: for the last day he
slew Sorbryn the valiantest knight in all Pagany, and also wanne his good
horse. But yet I am displeased with him, for that when he played with me at the
Chesse, he was not so hardy as once to embrace and kiss me, if he had, I would
have loved him in such wise, that if he had required of me my love, I would not
have refused him, though my father had sworn the contrary an hundred times:
thus the Ladies and Damsels devised together, but Huon set little thereby. Thus
king Iuoryn and his men issued out of the City of Mombrance, and came to the
fields and then road forth toward Anfalerne, and at the last came before the
gates of the city, and there ordered them in battle array, and Huon who had
great desire to attain to renown, came to the gate with his spear in his
hand, and cried alowd to them that were on the walls, and said. Where is
Galaffer your Lord? go and show him, that he come and Just against him that
has slain his Nephew, and that I will serve him in like sort if I may meet
with him in Battle, or else he shall deliver to me the fair Escleremond.

Galaffer was near by, and heard what Huon said, and knew well that it was he
by reason of the horse Blanchardyn, whereof he was right sorrowful, and said to
Gerames. Friend, I shall show you here him that has done me all this ill, now I
shall see if ye will keep promise with me. Sir quoth Gerames, take no care,
for by the faith that I owe to God, I shall render to you both the horse and
the man, to do with them at your pleasure. Then Gerames issued out all armed,
well horsed, and took a good spear in his hand, he was a goodly knight of
his age, puissant of body, and in his time greatly redoubted, and when he was
on his horse, he stretched himself in his saddle in such wise, that his
stirrops stretched out a long handful or more, he was greatly praised of the
Paynims that saw him, and then the Admiral Galaffer commanded every man to be
armed, and he himself was armed richly. Then the gate was opened, and Gerames
was the first that issued out with his company, when he was without the city,
he struck his horse with his spurs, so that he was a great space before all
his company, with his spear in his hand and his shield about his neck, and
his white beard hanging down on his breast under his helmet. Now when Huon on
the other part saw Gerames coming, he spurred Blanchardyn, and came against
Gerames, and so they met together without any word speaking, and struck each
other on their sheeldes, so that all was broken, but their armor was so good
that they took no hurt, but their spears brake to their hands, and the
shiuers flew up into the air, and the strokes were so rude, that both the
knights and horses fell to the earth, but they arose again, and gave each
other great strokes.

Gerames who was expert in deeds of arms, took his sword with both his
hands, and gave Huon such a stroke on the helmet, that perforce he was feign
to set one of his knees to the earth the stroke was so heavy, and if it had
not been by the grace of God, he had been slain, and Huon was so astonished
with the stroke, that he had much adoo to recover, but said: Ah good Lord
succor me, and grant me that before I die I may see the fair Escleremond.
These words he spoke openly, for he thought that Gerames had not understood
him, for he little thought that it had been Gerames yt fought with him, the^ he
came to Gerames with his sword in his hand to have been revenged, for he never
before received such a stroke as Gerames had given him. But Gerames understood
Huon by his words and knew him, and therewith cast down his sword to the earth,
and had such sorrow that he could not speak a word. When Huon saw that, he
maruayled greatly why he cast his sword to the earth, and then Huon would not
touch him, but said. Paynim, what is thy mind to do? will thou have peace or
else fight with me? Ah sir quoth Gerames, come forth and strike of my head,
for well I have deserved it seeing I have stricken you so rudely, but I knew
you not, whereof I am very sorry. When Huon heard him speak, anon he knew well
that it was Gerames, whereof he had great joy in his heart for finding of him.
The Paynims that regarded them, had great marvel what thing the two
Champions meant or thought to do. Sir quoth Gerames, it behooves us shortly to
determine our business, for I see on all parts Paynims assemble together to
behold us, I shall show you what is best for us two to do, leap you upon
your horse, and I shall leap on mine, then I shall take you, and lead you
perforce as my prisoner to the City of Anfalerne, and there shall ye see your
Love Escleremond, who will have great joy with your coming, and she will tell
you other news. Friend quoth Huon, I shall do as ye devise, then they leapt
on their horses, and Gerames came to Huon and laid hand on him, as though he
took him Prisoner, and so led him toward the city of Anfalerne, and his
company followed him, and when king Iuoryn saw how Gerames had led away Huon
as Prisoner, he began to cry and said: On forth ye Sarazins, how suffer you
this young man to be led away as a Prisoner to ye city of Anfalerne? I shall
never have joy at my heart if ye suffer him thus to be led away.

Then the Sarazins dashed into the preasse to have rescued Huon, and on the
other part the Admiral Galaffer came and met Gerames and Huon, and then
Gerames said to him: Sir, go and fight with your enemies, behold here the
young man that slew your Nephew Sorbryn, I shall lead him into the city and
set him in sure prison, and then I shall shortly return again to you to
fight against king Iuoryn. Friend quoth Galaffer, I require you so to do, and
as soon as ye have set him in prison return again. Gerames departed from
the Admiral, and went to the city with Huon and his xiij. companions with
him, when they were entered into the City, they lifted up the bridges and
closed the gates, in the City there was no man of war, for all were in the
field with the Admiral against king Iuoryn, there were none but women,
children and old folks, and when that Gerames and Huon saw how they were
strong enough for them in the City, they went into the streets and cried
Saint Dennis, and slew all that they met as well old men, as women and children,
so that within a short space they had clean won the town. Many Paynims fled
and leapt into the dikes, and brake necks, arms, and legs, then they went
into the Pallaice, and there they found the fair Escleremond, and when Huon
saw her, he did of his helmet, and ran and embraced her, and when the Lady
saw that it was Huon, the joy that she had was so great that it was marvel
to see it, there was such joy at their meeting that it cannot be recounted.
Huon and the Lady embraced and kissed each other many times, and she said. Ah
Huon, ye be right heartily welcome, for I thought that I should never have seen
you more. Lady quoth Huon, I ought greatly to love and cherish you, and I am
right joyful that it has pleased God that I have now found you in good health
and prosperity, for a more truer man than ye be there is none living.

When all the company had made their salutations one to another, they went to
dinner and were richly served, for there was great plenty in the city, and
the Sarazins were without the City, whereas they fought and slew each other,
there was such slaying on both parts, that the fields were covered with dead
men and fore wounded, many a horse ran about the field and their Masters lying
dead, these two Kings fought one against the other puissance against
puissance, and two Sarazins that were escaped out of the City of Anfalerne,
came to the Admiral Galaffer and said. Ah Sir, your City is lost by the
Frenchmen, who be entered into it, there is neither man nor woman therein but
they are all slain, the old knight that came to you and his xiij. companions
be all servants to the young man that slew your Nephew, when the two Frenchmen
fought one with another, they took together acquaintance, and they be all
subjects to the young man that was with king Iuoryn, and it is he that slew the
Admiral Gaudise, and discomfited the giant Agrapart, we knew him well when he
entered into the city, we would have showed you thereof, but we durst not
until ye were returned from the battle. Now they be in your Pallaice which
pleases them, for there is neither man nor child living, but all are slain
except some xxx. Ladies and Damsels, who were with her that should be your
wife, and they be put out of the City, ye may see them sitting without the
gate pitiously weeping.

When the Admiral Galaffer heard that, he was heavy and sorrowful, and said to
his men that were about him. Sirs, I pray you hastily give me some council
what I shall do, for it is needful. Sir quoth they, it is now of necessity
that ye go to king Iuoryn, and kneel down at his foot, and pray him to
have mercy upon you, other council as now we cannot give you. Sirs quoth
Galaffer, I shall do as ye have said, then the Admiral Galaffer with his
sword in his hand went through the preasse, and came to king Iuoryn, and
alighted from his horse and kneeled down before him, and said. Sir King, I
yield to you my sword, with the which if you please strike of my head, for
well I have deserved it. But Sir I pray you for the love of Mahound have mercy
of me, I offer to make you such amends as you and your Lords shall judge, so
that ye will aid me to take the Frenchmen that be in my City, and have taken
away my wife your Niece Escleremond. Sir, the young man that ye so loved, who
came but lately to your Court with a Minstrell, is the same Frenchman that slew
your brother the Admiral Gaudise, these tidings I have heard by two
messengers that knew him in your Court, and now there are with him xiij. other
Frenchmen, whom I had retained with me to maintain my war, but they be al
subjects to the young man, and now all xiii. be in my palace, and my wife with
them.

Chap. LIX.
How Iuoryn caused Mouflet the old Minstrell, to be brought to the gibet to
have been hanged, and how he was rescued by Huon.

IVORIN heard Galaffer, and said, Alas, I was unhappy that I knew not this
young man that had slain my brother, if I had, it should dearly have been
bought. Therefore Sir Galaffer, cause your men to withdraw from the battle,
and I shall withdraw mine, and I shall know of my Barons what counsel they
will give me. Then both parties blew the retrait, and King Iuoryn said to his
Lords. Sirs, what counsel will ye give me, as touching the Admiral
Galaffer? Sir (quoth they) give him again his lands, since he asks mercy,
if he has done ill, he offers to make amends. Then Iuoryn called Galaffer,
and said: Sir Admiral, I render again to you all your lands, and pardon you
of all mine ill will, and beside that, I shall help you to destroy the
Frenchmen that are in your city of Anfalerne. Then Galaffer kneeled down, and
thanked King Iuoryn for the courtesy that he showed him and offered to do,
and so would have kissed his feet, but Iuoryn would not suffer him, but lift
him up.

Thus these two kings agreed together, and swear together, to have the death of
Huon and his knights. Then Huon and his company abandoned up the city of
Anfalerne, because he had so few men to keep it, and so kept the Castle, the
which was strong enough, standing on a rock on the sea side, it was indeed
impregnable, so it were well victualled, at the corner of the Castle there was
a strong tower, and underneath it was the Port whereas ships came to their
anchor. When Iuoryn and Galaffer saw that the town was given up by the
Frenchmen, they entered into it with all their great puissance, and lodged
about in the town, but in taking of their lodgings, Huon and Gerames, and such
as were with them, shot out darts, and quarrelled in such wise, that there was
not so hardy a paynim that durst peer before the Castle, if he did, he was
slain or hurt. When Iuoryn and Galaffer saw the dealing of the Frenchmen, they
raised up a gibbet before the Castle, thereby to make the Frenchmen afraid,
and then they took Mouflet the Minstrell, and bound his hands behind him so
sore, that the blood came out at the nails, then they hanged his violl about
his neck, and then he was brought before Iuoryn, who said to him. A thou false
traitor, ill have thou remembered the goodness that my brother Gaudise has
done to thee, when he that slew him, thou have brought into my Court, thereby
to do me despite. But I shall neither eat nor drink, till thou have thy
desert, and that is to be hanged.

Alas quoth Mouflet, never in all my life have I done or thought any treason,
nor knew not that, that I brought to your Court, him that slew your brother the
Admiral Gaudys, who was my Lord and Master, therefore Sir, great sin it were
for you to put me to death, for that I am not guilty of. Thou lie false
traitor (quoth Iuoryn) and so commanded a thirty men to lead him to the
gallows, and when they were come thither, they caused the minstrell to mount
up on the ladder. The Frenchmen in the Castle had great marvel who it should
be that they would hang up there: and when the minstrell was above on the
ladder, he turned him toward the Castle, and cried with an high voice: Ah
Huon, how will ye suffer me here to die? yet remember the goodness that I have
done to you, and the courtesy that I did, when ye came all naked, I gave you
then clothing, and meat and drink, and I abandoned to you all that I had,
ill it has been employed without ye reward me better. When Huon heard the
Minstrell, he knew well that it was Mouflet who had been his master, then he
said to his company. Sirs, I require you arm you quickly, for the Paynims
here without have reared up a gybet, whereon they will hang a Minstrell, who
has done me great pleasure, I would be right sorry if he should have any ill.

Then Gerames and al his companions made them ready, and issued out of the
Castle with Huon, by a secret posterne, so that they that were about the gibet
were not aware of of them, till Huon and his company was among them. Huon
ran at him that should have hanged the minstrell, and struck him with his
spear clean through, and so he fell down dead, and then Huon took down
the Minstrell, and made him to fly away to the posterne, and his violl about
his neck, he that had seen him fly away, could not have kept himself from
laughing, for he ran so fast, that he seemed to be no old man, but rather of
the age of thirty year, and Huon and Gerames and his company, slew and beat
down all the thirty Paynimes, so that none escaped the death. When King
Iuoryn and Galaffer perceived that there was much ado about the gibet, they
said, Sirs, the Frenchmen are come out of the Castle, go and look that ye do
so much, that none of the^ enter again. Then Paynims on every part issued out
of their lodgings, and ran thither he that best might, without keeping of
any good order, and Huon and Gerames when they saw them coming, they made
semblance to return to ye city a soft pace, and the Paynims came after them
crying and howling like dogs, and when they approached near, Huon suddenly
turned, and with his spear he met so the first, that he ran him clean
through the body with his spear, so that he fell down dead, and Gerames and
his company struck so among the paynims, that the place ran like a river of
blood of the dead Paynims: Huon struck with his sword with both his hands, he
struck none with a full stroke, but that he claue the head to the teeth, but
finally, the force of the paynims was so great, that at length they could not
abide it.

Then Huon, who was expert in deeds of arms, perceived that it was time to
depart, he called his men together, and went toward the posterne, the which
with much pain they got in thereat, and so they entered in all xiii. companions,
but yet they were so hasted and pursued, that Garyn of Saint Omer abode
without, and defended himself valiantly: but at last he was slain by the
Paynims, then Huon was right sorrowful, when he saw that Garyn was not
entered into the Castle, and pitiously complained for him, and said. A dear
cousin, who for the love of me have left your wife and children, and land, and
signories, I am sorry of your death. Sir, quoth Gerames, leave your sorrow, and
think to make good cheer, and to keep well our fortres, our Lord God has
always aided you, and shall do through his grace, go we up and make good
cheer, for with this sorrow we can win nothing.

Then when they came into the Palace, they met with Escleremond, and when Huon
saw her, he said: My fair Love, this day have I lost one of my good friends,
whereof I am sorrowful. Sir, quoth she, I am sorry thereof, but that thing
that cannot be recovered, must be left, we be all made to die, God will have
mercy on his soul, with such like word Escleremond and Gerames appeased Huon,
and when they were in the hall, they unarmed them, and went to dinner, and
afterward they looked out at the windows, to see the countenance of the
Paynims: then Gerames said to the Minstrell. Mouflet my friend, I pray thee
take thy violl, and give us a song to make us merry, then the Minstrell took
his Instrument, and gave them a most sweet song, the which was so melodious
for to hear, that they all believed that they had been in Paradise, and they
all made exceeding great joy, with such a cheerful noise, that the Paynims
that were without, did hear it, and said among themselves. Ah these Frenchmen
are people to be feared and doubted, and they were right sorrowful for the men
that they had lost by the prowess of these Fourteen persons.

Chap. LX.
How the good Provost Guyer, Brother to Gerames, arrived at the Port of
Anfalerne.

WHen that King Iuoryn saw and knew the great loss that he had received,
he was right sorrowful, and then the Admiral Galaffer said. Sir, for the
honor of Mahound be not so sore troubled, for a thing the which you shall
well atchieue and bring to an end, you know well these Frenchmen are as a
bird being in a Cage, for they cannot escape neither by land nor by water, and
they are without hope of any rescue: to day they were Fourteen, and now they
be but Thirteen, you are lodged in a good Town, and have the feelds and the
Sea at your pleasure, it is not possible for them to escape, they have neither
Ship nor Galley to fly in: Therefore Sir, appease your self, suffer them to
waste their victuals.

By these words somewhat King Iuoryn was appeased, and the Frenchmen in the
Castle devised together, and Huon said unto Gerames. Friend, you see well we
be here enclosed, and we can neither depart by Land nor by Sea, nor we look
for no succor of any man living, and here before us are lodged Paynims who
have sworn our deaths. Sir, (quoth Gerames) true it is, but I hope in our Lord
God that he will send us some good adventure, and if it please you, let us two
go down and sport us by the water side, near to the Port until night come. I
am content, (quoth Huon) we may go thither and not be seen by the Paynims,
for thither might come Ship or Galley without danger of the Town: thither
they went, and when it was near hand night, Huon looked into the Sea, and saw
a Ship coming thether-ward. Then Huon said unto Gerames: Friend* behold yonder
comes a Ship with full sail, they will arrive at this Port, they be
Christian men I see well by the tokens that the Ship does bear, for upon the
Mast I see a red cross. Sir, (quoth Gerames) by all that I can see the ship
is of France, and therefore (as I have said to you before) God will send us
some good adventure, and therewith by fear of the Tempest, the Ship came
into the Haven and cast their anchors.

Then Huon approached to the Ship, and demanded for the Patron, and for the
master of them that were in the ship, then the Mariners regarded the place
whereas they were, and they knew plainly by the great Tower, that they were in
the Port of Anfalerne, whereof they had great fear, and said one to another.
Ah good Lord God help us, for we see well we are but dead, seeing we be
arrived here in this Port, for we know well, that the Lord of this place is
the most cruellest Paynim between this and the red Sea. Thus they complained
them one to another, and Huon (who was near them) understood them well, and
said. Sirs, have ye no doubt of death, for ye are arrived at a good Port: I
require you to show me from whence you come, and what ye be? and they
answered and said. Sir, seeing you can speak French we shall show you, so
that you will assure our lives. Sirs, (quoth Huon) have no fear of death, nor
of any hurt that ye shall have, for we that have this place in keeping, are
Frenchmen: therefore show us hardly your entents? Sir, (quoth they) since you
would know what we be, we are all borne in the Country of France, and one
of us is of Saint Omers, and some of the City of Paris, and of diverse other
parts of the Realm of France. Friends, (quoth Huon) I pray you show me, if
there be any among you borne in the City of Bourdeaux. Sir, (quoth one of
them) here is one in this ship that was borne in Bourdeaux, an old ancient
man, I think he be of an hundred years of age, his name is Guyer, and we are
going on pilgrimage for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, to visit the holy
Sepulcher, but fortune by force of Tempest of ye Sea has caused us to arrive
here, and this Tempest has endured these three days and three nights passed,
whereby we be so weary and so sore travailed, that we can do no more.
Friend, (quoth Huon) I pray you show him forth, that you speak of.

Then the Patron of the Ship commanded, that the old man of Bourdeaux should
come forth, then Guyer the Provost came to Huon and said. Sir, behold me here,
what pleases it you to say unto me? When Huon saw him, he knew incontinent
that it was Guyer the Provost, and said: Friend, I require you show me where
you were borne? and what has moved you to come hither, seeing the great age
that you be of? and to show me what is your name? Sir, (quoth he) I shall show
you the truth, I had a Lord whom I loved entirely, he was Son to Duke Seuin
of Bourdeaux, and he was called Huon, and it fell so out, that after the death
of his Father about a Seven years, King Charlemaine sent for him to do his
homage to receive his Land of him, the young man by the commandment of his
Mother, he and his brother Gerard with him took their way toward Paris, and
by the way King Charlemaines Son called Charlot, was lying in a wood by the
counsel of certain Traitors, and there lay in a weight to have slain Huon
and his Brother Gerard, but the case fell otherwise, for Huon slew Charlot not
knowing who it was, wherefore King Charlemaine banished him out of the Realm
of France, and charged him ere he returned, to go to Babylon to do a Message
to the Admi- Gaudise. But his Brother Gerard abode still at Bourdeaux to keep
the heritage, and then the Duchess his Mother was so full of sorrow, that her
Son was so banished without cause, that she took thereof such a malady,
that she dyed thereof about five years past, and so thereby Gerard is Lord
and Governor of all the Lands, and he is married to the daughter of ye most
cruellest Tirant from thence into Spain, and this Gerard has learned of him
many ill customs, and has left all the good ways that was used in the days
of Duke Seuin and of the Duchess his Mother, and he has raised up in all his
Lands new Tails, and Gables, and Impositions, and chaced and put from him all
noble men, he destroys the Burgesses and Merchants, Widows and Orphelings,
there can no man show you the ill that he has done and does daily, and he
has disenherited me. And on a day the Barons of the Country desired me, that
I would take the pains to go and search as well by land as by water, if I
might find the young Lord Huon who is our rightful Lord, it is now about two
years that I have searched for him in diverse Countries, but I could never
hear one word of him, whereof I am right sorrowful, and to seek him I have
spent all my gould and silver: howbeit, these good Merchants have taken me into
their Ship, and for the love of God, they thought to have brought me into
France, but by fortune we be here arrived at this Port.

Chap. LXI.
How Huon and Gerames, and all their company, with the fair Escleremond,
departed from the Castle of Anfalerne, and sailed thence on the Sea.

WHen Huon understood the Provost Guyer, he said unto Gerames. Sir, come
forth, here I have found your Brother. Then Gerames came to his Brother, and
embraced and kissed him all weping, and said: My dear friend and Brother, you
be right heartily welcome. Ah Brother, (quoth Guyer) now I care not whether I
live or die, seeing I have found you, and if it were so that yet once ere I
dyed I might see my Lord Huon: then I cared not how soon I dyed. Ah dear
Brother, (quoth Gerames) you shall not die so soon, and yet you shall see
Huon, whose presence you so sore desire, it is Huon to whom you have spoken
all this season. Then Huon sore weeping came and embraced Guyer, and said: My
dear Friend, your coming is a joy to my heart, for a more truer Knight cannot
be found. Sir, (quoth Guyer) do you know me? Yea truly, (quoth Huon) and do
you know me? Yea Sir, (quoth Guyer) you are greatly desired in France, and
Brother Gerames, I desire you to show me where you have been since I saw you,
for it is about Forty years since you departed out of France: then Gerames
showed him all his life, and showed at length how he found Huon.

Long they were talking together, whereof they of the Ship were right joyful,
for then they saw well they were arrived at a good Port, and then Huon said to
ye Mariners. Sirs, I pray you make this night no great noise, nor make no
fire, nor show no light, for here before the castle is lodged two Admirals
Paynims, who have swoorne that they will never go hence until they have us at
their pleasure: therefore I counsel that we may escape out of this castle,
we be here about thurteene persons, and with us a noble Lady, wherefore I
require you let us come into your Ship or else we be all lost, and fear not
but you shall be well paid for your labor, ye shall have gold and silver as
much as ye will desire. Sir quoth the Patron, ye need not to speak of any
gold or silver, for this our ship is yours to do therewith at your pleasure.
Sir quoth Huon, I thank you of your courtesy, I pray you and your company
come with me into the castle, and I shall charge your ship with gold and
Silver, and rich jewels and precious stones, that you and all yours shall be rich
for ever, this must be done in have, before the Paynims here without perceive
us, for if they perceive us, we shall never get hence, but incontinent they
will send some of their ships and take this ship.

Sir quoth the Patron, we are ready to obey your commandment, and then the
Patron and xxiiii. Maryners went with Huon into the Castle, and charged all the
treasure that was within the castle, and other riches that Huon and his
company had taken in the town, they bare all into the ship, and vittayles
sufficient, then Huon took Escleremond by the hand all smiling, and said.
Fair Lady, one thing I demand of you, be ye not displeased to leave that
country and land where as ye were borne? Sir quoth she, I have long desired
to see the day that I now do see, therefore well we may thank our Lord God,
that has given us that grace to be set out of the hands of the enemies of the
faith of Christ, wherein we ought to believe, then Huon entered into the ship,
and the fair Escleremond and Gerames and all the other company, so they were
in number within the ship some xxxiiij. persons, and with them was Mouslet the
Minstrell, and when they were all entered into the ship, and the ship charged
with all things necessary, they weyed up their anchors, and hoysed up their
sails, and had so good and fresh a wind, that they were within a while far
from the lands of the two Admiralles Sarazins.

They sailed so long, that ere it was day light, they were passed the coast of
the Roades, and so came by the Isle of Creet: and so by the aid of God and good
wind, they arrived at the Port of Brandis. And so about noone, the Admiral
that lay at siege before the castle of Anfalerne, had gread marvel that they
could see no man stirring within the castle, then a Paynim said to Iuoryn. Sir,
know for troth, that within the castle ye shall find no man, the Frenchmen are
all fled, but we cannot tell how. When the two Admirals heard that, they were
sore troubled, and in have they set forth a Galley and xxx. Paynims therein,
commanding them to go to the Posterne, which they did incontinent, and when
they came there, they found neither man nor woman, but found the Posterne open,
and so they entered into the castle, and so opened the broad gates, and the two
Admirals entered in sore displeased that the Frenchmen were so escaped. Now let
us leave speaking of them, and return to Huon, who was arrived in sauegard at
the Port of Brandis.

Chap. LXII.
How Huon and his company arrived at the Port of Brandis, and from thence went
to Room to the Pope, who wedded together Huon and the fair Escleremond, and
of their departing from thence.

WHen Huon and his company saw how they were arrived at the Port of Brandis,
they issued out of their ship, and deuoustly went to the church of our Lady,
and there gave laud and praise to our Lord God, that had brought them thither
in such sauegard, then they went to Garyn of Saint Omers lodging, when they
came there, the Lady of the house (who was right wise and courteous) came to
Huon and said. Sir, of your coming I am right joyful: but Sir I pray you
where have you left Garyn my Lord and husband? for seeing I see him not with
you, my heart trembles, for fear least he be dead, or else of some great
encumbrance happened unto him. Madame quoth Huon, to hide the troth from you,
cannot cause you to have him again, for it has pleased god that he is
departed out of this world: wherefore I will counsel you as much as ye may
leave dolor and heaviness, for we must all come thereto, and I repute you so
wise, that ye know well that for any sorrow or weeping that ye make, ye cannot
have him again. When the Lady had heard Huon, she fell down in a trance,
more like to be dead then alive, than Huon and his company set her up, and
comforted her as much as they might, then Escleremond took and brought her
into her chamber, and did so much with her fair and sweet words, that somewhat
she appeased her, and then sore weeping she came to Huon, and he said. Madame
appease your self, and pray for him, for we must all pass the same passage.

With these words and such other the Lady was appeased, then they washed and
went to dinner, and after Gerames and other of his company went into the town,
and bought horse and Mules to ride on, and bought rich gowns all in one
livery, there they tarried about viij. days, and on the ix. day they paid the
Patron of the ship in such wise, that he was rich ever after, and every
Mariner had a good reward, whereof they thanked Huon and offered to do him
service. Then Huon and Escleremond with all their company took their leave of
their hostess, whom they left sore weeping, and at their departing Huon gave
her a rich gift, whereof she humbly thanked him, and when they were all ready
and their baggage trussed up, they depatred and took the way toward Room
with great joy and gladness: whosoever was joyful, Guyer the Provost was
joyful in two manners, one in that he had found his Lord Huon, and the other
for that he had found his brother Gerames, and also because that his Lord Huon,
had fulfilled the Message that King Charlemaine had charged him to do to the
Admiral Gaudise.

So long they rode together, that in a morning they came to Room, and alighted
at their lodging, then they all together went to hear divine service, and as
they issued out of the Church, they met a servant of the Popes, then Huon
demanded of him in what estate the Pope was in. Sir quoth the Squier, he is
ready to hear service, then Huon and his company leapt on their horses, and
road to the Popes Pallaice and their alighted, and then Huon held the fair
Escleremond by the hand, and the good Provost Guyer held his brother Gerames by
the hand, and so all the other two and two together, then they found ye Pope
sitting in his throne devising with his Cardinals, then Huon approached and
saluted him humbly. When the Pope beheld Huon, he knew him incontinent, and
arose up and came to him and embraced and kissed his cheek, and said. Fair
son Huon ye be welcome, I pray you show me how is it with you, and show me
of your adventures? Sir quoth Huon, I have endured many evils and troubles ynow
and all these that are come with me, but (thanked be our Lord god) it is so
now, that I have brought with me, the beard and great teeth of the Admiral
Gaudise, and have also brought his Daughter who is here present, and Sir I
require you to give her Christendom, and then I will wed her to my wife. Huon
quoth the Pope, all this pleases me right well to do, and the rather seeing
it is your pleasure, and I desire you to tarry here with me this night. Sir
quoth Huon, your pleasure shall be mine.

Thus Huon and his company tarried with the Pope all that night, whereas they
made great joy, and on the nexts morning a Font was made ready, wherein the
fair Escleremond was christened without changing of her name, and also there
was christened Mouslet the Minstrell, and he was called Garyn, and when the
Sacrament of Baptism was finished, the Pope himself said service, first he
confessed Huon, and assoyled him of all his faults, then he wedded him to
Escleremond, and when divine service was ended, then they went all with the
Pope to his Pallaice, and there was made the solempnities of the Marriage, but
to show the manner of their service, with the meats and drinks, and yt
apparel of the Brides, it would be ouer-tedious to rehearse it. But one thing
I dare well say, that there had not been seen of a long time before such a
glorious and rich seast, for the Pope did as much for them as though they had
been his own Brother and Sister, the melody of the Minstrels that played was
so sweet and delectable, that every man was satisfied with the hearing thereof,
and specially it was marvel to hear Garyn the new christened Minstrell to
play, he played so sweetlye on his vyoll, that it was geat joy to hear it.

Thus there was great joy in the Popes Pallaice, and even as they were well
served at dinner, so it was better at supper, and at night every man withdrew
himself, and the new Brydes lay together in great pleasure all that night, and
in ye morning they arose and heard service, and then dined, and then they
trussed up al their Baggage and charged their Summers, Mules, and Mullets, and
sadled their horses, and then Huon and Escleremond went and took their leave
of the Pope, and thanked him for the honor and great courtesy that he had
showed them. Sir quoth the Pope, if it would please you to tarry longer here
with me, my goods and my house should be at your commaundment. Sir quoth Huon,
I cannot render sufficient thanks to your Holiness for the good that ye have
done to us: But Sir, longer I cannot tarry, for the great desire that I have
to accomplish the rest of my business, therefore Sir, I recommend you to our
Lord God. The Pope kissed Huon, and took Escleremond by the hand: thus they
took their leave, and at their departing, the Pope sent to them a Somer
charged with gold, and clothes of silk, and thus they departed from Rome.

Chap. LXIII.
How Huon and his company arrived at the Abbey of Mauryse, whereas he was
received by the Abbot and Covent, with great reverence.

AFter that Huon had taken leave of the Pope, he and his company departed, and
the fair Escleremond was mounted on a fair mule, and so long they rode, till
they might see ye town of Burdeux. When Huon saw it, he lift up his hands to
the heavens, thanking God of his grace, that he had brought him thither in
sauegard, and then he said to Escleremond. Fair Lady, yonder you may see the
City and Country whereof ye shall be Lady and Duches, though it has been
ere this time a Realm. Sir (quoth Guyer the Provost) it is good ye regard
wisely your business, the which touches you right near, and Sir, if you will
do after my counsel, send first to an Abbey that is here by, called the Abbey
of Maurise, the Abbot is a notable Clarke, let him know of your coming, and
that ye will dine with him. Sir (quoth Huon) your counsel is to be believed:
and then Huon sent to the Abbot, certifying him of his coming.

When the Abbot knew of Huons coming, he was right joyful, for he loved
intierly Huon, wherefore he sore desired the sight of him, then he called all
his Covent, and charged them in the virtue of obedience, to make them selves
ready to receive Huon, the rightful Inheritour to the country of Bourdeaux,
though the kings of France be our founders. But as to our good neighbor we
will do this reverence, for honor is due to them that deserve it. Then the
Covent as they were commanded, ordered themselves, and so went out of the Abbey
to meet Huon, who when he saw them, he alighted on foot, and also
Escleremond and Gerames and all the other, thus the Abbot and his Covent in
rich cluthes seeming, met with Huon, when Huon was near to the Abbot he was
right joyful, and the Abbot who anon knew Huon, came to him right humbly and
said. Sir Duke of Bourdeux, thanked be god that ye are come home, for your
presence has long been desired, then they embraced each other with weeping
tears for joy, then the Abbot welcomed the Provost Guyer and all the other:
But he knew not Gerames, for for if he had, he would have made him great
feasting.

Chap. LXIIII.
How the good Abbot sent word to Duke Gerard of Bourdeaux, how his brother Huon
was in the Abbey of Maurise.

THVS the Abbot with his Covent brought Huon to the Abbey of Maurise, and Huon
and Escleremond on foot followed them, and when he came into the church, Huon
offered great gifts, and after their offerings and prayers made, they went
into the hall, and went to dinner: how well they were learned, it need not to
be rehearsed, they had every thing that needed, the Abbot sat by Huon and
said. Sir, I pray you show me how ye have done, and how ye have ended your
message, that ye were charged to do by King Charlemaine. Sir quoth Huon,
thanked be our Lord God, I have accomplished and done all that I was commanded
to do, for I have brought with me the Beard and the four great Teeth of the
Admiral Gaudise, and also I have brought with me his Daughter the fair
Escleremond, whom I have wedded in the city of Room* and to morrow by the
grace of God I will depart to go to King Charlemaine my sovereign Lord. Sir
quoth the Abbot, of that I am right joyful, but if it were your pleasure, I
would send to certefie your coming to Gerard your Brother, that he might see
you before ye depart hence. Sir quoth Huon, I am content that ye send for him.

Then the Abbot commanded a Squier of his to go for Duke Gerard, and so he
went and rested not, till he came to Burdeux before Duke Gerard, and said. Sir,
if it be your pleasure to come to the Abbey of Saint Maurise, there shall ye
find your brother Huon,, who is come lately from beyond the sea: when Duke
Gerard heard certainly, how his brother Huon was come to the Abbey of Saint
Maurise, he was so overcome with ire and displeasure, that his visage became
like a flame of fire, and said to the messenger: Go and return, and say to my
brother Huon, that I will incontinent come and visit him. Sir (quoth he) I
shall show him of your coming, and so departed, and came again to the Abbey,
and showed Huon what his brother Gerard had said. And when Duke Gerard saw that
the messenger was departed he was sorrowful and pensive, and called to him his
father in law, his wives father, who was named Gibouars, the most falsest
traitor that was from the East to the West, and Gerard said to him: Sir, I
pray you give me counsel in that I have to do, for all the devils in hell
have brought my Brother Huon from the parts beyond the Sea, and he is now
present in the Abbey of Saint Maurise, the Abbot there has sent me word
thereof, and that I should come thither to speak with him, for as to morrow he
would depart to go to Paris to the king, so that when he is come thither, he
will do so much that all his land shall be rendered to him, and that I shall have
never a foot of land left me, but that which ye have given me with my wife
your Daughter, wherefore dear Father in law, I pray you in this great matter
to council and aid me, or else I am but lost. Fair Son quoth Gibouars,
dismay you nothing, for without my wit do fail me, I think to play him a
turn, that it had been better for him to have tarried where he was, than to
have come hither to claim my land.

Chap. LXV.
How Gybouars of Beam and Gerard practiced Huons death, and how the traitor
Gerard came to see his brother Huon, who with great joy received him.

THus as ye have heard, these two traitors conspired, and then Gybouars said
to Gerard. Fair son, go ye your way to your brother Huon, and take with you
but one Squier, and when you come there, make to him all the cheer you can,
and show him as great love as ye can do, and humble your self to him, to the
intent that he take in you no suspicion. But when the morning comes, have him
to depart, and when ye come with him near such a little wood, find some
rigorous words to him, and make as though ye were displeased with him, and I
shall be ready in that same little wood ambashed, and xl. men of arms with
me. And when I see that words are between you, I shall issue out and slay al
those that come with him, so that none shall escape alive, and then take your
brother Huon, and cast him into prison, in one of the Towers of your Pallaice
in Bourdeaux, and there miserably he shall end his days, and then in haste ye
shall ride to Paris. But ere ye go to Paris, ye shall take from him the
Admiralles beard and great teeth, and then ye shall show to the King, how Huon
your brother is returned, without bringing either beard or teeth of the
Admiral Gaudys, and how for that cause you have put him in prison. The King
will believe you, for he hates Huon greatly, because of the death of his son
Charlot, whom he slew: for the hate that the King has to him in his heart,
shall never depart from him, and therefore son, when you be with your
brother, demand of him, if he have the Admirals beard and teeth or not, and
whether he do bear them himself, or who else, for if he have them not, he
shall never have peace with the King, but he will cause him to be slain of an
evil death, either hanged or drawn, for your brother laid hostage, promising
that he would never return, without he brought with him the Admiral Gaudys
beard and great teeth, and also he promised, that he would never enter into his
heritage, till he had spoken with the King, and that was enjoined him on pain
of death.

Thus as ye have heard, these two Traitors devised and concluded the death of
Huon. Gerard (quoth Gibouars) think well on your business, and I shall go
and assemble together forty of my most secret servants, and in other places
where I can get them, to furnish this enterprise. Sir (quoth Gerard) I shall
go to the Abbey to see my brother, when it is a little near to night. So when
the hour came, the false Traitor departed from Bourdeaux, and with him but one
Squier, and so they rode till they came to the Abbey, and there alighted, and
when he perceived his brother Huon, he embraced and kissed him with such a
kiss as Judas kissed Christ.

When Huon saw his brother Gerard come with such humility, the water fell from
his eyes with kindness, and embraced him and kissed him, and said. Right dear
brother, I have great joy to see you, I pray you show me how ye have done since
my departure? Sir (quoth Gerard) right well now I see you in good health.
Brother (quoth Huon) I have great marvel that ye be thus come alone without
company. Sir (quoth Gerard) I did it for the more humility, because I know not
how ye shall speed with the king, nor whether ye shall have again your land,
or no, if God will that ye shall have it, I shall assemble all the Barons of the
court to receive you, and to make you cheer according, this Sir I shall do
till you return, for often times these great Princes are mutable, and lightly
believe, for this cause Sir, I am secretly come to you. Brother, (quoth Huon)
your advise is good, I am content that you thus do, and to morrow betimes I
will depart toward Paris; then these two Brethren took each other by the hand
making great joy. Brother, (quoth Gerard) I am right joyous when I see you thus
returned in health and prosperity, have you accomplished the Message that
King Charles charged you withal? Brother, (quoth Huon) know for troth, that I
have the beard and great teeth of the Admiral Gaudise, and beside that, I have
brought with me his Daughter the fair Escleremond, whom I have taken to my
wife, and wedded her in the City of Rome, and also I have here with me
thirty Summers charged with gould and silver, and rich Jewels garnished with
pecious stones, whereof the half part shall be yours, and if I should show
thee the pains, travails, and pouerties that I have endured since I saw you
last, it would be ouer-long to rehearse.

Sir, (quoth Gerard) I believe you well, but Sir, I pray you show me by what
means or aid you did bring your Enterprise to an end? Brother, (quoth Huon) it
was by a king of the Fayrie called Oberon, who did me such succor and aid,
that I came to my purpose, and struck off the Admirals head and so took his
beard and great teeth. Brother, (quoth Gerard) and how do you keep them, and
where? Brother, (quoth Huon) behold here Gerames, who has them in his side,
King Oberon did set them there by the Fayrie, and by the will of God. Sir,
(quoth he) which is Gerames? Brother, (quoth Huon) here you may see him
before you, he with the great hoarie beard. Sir, (quoth Gerard) of what Land is
he of? He is of the best Friends that I have, (quoth Huon) and he is Brother
to the good Provost Guyer, you never heard speak of a truer nor more noble
man, I found him in a wood, whereas he had dwelt about Forty years in
penance, God aided me greatly when I found him, for if he had not been, I
could not have returned hither, much pain and poverty he has endured for my
sake, and now Brother, I pray you show me how ye have done since I departed
from you? it has been showed me that ye are very richly married, I pray you
where was your wife borne, and of what lineage is she of. Sir (quoth Gerard)
she is daughter to Gybouars of Cecyle, who is a great Lord and Signior. Brother
(quoth Huon) I am sorry that ye have taken such aliance, for I know him for
the most vile traitor that can be found, and the most vntruest. Sir (quoth
Gerard) ye do ill to say so, for I take him for no such person.

Chap. LXVI.
How these two Brethren departed from the Abbey about midnight, and how the
Traitor Gerard began to fall at rude words with Huon, when they approached near
the wood whereas Gibouars lay in ambush.

THus as these two brethren devised of Gibouars, the Abbot came to them, and
demanded of Huon, if it were his pleasure to go to supper. Sir (quoth Huon)
when it please you, I and my brother shall be ready. The fair Escleremond,
who was weary of travail, was in her chamber apart, and diverse other of her
company with her, whereas she supped and lay that night. Huon was somewhat
troubled, because his brother had taken to his wife the daughter of a Traitor,
thus they washed, and sat them down to supper, where they were richly served:
and at another table sat the Provost Guyer and Gerames his brother, and diverse
other Barons.

Gerard beheld the Provost, whom he utterly hated, because he went to seek
for Huon. He swear to him self, that if he might once go out of the Abbey,
that he should be the first that should loose his life, and he did eat and
drink but little for thinking to accomplish his ill Enterprise. When they had
supped, they aroase from the board, and their bedds were made ready. Then Huon
called the Abbot apart, and said: Sir, I have brought hither with me great
riches, I will leave it here with you to keep until my return, and I pray
you for any manner of thing that may fall, deliver it unto no man living, but
all only to my self, and if God give me the grace to return, your part shall
be therein. Sir, (quoth the Abbot) all that you take me to keep shall be
safely kept to your behoof, and I shall do so that you shall be content:
then he went to bed and Gerard with him, where Gerard said, Brother if you
think it good I shall call you up betimes, for it seems that to morrow the
day will be hot. Brother, (quoth Huon) I am content.

Thus they lay together in one bed, but the Traitor Gerard had no list to
sleep, for the great desire that he had to be revenged of his Brother, who
never did him any trespass, but alas why did not Huon know his intent? if he
had, the matter had not gone so to pass. At last the hour came that the
Cocks began to crow, then Gerard awooke Huon, and said: Brother, it were good
for us to arise for anon it will be day, it is good to ride in the cool, but
the ill Traitor, his thought was otherwise. When Huon heard his Brother, he
rose up, and every man arose up and made them ready, Sir quoth Gerames, how is
it that ye be so hasty to depart from hence? I pray you let me sleep a
little longer. Sir quoth Gerard, that is ill said, for he that has business
to do that touches him near, ought not to sleep nor rest until his
business be finished. By my troth quoth Huon, my Brother says troth, for I
have a great desire to speak with King Charlemaine, then every man trussed up
their things and took their horses, and the fair Escleremond was ready and
mounted on a stately mule, and so they all took their leaves of the Abbot, who
was right sorrowful that they would depart so early. Then the gates were
opened, and so departed Fourteen in a company, and Escleremond made the
Fifteen, and Gerard rode before to lead them the right way that he would have
them to ride, and Escleremond being very sumptuously apparelled rode very
soberly, and she came to Huon and said. Sir, I cannot tell what ayleth me, but
my heart is so sore troubled, that all my body trembles. Madame quoth Huon,
be not dismayed, nor have any fear, for ye be in a good country, where by the
grace of god, ye shall be served like a Princess and Lady of the country,
and with those words speaking, her Mule stumbled on the one foot before, so
that she had near hand a great fall, then Huon approached to her, and took
the bridle of the Mule in his hand and said, Fair Lady have ye any hurt? No
Sir (quoth she) but I had almost fallen.

By my faith quoth Gerames, we have done very ill, for that we departed from
the Abbey before day light. Sirs quoth Gerard, I never saw men so fearful for
so small a cause. Sir quoth Gerames, I know not why ye speak it, but if I
might council ye, we would not go one foot farther, but return again to
the Abbey till day light. By god quoth Gerard, it were great folly to return
again now for the stumbling of a Mule, I never saw men so fearful, let us
ride forth and make good cheer, I see the day begins to appear. So they
road forth until they came to a cross, whereas there was four ways, this
was about a League from the Abbey. Then Huon rested and said: Lo, here is the
border of the Territory of the Abbey of Saint Maurise, and this one way is to
Bourdeaux, the which way I will not ride, for so I have promised to King
Charlemaine, to whom I never yet falsed my faith, if I did, it should be the
cause that I might loose my Signiorie, and this other way goes to Rome, and
this other way before us is ye right way into France, the which way I will ride
and none other. So they road forth and all their company, and within a while
they were near to the wood, within a bow shoot whereas the Traitor Gybouars
lay in ambushment.

Now when Gerard saw his hour and time to speak unto his Brother Huon, he
said: Brother I see you are in mind to go into France unto King Charlemaine,
to have your Lands and Signories, the which I am sure you shall have, it is a
long space that I have kept it and maintained the Country in peace and rest,
and good justice, and have won but little, nor have had but small profit,
not the value of one penny, and I am married to a noble Lady, Daughter to a
great Lord, and it troubles my heart sore when you repute him for a Traitor,
if he knew it by likelihood it might turn you to great folly, for we
believed that you should never have returned, therefore now I may say that I
am not worth a penny: Therefore I would know of you, how you would aid me,
and what part I shall have at your return out of France? Brother, (quoth
Huon) I have great marvel of this that you say, you know well that in the
Abbey of Saint Maurise I have left Twenty Summers charged with fine gould, and
I have said unto you, that your part shall be therein as much as mine, nor I
shall have no penny but that one half is yours. Brother, (quoth Gerard) all
this suffizeth not to me, for I would have part of the Signorie to maintain
mine estate. When Huon understood his Brother, his blood roase into his face,
for he saw well his Brother searched all that he could to fall at debate with
him, and Gerames who was sage and wise, perceived anon that the matter was
like to go evil, and said unto Huon. Sir, grant to Gerard your Brother his
demand, you are both young enough to conquer Lands. Gerames, (quoth Huon) I
am content that he shall have Bourdeaux or Gerone, let him take which he list.
Brother, (quoth Huon) show which of these two you will have, and I will have
the other.

Chap. LXVII.
How these Traitors slew all Huons Company, except Gerames, and Escleremond,
and Huon himself, the which all three were fast bound hands and feet and
blindfold, and so brought unto Bourdeaux and were put in prison.

WHen the false Traitor Gerard saw and understood his Brother, how he did
grant him his desire, and saw how that in no wise he would strive with him:
he was therewith so displeased that he was near hand in a rage, then he came
to the Provost Guyer, and said. Guyer, Guyer, false Traitor, by thee and by
thy purchase I am like to loose all my Signorie, but by the faith that I owe
unto him that created me, before I die I shall strike off thy head, nor I
shall not let to do it for any person, and therewith when he saw his time, he
cried his word and token, and Gybouars who was in the wood with Forty men
armed, brake out with their spears in their rests, and when Huon perceived
them, it was no marvel though he was abashed: then humbly he besought our
lord God to save his body from misfortune, and gladly he would have returned
to the Abbey, but he was so sore ouer-layd that he could not, then he drew
out his Sword, and gave therewith the first that came such a stroke, that he
claue his head to the teeth, and so fell dead to the ground, and Huon struck so
upon the right hand and upon the left, that whosoever he struck a full
stroke, needed after no Surgion, if he had been armed he would not lightly
have been taken without great loss, but his defense could not avail him, for
he and all his company were unarmed, and all the other Forty were clean
armed, and they all fought cruelly, in such wise that within a while Twelve of
Huons men were slain in the place, and none escaped alive except Huon, who was
beaten down to the earth and his hands bound: then Gerard the Traitor came to
Gerames, who was beaten down by force, and then he cut open his right Side,
and took out thereof the Admiral Gaudise beard and four great teeth, the
which were set there by King Oberon of the Fayrie.

Huon seeing the old Gerames lying on the earth, he said with a hie voice unto
Gerard: Brother I pray you show me that courtesy, as not to slay that old
Gentleman, but save his life. Brother, (quoth Gerard) that he has, let him
keep, other hurt he shall none have at this time, then they bound his eyes,
and then they came to Escleremond, who lay on the earth in a swound they bound
her hands and eyes, and so set her whether she would or not upon a horse, and
Huon as he was blindfold, he heard the cries and weepings that she made, then
he said: Brother Gerard, I pray you for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ,
suffer none ill to be done to that good Lady, who is my Wife, nor no
dishonor. Brother, (quoth the Traitor Gerard) think on your self, and
speak no more, I shall do as it pleases me. Then they set Huon and Gerams on
two horses, and the false Traitor took the Twelve dead bodies, and did cast
them into the great River of Gerone, then they took that way to the City of
Bourdeaux, and led the three Prisoners fast bound upon three horses. Pity it
was to hear the noble Lady Escleremond complain, and she said unto Huon: Ah
Sir, you have said to me, that when we were once in your Country of
Bourdeaux, that you would cause me to be crowned with gould: but now I see
well, yt in great pain and misery we must use the residue of our lives, you
have found here an ill Brother, since he has purchased for you so much ill,
surely there is better faith and troth among the Sarazins, then is in the
people of the Realm of France. Madame, (quoth Huon) your trouble more
displeases me, then mine own, God send to my Brother Gerard such reward as
he has deserved, for ye treason that he has done us.

Thus they complained, and wist not whether they were carried, they entered into
ye City of Bourdeaux an hour before day. Alas that the good Burgesses of ye
City had but known, how their Lord Huon was so falsely betrayed, if they had
known it, he had been rescued, and Gerard and Gybouars hewn all to pieces,
but the false Gerard brought them by privy dark Lanes to the Pallaice, for
that they should not be perceived. Thus they came to the Castle, where they
alighted and unarmed them, then they took Huon and Escleremond and Gerames,
and put them all into a deep Prison all three together, and ordained that they
should have every day barley bread and water, and commanded the Iaylor to give
them none other thing, and also commanded, that neither man nor woman should
speak with them, the Iaylor promised so to do, for he was servant to
Gybouars, and such as the Master was, so was the Servant. Thus Huon betrayed
pitiously by his Brother Gerard, and set in prison, and with him his wife
Escleremond, and Gerames wounded on the Side as he was.

Now we will leave to speak of this pitious company, enduring great sorrow in
the horrible prison in the great Tower of Bourdeaux.

Chap. LXVIII.
How the Traitors returned to the Abbey of St. Maurise, and slew the good
Abbot, and took away all the Treasure that Huon had left there.

THus as ye have heard here before how Gerard and Gybouars had put in prison
Huon and Escleremond and Gerames in great misery, and when it was day, Gerard
and Gybouars departed out of Bourdeaux and all their company, and road again
unto the Abbey, and so came thither to dinner, then Gerard sent for the Abbot
to come and speak with him. When the Abbot heard how Gerard was come again to
the Abbey, he had great marvel, and so came to Gerard and said: Sir, you be
welcome, I pray you what adventure has brought you hither again so shortly? I
had thought that you had been gone with your Brother Huon. Sir, (quoth the
Traitor) after that my Brother Huon was departed hence, he remembered his
riches that he left with you to keep, and because he shall have great need
thereof, to give gifts unto the great Princes and Lords that be about King
Charlemaine, to the intent that his business may take the better effect:
Therefore my Brother has sent me unto you, desiring you to send his goods
unto him by me. Sir, (quoth the Abbot) when your Brother Huon departed hence,
true it was, that he left with me his riches to keep, and charged me, not
to deliver it to any person living, but all only to his own person: Therefore
Sir, by the faith that I owe unto my Patron Saint Maurise, I will not deliver
unto you one penny.

When the Traitor Gerard understood that answer, he said: Dane Abbot thou
lie, for whether thou will or not, I will have it, and no thanks to thee,
and yet thou shall also repent thy words. Then Gerard sudainly took the Abbot
by the hair of the head, and Gybouars took him by the one arm, and did so
strike him with a staff, that he all to bruzed him, and then did cast him to
the earth so rudely, that his heart burst in his body, and so dyed. When ye
Monks saw their Abbot slain, they had great fear, and so fled away, and the
two Traitors with their Swords in their hands, went after them with sore
threatenings, and when the Monks saw how they could not escape for the two
Traitors and their men, they fell down on their knees, humbly praying them to
have pity of them, and they would show them all the gold and treasure that was
in the house, to do therewith at their pleasure. Then the Traitor Gybouars
said how the Monks had spoken well, and when the Monks saw how they had peace,
they showed to ye two Traitors the place where ye treasure was, and delivered
to them the keys, so they took away all the treasure that Huon had left
there, and besides that, all the treasure of the church, crosses, sensers,
chalesses, copes, and candlestickes of silver, all they took and carried away,
and if I should recite all the riches that they had there, it should be too
long to be rehearsed. In that house there was a Monk who was cousin to
Gibouars, whom the two Traitors made Abbot of that place, so when they had
achieved their enterprise, they departed with all that riches, wherewith was
charged xv. strong Summers, they left not in the Abbey the value of a Florent,
for every thing that was good they took with them, and so road until they
came unto Bourdeaux. Now as they passed through the Town, they were greatly
regarded of all the Burgesses of the City, who had great marvel from whence
their Lord came with so great riches. These Traitors passed forth until they
came to the Pallaice, and there they discharged their Summers, then Gerard took
the Treasure that five of the Summers did carry, and laid it in his Chambers and
Coffers, then he ordained that Ten Summers should be trussed forth to go to
Paris, and sent them forward, and said how he would follow soon after. Then
he and Gibouars dyned, and after meat they mounted upon their Horses, and the
new Abbot Coozen to Gibouars with them, and two Squiers and about si^e other
Servants, and so road in have to ouer-take their Summers with their treasure,
and so within two Leagues they ouer-tooke them, and so then they all together
road so long, until on a Wednesday they came to Paris, they lodged in the
Street next unto the Pallaice in a good Hostrie, and were well served, and so
rested until the next morning: then they arose and apparelled them in fresh
array, and they led with them five of their Summers with riches, and two of them
they presented to the Queen, and the other three to the King, wherefore they
were received with great joy, then after they gave great gifts to every Lord
in the Court, and specially to the Officers, wherefore they were greatly
praised.

But whosoever took any gift, Duke Naymes would take never a penie, for he
thought that all that riches was not well gotten, and that they did it for some
craft, thereby to attain to some false and damnable enterprise, this Duke was
a noble, wise, and a true knight, and of good council, and he very well
perceived their malice. Then the King commanded the three Coffers to be
brought and set in his chamber, and would not look into them until he had
spoken with Gerard, whom he caused to sit down by him, and Gibouars in like
manner, and also the new Abbot, for it is an old saying and a true, that they
that give are always welcome. Gerard quoth king Charlemaine, ye be welcome: I
pray you, show me the cause of your coming. Sir quoth Gerard, I shall show
you, the great business that I have to do with your Majesty and your Lords,
has caused me to give these large gifts that I have given to you and others,
and Sir I am sorrowful at my heart for that which I must show you, and I had
rather be beyond the Sea, then to show you that thing which I must needs do,
for to hide it, that cannnot avail me, yet I never showed any thing in all my
life with so ill a will, for I shall be blamed of many persons, howbeit, I love
better to defend mine honor then I love all the world beside. Gerard quoth the
King, ye say troth, for better it is to show the troth, then to be silent in
so great a matter which so much touches your honor.

Chap. LXIX.
How the Traitor Gerard showed to King Charlemaine, how Huon his brother was
returned to Bourdeaux, without doing of his Message to the Admiral Gaudise.

SIr, quoth Gerard, true it is that you have made me Knight, and beside that, I
am your liege man, wherefore I am bound to keep your honor to my power, for I
am certain I shall show you such news, that all that be in your Court will
be sorrowful, much more my self. Gerard quoth Charles, come to the point, and
use no more such language nor such ceremonies, by that I see in you, it is but
evil that you will say. Sir quoth he, but late as I was in my house at
Bourdeaux, and with me diverse Lords and Knights, as we were devising together,
I saw my Brother Huon enter into my house, and three with him, the one was a
young damsel, and the other an old man called Gerames.

When Duke Naymes of Bauyer heard Gerard, he had great marvel, when he said
that Gerames was one of them, and said: Ah dear God* I hear that, which with
great pain I can believe, for if it be the same Gerames that I think it be,
he and I were companions together at a tourney holden at Chalons in Champanie,
where he slew by misaduenture, the Earl Salamon. Sir, quoth Gerard, I shall
show you as I have begun, true it is, when I saw my brother Huon, I was
greatly abashed, howbeit I did him honor, and made him good cheer, and made
him and all his company to dine: then after dinner I reasoned with my brother,
and demanded of him, if he had been at the holy Sepulcher of our Lord God.
But when he saw that I demanded that of him, he was sore abashed, so that he
wist not what to answer, and then I perceived by his words that he had not
been there. And then Sir, after I demanded of him, if he had furnished your
message to the Admiral Gaudys, but he could give me no answer, nor say any
words that I could believe, and when I saw that I could find no truth in any of
his words, I took him, and set him in prison, howbeit, it was full sore
against my will, but I considered in my self, that I must owe unto your grace,
faith and fidelity, and that I am your man, and that for no man living,
(though he were never so near of my kin) yet I would not be found with any
treason, and therefore Sir, my Brother, his wife, and his Companion, I have
retained them in my prison: wherefore Sir, it is in you to do herein what it
shall please you best. When all the Princes and Lords that were there
understood the words of Gerard, and that he had taken his Brother Huon, and had
put him in prison, there were none but that were sorry thereof, and many (for
the love that they bare to Huon) began to weep, and demanded of Gerard, who
had done that deed, saying, surely it is done by some manner of treason.

Chap. LXX.
How the King commanded that Huon should be sent for from Bourdeaux, to the
intent that he should die.

WHen the Emperor Charlemaine understood Gerard, he arose up on his feet, sore
troubled and full of ire, for by Gerardes words, the ancient hate and
displeasure that the King had to Huon for the death of Charlot his son, was
renewed in his heart, and said openly that every man might hear him. Lords
that be here present, before you all I summon them that were Pledges for Huon,
in such wise, that if the Traitor Huon be not rendered into my hands, to do
with him my pleasure: I shall cause the^ to be hanged and drawn, and there is
no man in my court that may be so hardy, as to speak or desire the contrary,
but I shall cause him to die a shameful death. And when he had thus said, he
sat him down again, and called Duke Naymes to him and said. Sir Duke, ye
have heard what Gerard has said of his brother Huon. Sir quoth the Duke, I
have well heard him but I believe the matter to be otherwise then he has
said, for there is no man will say the contrary, but that all that Gerard has
said, is done by false treason, and you shall find it so, if the matter be
wisely enquired of. Sir quoth Gerard, you may say as it pleases you, but I
take God to witness, and my father in Law Gibouars, and this good notable
religious Abbot, and his Chaplain, that all that I have said is true, for I
would not for any thing say that which is not just and true.

Then Gibouars and the Abbot his Chaplain answered and said, how it was true
that Gerard had said. By my faith quoth the Duke Naymes, all you four are
false liars and thieves, and the King is ill counseled if he believe you.
Naymes (quoth the King) I pray you how seems it unto you, this matter between
the two brethren? Sir quoth the Duke, it is a great matter, he that is here
before you, is the accuser of his brother, and has set him in prison, and now
he is come and accuses him here before you, because he knows well he cannot
come hither to defend himself. I should do a great evil deed, if I had a
brother that were banished out of France, and if he came to me for refuge,
and I then to take him, and set him fast in prison in mine own house, and then
after to go and complain upon him, to the intent to purchase his death. I say
there was never Noble man would think so to do, and they that have done thus,
are all false Traitors: all Noble men ought not to believe any such, and
specially he that will purchase such a deed against his own brother, I know
well, all that they have imagined and done, is by false treason, therefore I say
according to the right, that all four are false Traitors, and I judge for my
part, that they are worthy to receive a villainous death, for they are four
false witnesses.

When Gerard heard Duke Naymes, he changed color, and waxed as white as snow,
repenting in himself the deed that he had done to his brother, he cursed to
himself Gybouars, in that he believed his counsel, yet he answered Duke
Naymes and said. Ah Sir, ye do me great ill to owe me your ill will. Gerard
(quoth the Duke) it is for the illness that is in you, ye that would be one of
the Peers of France: certainly of such a Councellor as you be, the King has
little need, I had rather have lost one of my hands, then I should once have
consented thereto. Duke Naymes, quoth the King, I will you cause to come before
me, all such as were pledges for Huon at his departing. Then the Duke caused
them to appear before ye Kings presence, of whom there were diverse Dukes and
Earls. Then King Charlemaine said, Sirs, ye know well ye be pledges for Huon
of Bourdeaux, and you know the pain that I laid on your heads, if Huon did
not accomplish my message that I gave him in charge, the which he has not
fulfilled, wherefore without you deliver Huon into my hands, ye shall not
escape, but that ye shall die all. Sir (quoth Duke Naymes) for Gods sake I
require you, believe me at this time, I counsel you to take a good number of
your notable men, and send them to Bourdeaux, and let them take Huon out of
prison, and bring him to you, and hear what he himself will say, and if it
be true that Gerard has said, then I desire you to have no pity on him, but
I believe surely ye shall find the matter otherwise then Gerard his brother
has said. Naymes quoth the king, your saying is reasonable, I accord thereto,
I will he be sent for.

Chap. LXXI.
How the Emperor Charlemain went himself to Bourdeaux, to cause Huon to be
slain, for the great ill will that he bare to him.

YE have heard before, how the good Duke Naymes did so much, that King
Charlemain was content to send for Huon, but the king was sore displeased with
him, that he would not abide so long as to send for him, but he made himself
ready to go thither in person with all his train, and commanded that the
pledges should be set in prison till his return: but the good Duke Naymes
became pledge for them all to be forth coming, and so they went not to
prison. The King made him ready, and took with him twelve of his Peers, and
so took their way toward Bourdeaux: God aid Huon, for he was now in peril
of his life, if God had not pity on him.

Thus as I have showed you, King Charlemaine nobly accompanied, rode so long by
his iourneyes, that he came within the sight of Bourdeaux, and when he
approached near to the City, Gerard came to the king and said. Sir if it
please you, I would gladly ride before you into the City, to ordain to receive
you accordingly. Gerard quoth the King, it is no need that you go before to
prepare for my coming, there be other that shall go before, you shall not go
till I go my self. When Duke Naymes heard the kings answer, he said to the
king. Sir you have answered like a noble Prince, blessed be he that counseled
you so to say: thus the king rode forth, without giving any knowledge of his
coming, and so entered into the City of Bourdeaux, and rode to the Pallaice
and there alighted. Then dinner was made ready, and the King sat down and
Duke Naymes by him, and at other bordes other Lords and knights, and there they
were richly served: great brute was made in the Pallaice, so that Huon being in
prison, had great marvel of the noise that he heard, and demanded of the
Gailer what noise it was that he heard above in the Pallaice: the Gayler
answered with great pride and despite, and said, It needs not you to demand,
for you are like to know it too soon, but since you would know it, I shall
show you the truth, it is king Charlemaine and all his Barons, who are come
hither to judge you to be hanged. Go thy way false traitor quoth Huon, can
thou not show to me none other tidings but that? thus Huon answered the Gayler,
and there was as great brute in the City as in the Pallaice, with lodging of
the kings men.

The Commons and Burgesses of the City of Bourdeaux had full great marvel,
why the king came thither at that time so suddenly, and the king sitting at
the table made good ^heere, but Duke Naymes who sat by him, began to weep,
and could neither eat nor drink, he rose up then suddenly, so ^udely that
he overthrew cups and dishes upon the table. Naymes quoth the King, you have
done ill thus to do. Sir quoth Duke Naymes, I have good cause thus to do, and
I have wondrous great marvel that I see you so doted, I am in such sorrow
thereby, that I am near hand out of my wits: how is it that you be come into
the City of Bourdeaux, for to eat and to drink, and to take your ease? you
need not to have gone out of France for that, for you had meat and also good
wines sufficient at home in your own house. Ah right Noble and worthy
Emperor, what mean you to do? it is no small matter to judge to death one of
your twelve Peers, and it is not possible to give any true judgment, when you
and we are full of wine and spices. But Sir said the Duke, by the Lord that me
fourmed, that whosoever this day does eat or drink wine, as long as the life
is in my body, I shall never love him. Naymes quoth the King, I am content
with your will.

Then the King commanded that the table should be avoided and commanded
incontinent Huon to be taken out of prison and brought before him, they that
had commission to do it, went to the prison, and there they took out Huon and
his wife Escleremond, and old Gerames, and they were all three brought before
the King and his Barons. Huon saw where King Charlemaine sat among all his
Lords, and they all arose when they saw Huon and his company so pale and ill
colored, by reason of the noisome prison that his brother had put them in, and
Escleremond and old Gerames were greatly regarded: and when the Pledges saw
Huon before the King, they said. Sir, now ye may see Huon for whom we be
pledges, we trust now to be quit and discharged, it lies now in you to do
with him at your pleasure. Sirs (quoth ye King) I hold you quit, you may go
from hence forth where you please, for Huon cannot now escape our hands, then
Huon kneeled down before the King right humbly, and when Duke Naymes saw him,
the drops fell from his eyes, and said to the king. Sir I require you give Huon
audience, and hear what he will say. I am content quoth the King, let him say
what he will, then Huon kneeling on his knees said.

Sir, in the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, I first cry mercy to God, and
to you and to all your Barons I complain me of that false traitor that I see
there, who was my brother, if there had been any faith or troth in him, but I
believe in all the world cannot be found so cruel and false a Traitor, for
Cayne that slew Abell his brother, was never so false nor so cruel. When all
the Lords heard Huon, they al began to weep, saying each to others. Ah good
Lord, where is the beauty become that was wont to be in Huon? we have seen
him so fair, that no one could pass him in beauty, and now we see him pale
and lean and ill colored, it appears well, he has not been always in the
Ladies Chambers, nor among damsels to sport and to play with him. Thus they
devised of him, and took no heed of Gerard who was by them. Then Huon spoke
again, and said to the King.

Sir, true it is, the message that you gave me in charge to do unto the
Admiral Gaudys, I have done to the very uttermost as you have commanded
unto me, and I have passed the Sea, and came unto Babilone to the Admiral
Gaudys, and there I required of him in the presence of all his Lords, to have
his beard and four great teeth. But when he had heard my demand, he held it
for a great folly, and so incontinent he cast me into prison, whereas I had
died by famine, if the Admirals Daughter had not been, whom ye may see
yonder sitting by the pillar, and also by the aid of good King Oberon whom I
ought greatly to love, he is a king of the Fairie right puissant, and is in the
City of Momur, and he knowing of the peril that I was in, had pity on me,
and came and succored me in such wise and with so great a puissance, that in
Babylon he slew al such as would not believe in our Lord Jesus Christ. Then he
took me out of prison, and then we entered into the Pallaice, and there we
slew all such as we found there. Then I went to the Admiral Gaudys and struck
off his head, and then I cut off his beard, and opened his mouth and drew out
four of his great teeth, and when I had them, then I desired king Oberon to
aid me, and to find the means that I might safely bring the Beard and Teeth
to your presence, and to show me where I might best keep them. Then the good
king Oberon, by the grace of our Lord God and by the puissaunce that God had
given unto him, he closed them within the side of Gerames, so that they could
not be perceived, and Sir know for troth, ye never heard of such a man. Now
when I saw that I had fournished your message, I returned, and took with me
the fair Lady Escleremond Daughter to the foresaid Admiral Gaudys, and the
Twelve gentlemen that went with me out of France, who always have been with
me. And Sir, if I should show you the great pains and pauerties that I and
they have suffered, it would be too long to rehearse, but I may well say, if
the grace of God had not been, I had never come hither again, if I had had x.
lives I could never have escaped the death. Next after all these pains and
travails that I and they that were with me suffered, by the grace of God we
came and arrived at Rome, whereas the Pope received me with great joy, and
there wedded me to Escleremond the Admiralles daughter, whom you may see yonder
all desolate, and full of displeasures, and not without cause.

When the Barons that were there heard the pittious complaints of Huon, every
man of pity beheld the Lady, who pale and ill colored sat sore weeping, so
that such as regarded her, were constrained to take part of her sorrow, there
was no man but they began sore to weep, and Huon who was before the King, was
sorrowful to see his wife make so great dolor. Then he said unto the King.
Sir, if you will not believe my saying, send to Rome to the Pope to know the
truth, if you prove my words contrary, I submit my self to receive such
death, as you and your Barons can devise, if the Pope do not bear witness of
that I have said, God forbid that I should show you any thing otherwise then
truth. I have said nothing, but he shall show tokens that my saying is true,
and I can say more if I would show all, but it is not needful that I should
make a long sermon. But Sir, thus as I have showed you, I did return from the
place that you sent me to, and Sir know for truth, I came not so unprovided,
but that I brought with me great plenty of gould and silver, and my company
came all with me, and I purposed not to rest in any place till I had spoken
with your grace, for the great desire that I had to see you, and so along I
rode till I came to an Abbey here hard by, a four leagues hence called Saint
Mauris, because the Abbey was of your foundation, and not pertaining to the
land of Bourdeaux, for I would not have entered into this town, because of the
commandment that you gave me.

Thus I came and lodged me in the Abbey, and the Abbot received me with great
joy, and he sent word of my being there to my brother Gerard, and the traitor
came to me like a false traitor, and brought with him but one Squire, whereby
now I may perceive, that in him was nothing but falsenesse and treason. Huon
quoth Duke Naymes, your reason is good, for if he had been true as he ought to
have been, he ought to assemble the Barons and Lords of the Country, and so to
have come with them, and have received you with reverence and honor. Sir quoth
Huon, it is true, but the Traitor did otherwise, for when he was come to me,
by great subtlety he demanded how I had sped in my journey, and whether I
had spoken with the Admiral Gaudys or not, and declared to him your message,
and if I had brought with me his beard and four great teeth: and I showed him
I had accomplished your whole commandment, then the unhappy Traitor demanded
where I kept them, and I showed him, for I had no mistrust in him. Then he so
exorted me, that at the hour of midnight he made me to arise hastily, and
mkde me and al my company ready, and so leapt on our horses and rode forth our
way, and when (...) came to a cross way, and saw that I took the way into
France, he began to speak rigorously, to have occasion of some strife
between us, and near thereunto was a little wood, whereas there lay in
ambushment Gibouars and his company, forty men of arms well armed, and they
came and ran at me and my company that were unarmed, whereby they found in
us but small resistance, and so finally the twelve Gentlemen that were with
me, were all slain and all to hewn, and then they took their dead bodies
and did cast them into the River of Gerone, then they struck me to the earth,
and bound fast mine feet and hands, and blindfolded mine eyes, and in like
sort they did to my wife, and then they came to Gerames, and the Traitor my
Brother came to him, and with a sharp knife opened his side, and there (...)
took the beard and four great treeth of the Admiral Gau^^s, the which were
set there by king Oberon, the (...) Traitor knew the place whereas they lay,
by rea^^^ that I had showed him thereof before, would to God that the same time
that he came to Gerames to do that cruel (...) that Gerames had been armed,
I am sure then the (...) durst not have regarded him, to have done him (...),
but Sir when he had taken out the beard and teeth, then he bound Gerames hands
and feet, hurt as he was, as Sir ye may know the truth by him. Then Gerames
stepped forth and lift up his cloak, and showed the king the wound in his side,
the which every man might see that was there. Sir quoth Huon to the king, when
he had done all this, he set us on three lean horses, and so brought us into
this town bound hands and feet, and then set us in a deep prison, and so
has kept us hitherto with bread and water, and so has taken from us all the
riches that we brought with us, and Sir, if he be so hardy to say the
contrary, that it is not true that I have said, let him and Gybouars, like
traitors as they be, arm themselves, and I shall fight against them both, and
if I can conquer them both, whereof I have no doubt (with the aid of our Lord
God) then let them have as they have deserved: and if I cannot overcome them,
nor make them to show the truth, I will that then incontinent you cause me to
be drawn and hanged.

By my faith quoth Duke Naymes, Sir, Huon can say nor offer no more, for he
offers to prove the contrary of that Gerard has said. Sir quoth Gerard, my
brother says at his pleasure, because he knows well that I will not strive
against him, because he is mine elder brother, let the king do as it shall
please him, as for me, I never consented to do so cruel a deed as he lays
to my charge. Ah good Lord quoth Duke Naymes, how the false Traitor can cloak
and cover his illness. Huon quoth Charlemain I cannot tell what you have done,
but I will you show me the beard and ^oure great teeth of the Admiral Gaudis.
Sir quoth Huon, I cry you mercy, I have showed you how they be taken from me,
by the false traitor my Brother Gerard. Huon quoth the King, ye know well at
your departure out of France, I charged you upon pain of your life, that i^
by adventure you returned again into France, that you should not be so hardy
as to enter into this City of Bourdeaux, until you had spoken with me first,
and to keep me promise, you delivered to me Hostages, the which I have quit
seeing I have you in my hands, it lies now in me either to hang you or to
draw you, or to give unto you any other judgment, for at your departure you
were agreed that I should so do, and by the faith that I owe unto Saint Denis,
before it be night I shall cause thee to be hanged and drawn, and that shall
I not let so to do for any man living, for now I take you in your own house.

Sir, (quoth Huon) God forbid that a King of France should do so great a
cruelty. My Lord, I cry you mercy, for Gods sake do not to me so great an
outrage, for you may know right well that perforce I was brought hither, and
therefore great King, I require you let me have rightful and true judgment.
By my faith Huon, (quoth Duke Naymes) it is but a small request that you make,
for your right is so clear, that if reason may be showed to you, there is no
man can say the contrary, but that your Lands ought to be rendered unto you
frank and free, and your Brother Gerard to be hanged and strangled. Then the
Duke said to the King: My Lord, I require you have pity of Huon, and do
nothing to him but right, and you shall do great sin without you do him
right. Naymes, (quoth the King) you know well it is in me to cause Huon to
die, but seeing that he is one of my Peers, I will order him by judgment.

When the Lords and other Knights heard the King say so, they were right
joyful, for then they believed that the King would have pity of Huon, but
whosoever was joyful, yet Duke Naymes was not content, and said to the King:
My Lord, by that I see and hear, you bear Huon but small ^o^e, seeing that
you will put him to judgment, considering his deeds and sayings to be true,
and namely whereas he ^ffereth to prove it by the holy Father the Pope, then
Huon withdrew back and leaned him to a pillar there by. Then the King called
unto him all his Peers and Lords, and (...).

Sirs, I require you by the faith and truth and homage that you bear unto me,
that for me, nor for mine amity, that you aid not Huon against me, nor lay
nor do no falsehood, but the most rightful judgment that you can make, do,
I charge you give true judgment, without any favor or partiality. When the
Lords heard the King say so unto them, and that he coniured them so sore to do
right and justice, well they perceived, that the King had great hate unto Huon,
and that the death of his Son Charlot was not forgotten out of his mind. Then
they all together drew apart into a Chamber, right pensive and mourning, and
they sat down on benches, and beheld each other without speaking of any word a
long space. When Duke Naymes saw that, he arose upon his feet and said: Sirs,
ye have heard how the King has charged us to say the troth, we may perceive
well by him, that he bears great hate unto Huon, who is one of our
Companions, and therefore Sirs, I require you, that every man by himself will
say his advise as he thinks.

Chap. LXXII.
How the Twelve Peers drew to counsel, to give sentence upon Huon, either
with him or against him.

THen there rose up a knight called Gaulter, he was issued of the lineage of
Ganelon, who was one of the Peers of France, then he said. Sirs, as for me,
I say, seeing the case as it is, that Huon by right judgment ought to be
hanged and drawn, for as ye know well, the King has found him in the City
of Bourdeaux: therefore I say that the King may (without doing any sin) put
him to death, and Sirs, if ye think that I have said good reason, agree ye
then to the same, and let Gerard his Brother be Lord and Master of all the
Lands and Signiories that should appertain unto Huon. I consent and will as
much as touches my part, that Gerard be one of the Peers of France, in the
place of Huon his Brother, and when Gaulter had ended his reason, Henry of
Saint Omers spoke and said.

Sir Gaulter, go and sit down, your words can bear none effect, for they
be of no valor. But Sirs, (quoth he) shortly to speak and righteously to
judge, I say that it is reason, that Huon be restored to all his Lands, for
his deed is well proved and by good witness, as our holy Father the Pope,
for we may believe surely, that Gerard his Brother that thus has betrayed
him, has done it by false covetousness: therefore I say and judge that Gerard
be drawn at horse tails, and then hanged until he be dead. Then he said
no more, but sat down again.

When Henry of Saint Omers had said his reason, yt Earl of Flaunders arose up
and said to Henry. All that you have said, I will not consent thereto, but I
shall show you mine advise what ought to be done. Sirs, ye all know well
the world, the which as now is little worth, for now adays cannot be found
such true Friends as were wont to be, ye may well see by these two Brethren,
ye strife that is between them is foul and dishonest, we should do well, if
we could find the means by any manner of ways to appease them, and therefore
I counsel, let us all together go to the King, and desire him to have mercy
and pity of both these two Brethren, and that it might please him to appease
them, and ren^er to Huon all his Lands, and if we could bring it to this
point, it should be a good deed as to accord them together.

Chap. LXXIII.
How the Peers laid all the deed upon Duke Naymes, to give the judgment
upon him: But for all that ever he could say or do, the King judged Huon to
die.

AFter that the Earl of Flanders had spoken, the Earl of Chalons rose up and
said. My Lord of Flanders, your reason is good, and you have spoken like an
Noble man: but I know surely, that the King will do nothing at our desires.
But Sirs if ye think it good, let us all put the whole matter upon Duke Naymes
of Bauyer, and all that he will say, let us agree thereto, then all the Lords
accorded together, and said how the Earl of Chalons had said right well. Then
they came to Duke Naymes, and desired him that he would take the charge of that
matter upon him, and whatsoever he did, they were all agreed thereto: when the
Duke heard them, he stood still a certain space, and began to study on the
matter, and took all the ten Peers to counsel with him.

And when the fair Escleremond saw Huon her husband in that danger, among them
with whom he should have been in joy, then she began sore to weep, and
said. Ah Huon, I see here great poverty, when in the same proper town whereas
you ought to be Lord, to be in this danger, and beside that, ye are not
believed nor heard of any man that is here, for any proof or witness that ye
can say or show. King Charlemaine will not believe that you have been in the
City of Babylone, and yet surely there you have been, for I saw you there
slay my Father the Admiral Gaudys, and took his beard, and drew out of his
mouth four of his greatest teeth, great pity it were if you should die for
your truth and faythfulnesse, but the thing that most fears me, is that I see
none that be here likely to be a Noble man, except the King, (who is chief
of all other) and yet me thinks he is full of falsehood, for I see none other
but he that seeks your death. But I promise to God, that if he suffer you to
have this wrong and thus to die, I say then as for my part, that Mahound is
better worth then your King Charlemaine, and it be so that you receive death
without a cause, I will never more believe in your king, but renounce his law,
and believe in Mahound.

There were many Lords and knights that heard the Ladies words, whereof they
had such pity, that the most part of them began to weep. And when Huon
heard his wife, he turned toward her, and said. Lady I desire you to leave
your sorrow, and trust in God almighty, who so oftentimes has succored us,
you know not what he will do, let us be content with his good pleasure. Thus
with such words Huon appeased the fair Escleremond. And Duke Naymes, who was
in counsel with the other Peers, said to them. Sirs I have great sorrow at my
heart because of these two Brethren, so that I cannot tell what counsel to
find: I desire you all in this weighty matter to counsel me, and show me
your opinions therein. Sir, (quoth the Lords) other counsel you shall not
have of us, for we have laid all the matter upon you, to do therein what it
shall please you. Sirs, (quoth the Duke) to dissemble the matter avails not,
but since that Huon must pass by judgment, how say you, shall he be hanged or
drawn? Sir quoth Gaulter, who was the first speaker, me thinks he can escape
none otherwise? Ah Traitor quoth the Duke, thou lie falsely, for it shall
not follow after thy council, whether thou will or not, there is no man this
day that shall be so hardy as to judge him to die, therefore Sirs yet show me
again, whether ye will agree to my council. Sir quoth they, we have laid
the charge upon you, the which we will all abide by, but whosoever was glad,
Gaulter was sorrowful and angry, for he would have consented to the death of
Huon.

Then all the Barons right sad and pensive went out of the counsel Chamber,
and they could find no manner of ways how to save Huon, but they all prayed to
God to aid and succor him. And Huon seeing the Barons coming so sadly
together, thought that the matter was not at a good point, whereby he began
sore to weep: when Escleremond and Gerames saw the sorrow that Huon made, they
had great pity thereof. Then Huon beheld Duke Naymes, for he knew well all the
matter lay in his hands, he feared greatly the judgment that should be made
upon him and said. Thou very God and man, as I believe verily that thou did
die on the holy cross to redeem us all, and that on the third day thou did
rise from death to life: I require thee humbly in this great need to succor
me as truly as I am in the right, for more wrong no man can have. Then the
Duke Naymes of Bauier came to the king, and said. Sir, will it please you to
hear what we have devised? Yea quoth the king I desire nothing else to know.
Well Sir quoth the Duke, then I demand of you, in what place of your Region
think you to judge one of your Peers of France? Naymes quoth the King, I
know well you be a Nobleman, and all that you say is to deliver Huon of
Bourdeaux, but I will ye know, all shall not profit him. Then the Duke said,
Sir to say so ye do great wrong. Therefore sir regard well in what place you
will have one of your Peers judged, if you know not where it should be done, I
will show you. In your Realm are but three places to do it in: The first is
the Town of Saint Omers, the second is Orleance, and the third is Paris, and
therefore Sir, if you will proceed upon Huon by justice, it is convenient that
it be done in one of these three places, for here in this town he cannot be
judged.

Naymes quoth the King, I understand well why you say this, I well see and
perceive, that you entend to none other end, but to deliver and quit Huon: I
had thought to have entreated him by the order of justice, to the intent that
none of you should have reproved me, therefore I ordained that he should have
been judged by you that be the Peers of France, and I see well you have done
nothing therein, and therefore as long as you live, you shall meddle no more
with that matter, but by the beard that I bear on my chinne, I shall never dine
nor eat meat after this dinner, til I see him hanged and drawn, for all your
bearing of him against me* Then he commanded the tables to be set up, and when
Gerard understood the king, he was joyful thereof in his heart, but he made no
semblance of joy, because of the Lords that were there present. When Huon and
Escleremond had heard how the King had sworn the death of Huon, the dolorous
weepings and tears that they made were so extreme, that hard it were to
declare it, and Escleremond said to Huon. Ah Sir, now I see well that great
pity it shall be the departing of us two, but if I had a knife, I would not
abide your death, but first I should slay my self before this false and
untrue king. Her complaints were so pitiful, that most part of the Lords wept
for pity, and the old Gerames sorely wept and said: Ah good Lord God, in what
hour was I borne? in great dolor and pain have I continued my youth, and now
in mine age thus shamefully to die? Thus all three made such sorrow, that it
would have made a hard heart to lament. All three thought no otherwise but to
die, because they had heard King Charlemaine make such promise, but that which
God will save, no man can let: and god save the good king Oberon, for king
Charlemaine shall be forsworn, as ye shall hear hereafter. Now let us leave
speaking of this pitious company, and speak of the noble king Oberon of the
Fayrie, who as then was in his wood.

Chap. LXXIIII.
How king Oberon came to succor Huon, and made Gerard to confess all the
treason that he had purchased against Huon his brother.

YE have heard before, how King Oberon was displeased with Huon, because he had
broken his commandment. But when Huon had been at Rome, and confessed all his
sins, and was assoiled of the Pope: then King Oberon was content, and in his
heart forgave all the ill will that he had to Huon, and as he sat at dinner he
began to weep. When his Servants saw that, they had great marvel, and said
unto him: Sir, we desire you to show us, why you do weep and be so troubled?
there is some displeasure done unto you: therefore for the love of our Lord
Jesus Christ, we desire you hide it not from us.

Sirs, (quoth the King) I remember now the unhappy Huon of Bourdeaux, who is
returned from the far parts, and he has passed by Rome, and there has taken
his Wife in marriage, and is confessed of all his sins, for the which sins
he has been by me sore punished. But it is time if ever I will do him any
good, now to aid him and to succor him against King Charlemaine, for he has
sworn never to go to bed, until he have hanged and drawn the poor Huon,
but by the grace of our Lord God, Charlemaine shall be forsworn: for at this
time I shall succor and aid him, for he is as now in such a danger, that
without he be succored, incontinent death is near him, he was never in his
life in such peril. He is now in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux, and his Wife the
fair Escrelemond and the old Gerames, with fetters on their feet, being in
great sorrow, and king Charlemaine is set at dinner, and has made his oath to
hang Huon, but yet whether he will or not, he shall be perjured, for I will
go to my Friend Huon and help him at his need, therefore I wish my Table and
all that is thereon, near to King Charlemaines Table, and somewhat above his
about two foot hyer, and also I will, because I have heard say, that often
times of a little Castle comes a greater: therefore I will that on my table
be set my Cup, my Horn, and my Armor, the which Huon conquered of the Giant
Angolaffer, and also I wish with me a C.M. men of arms, such as I was wont to
have in battle. He had no sooner said the words, but by the will of god and
the puissance of the Fayrie, his table and all that king Oberon had wished, was
set just by king Charlemaines table, more higher and greater then his was.

When king Charlemaine saw the table, and the Cup, Horn, and coat of maile,
he had great marvel, and said to Duke Naymes: Sir Duke, I believe you have
enchaunted me. Sir, (quoth the Duke) never in my life I me^le^ with any such
matter: the Lords and such as were there, were greatly abashed how that matter
came to pass. Gerames who sat near to Huon, when he saw the Table, the Cup
and horn of Iuorie, and the Armor thereon, he knew them well, and said to
Huon. Sir, be not dismayed, for on yonder Table that you may see, is your Cup
and horn of Iuorie, and coat of maile, whereby I perceive that you shall be
succored by King Oberon. Huon beheld the Table, and had great joy when he saw
it, then he lifted up his hands to heaven and thanked our Lord God, that he
would visit such a poor sinner as he was saying: Ah King Oberon, in many
great needs have you succored me. Therewith arrived King Oberon in the City,
whereof the Burgesses and the Commons were greatly abashed, when they saw such
a number of men of war enter into their city, without any knowledge before.
When king Oberon was within the Town and all his company, he said to his
Lords: Sirs, look that you set good watch at every gate, so that no man go
out, the which they did diligently, for at every gate they set x.M. men. Then
King Oberon took the way to the Pallaice, and at the gate he left x.M. men,
commanding them upon pain of their lives, that they should not suffer any man
to pass out, and also he commanded, that if they heard him blow his Horn of
Iuorie, that incontinent they should come into the Pallaice to him, and slay
all such as they should find there. Then king Oberon went up into the Pallaice,
and many of his Lords with him, he was richly apprrelled in cloth of gold, and
the border thereof was set with rich precious stones, goodly it was to
behold, for a fayrer little person could not be found: he passed just by King
Charlemaine, without speaking of any word, and went so near to him, that he
shouldred him so rudely, that his bonnet fell from his head. Ah good Lord quoth
Charlemaine, I have great marvel what this dwarf may be, that so rudly has
shouldred me, and almost overthrown my table, he is fierce when he thinks
scorn to speak to me, howbeit, I will see what he will do, I cannot tell
what he thinks to do, but me seems he is right joyful, and also he is
the fairest creature that ever I saw. When Oberon had passed by the King, he
came to Huon and wished the fetters from all their feet, and led them before
Charlemaine without any word speaking, and caused them to sit down with him
at his own table that he had wished thither: then he took his cup, and made
thereon three crosses, then incontinent the cup was full of wine, then King
Oberon took it, and gave it to Escleremond to drink, and then to Huon, and so
to Gerames, and when they had all three drank well, he said to Huon. Friend
arise up, and take the cup and bear it to King Charlemaine, and say unto
him, that he drink to you in the name of peace, if he refuse it, he did
never such a folly in all his life. King Charlemaine, who sat near to them
at his own table, hearing king Oberons words, wist not what to think, and so
sat still and durst not speak one word, for the great maruailes that he saw
there, and no more durst none of his men, for they were so abashed, that there
was none there but that gladly would have been a hundred leagues thence. But
whosoever was afraid, Gerard was not very well pleased.

Then Huon rose from Oberons table, and took the cup, and went therewith to
king Charlemaine, and delivered it to him. The king took it, and durst not
refuse it, as soon as it was in his hands it was dry and void, and not a
drop of wine therein. Fellow quoth the King, you have inchaunted me. Sir quoth
Oberon, it is because you are full of sin, for the cup is of such dignity,
that none can drink thereof without he be a noble man, and clean without
deadly sin, and I know one that ye did not long ago, the which as yet you
were never confessed of, and if it were not to your shame, I should show it
here openly, that every man should hear it. When the Emperor Charlemaine
heard King Oberon, he was abashed, and afraid that King Oberon would have
shamed him openly: then Huon took again the cup, and then incontinent it
was full of wine again, and then Huon bare it to Duke Naymes, who sat next to
Charlemaine. Naymes took the cup and drank thereof at his pleasure: but all
the other could not touch the cup they were so full of sin. Then Huon
returned to king Oberon, and sat down by him, then Oberon called to him Duke
Naymes, and commanded him to rise from Charlemaines table, and to sit down by
him at his table, the which Duke Naymes did, for he durst not say nay. Then
Oberon said to him. Sir Duke Naymes, right good thanks I give you, in that you
have been so true and just to Huon, and thou King Charlemaine that art
Emperor of the Romans, behold here Huon, whom wrongfully and without cause
you have disenherite, and would take from him all his lands, he is a Noble man
and true, and besides that I say unto you for truth, he has done your message
unto the Admiral Gaudys, and I aided to bring him to his death, and then he
took out of his mouth four of his greatest teeth, and also did cut off his
white beard, and I did ^lose them within the side of Gerames by the will of
God, this that I have said, you may be surely believe, for at all these deeds
I was present. See yonder false Traitor Gerard, who by his malicious intent
has done this treason, and to the end that you may know the matter more
surely, you shall hear it confessed by his own mouth.

Then Oberon said to Gerard, I conjure thee by the divine puissance and power
that God has given me, that here before King Charlemaine and all his Lords,
thou show and declare ye troth of this treason, which thou have done against
Huon thy Brother. When Gerard understood Oberon, he was in such fear that
he trembled for dread, for he felt in himself, that he could have no power
to hide the troth of the treason, and then he said. Sir, I see well to hide the
troth cannot avail me, therefore true it is, I went to the Abbey of Saint
Maurise to see my Brother Huon, and Gybouars accompanied with Forty men at
arms, we departed from this City and laid our ambushment in a little wood
about two Leagues from this City, to watch when my Brother Huon should pass
by that way. Gerard, (quoth King Oberon) speak out hyer that you may the
better be heard, and that every man may hear the treason and falsenesse that
you have done unto your Brother. Sir, (quoth Gerard) I wot not what to say,
for I have done so ill and falsely against my Brother, that more ill I could
not do, and I am ashamed to recount it. But to say truly, that before it was
midnight, I made my Brother to rise and to depart from the Abbey, and when we
came near the place where as my Father in law Gibouars was with his
ambushment, I began to strive with my brother so highly, that Gibouars might
hear me, who when he heard me speak, he brake forth of his ambushment, and
ran at my brothers company, and so slew them all, except these three that be
here, then we took the dead bodies, and did cast them into the River of
Gerone, then we took Huon and his wife, and the old Gerames, and bound their
hands and feet, and blindfolded their eyes, and so brought them on three
lean horses into the City, and I took out of the side of old Gerames the
beard and four great teeth, the which (if it please you) I shall fetch from
the place where I left them.

Gerard quoth Oberon, you shall not need to take that labor, for when it
shall please me, I can have them without you. Well Sir quoth Gerard, thus when
I had set them in prison, I went back again to the Abbey, and then I
demanded of the Abbot and Covent, where the treasure was that my Brother had
left there, and that he should deliver it to me, bearing him in hand that my
Brother Huon had sent for it. The good Abbot would not deliver it to me,
wherefore Gybouars and I slew him, and then we made this Monk here the
Abbot, who is near of kin to Gybouars, to the intent that he should aid to
bear us witness, and to justify our sayings. Then we took all the treasure
that was there, and brought it hither, then I charged Ten Summers, the which I
had with me to King Charlemaines Court at Paris, the which treasure I gave part
thereof to the King, and to other, by whom I thought to be aided to perform
mine unhappy Enterprise, and I believed surely, that by reason of the riches
that I gave, that my Brother should have received death, and thereby I to have
been Lord and Master of all his Lands and Signiories, and all this treason
that I have showed, Gybouars caused me to do it, or else I had never thought
to have done it.

Gerard, (quoth King Oberon) if it please our Lord Jesus Christ, you and he
both shall be hanged by the necks, there is no man living shall save you. Sir
Emperor Charlemaine, you have well heard the confession of Gerard, of ye great
treason that Gybouars and he have done unto Huon: but by the Lord that fourmed
me to his semblance, both they two and the Abbot and his Chaplain, shall be
hanged for their false witness. By the faith that I owe to Saint Denis, (quoth
King Charlemaine) they cannot escape it. Sir, (quoth Duke Naymes) it is great
sin to trouble a noble man, you shall do well if all four be hanged. When
all the Lords heard Gerard confess that great treason that he had done unto
his Brother, they blessed them, and had great marvel of the false treason
that the one Brother did to the other.

Chap. LXXV.
How King Oberon caused to be hanged the four Traitors, Gerard, Gybouars, and
the two Monks, for their false witness, and of the peace made between Huon
and Charlemaine: And how King Oberon gave unto Huon his Realm of the Fayrie.

WHEN King Oberon had heard Gerard confess the treason done to his Brother,
and heard how Gerard had offered to go and fetch the beard and great teeth,
and how he had denied him to go: then he said, I wish them here upon this
Table, he had no sooner made his wish, but they were set on the Table, whereof
all such as were there had great marvel. Sir, (quoth Huon to King Oberon)
humbly I require you, that of your grace you will pardon my Brother Gerard all
the ill that he has done against me, for he did it by Gybouars, and as for me,
here, and before God I pardon him, and Sir, if you will do thus, I shall be
content therewith. And to thentent that we may use our lives from henceforth in
good peace and love, I will give him the half part of my Lands and Signiories,
and Sir, in the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, have pity of him. When ye
Lords that were there present understood Huon, they all for pity began to
weep, and said among themselves, that Huon was a noble knight, and that it had
been pity if ye matter had framed otherwise. Sir Huon, (quoth Oberon) it is not
necessary to request this, for all the gold that is in the world shall not
respit their deaths. I wish by the puissance that I have in the Fayrie, that
here beneath in the meadow there be a pair of Gallows, and all iiij. thereon
hanged. Incontinent it was don, and all iiij. hanged: thus as ye have hard ye
traitors were paid their deserts.

When king Charlemaine had seen the great maruailes that were done by king
Oberon, he said to his Lords. Sirs I believe this man be some God himself, for
there is no mortal man can do this that he has done. When Oberon understood
the Emperor, he said. Sir know for truth I am no God, but I am a mortal man
as you be, and was engendered on a woman as you were, and my father was Julius
Caesar, who engendered me on the Lady of the Secret Isle, who had been before
lover to Florymont son to the Duke of Albany, she bare me nine months in her
womb, and I was begotten by Julius Caesar, when he went into Thessaly after
Pompey the Great, he was amorous of my mother because she prophesied that my
Father Julius Caesar should win the battle as he did, and when I was borne,
there were with my mother many Ladies of the Fairye, and by them I had many
gifts, and among other there was one, that gave me the gift to be such a one
as you see I am, whereof I am sorry, but I cannot be none otherwise, for when I
came to the age of three years, I grew no more, and when this Lady saw that
I was so little, to content again my mother, she gave me again, that I
should be the fairest creature of the world, and other Ladies of the Fairie
gave me diverse other gifts, the which I ouerpasse at this time, and therefore
Sir know for truth, that above all things God loves faith and troth, when it
is in men, as it is here in Huon, and because I know for certain that he is
true and faithful, therefore I have always loved him.

After that king Oberon had ended his words, and showed the Emperor
Charlemaine of all his estate, he called Huon and said. Sir arise up, and take
the beard and the teeth, and bear them to king Charlemaine, and desire him to
render you your lands as he promised. Sir quoth Huon, I ought so to do, then
Huon came to King Charlemaine, and said. Sir by your grace, and if it may
please you, receive here the beard and teeth of the Admiral Gaudis. Huon quoth
the King, I hold you quit, and I render to you all your lands and signiories,
and pardon you of all mine ill will, and put all rancour from me, and from
henceforth I retain you as one of my Peers. Sir, (quoth Huon) of this I
thank God and your grace. Then the Emperor Charlemaine clipped and kissed
Huon, in token of peace and love.

When the Lords saw that, they wept for joy, and thanked God that the peace was
made, and especially Duke Naymes was joyful: then within a while diverse of ye
Lords departed from the Court. Then king Oberon called Huon unto him and said:
Sir, I command you as dearly as you love me, that this same day four year
to come, that you come into my City of Momur, for I will give you my Realm
and all my dignity, the which I may lawfully do, for at my birth it was given
me that I might so do, for it lies in me to give it whereas I think best,
and because I love you so entirely, I shall set the crown upon your head, and
you shall be King of my Realm. And also I will, that you give unto Gerames all
your Lands and Signiories in these parts, for he has well deserved it, for
with you and for your love, he has suffered many great travails. Sir, (quoth
Huon) seeing this is your pleasure, I ought well to be pleased therewith, and I
shall accomplish all your commandments. Huon, (quoth Oberon) know for troth, I
shall not abide long in this world, for so is the pleasure of god, it be
houeth me to go into paradise, where as my place is appointed in the fayrie, I
shall bide no longer, but beware as dearly as you love your life, that ye
fail not to be with me at the day that I have appointed, beware that ye
forget it not, for if ye fail, I shall cause you to die an ill death, and
therefore remember it well. When Huon heard king Oberon, he was right joyful,
and stooped down to have kissed his feet, but then Gloriant and Mallaborn
took him up. Then said Huon: Sir, for this great gift I thank you.

Chap. LXXVI.
How King Oberon departed, and took leave o f king Charlemaine and of Huon and
Escleremond, and also how king Charlemaine departed from Bourdeaux.

WHen king Oberon had imparted to Huon as much as he would that he should do,
then he said to Huon, how he would depart, and took leave of him, and kindly
embraced him: then Oberon stood still a little while and beheld Huon and began
to lament, when Huon saw that, he was sorry in his heart and said. Ah Sir
king, I desire you to show me why you make this sorrow at your departure? Huon
quoth Oberon I shall show you, it is for pity that I have of you, for I swear
by him that created me, that before I shall see thee again, thou shall suffer
so much pain, travail, poverty, hunger, thirst, fear, and adversity, that
there is no tongue can tell it, and thy good wife shall suffer so much, that
there is no creature that shall see her, but shall have great pity of her. Ah
Sir quoth Huon, then I require you to aid and comfort me. Huon quoth Oberon,
what comfort would ye have of me? Sir quoth Huon, I desire you to let me have
your horn of Iuory, to the intent that if I should have any need, that you may
succor me, for so well I know you, that you will come and succor me. Huon,
(quoth Oberon) seeing I have agreed you with Charlemaine, trust not on me to be
succored in any of your business, suffice you with the gift that I have given
you, even all my Realm and puissance that I have in the Fayrie, trust on none
other succor of me^. Sir, I am sorry thereof quoth Huon, yt it may be none
otherwise.

Then King Oberon took leave of King Charlemaine, and of Duke Naymes, and of
all other Lords there present, and went to Huon and embraced him, and took his
leave of him, and of Escleremond and Gerames, and said to Escleremond: I
commend you to God, and desire you, if you have done well hitherto, that you
will persevere ever better and better, and bear always faith and honor to
your husband. Sir quoth she, I pray God I live no longer then, if I do the
contrary. Thus King Oberon departed, and after his departure, king Charlemaine
made ready his company, and took leave of Huon and of Escleremond and
Gerames, and they brought the King about two leagues off, and then took their
leaves of him, and of Duke Naymes, and of all the Lords. Then the king said
Huon, if any war be moved against you, or if that you have any great affairs
to do, let me have knowledge thereof, and I shall come and succor you, or else
send you such aid as shall be sufficient. Sir quoth Huon I thank your grace,
and so took his leave of the king, and returned to Bourdeaux, whereas he was
received with great joy. Now let us leave speaking of Huon, and speak of
Oberon of the Fayrie.

Chap. LXXVII.
How king Oberon devised with his knights, in the City of Momur in the Fayrie,
of the deeds of Huon of Bourdeaux, and of that which should happen after to
him.

WHen King Oberon was departed from Bourdeaux, he came to his City of Momur,
and there he began sore to weep, Then Gloryant demanded of him, why he made
that sorrow? Gloryant quoth Oberon, it is for the unhappy Huon, he is alone,
and I know well hereafter he shall be betrayed, and all for Escleremond his
wife, for though that he have ere this time suffered great travail, and much
trouble and poverty, yet I know surely, that he shall suffer more then ever he
did, and he shall have no succor of any man living. Why Sir, (quoth Gloriant)
how can that be? for Huon is a great Lord, and has many friends, and is the
most hardiest Knight now living, and he is at accord which King Charlemaine,
therefore he were a great Fool that would make him any war, or do him any
displeasure. Well, (quoth Oberon) God aid him in all his affairs, for ere it
be long he shall have much to do.

Thus Oberon entered into his rich Pallaice, and said again. Ah dear Knight
Huon. I know well you shall be betrayed for the love of your Wife, who is
fair and good, and if you take not good heed, you shall leave her and your
self in great peril of death, and if you escape the death, yet you shall
suffer such pain and poverty, that there is no Clearke living so sage that
can put it in writing. Sir, (quoth Gloriant) me thinks this cannot be,
seeing the love that is now between him and Charlemaine. Gloriant, (quoth
Oberon) yet I say again unto you, that before this year be passed, Huon shall
be in such distress and so hardly kept, that if he had Ten Realms, he would
give them all to be out of that danger that he shall be in. Then Gloriant was
pensive, and said. Alas Sir, for Gods sake never leave Huon your friend in such
danger, but rather succor him. Nay surely, (quoth Oberon) that will I not do,
seeing I have promised him my dignity and Land, he shall not be aided nor
succored by me, for he shall be closed in such a place, that I would not go
thither for Ten of the best Cities of the world. Now let us return unto
Huon, being in his Pallaice at Bourdeaux.

Chap. LXXVIII.
How Huon took homage of his men, and chasticed his Rebels, and of three
Pilgrims, by whom much ill fell after, as ye shall hear.

AFter that king Charlemaine was departed from Bourdeaux, and that Huon was
returned, he assembled al his Barons, to whom he made good cheer, and there
they took their Lands and Fees of him, and made their homage. Then he took
a Thousand chosen Knights with him, and road to his Lands, and took possession
of Towns and Castles, and was obayed in every place: except of one named
Angelers, who was Coozen german to Amerie, whom Huon had slain before at
Paris, before the Emperor Charlemaine for the love of Charlot. This Angelars
was false and a Traitor, and he had a strong Castle within three Leagues of
Bourdeaux, he would not hold of Huon, nor obey him though he was his Leige-man.
When Huon saw that he would not hold of him, nor do him homage: he was sore
displeased, and made promise, that if that he might get him perforce, he would
surely hang him up, and as many as were in the Castle with him.

Then Huon assailed the Castle, and they within defended themselves valiantly,
so that many were hurt and slain on both parts, Huon was there eight days,
and could not win the Castle: then Huon ordained before the place a pair of
Gallows, and upon the ninth day he made a fresh assault by such strength,
that he wanne the Castle and entered perforce. Angelars was taken and Forty
men with him, and they were all hanged on the Gallows. Then Huon gave the
Castle unto one of his Knights, and then he departed, and went to the Castle
of Blay, whereas he was received with great joy. And the fair Escleremond was
in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux, well accompanied with Ladies and Damsels, and as
they were devising together, there entered into the Pallaice three Pilgrims,
who right humbly saluted the Lady Escleremond. Sirs, (quoth the Lady) I pray
you show me out of what Country ye are come? Madame, (quoth one of them)
know for troth that we are come from Jerusalem, and have made our offering to
the holy Sepulcher, we have suffered much poverty in our journey, wherefore
Lady we require you humbly for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, to give us
some meat. Sirs, (quoth she) you shall have enough, and then she commanded
two of her Knights to see that the Pilgrims should have meat and drink, and
so they were set at the end of the Hall, and a Table covered for them, and
thereon bread, flesh, and wine, they were well served. Then ye Duchess
Escleremond went to visit them, and demanded where they were borne? and
whether they would go? Madame, (quoth they) we be all three borne at Vyenna,
and thither we would return. Sirs, God be your guide, (quoth the Lady) and
she gave them Ten Florents, whereof they had great joy and thanked the
Duchess: but alas, that guifte was ill bestowed, as you shall hear hereafter.

They departed and took their way, and travailed so long, that upon a Tuesday
they arrived half a League from Vyenna, and there they met Duke Raoul who was
going a kauking, he was a great and puissant Lord of Lands and Signiories, and
hardy in deeds of arms, great pity it was that he was such a Traitor, for
a more subtle man could not be known, for all the days of his life he was
ever a moouer of war and strife, and to do treason without having regard
either to kin or other, God confound him, for by him and his cause Huon
suffered so much ill, that it cannot be recounted. This Duke Raoul was to
marry, thus as he was in the feelds a hauking, and twenty Knights with him,
he met the said three Pilgrims, and anon he knew them. Then he road unto
them and said: Sirs, ye be welcome home, they were joyful, when they saw the
Duke their Lord salute them so humbly, and for joy thereof they showed him
such news, that by the occasion thereof, twenty Thousand Knights lost after
their lives, and Raoul himself received the death, and Huon had such trouble,
that he had never none such before, as you shall hear hereafter.

Then the Duke said to the Pilgrims: Friends, I pray you show me, by what
Countries you have passed to come hither. Sir, (quoth they) we have passed by
France, and first we were at Bourdeaux, and there we found the Duches
Escleremond wife to Huon of Bourdeaux, of whom you have hea^d so much
speaking, for she is so fair and so well favored, so sweet, pleasant and
gracious as can be devised, she is Daughter to ye Admiral Gaudise, whom Huon
has slain and taken her to his wife, great pity it is that Huon should have
such a wife, for she were meeter to be wife to a puissant King, for whosoever
had such a wife to lie by, might well say that there were none like her in all
the world, would to our Lord God Sir, that she were your wife. When the Duke
heard that, he changed color, and greatly coueted the Lady in his heart, so
that he was stricken with such violent and burning love, that he had to the
Lady Escleremond, as he promised and swear that he would have her whosoever
said the contrary, and said that he would slay Huon, and them have Escleremond
to his Wife. Thus Duke Raoul swear the death of Huon, and then he departed
from the Pilgrims: ill was bestowed the alms that Escleremond had given them.

Chap. LXXIX.
How Duke Raoul of Austrich, by the report of the Pilgrims* was amourous of the
fair Escleremond, and of the Tourney that was proclaimed, to the intent to
have slain Huon.

THus Duke Raoul returned to the City of Vyenna right pensive, and sent for
his privy counsel, and then he commanded them to assemble as many people as
they could, because he said that he would go to his Uncle the Emperor of
Almaine, to whom he sent a secret Message, that he should cause a Tourney to
be proclaimed in some convenient place, to the intent that the Knights of
Almaine and of other Countries should assemble there. The false Traitor did it
for a craft; to the intent that Huon by his prowess and hardiness should come
to that Tourney. The Messenger road forth until he came to Strasbrough,
whereas he found the Emperor who was uncle to Raoull, for he was the
Emperors brothers son. When the Emperor heard the message, he was
joyful, and not a little pleased to hear such news from his Nephew Duke
Raoull, whom he loved entierly, and to do him pleasure, he sent to all Lands
under his obeisance, to all Knights and Squiers, such as of custom were wont
to just and tournay, desiring them to come at a day assigned to the city of
Mayence, for there he would keep open Court.

Now the Emperor knew not for what intent his Nephew Raoull had devised that
tournay: Alas he did it but to find the place to slay Huon, to the intent to have
his wife Escleremond. Then Duke Raoull assembled his Barons, especialle such as
he had perfect trust in, he showed them at large the cause why he had assembled
all the people to go to the tournay. Therefore Sirs quoth he, I will that ye
swear to me the death of Huon of Bourdeaux, for I will that ye and I put all
our uttermost to slay him, and then I will wed his wife, of whom I am so
amourous, that I cannot sleep nor take any rest. The same time that they thus
made promise and swear the death of Huon, there was among them a varlet with
Duke Raoul, who in his youth had served Huon of Bourdeaux: now when he
understood, that if Huon came to ye Tournay, there he should be murdered: as
privily as he could, he departed from Vyenna, and never rested until he came
to the City of Bourdeaux, whereas he found Duke Huon in his Pallaice with his
Lords, who had been before advertised, that there should be held a great
Tournay at Mayence in Almaine, and he devised with his Lords how to go thither.

The same time the Varlet came thither, and humbly saluted Duke Huon, who said
to him: Friend where have thou been so long? Sir quoth the Varlet, I come now
from Vyenna in Austrich, where Duke Raoul who is Lord thereof, has proclaimed
a Tourney in every Country, but Sir, if you go thither, you shall be slain,
for this Tourney is devised for none other intent, because it is too well
known, that there can be no hye deeds of arms done in any place, but that
you will be present at it. And when they have slain you, then Duke Raoul will
have the Duchess your Wife in marriage: therefore Sir, (for Gods sake) advise
you well that you come not there, in as much as you love your life, for you
cannot escape, there be twenty Thousand men that have sworn your death,
therefore if you enter into the Tourney, you can never escape the death, and I
have heard Duke Raoul swear, that when he has slain you, he will keep all
your Lands. When Duke Huon had heard the Varlet, he swear by God and made a
solemn promise, that Duke Raoul should dearly buy his false treason.

Then the Duchess Escleremond kneeled down before Huon and said: Dear Lord,
I desire you to forbear your going thither at this time, for I have heard
often repeated, that this Duke Raoull is puissant and has great Lands, and
besides is Nephew to the Emperor of Almaine, and also I have heard say, that a
faller Traitor there is none living in this world. Madame quoth Huon, I have
well heard you, but by the Lord that fourmed me to his Image, though I should
loose half my lands, yet will I go to see the Traitor, what, thinks he to
abash me with his threatenings? If I may meet him at the Tournay, or in any
other place where soever it be, though he had with him ten Thousand men of
arms, and that I had alonely but my sword in my hand, I shall slay him
whatsoever should fall thereof, and let our Lord God do with me as it shall
please him: I shall never have joy at my heart till I have slain him.

When the Duchess heard Huon how he would do none otherwise, and that she
could not let him of his enterprise, she was sorrowful and said. Sir, seeing
it is your pleasure, reason it is that I must be content, but yet Sir I desire
you to take with you x.M. men well armed, to the intent that ye be not found
unprovided: so that if ye be assailed, yet ye may be of sufficient puissance
to resist your enemies, and that it will please you to suffer me to go with
you, and I will he armed with my sheeld and sword by my side, and if I may
meet Duke Raoull, I shall give him such a buffet, that I shall strike him from
his horse, for I am so displeased with him, that there is no joint in me but in
trembles for anger, and I shall never have joy at my heart till I be revenged
of him. When Huon heard the Duchess his wife, he was well comforted, and began
to laugh and said. Fair Lady, I give you great thanks for your words, but
ye are too far gone with child to ride armed, it is a vij. months past
since ye were first with child, then Huon made to be proclaimed in all his
lands, that every man should be ready to go with him to the Tourney at
Mayence. The Dukes intent was anon known throughout all the country, so that
it being spread abroad, the brute thereof came to the hearing of the Duke
Raoull, and when he heard that Huon would come to the Tournay he was not a
little joyful thereof, then he swear he would go and see Escleremond in the
guise of a Pylgrime, and then he put on a beggars garment, and took a
staff and a wallet, he showed his intent to them of his privy Council, they
would have stopped his going, but they could not.

Thus he apparelled himself like a beggar, and with an herb rubbed on his
face and hands, that such as had not seen him otherwise apparelled, could not
have known him, he was so foul and black, then he desired his men to keep
secret his enterprise. Then he departed from Vyenna, and never rested till he
came to the City of Bourdeaux, and so went unto the Pallayce, where he found
Huon amongst his Barons making great cheer and feast, for unto him were come
diverse Lords and Knights, devising of the Tourney that should be holden at
Mayence. Thus Raoull came before Huon, and desired him for the honor of our
Lord God to give him some meat and alms. Friend quoth Huon, thou shall have
enough, but I pray thee tell me from whence thou come, and whether thou will
go, and of what country thou art. Sir quoth Raoull, I was borne in the
country of Berry, but it is xx. years past since I was there, when I departed
thence I was but young, for if I saw my father or mother now before me I should
not know them, and Sir I came from beyond the Sea, whereas I have been prisoner
among ye Sarazins, the space of 14. years in a strong Castle, where I have
suffered much disease of hunger and cold, and at the last I escaped, by reason
of a young man, to whom I promised that if he could bring me to Acre in
sauegard, that I would then give him twenty Ducats of gold, the young man was
covetous to have the money, and found the means that he brought me to Acre,
whereas I found a kinsman of mine, who paid the young man the money the which
I had promised unto him, and also he gave me fifteen Ducates, the which I
have spent with coming hither. Friend, (quoth Huon) I pray unto God to aid
thee, for if thou were not so ill apparelled, thou should seem a man of a
high lineage, for it seems to me if thou were well armed and weaponed, and
were in some business, thou were like enough to be feared.

Chap. LXXX.
How after that Duke Raoul had been at Bourdeaux in the guise of a Pilgrim
to see the fair Lady Escleremond, he returned again to Vyenna.

AFter that Huon had long devised with Raoul, he washed and sat down to
diner and the Duchess his wife by him, then Huon commanded that at the end of
the Table right before his Table, Raoul the Pilgrim should be set, and there
he was well served: but Raoul had little care either of meat or drink, for his
thought was of another matter whereupon he sore studied, for before him he saw
the noble Duchess Escleremond, of whom he was so amourous, that he could not
withdraw his eyes from her, for the more he beheld her, the more he was
embraced with her love, he thought he never saw before so fair a Lady in all
his life, so that for the great beauty that was in her, he changed often
times his color, but it could not be perceived, because he was so black and
foul with rubbing of certain herbs, and he said within himself, that
whosoever had such a Lady to his Wife, might well make auant to be the
happiest man of the world, even he that might but have his pastime with so
fair a Lady, and sw^^re by the Lord that fourmed him, though he should be
damned in hell for ever, he would slay Huon and have his Wife in marriage, and
all Huons Lands to be his for ever. Alas that it had not pleased our Lord God,
that at this hour Huon might have known the treason of Raoull, he should
then have bought it full dearly.

When the Traitor had eaten and made good theere, Huon gave him a Gown,
shirt, hose and shoes, and monney for his dispense, Raoul took it, he durst
not refuse it but thanked Huon, and so took his leave and departed, he durst
no longer tarry for fear of knowledge, and as soon as he could he departed
out of the Town: of his iourneys I will make no long rehearsal, but he
labored so long that he arrived at Vyenna, then he went to his Pallaice,
whereas he was well received of his Lords, and they laughed when they saw him
in that apparel. Then within a while after he made him ready, and his men
who were a great number, and so departed from Vyenna, and took the way to
Mayence. When his Uncle the Emperor of Almayne was advertised of his coming,
he went and met him without the Town to do him the more honor, and when he
saw him, he was joyful and kissed him, and said: Fair Nephew, I am glad of
your coming, I have long desired to see you. The good Emperor knew nothing of
the treason, that his Nephew had purchaced against Huon of Bourdeaux, for if he
had known it, to have dyed in the quarrel, he would never have consented to
that treason. Thus hand in hand the Emperor and his Nephew Raoul entered with
great joy into the City of Mayence, whereas they were highly received, great joy
was made at their coming, much people were in the Town come thither to Just
and Tournay, and many other to behold the Triumph. Now let us speak of Huon
of Bourdeaux.

Chap. LXXXI.
How Duke Huon took leave of the Duchess his Wife, and how he arrived at
Mayence, and went to the Pallaice.

WHen Huon saw his time to depart from Bourdeaux, to go to the Tourney at
Mayence, he made ready his train, and took with him ten Thousand men of
arms for the guard of his person, of the best horsemen in all his Country:
then he took his leave of the fair Escleremond his Wife, who began sore to
weep when she saw his departure, right sweetly they kissed together at their
departing. Then he took his Horse, and he and his company departed from
Bourdeaux, and rested not until he came to Coleyne on the Rheine, there he
tarried two days to refresh him, and upon the third day he armed himself, and
called his company before him and said: Sirs, I will take my leave of you all,
for none of you shall go with me, be nothing abashed, for he that always
has saved me out of all perils, will not forsake me at this time.

When his men heard him, they had great marvel that he would take his Voyage
alone, and he said unto them. Sirs, have no doubt of me, for I shall not die
until mine hour be come. They of Coleyne enquired nothing of their estate,
for as then there was no war, and they believed that they would go to the
Tourney. When his Lords saw that he would thus depart, they were sorry that he
would go to the Tourney alone, and said one to another, we fear greatly that
he shall never return again, and we shall never have such another Master
again. Sirs, (quoth Huon) you shall not need to take any sorrow for me: for
certainly I know well, if any perilous business should come to me, that I
should be aided by King Oberon: but he needed not to have said so, for when
King Oberon departed from him, he had him not to trust upon any aid from him,
and therefore Huon was a fool and ill advised to trust thereon, or to
undertake so perilous an Enterprise as he did, whereby he was in great peril of
death, as ye shall hear hereafter.

When Huon was ready, he leapt upon his horse without any stirrup, clean
armed as he was, and after stretched him so in his stirrops, that the leathers
strained out three fingers, he was a puissant Knight armed or unarmed, and
greatly to be feared, he took leave of his men, and left them weeping in that
City of Coleyn. Then he road toward the City of Mayence, and so long he
road that he had a sight of the City, and then he saw about in the meadow many
Tents and rich Pauilions, pitched up with pummels of fine gould shining against
the Sun. Huon beheld them well, and so passed forth and entered into the
City, whereas he saw every street full of Knights and Squiers, abiding there
until the day of the Tourney. Huon passed forth until he came to the
Pallaice, whereas he found the Emperor and his Nephewe Raoul, whom Huon
loved but little, as he showed well shortly after as ye shall hear.

When Huon was come before the Pallaice, he saw the Emperor and Raoul his
Nephew going up the stairs: then Huon met with a great Almayne, and said to
him. Friend, I pray thee show me what be yonder two Princes that go up the
stairs, and that so much honor is done to them? Sir, (quoth he) the first is
the Emperor, and he that follows is his Nephew Duke Raoul, he was Son to
the Emperors Brother, the Tourney that shall be made, is done for the love of
him, and at his request, and after the Tourney, he thinks to marry a great
Lady, whose name shall not be known till the Tourney be done. When Huon
heard that, he blushed in the face for the great ire that he was in, for he
knew well, that Raoul (if he could find the means) would have from him his Wife
the fair Escleremond: but he promised in his mind, that first he should
dearly buy her. Friend, (quoth Huon) I desire you to do so much for me, as to
hold my horse until I return again out of the Hall, and that I have spoken
with the Emperor and with his Lords. Sir, (quoth the Squier) with a good will I
shall here hold your horse until you come. Now God aid Huon, for ere he might
return again, he was in great peril of death, as ye shall hear.

Chap. LXXXII.
How Huon slew Duke Raoul in the presence of the Emperor, sitting at his Table,
and of the maruailes that he did: And how in the chase that was made after
him, he struck down the Emperor, and wanne his good horse.

HVon who was full of ire and displeasure, went up into the Pallaice, and came
into the Hall, whereas he found many people, there was the Emperor, who had
newly washed his hands, and was set at the Table. Huon pressed forth before
the Table with his Sword in his hand, and said. Noble Emperor, I conjure thee
by the great virtue divine, and by your hopeful part of Paradise, or that your
Soul is to be damned, if case be that you say not the troth, and give true
judgment without falsehood, nor to spare to say ye troth for no man living,
although he be your nearest Parent. Friend, (quoth the Emperor) say your
pleasure, and I shall answer you. Sir, (quoth Huon) if you have wedded a
Lady, and love her dearly, and that she be fair, good, sweet, and sage, and
repleat with all good virtues, and that you know surely, that she loves you
entirely, as a good true wife ought to love her Lord and Husband, and then a
Traitor privily to purchase your death for love of your Wife, and if by
adventure after^ward you find him in the feeld, or in town, meadow or wood, in
Pallaice or in Hall, and that you might accomplish your thought and your
desire, against the same Traitor who did purchase the said treason against
you: I demand then of you, if you would slay him or not?

Friend, (quoth the Emperor) you have coniured me, and I shall answer you to
the troth. Not for the value of ten Cities I will not lie, therefore know for
troth, if I had a Wife such a one as you speak of, adorned with such fair
virtues, and whereof there be many such: Howbeit, if I had such a one as you
recite, and that I knew surely that she loved me entirely, then if I kn^w any
man living that would purchase me such a treason, although he were my near
Parent, if I might find him in what place so ever it were, and though I should
be slain in the quarrel, there should neither be Church nor Altar that should
save his life, but that with my two hands I should slay him: and also my heart
should serve me further, that after I had slain him, I would draw out his
heart out of his body, and eat it for despite. When Huon heard the Emperor,
he said: Oh right noble and virtuous Emperor, just and true judgment you have
given, the which I repeal not, but I shall show you what has moved me to
demand of you this judgment, if such a case should have fallen unto you. And
Sir, to the intent that you shall know the troth what has moved me thus to
do, you may see here before you he that would do in like case against me,
which is your Nephew Raoull, who has purchaced my death like a cruel and a
false Traitor, to the intent to have Escrelemond my Wife and all mine
heritages: the judgment that you have given is just and true, you shall never
be blamed in any Court, but you shall therein be named a noble Prince, and
therefore Sir, having found him so near me, that purchaceth for my death and
shame, I should never be worthy to appear in any Princes court, without I were
revenged of him, and I had rather die then to forbear him any longer.

Therewith he drew his Sword, and when Raoul saw the clearenesse of the Sword,
he was afraid because he was unarmed: howbeit, he thought that Huon would not
have been so hardy, as to do him any hurt in the presence of his Uncle the
Emperor: but when he saw that Huon did lift up his Sword to strike him, he
was in great fear, and fled to the Emperor to save his life, but Huon
perceived him so quickly, that he struck him with a reuerse stroke in such
wise, yt he struck off his head from his shoulders, and the body fell down
before the Emperor, and the head fell upon the Table in the dish before the
Emperor, whereof he had great dolor. God give me good luck, (quoth Huon) this
Traitor shall never be amourous of my wife, for now I am sure enough of him.
The Emperor who sat ye Table, had great sorrow at his heart when he saw his
Nephew dead before him, then he cried aloud and said. Sirs ye my Barons, look
that this Knight escape you not, I will never eat nor drink until I see him
hanged, I should have great sorrow at my heart if he should escape. Huon
understood him well, and feared him but little, but with his sword he laid on
round about him, and struck off arms, hands, and legs, so that there was none
so hardy that durst approach near to him, he slew so many that it was fearful
to behold him, within a short space he had slain more then eight and Twenty,
and the Emperor was in such fear, that he wiste not how to save himself,
for the great maruailes that he saw Huon do, he doubted because he was unarmed,
and Huon cried and said: Traitors I doubt you nothing. Then on all parts
Almaines and Bauiers assailed Huon, but he defended himself by such force and
puissance, that by the murder that he made, the blood ran upon the pauement
like a River.

Huon might have tarried too long, for the Emperor and his men went and armed
them, and Huon who saw well, that he could not long endure without great
peril of death, striking with his sword round about him, he withdrew back
down the stairs of the Pallaice, and none durst approach near him, because
they were unarmed and for fear of him. Huon by his hie prowess, for all his
enemies, came unto his horse and mounted upon him, and so issued out, and there
was a Knight called Galeram, who was coozen German to Duke Raoul, and he was
clean armed and mounted on a good horse, and he followed Huon and said: Abide
Villain, thou haste slain Duke Raoul my Coozen, without thou return unto
me, I shall strike thee behind.

When Huon heard him, he swear he had rather die then to refuse to turn unto
him, then he turned, and they couched their Spears, and they met so fiercely
together, that they gave each other maruailous great strokes, Galerames Spear
brake all to pieces, and Huon who had employed all his force and virtue, struck
Galeram upon the Sheeld with his Spear, the which was big and strong, so
that Galeram fell out of his Saddle so rudely, that in the fall he brake his
neck, and so lay dead upon the earth, and Huon who thought he had not been
dead, returned again to him, but when he saw that he stirred not, he departed
thence: but he tarried very long, for he saw well he was closed in round
about, and saw well without God had pity of him, he was not like to escape
without death or taken Prisoner. They cast at him Darts and Swords, and one
with a sharp Sword came unto him and gave him a great stroke, but his good
Armor saved his life, for all the strokes that he had received, he never
removed out of his Saddle.

When Huon saw in what danger he was, he called upon the Lord God humbly,
praying him to deliver him out of that peril, with his sword he did maruailes,
he slew and claue heads to the brain, that he seemed rather a Spirit of hell
then a man, for he that had seen him, would have said that he had been no
morta^l man. He saw pass by him a Knight of Almayne, called Sir Hans
Sperguer, as he passed by, Huon gave him such a stroke that he claue him to
the gyrdle: whereof the Almaynes were so abashed, that none durst approach
near to him, they feared him sore. Alas that his men at Coleyne had not known
what case he was in, they were so far off. Huon who fared like a wild bore,
he laid on round about him, so that his sword was all bloody, of the men that
he had slain and maimed. They cast darts at him so, that at last his horse
was slain under him, whereof he was sorrowful: howbeit like a courageous
Knight, with his sword still fought valiantly with his enemies, and he saw
where the Earl of Seyne came to him, to have stricken him with his sword, but
Huon met him so hastily, that he had no leisure to strike him, and Huon gave
him such a stroke, that his helmet could not save his life, for Huons sword
entered into his brain, and so he fell down dead among the horse feet.

Huon who was quick and expert, took the dead knights horse, and leapt upon
him, and when he saw that he was new horsed again, he was joyful, and then
he was able to depart in despite of his enemies: but the Emperor who had
great sorrow at his heart for the death of his nephew Raoull, made great haste
after Huon with ten thousand men with him, and so came from Mayens all on the
spur, desiring to overtake Huon, and so rode on before his men, for his horse
was so good, that he would run as fast as a bird could fly, in all the
world there was no horse like him. The Emperor on this horse followed Huon,
and as he rode, he saw all the way dead men lie that Huon had slain, he
spurred his horse, that anon he ouertooke Huon, and said. Thou Traitor, turn
thy sheeld toward me, or else my Spear shall go through thy body: for the
sorrow that lies at my heart, for love of my Nephew whom thou have slain,
constrayneth me to make have to be revenged of thee, nor I shall never have joy
at my heart until I have slain thee, much it greeueth me that I am
constrained to slay thee with my Spear, for I had rather hang thee. When Huon
heard the Emperor who was so near him, and saw how he was mounted on so good
a horse, he called upon our Lord God, and desired him of his grace to aid him
to conquer that horse, and when he saw that the Emperor was far before his
men, he turned his horse head toward the Emperor, and couched his spear, and
the Emperor came against him like the tempest, and they met together so
rudely, that their spears were pierced, so that the Emperors spear brake all
to shiuers, and Huons spear was so rude and strong, that he struck ye Emperor
with such puissance, that he was stricken from his horse to the earth sore
astonished, so that he wist not where he was, and Huon who had great desire to
have the Emperors horse, alighted quickly from his own horse, and took the
Emperors horse and mounted on him, and was thereof right joyous, then he said
to himself, that he doubted not them all, he struck the good horse with his
spurs, and found him quick and light under him.

There he left the Emperor lying on the earth, who was not a little content
that he was so soon succored, for if the Almaines had not quickly come, Huon
had slain him, but when the Almaynes came to their Lord, and found him lying
on the earth, they believed verily he had been dead they began to make great
sorrow, and the Emperor who was come again to himself said. Syrs, thanked be
God I feel^ no hurt, but I may well ride, but I have great sorrow at my heart,
that Huon has thus led away my good horse, and is escaped away, and also
has slain my two nephews: but Sirs I counsel you that none follow him, for
it shall be but a lost time, for the good horse that is under him and he that
is on him is so valiant in arms, yt he is greatly to be doubted, therefore I
counsel let us return back again, for we may loose more then we shall
win, but by the grace of God, ere it be three months past, I shall assemble
such a number of men, that the valleys and mountains shall be full of men,
then I will go to the City of Bourdeaux, and will not depart thence till I
have woonne it, and if I may get Huon, I shall make him die of an evil death,
and shall take and wast all his lands.

Chap. LXXXIII.
How Huon after that he was mounted upon the Emperors good horse, he arrived
at Coleyn, where he found his men, and how he departed thence: And of the
Emperor who lay enambushed in a wood, abiding there to have slain Huon.

THus as ye have heard Huon departed with the Emperors good horse, and left
the Emperor lying on the earth, who commanded his Barons to return back,
and not to follow Huon any further. Therewith there came to the Emperor a
Knight called Godun, he was borne at Norembridge, and he said. Sir, if you will
believe me, and do after my council, you shall do otherwise, you shall
return to Mayence this night, and ordain four Thousand of such men as you
have here, and send them within two Leagues of Coleyne on the hye way into
France, and there you shall find a little wood, and there let them lie
enambushed till Huon pass by them, for I know well he will go straight to
Coleyne this night, and lodge in a French-mans house that dwells there, and
in ye morning surely he will depart thence, and so pass by the said
ambushment, so that it shall not be possible to save himself alone, but either
he shall be slain or taken.

When the Emperor heard Godun, he said: Sir, you have given me good counsel,
and this is likely to be done, but it were convenient to send more then four
Thousand, for the great desire that I have to get him into my hands,
constrains me to cause him to be taken, to the intent to be revenged of him:
therefore I would go my self, and take with me ten Thousand men, and shall
go and ly in the place that you have appointed, for I shall never have perfect
joy at my heart as long as Huon is alive, for he has caused much sorrow at my
heart, for the death of my two Nephews whom so pitiously he has slain, let
us take our way about two Leagues beside Coleyne, nearer we will not
approach, to the intent that our coming be not known. Then he chose out ten
Thousand of the most valiantest men in his company, and the rest he sent back
to Mayence. Thus the Emperor road forth, and road so long that day and night,
that an hour before it was day he came to the said wood, and there laid his
ambush. And Huon rode so, after he was departed from the Emperor, that late in
the Evening he came to Coleyne, whereas he was received of his men with great
joy, then Gerames said. Sir, I require you show us of your adventures, then
Huon showed them every thing, and the manner how he had slain Duke Raoul, and
how he departed from Mayence, and how he was pursued, and how he wanne the
Emperors good horse: whereat Gerames and all the other had great joy, and
thanked God of his fair adventure, and had great marvel how he escaped:
but they knew nothing what the Emperor was about to do, nor that he was in
the wood abydinge there for Huon.

That night Huon and his company were at Coleyne making good cheer, and the
next morning they heard service, then they mounted on their horses and issued
out of the town, they were to the number of thurteene Thousand hardy fighting
men, and when they were out in the feelds, Huon like a good man of war said.
Sirs, I desire you let us keep together, and ride like men of war, to the
intent that we be not suddenly taken, and so they did: the day was fair and
clear, they might well be perceived a far off, as they were by the Emperor
of Almaine, who lay enambushed for Huon, the Emperor espied them first, and
said to his company. Sirs, yonder a far off I see many people coming
toward us, they seem unto me men well expert in arms, never believe me but
they be Frenchmen, and he that is their Captain is Huon of Bourdeaux, he is
not come hither like a small Personage, but he is highly accompanied like a
great and mighty Prince: I see well he is valiant by that he has done, he is
so noble and hardy that none may be compared to him, you have well seen, how
that he all alone came into my Pallaice, and there slew my Nephew Duke Raoul,
wherewith my heart is in great displeasure, he is greatly to be doubted, for
without God help us, we shall have enough to do with him, would to God that
he and I were at accordment and agreed, for he is so noble and so valiant that
he fears no man. You have well seen since he departed from Mayence, he has
slain more then forty of my men, and has borne me to the earth, and he has
taken from me my good horse, whereby he may be well assured, that there is no
man shall take him if he be upon his back: howbeit we must set upon him, for
my heart shall never be in ease as long as he lives: therefore Sirs, I desire
you every man, this day show the love that you bear unto me, and the sauegard
of your lives, for to fly away avails not: therefore Sirs, set on together,
and do so that we may have the first advantage.

Chap. LXXXIIII.
Of the great Battle within two Leagues of Coleyn, between the Emperor of
Almaine and Huon of Bourdeaux, and of the Truce that was taken between them.

HVon who road before his Barons devising with old Gerames, regarded on his
right hand toward ye little wood, and he saw in the wood great clearenesse, by
reason of the Sun shining on the healmes and on the spears points, whereby
he perceived plainly, that there was much people hidden in the wood, he
showed them to Gerames and to his other company, and said: Sirs be in a
surety, that without battle we cannot escape, here is the Emperor who lies
in wait for us. I desire you let us do so, that he shall have no cause to
make any auaunt of us, yonder you may see them, how they set themselves in
order to abide us, therefore let us quickly set on them: and so they did in
such wise, that with the very running of their horses the earth trembled, and
the sun lost his light, by reason of the powder that rose up into the air
from both parts.

Huon who ran before on his puissant horse, beheld Godun who was foremost in
his company, he ran at him with a strong spear, so that he ran him
clean through the body, so that he fell down to the earth, and with the same
spear Huon met Crassyn Polinger, who bare the Emperors banner, Huon struck him
so fiercely, that he bare horse and man and banner all to the ground, whereof
the Almaines and Bauiers were sorrowful. Huon did so much ere his spear was
broken, that he first bare five to the earth, so that they had no power after
to relieve themselves, there were many spears broken, and many a knight borne
to the earth, and there dyed among the horse feet, for the father could not
help the son, nor the son could not help the father, and many a horse
ran abroad in the field, and their Masters lying dead in the blood and mire.
Huon who rode about in the battle slaying and wounding his enemies, beheld
on his right side, and saw the Earl Sauary slaying many of them of Bourdeaux.
Ah good Lord quoth Huon, if yonder knight reign long, he shall do me great
damage. Then he rode to him, and gave him such a stroke with his sword, so
that he struck off his shoulder and arm so rudely, that it fell upon the
earth, so that for the great pain that the Earl Sauary endured, he fell from
his horse, and there was slain among the horse feet, whereof the Emperor
(who was there by) right sorrowful when he saw another of his nephews slain,
and said. Ah Huon, of God be thou cursed, since thou have slain so many of my
friends, I shall never have joy in my heart, till I have thee in my hands to
hang thee. Sir (quoth Huon) ere you have taken me, you are like to loose more
of your friends, and beware of your self, that you come not into my hands,
by your nephew Raoull ye have all this damage, who by his falsenesse thought
to have betrayed me, and to have had my wife: if I have slain your nephews
and your men, I have done it in defending mine own body, I say to you if you
be not well aware of me, I shall bring you to the point that it shall be hard
for you to be carried away in a litter. Huon quoth the Emperor, the great hate
that I have to thee for the death of my nephews, makes me feel much dolor at
my heart, that I had rather die then that I should not be revenged of thee,
therefore beware thou of me, for I shall neither eat nor drink, till I have
thee either quick or dead.

Then they two went back to take their course together, but ere they met, the
Almaynes came running thither, for the fear that they had of loosing their
Emperor, and on the other part came thither the old Gerames, who fought so
fiercely, that whomsoever he struck with a full stroke, had no need of any
Surgion, and his company failed not for their parts, and Huon with his good
sword opened the thick prease, so that the Almaynes greatly doub^ed him. Huon
with his noble chivalry, caused his enemies to recule back half a bows
shoot. Then there was a knight of Almain saw well, that without some remedy
were found, the Emperor and his company were like to be slain, he went out
of the battle as privily as he could, and ran on the spurs, and rested not
till he came to Coleyn, where incontinent he rode to the Prouosts house, and
found him in his house newly reine from mass, then the Knight said to him. Sir
Provost, if ever you will see the Emperor alive, cause the commons of this
City to be armed, and come and succor the Emperor hastily, for when I came
from him he had great need of aid: there is Huon of Bourdeaux, who has
slain three of his nephews, and this other day he was lodged in this City,
the Emperor knows well that you knew nothing thereof, for Huon had lodged
his men in the suburbs, and in other little houses, because he would not be
perceived. Sir Provost make haste in this business.

When the Provost heard what danger the Emperor was in, he sounded the watch
bell, and made to be cried in every street, that every man that was able to
bear arms, should arm them, and go out into the field to succor the
Emperor, who was in great danger of his life. When the Bourgesses of the
town heard that cry, every man armed them as well as they could, some were
harnessed behind, and some in a Jack all smoked, and with staves and other
weapons, what a foot and a horse back, there went out of the City twenty
thousand men, if you had seen the horsemen, you would have laughed at them, for
it seemed they were set on horse back in despite, there was never seen so
rude a company it was no marvel, for they were not accustomed to ride in
harness. The Provost went before, and exhorted them to do their deuoirs, so
they took their way to come to the battle, whereas Huon and his company did
part of their wills, and the Emperor seeing that, he began to loose his men
and place, he rode searching in the battle for Duke Huon, whereas he found
by adventure Huon, who had then newly slain by adventure the Emperors
Seneschall.

When that the Emperor saw him slain, he was right sorrowful, and in a
great rage he cried to Huon and sayd^: Thou knight that never art satisfied to
shed the blood of my men, to abate my lineage and force, I pray thee turn thy
shield unto me, for if thou knew the great hate that I bear thee, thou
would never appear before me. Sir quoth Huon, I marvel that you so sorely
hate me, and have tarry^d so long for revenge, therefore beware, for if I can I
will send you after your Nephews, whom ye say that ye love so well. They
took their course with great and rude spears, and so came together like the
tempest, and met so rudely, that the buckles of their Armor all to brast, and
the Emperors spear brake all to pieces, but Huons spear was big and
strong, and therewith he struck the Emperor with such puissance, that his
spear ran through his shoulder, so that the Emperor fell to the earth so
rudely, that with the fall he brake the bone of his thigh, whereby he was in
such dolor that he swounded. And when Huon saw him lie on the ground, he came
to him with his sword in his hand, and would have slain him if he had not
been succored: but there came so many Almaines, that whether Huon would or
not, they took the Emperor and bare him out of the field, and laid him in the
wood, and then demanded of him how he did. Sirs quoth he, I am sore hurt, for
my thigh is broken, whereby I endure more grief than I can abide, but as for
death, I trust by the grace of god I shall escape it. When they heard that,
they were all joyful, and said: Sir, know for troth, that your men are sore
discomfited, for they be so sore oppressed by Huon and his men, that we fear
all your men will be slain, we will go again to the battle, and leave
some with you to look unto your Majesty. Well quoth the Emperor, but your
force nor your defense cannot avail you any thing against Huon, nor against
his men. But I shall show you what ye shall do, ye shall send quickly to
Huon, and desire him in my name to cease slaying of my men, and that there may
be a truce had between him and me, for the space of half a year, for within
that time I hope to find some other treaty that he and I might be friends:
and if he refuse this, then I see none other remedy but that we shall be all
slain or taken, and then he will cause me to die in some noisome prison. Sir
(quoth his knights) we shall do your commandment, but we fear sore that we
shall not be heard. Sirs quoth the Emperor, go to him and do the best ye
can.

Then they returned to the battle, whereas they found their company ready
to fly away, for they were near all slain and taken, the Knights from the
Emperor came to Huon, and desired him in the name of the Emperor that he
would cease the battle, and sound the treaty, and they would do likewise in
the same manner, and that there might be a firm truce between them for half
a year, and in that season they trusted that some good ways would be found,
that the Emperor and he might be good friends together. Sirs (quoth Huon) if
the Emperor your Master had me in that danger which he is in, he would not
suffer me to escape alive for all the gold in the world, howbeit, I am content
that he have truce for half a year, the which I shall surely keep on my
part, and if I be assailed, I shall defend me, and if so be that he come to
Bourdeaux to assail me, by the help of God and my good friends, I shall do
the best that I can. But if he will have peace with me, and pardon me his
displeasure, for the death of his nephews, I shall be ready to make peace,
and I shall make amends for all wrongs, though I was not the beginner.

Then Huon caused the retrait to be sounded, and in likewise so did the
Almaynes, who had thereof great joy: it came to them at a good point, for else
all had been slain or foiled. When he had the upper hand, now that he pursued
still his chase, for then he might have had an end of that war, and neither
shield nor spear more broken, whereas after many a man was slain, and was the
cause that the City of Bourdeaux was lost, and the fair Escleremond taken and
set in prison in the City of Mayens, and Huon suffered so much pain and
trouble, that no mortal man can show it. Thus as you have heard Huon granted
the truce, and so both parts withdrew, whereof the Emperor and his company
were right joyful. Then Huon called his company, and showed Gerames and his
Lords how he had granted truce to the Emperor for half a year, and
therefore I charge you all not to break the peace: the Emperor was glad when
he heard it, for he knew well he had escaped a great danger. Then he charged
all his men on pain of death, that they should not break the truce. And Sirs
(quoth he) I pray you make ready a litter that I may be carried to Coleyne,
for the pain that I feel in my legs causes all my body to tremble, and
when I come there, I will tarry till I be whole. Sir (quoth his Lords) your
commandment shall be done, then they laid the Emperor in a litter, sore
complaining the loss and death of his nephews and Lords that were slain,
and his leg grieved him sore. Then Huon said to Gerames, Sir thanked be God
we have vanquished the Emperor, and slain many of his men, therefore it is
good that we return now to Bourdeaux, I have great desire to see my wife
Escleremond, who thinking long for my coming, I am sure she is sorrowful
that I have tarried so long Sir (quoth Gerames) if ye have great desire to
return, so have al other of your servants, they would gladly see their wives
and children, and some would see their lovers.

Chap. LXXXV.
How Huon granted the truce to the Emperor, and how the Provost of Coleyne
came and assailed Huon, not knowing of any peace taken.

WHen Huon understood the old Gerames, he had great joy, then he sounded the
Trumpets with such brute, that marvel it was to hear, and commanded every
man to set forward toward Bourdeaux. Then he beheld on his right hand, and saw
them of Coleyne coming in a great number, they were well near twenty
thousand Burgesses and other, they came with banners displayde ready to fight.
When Huon saw them, he had great marvel from whence they should come so
hastily. Then he said to his men: Sirs, I perceive clearly we be betrayed, for
if I had pleased, the Emperor nor his men could not have escaped, he has
falsely betrayed me, since under the color of truce they come to set newly
upon me.

Thus Huon said by the Emperor without cause, for he knew nothing thereof,
nor that any succor should have come to him. Sirs (quoth Huon) let us rest
here, and tarry till they come nearer to us, then let us set on them with such
haste, that they shall not know what to do. Sir (quoth his men) have no doubt,
we shall not fail you for fear of any death, we trust to slay so many, that
the earth shall be covered with the dead bodies of your enemies. Huon ordered
his battle, and the Provost of Coleyne comforted his men, saying: Sirs, our
Emperor is discomfited by Huon and his company, who be yonder abiding before
us, they think to depart in sauegard, but they have no power to do so, for
the most part of them are sore hurt, and their horses sore travailed, wherefore
they shall the sooner be discomfited. Then the Provost and his men ran
quickly upon Huon and his men, there began a fierce battle, wherein many a
most valiant man lay on the earth dead, and at the very first brunt there
were so many slain, that the whole field was covered with dead and maimed
men: some were overthrown without any hurt at all, and yet they could never
rise, because of the great prease of the horses that did run over them. Huon
who was very full of ire, because he had thought that under the color of
truce he was assailed, he ran fiercely at a knight, who had done very great
hurt among his men, it was he that went to Coleyne for that succor, and Huon
struck him clean through the body with his Spear, so that he fell down dead
to the earth.

Then Huon cried his cry to call his men together, he laid on the right side
and on the left, so that he did cut of arms and legs, and raced their
helmets from their heads, he seemed rather a man of the Fayrie then a mortal
man. But he had much to do, for his men who had fought all the day, were sore
trauayled and weary, howbeit they defended them selves right valiantly, and
slew so many of the Commons of Coleyn, that the blood ran on the ground in
great streams, and the Emperor who issued out of the wood in his Lyttour,
when he came into the field, he heard the brute and cry of the Battle,
wherewith he was so abashed. Then he demanded what noise it might be. Sir
(quoth a Knight) it is the good Provost of Coleyn, who has brought with him
the Commons of the City of Coleyn to aid and succor you. Sir, (quoth the
Emperor) and he shall dearly buy it: howbeit, I think he knows not of the
Truce that we have taken with Huon, for if I knew that he was advertised
thereof, I should cause him to die an il death. Go to him and command him that
incontinent he go to Huon, to make amends for his trespass, and if he will
not do it, I charge you incontinently to slay him. When the Emperor had given
his commandment to one of his knights, he rode as fast as he might to ye
Provost, who was right sorrowful, for that he had lost four thousand of his
Commons, and the knight was slain that came to him. Then the Emperors knight
said. Sir Provost, ye have done right ill, seeing ye have broken the truce
that was made between him and Huon, if the Emperor may get you, ye shall
never see fair day more, without incontinent ye go to Huon, and deal so with
him that he be content, so that no reproach be laid to the Emperor. When the
Provost and his company heard the Emperors commandment, they were sore
abashed, and reculed back. And the Prouest, who was in great fear for that he
had done, and desiring to accomplish the Emperors commandment, struck his
horse with his spurs, and rested not till he hrd found Duke Huon. Then he
lighted a foot, and took his sword and said. Ah right noble and virtuous
Prince, I desire thee in the honor of Jesus Christ have pity on me, and
pardon me the injury that I have done against you, the which I have done
without the knowledge or license of the Emperor, who will cause me to die a
shameful death without ye pardon me, for all I knew not of the truce
between you and the Emperor, for I thought he had been dead: Sir that which
I have done, was to the intent to rescue my rightful Lord, and thereby I have
lost this day more then four thousand Burgesses and commons of the City of
Coleyn, and the most part of my best friends, and therefore Sir, I pray you have
pity on me, else the Emperor will slay me, or set me in perpetual prison.

Chap. LXXXVI.
How Huon arrived at Bourdeaux, and of the counsel of the fair Escleremond
his wife, the which he would not believe nor follow.

WHen Huon understood the Provost, he had great pity, and though that he ought
in reason to pardon him, seeing that that he had done was in a just cause, and
that he was not advertised of the truce taken between the Emperor and him.
Then Huon approached to the Provost and said: Friends arise up, I pardon you
this trespass that you have done for your Lord, and it is but reasonable,
since ye knew nothing of the truce, ye have done as a true subject ought to do
to his Lord, and I cannot be angry with you for the same.

Then the Provost took leave of Huon, and returned to the Emperor, who was
then near to Coleyn, and Huon rode forth toward Bourdeaux, and so on a
Wednesday about dinner he entered into Bourdeaux, whereas he was received with
great solemnity of the Bourgesses, and of all the Clergy of the City. Then
he alighted at his Pallaice, whereas he was by the Duchess Escleremod well
received with great joy, and she demanded of him if he were well and in good
estate. Fair Lady (quoth Huon) thanked be our Lord God I am in good health.
Sir (quoth she) of your coming I am right joyous, and I desire you to show me
of your adventures. Madam (quoth Huon) know for truth I have been at Mayens,
whereas I found the Emperor, and with him Duke Raoull his nephew, who had
proclaimed a tourney, and because he was advertised of my coming, his
intention was that if he had found me there, he had concluded with his men to
have slain me, but by the grace of God I have done so much, that in the
presence of the Emperor his uncle, and all them that were there present, I
struck off his head, because he made his auaunt, that as soon as he had slain
me, he would have had you to his wife, and all mine heritage. And when I had
slain him, I departed in haste to Mayens, and it was not long after, but that
the Emperor followed me with all his men, mounted upon the good horse that ye
have seen, who is so good, that I believe surely there is not such another in
the world, and the Emperor who had great desire to revenge the death of his
nephew Duke Raoull, vaunced himself a bow shoot before his company, and
cried after me with many injurious words. And when I saw that he was far off
from his men, I turned toward him, and ran and bare him to the earth, then I
took the good horse and mounted on him, and let mine own go, and when his men
saw him lying on the earth, they feared lest he had been dead, they assembled
about him, and took no heed to follow me, because they knew well it was but
a folly to follow me, seeing I was mounted on the Emperors good horse.

Thus I departed from them, and went and lay all that night at Coleyne, whereas
I found my men, whom I had left there when I went to the Emperors Court all
alone, the next day I departed, but I was not gone far out of Coleyn, when
the Emperor and ten thousand men met me in the way, whereas they had lien
in a little wood in wait for me. Then they ran at me and at my men, there
was a great battle on both parts, and many slain and wounded: but I did so
much by the grace of God and my good company, that I overcame them, and I slew
two of his nephews, and I bare the Emperor to the earth, and when he saw that
the loss of the battle ran on his side, he sent to me then a messenger to
have truce for half a year, the which I granted, because I thought I had
done him displeasure enough, as in slaying of three of his nephews. Thus we
departed, and as he returned, I met the Provost of Coleyn, who brought with him
twenty thousand men to have rescued the Emperor, and so we fought together.
But as soon as the Emperor was advertised thereof, he sent and commanded
that he should no more fight with me. Then the Provost came to me and cried me
mercy for that which he had done, excusing himself that he knew nothing of
the truce. Then we made to sound the retrayt on both parts: and thus we
departed without any more strokes giving, whereof I thank God that I am thus
escaped.

Sir (quoth Escleremond) ye ought to thank God that he has sent you that
grace, for I have heard say, that the Emperor of whom you have slain his two
nephews, is great, puissant, and a rich Prince, right sage and expert in the
wars, wherefore it is to be feared, that he will not let the matter thus to
rest. Madam (quoth Huon) I know well this that you say is true, I think well
he be displeased with me for the death of his nephews, and many other of his
kin, thus as I have said I iusted with him two times, and at the second time I
struck him to the earth in such wise that he brake his thigh, so that he was
constrained to be borne thence in a litter, and it has been told me since,
that the loss of his good horse greeueth him more then the loss of his men.
Lady to show you the perils and adventures that I have had since I departed
from you, it would be too long to show you. But surely I think as soon as the
truce is expired, that then the Emperor with all his puissance will come and
besiege me here in Bourdeaux, for it has been showed me of troth, that then
the Emperor has so made his oath and promise, and has sworn by his crown
imperial, that he will not depart hence till he have taken and destroyed the
City. Sir (quoth Escleremond) if you will believe me, ye shall resist this,
and I shall tell you how, ye know well I have a brother called king Salybraunt,
who is king of Bougye, the which extends on the one side near to Mombraunt,
and on the other side near to Trypoley in Barbary, he may lead in battle a
hundred thousand men, and Sir, surely he is a good Christian, howbeit there
are but few that know it, verily he has believed in Jesus Christ, and Sir if
you will go to him and desire his aid, by the same token, that when you were
prisoner in Babylon, I discovered the secrets of my mind to him, and showed
him of the love between you and me, and how ye would lead me into France,
whereof he was joyful, and desired me affectuously that I should do so much
to you, that we might come and see him in his own Realm.

But the adventure fell so, that our departing fell otherwise then we had
devised, he was there, and saw how my father was slain, and all such as were
with him, then for fear he ran away, and did hide him in a garden behind
the Pallayce, and there tarried till it was night, and then he stole away and
went into his own Realm, there shall ye find him if you will go thither, I
know surely that he will make you exceeding great good cheer, and will not
refuse for to aid and succor you, for he will be so exceeding puissaunt and
mighty, that he will bring with him more then a hundred thousand Sarizens,
and also Sir, I would counsel and advise you, for to take along with you some
five or six Priests well furnished with Oil and cream, for as soon as he
has his men out of his own Country, he will cause them to be christened,
and such as will not, he will cause them to die an ill death. Sir, I require
you believe my counsel at this time, for you know well, that out of France
you shall get no succor, for if some would, yet they dare not for doubt of King
Charlemaine, the hate that he has to you is not yet quenched, for the death of
his son Charlot he will never forget, and Sir if ye go not to my brother
for succor, ye may happen to repent it, and peradventure it may be too late,
and do as he does, that shuts the stable door when the horse is stolen.
Thus the fair Lady Escleremond exhorted Duke Huon her husband, whom she
loved entierly.

Chap. LXXXVII.
How Huon had great joy for the birth of Claryet his Daughter.

WHen Huon had well heard his Wife, he said: My right dear Lady and
Companion, right well I know the great love that you bear to me, the which
has constrained you to say thus, whereof I thank you. But by the Lord that
upon the Cross died for to redeem humane Lineage, I will go to no place, nor
send for any succors, until I see them before my City, and that I have cause
to labor for succors, nor until I feel the strokes of Almaines and Bauiers,
that they can give when they be out of their own Country, nor as long as my
sheeld is hole and found, first I think they shall feel the sharpness of my
Spears head and good Sword, and yet by Gods grace I shall not abandon you, nor
leave my City and good Burgesses, for it might greatly be laid to my reproach
if I should thus go away. Alas Sir quoth Escleremond, ye may well know that
this that I have said, is for the fear that I have of you, for I have been
well advertised, that the Emperor sore hates you, and not without cause, for
his Nephews and Lords that ye have slain, and therefore Sir if ye will
believe me, ye shall have men to defend you brought hither by the king my
brother, so that when the Emperor is come into your land, it shall lie in you
either to make peace or war at your will: reason it were, that you made him
some amends for the hurts that ye have done unto him. And on the other part,
if he will have no peace, the^ it shall lie in you to make him such war, so
that he shall not depart without your agreement and to his great loss. Sir,
the fear that I have to loose you, constrayneth me thus to say, I have heard
it often times said, that the entry into war is large, but the issuing out
thereof is very straight, nor there is no war but it causes poverty. But
seeing it is your pleasure not to believe me, it is reason that I must be
content that your pleasure shall be fulfilled: then they entered into other
devises, and great joy and feasts were made in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux
between Huon and the Lords of the Country.

At last the fair Lady Escleremond, who was great with child, fell upon
trauayling, and she prayed to god for help, and suffered great pain, whereof
Huon had great pity when he heard thereof, for the love between them was
exceeding great, at last the Lady was brought to bed of a fair Daughter,
whereof Huon thanked God: then entered into the Ladies chamber a great number of
the Ladies of the Fairie, and came to Escleremonds bedside and said. Lady,
ye ought (...) to thank God, for ye have brought forth the fairest and best
creature that as now is in the world, and to whom our Lord god has granted
most graces at her birth, for a more fair, me dest, wise, and courteous has
not been borne this C. years past, for she shall have such destiny and
fortune in this world, that of the Realm of Aragon she shall be crowned
Queen, and she shall so govern her self, that she shall be accounted of, as
if she were a Saint in Paradise. At Tortouse there is the Church where she is
honored, the which is founded in her name, and is named Saint Clare.

Escleremond was joyful of the words of these Ladies of the Fairie, and great
joy and feasting was made every where for the birth of this Child, who was
greatly regarded of the Ladies of the Fayrie, and they said each to other, that
this Child was the fairest creature in all the world, they took this Child
each after other, and blessed it three times, and then they laid it down and
departed suddenly, so that no man wist not where they were become, whereof all
the Ladies and other had great marvel. This tidings was brought unto Huon, he
was right joyful and said: A worthy King Oberon, I believe surely that as yet
you have not forgotten me: now I doubt nothing the Emperor nor all his
puissance, seeing you have remembrance of me. Then Huon came into the Hall,
and thither his Daughter was brought unto him to see, he took her in his
arms and showed her to his Lords, who were very joyful to see her. Then she
was borne to the Church, and with great solemnity christened, and named
Clariet, because she was so fair and clear to behold. Then she was brought
to the Duchess, who had of her great joy. When the Duchess had kept her
Chamber a Month, then she was churched, whereof all the Court was joyful, and
such feasting was made, that if I should show you the riches and nobleness
that was there showed, it should be ouer-long to rehearse. Therefore I will
leave speaking thereof at this time until another season.

Chap. LXXXVIII.
How the Emperor assembled a great host, and came unto Bourdeaux.

YE have at large heard here before, the manner and cause why this war was
moved, between the Emperor of Almaine and Huon Duke of Bourdeaux, the which
after the Truce was expired, and that the Emperor was hole of his thigh that
Huon had broken: he published the war again, and sent over all his Empire,
that every Duke, Earl, Baron, Knight and Squier should come to him, and
Soldiers from all parts, and that within a Month they were to be at the City
of Mayence, to the intent to make war upon Huon of Bourdeaux. This
commandment was published, and such diligence was made, that by the day
appointed, every man was come to the City of Mayence, and lodged in the City,
and in Pauilions about the City: there were assembled more then forty
Thousand, and all men well appointed for the war. When this Emperor who was
named Tirrey saw them, he was very joyful, and sore threatened Huon, and made
promise to all his Barons that he would never return into his own Country,
until he had first slain Huon, who had done him so great damage.

Then he commanded his Constables and Marshals to be ready to depart the
next day, and to take the way toward Coleyne with all his Artilerie and
carriage, the which was done. The next day the Emperor entered into the feeld,
and so road toward Coleyne, and when the Emperor was within a League, then
there met with him the old Sauarie his Brother: who was Father to Duke Raoul
slain by Huon. when these two brethren met together, there was great joy made
between them. But then Duke Sauary began to weep, and said to his brother
the Emperor. Sir of your coming I am right joyful: But when the pitious
death of my dear beloved son your nephew Raoull comes to my mind, there
is no member of me but for dolor and displeasure trembles, nor I can never
have perfect joy at my heart, as long as he that has done me this
displeasure lives.

This Duke Sauary was a noble man, but between him and his son Raoull was
great difference: for the Duke Raoull was the vntruest Traitor that ever lived:
the which wickedness proceeded by the Duchess his mother, who was daughter to
Hurdowin of France, the most vntruest and falsest Traitor that as then lived
in the world. When the Emperor heard his brother speak, the tears fell from
his eyes, and he embraced him and said. My right dear brother, your dolor
much displeases me, for your dolor is mine, and thereof I will have a part,
and if ye have much joy, my part shall likewise be therein. But it is not
possible for us to have him again for whom we make this sorrow. God aid Huon
now from his enemies, for they greatly desire his death: yet oftentimes they
that desire another man's death, auaunceth their own. Thus as you have heard,
the Emperor and Duke Sauary entered into the City of Coleyne, whereas they
were received with great joy, and so rode to the Pallayce, and there they
supped. I will make no long rehearsal of the good cheer that they made there.
Then after Supper they went to their rest, and the next morning rose and heard
service, and took a sop in wine, and then departed out of Coleyne. It was a
goodly host to behold, they and their carriage and their artillery reached
four leagues of length. Thus they all had sworn the death of Huon, they
passed by high Borgoyn and by Dolphinne, and so passed the river of Roan, and
so into the country of Bourdeaux. Now I will leave speaking of them till
another season.

Chap. LXXXIX.
How the Emperor Tirrey of Almaine besieged the City of Bourdeaux, and how
Huon made him ready to fight with his enemies.

THus you have heard here before, the devises that the Duchess Escleremond
had made to her husband Huon, who as soon as she was churched, Huon sent his
commandment through all his country, every man to be ready in arms, and to
come to Bourdeaux, because he was advertised of the coming of his en^mies. The
messengers made such diligence, that within fifteen days after every man was
come to Bourdeaux, and there Duke Huon received them with great joy. Then he
repaired the City and the towers and walls, and it was well furnished with
victuals and artillery, as in such a case it well appertained, for at that
time the City of Bourdeaux was not so strong as it is now, when Duke Huon saw
the City so well garnished with men and victuales, he was right joyful, and
then he called to him the old Gerames, and said: my right dear friend, ye see
well this war that is apparent between the Emperor and me, and now we be
well advertised of his coming, who is ready to come with all his (...), to
besiege this our City, and therefore my hearty dear friend* who has aided
me in so many businesses, I pray you counsel and aid me now, for in all the
conduct of my war, I will that ye have the charge, and that you will comfort
my men well, so that of us there be no evil report ma^e, and that our enemies
have no cause to praise the war that they have against us, nor that when they
be returned into their countries, that they make not their auaunts among their
wenthes and their lovers.

Sir quoth Gerames, I thank you of the honor and great trust that you have in
me, howbeit, ye have many other more sage and hardy then I am; to whom this
great charge should better appertain then to me. But Sir, as for me, I shall
so acquit me, that I trust I shall not be reprehended.

Thus as you have heard, Huon made his devises among all his Barons, and made
all his ordinances for the defense of the City, and the manner of their
issuing, and appointed men for their rescue in reculing. And the Emperor was
entered into the Country of Bourdeaux with a mighty army, burning and
destroying the Country, whereof the poor people were sore abashed, because
they never had war before, and thus the Emperor never rested wasting and
destroying the Country, till they came before the City of Bourdeaux, and
there he pitched up his tents and pauillions, and the Emperor lay on the way
leading to Paris, on the other part Duke Sauary father to Raoull was lodged by
the Emperors marshalles, so that all the City was closed round about. Huon
who was within the City, beheld their countenaunces and manner of their
lodging: he commanded that all his men should be ready to issue out upon
their enemies, the which they did. Then Huon armed himself very richly, and
mounted upon his good horse, the which was the Emperors, and swear that ere he
returned again, he would show his enemies what they of Bourdeaux could do.
When he was mounted on his good horse, he came into the City, and found the
old Gerames ready apparelled with all his company. Then he appointed five
thousand men to keep the City, and twenty thousand men to go with him. Thus
Duke Huon made his ordinances. Ye may well imagine that the sorrow was great
that Escleremond made for the Duke her husband, she was right wise, she feared
to loose him, because she knew him so aduenturous, and that his enemies were of
so great number, but right pitiously weeping, she made her prayers to the Lord
God devoutly, that he would keep and defend Huon her husband and all his men
from danger and loss, and to send him peace with his enemies.

Chap. LXXXX.
Of the great Battle that was before Bourdeaux, whereas Huon had great loss,
and the old Gerames taken.

THus as you have heard, Bourdeaux was besieged by the Emperor of the high
Almaynes, and by his brother the Duke Sauary with a great number of men. Then
Huon issued out, and when he was past the port, he made haste, to the intent
to surprise his enemies, for at that time the Emperor was set at dinner. Then
Huon and his company all at once dashed in among the tents and Pauillions, and
beat them down to the earth, so that they that were within were much abashed,
for they thought verily that Huon durst never have issued out of the City
against him and the great number that he was of. Huon laid on round about him,
so that who soever met with him, had no need of a leches craft. Also the old
Gerames did maruailes, and so did the Bourdeloies, many a rich tent and
Pauillion was beaten to the ground, and they within slain and all to behewen,
and Huon who was mounted on a good horse, met a Knight of the Emperors house,
and he gave him such a stroke with his sword, that he cloue his head to the
teeth, and then he stroke another, that his head, helm and all fell to the
earth, they that saw that stroke were sore abashed.

The Emperors men assembled together by heaps, but by the mighty prowess of
Huon, anon they were again departed, for he was so doubted and feared, that
none was so hardy to approach near him. The cry and voice mounted so high,
that the Emperor who was at dinner, when he heard them cry, he rose from the
table and demanded what noise it was? Sir (quoth a knight) who was fled and
sore hurt, know for truth that your enemy Huon is issued out of Bourdeaux, and
has done so much hurt, that he has slain a quarter of your host, and
without that you do rescue your men very shortly, your loss is like to be
exceeding great, for I have seen Huon your enemy mounted upon your good
horse, whereon he does great maruailes, for there is none that meets him but
he is slain, he is so cruel and hardy. When the Emperor heard the knight,
he swet for displeasure, and incontinent he armed him, and issued out of his
tent, and mounted on his horse, and found his men ready. Then he saw Huon
mounted on his good horse, whereon he said to his men. Sirs I require you at
this time put to your pains, that I may be revenged on my enemy, who before
my face yonder kills my men, he is so valiant, that whomsoever he strikes
with a full stroke, is but dead, great damage it was when he slew my nephews,
whosoever can deliver him to me quick or dead, shall be my friend for ever,
and I will show him that courtesy, that Escleremond who is so fair, I shall
give her unto him in marriage, and all the Court of Bourdeaux.

Then such as heard the promise, made them ready for the covetousness of that
gift: But some hasted so much to accomplish the Emperors will, that it was too
late after for them to repent. It is an old saying, that an ill haste is not
good, some hasted so much, that afterward bought it too dear, as you shall
hear here. After these words spoken by the Emperor, such as desired to
accomplish his will, ran in altogether into the Battle against the
Burdeloyes, where was great slaughter made on both parts. Huon who had great
desire in his heart to slay his enemies, did so much by his prowess, that he
reculed his enemies to their tents, and it had been ill with them if Duke
Sauary had not rescued them, he with his great prowess made them to recover
again the field, and there was a sore battle on both the parts. The old
Gerames that day slew many a man, but he adventured himself so far forth
among his enemies, that his horse was slain under him, so that he was
constrained to fall to the earth, and then he was taken and led to the
Emperors tent, and great fetters clapped upon his legs: alas that Huon had not
known thereof, if he had, he should not have been led away without great
loss. But he was in the Battle doing maruailes in arms, he held his sword
in his hand, tainted with blood and brains of men that he had slain, there
was none so hardy that durst approach near unto him, he cried still
Bourdeaux, to draw his men together, and dashed into the greatest prease, and
struck on all parts, in such wise, that his enemies still gave him place, for
none durst abide his strokes.

Now the prease was so great of the men of Duke Sauaries, that he had great
pain to break in among them, he fought so, that he seemed rather a man of
the Fayrie, or a Spirit, then a mortal man, every man had great marvel of
the prowess that he and his company showed. Then came against him the old
Duke Sauary, with a burning desire to be revenged for the death of his son
Raoull. And Huon perceived him well, and made such haste, that the Duke had no
leisure to give the first stroke, for Huon gave him such a stroke with his
sword, that he cut a quarter of his shield clean off, and the stroke glyded
to the horse neck by such virtue, that it struck off the horse head clean, so
that thereby the Duke fell to the earth, and if he had not been well succored,
he had been slain, but there came to him so many men, that whether Huon would
or not he was succored, and mounted upon a new horse. When Huon saw that he
was escaped, he called upon our Lord God, and said. Ah good Lord, if I tarry
here long, I see well that my force shall but little profit me, for there be
twenty against one.

Then he called certain of his Lords that were about him, and said. Sirs, I
perceive well our force cannot long endure, therefore it is better to depart
betimes, then to tarry too long. Sir (quoth they) as it shall please you, so
then they turned them toward Bourdeaux a soft pace, and Huon did as the
shepherd does go behind his sheep, so went he with his sword in his hand,
defending his company from his enemies, right sorrowful and angry for the
loss that he had that day, for in the morning when he departed from Bourdeaux,
he had twenty thousand of good fighting men, and at his return he saw well
that he had not above four thousand, wherewith he was sore displeased, and
oftentimes by the way turned and returned to his enemies. At last he met with
a Knight named Iozeram, and gave him such a stroke, that he fell down dead to
the earth, whereof the Emperor Tyrrey was sore displeased: for he was his
cousin german, and after that he slew four other Knights of Almaine. Then he
returned again after his men, and so led them forth still as the shepherd
does his sheep, and oftentimes turned and returned upon his enemies, so that
there was none so hardy that durst approach near him.

Therewith thither came the Emperor, richly armed with arms imperial, and
mounted upon a puissant horse. Then he cried, on forth my Barons, take heed
that this traitor Huon escape not away, if I may have him in my hands, all the
gold in the world shall not redeem him from hanging. Huon who heard the
Emperor said: Ah false old dotard, thou lie falsely, I was never traitor.
Then the Emperor ran at Huon, and struck him on the shield, and struck it
clean through, and the spear brake all to pieces: but Huon with his sword
struck the Emperor on the Helmet, so that the circle set with stone and
pearl was beaten to the earth, and if the horse had not swarued, the Emperor
had not escaped alive: nevertheless the stroke light so on his shoulder, that
the sword pierced the maile, and gave him a deep wound, and further the sword
descended to the bow of the saddle, so that the horse was stricken nigh asunder
in two pieces, and so the Emperor and the horse fell down to the ground
together, so that if he had not been rescued by the Almaines he had been
slain. Huon was sorry when he saw the Emperor so escaped with his life, then he
turned and rode toward Bourdeaux after his men, who tarried still for him, and
Huon did so much by his prowess, that for all the Emperor and his men he
entered into the City of Bourdeaux.

But as then he knew not that the old Gerames was taken prisoner, so thus as
you have heard Duke Huon entered into Bourdeaux with four thousand men, of whom
the most part were sore hurt, then he rode to the Pallaice, and there alighted.
Then he looked about him, and was sore abashed when he saw not Gerames by him,
then he demanded if any man knew where he was. Sir (quoth a Knight named
Gallerance) know for truth that he is taken prisoner, and is in the hands of
your enemies, for to have aided him I was wounded in three places, and near
hand slain, I employed my force to have succored him, but I could find no
remedy. When Huon heard that, he praised greatly Gerames force and virtue,
and greatly complained and said. Alas that I had not known of his taking ere I
returned, I would sooner have dyed, but that at the least I would have taken
some man sufficient to have redeemed him again out of danger. A lamentable
thing it was to hear Duke Huon, what sorrow he made for his friend Gerames,
but his complaints could not avail him, his Lords said, Sir by the grace of
God you shall have him again safe and alive. Sirs quoth Huon, it shall be a
great adventure without they put him to death.

Then Huon mounted up to the Pallaice, whereas he met Escleremond his wife,
whom he kissed and embraced many times. Sir (quoth the Lady) I pray you show
me of your news. Lady (quoth Huon) they be but poor and dolorous, for of
twenty thousand men that I had with me out of this City, I have brought home
alive but four thousand, and yet the most part of them before wounded, and
beside, the old Gerames is taken prisoner, who has suffered before this time
so many pains and travails for my sake. Alas Sir quoth the Lady sore
weeping, I had rather you had believed me, and that you had gone and sought for
succor of my brother, who would not have failed you, but would have come with
you with so much people and puissance, that the Emperor should not have durst
to have abiden you. Madame (quoth Huon) speak no more thereof, for the loss
of as much as ten Cities be in value, I would not have gone thither, nor to
none other part for any succor, nor yet will not, till that I see me more
oppressed then I am as yet, I might well be reputed for a coward and recreaunt,
thus to abandon my City, I had rather be dismembered into pieces, then for
fear I should leave you, it would be greatly to my reproach in the Courts of
hie Princes, and when I come there, to be marked with the finger for that great
default. Sir (quoth Escleremond) your pleasure is mine, since that you will have
it so, but I am right sorrowful for the old Gerames, who is prisoner in the
tents of your enemies, who has suffered for your sake many great pains and
pouerties, I cannot be but sorry when I remember him. Madame (quoth Huon) as yet
Gerames is not dead, I hope by the grace of our Lord God that we shall have him
again alive. Sir quoth she, I pray to God that it may be so. Now let us leave
speaking of Huon, and speak of the Emperor, who lay sore hurt on the earth.

Chap. LXXXXI.
How the Emperor raised up a pair of Gallows, to hang up the old Gerames,
and all the Bourdeloyes that were taken prisoners.

YOu have already heard here before recounted, how Huon entered into Bourdeaux,
after he had beaten down the Emperor Tirrey, whom he left lying upon the
earth, and had been flaine, if his men had not quickly rescued him: now his
men were sorrowful, for they feared he had been dead, and unlaced his helmet,
and was right joyful when they found him alive. Then they demanded and said:
Sir, we desire you show us in what case you feel your self? Sirs, (quoth he)
I am sore hurt, whereby I feel great pain, this enemy Huon has brought me
into this case, I was foolishly counseled when I came hither to seek for him,
for if I had tarried still at Mayence, I believe to do me displeasure he would
have come thither: sirs, I pray you bear me into my Tent, that my wound may
be searched, then he was borne into his Tent and unarmed, and laid upon his
bed, and he swounded thrice for pain of his hurt. And when he came to
himself, and his wounds were searched by his Surgions, he demanded where ye
Knights of Bourdeaux were, they that were taken in the Battle, and demanded
that they should be brought to his presence.

Gerames was brought before him, who was great and puissant, with a beard as
white as snow, he was a fair old Knight to behold, his visage plain and
smiling, he seemed to be a man of high affairs, when the Emperor saw him, he
said: Thou old Catiffe, show me what thou art, beware and show me the troth?
Sir, (quoth Gerames) know well that for fear of any death I shall not spare to
say the troth, ^^^ing you will needs know what I am, I am named Gerames, and am
Huons Servant, whom I love naturally, and also I am his kinsman, whereby I
have the more cause to love him, and I have slain diverse of your men. Well,
(quoth the Emperor) I repute thee for a Fool to give me this knowledge, for
by the grace of God, to morrow early ere I eat or drink, thou shall be drawn
and hanged, and xl. of thy company yt were taken with thee in the battle. Sir
quoth Gerames, of this that you show me I give you no thank for it, but I hope
by the aid of Jesus christ, yt I shall do you more damage ere I die. Ah Villain
quoth ye Emperor, great marvel I have of thee, that thus before me thou do
use these threatenings, and yet thou see how thou art my prisoner, and that it
lies in me to put thee to what death it pleases me, know for troth, and if it
were not so late of the day as it is, I would not suffer thee to live one hour.
But ere I sleep I shall cause a Gallows to be made, whereas thou and thy
company shall be hanged, and I shall cause thee to be hanged so near to the
City, that if Huon be so near kin to thee as thou say, he will show how well
he loves thee, he may have great ^olor, when before his eyes he shall see his
coozen and his men hanged, and then afterward I will assail the city, and take
it perforce, so yt then Huon in any wise shall not escape out of my hands, and
so to be hanged with other, and the fair Escleremond shall be burnt or condemned
to prison, and then I will burn all the City and destroy it clean. Sir quoth
Gerames, you may say your pleasure: but in the doing is all the matter, and
when the Emperor saw that Gerames doubted not the death, he was sore abashed.
Then he commanded incontinent Gallows to be raised up, so great, to hang
thereon the forty prisoners, and to be set on a little rock near to the
City of Bourdeaux, to the intent that Huon and his men might see them plain,
thereby to abash them, the which was done, so the matter rested until the next
day in the morninge. And when it was day, Huon within the City rose and came
to his Pallaice, and regarded out at his windows, to see and behold the host
of his enemies, and as he stood, he espied the new Gallows standing on the
rock: then he called his Lords and said. Sirs, never believe, but yonder
Gallows that I see new raised, is for none other intent, but for to hang
thereupppon my men that be taken and my good Freende old Gerames: whereof I am
very sorrowful. Therefore Sirs, quickly make you ready, and mount upon your
horses, for ere they be hanged, we will prove our selves against them: look
toward the Host, and see when they be coming toward the Gallows, and when
you see them, be ready on horseback and open the gate, that we may issue out
all at once, and let us never think to return until we have rescued our men,
for I purpose never to return into this City, until I have delivered them
out of the hands of our enemies. Then they armed them about seven Thousand by
tale, of good men of arms well horsed, ready at the gate to depart when time
came. Now we will leave speaking of Huon, and speak of the Emperor.

Chap. LXXXXII.
How Huon issued out of Bourdeaux, and rescued the old Gerames and his
company, whom the Emperor would have hanged.

THe Emperor, who had great desire that Gerames and his company were hanged,
caused the^ to be brought forth by couples, one fast tied to another, and
Gerames was the foremost, who then right tenderly began to weep when he saw
himself in that case. Ah good Lord, (quoth he) I require thee have mercy on
our souls, and keep and defend my good Lord Duke Huon, who by the
commandment of King Oberon, should give me his Duchy, and he to have king
Oberons dignity of the Fayrie after four years passed: I cannot say what
fortune will fall, but I may well say, that I shall never come to greater
honor, yet I am comforted in yt I am so old, it is good reason that I be
content to have lived so long, it is now time that I depart out of this world.
Then the Emperor called unto him a Knight, and said: Sir Othon, I will that
incontinent you take three Thousand men, and take these Prisoners, and hang
them up all upon the Gallows that were made yester-night late, and if it be
so that Huon issue out* look that you quit your self valiantly, and if you
have need of any aid, take my horn and blow it, for I have ready appointed ten
Thousand men to succor you if need be.

When Othon heard the Emperor, he was right sorry to have that evil office,
for in his youth he was brought up in the house of Duke Seuin Father to Huon,
and somewhat he was of his kin, but as then he had slain a man, wherefore he
fled from Bourdeaux, and came and served the Emperor at Mayence, wherefore he
was right sorrowful to have that Commission: then he said unto the Emperor.
Sir, me thinks you do ill to cause them to die so hastily, better it were to
abide to see what end your war will come unto, and also if it fortune that
any of your Lords to be taken hereafter, for one of them you might recover him
again, and if you slay them, then if any of your Barons happen to be taken,
they shall die of like death: and therefore Sir, if you will believe me, you
shall forbear slaying them at this time, and Sir, if you will give me license,
I will do so much to Duke Huon, that for the offense that he has done unto
you, he shall make you amends at your own pleasure, and he shall go unto
some holy Pilgrimage, to pray for the Souls of your Nephews, and other of your
lords that he has slain, and he to have with him two Hundred men in their
shirtes, and so to go to the holy Sepulcher at his own charge and cost, and
he to hold of you all his Lands, and to do you homage.

Then the Lords that were there present, all with one voice said unto the
Emperor: Sir, the counsel that sir Othon has given unto you, is worthy to
be believed, we all agree thereto, and desire you so to do, but when the
Emperor heard them, he was sorrowful and sore displeased. Sir, (quoth Othon)
you may surely know, if you hang any of them that be taken, if Huon happen to
take any of your men, he shall never escape vnhanged and drawn. When the
Emperor had heard Othon speak, he was so troubled and angry, that it seemed
by his face, that for very anger he was near hand in a rage, and said. Behold
sirs this Fool, who would let me to take vengeance on them that so sore have
troubled me, he has heard me ere this time swear and make solemn promise,
that I would never return into my Country, until I had hanged and drawn
Huon of Bourdeaux, for by that Lord that made me to his similitude, I know no
man this day, though he were never so near a kin to me, except mine own
Brother, but I shall make him to be slain, if he speak any more to me for
respiting of their lives, nor I shall never love him, for I make a vow to our
Lord God, that I will never return into my Country, until I have taken this
City perfor^e. Sir, (quoth Othon) seeing it is your pleasure I shall speak no
more thereof, but I believe it will be long hereafter before you find any
that will be glad to do your pleasure. Othon, (quoth the Emperor) dispatch
the matter, and revenge me upon the old Gerames and upon all his company. Sir,
(quoth Othon) it is convenient that I do it seeing it is your pleasure: then
without any more words he departed, and took Gerames and the other Prisoners,
and went with them toward the Gallows.

Gerames went before with the haulter about his neck sore weeping, and all his
company after him, so that at the last they came to the place of execution,
where the Ladders were set up, and then the hangman came unto Gerames and
said: Come on thou old Dotard, thou have lived long enough, thou shall no more
see him whom thou love so well, and I hope shortly he shall bear thee
company wauing in the wind. When Gerames heard him, he beheld him fiercely and
said: Ah thou unhappy Villain, if one of my hands were loose, thou should
never see fair day more, how art thou so hardy, to say or to think so
villainous a word, of the best and most valiantst Knight now living? Then
Othon came to them, and hearing the hangman how he reviled Gerames, he said.
Ah thou base slave* think thou not that this knight has not enough to suffer
though thou do not revile him? if thou thy self were in that case that they
be in, and they in the city of Bourdeaux, thou would soon repent thy
saucie words, and therewith he lift up a staff that he had in his hand, and
struck the hangman therewith, that he fell down to the earth: then he said. Ah
thou false thief, do thine office and speak no words: whereupon the hangman
durst speak no more, but then he took Gerames by the halter that was about
his neck, and so mounted upon the ladder and Gerames after him, who made
pittious complaints for Huon his good Lord.

The same time that Gerames mounted upon the first step of the ladder, they
within the City upon the walls perceived it, and saw evidently, that without
the prisoners were speedily rescued, their lives were lost, then they said to
Huon. Sir, if you tarry any longer, your men shall be all hanged, for yonder
we see one of them is mounted on the ladder, who has a beard as white as the
snow. When Huon heard that, he was sore displeased, and said. Ah good Lord, I
know surely that it is my true friend Gerames, whom they would first put to
death, therefore Sirs, I require you quickly let us issue out at the gate, for
if Gerames be not presently succored, the Traitors will put him to death,
but if that I may come time enough, his peril shall be dearly sold to them.
Hereupon Huon with seven thousand fighting men, issued out at the gate so
fiercely, that the earth seemed to groan under them, their horses made such a
thundering, and so within a short spare (by a secret way) they came to the
place whereas the gallows stood. Huon was the first that arrived there, and he
marked well the hangman that should have hanged Gerames, and gave him such a
stroke with his spear, that he ran him through, so that he fell from the
ladder dead, so was Gerames revenged of ye injury that he had done to him
before: then Huon said, Gerames come down of the Ladder, and arm you in some
armor of them that shall be here slain. Gerames thanked our Lord God, and
came down the ladder, and then thither came Huons company, who untied all the
other Prisoners: then began a sore Battle, the Almaines would not fly, the
which Huon seeing, cried to them and said: Ye false Traitors, your deaths are
judged, dear shall be sold to you the offense that ye have done unto me, when
ye would slay thus my men with so villainous a death, better it had been for
you to have been at Mayence, hidden in the laps of your Mothers and Lovers.

When they understood Huon, anon they knew him, whereof they were sore abashed,
then Huon met with a Knight of Almayne, and ran him clean through, and so he
served three other, then he drew his sword wherewith he did great maruailes,
for ere he ceased, he slew fourteen, and also his men did maruailes in arms,
so that within a short space the Almaines were discomfited, so that none
escaped away alive, except Sir Othon, who valiantly defended himself. But when
he saw that his force would not help him, he yielded himself to Huon, and
gave him his sword, and cried him mercy, and said. Sir, I beseech you slay me
not, but have pity on me, and I promise you faithfully, that against my will I
came hither, but I was forced so to do by the Emperor, and first I desired
respite. Insomuch that the Emperor was sore displeased with me, I entreated for
a peace to have been made between you and him, but my words could not
prevail. Sir I am your kinsman, and was brought up in Duke Seuin your fathers
house, and there I served a master who did beat me, and when I felt my self
strong and of age, I was displeased that he did beat me so without a cause,
and I slew him and fled away, and came to Mayens, and ever since I have served
the Emperor, who is come hither to besiege you. Friend (quoth Huon) fear not
your death, but I pray you from hence forth aid and serve me, as ye ought to
do to your loving friend. Sir quoth Othon, God shame me if I do the
contrary, but I shall serve you truly as long as life is in my body.

Then Huon came to the foot of the ladder, whereas he found Gerames as then
not untied, Huon embraced and kissed him often times, and said. Right dear
friend, I am right glad at my heart when I see you whole of body, and then he
went to the other and losed them, and unbound their eyes, and said. Sirs arm
your selves with the harness of them that be dead, for a man that is armed
has the advantage of others that be not armed. It was needful for them to be
armed, God defend them from evil, for anon after they had so maruailous a
reencounter, that they had never the like before, for the other ten thousand
men came to revenge them that were dead, they hoped to have come time enough,
but they failed, for they came too late, Huon had taken of al them their
truage. When Huon saw that he had done that which he came for, he returned him
toward the City, but he was so pursued, that he was near surprised and
stopped from entering into the City. When Huon saw his enemies coming, he
cried aloude to his men, saying. Sirs, let us turn upon them that come toward
us, to the intent that they shall not make their auaunts, that they have caused
us to fly away before them: then he and all his men turned against their
enemies with a most valiant courage, and at that meeting many spears were
broken on both parts, and many a knight borne to the earth, that had never the
power after to relieve themselves, there was such a slaughter on both parts,
that it was pity to see them. And great marvel it was to see Huon, how he
beat down his enemies, and claue helmets, and rased them from the heads of
his enemies: he dealt in such wise, that no Almaine durst abide his strokes he
was so doubted and feared, he made the thick prease to break a sunder, and
fly away before him, and by him was Sir Othon, who that day did many a noble
deed of arms, for next Huon (above all other that day) he bore the price.

Finally, Huon and Othon and his other men did so much, that the Almaines were
chaced to their Tents, and many slain in the chase and sore hurt, so that
they never road upon horseback after. Sometime it fortuneth, that it is
folly to venture too much forward, and too late to repent afterward: I say this
for Huon and his company, who were gone so much forward, that in great danger
they returned to the City, for the Almaines (who were thirty Thousand men
ready before their Tents) when they saw Huon and his men chase their company,
they set forth against Huon: and when Huon saw them, he said unto his men.
Sirs, it is good that we recoile into our City, for yonder I see coming
(...) then thirty Thousand Almaines as fast as they can: so when Huons company
saw them, they doubted greatly, and not without cause, for they had been
before at two great skirmishes, whereby they and their horses were weary and
sore travailed, the which was no marvel, so by the counsel of Huon, they
returned a false gallop toward their City, and the Almaines were at their
back, and chaced them so quickly, that more then five Hundred Almaines entered
into the City with them of Bourdeaux. But they that kept the gates that day
were wise and discreet, for as soon as they perceived that Huon and his
company were entered, and with them about five Hundred of their enemies: they
would keep their gates no longer open, for fear that their enemies should
have entered with too great a number, so that for have they cut asunder the cord
yt held up the Port^^lloys, the which fell down by such force, that it fell
upon the horse of an Almaine that was under it, the which horse was cut
clean assunder, so that the man and the fore part of the horse fell within the
gate, and the hinder part of the horse fell without, whereat the Almaines that
followed after were sorrowful and angry, that they had not come thither
sooner.

Then they returned to their Tents, complaining for the great loss and damage
that they had sustained that day, by the high prowess of Huon and his men, and
also they that were entered into the City were sore abashed, when they saw
themselves encloased within the City. When Huon perceived it, he had great
marvel, that they were so entered in among his men, for he knew not thereof,
and yet he himself was the last that entered, then he said. Ah ye false
Traitors, ye shall all die an ill death: and then he said to his men. Syrs,
slay them all, then incontinent they alighted, and kneeled down before Huon,
and required him to have mercy and pity of them, and to save their lives, and
put us in prison (quoth they) we be all men of a noble lineage, and it may be
so, that by us ye may have peace with the Emperor. Then Gerames said unto
Huon: Sir, I require you to have pity of them, and put them not to death, for
so it may be that by them you may have peace with the Emperor. Friend, (quoth
Huon) I am content to do at your pleasure, as you will have me do: then he
commanded that they should all be unarmed, and they all made promise unto
Huon not to depart without license. Gerames, (quoth Huon) I will that these
Prisoners be brought up into the Borough, and there parted and set into diverse
houses that be sure, and let them have all things necessary for their living:
then Gerames delivered them to the keeping of such as he trusted, and so each
of them was kept in a courteous Prison. Now let us leave to speak of Huon and
of his Prisoners, and return to the Emperor.

Chap. LXXXXIII.
How the Emperor assailed the City of Bourdeaux two times, whereas he lost
many of his men.

AS you have heard here before, how Huon chased his enemies to their tents, and
how it was time for him to return to his City, and how he was so pursued by
the Almaynes, that more then five hundred of them entered into the City, and
were closed within it, and the residue returned to their tents, sorrowful and
angry for the great loss that they had. So when they were returned, the
Emperor demanded what tidings, and how they had spedde, and if they had not
taken Huon quick or dead. Sir (quoth a knight) it is folly for you to speak
thus, for Huon is no man so lightly to be taken, for the fifty men that you
sent to have been hanged, be rescued by Huon, and the three thousand men that
you sent with them are all slain, and diverse other sore hurt and in peril of
death, and besides that, five hundred men of the best of your friends are
entered into Bourdeaux: for we so hastily pursued Huon and his men, that
entering into the City, five hundred of our men entered into the City,
entermedled with Huons men, and there they be enclosed within: therefore Sir we
advise and counsel you, that you agree with Huon, for if you do not you shall
loose all your men, for Huon is so fell and cruel, that he will hang up your
men, as ye had thought to have done his, of whom one of them was his cousin, you
may do as it pleases you.

When the Emperor heard his Barons, what counsel they gave him, he was very
sorrowful and said. Sirs ye do me great wrong, to require me to make any peace
with Huon, since ye know well what ^ath and promise I have made, that I will
never be at peace with him, and to the intent yt ye shall speak no more
thereof, know for troth, that if X.M. of my nearest friends were taken by Huon,
I would rather suff^^ them to die a shameful death, then to agree to any peace
with Huon till I have slain him, and his City be burnt and destroyed. Sir
(quoth they) seeing it is your pleasure, ye may do as you think best. Sirs,
(quoth the Emperor) I will that ye assemble all mine host, and send to my
Brother that he bring all his men, and then with all our puissance we will
assail the City, and that none be so hardy as to recule back until the
City be taken: this was proclaimed through the Host, and every man was ready
to assail the City, and the chief Captain was Duke Sauary, who brought all
his men in good order to the dikes, well fournished with ladders and other
necessary things pertaining to assault.

The same time Huon and his men were unarmed and going to dinner, but when he
heard the noise and cry without, he took a sop in wine, and armed him and all
his men, and every man went to the walls to their defense, and Huon and old
Gerames, Othon, and Barnard a valiant knight mounted on the tower over the
gate, and the Almaines on every part entered into the dikes, and raised up many
a scaling ladder to the walls, but they within cast them down, so that they
had no power to rise up again, for there was cast down upon them earth,
timber and stones. Fierce was the assault that the Almaines made, and they
within made noble defense, for Huon and Gerames shot so with their crosbowes,
thar at every shoot they slew some man or sore wounded him, and long endured
this assault, so that finally the Almaines were constrained to recule back a
bow shoot, whereof they within were very joyful.

Then the Emperor Tirrey being sorrowful and full of rage, came to his men,
and rebuked them shamefully, commanding them that incontinent they should
return again to assail ye City, saying that they should not fail to win
it. Then the Almaines (to please their Lord) returned in great have with their
ladders and pikes, and came into ye dikes whereas then there was no water, and
raised them up to the walls: but they were no sooner up, but they within beat
them down again, and put them in danger of their lives, for they cast down
Timber, stones, and faggots, with fire and hot oil and lead upon them, so
that the assailants were feign perforce to recoile back, and they within shot
arrows so thick, that it seemed like snow. The Emperor was sore displeased
and Duke Sauary, when they saw none other remedy, many were slain and sore
hurt, and the Emperor and Sauary his Brother seeing that they could nothing
profit, sounded the retrait, and so returned to their Tents, sore displeased
for their great loss that they had, for they lost that day more then two
Thousand men, lyinge dead in the feeld and in the Dikes, and more then three
Thousand sore hurt.

Then Duke Sauary said to the Emperor: Sir, me thinks it is but folly to
assail this City, it is strong, and well furnished with men and good Knights
to defend it, wherefore we may well perceive, that without great damage we
cannot win it, without it be by famine, for he that is Lord thereof is
hardy and cruel, and to be feared and doubted, for he is expert in arms,
wherefore it is impossible to take the City perforce. When the Emperor
understood him, he was right sorrowful, and made again new promise, not to
depart thence, until he had Huon at his pleasure. Huon, who little set by the
threatenings of the Emperor, went into his Pallaice, and said to his men: Sirs,
we ought greatly to thank God for the defense of our City, many Almains ^ee
slain and hurt, I doubt them nothing, for our City is strong, and before it
be lost, it will cost many men their lives. I desire you all take good heed
that we be not beguiled. Sir, (quoth they) we shall take good heed thereof, as
well for you, as for the sauegard of our lives. Thus Huon and his men devised
together, howbeit, they were sore grieved, for at the beginning they were about
twenty Thousand men, and then they were not above six Thousand. Now let us
leave speaking of them, and speak of the Emperor, who was right sorrowful
for his loss.

Chap. LXXXXIIII.
How Huon sent Habourey his Messenger to the Emperor, to require peace, and of
his answer.

WHen the Emperor had heard Duke Sauary his Brother speak, he made a solemn
oath, that whatsoever fortune should fall, he would not depart thence Winter
nor Summer till he had won the City, and then he sent for his Reerband, as
far as his Empire stretched, commanding every man to come to him all
excuses laid apart, and so they did. Now of their coming by the way I make no
mention, but so long they travailed, that they came within a League of
Bourdeaux, and when the Emperor knew thereof, he had great joy, and mounted on
his horse with other Lords with him, and road and met them, and spoke to them
and made them good cheer. Thus his force increased, and Huons diminished
daily, often times Huon issued out upon his horse called Amphage, and made
daily many great Skirmishes, sometime he wan, and sometime he lost, he slew
many Almaines, so that they all feared him, for there was none that durst abide
him, his horse was so cruel, that none durst approach near him without he
were slain, and Huons men quit them valiantly, so yt if they lost at one time,
they wan iij. times for it: but their force could not long endure, for their
enemies were so many and they so few, and they had made so many issues, that
they had lost many of their company, for of xx.M. they were left but v.C. men,
whereof Huon was sorrowful. Now when he saw yt he had but v.C. men, he called to
him Gerames, Othon, Barnard, and Richard, saying. Sirs, I see that every day we
diminish, wherefore we cannot long endure against the Emperors force, therefore
I think that it were good that we sent to the Emperor, to know if he will
hear speaking of any peace. Sir, (quoth they) we think your advise right
good, and it were good to know if he will agree thereto or not. Then Huon
called Habourey his Messenger, and commanded him that incontinent he should
go to the Emperor, and say unto him: that if it be his pleasure to hear
speaking of any peace, I shall (quoth he) condescend thereto, and to make him
amends at his pleasure, for the wrong and damage that I have done unto him and
his men. Also show him, how that I will become his man, and do him homage for
all the Lands that I have, the which I was wont to hold of the King of
France: but seeing I have no succor from him, I am driven perforce to
purchase for my profit in some other place. And besides that show him, that
the five Hundred Prisoners that I have of his men, I shall deliver them quit
without any ransom paying, and also when Lent comes, I and a Hundred
knights with me at my cost and charges, shall pass the Sea and go to the
holy Sepulcher, to pray for the Souls of his Nephews that I have slain, and
for all other that have been slain by occasion of this war. Sir, (quoth the
Messenger) I am ready to fulfill your commandment whatsoever fall thereof,
and so he departed and went to the Emperors Host, and entered into the rich
Tent, and then he kneeled down before the Emperor and said.

The almighty God, who on the Cross dyed to save all humane kind, keep and
defend from all ill the Emperor and all his Barony: Sir, Duke Huon of
Bourdeaux sends to you salutation and good amity, requiring you in the
honor of god, that he may have peace with you, by that he will become your
liege-man, and do you homage and hold his Lands of you, and will deliver
quite the five Hundred men of yours that he has in prison in the City, and
moreover, he offers himself and a Hundred Knights to pass the Sea this
next Lent, and to go to the holy Sepulcher, to pray to our Lord God for the
souls of your Nephews that be dead, and for other that by him and by his
means have been slain in this war. Sir if it please you this to do, ye
shall do a great alms deed, for life cannot be had again to them that be
dead. When the Emperor Tyrrey had well heard Habourey the messenger, he became
as red as a brand of fire, and regarded the messenger fiercely, and said. Avoid
my sight thou false varlet, but that I doubt to be reproved, I should cause
thee to be hewn in pieces, but a messenger ought not to be touched for any
words that he can speak, but say to thy Lord, that by him and by his means I
have lost more then twenty thousand men, beside my three Nephews and my
younger brother, but by the Lord that died on the Cross to redeem us all, I
will never have peace with him, till I have him at my pleasure, nor never
return thou again hither to me, nor none other, upon any such message.

When Habourey the messenger heard the Emperor, he was in great fear, and
would gladly have been in Bourdeaux, then he departed without any more
speaking, and rested not till he came to Bourdeaux, where he went to the
Pallaice, whereas he found Duke Huon, then he said. Sir I have been with the
Emperor, and showed him at full all your message, but his answer will not
serve to your demand, for he said to me, that he will have no peace with
you, till he have you at his pleasure, to do with you what he will, and thus
I departed from him, and left him sitting at his table at dinner.

Chap. LXXXXV.
How Huon issued out of Bourdeaux, and came to the tents and fought with the
Emperor.

WHen Huon understood the Messenger, he was full of anger and displeasure, and
said. Sirs, I command you all in have to go and arm you, for ere ever the
Almaines be risen from their dinners and armed, I shall make them so
sorrowful, that they shall curse the hour that ever they were borne, for I
had rather die then to leave them in this point, for I will go serve them of
their first mess. Then every man armed him, and Huon leapt upon his good horse
Amphage, and then he took his leave of the fair Escleremond his wife, and so
departed out of Bourdeaux with his company, and road toward the Emperors
Tents. The same time the Emperor was risen from his Table, and he had ordained
three hundred men on horseback to keep the Tents whiles he was at dinner:
then Huon and his company came so quickly, that he was among them ere they
perceived any thing, and he cried Bourdeaux, and struck a Knight with his
Spear clean through the body, so that he fell dead to the earth, then he ran
at another, and served him in likewise, and so he slew four before his Spear
brake. Then he drew his Sword, and beat down men and horses, and brake the
thickest press, so that every man gave him way, and Gerames, Othon, Barnard,
and Rychard and all his company did maruels in arms, and so much they did,
that within a short space the iij. hundred Almaines that were set to keep the
Tents, were all slain. Then Huon and his company entered in among the Tents and
Pauilions, where they bet down the Tents, and such as they met were slain:
then the Almaines on all parts armed them, and the Emperor sounded his
Trumpets and armed him: he was so sorrowful and angry, with the travel and
damage he was put too by Huon, that he enraged and was near out of his wit,
for night and day he could take no rest. When he was armed, he mounted on his
horse, and xx.M. Almaines with him, and they all swear the death of Huon, whom
God defend, for if he long tarried there, he should be in danger of his life.
But he was wise and discreet in Feats of arms, and he looked toward the
Emperors Tent, and saw well twenty Thousand men ready to come upon him,
then he said to his men. Sirs, it is time that we retire to our City, we may
well now go without blame, for we may no longer tarry here without great
danger. Sir, (quoth Gerames) we be ready to do your commandment, then
they took the way to return to the City, but the Emperor who greatly
desired the death of Huon, he and his men pursued Huon as fast as their horses
could go, and when the Emperor was near to Huon he said. Ah thou false
Traitor, so many times thou have troubled and angered me, that longer I will
not suffer thee to live, turn toward me, for with thee I will just, or else I
shall slay thee flying: I had rather to die, then not to take of thee vengeance
for the hurts that thou have done to me.

When Huon heard how the Emperor called him Traitor he was sore displeased,
and turned his horse toward the Emperor and said. Ah false old Churl,
whereas thou say I am a Traitor, I shall show thee how thou lie falsely:
then they ran each at other with their Spears in their restes, so that they
met so rudely, and struck each other on their sheelds by such force, that their
sheeldes burst assunder, the Emperor was a puissant Prince, so that his Spear
burst all to pieces, but Huons Spear was strong and held, wherewith he gave
the Emperor such a stroke, that Sheeld nor Holberd could not warraunt him,
but that the Spear entered into the Emperors side, so that if he had not
swarued aside, he had not escaped death, that stroke was so sore, that the
Emperor sell to the earth in such wise, that near hand he had broken his neck
with the fall, and so lay in a swound. Huon seeing the Emperor lying on the
earth, in great rage and displeasure, he desired to have slain the Emperor,
then he drew out his Sword, and turned to strike off his head: the which he had
don, if he had not ben rescued: but ye Almains from all parts came thither, so
that they rescued the Emperor from death, and set him on a horse with much
pain, then he thanked our Lord God that he was so well escaped, and made a
vow to God, that he would never more fight with Huon hand to hand, but he
would pursue him to the death if he could.

Chap. LXXXXVI.
How Huon made another issue out of Bourdeaux, and took away all the beasts
that were in the pastures without the town, pertaining to the Emperors host.

WHen Huon saw that he could do no more at that time, and that the Almaines
increased in great number to have assailed him, then he spurred his good horse
Amphage, who made such leapes, that it seemed he had flowne in the air, he
had his sword in his hand, and stroke therewith so great strokes, that none
durst approach near him. Thus he rode after his men, and led them toward the
City as the shepherd does his sheep, for as soon as his enemies approached
near him, he showed them his shield and his spears point, and as he rode,
there came a young knight named Gerard, right hardy and valiant in arms, he
was bastard son to the Emperor, who greatly desired in his heart to win
honor and praise: he saw Huon mounted on his good horse, and saw likewise
that no man durst approach near unto him, he came after him and cried. Ah
thou false Traitor, to fly away it shall not avail thee, for I bring thy
death in the point of my spear, with the which I shall slay thee flying,
without thou turn to me, for ere thou escape me, I shall cause thee to be
hanged in the sight of them within Bourdeaux.

When Huon understood the Knight, and saw the great hate and rage that he was
in, and hearing how he called him Traitor, he thought and said to himself,
that he had rather die, then he that had said these words should have departed
without feeling the sharpness of his spear, the which he couched in the
rest, and spurred his horse, who ran like the thunder, and he gave the knight
such a horrible stroke, that neither his shield nor his armor could save his
life, for his spear pierced through both his sides, and he was clean borne
over his horse ^^upper stark dead. Go thy way quoth Huon, thou shall never
have power to do any man displeasure any more* and then he drew his sword,
wherewith he dealt such discipline among the Almaines, that all fled before
him. Gerames, Othon, and Bernarde, and Richard employed their forces and
virtues right valiantly, but the Almaines did so much, that Huon lost part of
his men, and the rest he led with him, oftentimes he turned and returned
against his enemies, but whatsoever force or prowess he showed, if he had not
in haste gone away, he nor never a one of his men had escaped without death,
for more then thirty thousand Almaines were near him, and all those desired
his death, but God gave him that grace, that he and the small number that he
had left, entered with him into the City, and the gates were clo^^^, and the
Emperor in great displeasure returned to his tent, and by the way he found
his bastard son dead, for whom he made such sorrow, that his Lords nor his
brother could not appease him, and so he caused him to be borne to the tents,
and was greatly complained of all the Barons, for he was like to have been a
very noble man.

And Huon went to his Pallaice, where he found the fair Escleremond, who
demanded how he did. Right well Lady, quoth Huon, thanked be God I am
returned in sauegard, but I have lost many of my men, and therewith he wept, and
the Lady comforted him so much as she might. Then the Emperor being in his
host, knowing for truth that Huon (...) a small company in the City, and
that he thought he could do^ him but small damage from thence forth, (...) and
came and lay nearer the City, and dressed up his (...) and mountains to
break the w^lles, and made every day b^ttering at the walls, and they within
defended them valiantly, for with their crosbowes many men both within and
without were slain. This siege endured from the beginning of August to the
Easter after, whereof Huon was sore displeased, and very much complained for
the loss of his noble Barons, and other good men that he had lost. Also he
saw his towers and gates so beaten, and his enemies lying before the City, and
looked for no succor from any part, and that he had with him not above three
hundred knights, and a hundred men to keep the City withal, then he called
Es^le^emond his wife, and said. Madame, I know well you endure trouble and
displeasure enough, and therefore I pray you if you can give me any good
counsel, give it me now, for the rage and displeasure that I have at my heart
troubles so mine understanding, that I cannot tell what to do^, now on the
other part I see my City besieged, and my men slain, and I can get no
agreement with the Emperor, for he is sore displeased with me, that I can
never have his love, he has slain my men, whereof I am so sorrowful, that
my heart near fails me.

Sir (quoth Escleremond) ye do great wrong to say these words before me, or
in this sort to complain your damages, if you would have believed me, then
you had gone to my brother for succor, who would have come with you, and
brought you such a number of men, that the Emperor durst not have abidden you,
and also to have made thereby my brother a Christian man, for he has believed
in our Lord God this seven years past. Madam quoth Huon, all that you say
might have been done, but I had rather have lost three such Cities as this,
then to have left you and my Lords and good Burgesses whom I love so
faithfully: if I had but a thousand Knights to defend my City, with an ill
will I should depart from you, for I am assured, that if I go and seek for
succor, both I shall have pain enough, and ye that shall abide here, are
like to have more, for I know well that the Emperor so hates us, as he
sets all his intent to have us, and if he take you, you shall be in great
peril, and if I tar^ie here with you, and go for no succor, this City will
be taken or famished, and both you and I be destroyed: the Emperor who loves
us but a little, and not without a cause, i^ he may take me, I shall die a
shameful death. It is no marvel if he be displeased with me, for I have
slain his sons and nephews, and many of his best friends, if he may take
me, I shall have no pity showed me, and I know well without I have some
succor, my end is at hand. Wherefore Madame, I think it best that I go to
your brother for succor, for I see that I have tarried ouerlong. Sir quoth
Escleremond, ye speak of this very late, for now ye know well, that all our
bread and wine, and flesh, and fish begins to fail us, and all our other
victuals, wherefore it cannot be long after your departure, but that this City
will be taken and destroyed, and the men within slain, and I led into great
misery, yet for all that I would not counsel you to abide here, but I pray you
make have to depart.

When Huon heard her, he began to weep, and abashing his cheer to the earth,
and studying a little, he said* Madame I think upon one thing, the which to
you will be profitable, whereby you shall have victual enough to live an whole
year. Sir quoth she, of that I thank God if it may so come to pass. Madam
quoth Huon, I shall tell you how this City may be reuitayled without any great
loss of any men, true it is, that here without in the meadow, there are two
hundred men set there by the Emperor, to keep the beasts pertaining to his
host, the which are without number, what in beefes, kine, and hogs, and more
the^ ten thousand sheep, which beasts ere I sleep, I will bring into this
City, and then ye may slay them and po^der them in salt, so that ye shall have
no famine for a whole year.

Sir, (quoth she) I pray unto God you may bring it well to pass: thus they
tarried until supper time, and after when it was night, and that they thought
that they of the host were a sleep, and saw that the weather was troubleous,
even as they would desire it, he armed him and all his men, and set men at the
gate to defend him at his recoiling. Then he mounted upon his good horse,
and he opened the gate, and issued out as privily as he might, and took the
way to the meadow and came thither: and Huon then cried and said. Ah ye
Villains this pasturage is mine, I come to challeng it, in an evil hour ye
put your beasts here to pasture, ye shall make me amends, for all the beasts
that I find here in my pasture, I will go and pound them, and if the Emperor
will have them, he must buy them and make amends for their forfaite, and ye
that be the Keepers shall dearly abide it.

When the keepers heard Huon speak, they had great fear, and they thought to
have gone and taken their horses, and so to have defended themselves: but Huon
and his company gave them no leisure so to do, for Huon with his spear
struck one stark dead, and after he slew the second, then the third, and
fourth, and so slew very many as long as his Spear held: then he set his hand
on his sword, wherewith he claue asunder healmets and sheelds, and beat down
men on every side, and Gerames, Othon, and Richard did very valiantly, and so
much did Huon and his men within a short space, that the two Hundred men that
kept the beasts were all slain, except one who escaped, and ran to the
Emperors host, where he showed the Emperor, how Huon and his men were issued
out of the City and that all the keepers of the beasts were slain, and the
beasts taken and driven into the City.

When the Emperor heard these tidings, he was right sorrowful, and armed him
and his men, and leapt on their horses and ran toward the City, to stop
Huon from entering into the City: but before they came thither, all the beasts
were entered into the City. Now when Huon saw the Emperor coming, he said
unto his men: Sirs, I require you let us turn upon our enemies who comes
after us, for I would feign show them, how men that comes from foraging can
run with their Spears. Then they turned against the Almaines, so that each
of them ^^re a man to the earth, and they drew their Swords, and stewe men
round about them, and Huon upon his good horse Amphage held his Sword in his
hand, all to be sprinkled with the blood of his enemies, wherewith he cut off
arms, legs, and hands, he was more doubted then the Devil, for by his
prowess he did so much, that his enemies fled before him and made him way,
so that in despite of all the Almaines, after that he and his men had slain
four Thousand of his enemies, he entered into the City with all yt pray of his
beasts, wherewith the Emperor and his men that followed, were sore displeased
for the loss that they had received, and for that Huon was so escaped from
their hands, and that he had taken away their beasts and slain his men. Thus
as ye have heard, Huon entered into the City of Bourdeaux with all his pray.

Chap. LXXXXVII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux made him ready to go to seek for some succor: And of
the sorrow that the Duchess his wife made.

AFter that Huon was entered into the City, he went to his Pallaice, and there
found the Duchess Escleremond, who unlaced his helmet, and clipped and kissed
him, and said. Sir, I pray you how have you done? Fair Lady, (quoth he) we
have slain many an Almaine, and have brought away the pray, for in all the
Emperors host we have not left neither Porke, Kine, nor Mutton: we have
brought all into this City thanked be God, so now I shall leave you in more
suertie in mine absence, for you have now victual enough for a whole year.
Now I will go to your Brother, and if I find that he will be christened, I
shall bring him with me: if not, I shall defy him and slay him, without he
will believe on Jesus Christ whatsoever fortune fall. Sir, (quoth Escleremond
sore weeping) have no doubt of that, for it is more then seven years since he
desired to be christened: wherefore Sir, I require you love my Brother. Madame,
(quoth Huon) I shall do your pleasure: then he called to him his privy
friends, and said.

Sirs, ye know well what danger and peril we be in: and because in all
things needful, there ought to be made provision with diligence, this City
is now well provided of victualles, wherefore ye shall not need to make any
issuing out, without ye see great advantage: and as for assault, if ye defend
it well, it is impregnable for our enemies to win it, but if ye be to yield it
up, beware what ye do, for the great hate that the Emperor has against us,
peradventure will constrain him to break his promise, if ye be taken by
force or by this means, ye shall all die miserably, and my wife be murdered
in prison, or else miserably to finish her days, and my little Daughter
Clariet, whom I love so dearly, she shall be lost, and my City destroyed and
brought to utter ruin: wherefore I commend unto you my wife and my Daughter,
and all the rest until I return again: the which shall be shortly if I may,
and I shall bring with me such succor, that ye shall all be joyful
thereof. Sir, (quoth Gerames) God give grace to send you again in sauegard,
you know well that you leave us in great poverty and fear: wherefore we all
desire you not to forget us, and therewith they all wept. Then Huon said, I
pray ye* make no such sorrow ^or my departing, for ye know the business that
causes me to depart: for without I go for some succor, ye know well we are
but dead, and Gerames I give you the keeping of my wife and Child, ye are bound
to serve me truly, for in you I have my perfect trust. Sir, (quoth Gerames)
have you no doubt, but that as long as I have life in my body, I shall not
fail them in life nor death.

When Huon heard Gerames say so, he began sore to weep, and the fair Lady
Escleremond began to make such sorrow, that great pity it was to see her: she
wrang her hands and tore her hair, and made such outcries, that every man
had pity of her, yet they comforted her as much as they might. But she had
great cause to weep and to be sorrowful, ^or before Huon returned to
Bourdeaux, she and all they that were with her suffered so much pain and
poverty, that to show it would cause a hard heart to weep for pity. And after
that Huon had thus spoken to his company: he entered into his Chapel, and
was confessed of the Bishops of the City, and received the Sacrament. Then the
Bishop gave to Huon a stoale that was hallowed and of great virtue, and said.
Sir, I require you for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, keep well this
stoale, for such an hour may fall that it will stand you in good stead. Huon
right humbly took it, and thanked the Bishop: it did him good service
afterward, for on a day as he passed, he had thereof so great need, that he
would not have forborne it for fourteen good Cities, as ye shall hear more
hereafter.

Chap. LXXXXVIII.
How Huon departed from the City of Bourdeaux, and sailed until he came
into the hye Sea, and had many great fortunes.

WHen Huon had taken the the hallowed sto^le, he delivered it to his Chaplain,
who was a wise man, and of a holy life, and commanded (...) to keep it well.
Then he to^ke five knights to have with him, and his Chaplayne and a clack to
serve him* Then Huon went to his wife, and kissed her at his departing, and she
fell in a swound in his arms, and Huon (...), releaued he^ and said. Fa^re
Lady* I require (...) making of this sorrow. Ah good sir (quoth she) (...)
ought to be sorrowful, since ye leave me besieged with them that desire your
death. Madam, (quoth Huon) (...) you not, for by the grace of God I shall make
a short return. Then he clipped and kissed her, recom^^^ding her to our Lord
Jesus Christ. Then Huon and such as were appointed to go with him, departed
out of the Pallaice, and went to a back pos^er^e upon the river of G^round,
where there was a ship ready, and richly garnished with all things
convenient, there Huon being armed and his men, entered into the ship, and had
no horse with them*

When Huon departed, he delivered his good horse to the ^eeping of sir
Bernarde his cosen, and took his leave of Ger^mes and of all his other
company, and so hoysed up sail, and (...) was day in the morning, he was
more then two (...) from Bourdeaux. Then Huon regarded the City, and ^^re
weeping, did recommend it to our Lord Jesus Christ, humbly requiring him to
have in his sauegard, his (...), wife and child, and all other that were within
it. Thus (...) Huon sailed along the river of Geround, pitiously complaining
for his wife the fair Escleremond, and for hi^ ^ayre daughter Claryet, whom he
could not forget, for he had so great doubt to loose them, that when he
remembered them he wept. They sailed so long, that they entered into the high
Sea, and he had good cause to weep and (...) great sorrow: for he (...)
till the (...) had taken it: (...), Huon (...) in his Ship, (...) his heart
gave him, that before he (...) City of Bourdeaux, the City should be taken
and his (...) Escleremond (...) therefore he (...), that if it so (...), and if
ever he returned (...) end (...) thereof, he would (...) the Emperor (...):
and that Castle nor Town should no^ save him.

There was a notable knight with Huon, who said (...) him: Sir, leave your
musing, and put your trust in God, he shall aid you and succor you in all
your (...) your Wi^e, and keep your City (...) fort your self no further,
(...) th^nke of God, and (...) unto him to give you the grace to accomplish
your Voyage, the (...) I hope you shall not fail of, if you thus d^e. When
Huon heard him, he was much comforted, and thanked the Knights and so sailed
^oorth, until they were (...) the Sea, and lost their right way, for the
^hippe turned ^n the right hand, and loss the way that they should have
sa^led, and (...) unto places not known to any of the (...), whereof the
Patron was sore abashed in himself, without making any knowledge thereof, and
so long they sailed with wind and weather, that they arrived at a Port whereas
they found many boats, there they cas^ their anchor, and went a (...)
themselves. Then Huon called to him the (...), and demanded of him if he could
sail (...). Sir, (quoth the Master) I was (...) no wind to go thither, it
were a (...) me to sail thither, (...) by that strange Sea. But I (...) here
in this Port whereas you are now, to (...) Patron that can bring you (...)
(quoth Huon) I pray you to do so much as to get me (...). Sir, (quoth (...)
do what I can: then h^^ and Huon (...) Ship, and from boat to boat to get a
Pilot, (...) to an ancient man, who said that he could well bring them
thither, and said how that he had been there before that time. Friend quoth
Huon, if he will bring me to the Realm of Aufamie, I shall give you gold and
silver plenty. Sir quoth the old Patron, I shall do your pleasure, but Sir,
one thing I say to you, know for troth the voyage is very dangerous for to
pass, and a very long voyage, for it will be half a year ^re you can come
thither, and beside that, we must pass by a perilous Gulf, the which is
reputed to be one of the mouths of hell, and if by adventure or fortune of the
wind, that we be blown near unto it, we shall never depart, but be lost
forever.

When Huon heard the Pilate, he began to weep and complain for his wife
and his dear daughter, whom he had left in the city of Bourdeaux in great
danger to be taken. For he saw well then, that he could not return for the
space of a whole year with any succor: howbeit, he left not his voyage, then
he commanded his servant to discharge all his baggage and victualles out of
the one ship into the other, and when the new ship with the new Patron
was ready in all things, Huon entered into it. Then the new Patron demanded of
the old mariner, the cause why they came thither, and from whence they came.
Sir, quoth he, true it is, we came from the city of Bourdeaux, the which
stands upon a notable river, and when we were entered into the sea, a sore
wind rose upon us, in such wise, that we were constrained to abandon our
ship to the wind and weather, and fortune of the sea, the which has brought
us hither. Friend quoth the new Patron, as soon as ye were out of the river
of Gerone, if ye had turned your stern toward the sea road, ye had never
come hither, and within a month ye should have come to the realm of Aufamie,
whereas now ye be very far off. When Huon understood the cause of their
coming thither, he was right sorrowful, and sore displeased if he could have
amended it. But his displeasure could not help him, but rather hinder him*
therefore he let it pass, and so took leave of his first Patron, and lift
up their anthors and sails, and when they were in the sea, the wind arose,
and increased more and more for the space of six weeks that the wind changed
not, so that if God had suffered the wind to have continued one month or six
weeks longer, they had come to the place whereas they would have been.

But ere that they came there, they suffered much pain, for there arose upon
them such a wind and tempest, that they were forced to avail their sails.
The heavens waxed dark, the moon was covered, the torment was great and
dangerous, the waves of the sea were of a great height, and terrible to
behold, whereby, whether they would or not, they were constrained to go as
the wind would lead them, their fortune was so great and terrible, that there
was never seen such a mighty storm before, whereof Huon and his men, and his
Patron were greatly afraid, and specially the Patron more then Huon was, he
was sore discomforted, and pittiously he called on our Lord Jesus Christ,
requiring him to bring them to a good Port, there was neither mariner nor
Patron, but all were sore afraid, nor they wist not where they were. They were
in this torment for the space of ten days, in all the which time they never
saw the cleerenesse of the sun, for the great darkness that was there as
then, the which did very greatly annoy them. And when it came to the eleventh
day, and that the torment and wind began to abate, and the sea waxed
peaceable and still, therewith Huon and his company were well comforted: the
heaven cleared by, and the glorious sun cast out his rays along upon the
sea. When the master of the ship saw the fortune of the Sea, and that the
great torment began to cease, he caused one of the mariners to mount up
into the top, to see if he might discrie any land, but he could see none,
whereof the Patron was greatly abashed, and said how that he knew not in
what Country he was, for he never sailed in those parts, and said to Huon.
Sir, it is fifty years since that I first used the sea* but yet I never
sailed in these parts, whereof I have great marvel. When Huon heard that, he
was sore displeased and said. Sir let us take the advantage of the wind, and
let our Ship drive under the conduct of our Lord Jesus Christ, I hope that
our Lord God will not suffer us to be perished in this Sea. Sir, (quoth the
Patron) I do agree well to your saying, and so let us do: then they turned
their hel^^^, and took the wind into their full sail, the wind was ^ood and
fresh, and the Sea very meek and peaceable, so that within a short space they
had sailed a great journey.

When Huon called upon our Lord God, and held up his hands toward heaven
and said. Thou very God, who in (...) transit^rie world did vouchsafe to
be borne in the (...) of a maid, and afterward did reign here upon
earth xxxi^. ye^res, and then did suffer death and passion upon a Friday,
and after that did rise from death to life, and wentst into hell, and drewest
out souls out of pains infernal: Even so as I believe that this is true, I
require thee to have pity and compassion upon us, and give us grace that we
may safely escape out of this perilous Sea, and to keep and save my dear and
loving wife Escleremond and my Child, and my noble Lords whom I left in the
city of Bourdeaux in great peril of their lives, and give me the grace, that
I may bring with me such succor and aid, that thereby I may bring them out of
the danger that they he in.

Chap. LXXXXIX.
^owe Huon arrived on the perilous Gulf, where as he spoke with ^^das, and
how he arrived at the Port of the (...).

WHen Huon had made his prayers to God, he beheld into the Sea, and saw a
far off like a great piece of Canuasse, and there by he heard as great a
noise, as though there had been a Thousand Smithes, and a Thousand^
Carpenters, and a Thousand great running Rivers together, all beating and
laboring together. Huon who heard this great noise, had great fear thereof,
so that he wi^te not what to do, and so were all those that were in his
company, the Patron commanded a Mariner to mount up into the top of the
Ma^^, to see what (...) it was that made all that noise, and so he did, and
(...) round about him and beheld that way, and at (...) the dangerous Gulf,
whereof he had heard often times spoken, and thereof he had such great
fear, that near hand he had fallen down into the Sea, he came down and
said unto the Patron. Sir, we be all in the way to be lost, for we be
near one of the Gulfes of hell, whereof Huon and the Patron and all other had
such great fear, that they all trembled. Sir, (quoth the Patron) know for
troth, that it is impossible to escape out of this perilous Gulf, for all the
Seas, and waters and Rivers there assembleth together, and perforce we must
pass that way, which when Huon heard: then he began pitiously to complain,
and said. Ah sweet and loouing wife Escleremond, I see now clearly that our
loves must depart, the beauty and the bounty that is in you I cannot forget.
Alas I shall never see you more, I pray to our Lord Jesus Christ to give you
that grace, as to be agreed with the Emperor Tirrey, to the intent that in
peace and rest you may use the residue of your life: for as for me, I shall
never bring you any succor or aid.

Then he studied a long season, and then said again. Good Lord I thank thee,
and since it pleases thee that I shall pass out of this world: I humbly
require thee to receive my S^^le into thine hands, as for my body and life I
care little for, seeing it pleases thee that I shall thus end my days, and
depart this life.

Then Huon left his weeping, and the wind ceased and the sail abated: yet
nevertheless the ship still went forth alone in such wise, as though it had
flowne upon the Sea. Sir, (quoth the Master of the Ship) you may see
evidently, that we need not to travail our selves to guide our Ship, for the
Gulf that is so near us, draws the Ship unto him in such haste as ye may
see, and anon ye shall see that we shall tumble therein. Master quoth Huon,
it is convenient now that we abide the adventure and fortune of the sea, such
as our Lord God will send, let us trust in him, and desire him that his
pleasure be fulfilled, and more I cannot strive. Then Huon Chaplain confessed
them one after another, and then incontinent the great noise ceased. But they
came thither at a good point, for the very same time, (as their good fortune
was,) the Gulf was full and plain, so that a ship might pass over it
without danger, as well as in another place of the sea, and when the Patron
saw that, he said to Huon. Sir, we ought greatly to thank our Lord God, for
we are now come at such a time, that the Gulf is full and plain, so that we
may pass over surely without any danger. When Huon heard that he was right
joyful, and all weeping he kneeled down, and so did all the company, and
de^outly they thanked our Lord God, that he had sent them that good grace.

Then Huon rose up, and saw beside him a great piece of Canuasse, and the
waves of the sea beating against it with great violence, whereof he had great
marvel. For the waves of the sea bea^e so sore against the cloth, and with
so great violence, that they reculed back, and for all the beating of the sea
against the canuasse, yet it brake not. Then Huon heard a voice crying an hie,
and pitifully complaining, saying. O very God, in an ill hour I was borne,
when I sold the puissant God* who did me that favor, as to take me as one of
his disciples and Apostles, and for the goodness that he did me, I rendered
him an evil reward: for the devil, the enemy of all humane lineage, entered
into my body, the which was full of sin, and exhorted me to sell my God and
good Lord, for thirty pence of money, that was then current in the country of
Jude, and unhappy that I was, if I had trusted in his great mercy, all the
trespass that I had done had been forgiven me. But pride and misbeleefe,
and false hope that was in me with the ^iuell, who blinded mine understanding,
and would not suffer me to have any hope of grace, or pardon for my trespass,
for of my sin I never had repentance. And the Devil doubting to have lost
me, put me into despiration, whereby I lost the grace of God: for if I would
have asked mercy of my Lord God, he would have pardoned me of all the
trespass that I had committed against him: Alas poor Caytiffe that I am, from
hence shall I never depart, but always to remain in this torment and pain.

When the Master of the Ship heard this voice, he demanded of him and
said. What art thou that thus pityously complains? I command thee to show
me, and whether there be any man living in this world that can aid and
succor th^e, and cast thee out of the torment and pain that thou art in. When
the voice heard him, he spoke no more words, nor made no answer at all:
then Huon advanced himself to the board of the Ship, being desirous to
know what thing it was that made that pitiful complaint, and said. Thou that
so sore do complain and mourn, I conjure thee in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by all his power, and by the blessed Virgin Saint Marie his
Mother, and by all the Saints and holy Angels and Archangels, that are in the
Realm of Paradise, and by all that ever God has made and created in Heaven
and in earth, that thou aunsweare and show me what man thou art, and who has
put thee here in this misery? and wherefore thou art here? and whether thou
may come to us or not? and what is thy name? and why that this Canuasse is
here set, wherefore it serves? and also show me if ever thou shall depart
from hence or not?

When this voice had heard Huon conjure him in such wise it answered him
shortly, and said. O thou mortal man that have coniured me so sore: and also
have desired for to know my name, I shall show unto thee for certainty, that
my name is Judas, and I am the self same man that sold our Lord Jesus Christ
to the Jews for thirty pence, then being current money in the country of
Jude, and delivered into their hands my right dear Lord and Master, who so
much honored me, as to account me as one of his Apostles, and by a false and a
fained love, I kissed him on the mouth, for to (...) which was he. And after I
saw him beaten (...) as ye may read in the holy (...) and (...), who therein
have made (...) passion, (...) I had betrayed my (...) (...) my (...) sore
displease^, (...) cry (...) I did commit (...) ^olly, for he was so (...),
that if I had cried him mercy, he (...). But the Devil (...) is enemy to
(...), would not suffer me to do it* for I went (...) and hanged my self on a
tree, and when I was (...) in the place whereas ye see (...) I shall remain
(...) and pain, (...) from hence, for now it is too late to (...) grace, for
judgment is given upon me. (...) suffer this torment and pain continually,
(...) and ^euers of the world do assemble together (...), even here as I am
in this Gulf, where I am sore (...) and greatly tormented, by the great (...)
and course (...) I am tormented, and cannot by (...) shall come out of this
great torment nor (...)*

(...) that ye demand whereto it serves, and (...), know for a troth, that
on a day I (...) of God, nor I (...) gave after any thing (...) as long as I
lived, and therefore when I was (...) God would, that the good deed that I
(...) this (...) for his sake, should not be (...) our Lord God would that
this (...) right side, to the intent for to (...), and from the great waves of
the sea, (...) against me, as you have (...) against this C^^^as, I had no
grace for (...) God for my trespass the devil was (...), wherefore let every
man take example by (...) he has space: and thus I have showed (...) quo^h
Huon, I believe if thou will yet cry (...), he will have mercy and pity on
thee.

Nay, nay quoth Judas, to pray now cannot avail me, for I am damned for ever,
and if ye will believe me, beware, and tarry not here too long, for if ye
do, ye shall never depart hence, for the G^lfe which is now full and plain,
it will not continue long, but that the sea will issue out, and all the rivers
within it: ye were happy that ye came at the hour that you did, for anon
the waters will issue out with such abundance, that the waves that will rise
shall seem like high mountains. It is more then two hundred years since
there passed any ship this way, but that men, ship and all were swallowed into
the Gulf: wherefore Huon I counsel thee, that inc^ntinently thou depart
hence, without thou will be lost forever, it is time that thou depa^t hence
whilst the Gulf is full, for it will not long rest, but that the waters will
issue out with such a brute and noise, that if ye be fi^teene leagues off, ye
shall well hear the torment that it will make. If ye had come but half an
hour sooner then ye did, ye had never escaped the great danger thereof.

When Huon understood Judas, he had great marvel, and joined his hands toward
the heaven, thanking God of the grace that he had sent him. Then Huon desired
the Patron that they might depart from thence in haste: Sir (quoth he) it shall
be done. Then they drew up their sails and departed, and they had not sailed
a league, but that the saw a far off great brands of fire burning, issuing
out of the Gulf so long and so high, that they had near hand come to the^r
ship: and the waves that issued out of the Gulf, were as high as mountains,
and they approached so nere unto their ship, that they had like to have
per^^hes, for there (...) was near hand full of water, so that they had (...)
to (...) to lade out the water and were feign to abate their sail, and the
water that ^ssed out of the Gulf dra^e them so ^^orftly, that a bird could not
die no faster then they went. In that case they we^e a month, and durst never
hoyse up sail, but thus they drove a great season without seeing of any
land, then Huon called upon God, and said. Ah very God, I had rather have
tarried still in mine own Country, and have taken such fortune as it should
have pleased thee to send me: then here to be lost in this strange Sea.
Dear La^ie Escleremond, I pray unto God to keep you and Clariet my Daughter,
for I think that I shall never see you more. Thus Huon complained, sailing in
the Sea in fear of his life, and thus they were in the danger of this Gulf
five weeks, and never could see land, whereof they were in great fear,
often times they prayed to our Lord to have pity of them.

Then Huon desired the Patron to mount up to the Mast, to see if he might see
any land, and the Patron who greatly desired so to do, anon he mounted up,
and regarded on all parts, to see if he might espy any land. At last he saw a
far off an hye rock, and on the height thereof they saw a thick wood, and
at the entry of the wood he saw a little house, whereof he thanked God, and
descended down and showed Huon what he had seen, and said. Sir, yonder a
far off I have seen a great Rock, and on the height thereof a great thick
wood, and therein I have seen a little house or hermitage, the house is white,
I cannot tell what it is, but by the grace of God ere it be night, we shall
land there and refresh our selves. When Huon heard that, he was right joyful
and thanked God: then they drew to that Port, and had good wind and a fresh,
weening to have come thither the same night: but they sailed four days and
four nights, and could come no nearer to the wood then they were before,
whereof they had marvel, for it seemed to them ever, that the wood and the
house roase up higher and higher, and then they could not tell whether they
went, for if they had known, they would not have gone thither for all the gold
in the world, for if God had not had pity of them, they were all likely to
have been lost, for the place that they saw a far of was a Castle, and
therein cloased the Rock of the Adamant: the which Castle was dangerous to
approach, for if any Ship come near it, and have any iron nails within it,
and that a ship come but within the sight thereof, the Adamant will draw the
Ship unto him. And therefore in those parts the Ships that sayleth by that
Sea, are made and pinned with wooden nails, and without any manner of iron,
otherwise they be lost and perished, for the property of the Adamant is to
draw iron to him.

Thus Huon and his company were there the space of six days, going and
sailing about the Rock of the Castle of the Adamant: But if they had had a
good wind the first day, they had arrived even at the white house that they saw
first in the wood, the which was the fairest and most richest house in the
world, within the which was so much gould and riches, that no man living could
esteem the value thereof, for the Pillars within that h^use were of Cassedony,
and the walls and Towers of white Alablaster. There was never described in
Scripture nor History, the beauty of such a Castle as this was, for when the
Sun cast his rays on it, it seemed a far of to be of fine crystal, it was
so clear shining. In this Castle was neither man nor woman, but dead men's
bones lying at the gate of this Castle, and at the Port there lay many Ships,
so that their Mastes seemed a far off to be a great Forest.

Chap. C.
How Huon devised with his Patron, in regarding of the Castle of the Adamant.

THis castle was set on a rock of the Adamant ^one, from the East to the west
was not so strong a Castle, for if all the world had come before it and men
within to defend it, could never be won by any mortal men. The forest that
so seemed to them a far off, were the ^a^^s of ships that had been there
arrived by constraint of the Adamant, but for all the ships that were there,
there was no man living therein, yet there lay bones of men that had died by
famine and rage. Huon and his c^m^a^te had great marvel, for when they
approached (...) to the Castle, they (...) forced to strike sail, for the
^da^ant drew the ship so sore, that if they had not quickly stricken their
sail, their ship had broken all to pieces, and they all been drowned in the
sea. The ship went so fast, that it was maruailous to consider it, and then the
Patron of the ship, who was wise and discreet, knew anon how they were near
to the Castle of the Adamant, because their ship went so fast without sail
thetherward, faster than if they had had a full wind in all their sails, and
they could not turn their ship any way from that part, for they would gladly
have returned, but it would not be, because the Adamant drew the iron so sore
to him by nature. When the Patron saw that needs they must arrive there, he
began pitiously to lament, and said to Huon. Sir, our Lord God has created us
in this world to live and to die, and there is none but must pass the passage
of this, and because we know surely that no creature can escape that,
therefore we ought to be content with that which can be none otherwise: Sir I
say this, that we must all dye.

When Huon heard the Patron, he had great marvel and said: Patron, I pray you
show me the cause why ye say thus? in this Castle that we see before us, are
there any Sarazins within it, or spirits of hell that have sworn our death?
surely I doubt them not, make good cheer, and be nothing abashed, take good
courage and joy, ^or by the aid of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the force of
my arms, and good Swoorde, if there be any man within the Castle that will
resist against us, I assure you I shall soon deliue^ you from him. Anon you
shall see what I can do, I never (...) in all my life so fair a Castle, I
cannot tell whether they within will defend us the entry into the Port or not:
if they will have any Tribute of me, I shall gladly pay it, so they demand
nothing else, and if I see that they will demand any thing else of me, I
shall show them how my Sword can answer it, for I had rather to die, then
in any Princes Court it should be laid to my reproach and shame, that for any
man I should retire back one ^oote for fear or doubt of any death, for I will
never be taken alive, thereby to dye in prison. Sir, (quoth the Patron) your
force and great prowess can nothing avail you, for if we were as strong
and as great as ever was Sampson, it should nothing advantage you, I shall
show you the cause why. The Castle that you see yonder before you, is the most
fairest and strongest Castle in all the world, it is set and compassed round
about with a Rock of Adamant stones, the which naturally does draw unto it
all manner of iron, as you may well see by our ship that goes so fast
without any sail: the Adamant does draw it, because of the anchors and nails
that be in our Ship, the wood that seems to be a Forest, are the Mastes
of such Ships as has there arrived, and are drawn thither by the Adamant.

When Huon understood the Patron, he was right sorrowful, and no marvel,
then pitiously he complained for his wife and for his Child, for he saw
well that he could not escape the death, nor never depart from thence: then
he wept pitiously and said. Ah good Lord, who in this world has formed me, I
require thy grace, that thus (poor sinner that I am) inclined to all
misfortune, that it may please thee to receive my soul into Paradise, as for
my life I make none account thereof. But I pray thee good Lord to save my Wife
and Child, whom I have left in danger of death, or else in shameful
imprisonment. And with those words the Ship entered into the Port with such
a force and puissance, that it ran in amongst the other Ships, so that if
the ship had not been strong, and the other ships rotten, Huons ship had
been broken all to pieces, for it ran under the water three or four of the
other old ships, and was not broken thanked be almighty God. Then he
looked into the Haven, and saw so many ships, that he had great marvel
thereof, and he was sore dismayed and abashed, in that he saw neither man
woman nor Child stirring abroad. Also he looked about him and beheld the
Castle, the which was so fair and rich, that there was none such throughout
all the world. Then he thought to send thither one of his company, for to
know what people were within the Castle, but he saw well that there was no
way to enter, but by a straight way of three Hundred and fourscore greeces of
height, the way was so straight and narrow, that no man but one at once could
mount up the degrees, he had great marvel and was sore troubled in mind, when
he saw no man coming from the Castle. Then he called one of his Knights and
said: Sir Arnold, I will and command that you go up into this Castle, to see
what people be within it, either Sarazins or Paynims: know who is Lord
thereof, and say how that I greatly desire to be acquainted with him: if you
can do so much that I may be acquainted with him, then I and my men will
mount up together until some good adventure fall, for I hope in our Lord God
that we shall escape this danger. Sir, (quoth Arnold) I shall do as you have
commanded me. Then he departed, and went from one ship to another until
he came to the land, and then he went to the (...), and ^ound the degrees and
mounted up: but before he came to the Castle gate, he rested himself three
times, and when he came to the gate, he rested him he was so weary, and
beheld the gate, the which seemed unto him maruailously fair and rich: then
he began to cry and call, to the intent that some man should come and to
speak with him, and when he saw that none did speak, he sto^de and
hearkened if any person were coming to open the gate: but none appeared, and
then he knocked and called again, and said: Porter that art within, come and
open the gate, or else cursed be thou of God: this Arnolde had a good
occupation to knock, cry, and call, for within was neither man woman nor
Child that would open the gate, when he saw that, he was near angry with
displeasure, and looked down under the gate to know if he might epsy either
man or woman to speak unto, then he turned him round about and looked on the
right hand of the Hall door, and there he saw an horrible Serpent, the which
kept the Castle and Pallaice, it was a maruailous great Serpent, higher then
any horse, his eyes like two Torches burning: when Arnold saw him, he was
right sorrowful and sore displeased, and when the Serpent heard the knocking
and great noise at the gate, braying and crying he came toward the gate: and
when Arnold saw the Serpent with great fury approaching to the gate, he
fled away in so great have, that he near hand (with very fear) fell down
the stairs, he rested not until he came to the ship whereas Huon was, and
said. Sir, I have been above at the gate of the Castle, and called and
knocked thereat more then the space of an hour: but there was neither man,
woman, nor Child that did appear, and when I saw that, I laid me down and
looked under the gate, to know if I might see either man or woman to speak
unto, but I could never see any creature, but a great and a horrible Serpent
higher then a great horse, with eyes redder then fire, with maruailous great
tallons and and tail, there was never man saw a fowler figure of a beast.
Alas, (quoth Huon) now I see we be all but dead, for we have nothing to eat
nor drink, wherefore we shall die for famine and rage. But if I may enter
into the Castle, I shall give that Serpent such a stroke, that he shall never
hurt any man living. Alas what have I said, my hardiness nor my prowess
cannot help me, for I see well that I and all you must die, for it is
impossible for us to depart from hence.

Then the Patron said to Huon sore weeping. Sir, it behooves us to part our
victual, if you will sustain the right and custom of the sea, when men come
to such a case, yt there is no remedy to get any fresh victual, then it is
reason that the Lord and Captain to have the one half to his part, and the
other part (...) to be divided amongst his men. Master, quoth (...)) you may
do your pleasure, do as you shall think (...)*

(...) the Patron caused all their victuals to be brought (...) was divided,
the Patron was a wise man. (...) that, he began to weep, he did eat but
(...), because his victual should endure the (...), all that but little
auailed, for before fifteen (...)* all their victuals were spent, except Huons
(...) man part, and kept for (...) other men had. And as they were in this
(...) a Galley wherein were Thirty men (...) and Pirates of the Sea, they came
and arrived ^eere ^^ the Ship whereas Huon was in, not knowing what place
they were in: when they arrived it was in a dark night, they had great
marvel of Huons Ship wherein they saw great light, and then they said one
to another, it is happy for (...) that we have found here this fair Ship,
it can ^ot ^ee but it is rich and full of goods: they shall not escape us,
(...) shall be ours, for ther^in are ^ut few men to defend the Ship.

Chap. CX.
How a Galley with Sarazins came and ^ff^yled Huon, who (...), and also all
Huons men, and how Huon went to (...) of the Adamant and slew the great
Serpent, and of (...) that he found there,

WHen Huon saw the Galley ariue and going to his Ship, he had great
marvel what men they were, then he alighted a torch, and to^ke it in his
hand* and came (...) on the Ship and said. Sirs of this (...) well arrived
here, we have great joy of your company, when the Sarasins heard Huon, they
perceived by his language, that he and his company were Christian men: then
each of them beheld other, smiling for joy, one of them turned his speech, and
spoke good Spanish, and said to Huon: Fellow it is no need for us to hide
what we be: all we that thou see here be Sarasins, and ye be Christened,
wherefore we will have all the riches that is in your ship, and beside that, all
your heads shall be stricken off, and your bodies cast into the sea. Paynim,
quoth Huon, ere thou have our ship at thy commandment, first thou shall buy
it dearly. Then Huon cried to his men that they should arm themselves to
defend them from the Paynims, the which they did diligently. And Huon who was
ready armed, and by that time the Sarasins were entered into the ship. Huon
was ready before them, with his sword in his hand, wherewith he struck the
first that he met with all, in such wise, that his head flew from his
shoulders. Then he struck another, and claue him to the throat, and so the
third and the fourth were shortly slain, he laid on so round about him, that
his enemies were afraid to behold him. Then the chief master of the thieves
came and rebuked his men, because they had suffered Huon to do them so much
hurt and damage, he approached to Huon to have stricken him, but Huon, who was
light and expert in deeds of arms, avoided his stroke, and struck the Sarasin
with a reuerse, that his head flew from his body a great way off. Then Huon
cried Bourdeaux, to rejoice his men, and to give them courage. Also Arnolde who
had seen the Serpent in the Castle, did maruailes, and beat down his
enemies, whereof Huon had great joy. And there was a great mighty Sarasin, who
came behind this knight Arnold, as he fought with another Sarasin, and he gave
Arnold with an axe such a great stroke, that he claue his head to the teeth,
whereof Huon was right sorrowful, and said, he had rather die then the death
of Arnold should not be revenged. Then he approached near unto the same
Paynim, and lifting up his Sword with both his hands, he struck the
Sarasin on the shoulder, that the sword entered into the breast. And the Patron
of Huons Ship, unarmed came into the battle with a great staff in his
hands, wherewith he laid upon the Sarazins in such wise, that such as he
struck needed after no Surgion. Then a Sarazin advised him, and came and gave
the Patron such a stroke with a Sword upon the head, that his head was
cloven to the brain, wherewith Huon was right sorrowful and sore displeased.
But it was not long before he revenged his death, for he struck the Sarazin
such a stroke, that he claue him to the breast, and when the Patrones
Servant saw that their Master was slain, they all made great sorrow, and
disarmed as they were, they came and entered into the Battle with great staves
in their hands, and fought with them fiercely.

But the Sarazins who were all armed, had anon slain them all, whereof Huon
was right sorrowful and angry, for he had then with him lest alive no more
but four men of defense. And the Sarazins, who in the beginning were Thirty,
were all slain except seven persons, they greatly feared Huon, for they saw
well that none could endure against his stroake^, and then they fled out of
Huons ship and entered into their own Galley. But Huon and his three Knights
that were with him, followed them so fast that they slew them all, and cast
them into the Sea. Then Huon and the three Knights that were with him, took
all the flesh, bread, and wine that was in the Galley, and bare it into their
ship, whereby they lived more then seven Months. And then when their
victuals begann to fail, then they were right sorrowful, they had no victual
to live by long, and yet they did ^a^e but little, so they began to be pale
and lean through famine, pitiously Huon complained and said. Oh ye my dear
and true Friends, who for my love have left your Lands, your Wives and
Children, n^we I pe^ceiue ye must needs die for the ^ag^ of famine: ^las
poor Cayliffe that I am, I shall not long live after you, great pity it was
to hear the complaints that Huon made, who saw that he must follow the same
dance. Then he said: Ah fair Lady Escleremond, I shall never see you more,
I pray unto our Lord God that he will comfort you in all your affairs, as for
me poor soul, it is impossible to live four days longer. After that he
had made this pitiful complaint, he beheld the three Knights, who rendered up
their souls and died through hunger. The pitiful complaints that then he made
was pity to hear, he had no hope to be aided by any mortal man, wherefore he
knew surely that he could not live above two days longer. Then all weeping,
he went from his Knights that lay there dead, and went to the board of his
ship, and looked into the Sea to see if he might epsy any manner of Ship
coming thither. For he thought that if any ship came thither of the
Sarazins, he would have some victuals or else to dye in the quarrel. Thus
Huon was there alone without any company, sore weeping and almost dead through
famine.

When Huon saw that no manner of ship was coming thither, he was right
sorrowful. Then he turned him and regarded the Castle, the which seemed unto
him maruailously fair and great, and said. Ah good Lord, how can it be that
this fair and rich Castle should be void without man or woman? I have great
marvel of that sir Arnold showed me, for he showed me that within the Castle
there was neither man nor woman, and how that there should be a great
Serpent, I cannot tell whether it be true or not, or whether he spoke it for
fear, but by the grace of God (though I shall die in the quarrel) I will know
the troth, for I were as good to die by the horrible Serpent, as to die for
hunger. Then he took his good Sword, and put on his helmet, and took his
sheeld, and did so much with going from ship to ship, until he came to
the gate of the land. And then with much pain he mounted up the degrees, and
so came to the Castle, and then he sat down and rested him, and beheld the
fair Castle, he thought that he never saw none such before, for the walls and
Towers were of fine Alablaster clear shining, and the Towers richly covered
with fine goulde of Arabia: when the Sun cast his rays and spheres
thereuppon, it cast so great a light, that it gave light a far off, and when
he had long beheld it at his pleasure, he saw the gate the which was fair
and rich, that great beauty was to behold it: for the two leaves of the gate
were covered with fine goulde, intermedled with other rich ouerages.

And on his right side he saw by the gate a window, and over the same there was
written in Letters of gould, saying: Let any man beware how he enters into
this Castle, without he be the worthyest Knight of all other, or else it were
folly to assay it. For he shall find there such adventures, as if his body
were harder then a stethye of steel, yet he should be but dead and lost,
without he be of that puissance, to resist against the great Serpent and
vanquishe him, many men have assailed, that never could speed, and he that
will enter into the Castle, behold a little purse that hangs on the right
hand of the gate, where he shall find the key for to open the gate. When Huon
had read the writing, he began sore to muse in himself, and said: Good Lord,
since thou have saved me from so many perils in time past, I humbly require
thee at this time to aid and succor me: and to give me that grace, that I
may vanquish this horrible Serpent and bring him to the death, for I had rather
die in fighting like a valiant knight, then to die for famine. Then Huon arose
up, and went to the purse, and took out the key, and opened the gate and
entered, and closed the gate again after him.

Chap. CII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux fought with the horrible Serpent, and slew him within
the Castle of the Adamant.

WHen Huon was entered into the Castle, he saw before the Hall door the
horrible Serpent, who was risen up: his skin was of diverse colors, and it was
so hard, that no iron nor steel could enter into it. When Huon saw the beast
so great, he doubted himself, and called upon Jesus Christ, requiring him to
have pity upon him, and to give him the grace to slay that dreadful beast:
when the beast saw Huon, he had great marvel, for he had been there a
long space that never man came there, he stretched out his claws, and cast his
tail round about him, and came hastily against Huon, who when he saw the
beast approach near to him, he made the sign of the Cross upon his
forehead, recommending himself to God, with his Sword in his hand and his
sheeld before him, and he fiercely marched toward the Serpent, he was so
hideous and fearful to behold, that the beast seemed rather an enemy of Hell,
then any other beast, his body was maruailous great with an ougly head, with
two eyes bigger then two basins full of burning fire, and when he came near
unto Huon, he lifted up one of his paws, thinkinge to have drawn down Huon
to the earth, he struck upon Huons Sheeld with such force, that he pulled it
from his shoulder, leather nor buckle could not resist it, and then with his
teeth and nails he tare the Sheeld all to pieces: Huon who was legier and
light, leapt by the side of the Serpent, and gave him a great stroke with his
Sword upon the ear, that he thought to have cloven asunder his head. But he
could do it no more hurt, then if he had stricken upon a stethy, so that his
Sword rebounded again, whereof Huon was right sorrowful, and said: Ah good
Lord, now I see well that my days are at an end. Ah fair Lady Escleremond,
I pray our Lord God to save you and my Daughter Clariet, for this day you shall
loose me.

Then he advanced him to the Serpent, and gave him a great stroke upon the
haunch behind, and if he did but little with his first stroke, he did less
hurt with that stroke, for he could in no wise cut through the Serpents
skin, wherefore he was in great fear: and the Serpent when he felt himself
stricken cast his tail round about Huon with such force, that he overthrew
Huon to the earth, yet he quickly relieved again. Then he saw by the gate a
great square Spear with a sharp broad head, and then he put up his Sword,
and took the Spear in both his hands, and came with all his force and
strength against the Serpent, who came and encountered him with open mouth to
have swallowed Huon* but Huon who was strong and light, took the spear and
laid it on his arm, and saw the Serpent with his mouth open, he struck the
Spear into the mouth of the Serpent so deep, that with the head of the
Spear, he cut his heart asunder, when the Serpent felt himself hurt to the
death, he cast out a terrible cry, so that all the place sounded, and so that
the noise might be heard a league off. Thus the horible Serpent was slain.
When Huon saw that he was dead, he kneeled down and lift up his hands to
heaven, thanking our Lord God for his grace. Then he arose, and went to the
Serpent and beheld him, for he was hidious and fearful to behold, he was
eighteen foot long. When Huon had well beheld him, he went and sat down by
the hall door for to rest him for he was so weary and faint with the blood
that he had lost, and with sweat, that he had much pain to draw his breath,
the which was no marvel, for he had neither eat nor drunk of all that day.

When he had well rested him, then he arose up, as desirous to know whether any
man or woman were within the Castle or not, to speak unto them, he entered into
the hall, the which he maruailously regarded, it was so fair and rich to
behold, that there is no Clarke in the world can discribe the beauty and
richesse thereof: the rich Chambers that were on the side of the hall, were all
composed and made of while marble poli^^ed, the posts were covered with fine
gold, at the end of the hall there was a chimney, whereof the two pillars
that sustained the Mantle tree were of fine Jasper, and the Mantle was of a
rich Calsedony, and the Lintell was made of fine Emera^is, ^rayled with a wing
of fine gold, and the Grapis of fine Saphers. This chimney was so rich, that
none such could be ^ound, and all the Pillars in the hall were of red
Calsedonie, and the pauement was of fine Amber.

When Huon had well beheld this Hall, he looked toward the Chambers, and over
the door of every Chamber was written in letters of gold, the which showed
where the keys were of every chamber: Huon who could well read the letters,
and understood it, he found a purse, wherein were the keys of every chamber,
all of fine gold: he took one of the keys, and opened one of the Chamber
doors, and entered into the Chamber. Then he looked all about the Chamber, and
saw it garnished and hanged with the most richest clothes that ever were
seen, the benches and bedsteads were all of white Iuorie, so richly entrayled,
and wrought and garnished with precious stones, that no man's tongue could
describe the beauty and richesse thereof, all was made by enchauntment. This
Pallaice was exceeding great and large, and well garnished with chambers.

When Huon had well beheld this chamber, he was greatly abashed, that he
could neither see man nor woman. Then he looked over another Chamber door,
where there was also written in letters of gold, according as it was written
over the first door. Then Huon took the key, and opened another door, and
entered into that Chamber also, and there he found a great quantity of gold and
riches, and rich Iewelles, with other most precious stones, that great beauty
it was for to behold. Ah good Lord (quoth Huon) I would never have believed
that in all the world there had been so much riches, as I see here present
before me: then anon he saw another chamber, and took the key and entered
therein, and for all the riches that he saw before, there he found much more,
there were Presses made of fine Iuorie, very richly wrought and entrayled, so
that there was no beast nor bird, but there it was most cunningly wrought, in
the which Press were gowns and roabes of most fine gold: and most rich
mantles furred with Sabyles, and all other things the which were appertayning
unto the apparel of mankind, and the beds so richly covered, that it was
impossible to be described by any mortal man, this chamber was so fair and
rich, that Huon could never be satisfied with beholding and viewing thereof,
there were windows very richly glazed, opening upon a Garden side, the which
Garden was so fair, and so well garnished with flowers of most precious sweet
smelling, and of all manner of trees charged with fruits, so good and so
delicious to eat, that the very smell of them would have satisfied a man's
appetite.

Huon who saw this fair garden, desired greatly to enter into it, to gather
some of that fruit, he looked over the door and found the purse with the key
therein, and then he opened the door and went into the garden, and gathered of
the fruit at his pleasure, and did eat thereof, for he had a great desire to
eat, he thought the fruit maruailous good. If I should show or discribe the
beauty of this garden, it would be ouerlong to resite, there were so many
sundry fruits, so fair and so sweet of smelling, that a sick man of any
infirmity, would soon have recovered his health. Also there were herbs and
flowers so sweet and delightful, that all the garden seemed to be full of
balm. When Huon had been there a good space, and had well eaten of the fruit
at his pleasure, he returned back into the chamber that he came from, and
then he unarmed him, and put off all his clothes, and took out of the
Press a fine shirt, and doublet, hosen, and shoes, gown, coat, and cappe,
such as he would choose, for there was no man to say him nay, when he was thus
newly arrived, there could not be found a more goodlier man, according as the
Chronicle says, I believe he was borne by the Fairie, as then there could not
be found so goodly a man living. When he was thus apparelled, he went from
chamber to chamber, always hearkening whether he could hear the voices either
of men or women, but as long as he continued there, he could hear nothing,
whereof he was right sorrowful. There he continued eight days, without
eating of any thing, saving of the fruits of the Gardine, whereby he waxed
feeble and ^aint, the which was no marvel, for he had been there eight
days without eating either bread or flesh, he was so feeble, that he thought
he could not long endure there without death. Then he prayed unto our Lord God
for to comfort and strengthen him out of that great danger: most pittiously
he complained for his wife and child, saying: Ah my dear Wife, God aid and
succor you in all your affairs, for ye shall never have any succor and aid
of me more, for I tarry but for the hour of my death, the which is now near
at hand approaching unto me, for I am so sore and grievously bitten with
famine, that I have much pain to sustain my self. Thus Huon was eight days
in the Ca^^le of the Adamant, every day eating of the fruits of the gardine,
and at night he lay ever in the (...) bed in the chamber. Now let us leave
speaking of him, and let us turn to the Duchess Escleremond, who was besieged
within the City of Bourdeaux, whereas she was in great displeasure, and not
without a cause, for she suffered much pain and trouble.

Chap. CXII.
How after that Huon was departed from Bourdeaux, the Emperor made diverse
assaults to the City, but he could not win it, for the defense of the good
chivalry that was within it, and of the ambushment that was laid by the
counsel of Duke Sauary, whereby the City was taken and won.

YE have heard before, how Duke Huon departed from his City of Bourdeaux,
whereas he left the Duchess his wife, who was in great displeasure when she
saw the departing of her husband, she greatly complained, and said: Ah my
right ^eere Lord, your departure ought g^eatly to grieve me, I fear you shall
not come in time to succor, and to bring me out of the danger that I am in,
for it is impossible for us long to endure against this Emperor. A^as I have
more so^ro^ for my daughter* the^ for my self: and I am sorrowful for my
Lords and (...)* who for the love of you and me are in pe^^ll of their (...)*
had been better for us to have tarryed still in (...) come hither to ^uffer
all these to^men^s, p^ines, and (...), and at last painful death: with saying
of these (...) Duchess fell in a tr^^^ce among her Lords. (...) relee^ed
(...)* and said discomfort you (...) but take good (...) and (...) your men,
who have great desire to defend (...) City, for the sauegard of their own
bodies and lives, thus to make sorrow, ye can win nothing thereby, but loose
more to more: have no doubt that Huon your husband will leave you at this
point, he is gone to your brother for succor, he will not long tarry, and
he will bring you such succor, that the Emperor nor the Almaines shall have
no leisure to grant him the victory.

Thus Gerames comforted the Duchess, who was glad for to hear Gerames, and
thus as they devised together, the Emperor who was advertised of Huons
departing, and how he was gone for succor, he assembled his Council into his
tent, and there he showed and declared the great losses that he had suffered,
as well of the death of his nephews, as of other of his friends and kynne, and
the great damage that by Huon he had suffered, and said. Sirs, all this ye
know well, his acquaintance has cost us dearly, ye have all heard how he is
departed to seek for succor, but I cannot tell to what part he is gone. As
for the Realm of France, I know right well he shall have no succor there,
for as it has been showed me of ^ate, that the right Noble and victorious
Prince Charlemaine is dead, who loved Huon but little, because of his son
Charlot, whom Huon slew, and Charlemaine has left behind him but one son
named Jews, who is but of a young age: and I believe if he were of full age,
that he would rather come for to succor me then Huon, who slew Charlot his
brother, therefore it can be no otherwise, but that he is gone into some far
country for succor, therefore I think it best that in the mean time ere he
return, that on all sides let us continually assail the City, and let every
one do their part, to be revenged for the death of their friends, which are
here slain by them within the City.

When the Lords heard the Emperor, all with one voice answered and said.
Sir, the reason which you have showed unto us, is to be kept and done, and we
shall go arm us and make us all ready, to the intent to come to your
intention, the which is very good and reasonable. Then they sounded al their
horns and busins, and every man speedily armed himself, and came with
Ensign displayde to assail the City, and they that were within, as well as
they could they defended the City: they which were without, reared up
ladders against the walls with mighty strength, but they which were within
did beat them down into the Dikes, and then they did cast down upon them
hot lead and boiling Dyle, and quick Lyme, and great stones, and fagots
burning, so that they which were down in the Dikes, had no power for to relieve
themselves again, but there most miserably dyed under the ladders. There was
on both parts exceeding great shooting with Crosbowes, and slinging of stones
so thick, that they seemed like unto snow flying in the air, maruailous it
was to behold the old Gerames, how he exhorted his company for to do
well, and also the Duchess Escleremond, with her daughter in her arms, crying
unto her men, and said: Ye my dear Lords and Knights, fight lustily, but to
your pains, for to defend your bodies and your lives, your wives, and your
children, to the intent that the Almaynes make not their bragges and vaunts of
their winning of this most noble City by their assaults, the which is so
goodly and rich, for Sirs, I know right well ye shall not abide this trouble
for no long season, for Duke Huon your rightful Lord will shortly aid and
succor us all. Then all the noble Barons, Knights, and Burgesses, hearing the
exceeding great comfort of the Noble and virtuous Lady the Duchess
Escleremond, with a maruaylous great courage and valor they came to their
defenses, and behaved themselves so valiantly, that their enemies were forced
to retire back with great loss and damage, whereof the Emperor and his Lords
were right sorrowful, and they within the City right joyful of the great
victory the which God had given them that day. Then every man went unto his
lodging, and made great joy, and the Emperor and his men withdrew themselves
in great displeasure for his loss.

When the Emperor was unarmed, and had well refreshed himself, then he said
unto his Lords, Sirs, we have been a long season before this City, and have
sustained many losses, therefore sirs I require you to counsel me what is
(...) do, this City is strong, and well furnished with knights and men to
defend it, by us it will never be won: without vic^ualles ^aile them, but I
think they have but small store of (...), therefore I desire you to show me
your abuises, whether (...) shall depart from this City without more doing, or
(...) here upon such fortune as God will send us. When the Emperor had said as
much as he pleased, then the Duke Sau^^y his brother rose up and said. Sir, me
thinks if it may (...) believed, that this City cannot long endure, and the
cause (...) I shall show you: ye know well that Huon their Lord is (...) to
seek for succor, on the other side, they within the City have but few men,
and but ill furnished of victualles, within the City there is an old knight,
who is a valiant and a hardy knight, and therefore it were profitable to
study how he might be taken or else slain, this should greatly advance
your enterprise, of the which ye cannot fail, if you will believe my counsel
as I shall show you. True it is that this day we have had great loss, and
received great damage, whereof they within are joyful, wherefore it were good
to send certain mut^ons and beasts in the night time, with a few keepers: send
them into the meadow near unto the City, and I am sure that when the old
knight knows thereof, the which he shall know by the watch men on the towers
and walls, then incontinent he (...) out (...) such power as he has, to take
the beasts (...) bring them into the City. And to the intent that they ^^all
never return again into the City, incontinent ere the (...) a good number of
Beefs and Muttons. Then (...) armed ten thousand men, and send them to a
(...) whereas the gallows is raised, and when they (...) that they within the
City be issued out to fetch the (...) the ten Thousand men draw near to
the gate (...)* to the e^tent that they without shall not enter (...) to their
great loss. And if you will thus do, I put (...) that before it be midnight
they shall be all taken (...), and the matter may so come to pass, that you
shall enter into the City at your pleasure.

Thus I have showed you as I think best, if any man know any better way, let
him speak. Then every man regarded the Emperor, and said, Sir the counsel
that Duke Sauary has given you, we think that a better counsel cannot be
given to any Prince. When the Emperor understood the counsel of his brother
Duke Sauary, and that all his Lords did allow the same, he was right joyful,
and said that it should be so done. Then he called his marshall, and
commanded that it should be done according as his Brother had devised it
before, the which was done very diligently, and sent with him fifty men, with
six hundred muttons, and two hundred beasts near unto the City, and then
laid their ambushment of ten thousand men by the little mountain: it was
dark night, and the Moon was not risen, whereby they within could not
perceive them, the which turned to their great loss and damage, for all those
that issued out of the City of Bourdeaux were slain and taken prisoners, as
ye shall hear hereafter.

Chap. CIIII.
Of the death of the old Gerames, and of the taking of the City of Bourdeaux,
and of the coming of the Duchess with the Emperor, and of the delivering up
of the Castle to the Emperor.

YE have heard before, how the Emperor assailed the City of Bourdeaux, and
of the great loss that he sustained, whereof Gerames and they within the City
were right joyful, and made great feasts, and thanked our Lord God. Then after
Supper Gerames called all the knights and other together, and said. Sirs, ye
have seen this day the great assault that the Emperor and his men have made
to this City, but thanked be God the loss is returned to them, for there are
dead and wounded a great number of them, and many of them are sore wearyed with
travail, and think now for to rest themselves, and now is their hour that
they be set at Supper, and customably they sit ever long at their Table,
far longer then French men do: wherefore I think best, that incontinent
without delay we should arm our selves, and issue out of the City, and go to
their tents and raise them, and then let us do there as good Knights ought
to do, to the intent that good songs may be made of us, and that the Almaines
have no cause to say, but that we be as good men as they be. Sir (quoth
Othon and Barnard) we be ready thus to do. Sirs (quoth Gerames) let us make
haste, that we may return again ere the Moon rises. Then they armed
themselves. Alas what an il adventure came to them at night, for the most part
of those that issued out, were taken and slain. Ah good Lord, what a loss
fell to the City of Bourdeaux. Ah noble Lady Escleremond, ye may well weep
and complain all your days, for sorrow, pain, and dolor approaches near,
whereby ye are like to bear such diseases and poverty, that no man living can
recount it, nor ye shall never be out of that danger and trouble, till ye
be delivered by the good Duke Huon your husband.

When Gerames and his company were ready, they mounted on their horses, and
issued out at the gate as privily as they could, so that they were not
perceived by them that were set to watch for them, nor they heard not when they
were in the field, they rode a false gallop to the tents, the which they might
well ^e clearly by the lights that were in the tents: when they came near,
they dashed their spurs to their horses, and cried Bourdeaux, and s^rake and
cut asunder the cords and stays, so that many tents fell to the earth, and
such as came out were slain, a great noise and cry began to rise in the
host, and every man ran to their armor, and Gerames and his company slew
many of their enemies, and made them for to fly before them, it was dreadful
for to behold the damage that they did there. But finally the loss fell upon
them, for the Emperor and all his men were ready, when Gerames saw how all
the host was moved, then he said to his company. Sirs, it is time for us to
retire back, for we may tarry here too long, yonder comes the Emperor
with a mighty army to close us in, it is needful for us to make haste, that
we may go away in safety. Then altogether in one company they returned, and
went the way toward Bourdeaux. But they had not gone far, ere that they were
overtaken by the Almaynes, and they laid on on all parts with their swords and
spears. Then Gerames turned him to an Almaine, and with his spear ran him
clean through, and in drawing out his spear, he fell down dead to the
earth, and then he struck another, whom also he slew. He did such deeds of
arms, that ere his spear brake, he slew five of his enemies, whereof the
Almaynes were sore abashed. He brake the prease in such wise, that none durst
approach near unto him, right well did Othon and Bernard, and such as were
with him. But when the Duke Sauary, who with ten thousand men lay in
ambushment near unto the City, had heard the great noise and cry, he
supposed that they within the City were issued out. When Gerames and his
company saw how they were enclosed both before and behind, they were sore
abashed.

When Gerames saw that their force and powers could not avail them, but that
either they must be taken or slain, then earnestly he called upon our Lord
Jesus Christ, requiring him to save and defend his good Lord Huon of Bourdeaux,
and the Duchess Escleremond his wife. And he cried to his company and said.
Sirs, I pray you heartily at this time show forth your Prowess, and behave your
selves so valiantly, that this Emperor and Almaines have no cause to make
their auaunts, that they have found us as men amazed, but let us show them how
our swords can cut. Then all together they assailed their enemies in such wise,
that at ye first brunt the Almaines were constrained to retire back, and
Gerames did such deeds, that none durst approach near unto him. Then the Duke
Sauary with ten thousand men came upon them suddenly, the which was no equal
part, and also the Emperor with his great battle came also upon old Gerames
and his company, who had gotten themselves into the subburbs of the City, and
a mighty wall behind them at their backs, whereas they did stand at a bay
against the Almaines. Gerames was in the midst of them, and underneath his
helmet appeared his long white beard, and the Emperor who had great shame,
that so few men in number should keep a baye against his highness, and do
unto his men so great damage, he perceived where the old Gerames was, who had
oftentimes slain many of his men, and done him so mighty damages, that he
thought he could never be revenged thereof sufficiently, and thought that if
he should have escaped then alive, that he would do him much more hurt and
damage after, and said to himself, that he had rather die incontinent, then
he should not as then be revenged on him, and therewith incontinent he couched
his Spear and ran at old Gerames on the one side ere he was aware, so that the
Emperor ran him clean through the body, so that the gentle knight Gerames
fell to the earth, and died incontinent: great damage fell that day to Huon of
Bourdeaux, for he lost the truest and best friend that he had. Alas for that
pitious journey that fell that day to them of Bourdeaux. They had good cause
for to weep, alas good Duchess Escleremond, what loss have ye received, to
loose him, who was your chief comfort and refuge, ye might have called him
more then father. Ah right noble Lady, there never came to you a greater
mischief, then ye have by the death of Gerames, who lies dead even now among
the enemies.

When the Almaines saw that Gerames was dead, then they fought so, that within
a short space all them of Bourdeaux were slain, and not one escaped alive,
except Barnard, who was on the puissant horse Amphage: for the gambaudes and
work that he made, not an Almaine durst approach near him, for Bernard next
unto Huon, was the most valiant knight of his body, that was as then living,
for when the Almaines saw him upon that horse, they chased him no further, but
they went to their tents, and Bernard ceased not till he came unto the gate of
the City, the which was opened, when he was entered, and the gate closed
again, the Burgesses and comunaltie saw how Bernard came in all alone, they
demanded of him, and said. Sir, where is your captain and the old Gerames.
Then sore weeping, he showed them at length the pittious and dolorous
adventure, the which when they heard, they made such cries and weeping, that
pity it was for to hear and to see them, the brute and noise was so great
and loud, that the Lady Escleremond heard it, whereat she maruailed, and stood
in a great fear. Therewith Sir Bernard entered in at the Castle gate, and so
mounted into the hall, whereas he found the Duchess Escleremond, who was sore
abashed when she saw Sir Bernard come alone, who showed her the great loss
that he had sustained that day, wherewith for inward sorrow she fell down in a
swound, and so lay a long space as though she had been dead. Then the Ladies
and Damsels sore weeping relieved her, and then she cast out a great cry,
wringing her hands, and tearing her hair, and said. Ah Huon my right dear
Lord, this day ye have lost your most sorrowful and dolorous wife and well
beloved daughter.

Then the Ladies, and Damselles, and other wives, who had lost their husbands,
fathers, and brethren, came into the Castle, and made such cries and sorrow,
that the noise thereof was heard into the Emperors host without, and it was
showed the Emperor, that the noise and brute that was made within the City
and Castle, was for the loss they had received that day. And then they
said, that it should be good that the next morning every man should be ready
to go and assail the City, and said, that if ever they would win it, the
hour then was come. When the Emperor had heard that reason, he said that the advice was very good, and that he would that it should so be done, he gave the
charge thereof to his Constable and Marshalles: and so the next morninge his
host was ready, and the Emperor commanded to set forward, and then they came
before the City garnished with all things needful and necessary for assault:
and they marched forward, and approached the City, and when they came there,
they gave a great cry, and entered into the Dykes, and reared up their ladders
to the walls in diverse places, so that they that were within were sore afraid.
For within were but Burgesses and Merchants, who could but little skill of
war, howbeit, they mounted upon the walls, and defended their City. But
the City was so sore assailed on all parts, that the defendants wist not where
to make resistance, the shot of them without slew so thick, that none within
durst appear upon the walls: whereby they entered perforce into the City,
and slew as many as they met withal in their entering. And then they went
unto the gate, and opened it, so that the Emperor and all his Lords entered
into the City. Then every man went abroad in the streets, to take
prisoners, and to spoil men's houses.

When the Emperor saw he was Lord of the City, he caused it to be
proclaimed in every street, that no man on pain of death should wrong any
woman, or deflowre any maid, nor to break any Church, nor to set any house
on fire, and also such as were in any Church for sauegard, that they should go
at their pleasure, without any trouble or danger either of body or goods, for
the Emperor, who was a wise Prince, thought in himself, that great damage and
pity it would be, to destroy and put to ruin such a famous City, so
strong and well furnished with Burgesses and Merchants. When such as were
fled into strong places for refuge, understood the Emperors commandment,
every man and woman returned to their own houses, so that there was but
little damage done, and that was done by them that entered first. When the Lady
Escleremond saw how the City was taken, ye may be sure she was right
sorrowful. For first she saw her City taken by the enemy, and her self
closed within the Castle ill furnished with victualles, and much people with
her, whereby she saw clearly (without God did aid her) that her death
approached near. Then pitiously she complained to God and said. Very God on
whom I believe firmly, and for whose sake I have left my first misbeleefe,
and forsook my parents and friends to take to my husband a Christian man, to
the intent to receive thy law, O God I require thee of thy grace to have pity
upon me poor desolate creature, and to keep and defend my dear children
from all ill incombrances, for if it be thy pleasure to save my child, I am
content to abide what fortune it shall please thee to send me, and beside
that, I require thy grace to save and keep Huon my dear Lord and husband.

Then all weeping she called unto her sir Bernard, and said* Right dear
Friend, I can take no counsel now but of you, you see well how our deaths
approache, and that it is impossible for us to keep and defend this Castle
against the Emperor, who has won the City, and I doubt if he enter into
this Castle perforce, we shall be the first that shall receive death, and
because I see well that I cannot escape from hence, I require you my dear
Friend, and by the troth that you bear unto Huon my Lord and yours, that
incontinent you take my dear Daughter Clariet whom I hold here in mine
arms, and find some means that you may depart out of this City, and bear
her straight to the Abbey of Cluny, the which is in Burgoyne, and deliver her
into the keeping of the Abbot there: and recommend me unto him, he is Uncle to
my Husband Huon, and great Uncle to my Child. Lady, (quoth Bernard) I know
well that if I be taken here, I shall be utterly slain: howbeit, if I could see
or know that my abiding here could aid or succor you, both for mine honor
and for the love of my good Lord and Master Huon, I would never depart hence
from you, but my resistance and force is but of small value, and because I
would serve you as I am bound to do, I am ready sournished to take upon
me that adventure, as to bear your Child away, and to set her in sauegard by
the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

When the Duchess understood Barnard, she was well comforted, and as for her
self she regarded neither her life nor death, when she knew that her Child
should be saved. Then she delivered her Child unto Barnard, to the intent
that in the night time he should issue out. Then the Emperor and his Lords
came before the Castle: and when the Duchess knew that, she came to the
gate, and at a window she desired to speak with the Emperor, who was there
ready present and said. Madame, say what you will to me at your pleasure: and
when she saw the Emperor, she said. Sir, I know well that you are the head
and cheifest of all the christened and noblest, whereby you are bound to defend
and to keep from ill all noble men and women, I that am the Daughter of an
high and mighty Emperor, and that for the love of my good Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, have forsaken mine own false beeleefe, to believe upon the
Christian faith: Sir, I require you (for his sake that made and created you) to
have pity and compassion of me, and of all those that be here with me, and
to respite our lives, and to put from you all rancour and malice, and pardon
them that nothing had to do with the beginning of this war.

When the Emperor had heard the reasonable request of this fair Lady, he
cast from him all the mortal hate that he had unto her, and unto them that
were within the Castle with her. Then he moved with pity and compassion of
the noble Lady, aunsweared and said: Madame, for the love of our Lord Jesus
Christ, I repel from me all my displeasure, so that you render unto me this
Castle, and to put it under mine obeisance to use it at my pleasure, and to
yield your body as my Prisoner, and all those that be within, and thus you
shall have all your lives saved. Sir, (quoth the Duchess) laud and praise be
given to our Lord Jesus Christ, for this grace that you show unto me and to
my company. Then the Emperor went back, and made express commandment
throuhout the City, that no man should be so hardy, as to do any hurt or
injury to any manner of person within the City, but to suffer every man to
abide in their own houses peaceably without killinge, whereof the Burgesses
and communaltie of the City, were right joyful. Thus as ye have heard the
City of Bourdeaux was taken by the Emperor, who was chosen in Almaine: and
committed by the Emperor Charlemaine until his Son Lewis should be of
full age, and able to rule the Empire.

Chap. CV.
How the Duchess Escleremond delivered her Daughter Clariet to Barnard, to
bear unto the Abbot of Cluny, of whom the Abbot was right joyful.

YE have heard the pitiful taking of the City of Bourdeaux, and of the
treaty and appointment that the Duchess Escleremond had made with the
Emperor, and when she had made her appointment, she went unto her company
pitiously weeping, and showed them all the manner of her treaty, whereof
every person was glad that their lives should be saved, but they made great
sorrow, for that the Duchess should become a Prisoner, and then she called
Barnard, and said. Sir, when it is night, issue out by the Posterne with my
Daughter Clariet, and bear her unto the good Abbot of Cluny, who is her great
Uncle. Madame, (quoth he) be of good cheer, and by the grace of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, I shall not rest two nights in one place, until I have
delivered your daughter unto the good Abbot of Cluny her great Uncle. Then
Barnard took leave of the Duchess, who kissed her Daughter at her departing,
sore weeping and pitifully complaining.

There was a Posterne that opened into the feeldes, and it was so small that
Barnard was feign to lead his horse in his hand, the night was dark, but he
knew well the ways, and afterward he mounted on his horse with the Child in
his arms, and so road forth and passed the Lands of Bourdeaux, and was never
seen by any mortal man until the next day, he road so all the night that his
horse was weary. And when he saw that he was past all dangers and escaped
all perils, then he road at his ease for love of the Child, and he complained
greatly for the good horse Amphage, that Huon had left in his keeping until
his return, but he durst not take that Horse with him, for fear that he
should have dealt the worse with the Lady Escleremond, the which had been
true, for the Emperor loved the horse so well, that he desired more to have
the horse again, then for to win the City, and therefore Barnard durst not
take the Horse with him. So long Barnard road, that he arrived at Monglew, the
which is called Lion on the River of Roane, and from thence he road to Mascon,
and from thence he rested not until he came to the Abbey of Cluny, and then
he alighted, and desired to speak with the Abbot: and when the Abbot saw
Barnard with a Child in his arms, he had great marvel thereof: and when
Barnard saw the Abbot, all weeping he saluted him and said. Sir, the right
desolate Duches of Bourdeaux, your Niece and wise unto the Duke Huon of
Bourdeaux your Nephew, has sent here unto you her Daughter Clariet. Then the
good Abbot embraced him, and took the child and kissed it more then twenty
times, and demanded why he brought the Child unto him. Sir, (quoth Barnard)
the City of Bourdeaux has been besieged by the Emperor of Almaine, and so
straightly kept, that it was near hand famished, many Knights that were
within are slain, so that Huon your Nephewe, by the counsel of the Duchess
his wife, and consent of all his company, is departed out of Bourdeaux to
seek succor of the King of Auphamie brother unto Escleremond Huons Wife, and
so it is a long time since he departed, and we never could hear word of
him, and thus he left us in Bourdeaux, and our chief Captain was the old
Gerames your Coozen, who was Brother to the good Provost Guyer, and so it was
that upon a night we issued out and road to the Emperors Tents, and slew
many of our enemies, and when we saw our time we returned toward our
City, but by some spy we were perceived when we issued out, whereby the
Emperor knowing thereof, sent Duke Sauary his Brother with ten Thousand men
to lie in ambushment near to the City, so that when we had thought to have
entered into the City, Duke Sauary was before us with ten Thousand men, there
we fought a long space, but finally the old Gerames and his company were all
slain, none escaped but my self, and that was by reason of my horse, so I
entered into the City, whereas there was made great sorrow, and the next day
the Emperor with great assault wanne the City, and came to the Castle whereas
the Duchess was, who saw well that she could not long hold the Castle, she
made her treaty to save her body and her company, and so they are all
Prisoners: before she delivered up the Castle, she delivered me her
daughter, and so I issued out at a Posterne privily, and was not perceived,
therefore Sir your Niece has sent you her daughter, to the intent that for the
love of her father, and of her ye would keep and nourish her, till her father
Duke Huon were returned.

When the abbot understood Bernard, he began to weep, and took the child
in his arms, and kissed her oftentimes, and said. My dear child, if it
please our Lord God I shall be to you both father and mother, and shall
nourish you until ye be great, and then marry you unto some mighty Prince,
in whom it shall lie to conquers your heritage, lands, and signories, for I
have here in my house such treasure, that it is sufficient to conquer a whole
Empire. Then the Abbot sent for a noble Lady of the country, and a nurse, and
delivered unto them the child for to keep and to nourish, for a fayrer
creature of her age was never seen. Then the Abbot said to Barnard, Sir ye
shall abide here still with me, until the child be of age, or else till
her father be returned. Now let us leave to speak of this young child
Clariet, and of the Abbot, and return to speak of the dolorous company that
were in the Castle of the noble City of Bourdeaux.

Chap. CVI.
How the Duchess Escleremond yielded up the Castle to the Emperor, and how she
and her company were prisoners in the City of Mayence.

YE have well heard here before, that after the departing of Barnard from the
Castle of Bourdeaux, with Claret Huons daughter, how the Emperor had made a
treaty with the Duchess Escleremond, for the deliverance of the Castle, the
which passed: and on the next morning the Duchess spoke with the Emperor, who
with all his men was there ready before the place, abiding to have the
deliverance of the Castle. And when he saw the Duchess at a window over the
gate, he said. Madame, I will that the promise that ye made me yesterday ye
perform, or else I will do according as I think best. Sir, (quoth the
Duchess) I am ready to fulfill my promise, so that ye promise me again, that
my body, and all Ladies and Damselles and other shall be saved, and not touched
by no villain, nor no ill done unto our bodies. Madame (quoth the Emperor)
all this that you require here, I promise to perform: but you, and all such
as be with you shall be my prisoners. Sir (quoth the Duchess) my life and my
body, and all such as be here with me, I put them in the sauegard of God and
of you.

Then she descended down, and came into the hall, whereas she found her
company making great sorrow each to other, for they knew not where ever they
should meet again or not. Then the Duchess commanded to open the gate, the
which was done immediately. Then the Emperor and all his Lords entered into the
Castle, but he would not go into the hall, till he had all the Ladies and
other brought out, to the intent that they should make no request to him, and
he ordained a thousand Knights of the most ancient men of his host, and then
be delivered the Duchess, and six Ladies with her, and all the other
prisoners, as well they that were within the Castle, as other that had been
taken before at diverse skirmishes, and sent them straight to the City of
Mayence, and set them all in prison in Towers and other places, but the
duchess was put all alone in a strong tower, within the which there was a
deep dungeon, and therein she was set, out of the which she never issued
until she was delivered by Huon her Husband. Then the Emperor being in the
Castle of Bourdeaux sent over all the Country, that all such as were alive
should come and do their homage unto him, and take their Lands of him, the
which they did according to his commandment. Then he made his Prouosts and
Officers to do justice both in the City and Country: and after that the
Emperor had been there eight days, he went out of the City, and road and
took possession of Blames and Gerone, and set there his Officers, and when he
had full possession of all the Country, he left Keepers in the Country, and
so returned to the City of Mayence, whereas he was received with great joy
and triumph. Now let us leave to speak of the Emperor Tirrey, and speak of
Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, being in the Castle of the Adamant, in great poverty
and famine.

Chap. CVII.
How there arrived at the Castle of the Adamant a Ship full of Sanazins,
wherein was the Bishop of M^llaine, and how Huon caused them to be christened,
and then he brought them into the Castle, whereas they found great store and
plenty of victuals.

YE have heard here before, how Huon was in the Castle of the Adamant in
great poverty and famine, whereas he had been ten days without meat and
drink, except Apples and fruit that grew in the Garden, whereby he became so
feeble and weak, that he had scarre power to sustain himself upon his
feet, he found there riches enough gould and silver, apparel and Jewels, and
rich bedding, so that he wanted nothing except victual, and as he walked in
the chamber whereas the treasure lay, he beheld an Arch vaulted richly, painted
with gould and azure, under the which stood a rich chair, and therein a
coushin of cloth of gould, bordered with pearls and precious stones. Huon who
was weary of walking, sat down in the chair to rest him. Then he began
sore to muze, casting down his looks to the earth, and by reason that his
long Mantle had swept the powder away from the pauement, there appeared letters
of gould written upon the pauement, and he red them, and the tennour of them
was: Whosoever reads this Letter, shall find that under this pauement, there is
a Celler with victual both bread, flesh, and wine, and of all sundry meats for
man or woman to eat of. But the Letters said, that whosoever should enter into
this Celler, except he be without deadly sin: as soon as he touches any of
the meat, suddenly he shall die. When Huon had read all the Letters, he had
great marvel and fear, and thought within himself, that when he departed
from Bourdeaux, he was confessed before his Priest died, and since that time
he could not remember any thing that he had committed that should be deadly
sin: and then he made his prayers to our Lord God devoutly sore weeping, and
when he had ended his prayers, as he kneeled upon his knees before the
chair, he saw hanging upon the side of the chair a little key of gould, he
took it up in his hand, and began to muze on the writing that said:
Whosoever enters into this Castle, though they be valiant and wise or noble
Knights, yet they shall not know well what to do. Then he said unto
himself, rather then I should die for famine, it were better to die shortly
then long to endure in this hunger and thirst.

Then Huon recommended himself to the aid and help of almighty God, and
took the key and opened a little wicket and drew the door unto him. Then he
looked down into the Celler, the which was as clear, as though the Sun in
the midst of the day had entered in at the windows, and so he went down
about Seauen-score greeces: then he regarded on the right hand, and saw a
great Oven with two mouths, the which cast out a great clearenesse, then he
saw near thereunto Ten fair young men, they were all of the Fayrie, four of
them made the Past for bread, and two delivered the loaves to other two, and
they did set them down upon a rich cloth of silk: then the other two men
took the loaves and delivered them unto one man by two loaves at once, and
he did set them into the Oven to bake, and at the other mouth of the Oven,
there was a man that drew out the white loaves and Pastes, and before him
there was another young man that received them, and put them into Basketts
which were richly painted.

When Huon had well advised them, he had great marvel, and came and saluted
them, saying: Sir, I pray to our Lord God to save you and all your company,
and when they heard Huon speak, they gave unto him no manner of answer, but
beheld each other, and when Huon saw that none of them would make him any
answer, he was sore abashed and greatly troubled in his mind: howbeit he said.
Sirs, you that be here, I conjure you in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, and of the Angels and Archangels, and of all the
Court celestial, that ye answer me to that I do demand of you.

Then they all ceased from their labor and business, and beheld Huon, and
rubbed off the paste and meal from off their hands and fingers, and the
Master of them beheld Huon and said. Friend you do us great wrong to conjure
us, we will that you well know, if you were either Sarazin or Paynim, you
should never depart from hence without death: your troth and nobleness has
preserved you, you ought greatly to thank God, I know well that you have
great hunger, for it is Ten days since you did either ^ate or drink any
thing, except all only of the fruit that you found in the Garden, the which
as yet is not ripe nor ready to eat. Therefore Huon fair Sir, I know well
that you have great hunger, and therefore if that you will drink or eat,
enter into yonder rich Chamber the which you see open, where you shall find
the Table ready set, and the cloth laid, and the pots of silver, and the
vessel of gould bordered with precious stones and pearl, and the Basins of
gould and Ewers with water to wash your hands, and there sit you down at the
Table, and there you shall find meats and drinks such as you will with for, and
as long as you will tarry here in this Castle, you shall have every day like
service or better if you list, for any meat that you will wish for, you shall
have it at your pleasure, and of wine in likewise two times of the day without
you will fast. But sir, I require you of one thing, that from henceforth you do
not conjure me nor any of my company, and then you shall have every thing at
your desire. Sir, (quoth Huon) from henceforth I shall not speak unto you, so
that by the coniuration that I have coniured you, you will show me what
people you be that abide here in this Castle: and what you call this Castle,
and who is Lord thereof, and by whom all the riches that is here within is
kept: I will go eat some meat, and then I pray you for to show it unto me?

Then they answered Huon right fiercely and said: Ah thou false and untrue
Knight, for to demand any such thing of us, at this time I shall show you,
but afterward, by me nor by none other of my company, you shall never hear
word spoken. Sir, (quoth Huon) the request I am sorry of: and I heartily
desire you yet, if hereafter I speak unto you alone, that you will answer
me. Nay surely, (quoth he) that will I never do, but I shall show you that I
have promised, seeing you are so desirous to know it.

Sir, know for troth, that Julius Caesar Father to the good and noble King
Oberon, caused this Castle to be made by craft of the Fayrie, the which Castle
cannot be grieved nor taken perforce: so it fortuned upon a day that Julius
Caesar, after he had vanquished the great Pompey, he came into Alexandria to
^^olomeus King of Egypt, and discomfited him and took from him all his Lands,
to give it unto his Sister the fair Cle^^^tra, who was Queen of that Land,
and after she married Marcus Antonius, and after that Julius Caesar had this
done, to refresh him, he came hither with the Queen of the privy Isle, and
brought her the same night into this Castle, and there were three Kings of the
lineage of Tholomeus, who when they knew that Caesar was in this Castle, they
made an army, and with many Ships and Galleys, they came and laid seege
before this Castle, and lay at the seege a long space, and could not hurt it
the value of one penny, so long they lay here, that they were sore displeased
therewith, and so they thought to depart home into their own countries, but by
reason that their ships were nailed with iron nails, they could not depart
from hence, for the Adamant stone that by nature draws the iron unto him, and
so they lay here so long, that they al died miserably for famine and rage,
for no ship can depart from hence without it be pinned with nails of wood,
and not of iron. And whereas you demand, from whence comes the Treasure that
is here within this Castle? Know for a troth, that it was the riches that
these three Kings left in their ships when they dyed, the which Treasure
after that they were dead, Caesar caused it to be brought into this Castle, and
before he dyed, he delivered unto me the keeping of this Castle and
Treasure. And I and Forty other of my fellows, are here condemned by the
Fayrie to abide here unto the end of the world. Now when that tidinges came
to the knowledge of the noble King Oberon, that his Father Julius Caesar was
slain, and murdered within the Senate of Rome by them whom he trusted well,
King Oberon took such displeasure, that he made promise and assurement, that
he would never come here more, and no more he has done: for he thought if he
should have come hither again, that he should have dyed for sorrow, for the
great love that he had unto his Father Julius Caesar. And since you will know
my name, I am called Gloriadas, and this Castle is called the Adamant. Now I
have showed you the troth of your demand, and one thing I say unto you, you
shall never depart from hence as long as you live, without you fly in the air
as a bird does fly: now I have showed you your desire.

When Huon understood him, he was right sorrowful: and so after he had well
eaten and drunken at his own pleasure, he took his leave and departed, and
came unto a door of a chamber, and saw Letters of goulde written over the
door, whereby he had knowledge where the key was, he tooked it and opened the
door and entered into the Chamber, and saw how that all the Chamber was made of
Crystal, and painted richly with gould and Asure, and there was the
protraiture of all the Battles of Troy, and all the deeds of Alexander: and
upon the pauement was spread abroad, Roses, flowers, and herbs sweet
smelling above all other savors in the world, and in the Chamber there were
diverse birds flyinge about, singing so maruailous sweetly, that great joy and
melody it was to hear them: the riches and great beauty of that chamber could
not be described. Huon had maruailous great pleasure to behold it, and there
he saw a Table set full of meat, and there by stood great pots of gould
garnished with precious stones full of wine, there was no meat in the world but
that there it was ready: Huon had good appetite to eat, for he had eaten but
little before, by reason of the talking that he had with Gloriadas: and then
two young men brought him a Basin of gould broadered with pearls to wash his
hands, and another brought him a Towell to wipe his hands. Then Huon sat down
at a rich Table, the which was bordered with precious stones, the cloth that
lay upon the Table was of silk richly wrought, Huon did eat his meat, for
he had good appetite thereto, a goodly young man carved for him, and another
bare his Cup, many folks there was, to have done service unto any creature
living in the world, and he spoke unto them, but none would answer him one
word, wherewith he was angry and sore displeased: but when he saw that there
was none other reamedie, he did let it pass and forgot it, because of the
sweet melody that the bird^s made: often times he wished for his Wife the
fair Escleremond, and for his Daughter Clariet, and for Gerames, Barnard, and
Richard, and his other company that he left at Bourdeaux.

Thus Huon was served in the Castle of the Adamant, and when he had dined,
the Servants took up the Table, and brought him water and a Towell for to wash
his hands, and ^^en he rose up from the Table, and went down into the Seller,
whereas he saw every thing as he had seen before, he sa^^^^ them in passing
by, but they made none answer, so he came unto greeces and mounted up, and
then went and sported him from chamber to chamber, and then into the Garden,
wherein he took great pleasure: and when the time came for to eat, he
returned into the Seller, and so into the Chamber, whereas he found every
thing ready as he had done before: but he was sore and greatly displeased,
that they that served him would not speak no word.

Thus Huon was there a whole Month, and took such pleasure there, that he
recovered his heath, and strength, and beauty, greatly he was annoyed that
there was no man there that would speak one word unto him: oftentimes he
wished himself at Bourdeaux with a hundred Thousand men at arms to give
battle unto the Emperor who had done him so much damage. And upon a day as
Huon walked in the Hall saying of his prayers, he looked out at a window into
the Sea, and he saw a far off a Ship coming with full sail to arrive at
the Port, and they were about Foure-score Merchants all of Spain, and they
knew not what Port they did arrive at.

Chap. CVIII.
How Huon saw a Ship arrive at the Port of the Castle of the Adamant.

WHen Huon saw this Ship arrive at the Port, he greatly complained for them,
and said: Ah good Lord, what a sort of good Merchants have here been lost,
if they of yonder Ship knew thereof, they would not ariue here by their
wills, and so then he saw the Ship come in with such a force, and it dashed
in so sore amongst the other old Ships, that the Ship was near hand
perished. But the other Ships were so old that they were rotten, so that
thereby the new Ship was saved, who had been twenty days in torment on the
the Sea, so that the men that were within it were sore trauayled and faint for
famine, that they were scarce able to sustain themselves upon their feet.

When Huon saw them arrive, all weeping he complained for them, for he saw
well that they were all lost, and that they should never depart from thence,
when the Ship was arrived, the Merchants within it called upon Mahound to
aid and to succor them, and the Master of the Ship stood up and went a
shore, and looked toward the Castle, and saw Huon where he stood leaning in
a window: whereof they had great joy, thinking that they were arrived at a good
Port, supposing that he that they saw there before them, had been the Lord of
the Castle, because he was so maruailous richly aparelled, and then they
saluted Huon in the name of Mahounde their God. When Huon heard that, he knew
surely that they were Sarazins, and he that could very well speak the Spanish
language, answered to the Master and said. Friends, you that be here arrived,
show me (I pray you) the troth from whence you are come? and what you be? for
be you sure that as long as you live you shall never depart from hence, and
without you have victuals brought with you, you are all arrived at an
unfortunate place.

Then the Master trembling said, Sir know for troth, that I am of the country
of Spain, and dwelling in the City of Luysarne, and they that are come hither
with me, are all Merchants of Portugal, and are come from the city of Acre,
and there we charged our ship with Merchandise, and we had a maruaylous good
wind until we were passed the straites of Morrocco, and that we were near
to our own country, and then suddenly a great tempest arose and took us, and
drove us off from the coast of our own Country a great distance, and this
tempest has continewed these twenty days past so extremely, that we were
feign perforce to abandon our ship to the raging of the Sea and wind, even
as the ship would go at adventure, but at the last by good fortune we
chanced to arrive by a great rock and there we cast anchor: and presently
after that we were arrived there, we went up into the Rock, and there we found
the Bishop of Lishborne and one of his Chaplains with him, who came thither
driving upon a mast of a ship that had been perished, but all the rest of
his company were drowned by misfortune at sea. Then the Bishop and his
Chaplain humbly prayed me to have pity upon them and to save their lives, and
to take them into my ship: whereupon I had compassion on the^, and (as one
very glad and willing to deliver them from that danger) I took them into my
ship, and gave them meat and drink and other things such as I had, for
they had been almost dead by famine if I had not succored them, and yet I
think that they will not live until to morrow at night, for truly I have no
more victualles, neither for my self nor for such as be within my ship: thus
Sir I have answered to your demand, and therefore I desire you in the honor
of God and of Mahound, to show me to whom this Castle does appertain, and who
is Lord thereof? and what is the name thereof, and of this Port whereas we be
arrived? Friend quoth Huon, know for troth that this Castle and Port is the
place in the world most hated and doubted of Paynims and Sarazins, and I shall
show you the cause why this Castle is set on a Rock of Adamant stones, so
that if any ship chance to come hither by adventure, it can never depart
from hence again. For the Adamant is of that nature, that it draws always
unto him the iron: and therefore any ship that is nailed or have in it any
iron, and by chance come near this Port, by force it shall be constrained
here to arrive.

When the Merchant heard Huon, he began sore to weep and lament, and so did
all the other and said. Sir, we are sore dismayed and abashed, of these words
that you have said. Friend, (quoth Huon) all that I have said is of troth: but
sirs, if you will believe me, and take upon you christendom, and believe
upon the faith of Jesus Christ, and believe firmly in him: you and all such
as be in your ship, I shall bring you into such a place whereas you shall
have meat and drink at your pleasure, and apparel as rich as you shall
demand, and then I shall show you so much gould and riches, that you shall be
satisfied with the beholding thereof. Therefore if you will believe upon God,
and of his Son Jesus Christ, you shall have all this that I have said before,
or else you shall al die of rage and of famine miserably.

When the Patron had well heard Huon, he said: Sir, know for troth, it is
about Seven years past since I believed upon the faith of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and Sir, I thank you of the courtesy that you have
showed unto me, and from henceforth I submit my self to the sauegard of
almighty God, and of his Son Jesus Christ. When Huon heard that, he was
right joyful, and said. Friend, go to thy Ship, and remove all thy
company to believe upon Jesus Christ, and show them what per^ll and danger
they be in now, and what wealth they shall have if they believe upon almighty
God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, and also show them what pleasure they shall
find in this place, and if they will not, thou may well say that they are
come to their last and shortly, and the two men that thou have saved, cause
them to come hither unto me. Sir, (quoth the Patron) I shall send them unto
you, and then he departed and entered into his Ship, and there he showed his
company all that he had heard of Huon, and what he was commanded to say unto
them. When the Marchaunts who were all Paynims had heard their Patron declare
in what case and perrill they were in, they all answered, how that they were
all ready to do his pleasure and to receive christendom, whereof the Patron
was right joyful to hear them say so.

Then the Patron sent for the Bishop and his Nephew who was his Chaplain, and
said, Sirs, in the Castle there is a Lord, who prays you that incontinent
ye will come a land and go to speak with him. When the Bishop heard the
Patron, he arose up with much pain for faintness by reason of famine, and
said, how that he would gladly fulfill his commandment. Then he and his
Chaplain departed out of the Ship, and came to the stairs and mounted up to
the Castle, but they were feign to rest them by the way diverse times, and when
they came unto the gate, they maruailed greatly of the great beauty and rich
work that they saw there, and so they came unto Huon, who tarried for them at
the Hall door. When they came near unto him, they humbly saluted him. Sirs,
(quoth Huon) God save you, and I pray you show me the troth what Country you
be of? Sir, (quoth the Bishop) seeing it is your pleasure to know, I shall
show you the troth. Sir, I was borne in the Cite of Bourdeaux, and am Bishop
thereof, and have been this Twenty years, and a deuo^ion took me to go a
Pilgrimage to the holy Sepulcher, but God would not suffer us so to do: for
when we were departed from Lishborne, a great wind and torment arose upon our
Ship, the which was fair and rich and well furnished with Merchants, and so by
fortune our Ship ran against a Rock, so that our Ship burst all to
pieces, and there all our company were drowned, except my self and my
Chaplain, who is my Nephew, and we two saved our selves upon the Maste of
our Ship floating upon the Sea, so that by the grace of God, the Ship that
is here beneath arrived by fortune at the Port near unto the Rock, and I
prayed him in the honor of God and of his Son Jesus Christ to save our
lives, and the Patron had pity and compassion of us, and took us into his
Ship, and did so much for us as though we had been his Brethren. Sir, thus I
have showed you our adventure: and Sir, I require you to pardon me in that I
so stearnly behold you, but I shall show you (quoth he) the cause why I do it,
me thinks I see before me the good Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, who sweetly
nourished me in my youth, you greatly resemble unto him, and he set me to
school at Paris, and then he sent me to Rome unto our holy Father the Pope
of Rome, to whom I was a ki^, and he did me much good, and he gave me the
Bishopric^e of Millaine: Duke Seuin is dead, God be with him, and he had two
Sons the eldest called Huon and the other Gerard, Huon was sent for to Paris
by King Charlemaine, and by the way there fell unto him a maruailous
adventure, for he show the Kings Son Charlot in his own defense, not
knowing that it was the Kings Son: wherefore the King banished him out of
the Realm of France, and sent him to the Admiral Gaudise in Babylon to do
his Message, and afterward he returned into France: and since he has had
great war with the Emperor of Almaine, more I cannot say, and I am right
sorry that I know not where he is become, for my Father who was Brother to
the good Abbot of Cluny, long ago nourished Huon up in his youth, before his
Father Duke Seuin died, my Father did teach him: wherefore I have great sorrow
and grief at my heart that I know not where he is become, since the peace
was made and concluded between him and the King of France.

When Huon had well heard the Bishop and understood him, his blood changed,
and embracing him sweetly, he said: Sir, you are my Coozen, and I am Huon, who
passed the sea and went to the Admiral Gaudise, and slew him, and led away
with me his Daughter the fair Escleremond, who was married unto me by our holy
Father the Pope, and I have left her in the City of Bourdeaux in great
poverty and misery, besieged by the Emperor of Almaine, I believe surely
that she is taken by this time. When the Bishop heard Huon, he began sore to
weep, and Huon embraced and kissed him, and said. Coozen you are happy to
find me here, or else shortly you had been dead. Sir, (quoth he) I ought
greatly to thank God thereof. But Sir, I require you to give me some meat,
for I am so sore punished with hunger and thirst, that I am near hand
famished, and can scarce sustain my self upon my feet. Coozen, (quoth Huon)
by the grace of God I shall bring you to such a place, whereas you shall have
meat and drink at your pleasure, and such as you will with for.

Then Huon took him by the hand, and brought him into the Pallaice and through
the Chambers, the Bishop was greatly abashed to see the riches that he saw
there. Then they went down into the Seller, the Bishop beheld the manner of
every thing, and had great marvel that none of them that he saw there
would not speak any word, he passed by them with Huon and saluted them, and
then he entered into the rich Chamber, whereas the Table was ready and Servants
to give them water, and they all three sat down: and then Huon said unto the
Bishop. Coozen, I conjure you by the Sacrament that you have received, that
you nor your Chaplain be so hardy as to eat one morsel of meat, if any of you
be in any deadly sin, if you be, incontinent confess you to your Chaplain,
and he unto you: for if you do otherwise, you shall no sooner eat one
morsel, but incontinent you shall die.

When the Bishop had well heard and understood Huon, he had great marvel
and said: Coozen, by the grace of God I feel my self in good estate not to
abide death, for when I departed from Rome, both I and my Nephewe were
confessed of the Pope, and assoyled of all our sins, and since we entered
into the Sea we have committed no sin. Then Huon said: Cozen, seeing that
you be both in this case, you may eat and drink at your pleasure, and so they
did, for they had great need thereof, they all three were richly served, they
had every thing as they wished for, the Bishop and his Nephew did eat and
drink, and they were greatly abashed of the great riches that they saw there,
and they were ravished at the sweet singing of the birds, and the herbs and
flowers that were there spread abroad smellinge so sweetly, that they
thought themselves in Paradise, and they had great marvel to see the Servants
to serve them so peaceable, but they would never speak one word, they would
gladly have demanded the cause why, but Huon had expressly charged them that
they should make none inquiry.

Thus they passed their dinner in great joy, and the^ washed their hands and
arose up from the Table, and the Bishop and his Chaplain said grace deuously.
Then Huon took the Bishop by the hand, and said: Cozen, we will go up
into the Pallaice, and then you shall go down into your Ship, and show them
without they will die incontinent, let them be christened, and dress up Tubbes
with water of the Sea, and hallowe you it and christen them therein, and I
shall come after you with my sword and clean armed, to the intent that if they
refuse thus to do, I shall strike often their heads. Sir, (quoth the Bishop) I
shall do your pleasure.

Then Huon armed himself, and went after the Bishop and his Nephewe down to
the ship, and when they came there, they found Elinas the Master of them,
who had preached so much unto the Sarazins, that he had converted them all
except Ten, they bare him in hand that they were glad to be christened, but
their thoughts were otherwise, for they Ten had concluded in their courages,
not to renounce the Law of Mahomet, for to believe upon Jesus Christ, but
they were content to be christened, to the intent that they would not die there
for famine.

When Huon and the Bishop was come unto them, the Bishop said: Sirs, I require
you all to show me your intention, that if with a good heart not colored, you
will become christened and believe on the Law of God the Father, and of his Son
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and leave the false and detestable Law of
Mahound, the which is nothing worth. Sir, (quoth they all) shortly deliver us,
for we be so hungry and thirsty, that we are almost famished, the which
ouer-presseth us so much, that we can no longer endure nor suffer it: and when
Huon had well heard them, he humbly thanked our Lord God, and had great joy
thereof, and the Bishop and his Chaplain confessed them all, and assoyled them
of all their sins, and in two great vessels christened them all. Then they
all cried upon Huon, and said: Sir, for the love of our Lord God give us some
meat. Sirs, (quoth Huon) you shall have incontinent enough, so that you shall
be satisfied. Then Huon and the Bishop and his Chaplain all three went into
the Castle, and charged upon their necks meat enough, and brought it into the
Ship, and caused all the Merchants to sit down, and the meat was set before
them, and the wine powered out into Cups, among other sat the ten Sarazins,
who had received the christendom faintly and falsely, and at the first morsel
that they did put into their mouths, suddenly they died: the other Merchants
when they saw that, they were greatly abashed, and regarded each other, and
durst not approach to touch the meat, for they had thought that they should
have all died. Sirs, (quoth Huon) be not dismayed nor abashed at this, for
these ten men that are dead, did baptize themselves but all only to save
their lives and to have meat, and not with a good conscience, nor for ye love
of almighty God, who has all men's hearts at his pleasure: therefore be not
afraid, eat and drink at your ease, for ye shall want nothing, but have all
things at your wish.

When the other Merchants understood by Huon, how that they that died were no
true Christian men, they were greatly abashed, and so fell to their meat and
drink: and when they had eaten and drunken at their pleasures, they arose and
took all the riches that were in the Ship and carried it up into the Castle,
and when they came there, they had great joy and pleasure, to behold the Hals
and rich Chambers that were there: so much gould and silver and other riches
they saw there, that they had thereof great marvel. Then they beheld the
rich beds, and Chambers apparelled whereas they might rest them: and then
they saw the fair Garden so pleasant and delightful to behold, that the more
they regarded it, the fairer it seemed unto them, the place was of length and
breadth a bow shoot and more. And when the hour came for supper, then Huon
led them down into the Seller, and after into the rich Chamber, whereas
there was meat and drink plenty, and after Supper they went again into the
Pallaice, and lay in the rich beds that they found there ready, and in the
morning the Bishop and his Chaplain did sing Mass before Huon, and all the
other that were there present, and when they would eat, they went to the
place accustomed, and there they found always ready every thing that they
desired or wished for, in the day time they would be in the Garden to sport
them, oftentimes the Bishop preached unto them, and confessed them of all their
sins.

Thus they were there all together the space of one Month in great pleasure
and solace, but whosoever had joy, Huon had none, for his abiding there greatly
grieved him, for oftentimes he would complain for his Wife the fair Lady
Escleremond, and for his Daughter Clariet, and said. Madame, as often as I
remember what danger I have left you in, my heart near departs out of my
body: Ah cursed Emperor, thou causest me to suffer much ill, when I think
that by this time thou have taken my City, my Wife, and my Child, and set them
in thy Prison, I would if it were the pleasure of our Lord God, that they were
here with me: then I would never depart from hence, and no more I shall do,
without it be by the grace of God. Ah noble King Oberon, you have given me the
realm of the Fayrie, if it might be your pleasure now so much to succor me,
as to deliver me from hence, and to aid me to destroy this Emperor who has
done me so much ill: for ever were I bound to your Mightiness.

Chap. CIX.
How Huon was borne by a Griffen out of the Castle of the Adamant, and how he
slew the Griffen, and five other young Griffens: And of the Fountain of the
fair Garden, and of the fruit of the Tree near to the Fountain.

THus as ye have heard Huon passed away the time in the Castle of the Adamant,
and upon a day he leaned and looked out at a window into the Sea-ward, and
he saw a far off a great bird come flyinge thether-ward, this bird or
foul was bigger then any horse in the world, whereof he had great marvel.
Then he saw where it came to the same Port, and lighted upon the Maste of a
great Ship, and saw how with the weight of the Foul, the Mast had near hand
broken asunder. Then after he saw the Foul alight down into the Ship, and
took with his tallants one of the Ten men that died because they would not
believe firmly upon God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, they could not
putrefie, but lay still in the Ship al whole and found: then the Foul lifted
him up into the air, and carried him away as lightly as a Hawk would carry a
Pigeon. Huon who saw this had great marvel, and beheld the Griffen which way
she did fly, and as far off as he might see, he saw to his similitude a
great Rock, as white to the sight as Crystal, and then he said to himself,
I would to God that I were there, I think it be some place inhabitable, and
then he thought within himself to come thither again the dext day, to see if
the Griffen would come again to fetch his pray, if he did, he^ thought if he
would be out of the Castle, the Griffen might bear him armed as surely, that
he should do him no hurt with his tallants, thinking to lie down armed with
his Sword in his hand among the dead men, and when the Griffen had brought him
where his young birds were, then to fight with the Griffen, yet he thought
before he would thus do, he would again see if the Griffen came, and held the
same way that she did before, for he thought surely that if she returned to the
same place, it must needs be some Land, and he thought that it were a thing
impossible to get out of that Castle by any other manner of ways.

Then Huon returned again to the Garden to the Bishop and unto the other
company, and made no semblance of that he had thought to do, and then he
talked with them of diverse matters. And when the time came, they went to eat
and drink as they had been accustomed to do before. When night came, and that
Huon was in his bed, he lay and studied of the conuayance of the Griffen,
desiring greatly for the day light, to go and see if the Griffen returned to
fetch her pray. When day came, Huon aroase and heard service, and then he went
to the window, and looked there so long, that at the last he saw a far off
where the Griffen came flying from the place as she had done the day before,
and came and sat down upon the same Maste, beholdinge the dead men that lay
under her, which of them she might take to her pray: Huon beheld her, and saw
how that she was a cruel Foul. Her neck was maruailous great, her eyes as
great as a Basin, and more redder then the mouth of a fournace, and her
tallants so great and so long, that fearful it was to behold her, and then at
last she lighted down into the Ship, and took one of the dead bodies in her
tallants, and so mounted into the air, and flew the same way as she did the
day before.

Huon beheld the Griffen well, and saw how that she flew to the white Rock.
This Rock was called the Rock of Alexander, for when Alexander passed the
deserts of India, and went to speak with the Trees of the Sun and of the
Moon, he came unto the same Rock, and at his return, he bathed him in a
Fountain near to the Rock, and there he tarried a certain space, and saw
there many things. Now let us leave speaking of this Rock, and return unto
Huon, who fixed his courage, that he determined to be borne from thence by
the Griffen, and said within himself, that he had rather adventure death,
then to abide any longer there: for he had so great a desire to see his Wife
and his Child, that he put from him all fear of death.

When Huon saw that the Griffen was gone with her pray, he went to the
Bishop and unto his company, and showed unto them all that he had seen and
thought to do: and when they all had heard Huon, they began pitifully to
weep, and wrang their hands, and did tare their hair, making the greatest
sorrow and grief in the world, and cried out and said: Ah Coozen, (quoth the
Bishop) by the grace of God you shall never take upon you such a folly, you
ought not io seek your own death, sooner then it is the pleasure of God that
your hour be come: Sir, for Gods sake forsake us not, but tarry here with
us. Friends, (quoth Huon) when I remember the danger that I left my wife and
my child, and my City and Lords, and Burgesses and Communaltie in, my heart is
so sorrowful and so agreeued there at, that it near hand slays me, you
shall abide here in the sauegard of our Lord God, and I will take the
adventure that God will send me, and I pray you to speak no more unto me in
this matter, for by the grace of God I will venture it.

When they saw that they could not turn Huon from his Enterprise, the sorrow
that they made no man can declare, that night they passed in great sorrow and
dolor, until the next morning that Huon arose. Then he came to the Bishop,
and was confessed and received at his hand, then he dined well with his
company, and then after dinner he went and armed himself in double armor,
and with maile upon his Legs and helmet upon his head, and guirded his Sword
about him, and when he was ready and that it was time to depart, he took
his leave of the Bishop and of all the other, and commended them all into the
sauegard of almighty God. When the good Bishop saw his departure, he made
great sorrow and so did all the other, but none of them durst speak any more
unto him: the Bishop embraced him at his departing, and said. Coozen, into the
sauegard of almighty God and of his Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ I
commend you, and that he may of his grace preserve you from all your enemies.
Sir, (quoth Huon) the great desire that I have to aid and succor her, whom I
left in great poverty and doubt of her life, constrayneth me thus to depart,
for if I go not by this means, I must ever abide here, and then I shall
break my promise unto her, but by the grace of God I will keep my faithful
promise. Thus I recommend you unto God, and then he departed from them, and
passed out of the gate, and went down the stairs, and so came into the
ship, and then he looked into the Sea, and saw where the Griffen was
coming, and when he perceived that, he lay down among the dead men with his
sword naked in his hand, and held it upon his thigh* because it should not fall
into the Sea, and as soon as he was laid crewling among the dead men, the
Griffen came, and alighted upon the ship Mast as she was accustomed to do,
and she was so heavy and so great (as is aforesaid) that the Mast was near
hand broken asunder.

When Huon saw that, he was in great fear, and called upon our Lord Jesus
Christ for aid and succor, and to save him from the cruel Griffen, and the
Gr^ffen looking for her pray, saw where Huon lay armed, whereby he seemed more
greater then any of the other dead men, the Griffen desired to have him unto
her nest, to give him unto her young birds: and then she came down into the
ship and took Huon in her claws, and strained him so fast by both sides,
that her claws entered into the flesh for all his armor, so that the blood
issued out, and Huon was in that distress, that all his body trembled, and
pitiously he called upon our Lord God for aid and succor, but he durst not
stir for any pain that he felt, the Griffen did bear him so hie and so
far, that in less then three hours she did bear him unto the white Rock,
and there laid him down, and for travail that the Griffen had, she flew down
the Rock to a Fountain to drink, the which Fountain was of such great
virtue, that the bounty thereof could not be described, and Huon who lay
upon the Rock, was sore weary and faint, for the blood that he had lost,
he thought within himself, that if ever he would escape from that danger,
it was time for him then to show his Prowess: then he arose up and looked
round about him, and saw how that there was near him a fair Forest, and
then he prayed unto our Lord God to aid and succor him to depart from thence
in sauegard, and that he might once again return into his own Country, to
see his Wife and Child whom he so well loved: then anon he saw the Griffen,
who had seen Huon rise up, then she came with her mouth open to have devoured
Huon: but he was replenished with his Prowess, and came against the Griffen,
who had her paws ready open to have griped Huon, but he who was light and
quick, gave the Griffen such a stroke with his Sword, that he struck off one
of her feet by the joint, and so the Griffen fell to the earth, and gave such
a cry, that the young Griffens being in their nest in the Forest heard the
cry, and knew well that it was the voice of their Mother, Father they had
none, for he was slain but a little before by a King of Persia with his
Archers, because the Griffen had slain the Kings Horse for meat for his young
ones.

Thus when they heard the cry of their Mother, they arose up into the air,
they were five in number, they came all at once with open wings upon Huon,
and when he saw all five coming upon him, he had great fear, he struck the
first upon the neck, in such sort, that he struck off the head clean from
the body: then the second seized Huon by the maile, that if he had not
stricken off her Leg, he had borne him up into the air, but Huon gave him
such a stroke, that the Leg hanged still at the lap of the maile, and he
took it off with his hand and cast it to the earth, and with another stroke
he slew that Griffen,: and then came the third and gave Huon such a buffet
with his wings, that it made Huon to kneel down upon one of his knees. Then
Huon struck that Griffen such a stroke on the wing, that it fell clean from
the body. And the fourth he struck off his Legs, and with another stroke
struck off his head, and then also he slew the other with the one winge. Then
came the fifth Griffen, who was bigger then any of the other Griffens, and then
Huon struck at him, and the Griffen reared up his feet and spread abroad his
wings, and gave Huon such a recounter, that the noble Knight was stricken to
the earth.

When Huon felt himself hurt and lay upon the earth, he called upon God for
aid and succor, for he thought that he should never have risen more, and
wished himself at that time that he had tarried still in the Castle of the
Adamant with his company, who for sorrow that they had when Huon went into
the ship, they durst not abide the coming of the Griffen, but went and did
hide themselves in the Castle, and Huon who was sore wounded with this fifth
Griffen, rose up as well as he might, and came to the Griffen, who was ready to
destroy him with his beak and nails. Thus Huon like a virtuous and a hardy
Knight took courage, and lifted up his Sword with both his hands, and struck
the Griffen such a stroke upon the head, that he claue it to the brains, so
that the Griffen fell down dead to the earth.

Chap. CX.
How Huon fought with the great Griffen, and slew her.

WHen Huon saw that he had slain the five young Griffens, he thanked our
Lord God for the grace that he had sent him, as to overcome such five terrible
Fowls: then he sat down to rest him, and laid his Sword by him, thinking that
they had been all slain, but it was not long, but that the great Griffen who
had brought him from the Castle of the Adamant, came upon him with three
feet, and beating with his wings, and when she saw her young ones slain,
she cast out a great cry, so that all the Valley rang thereof. When Huon saw
her coming, he was in great fear, for he was sore weary with travail and
loss of blood, that it was pain to sustain himself: howbeit, he saw well
that it was great need to defend himself, and then he came to the Griffen to
have stricken her, but he could not, the Griffen was so near him beating with
her wings so fiercely, that Huon fell to the earth, and his Sword fell out of
his hands, whereof he had great fear, for he thought himself never so near
death in all his life as he was then, he called then right pitiously for aid
and succor of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Griffen did ^eat him maruailously
with her beak, wings, and tallants, but the noble coats of maile that he had
on were so strong, that the Griffen could not break them, but if the Griffen
had not lost before one of her Legs; and lost so much blood as she had
done, Huon could never have escaped without death, the Griffen so sore defoyled
and beat him, that he could not in no wise arise up again.

Then Huon remembered himself, how that he had by his side a rich knife, the
which he brought with him from ye Castle of the Adamant, he drew it out, and
therewith struck the Griffen upon the breast six great strokes, every
stroke as deep as the knife would go, and as his fortune was, this knife was
of length two foot, and therewith the Griffen fell down dead. Then Huon arose
and put off his helmet, and lifted up his hands unto Heaven, and thanked our
Lord God of his victory, and he was so sore travailed, and charged with blood
and sweat, that he put off his helmet and beheld round about him, and could
see nothing to trouble him. When he had tarried there a certain time, he
arose up and looked down the Rock, and he saw a Fountain in a fair
meadowe: then he went down and came thither, and he saw the Fountain so fair
and clear, that he had great marvel thereof, he saw the workmanship
thereof rich, all of white Jasper wrought richly with flowers of fine gould and
Azure, and when he saw the water so fair, he had great desire to drink
thereof, then he did off one of his double armours to be the more lighter, and
so approached unto the Fountain, and saw the gravel in the bottom all of
precious stones, and then he put off his helmet, and drank of the water his
fill, and he had no sooner droonke thereof, but incontinent he was hole of all
his wounds, and as fresh and lusty as he was when he came from the Castle of
the Adamant, whereof he most humbly thanked our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

This Fountain was called the Fountain of youth, the which was of such
virtue, that whatsoever sickness a man or woman had, if they bathed them in
the stream of that Fountain, they should be hole of all infirmities. Then
Huon unarmed himself, and put off all his clothes and bathed himself in the
stream, to wash away the blood and sweat that his body was colored withal,
and when he was clean washed, he armed himself again with one of his
armours, and left off the other. By this Fountain there grew an Apple Tree
charged with leaves and fruit, the fairest that might be found. When Huon
saw the Tree charged with so fair fruit, he arose upon his feet and
approached unto the Tree, and took thereof a fair Apple and a great, and did
eat thereof his fill, for the Apple was great, and he thought that he did
never eat before of such a fruit. Ah good Lord, (quoth he) I ought greatly to
laud and praise thee, seeing thou have thus replenished me this day with such
a Fountain and such fruit. Then he looked upon his right hand, and saw a
great Orchard full of Trees, bearing good fruit of diverse sorts, that great
beauty it was to behold them. This Garden was so fair, that it seemed rather
a Paradise then a thing terrestrial. For out of this Garden there issued such
a smell and odor, that Huon thought that all the balm and spicerie in the
world could not cast out so sweet a smell. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) what
place is this that I am in? for if the Griffen had not been here, I would have
thought that I had been in Paradise: good Lord God I pray thee to aid and
succor me in all mine affairs and enterprises, and at this time that I be not
lost nor dead.

Chap. CXI.
How an Angel appeared unto Huon, and commanded him to gather three Apples
of the Tree by the Fountain, and no more: and how the Angel showed him
tidings of his wife the fair Escleremond, and of his Daughter Clariet, and
showed him the way that he should go from thence.

THus as ye have heard Huon devised by himself at the Fountain, then he
went again to the Tree, and said that he would eat of that fruit, and gather
thereof as much as should suffice him for six days, and in that space he
trusted to come to some place, whereas he should have meat sufficient. Thus as
he was going toward the Tree, suddenly there appeared unto him a light
shining, that he thought he was ravished in Heaven among the Angels,
therewith he heard a voice Angelical that said: Huon, know for troth, that
our Lord God commands thee, not to be so hardy as to gather any more fruit
of that Tree, except three Apples, the which God is well content that thou
shall gather, and no more, hereafter they shall serve thee well, so that thou
do keep them clean and worthily as they ought to be kept, it shall not be
long ere thou shall have great need of them, the fruit of this Tree is called
the fruit of youth, it has such virtue, that if a man of Four-score, or of a
Hundred years of age do eat thereof, he shall become again as young as he
was at the age of Thirty years, in yonder Garden thou may go and gather
there of the fruit at thy pleasure, and eat what thou list: but eat no more
of this that thou have eaten of, and therefore beware I charge thee, gather no
more thereof, except the said three Apples. Know for troth that if thou
breakest my commandment, the fruit shall be dearly sold unto thee.

Sir, (quoth Huon) laud and praise be given to our Lord God my Creator, when
he shows his grace unto me that am so poor a sinner, and that he will
thus visit me, I shall never consent to break his commandment, I had rather
die then so to do: my body and my Soul I recommend unto his good grace. But
thou the Messenger of God, I require thee to show me how does my wife
Escleremond and Clariet my Daughter, whom I have left in my City of
Bourdeaux, besieged by the Emperor Tirrey of Almaine, I have great fear that
they be famished within the City, and my Lords and company that I left there
with her slain and dead. Friend, (quoth the voice) know for certain, that the
City of Bourdeaux is taken, and all thy men dead or taken, and thy wife in
prison in the great Tower of Mayence, whereas the Emperor Tirrey keeps her
straightly, and thy Daughter Clariet is at Cluny in the Abbey, whereas she is
well served, and the Abbot who has always loved thee, he has her in his
keeping, and she is as well cherished there, even as she were his own
Daughter. Sir, (quoth Huon) and why was she brought thither? Huon, (quoth the
Voice) know well that Barnard thy coozen German brought her thither. Friend,
(quoth Huon) I pray you to show me if Gerames, Richard, and Othon be alive or
not? Friend, (quoth the Voice) at the taking of the City they were slain by
the Emperor.

When Huon had well heard those pitiful tidings, he began tenderly to weep,
complaining for the fair Escleremond his wife, and for the death of the old
Gerames, and said: Friend, I require you to show me if ever I shall escape,
considering that I am here closed in with the Sea, the which goes round about
this Rock, I see no way to go out thereof, gladly I would know if ever I
shall return into my Country, to see my Wife and Daughter who are in great
fear and danger. Huon, (quoth the Voice) comfort thy self, thou shall see
them again, thy Wife Escleremond and thy Daughter Clariet, and thy good City
of Bourdeaux, but ere thou shall come there, thou shall suffer much pain, and
be in great fear and danger, the Emperor Tirrey has conquered all thy
Country, and Geronnell is under his obeisance with the City of Bourdeaux.
Then Huon swear and made promise, that if our Lord Jesus Christ would give him
the grace that he might return into his own Country, that surely he would
slay the Emperor Tirrey whatsoever end come thereof. Messenger of God, I
require you to show me by what manner of ways I may pass out of this Rock.
Huon, (quoth the Voice) go to the said Tree, and gather the three Apples, (as
I have said unto thee before) and keep them well and cleanly, for thou shall
hereafter have so much profit by them, that at the end thou shall come unto
thy desire and will, and shall be out of thy great pain, trouble, and
thought, take this little path that thou see here upon thy right hand, and
so go thou down unto the foot of the Rock, and there thou shall find a
fair clear water, and thereuppon a fair ship, enter into it, but first go
into the Garden, and gather fruit to serve thee as long as thou shall be in the
ship, then unloose the ship from the chain that it is tied by, and let the
ship go whether as it will, until it comes to the Port whereas thou shall
arrive: but be thou sure before thou come there, thou shall be in as great
fear as ever thou were in all the days of thy life, nor thou were never in so
great peril, I commend thee into the sauegard of our Lord Jesus Christ, I go
my way, and leave thee here.

Then Huon kneeled down and held up his hands, and said: Ah thou very
Messenger of God, I require thee to have me recommended unto my Creator. Huon,
(quoth the Voice) be of good comfort, for as long as thou art true and
faithful, thou ^ha^t have aid and succor of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and shall attain to thy desires, but ere thou come thereto, thou
shall suffer much pain and fear: but after (as I have said) thou shall have
wealth enough, and exalt al thy Feends. Huon was glad of that the Voice had
said unto him, but he was in great displeasure, in that his Wife the fair
Escleremond was Prisoner in the great Tower of the City of Mayence, and of the
death of the old Gerames and of other his Lords and Servants, and said to
himself, if I may, the Emperor shall deerly abuy that bargain.

Then Huon went to the Garden, and gathered fruit to bear into the Ship: and
then he went to the Fountain, whereas the Tree of youth was there by, and
there by the commandment of the Angel, he gathered three Apples, and
trussed them safely: and then he drank of the Fountain at his pleasure. Then
he departed, and took the little path, the which was between the Garden and
the stream that issued out of the Fountain, the which stream ran and fell
into the great River whereas the Ship lay, and when he was entered into this
stream, he saw the goodlyest precious stones that ever he saw, they were so
fair and so rich, that the value of them could not be esteemed, the gravel
of the stream that issued out of the Fountain were all precious stones, and
they cast such light that all the Mountain and Rock did shine thereof,
whereof Huon had great marvel. Also he saw the Ship so fair, that he was
thereof greatly dismayed and abashed, the River joined to the rich Garden,
whereas Huon had gathered fruit of Fourteen sorts, the which he put into the
Ship, and then recommending himself to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, he
entered into the Ship, and untied the ship from the chain: then the ship
departed from that Port, this River was called Diplayre. Thus this ship went
as fast as though a bird had flowne, and thus as ye have heard Huon sailed
all alonge in this Ship upon the River of Diplayre, right desirous to bring
out of danger his Wife the fair Lady Escleremond.

Chap. CXII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux sailed in a rich Ship, and of the perilous Gulf that
he passed by: and how he arrived at the Port of the great City of Thauris of
Persia.

THus as ye have heard, was Huon upon this rich River in his Ship, the
which was bordered with white Iuorie, and nailed with nails of fine gould, and
the fore Castle of white Crystal, mingled with rich Ca^sidony, and therein a
Chamber, the sealing wrought with stars of gould and precious stones, the
which gave such clearness in the dark night, as though it had been fair
day, and the bed that Huon lay upon, there is no humane tongue can esteem
the value thereof, therein lay Huon every night, and in the day came abroad in
the Ship, it was yrkesome to him for that he was alone without company, and
sailed every day between two Rocks without sight of any Town or Village,
man or woman: and when he had been in this Ship three days and three
nights, he beheld before him, and saw how the two Rocks began to draw
together and cover the River, and it seemed unto his fight, that the Ship
should enter into a darkness: howbeit, the River ever still kept his full
breadth, but the nearer he came, the darker the passage seemed: and when the
ship came near unto it, she went so fast, that Huon thought that no bird in
all the world could fly so fast, and then it began to be sore black and
dark, and the wind rose and it hayled so extremely, that he thought the Ship
should have perished, and Huon was so cold, that he wiste not how to get him
any heat. Then he heard pitiful voices speaking diverse languages, cursing the
time that ever they were borne. Then he heard thunder, and saw lightning so
often, that certainly he thought to have been perished, and never to have
escaped out of that danger.

Thus Huon was in this ship in great fear of loozing of his life, and when
he was hungry, he did eat of the fruit that he had brought thither, then
again he was comforted, in that the Angel had said unto him, that he should
see again his Wife Escleremond, and his Daughter Clariet. When he had been in
this case the space of three days, he sat down upon the Sea board of the
Ship, and then he heard such a brute so great and so horrible, that if the
thunder had fallen from the Heavens, and that all the Rivers in the world had
fallen down from the Rocks, they could not have made so hideous a noise as
the Tempest of the Gulf made, the which is between the Sea of Persia and the
great Sea Ocean, it was never heard that ever any Ship or Galley escaped that
way without perishing. When Huon saw himself in that danger, devoutly he
called upon our Lord God, and said. Ah good Lord, now I see and perceive, that
without thy aid and succor I am lost and come to my end, but seeing that it is
your pleasure and will that I shall perish here, I beseech your beneuolent
grace to accept my Soul into your favorable hands.

Huon had no sooner spoken those words, but a wind aroase with so great a
Tempest, that he thought then surely to have been cast away. Then he saw
coming against him great bars of iron red hot, that fell down from on high
into the River before Huon in such sort, that when they fell into the water, by
reason of the heat of the bars troubled so the water, that fearful it was to
behold it. Thus Huon was a great space, before he could pass the Gulf, the
which was so perrilous, and the Ship went so sore by force of the wind, so
that the ship went out of the midst of the stream, and was near to the
Land, so that the Ship was grounded, and could go no further.

When Huon saw and perceived that the Ship was upon the ground, he thought
then surely to have been drowned. Then he took an anchor and put it into the
water, to know how many foot the water was of deepenesse, and he found it
but five foot. Then he took one of his anchors and cast it a shore, and
then drew by the coard, until the ship came near to the bancke-side, then
he issued out of the Ship and leapt a land, and then he saw suddenly
about him a great clearness, whereof he was greatly dismayed and abashed, and
wist not what to think: then he saw before him that all the gravel in the
water were mingled with precious stones, and when Huon saw that, he took a
scoope and cast into the ship so much of those precious stones, that it gave
as great a light as though ten Torches had been burning, and so much of
this gravel Huon did cast into the Ship, that he was weary of labor, and
when he saw the Ship sufficiently charged, then he entered again and drew
up the anchor, and travailed so sore, that he brought again the ship into
the midst of the stream, then the ship went so fast that a bird could not
have followed it.

Thus he was ten days before he could pass that Gulf, and thus day and
night he sailed with great fear, and sore oppressed through hunger and
thirst, for he had nothing to eat nor drink but fruit, so that thereby he
was waxed so feeble, that he could scarce sustain himself upon his feet,
and upon the eleauenth day at the Sun rising, he saw appear the clearness
of the day light, and then he was out of the darkness, and entered into the Sea
of Persia, the which was so pleasant and peaceable, that great pleasure it was
to behold it, and then the Sun arose and spread abroad his streams and
spheres upon the Sea, whereof Huon was so joyful, as though he had never
felt pain nor fear: then a far off he saw appear before him a fair great
City, and in the haven thereof there were so many ships and Galleys, that
their Mastes seemed to be a great Forest, whereof Huon had such joy at his
heart, that he kneeled down lifting by his hands unto Heaven, and humbly
thanking our Lord God that he had saved him from this perilous Gulf.

This City was called the great City of Thauris in Persia, the Lord thereof
was a puissant Admiral, who had made to be proclaimed and published, that all
manner of Marchaunts by land or by Sea that would come to his City, should
have free going and free coming without let or disturbance, either in their
bodies or goods, whether they were christian men or Sarazins, so that if they
lost the worth of a penny, they should have again four times the value
thereof, and the same time that Huon came and arrived at that Port, was the day
of their free Feast: wherefore there was so much people of diverse Lands, that
they could not well be numbered. When Huon was come into the Port, he cast his
anchor near unto the bancke-side, and was right joyful when he saw himself
that he was upon the firm land: and then he had great desire to know in
what place he was arrived in, and whether he was arrived at a good Port or
no? Now let us leave speaking of the good Duke Huon, until we have occasion
to return unto him again.

Chap. CXIII.
How Sir Barnard departed from the Abbey of Cluny, and went to seek for Huon
his Cozen, whom he found at the Port of the great City of Thauris.

YE have heard here before, how after the taking of Bourdeaux, Barnard who
was Cozen unto Huon, had borne Clariet Huons child into Burgoine, and delivered
her to be kept with the good Abbot of Cluny. After that Barnard had tarried
there the space of eight days, he was weary with being there, and upon a day
he said unto the Abbot. Ah Sir, I would at the taking of Bourdeaux, I had
been slain with my Cozen Gerames, for when I remember my good Lord Huon, my
heart fails me in such wise, that it is great pain for me to bear the
sorrow that I endure, and afterward when I remember the Duchess Escleremond
his Wife, who endures such misery that it is pity to think thereof,
doubleth the sorrow and grief that I have at my heart. Alas, what shall Huon
say, if he return and find his City taken, his men taken and destroyed, and
his Wife in Prison in great poverty and misery? I fear me that he will die
for sorrow. Alas, I see all that I have is lost for the love of Huon my Lord,
for the which I care little for, if he be in safety alive, and that he may
return again, and I am in great displeasure, that we can hear no news of
him since he departed from Bourdeaux, I shall never rest as long as I live
until I have found him, or hear some certain news of him. Cozen, (quoth the
Abbot) if you will enter into this enquest, you should do me great pleasure,
and for the great desire that I have had, that you should go this Voyage, I
will give you a Thousand Florents toward your journey. Sir, (quoth Barnard) I
thank you.

Then the Abbot delivered him the money, and Barnard made him ready to depart
the next day, and so he did, and took his leave of the Abbot and departed,
and rested not until he came to Venyce, whereas he found Galleys ready to
go to the holy Sepulcher, whereof he was right joyful, and so sailed forth
until they came to the Port Iaffe, whereas he went a shore with other
Pilgrims, and ever as he passed by the other Ports, he ever demanded for Huon,
but he could never find any man, that could show unto him any manner of news
of him, and then he departed from the Port Iaste and went unto Jerusalem,
whereas he tarried eight days. Then when he had done his Pilgrimage, he took
forth his journey unto Kayre in Babylon, and when he came to Gasere, which
stands at the entering of the Deserts, he met with many Merchants, who were
going to the free Feast which was holden in the great City of Thauris. Then
he thought to demand of them whether so much people were going, and all in
one company, and he spoke unto a Merchant of Geanes, and demanded of him
whether so much people went together in one company, for they were to the
number of six-score Merchants christian men, and he. Then the Merchant said:
Sir, as me thinks by you, you are of the Country of France, I shall show
you whether we go: Sir, within this eight days the free Feast shall be at the
great City of Thauris, whereas there shall come a great number of Merchants,
as well Christian men as Sarazins, as well by land as by Sea, and there is
nothing in this mortal world but there you shall find it, and hear of all
manner of news, from all the parts of the world.

Now I have showed you whether we are going, I pray you show me whether you
would go and whom you do seek for? Sir, (quoth Barnard) know for troth
that I am of the Realm of France, and I do seek for a Knight who is Lord of
Bourdeaux, and is called Huon, and it is long since I departed out of my
Country, and I could never hear any thing of his life nor death. Sir, (quoth
the Geneuoys) if ever you shall hear of him, (if you will believe me) you
shall go with us into the Realm of Persia, to the free Feast at the great
City of Thauris. Sir, (quoth Barnard) in a good hour I have met with you, I
shall not leave your company until you come there, to see if God will send
me so good fortune as to find him that I seek for.

Then the Merchants departed, and road all together until they came unto the
great City of Thauris, and when they were lodged, they went about their
merchandise whereas they lysted. Thus Barnard was eight days in the City
going here and there, ever enquiring news for him whom he sought for: and
upon a day he went down to the Port unto the Seaside, whereas many Ships
and Galleys lay at anchor, and as he looked about, he saw near to the
Seaside a little proper Vessel maruailously fair, and the nearer he came
unto it, the fairer and richer it seemed, for he saw great clearness and
shining within it, by reason of the rich stones that were therein, whereof he
had great marvel, and especially because he saw within the Ship but one
man clean armed, he wist not what to think, but he thought that he was
christened: then he approached near to the Ship and saluted Huon, and said.
Sir, God give you good adventure, for me thinks you be a Christian man.
Friend, (quoth Huon) God save thee, me thinks by thy speech, that thou were
borne in the good Country of France, by reason that thou speak French, for
I have great joy when I hear that language spoken: and friend, I require thee
to show me where thou were borne, and what thou seek for here?

Sir, (quoth Barnard) seeing you will know of my business, I shall show you,
as he that is right sorrowful and heavy, and little shall you win thereby
when you do know it, but seeing that it is your pleasure, I shall show you
the troth. Sir, I was borne in the good City of Bourdeaux, whereas I have left
my house and heritage, to seek for my good Lord sometime Lord of the same
City, and he was called Duke Huon, who went from Bourdeaux to seek for some
succor whiles the City was besieged, and so it is, my Lord Huon returned not,
nor it cannot be known where he is become, and because the City at his
departing was beseeged by the Emperor of Almaine, and the City but ill
fournished with victual to maintain it long, and also it was so sore beaten
with Engines, that the Emperor wanne the City perforce, and slew all those that
my Lord Huon had left there, except three Hundred, the which were taken
Prisoners by the Emperor, and led into the City of Mayence, with the noble
Duchess Escleremond wife unto my good Lord Huon, and she is kept in a
straighc Prison, whereas she spends her days miserably, whereof my heart is
in such sorrow and grief, that when I remember them, it near hand slays my
heart.

When Huon had well heard and understood Barnard, he knew him well, but he
had no power to speak any word unto him, his heart was so full of sorrow and
grief, for that his Cozen Barnard had showed him, and the cheifest of his
sorrow was for the trouble of his wife the fair Lady Escleremond, who was in
great peril of death. Thus Huon was a great space, and could speak no word
for sorrow and grief, and wist not what to do: and also he saw his Coozen
Barnard, who had taken great pains to search for him, whereof he had such
pity, that the tears fell from his eyes.

When Barnard saw that the Knight gave him no answer, and beheld under the
ventaile of his helmet, the tears of water fell down from his eyes, he was
thereof so dismayed and abashed that he wist not what to say. Then he said:
Sir, me thinks you are a Christian man, and because I see and perceive in you
that you are a man, that has been in many places and Countries: therefore I
desire you to show me, if you heard ever any manner of speaking of my good
Lord Huon Duke of Bourdeaux, whom I have sought for in many Countries both by
land and by Sea, and I could never hear any certain tidings of him, whereof I
am right sorry, for if I can hear no word of him by you, I will never hope
more to have any knowledge of him: I think I shall have some knowledge by you
if he be alive, for if I know nothing by you, I will never seek him further,
but I will go into a Desert unto some solitary place, and there to do
penance, and to pray unto God for my good Lord Huon, and to pardon me of all my
sins and offenses, and I require you in the name of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to show me what you be? and where you were borne? and from
whence you come, that has brought in your ship so great riches, for I know
certainly, that in all France cannot be found the value of so great riches:
nor the puissant Charlemaine could never assemble together such riches as you
have in your Ship.

When Huon had well heard Barnard, he said: Friend, I have great marvel of
that I hear you say, for in my Ship I know neither gould nor silver, nor
none other thing but my body and mine armor. Sir, (quoth Barnard) beware what
you say, for the riches that I see in your Ship, if you will sell it, you may
fill again your ship with monney, if you will believe me, the Treasure and
riches that you have brought in your Ship, the value thereof cannot be
esteemed. When Huon heard that, he had great marvel and was right joyful,
then he looked down into the bottom of the Ship, and saw the rich stones
there lying among the gravel, the which he never took heed of before, for
when he did cast it into his Ship, he thought all had been but gravel to
ballaice his Ship withal, that it might sail the more surely. Then Barnard
said: Sir, I pray you hide it not from me, where have you had this Treasure
and in what Country? all the stones that be there I know the virtue of them
all, for since I came out of my Country, I was a whole year with the best
Lapidarie and knower of stones that was in all the world, and he taught me his
Science: Sir, surely the place whereas you had them in is of great dignity.
Friend, (quoth Huon) I shall show you the troth, fortune brought me by the
Gulf of Persia, whereas as I suffered much pain and trouble, but thanked be
God, I escaped from that hard adventure, the force of the wind that came out
of the Gulf, drove my Ship out of the stream to the land, and when I saw
that I was so near to the land, I went out of the ship and took a scoope,
and therewith I did cast into the ship some store of the gravel that lay by
the sea side, to ballays my ship therewith, not knowing that any precious
stones had been among the gravel: and when I thought that I cast in
sufficient, I entered again into my ship, and so sailed forth more surely then
I did before, there I had these stones that be in this ship: the which ye
say be of so great value.

Sir, (quoth Barnard) I pray you wherefore serves yonder foot of a great
Foul or beast, that I see hang yonder in your Ship, I cannot tell whether
it be of a Foul or of a Dragon, for it is a fearful thing to behold. Friend,
(quoth Huon) anon I shall show you, but first I pray you show me, what
virtue and bounty are in these stones, the which you have so much praised: and
also to show me unto whom this noble City appertains. Sir, (quoth Barnard)
this City is called Thauris, whereof is Lord a rich Admiral, who is Lord of
all Persia and of Media, who when he shall be advertised of your coming
hither, he will have of you Tribute as he has of other Merchants, and as for
your stones, two of them that I see yonder if you give them for your Tribute,
he will be well content: and Sir, I shall aid you in your merchandise to the
best of my power, the Admiral is a noble man in his Law, and of great
credence. Friend, (quoth Huon) I thank you for the courtesy that you show
me: but Sir, I pray you show me the stones that be of so much virtue, I would
have the best laid apart from the other. When Barnard heard how Huon desired
him to show the virtue of the stones, then especially he showed Huon six
stones, and he drew them out from the rest, and laid them upon Huons sheeld,
and so chose out Thirty other, and showed them all unto Huon, and said. Sir,
these Thirty stones that I have laid upon your sheeld, are of so great
value, that there is neither King nor Emperor that can pay the value of them,
and especially of five of them: and when Huon heard that, he was right joyful.
Then he would hide no longer himself from Barnard, and also because of the
great heat that he was in, he did put off his helmet, the which he kept on
all that season, because he would first know of Barnard some tidings ere he
would be known unto him, for he knew his Coozen Barnard well enough at his
first coming unto him.

Chap. CXIIII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux and Barnard his Cozen, acknowledged themselves each to
other, and showed the discourse of their adventures.

WHen Barnard saw Huon put off his helmet, he became as ruddie as a Rose, and
was so ravished that he wist not what to say or think, and said: Sir, I
cannot say truly what you be, but you resemble so much like Huon whom I seek
for, that I cannot tell whether you be he or not. Coozen, (quoth Huon) come
hither unto me and embrace me, I am he whom you do seek for, and so they
embraced each other in such wise, that of a long space they could not speak
one to another, at last Huon said. My right dear Coozen, I pray you show
unto me all the news that you know of Bourdeaux since my departing. Sir,
(quoth Barnard) I shall show you that I would feign know my self, but first
Sir, I pray you show unto me the adventures that you have had since your
departing from Bourdeaux. Coozen, (quoth Huon) if I should show you all the
Adventures and Fortunes that I have had since my departing from you, it would
be ouer-long to rehearse it: but breefely I shall declare it unto you.

When I was upon the Sea, a great Tempest rose upon us, the which continued
the space of Ten days without ceasing, and then Huon showed him how he was in
the Gulf, and what peril he was in there, and how he spoke with Judas, and
how he arrived at the Castle of the Adamant, and how his company there died by
famine, and how he entered into the Castle and slew the Serpent, and showed him
of the beauty and adventures that were in the Castle: and how he was borne
unto a Rock by a Griffen, and how he slew the five young Griffens, and
afterward the great Griffen, whose foot was in the Ship the which he showed
unto Sir Barnard: and discoursed of the Fountain and Garden, and Tree of
youth, and of the Ship the which they were in, and how he found it by the
River, and how by the voice of the Angel he entered into the Ship: and
afterward he showed what great pain and peril he suffered in passing the
Gulf of Persia: and how he was perforce driven a shore, and there he cast
in the stones thinking it had been gravel: and how he was as then come and
arrived at the great City of Thauris in Persia.

When Barnard had well heard and understood Huon, he embraced him, and said: Ah
right dear and virtuous Knight, to whom in prowess and hardiness none can
be compared, of your coming I ought to be joyful, and I thank our Lord God
of the grace that he has sent you. Sir, (quoth Huon) I ought greatly to thank
our Lord Jesus Christ, in that I see you in good health, and now I pray you
to show me what has fallen in the Country of Bourdeaux since I departed
from thence. Then Barnard all weeping showed him every thing as it had
fallen, and showed unto Huon the manner how the good City of Bourdeaux was
taken, and of the death of the old Gerames and his company, and of the taking
of the noble Duchess the fair Escleremond: and how the Emperor held her in
prison in the City of Mayence, in great poverty and misery, and of his
Daughter Clariet, how he had brought her unto the Abbey of Cluny, and set her
in keeping there with the Abbot her Coozen.

When Huon had well understood Barnard, he made great sorrow in his heart and
said, if God would aid and help him, he would cause the Emperor to die an
evil death. Sir, (quoth Barnard) will you appease your self, if you have
trust in our Lord God, desire of him aid and succor, and let the wheel of
fortune run, and if you do thus and take in worth any thing that is fallen
unto you, you shall not fail but come unto your desire: thus with such words
Barnard appeased Huon his Coozen, and thus they devised together of diverse
things. Coozen, (quoth Huon) I pray you to show me the virtue of these
precious stones that you have laid aside from the other. Sir, (quoth Barnard)
the five that lies there by themselves have great virtue, this stone is of
such great virtue, that he that bears it upon him cannot be poisoned, also
it is of such dignity and worth, that whosoever do bear it, may go and come
through fire without feeling of any heat, though he were in a hot burning
Oue^, also if a man fall into the water, having this stone about him, he
cannot sink nor drown: Sir, this is the virtue of this first stone.

Then Huon took it and kept it for himself: and then Barnard took up another
and said. Sir, here is another stone of such virtue, that a man bearing it
about him, can have neither hunger, thirst, nor cold, nor shall not wax elder
by seeming neither in body nor visage, but he shall ever seem to be of the
age of Thirty years, nor fasting shall not impair him. Then Huon took that
stone and put it into his bag, and said that he would keep that stone for
himself. Well, (quoth Barnard) Sir, here is another of such bounty and
virtue, that he that bears it cannot be hurt in arms, nor vanguished by his
enemies, and if any of his kin were blind, and touch but his eyes with this
stone, incontinent he shall see again, and if the stone be showed unto a man's
eyes, he shall incontinent be blind, and if a man be wounded, do but turn
this stone in the wound, and incontinent he shall be whole.

When Huon heard that, he was right joyful, and said that he would keep
well that stone. Sir, (quoth Barnard) here is another, the which has so great
virtue, that if a man or woman be never so sick, show them but this stone,
and incontinent they shall be whole of any manner of malady, and also if a man
were closed in prison, in chains and fetters, hands and feet, do but touch
them with this stone, and the chains shall break, and also if any man have
any cause to be pleaded in any Court before any Judge, be his matter rightful
or wrongful, he shall win his cause whether it be for Lands or Goods, and
also if a man have this stone in his hand and close it, he shall be
invisible and may go whereas he list and shall not be seen. And you shall see
the proof, for as he had this stone in his hand, he closed it, and incontinent
he was invisible, so that Huon could not see him, whereof he was not content,
for he feared least that he had lost his Cosen Barnard forever, and said: Ah
good Lord, thou have given me the grace to find my coosen Barnard, who should
have kept me company until I had returned into mine own country, and now I
see well that I have lost him.

When Barnard heard Huon, he laughed, and Huon who heard him, groaped all
about with his arms abroad, until at last he embraced him, and held him fast,
and when Barnard felt that, he opened his hand, and then Huon saw him
again, whereof he was right joyful, and blessed him at the virtue of that
stone, and took it and laid it up among the other in his bag, and said how
that he would keep that stone especially, because it was of such a wonderful
great virtue.

Thus Barnard did choose out the stones one from another, and there were so
many good stones, that the value of them could not be esteemed: then he
turned up the bottom of the gravel to seek out the best, and among other he
did choose out a Carbouncle, the which cast out such a light, as though two
Torches had been light. Barnard took it and delivered it unto Huon, and said:
Sir, be you sure that whosoever bears this stone upon him, may go dry
footed upon the water, as sure as though he were in a Vessel, and also if a
man go in the dark night, he shall see as well as though he had the light of
six Torches, and if a man be in battle, having this stone about him, he
cannot be overcome nor hurt, nor his horse weari^ nor faint, nor hurt nor
wounded. When Huon heard that, he smiled, and took the stone and put into his
bag among the other.

Thus as they were devising together, there came unto them diverse Merchants
Sarazins, who with great marvel beheld this little ship, and they saw it
so fair and rich, and so well garnished with precious stones, that they thought
that all the merchandise that were in the Haven, was not half the value and
worth of that they saw there, then they approached unto the ship and
saluted Huon, and said: Sirs, is it your pleasure to sell us any of your
stones, we are here diverse Merchants, that will be glad to buy of them, if
ye please? Sirs, (quoth Huon) as for me, as this day I will sell none until
to morrow in the morning, and then if it please ye, you shall have of them:
therewith the Merchants held their peace and spoke no more, but there came so
many Sarazins and Paynims to behold the Ship, that great marvel it was to
behold them: so that the news thereof spread abroad in the City, and the
Admiral was aduertized thereof, who incontinent accompanied with his Lords,
came to the Port side, whereas this Ship lay at anchor.

When the Admiral was come thither, he beheld the Ship, the which he thought
fair and rich, and how that there was never King nor Emperor that ever
beheld any such, and it shined so clear by reason of the stones, that the
Admiral and all such as were with him, thought that it had been the Sun
shining in the midst of the day. Then he approached unto the ship, and
found there Huon and Barnard, the Admiral saluted them, and said: Sirs, it
appears well that you be Christian men, it is convenient that you pay me the
Tribute that is accustomed to be paid in this City. Sir, (quoth Huon) it is
good reason and right, that we pay you as we ought to do. Sir, here is two
stones the which I give you, and I desire you to take them in worth: the
Admiral took the stones and beheld them well, and said. Friend, now you may
go and come into this City, to make your merchandise at your pleasure to your
most profit and gain, for the gift that you have given me is to me more
acceptable, then if you had given me the value of four of the best Cities in
all this Country, right joyful was the Admiral, for he knew well the
virtue of the stones, the one of them was of such bounty and dignity, that
the bearer thereof could not be poisoned, nor no treason could be done nor
purposed, coming in the presence of him that bears this stone, but
incontinent the dooer should fall down dead: and the other stone had that
virtue and dignity, that the bearer thereof could never be perished by fire
nor water, nor destroyed by iron, for though he were all a day burning in a
hot Oven or Fournace, he should not loose one hair of his head, nor perish in
the Sea. Freende, (quoth the Admiral) the courtesy that you have done unto
me this day shall be well rewarded, I will and command that throughout my
Realm as well of Persia as of Media, that you shall go at your pleasure to
sell your Merchandise, and no man shall let nor trouble you: but one thing I
would desire of you to show me, what adventure has brought you hither? and
of whence you be, and of what Country? and in what place you have found
these stones, whereof you have so great plenty? howbeit I understand your
language, whereby I know that you be Frenchmen, long ago I was in France
and dwelt there, and served in the Court of King Charlemaine, and was never
known, and I have great marvel where you have found so many goodly stones,
it is near hand a Hundred years since I was guirded with a Sword: but I
never saw so rich stones here before.

Chap. CXV.
How the Admiral of Persia did great honor unto Huon of Bourdeaux, and led
him into his Pallaice, whereas he was received with great joy and triumph.

WHen Huon of Bourdeaux had well heard and understood the Admiral, he regarded
him much, because he was a fair old man, and seemed to be a noble man, and
said. Sir, because I know and see apparently in you great nobleness, troth,
and freedom, I shall show you at length all mine adventures, without hyding of
any thing from you. Sir, know for troth, my name is Huon, and I was borne in
the Country of France in a City named Bourdeaux, and I departed from thence
about two years past, since the which time I have suffered much pain and
poverty. When I departed from thence, I had with me Seven Knights, and my
Chaplain and a Clarke to serve him, and we took our Ship at Bourdeaux, and
we sailed down the River until we came into the maine Sea, then the wind
rose against us, and so continued a long space, so that our Patron knew not
where he was, and so at the last we came to a Port, whereas we found many
ships of strange Countries, and there we got us a new Patron, and as shortly
as we might we sailed forth on our journey. But when we were come again
into the hye Sea, a great Tempest arose so that we were near hand all
perished: this Tempest endured Ten days, so that we were feign to abandon
our ship to the wind, and upon the eleauenth day we arrived at the perilous
Gulf, whereas we found Judas, who betrayed our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
we were then in such fear, that we looked for nothing but when we should
perish and end our lives: but God always his Servants and such as believe in
his holy Laws, and keep his Commandments, will ever keep and preserve
them, he sent us a wind, the which drove us from that perilous Gulf, and
brought us unto the Castle of the Adamant, and there he showed the Admiral at
length the beauty of that Castle, and how there arrived a ship with
Sarazins who were Pirates of the Sea, and how they fought together, and also he
showed him all the adventures of the Castle that he had there, as well of his
men that dyed by famine, as of them that he left there, and also he
discoursed how he ^ame by victu^ls, and also he showed how he departed from
thence, and was borne away by the Griffen, and how he struck off one of her
Legs when he fought with her, after the Griffen had set him upon the Rock,
the which Leg he showed unto the Admiral, whereof he had wonderful great
marvel: and then also he showed him how he fought with the five young
Griffens, and slew them, and also of the old Griffen, and also of the Fountain
wherein he bathed himself, and of the fair Garden, and of the Tree of youth
that stood by the Fountain, and of the virtue of the fruit thereof, and how
he did gather of the same, and more would have done, but that he was
forbidden so to do by an Angel sent from God, but before I was commanded to
the contrary, I did both eat of the fruit, and drank of the water of the
Fountain* whereby I was whole incontinent of all the great wounds that the
Griffens had given me when I slew them. And Sir, (quoth Huon) know for
tro^h, that of this Tree I gathered three apples by the commandment of the
Angel, and have kept them surely: then the Ang^ll showed me the way how I
should go from the Rock, and under the Rock side I found a great fair
River, and there I found this ship that we be now in, and entered into it: and
then there came a wind (quoth he) and drove my ship so fast, that a bird
could not have overtaken it. Then he discoursed unto the Admiral, how he
passed by ^he Gulf of Persia, and what torments he suffered there, and how
he was there ten days and how he was driven to the sh^are, whereas he found
those precious stones, and he thought that it had been nothing (...) grau^ll,
and that he purposed nothing else but to ball^^ice therewith his ship, that
the ship might sail the more surely, and he said. Sir, God upon whom I
steadfastly believe so aided and succored me, that I am escaped from thence in
sauegard.

When the Admiral had well heard and understood Huon, he had great marvel,
for he never heard before of so great and wonderful adventures, and was sore
dismayed and abashed, and said. Friend, I have great marvel of that I have
heard you say, for it is near hand six-score years since I came first into
this world, and I never heard that ever any man escaped alive out of the Gulf
of Persia: therefore you may well say, that the God upon whom you do
steadfastly believe, has showed that he loves you well, when he has saved
and preserved you out of that perilous Gulf, your God is puissant, and loves
all men that steadfastly and unfeignedly believe in his holy Laws, and keep his
Commandments, and he is false and untrue that believes not in his Laws,
but he loves you well, when he has delivered you out of two such Gulfes,
and also from the Castle of the Adamant, from whence none can depart nor never
did, nor I think never shall: and also has suffered you to slay the Griffens,
surely you ought to love him that has given you that grace, and for the great
maruailes that he has done unto you, I will be christened and receive your
Law, but I fear me if my Lords and men knew thereof, they would slay me
shortly, for against them all I cannot resist.

Sir, (quoth Huon) to the intent that you should have the firmer belief in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I have three Apples, the which have such virtue
in them, that if you will believe in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I shall
give you one of them, the which you shall eat, and incontinent after you have
eaten it, you shall become young again of the age of Thirty years, and you
shall b^e as fair and as lusty, as you were when you were of that age, there
is not so old a man nor so crooked, if he eat of this and believe firmly
and unfeignedly in our Lord Jesus Christ, but he shall become as young and as
lusty as he was at Thirty years of age. Friend, (quoth the Admiral) if it
be so, that by eating of this Apple I shall become as young and as lusty as I
was at Thirty years of age, whatsoever come of me, I will be christened and
believe in the Law of Jesus Christ, the fear of death shall not let me to do
it, for too long I have believed in this false and detestable Law of Mahomet,
for if I had neither seen nor heard no more then you have showed unto me, I
ought to believe yet in your Law, and I shall do so much, that I trust I shall
cause all my Realm to believe in the same. Sir, (quoth Huon) and if you do as
you say, you shall be saved, and I shall give you the Apple, the which you
shall eat in the presence of all your Lords and men: and when they shall see
you wax young again, know for troth, that marvel thereof shall cause them
to believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and to renounce their false and detestable
Law of Mahomet. Friend, (quoth the Admiral) I believe well that which you say,
and I shall use my self after your advise.

Then the Admiral took Huon by the hand, and went together out of the ship,
and Huon left Barnard there to keep it, many people were come thither to see
the Ship, and also for the great maruailes that they had heard fallen unto
Huon, and they beheld Huon, and had great marvel of the honor that the
Admiral made unto him, for he led him still by the hand ^ntill he came to
his Pallaice, as they passed through the City they were greatly regarded of
men of sundry Nations, for Huon was so fair in his visage, and so valiant a
Knight in ^^ature, that none could be found as then that might be compared
unto him.

When Huon was come to the Pallaice, whereas he was honorably received with
great joy, the Admiral made him great feast and cheer, and the Tables were
set up, and they sat down to dinner: of their service and meats I will make no
long rehearsal, but when dinner was done, the Admiral commanded Carpenters
to make a great scaffold of Timber before the Pallaice, the which was covered
with rich clothes of gould and silk, and thither was brought a rich Standard
of gould with other things, and then he commanded throughout the City, that
all his Lords and Barons of his Realm that were come thither unto his free
Feast, that they should all come unto him at an hour appointed, the which they
did, there came so many strangers and other, that there were mo^ assembled
together then a Hundred and Fifty Thousand men.

When they were all there assembled together, then the Admiral holding Huon by
the hand, mounted upon the rich stage, and diverse other great Lords with him,
and when they were there, the Admiral stood up, and said with a hye voice
unto the Lords and to the people. Sirs, ye that be come hither by my
commandment, know for troth, the great love that I have had unto ye and
have, moves me to say and to show you the way, how that I and al you may come
to eternal Salvation, for if we die in this case that we be in, we shall
be all damned and lost by the false and detestable way that you and I do
hold: therefore I counsel and pray you, for the love that you have long
borne unto me, that you will leave with me the Law of Mahomet, and believe in
the Law of our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, who is worthy and holy, as
ye may see by the evident miracles that he has showed for this poor Knight
that ye see here by me. Then the Admiral showed unto the people all the
maruailous adventures that had fallen unto Huon, that is to say, how he had
been at the Castle of the Adamant, and how the Griffen did bear him from
thence, whom he slew and five of the young Griffens, and also of the
Fountain and Garden, and of the fruit of the Tree of youth, and how he had
passed the two Gulfes, whereas he had taken the rich stones that he had brought
thither, the which things could not have been without the aid and help of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and also he shall show before you evident
Miracles, that Jesus Christ will do for me if I will take his Law, for he
says unto me, that if I will believe in his God, he will make me to eat of
such a holy fruit, by the which I shall become again but of the age of
Thirty years, and as lusty as I was at that time: and therefore Sirs, if
Jesus Christ will do this for me, I will be christened. Then all the people
answered and said: Sir, if this that you have said come to proof, we shall
be all content to be christened, and to believe upon the Law of Jesus
Christ, and to leave the law that we have long kept, but we are hard of
belief that this shall be, for if it be so, there was never heard of such a
w^onderfull Miracle.

Chap. CXVI.
How the Emperor, by reason of the Apple that Huon gave him to eat, he became
of the age of Thirty years, whereby he and all the people of Persia and
Media were christened, and of the great honor that the Admiral made unto Huon.

WHen Huon had well heard and understood the Lords and the people, how they
were content to leave their Law and to believe upon Jesus Christ, he was
right joyful, and thanked God with all his heart: then Huon said unto the
Admiral. Sir, eat of the Apple that I have given unto you, and then the
people that be here assembled, shall see what grace our Lord God shall send
you, the Admiral took the Apple and began to eat thereof, and as he did eat
he began to change color, his hair and his beard the which were white,
began to change and wax yellow, before the Apple was clean eaten he was
clean changed, and his beauty and strength as he was when he was but of
Thirty years of age. Then generally all the people that were there, with one
voice cried and required to be cristened, whereof the Admiral and Huon were
right joyful, because they saw that the good will and desire of the people
was to receive Christendom.

When the Admiral felt himself again young and lusty, the joy that he had
at his heart could not be declared, the people also were right joyful, the
Admiral who was a goodly Prince, took Huon by the hand and said. My right
dear Friend, blessed be the hour that you came hither, for me and my people
you have brought us into the way of Salvation, and delivered us out of
darkness, therefore I will from henceforth, that in all my Realm you shall
have your part as well as my self, and I will and command that you be so
obayed: then he embraced and kissed Huon more then Ten times, saying: Friend,
blessed be the good hour that ever you were borne, and happy was that woman
that bare you in her body, the Paynims and Sarazins that were there, seeing
the great beauty that the Admiral was of, and also the wonderful great
Miracle that they had seen, said one to another, how they never had heard of
such a Miracle, and how that from thencefoorth they that would believe upon
Mahound, were accursed and unhappy, for they said that his belief, his law,
and his doctrine, was of no valor: then they cried with a hye voice. Oh right
noble and puissant Admiral, desire that noble man that is there with you, that
he will cause us to receive Christendom.

And as then in the City there was a Bishop of Greece, who was come thither in
embassage to ye Admiral from the Emperor of Constantinople, who hearing the
will and desire of the people, was right joyful, and he came unto the
Admiral and to Huon and said. Sir, it shall be no danger for you to be
christened, for Sir, I am here ready to do it. Then incontinent there was
brought forth Forty great Vessels full of clear water, the Bishop did
hallowe them, and christened the Admiral, and named him Huon, because Huon was
his Godfather. Then afterward all the Lords and people were christened, and
received the Law of our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ.

When they were all christened, the Admiral with great triumph and joy,
returned unto his Pallaice leading Huon by the hand, and great joy and feasting
was made that day in the City, and especially of the Christian Merchants that
were there, among the which there were about fifteen Priests, and they all
aided the Bishop to christen the people, the number could not be declared of
the men, women, and children that received that day christendom. The Admiral
being in his Pallaice, making great joy and Feasting with the noble Duke Huon
of Bourdeaux, said unto him: Friend, well you ought to render thanks to our
Lord Jesus Christ, seeing by you these two Realms, that is to say Persia and
Media, are reduced and brought unto the Christian faith and Law, and I will
that you know, that you may well say that in these two Realms you may
command any thing at your pleasure, without finding any person to do or say
to the contrary of your will and pleasure, and to the intent that you shall
surely believe what great love and affection I bear unto you: I will that mine
all only Daughter you shall have to your wife, so that you be not bound unto
none other. Sir, know for troth, the great desire that I have to have you
tarry still here with me, moves me thus to do, I have none other heir but
my Daughter, whereby after my death you shall be Lord and heir of the
Realms and Dominions that I hold, and in the mean season, I will that the
moitie of the revenues of these Realms and Dominions shall be yours, for
your company pleases me so entirely, that I would never have you to depart
from hence.

Chap. CXVII.
Of the complaints that Huon made unto the Admiral of Persia upon the
Emperor of Almaine, and of the succors that the Admiral promised unto Huon.

WHen Huon had well understood the Admiral, he said: Sir, know for troth,
that it is four years passed since I was married unto a noble Lady, who
passes in beauty all other that be alive in these days, and when I remember
her, all my body and heart trembles for sorrow, when I think of the trouble,
displeasure, and poverty that she is in: and therefore Sir, I thank you of
the great honor and courtesy, that of your bounty you offer me, I pray unto
God that he may reward you. Huon, (quoth the Admiral) seeing it is so that
you have a Wife, I hold you well excused: but I pray you to show unto me, for
what cause your Wife is in such case, or what Christian Prince is so hardy as
to trouble you, or to do you any displeasure? Sir, (quoth Huon) when I came
out of my Country, I left my City of Bourdeaux besieged by the Emperor of
Almaine, who has taken my City and slain my men, and some he keeps in
seruage, and my Wife put in prison, and there kept in great poverty and
misery, the which when I remember, sorrow and grief so sore gripeth my
heart, that all my members and joints tremble with displeasure. Huon, (quoth
the Admiral) I pray you to leave your sorrow and displeasure, and cast it from
you, and take joy and comfort, for by the holy law that I have received, I
shall so aid and succor you, that the Emperor who has done unto you so many
displeasures, I shall make him such war, that whether he will or not, for the
damage and loss that you have had and received, I shall constrain him to
make full restitution, for I shall lead with me in your company such number of
people, that all the Valleys and Mountains shall be covered with them.

Sir, (quoth Huon) of the courtesy and succor that you offer me I humbly
thank you, but if it please our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has aided
me out of many perils, I hope that he will so aid me, that I shall not need
to make any war to destroy the Christian blood, but Sir, first I shall go to
the holy Sepulcher, and then I will return into my Country, and do what I
can to get my Wife out of danger and the pain that she is in. Sir, the wife
that I have wedded, was Daughter to the Admiral Gaudise, who held as then
Babylon and all the Realm of Egypt.

Then Huon showed him all the matter how he came by the fair Escleremond,
whereof the Admiral was sore abashed, for the great maruailes that he had
heard Huon declare, and so were all other that heard it, and said one to
another, that without Huon had been well beloved of our Lord Jesus Christ, he
could never have escaped the death, with one of the least adventures that he
had showed unto the Admiral. Sir, (quoth Huon) the Emperor of Almaine has
taken my City and my Wife, and destroyed my men, and has taken into his
hands all my Lands and Signiories, but by the grace of God, I shall do so much
to get them again, and if I cannot attain thereto, then I shall return
again unto you to have your succor and aid. Huon, (quoth the Admiral) put
all melancholy from you, for if you give me knowledge that you cannot have
your will of this Emperor, I shall bring you people innumerable, that all
Christendom shall tremble for fear of you, and shall render unto you your
wife and al your Lands and Signiories, and your men that be in prison or in
seruage, and I shall put the Emperor into your hands, to do with him your
pleasure, or else I shall not leave in all his Land neither City nor town
standing upon the earth.

Sir, (quoth Huon) of this I thank you heartily, but Sir, I must work
another way first, for when I escaped from the Gulf of Persia, I promised unto
God, that before I went into mine own Country, to go and visit the holy
Sepulcher in Jerusalem, and to make war upon the Sarazins, before I made any
war upon any Christian men, but Sir, if I may get of the Emperor by fair
speech my Lands and my wife, I shall serve him with all my heart, for as long
as I live I shall make no war against any christian man, if I may have right
and reason showed unto me. Sir, (quoth the Admiral) of this that you say I
give you good thanks, but by the grace of God I shall go with you the Voyage
to the holy Sepulcher, and take with me fifty Thousand men, to make war
against the Paynims and Sarazins such as believe not in God, and I shall put to
my pain with all my power, to exalt and increase the law of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Sir quoth Huon, you have said nobly, if you thus do, great grace and
glory perpetual you shall deserve, whereby you shall be crowned above in the
Imperial Heaven. Now leave we to speak of this matter.

Chap. CXVIII.
How the Admiral of Persia assembled much people, and he and Huon with all
his army, took the Sea and came to the Port before the City of Angory,
whereas they found a great number of Paynims and Sarazins, ready to defend the
Port.

AFter that the Admiral and Huon had devised together of many things, the
Admiral sent out his letters and breefes, commanding through-out Persia and
Media men of war to be ready, and gave them a day to be ready to go with
him, certifying them, that his Navy of Ships should be ready for the
transporting of him and them, the which was done, and every man came at the
day that was assigned. In the mean season, Huon and Barnard went oftentimes
together, and visited the City of Thauris, whereas much honor was made unto
them, whereof Huon and Barnard oftentimes thanked God, of the good adventure
that he had sent them.

Thus as ye have heard, the Admiral of Persia assembled a great number of
people, and made him ready and entered into his ship, and all other into
diverse Ships, and shipped their Armor and horses, and Huon who desired to
please the Admiral, took his own little Ship and discharged it, and took
all the precious stones and did put them into another ship, the which the
Admiral had delivered to serve him, and then he said unto the Admiral. Sir, I
know well that the little ship that I came in hither, is not to serve in the
wars, and therefore Sir, as it is I do give it unto you, whereof the
Admiral had great joy, for in all the world there was none such of beauty nor
of riches. Then Huon gave the Admiral all a Bushel of the stones and unto the
Lords together, and they thanked Huon of his courtesy and Larges, of all the
stones he kept to his own use but three Hundred, and gave away all the
residue. Then he entered into the Ship that was appointed for him, and then
every man entered into their Ships, the which were well fournished and
victualed for the wars: then the Admiral took his leave of his Daughter, who
pitifully wept at her Fathers departing, and then they weighed up anchors and
hoysed up the sails, and they had such good wind, that anon they were far
from the Port: A goodly sight it was to behold the Navy, for at their
departing they made such great noise with Trumpets, Drums, and Horns, that
all the Sea did ring thereof.

Great joy and gladness had Huon and Barnard of the grace that God had sent
them, so long they sailed with good wind and sail, that they entered into the
great Sea of Caspis, and then they saw a far off a fair City standing by the
Seaside, called the City of Angory, wherein there dwelt an Admiral right
puissant and rich, and the same time he was in one of his Towers of his
Pallaice, and when he saw and perceived such a puissant Navy come sailing so
fast toward his City, he had great marvel, and was sore dismayed and
abashed, for he knew well that the Ships were of Persia, by the penons and
banners that he saw wauing upon the ships, and upon the other part he saw
in the tops and fore-castles, baners standing all of white, and therein red
crosses, then he said unto his Lords that were about him. Sirs, I am greatly
dismayed and abashed, what means yonder great fleet, seeing this City was
won by Reignard of Montauban, there came never Christian man here, and I
have more marvel to see the bann^rs and arms of Persia, the which these
Christian men do bear^ upon their ships.

Then the Admiral went down, and published in the City that every man
should arm them, and go to the Port to defend it, that the christian men
should not land there, then the cry and allarum began in the City so great
and horrible, with the noise of Trumpets, and Drums, Horns, and Basins, so
that the noise of them range upon the Sea, so that the Admiral of Persia and
Huon, and such as were upon the sea might well hear them. Then the Admiral
said unto Huon: Sir, I see and perceive well that at our landing we shall have
great battle and resistance. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray you what people be they
that have that City in guiding, and who is Lord thereof? Sir, (quoth the
Admiral) know for troth, that this City is great and well peopled, they
believe not in God, and about Twenty years passed this City was won by a
Lord of France, called Reignard of Montauban, and he made it to be
christened, and then about eight years after, it was won again upon
Christian men by the Admirals Son, the which Admiral was Lord thereof when
it was won. And now again they be all Paynims and Sarazins, as you may see
upon the seaside they are ready to abide for us and to defend their Port.
Sir, (quoth Huon) we ought greatly to thank our Lord Jesus Christ of this
fair adventure, when we see before us the enemies of our Christian faith, and
by the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, this day we shall do so
much, that the City and the Inhabitants therein shall be in our hands to use
them at our pleasure. Sir, (quoth the Admiral) I beseech almighty God to give
us the grace that it may be so, great grace our Lord God shall do unto us if
we may win this City.

Then the Admiral caused his men to be armed, and then they saw half a
League from the City a Port or Haven, the which was not kept nor defended,
because the Admiral of Angory would not issue out far from his City, until
he saw what countenance the christian men would make. Then the Admiral of
Persia and Huon advanced themselves so forward, that they cast out their
anchors, and launched out their boats well garnished with men Archers and
Crosbowes, so that they landed at this Port in sauegard and without any danger.
Then the ships drew to the land, and unshipped their Armor and Horses, and
so every man landed, except such as were assigned to keep the ships, and
then every man mounted upon their horses, and ordained three Battles, the
first was led by Huon, and with him twenty Thousand men of hautie and hye
courage: the second was led by a great Lord of Persia, who was Marshall of
the Host, the third guided the Admiral of Persia, who road from rank to
rank, admonishing his men to do their endeauours valiantly, then a soft pace
they drew in battle array toward the City.

Chap. CXIX.
How the Admiral and Huon took the Port, and fought with the Admiral of
Angory, and dicomfited him and took the City, and how afterward Huon went
into the Deserts of Abillant, to search adventures.

WHen the Admiral of Angory saw and perceived, that the christian men had
taken land and were ready to give battle, and were coming toward the
City, he ordained and ranged his Battles, and divided them into four
parts, and set them to be led and guided by such as he thought best, then he
advanced forward, and was to the number of fifty Thousand men. When these
two Hoastes saw each other, there was none of them but that feared the death,
the day was fair and clear, and so they approached, and all at a rush on both
parts dashed together in such wise, that by reason of the powder and dust that
did rise by their horses, the Sun that was fair and bright waxed dark, and
^he shot on both parts flewe so fast and as thick, as though it had snowed.
At their first meeting many spears were broken, and many a Knight borne to the
earth, so that they could never be relieved after, but lay on the ground among
the horse feet and there died in dolor, there were many horses running
abroad, trayling their bridles after them, and their Masters lying dead upon
the earth in the blood and in the mire.

Great slaughter there was made upon both parts, and Huon who went breaking
the great preasses whereas he slew so many Paynims, that every man feared
him, he saw where the Admiral of Angoryes Nephew was, who had slain a
christian Knight, and they ran so fiercely each at other, that the Paynim
brake his spear upon Huon, and Huon failed him not, but gave him so
maruailous and so great a stroke, that his Spear passed through his body,
and so he fell down to the earth and died. Then Huon ran at another, and
gave him such a maruailous stroke that it passed through his sheeld and body,
and with drawing out of the spear, he fell to the earth and never relieved
after, and so they three and four more he served in like manner, and did so
valiantly behave himself, that he slew eight before his Spear brake, and
then he drew out his Sword, and therewith he did such deeds, that it was
fearful to behold him, he cut legs and arms, and rassed off helmets, so
that none of his enemies durst approach near unto him, but they fled before
him, as the bird does before the Hawk, he brake asunder the thick preasses,
he did so to be feared that his enemies left him, for he never struck any
man with a full stroke, but he that received it was slain. Also with him was
Barnard his Coozen, who ever followed him, and did maruailes in arms, for he
was a sharp and an eager Knight. And also the Admiral of Angory enforced
himself to do damage unto the Christian men, he saw where the Admiral of
Persia was slaying of his men, and came and ran at him, and the Admiral of
Persia saw him, and encountered with him by such force and puissance, that each
of them bare the other to the earth, then quickly they relieved themselves with
their Swords in their hands, willing both of them to slay each other, the which
had been done indeed, if their men had not come and succored them, but
thither came so many on both parts, that the two Admirals had no power one
of them to touch the other.

With great force came thither Paynims and Sarazins, so that the Christian men
could not remount up again the Admiral of Persia, but was feign to fight a
foot, and had been in great ieopardie and danger, if Huon and Barnard had
not come and rescued him, they came thither hastily, when they heard the
showting and crying that was made about the Admiral of Persia, and they brake
asunder the great preasse of the Paynims. And when they saw Huon approach near
unto them, they were sore afraid, and they knew him well and parted, and
spread abroad and durst not abide, and Huon seeing the Admiral of Persia a
foot among his enemies, with his Sword valiantly defending himself, which
should but little auailed if he had not been quickly succored: and when Huon
saw him he said. Oh right puissant Admiral have no doubt, then Huon took a
Spear out of the hands of a Paynim whom he had slain, and therewith he
ran at the Admiral of Angory, and gave him so horrible and so vehement a
stroke, that the Spear passed through his body more then a foot, and so he
fell down dead among his men, whereof the Paynims were sore dismayed and
abashed, when they saw their Lord lie dead upon the earth, and then Huon
quickly took the Admirals horse by the rain of the bridle, and came unto the
Admiral of Persia, whereas he was fighting a foot, and said: Sir, mount upon
this horse, for the Paynims and Sarazins are discomfited. Sir, (quoth the
Admiral) blessed be the hour that ever you were borne, for by your excellent
Prowess I am saved and all mine Host, and have vanquished and overcome mine
enemies.

Then the Admiral mounted upon the good horse, whereof he was right joyful,
and so he and Huon and Barnard dealt such st^^^kes among the Paynims and
Sarazins, that they were constrained to ^y and to turn their backs, and then
they were chaced by such force, that they entered into the City one with
another* then the Christian men s^ewe the Paynims and Sarazins, men, women, and
children, that great pity it was to (...) lie dead upon heaps in the
streets, so that the blood of them that were slain, ran through the streets to
the horse pastors: finally by the hye prowess of Huon, and by the puissa^^e
of the Admiral of Persia, the Paynims and Sarazins were discomfited in the
City of Angory.

When the slaying was ceased, and that the Admiral and Huon saw how that they
had overcome their enemies, they ceased slaying of the people, and they went
into the Temples, Towers, and Pallaices, wherein many Paynims and Sarazins were
withdrawn, they were taken to mercy, promising to save their lives, if they
would leave the false and detestable Law of Mahomet, and believe in our
Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, and so many were christened, and such as
would not, were slain. When the Admiral and Huon saw that the City was
become christened, then they set their Officers, Prouosts, and Baylifes to
govern the City, and with them two Thousand persons to keep the City.

Thus they tarried there by the space of Eight days, and the^ they made ready
to depart, and trussed and new vittayled their ships, and then they entered
into their ships, and the trompets, busins, and tabors made great noise, and
the Mariners weyed up their anchors and hoysed up their sails, and sailed so
long until they were out of the Sea of Caspus and entered into the great flood
of Euphrates, the which descends into the great Sea, and when they were
passed the River, they coasted the deserts of Abilaunt, the season was fair
and clear and the wind^ fresh. Thus as they sailed by this great sea, the
Admiral and Huon stood at the board side of their ship, and devised of their
adventures, and praised God of his grace for that he done unto them: Huon quoth
the Admiral, I have great desire to see the holy City where our Lord God was
crucified and laid in the Sepulcher. Sir quoth Huon, by the grace of God we
shall right well and shortly come thither, and I hope he shall do unto us
far greater grace yet, as to aid us to conquer and to destroy all those in
our way, that believe not on our holy Law, for that is the cheifest intent of
our Voyage. Thus they devised together the space of eight days, without
finding of any adventure, and so upon an Evening, Huon all alone stood leaning
over the ship board, beholding the Sea the which was plain and peaceable,
and then he remembered the Duchess Escleremond his Wife, therewith the tears
ran tenderly down his visage, and said. Ah right noble Lady, when I remember
what peril and danger that I left you in, and in what poverty and misery you
be in now, I have no joint nor member but that tremblesh for the displeasure
that I am in, and for fear least that the false Emperor cause you to die ere
my return: then he began to make great sorrow and grief, but Barnard who
was not far from him, said. Ah Sir, you know well that in all the fortunes
and adventures that have come unto you, God has aided you and saved you from
the peril of death, therefore take good comfort to your self, and laud and
praise our Lord God for that he sends unto you, and doubt not if you have
perfect hope and trust in him, he will aid and comfort you, and he never
forgets them that with good heart serve him. Thus with such words Barnard
comforted Huon, and then the Admiral came and leaned down by Huon, and they
devised together about diverse and sundry matters.

The same time there arose up a wind and Tempest so great and so horrible, that
the sails were broken in diverse places, and some Mastes brake and flew over
the boards of the ship, the sea began to be rough and furious, so that
every man thought to have been perished, the fortune of this Tempest was so
horrible, as every man devoutly called upon our Lord God to save them from the
peril and danger that they were in. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray you to show me
what Country is yonder that I see before me, we were happy and fortunate if
we might arrive there, and cast our anchors under the Rock that I see there?
Sir, (quoth the Admiral) we be arrived at an evil Port, for we be near
to the Deserts of Abilaunt, upon yonder Mountain that you see is conversant
an enemy, who has caused many a ship and Vessel to be drowned in this Sea,
whereby we be all in great danger to be lost, for none can approach to this
Rock, but that he is strangled and slain by the enemy that is there: then
every man was in great fear, and the Admiral said unto the Mariners. Sirs,
I pray you if it may be, let us draw out of this quarter. Sir (quoth Huon)
me thinks you are too sore dismayed and a^ash^d, for by that Lord that made
me to his semblance, I shall never have joy at my heart, until I know why
that enemy causes them to perish so fast this way, I shall never rest until
I have spoken with him, and if he do any thing contrary to my pleasure, I
shall strike off his head. Huon, (quoth the Admiral) I have great marvel of
that you do say, for if there were five Hundred such as you be, within one
hour you should be all dead and stangled. Sir, (quoth Huon) doubt not you
that, for though I should die in the quarrel I will go see him, and know the
cause why he lets or troubles this passage, before it be three days to an
end, I shall go and speak with him what fortune soever comes thereof. Sir,
(quoth the Admiral) in you it is to do your own will, for since it pleases
you I must be content, but if you would believe me, you should not take upon
you that Voyage and Enterprise. Sir, (quoth Huon all smiling) I have my hope
and trust in almighty God, who has heretofore saved me from death, and so I
hope he will do yet, for it is a common proverb said, he whom God will aid
and succor no man can hurt. Sir, (quoth the Admiral) I pray unto our Lord God
to defend you from all evil, and to give you the grace to return again in
sauegard. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thank you heartily.

Then Barnard arose up and said: Dear Coozen, I require you to let me go
with you, and then the Admiral said. Sir, I desire you to be content, that I
and Barnard may keep you company, and we shall have with us for the more
sauegard of our persons four Hundred hardy Knights. Sir, (quoth Huon) by Gods
grace I will go alone, none shall go with me but my self and Jesus Christ
and his blessed Mother, in whose sauegard I commit my self. When Barnard heard
that, he had great sorrow at his heart, and so had the Admiral when they
saw that they could not turn Huon from his dangerous Voyage and Enterprise.

Then Huon armed himself, and took leave of the Admiral and of the other
Lords, and of Barnard, who made great sorrow for his Coozen Huon, who all alone
would go into the Deserts to seek adventures. When Huon had taken his
leave, he was set a shore, and made the sign of a cross upon his breas^:
then he mounted upon the Mountain, but ere he was the half way, a great
wind arose upon the Sea, so that the Tempest was great and horrible, whereby
the cords and cables of the ships with the Admiral burst asunder, and so
perforce they were ^ain to take the Sea, and sail at adventure as wind and
weather would serve them, whereupon they were cast out of that great Sea,
whereof the Admiral and Barnard and all the other Lords had great fear, and
greatly complained for Huon, who alone without company was mounted upon the
Mountain, and as he was going, he looked down into the Sea, and saw the
maruailous Tempest that was in the Sea, so that of two Hundred ships that he
had left there with the Admiral, he could then see no more but two together,
for all the rest were separated one from another in great peril and danger.
Then he began pitifully to weep and complain for his Wife the fair
Escleremond, whom he thought then never to see more, because he was in that
Desert, and saw the ships driven from the land in great fear of loosing.
Then he kneeled down, and held up his hands unto Heaven, requiring our Lord
God of his pity and grace to aid and to give him comfort, that he might
escape from thence alive, and to save the ships, and to bring them again in
sauegard to the place from whence they departed.

Then grievously he complained for his wife and Daughter, and said: Ah right
noble Lady Escleremond, when I remember the pains and dolors and pouerties,
that by my cause you suffer and have suffered, all my body sweateth by pain
and dolor: Alas, I had thought in short space to have aided and succored you,
but now I see well that our departing is come for ever more, in yonder
perilous Sea I see my Coozen Barnard and diverse other Lords, that by my cause
are in the way of perdition without God do aid and succor them, whom I
humbly require to send them that grace, that they may arrive at some good Port,
and that I may see them once again, to the intent that I may fight against the
Paynims and Sarazins, in exalting the Law of Jesus Christ. Thus Huon of
Bourdeaux made his prayers to our Lord Jesus Christ.

Chap. CXX.
How Huon went so long in this Desert, that he found Cain, and spoke with him a
long season: and how he beguiled Cain and departed.

AFter that Huon had thus made his prayers unto our Lord God, he arose up and
blessed him with the sign of the cross, recommending himself unto our Lord
God, and came to the top of the Mountain, but when he was there, all his
body trembled with travail, so that he was very faint and feeble. Then he
looked round about him, and saw in a fair meadowe a clear Fountain, thither
he went to refresh and to rest him, then he laid him down upon the grass to
refresh him before he would drink, he was so hot, and when he was well
cooled, he came to the Fountain and drank thereof a little, and washed his
hands and face, and then he went further into the Forest, and could find
neither Town nor Castle, Garden nor Trees with fruit, whereof he was right
sorrowful and sore displeased, and so searched all day to find some man or
woman, but al was in vain, and when he saw that the Sun went to rest, and
could find no creature, he was sore discomforted, he chose out a Tree, and
there under laid him down and slept, and in the morning when he saw the Sun
rise, and that his beams spread abroad upon the earth, he arose and blessed
him, and so went forth into the Desert, and found neither man nor woman, beast
nor bird, wherewith being sorrowful and angry, devoutly he called upon our
Lord God, praying him to have in his tuition and keeping his body and soul,
and that he might yet once see his Wife the fair Escleremond, and Clariet his
Daughter.

He went so long in this Desert, that at last he came to a plain of three bow
shoot large, and in the midst thereof he saw a Tun made of the heart of
Oak, bound all about with bands of iron, and it turned and rolled in the
plain, and never passed out of the circuit of the plain, and beside the Tun
he saw where there lay upon the ground a great mall of iron, great marvel
had Huon, when he saw this Tun roll about thus without cease like a
Tempest, and as it passed by Huon, he heard a pitiful voice within the Tun
sore complaning, and when he had heard it two or three times, he approached
near to the Tun and said. Thou that art in this Tun, speak unto me, and
show me what thou art, or what thing thou have need of, and why thou art put
there? Then when he that was in the Tun heard Huon, he rested still and spoke
no word: and when Huon saw that it would not speak, he said. Whatsoever thou
art, I conjure thee by him that created all the world, and by his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, whom he sent down to suffer death and passion upon the
Tree of the Cross, to redeem his Friends, who by the sin of Adam and Eve
were in Limbo, and by his glorious Resurrection, and by his Angels and
Archangels, Cherubins, and Seraphins, and by all his holy Saints I conjure thee
to show me what thou art, and why and for what cause thou art set here in
this Tun?

When he that was within the Tun heard how sore he was coniured, he
answered and said. Thou that have coniured me, thou do great evil to
cause me to show thee the troth, know surely that I have to name Cain, and
Son I was unto Adam and Eve, and am he that slew my Brother Abell, by false
and cursed envy that I had unto him, because his oblations and Dismes that he
made unto God were exalted, and the fume thereof went upward to Heaven, and
those that I made the fume went downe-ward, and when I saw that, I slew and
murdered my Brother Abell, wherefore, and for the great sin that I have
committed, I am damned to be and to suffer this martyrdom within this Tun,
wherein I am closed burning, and with Serpents and Toads here within devouring
me, and yet I cannot die, and here I shall be until the day of Judgment,
and then my pain shall be doubled. Now have I showed thee thy demand,
wherefore I repute thee for a fool, when thou art so hardy as to enter into
this Desert, whereas never man entered and departed without death, for know for
troth, that hither repaireth two enemies Feends of Hell, who shall slay thee
and bear thy soul into Hell, without thou will do as I shall show thee.

Friend, (quoth Huon) I pray thee to show me what it is that thou speak of,
or what thing thou will that I should do and I will do it, to the intent that
I may depart from hence, there is nothing in the world but I shall do it for
thee, so thou will show me the way how I may depart from hence. Friend,
(quoth Cain) I shall show thee what thou shall do, thou shall take this mall
of iron that thou see there, and strike therewith so long upon this Tun
until thou have broken it, to the intent that I may issue out, and when I am
delivered, I shall set thee in sauegard in Jerusalem or in France, or in what
country soever thou will wish. If thou will do this that I have said, and
deliver me from this torment: I shall set thee wheresoever thou will be in any
Land Christian or Heathen, and if thou do not this that I have said, before
it be night I shall cause thee to die with great torments, for anon thou shall
see come hither two Devils of Hell, foul and hideous to behold, and they shall
stangle thee and bear thy soul into Hell. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) humbly
I require and beseech thee to save me from this torment. Cain, (quoth Huon)
thou speak me fair and say as thou list, but I will not deliver thee
out of this Tun, until first thou show me how I may depart from hence.
Then Cain said, if thou will promise me by thy faith, and by thy part of
Paradise to deliver me out of this Tun, I shall show thee the manner how
thou shall escape from hence. Cain, (quoth Huon) have no doubt, and that I
promise thee to keep my faith, so thou will show me the manner how I may
depart out of this Desert, I shall deliver thee out of thy torment. Then Cain
said: thou shall go by this little path that thou see here by upon thy
right hand, the which shall bring thee straight to the Seaside, the which is
not far from hence, and then go down the Mountain, whereas thou shall find
a ship, and therein but one man, but before thou do enter into the ship,
bless three times, for he that thou shall find there is a Feende of Hell,
and show unto him how thou art Cain, escaped out of the rolling Tun, and bid
him to pass thee over, and say that thou will go and slay all the Christian
men that be in the world, and bring their souls into Hell, and when he
hears thee say thus, he wlil pass thee over in safety, for it is long
since that he has tarried for me, because he thinks that I should escape
out of this Tun: but thou must take with thee this mall of iron upon thy neck,
to the intent that he shall the better believe thee, and surely he will then
pass thee over.

Cain, (quoth Huon) I pray thee is this of troth that thou have said? Friend,
(quoth Cain) I lie never a word. Now I pray thee seeing I have showed thee the
manner how thou may escape, take this Mall of iron, and break asunder this
Tun that I am in, that I may be delivered out of this pain and torment.
Cain, (quoth Huon) I pray thee to show me who is he that did put thee into
this Tun, and what is his name? Sir, (quoth Cain) know for troth that God of
Heaven set me here, because I had displeased him for slaying of my Brother
Abell, wherefore I have suffered so much pain and sorrow, that more I cannot
endure: and therefore yet again I pray thee to deliver me from hence. Cain,
(quoth Huon) God forbid that I should deliver thee, seeing our Lord God has
set thee there: Know for troth, that thou shall never depart from thence except
it be by his commandment, for there thou shall be ever for me, I had
rather be perjured then to undo that thing which God will have done, to
punish thee for the evils that thou have done. I know well, as for the evil
that I have done, as in breaking of my promise to thee: God will lightly pardon
me for it, abide thou there with thy cursed sins, for sure by me thou shall
have none other aid.

Chap. CXXI.
How Huon departed from Cain, and passed the Sea in a Vessel guided by the
Devil, who believed it had been Cain, and Huon arrived at a City called
Colanders, whereas he found the Admiral of Persia and Barnard his Cozen, who
had laid siege to the City.

WHen Cain had well understood Huon, he said: Ah thou false Traitor, by whom I
am beguiled and mocked, thou art not worthy to be believed in any thing that
thou say, thou lie worse then a Dog. Oh thou false perjured Traitor,
thou have ill kept thy promise, thou art not worthy to be believed. Cain,
(quoth Huon) other good gettest thou none of me, for thou art not worthy to
be heard, when thou have stain thy dear Brother by false envy and cursed
treason, whereof thou art full: go thy way false Traitor, too much evil
cannot be done unto thee, be content with the Tun that thou art in, thou
need not fear of any refreshing nor of more furthering for me, well have
thou deserved it, but within short time thou shall have worse pain and sorrow.
Ah Traitor (quoth Cain and false liar, thou have lost thy part of Paradise.
Thou lie, (quoth Huon) unto thee ought to be kept neither faith nor promise,
because thou have slain Abell thy Brother: wherefore thou art now punished and
well have thou deserved it. Ah thou false lier, (quoth Cain) subtly thou have
deceived and mocked me by thy false words and subtilties, I see well that thou will go from hence and leave me still in this pain. Certainly, (quoth Huon)
that which I promised thee was but to beguile thee, for as by me thou shall
not come out, without he command it that set thee here. Well Huon, (quoth
Cain) know for certain, that in all thy life thou were never better
counseled, for if thou had delivered me out, incontinent I would have
strangled thee. Ah false Feend, (quoth Huon) yet have thou no repentance of
thine evil that thou have done. I will go my way, and thou shall abide here
still in great pain and torment forever, therewith Huon departed, and took the
Mall upon his neck, and entered into the little way that Cain had showed unto
him.

Now we will leave speaking of Huon, and speak of the Admiral of Persia, and
of his Army upon the Sea. Upon the second day the Tempest ceased, and the
Sea waxed calm and fair, then the ships drew again together as it pleased
God, and arrived at a noble City, the which was as then in Arme^^^ called
Colanders, a great and a fair City, but after it was destroyed by the noble
Duke Ogyer the Danoyse, he went into I^^ia. The Admiral and his company
greatly complained for Huon whom they had so lost, they thought never to see
him more, and Barnard his Coozen made such sorrow that great pity it was to
see him, the Admiral and all his Lords sore wept and pitifully complained for
Huon, they thought never to see him again, but he that our Lord Jesus Christ
will have saved cannot perish, for Huon the same time came down the Mountain,
to come unto the Port whereas the Vessel lay and the Devil within it. When
Huon saw the Vessel and the Feend within it, who was so hideous and horrible
to behold, that it was marvel to see, he seemed well to be the Devil of
Hell, his head was as great as an Ox head, his eyes more ^edder then two
burning coals, his teeth great and long, and as rough as a Bear, he cast
fire and smoke out of his gorge like a Furnace, it was no marvel though Huon
doubted him, for when he saw him so foul he had great fear, and so lent
himself to a Rock the better to behold him, and then he blessed him with the
sign of the Cross, recommending himself to the sauegard of our Lord God, but
it fortuned so the same time that the enemy saw him not. Ah good Lord, (quoth
Huon) I pray and require thee humbly to counsel me, in what manner I should
trust in this foul Feend who is fearful so behold, I marvel how I might be
acquainted with him, whether I might trust to be in the ship with him,
certainly I have great doubt that he will cast me into the Sea, or else slay
me on the other side of the Sea, I wotte not what to do, for I must be feign
to trust him, or else to return into the Desert, whereas I shall die with
famine, and never more see wife nor child: but seeing it is thus, I shall
adventure my self with him, and if I may escape from this adventure, I shall
go to the holy Sepulcher, whereas our Lord Jesus Christ was quick and dead,
and then I shall make war upon the Sarazins. Then Duke Huon took upon him
heart and courage, and with the Mall upon his neck he marched forth
fiercely: then he called the enemy and said. Oh thou that keep this Vessel
and passage, pass me incontinent over this Sea, and set me a land upon the
other side. When the Devil saw Huon with the Mall upon his neck, and
speaking so fiercely, he said: What art thou? whether will thou go? or what
do thou seek for here? or how art thou so bold to come hither? thou shall
never go further, but I shall cast thee into the Sea or strangle thee, and
then bear thy Soul into Hell.

When Huon heard him, he began to tremble, but he was nothing abashed, for if
he had fainted or tarried to have made answer, he had incontinent been
destroyed and slain, but like a hardy Knight full of great Prowess, and firm
in the faith of Jesus Christ, said. Hold thy peace thou Fool, for I am Cain,
for whom thou have tarried here so long, I came even now out of the rolling
Tun upon the Mountain, have thee and pass me over this arm of the Sea,
for I shall find neither man nor woman that believes in Jesus Christ, but I
shall slay him, to the intent that hell may be filled with their souls. When
the Feend heard Huon say so, he had great joy, and said. Cain, why have thou
made me tarry here so long as I have don? I am joyful of thy coming, for I
could never have departed out of this place, without thou had been
delivered out of the Tun: therefore Cain come on thy way, enter into this
Ship presently, and I shall bring thee whereas thou will be, gladly I will
pass thee over the Sea, to the intent that thou should slay Christian men
and Sarazins, to have their Souls into hell.

Then Huon entered into the Ship, recommending himself to our Lord Jesus
Christ, and said. Quickly pass me over: Before Huon thought that he had gone
but two Leagues, he was over on the other side, whereof Huon had great marvel
that he was so soon over, and thanked our Lord God that he was out of that
danger: then he took leave of the enemy, and said. Farewell, I will
return again shortly, within these three days thou shall hear tidinges of
me, and then the Feend answered shortly and said. Cain, go thy way quickly
and have thee, to the intent that when thou returnest into hell, thou shall
have good cheer of our Masters, who greatly desire thy coming. Then Huon
departed quickly, he thought ever that the Devil had followed him, and he
went so long that he approached to a City called Colanders, glad was Huon
when he had lost the sight of the evil Spirit, and in the Evening he entered
into the City of Colanders with the Mall upon his neck, the Paynims and
Sarazins that were within the City had great marvel, when he came alone
afoote clean armed into the City, and among other, there was one demanded of
him what he was, and why he went so alone armed? Then Huon answered him
fiercely to abash him therewith, and said: I am Cain, who by mine illness slew
Abell my Brother, wherewith God was angry with me, but before it be long
time I shall take such vengeance, that as many men or women or children as I
find believing in the Law of Jesus Christ, I shall destroy them all in such
wise, that the Paynims and Sarazins shall have no doubt for any evil that they
shall do unto them, for I shall destroy and slay them all, neither sparing old
nor young. When the Paynims heard that, they were right joyful, and that night
served Huon well and made him a great feast, because they trusted that he
should destroy all Christendom, and said among themselves, that as then he
was welcome thither, because the City the day before was besieged by the
Admiral of Persia. Thus Huon had great joy and feasting made unto him, and
after Supper he was brought into a fair and rich Chamber, wherein he lay and
slept soundly until the next morning.

Chap. CXXII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux had great joy, when he saw the Admiral of Persia
before Colanders, where he fought with the Sarazins.

AFTER that the Admiral of Persia had left Huon in the Desert of Abillaunt,
and how he had a great storm upon the sea, and at last their Ships
assembled together, and arrived at the Port before the City of Colanders, in
the which City Huon was now in, who was right joyful, when he knew that the
Admiral was come thither to lay siege to the City, and the Admiral and his
company was sorrowful because they had lost Huon, and especially Barnard his
coozen, for he thought never to have seen him again: but he had shortly
tidinges of him as ye shall hear after. When the Admiral was arrived at the
Port, they armed themselves, and ordained their men as well as they might to
assail the city of Colanders. They issued out of their Ships, and came
marching toward the City and made a great assault, and then the Paynims and
Sarazins armed them on all sides, and went to their defenses: then the Captain
of the Town came unto Huon, and said. Come on forth Cain, it is time for you
to show what you can do, for here without are christian men assayling the
City, I pray you spare them not, for we have great trust in you. Sirs, (quoth
Huon) seeing I am in this city, ye need not to fear any person, anon ye
shall see what I can do. Cain, (quoth the captain) I pray you go on before
and we shall follow you. Well, (quoth Huon) with this Mall I shall astone
them all, the Paynims had great joy of his words, weening surely it had been
Cain. Then Huon armed himself, and he had a good horse brought unto him,
whereupon he mounted: then he and the Paynims issued out of the city, and
found as then the Admiral of Persia and all his company ready arrived in
Battle. And when he saw that the Sarazins were issued out, he set upon
them fiercely, and Huon, who was joyful of the adventure that was fallen to
him, he stepped out apart to behold the battle, and would not meddle, because
he had been so well received and feasted in the city by them of the Town:
and he well perceived, that the assaults were of the Realm of Persia, and
how the Admiral and his coozen Barnard were there, whereof he had such joy,
that he wept for gladness, and thanked God of the good fortune that he had
sent him, and said. Ah good Lord, thou ought greatly to be praised, for thou
never faylest them at time of need that serve thee, now I may well say, that
with thy gracious aid, yet I shall once more see my Wife and my child: thus
Huon said to himself, beholding both Battles fighting.

Chap. CXXIII.
How the City of Colanders was taken by the Admiral of Persia, after he had
won the Battle, and of the great joy that was made unto Huon, when he was
known by the Admiral of Persia and his Cozen Barnard.

WHen the Admiral of Persia saw and perceived, that they of the Town were
issued out, he marched forth his Battles, and set upon his enemies, there
was great slaughter made on both parts: but at the last they of the City had
the worst, for the christian men were of a greater number then the Paynims and
Sarazins that were issued out, wherefore they were constrained to grant the
Victory to their enemies, the Paynims retired and fled toward their city,
and the Admiral and Barnard with their company chaced and slew them that it
was pity to see it. Finally, the Admiral oppressed them so sore, that he
entered into the City with them, and Barnard and his company, and slew and
beat down the Sarazins, that great marvel it was to see the blood that ran
through the streets. When the Admiral saw that he had the victory, then he
commanded to cease slaying, and that all such as would believe in our Lord
God, their lives should be saved and their goods, and so all such as would not
be christened, should be slain incontinent and none spared, the which was
done, many of them received Christendom, and as many as would not receive it,
were all slain.

Thus as this City was taken, then Huon (who was entered into the City with
the Admirals men) came to the Pallaice, whereas he saw the Admiral and all
the Barons and Barnard his Coozen, Huon had still his Mall upon his neck, and
when he came into the Hall he put off his helmet, and saluted the Admiral and
all the other that were there. When the Admiral and his Lords saw Huon, the
great joy that they had no tongue can tell. Oh right dear and virtuous Knight,
(quoth the Admiral) your coming does so rejoice me, that I cannot tell
whether I dream or not, you are much bound unto God, that he has given you
the grace to save you from peril. Then the Admiral embraced Huon, and you may
well know that Barnard his Coozen had great joy, and so had all the other, and
then the Admiral said unto Huon. Sir, I pray you to show me what adventures
you have had since you departed from us? Then Huon showed them all as ye have
heard here before, and how he escaped.

When the Admiral and the other understood Huon, they were never so amazed and
abashed in all their lives, of that he was so escaped from the hands of the
Devil, and said that he was much bound unto God, they were all glad and right
joyful for the coming of Huon, and especially Barnard. Then the Captain of
the City who had newly received Christendom, came unto Huon and said: Sir, I
require you to desire the Admiral to be my good Lord and Master, for I
promised faithfully to abide here in this Town as his good and true Servant,
keeping firmly the christian faith, the which I have newly received. When Huon
saw the Captain, who had received him into his house at his first coming into
the City, he went unto the Admiral, and said. Sir, I require you to give the
keeping of this City unto this noble man, and he to hold it as his own, and
to do homage unto you for it. Sir, (quoth the Admiral) all that you will I am
agreeable unto, I grant it him for the love of you. Then Huon thanked the
Admiral, the Captain seeing the great and rich gift that the Admiral had
given unto him for the love of Huon, he had great marvel of the great Larges
and courtesy that was done unto him by the means of Huon, and then he
kneeled down before them and thanked them, and did homage unto the Admiral in
the presence of all the Lords and Barons, and promised truly to keep the
City, against all men that would do any damage thereunto, nor never to yield
it up unto any person, but all only unto the Admiral or unto him that shall
have his Commission: thus as ye have heard the City of Colanders was taken.

Chap. CXXIIII.
How the Admiral of Persia and Huon of Bourdeaux, and all their Host passed
by Antioch, and by Damas, and came to the City of Jerusalem to the holy
Sepulcher, and was nobly received by the King of Jerusalem: and how the
Souldans Messenger came and defied the Admiral of Persia.

WHen the Admiral and Huon saw this City won and brought under their
obeisance, and had established there a new Lord and Captain, and set
Prouostes and Baylifes and other Officers, then they took advise together, and
determined since they were a ^and, to send back again their Navy of ships
into Persia, and they to go by land to the City of Jerusalem, for they had
from thence as they were but Ten days journey unto Antioch, and so to pass
by that City, and then unto Damas, and so to Jerusalem, and there to do their
offering, and if by adventure they found in their way either Kings or
Admirals, that would let or trouble them in their passing, they said that they
were of puissance sufficient to resist against them, and then they said, how
that from Jerusalem the Admiral might return by land into Persia, unto the
River of Euphrates, and there his Navy to meet him, and so to convey him unto
his City of Thauris* and Huon to return unto laffe, and from thence by water
to return into France. Thus they concluded to do, the which advise was
lauded and praised of all the Lords and Barons of the Host.

After this conclusion thus taken, the Admiral commanded his ships to be
discharged of all things necessary to be carried by land, the which was done
diligently according to his commandment, their horses were set a land, and
their Tents and Pauillions trussed upon Mules and Cammels and Dromodaries, the
which carriage seemed a great Host there were so many together, the noise and
brute that they made seemed to be a new world, and when all the ships were
discharged, the Patrons and Masters of the Ships took their leave of the
Admiral, who commanded them expressly to abide for him in the River of
Euphrates, and so they did accordingly. Now let us leave speakinge of them,
and return unto our former matter.

When these Ships were departed and every thing trussed, then the Admiral
commanded through-out all the Country, that all Merchants and other able to
do it, should send after his Host bread, wine, and flesh, and biscuit to
vittaile his Host, and the charge to see this done was given to the new
Admiral of the City of Colanders, the which he did diligently. When the
Admiral of Persia saw his time to depart, he made it to be proclaimed
through-out the City by a Trumpet, that every man should make him ready to
depart the next morning, to go whether it pleased the Admiral: this was done
so, that at an hour before the next day there was great brute and noise made
in the remoouing: then the Admiral and Huon made them ready, and mounted
upon their horses, and issued out of (...) City, and e^tred into the feelds,
and then the whole Host took the way toward Antioch: Of their iourneys I
make no (...) fall, they road forth so that they passed by low Armenia, (...)
the hye Ermine, and so upon a Monday they came before (...), whereas they
lodged that night a long by the the (...), without that any person of the
City made any (...) or to let them, but they brought out of the (...) bread,
wine, and flesh, and other things (...) their company, whereof the Admiral
and Huon (...) joyful, and gave them great thanks, and for that (...) would
not suffer that any of his Host (...) hurt or damage unto any person of the
City. (...) buy when they had dyned, they took their way to (...) the City
of Damas, and as they went thether-ward, they ^ooke certain Towns and
Castles, and brought them under their obeisance, and such as were taken
perforce, and (...) not believe in our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ,
incontinent they were all slain, and brought to utter ruin and destroyed.

(...) wasting and destroying the Country in their way, at last they came
before the City of Damas. When they came thither* they lodged about the City
in the Gardens and (...)* and constrained them within the City to bring them
(...), the which they did, for doubt of the destroying of their (...) and
fruits: there they lay one night, and the next day (...) the way to Jerusalem,
and had diverse Battles by the way, but they were of so great puissance that
none could (...) them. So long road this christian Host, that they came and
lodged before N^pelous, and there left their host: then the next morning, the
Admiral and Huon, and diverse of the great Lords and Barons of Persia
accompanied with them, (...) from Napelous to the number of four Thousand
vali^^^ Knights, to guard them into the City of Jerusalem, thither they came
about noone, whereas they were received with great joy of King Thibault, and
of the Patriarch and Archpriest, who as then were in the City of Jerusalem,
whom the Emperor Constantine had left there, and ordered for the keeping of
the City. When the Admiral of Persia, and Duke Huon and Barnard, and other
went and offered to the holy Sepulcher, then they went to the Temple of
Solomon, and unto the holy Temple of Simeon, whereas they made their offerings,
and the next Pilgrimages unto all the holy places in the City, with great
devotion and reverence.

When they had accomplished their holy Pilgrimages, they returned to the
Pallaice of the King of Jerusalem, whereas they were greatly feasted and
honorably received, of their service I will make none account, but one thing I
dare well say, that there was never King nor Admiral better served. And as
they sat at dinner, there entered a Sarazin ^oule and black, called
Trampoiguyffle, the which is as much to say as Balaach. Then he said a hye
before the Table, the same God that made the Firmament, and that down to us
sent his holy Prophet Mahomet to teach us his holy Law, he save and keep
Saphadin Souldan of Babylon and of Egypt, and may confound them that be his
enemies. To the Admiral of Persia and of Media, the Souldan sends word by
me, that wrongfully and without cause thou go and destroyest his Country
and his people, not giving him any knowledge why thou do so, and therefore
by me he sends thee word, that am his secret Messenger, that he will assign
unto thee the day of battle, that is upon Thursday next coming, between
Rames and lafte, whereas there is a plain Country, and he will that thou
know for certain, that if he take thee, thou shall be hanged and slain all
quick and never see fair day more, and al other that I see here sitting at
this Table.

Chap. CXXV.
Of the answer that the Admiral of Persia and of Media made unto the Souldans
Messenger, and of the report that he made unto his Master.

WHen the Admiral had well heard and understood the Souldans Messenger, he
began to smile and said. Tell thy Master, that I set nothing by his
threatening, nor by nothing that he can do, nor I will not leave for all his
saying, to destroy and to take his Towns and his Castles, and to slay all them
that will not believe in the Law of Jesus Christ, and say unto him from me,
that I am not in mind to retire back, but by the aid of God my creator, I
shall come and meet with him, so that he shall not need to tarry for me,
and I shall fight with him my puissance against his, to show him how they can
do that believe in Jesus Christ. Go thy way and say unto thy Master, that he
shall not find me flying, for any fear that I have of any man believing in the
false and detestable faith of Mahomet. Then the Admiral commanded to give the
Messenger meat and drink, and forty Florents, the Messenger refused it not
but took it, and thanked the Admiral, and when he had dyned, he tarried not
night nor day until he came to the City of Gasere, whereas he found the
Souldan and al his Army, the which was a great number, for they were a Hundred
Thousand men, and all they threatened the death of the Admiral of Persia, but
it is a common saying, yt many things lacks of foolish thoughts and so did
they. When the Messenger was arrived at Gasere, he came before the Souldan,
and made his report what answer the Admiral had made him, and when the
Souldan had well heard and understood the Messenger, he had great marvel
of the great outrage that he thought to be in the Admiral of Persia, in that
he durst abide him, and swear by his Law, that if he might have the
vpper-hand of the Admiral, that he would slay him quick. Then he commanded
his Host to dislodge, and to take the way toward Escalonne, the which they
did.

Chap. CXXVI.
How the Admiral of Persia sent for his men that lay at Napelous, and caused
them to withdraw toward Rames, and how they departed from Jerusalem: and
how he went to fight with his enemies.

AFter that Trampoiguyfle the Messenger was departed from Jerusalem, and
returned to his Master the Souldan: then the Admiral of Persia and Huon of
Bourdeaux, who were in the Pallaice with the King of Jerusalem, thither they
called all their counsel, and when they were all assembled, the Admiral
said. Sirs, I pray you to counsel me, in what manner I shall use my self, to
go and meet with the enemies of the Christian faith, the which are come
against us: therefore I desire every one of you to show me your opinions what
in this case is best to be done. Then Thibault King of Jerusalem arose up, and
said. Sir Admiral of Persia and Media, me thinks you should not abide them
here, but rather you ought to depart, and to go against your enemies, for if
you abide for them in this City, you shall do great damage to this country,
for we have truce with the Souldan for five years, the which with our honor
we cannot break, for if we would have made war against him, we could not
have resisted against him, and also we are far off from France, to seek for
succor and aid there: thus the King spoke no more. Then Duke Huon of Bourdeaux
said: Sir Admiral, the King of Jerusalem has showed you the troth, for if we
should abide here, it should be always to our reproach and shame, if this
holy City should be lost, the which was won by two noble Emperors of Rome
and of Greece, for the King that is here, his honor saved and the suertie of
his country, may not break the Truce that he has taken with the Souldan of
Babylon: and therefore mine advice is, that as (...) as we may command your
men that be at Napelous, (...) to dislodge and to meet with you at Rames, and
then when you have somewhat refreshed your Host, then set forward toward your
enemies, (as the King of Jerusalem has said) for ^ were great folly to give
them leisure to come too far forward, first let them know, how the Swords
and Spears of the Persians and Medians can strike, who sometime did (...) in
arms, wherefore it is reason that they follow now their Predecessors. When
Huon had finished his reason, the Admiral and all the other Lords that were
there, praised and held that counsel good, that was purposed by the King of
Jerusalem and of Huon, and then they departed and returned to their Chambers
and Lodgings. Then the Admiral commanded hastily his Host to withdraw
toward Rames, whereas he would tarry for them, the which thing was done
diligently, and the Host rested not until they came unto Rames, whereas they
^ound ready the Admirals Harbingers, who had already appointed their Lodgings.

Thus after that the Admiral had written to his Marshals of his Host, then
he took his leave of the King of Jerusalem, and in like wise so did Huon and
Barnard his coozen, without knowledging of himself to the King of Jerusalem.
Then they departed from the holy city, and road so long that they came to the
Town of Rames, whereas they found their Host lodged. Then they rested them
there until the next day, and then the Admiral commanded them to dislodge,
and to make them ready to take the way toward Escalonne. A goodly sight it
was to see the Host dislodge, Huon had thereof great joy, for he desired
rather to slay the Paynims, then to be in chambers with (...) and Damsels.
When they were all in the feelds, the Admiral ordained his Battles, the
first guided Huon of Bordeaux and Barnard his coozen, he had with him twenty
Thousand Persians fierce and hardy, the second Battle led the Marshall of
Persia, with twenty Thousand of good m^n of war, the third Battle led the
Admiral of Persia and of Media, and with him thirty Thousand of the most
valiantest men in his host, and when every thing was ordained as it
appertained, he went and visited them, exhorting them to do well their
deuoyre, and prayinge them to quit themselves valiantly: then he came unto
Huon, and said. Oh right dear and virtuous Knight, garnished and repleat with all prowess, all my hope I put in the strength and virtue of your arms and
body: therefore I pray you this day to show out your great virtues wherewith
you are garnished, for especially for the love of you and for your bounty, I
have taken and received the holy baptism, whereof I laud and praise our Lord
God of his grace that he has done unto me: therefore I desire you this day
to show unto the Sarazins, that your Sword is to be feared. Sir, (quoth Huon)
God give me grace to be such a one as you say, and to perform in me that
which lacks: and Sir, I trust by me it shall not be let, but that this day
our enemies shall have no cause to praise nor to make their boast, and
therefore Sir, let us ride forth surely, for by the grace of God I have hope,
that this day we shall make our enemies so much ado, that they shall have
scarce time and leisure to grant unto us the Victory.

Now as the Admiral and Huon were thus deuisinge together, they saw before
them a far off, the air wax thick, and that the Sun lost his clearness,
whereof they had great marvel, because they saw a little before the Sun
shine so fair and clear, there as they were anon they perceived, that the
darkness arose by reason of the dust rising of the Horses of their enemies,
who were hastily coming toward them to have taken them in their lodginge,
whereby they came all out of order, trusting al in their great number of men,
for they were more then a hundred Thousand, fearful it was to see them
coming, so fast they road that the one host might see the other. When Huon
had well perceived them, and saw their demeanor and disorder, he said unto
the Admiral: Sir, well you ought to praise our Lord God, for this day he
shall bring your enemies into your hands to slay them at your pleasure:
therefore Sir, I counsel you, that incontinent we hasten and set upon them,
to the intent that they shall have no time nor leisure to assemble together to
bring themselves in good order, if we do thus, there is no doubt but by the
grace of God we shall shortly discomfite them before they be assembled. Sir,
(quoth the Admiral) your opinion is good and reasonable, let it be done as you
have devised. Then the Admiral commanded the Marshals and Captains of his
host to march forward his Battles against his enemies, and then Trumpets and
Drums began to sound, that it was marvel to hear them, and then they set
on toward their enemies. When the Souldan and they of his host saw the
Persians coming against them ready ranged in battle, he called unto him
his Kings and Admirals, who were fifteen in number, and said unto them. Sirs,
it were good that our men rested still a season, that we may order and range
our Battles, for yonder we may see well our enemies coming. Then stepped
forth the Admiral of Dorbrey, who was horrible and great to behold, he was
fifteen foot of height, and road upon a goodly splayed Mare, the most
fairest and greatest that ever was seen, she had a great horn in her
forehead, if she were any thing chafed, none durst approach near unto her
but alonely her Keeper, this Admiral was foul and great, he rather seemed a
Feend of Hell then any humane creature, and when he came unto the Souldan,
every man made him way: then he said unto the Souldan. Sir, I have great
marvel of thee that thou art so afraid for a small number of men, who are
coming toward their deaths. Sir, know for troth, that before you can order
your men in battle array, I shall discomfite your enemies, and deliver unto
you the Admiral of Persia either quick or dead. When the Souldan had well
heard and understood the Admiral of Dorbrey, he said: Sir Admiral, I put all
the conduct of mine host into your hands, I have great affiance in the virtue
that is in you, and in the strength of your arms, the which are greatly to be
feared: then the Souldan commanded all his host to set upon their enemies,
and said. Seeing the the Admiral of Dorbrey is with me, I fear no man of
Persia nor of Media, and so spurred his horse, without making of any good order.

Chap. CXXVII.
Now speak we of the great Battle that was in the playnes of Rames,
between the Souldan of Babylon and the Admiral of Persia, the which was
discomfited by the Prowess of Huon of Bourdeaux.

WHen Huon who led the first Battle of the Persians, beheld and saw how the
Sarazins came on without any good order or conduct, he sounded his Trumpets,
exhorting his men to do well and valiantly, and commanded his Constables and
Marshals to march forward, and so did the Admiral and his company, and they
joined near one to another, to the intent each of them to succor other. When
Huon saw his enemies approach, and that it was time to set upon them, he
commanded his Archers and Crosbowes to shoot, and so they did, that by reason
of the shooting of both parts, it seemed like a cloud, that thereby and with
the dust together it darkened the light of the Sun, and then Huon ^ouched his
Spear, and ran at him that bare the Souldans Standard, who was coming
before all the other, to cause his company to follow the faster, Huon gave him
such a stroke with his Spear, that he pierced him clean through the body,
so that he fell from his horse with the Standard, whereof the Sarazins were
sore abashed and displeased, then they approached and came to raise up again
their banner, but Huon and the Persians encountered them so fiercely, that many
were slain on both parts: he that had seen Huon how he slew and beat down
the Paynims and Sarazins, would have said that he was no mortal man, but
rather a man of the Fayrie, for the great prowess and maruailes that he did,
for he caused the Paynims whether they would or not to retire back, and to
forsake the banner that lay upon the earth, for before he departed from thence
he slew five Kings and two Admirals, Huon was so feared, that there was
none so hardy that durst approach near to him, aad also his Coozen Barnard was
greatly to be feared, and he ever followed Huon as near as he could, then
there joined the Battles of the Marshals, and the Admiral of Persia set
upon the Souldans battle, and the Battle began so great and horrible, that
a hundred years before were seen none such, so valiantly did the Admiral of
Persia and such as were in his company.

When the Souldan saw his men so slain, he was right sorrowful and sore
displeased, and said unto the Admiral of Dorbrey: I may well curse the day
and time that I believed you, for by you I have lost my banner, and I see my
men slain, for if I had ordered my battles before, this mischief had not
happened, nor that which is apparent to fall, and then the Souldan couched his
Spear, and struck therewith a Knight who was great Master of the house of
Persia in such wise, that the Souldan ran him clean through, and so he
served the second, third, and fourth, and when his Spear was broken, he drew
out his Sword and did therewith great damage, great cry and noise was made
when the battles joined, there might have been seen many horses running
abroad in the field, trayling their bridles after them, and their masters
lyinge in the field among the horse feet, and a horrible thing it was to see
and to hear the complaints and cries, that the wounded men made among the
horse feet, having no power to relieve themselves, but there died and finished
their days miserably, great cry made the Sarazins and Persians that fought
together, and especially whereas Huon fought and searched the Ranks, and brake
the great preasses, he beat down and confounded all that came before him, so
that none durst abide before him, for by that time he had slain six of the
Kings, and five Admirals beside many other, so that the noise and cry came to
the hearing of the Admiral of Dorbrey, who did great destruction among the
Persians, so that it was an horrible thing to see and behold, and when he
heard how that there was a Knight that did great damage and hurt among them,
and had slain diverse Kings and Admirals, he said unto a Paynim who had
brought unto him those tidings and news. Go thy way and show him unto me
that has done us so great damage. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I shall show him
unto you, but I will approach to him no nearer then I am, now you may see him
yonder how he fights, and makes our men to retire back from him, for there
is none so hardy that dare approach near unto him.

Then the Giant beheld Huon, and saw how he made the Paynims to retire
back, and then he struck his Mare with his spurs, and Huon who well
perceived and saw him coming, feared him: howbeit, he refused him not, but
came with his Sword in his hand then against the Sarazin, and the Sarazin (who
bare a great hatchet upon his neck) saw Huon coming, and struck at him, but
as God would have it he mist him, for if the stroke had lighted upon him he
had been slain, the stroke alighted upon the crooper of his Horse, so that
the horse fell down dead and Huon upon his back, and he was not so soon
relieved, but that the Giant took him by the armor, and cast him before his
Saddle as lightly as though it he had been but a feather, and so he held and
carried Huon with the one hand and fought with the other hand. When Huon felt
himself so taken, he cried and called upon our Lord God, and prayed him to
have pity and compassion of Escleremond his Wife, for he saw well that his
life was determined. The Giant who was right joyful, in that he had taken
Huon who had done the Sarazins so much damage, he desired to find the
Souldan to make him a present of Huon, so that with the have that he made he
struck his Mare, and she began to leap and gambauld, and began to run,
and as fortune was, she ran among the broken spears and dead men that lay
upon the ground, so that she stumbled, and thereby kneeled to the earth, and
the Giant thought to gave relieved her but he could not, by reason of the
weight that lay upon her ne^ke, and by the great swiftness of her running,
she was feign to fall down to the earth.

When Huon saw and well perceived that, he was light and quick, and arose
upon his feet, and when he saw the Giant fallen down and began to
relieve, he hasted him, and lifted up his Sword with both his hands, and gave
the Giant such a stroke upon the helmet, that he claue his head to the
brains, so that therewith he fell down dead to the earth, and then Huon
seized upon the Mare by the raines of the bridle, and leapt upon her and had
great joy, and so had the Persians, and the Admiral had great joy, for it had
been showed him how the Giant had taken Huon, and that he was escaped and had
slain the Giant. When Huon felt himself upon the strong Mare, he dashed in
among the Paynims and Sarazins, and met with the King of Olyfarne, whom he
gave such a stroke, that he claue his head asunder: then he ran at the
Admiral of Orca^^y, who was Brother German unto the Souldan, he gave him
such a stroke upon the shoulder, that he struck off his arm, so that it
fell down to the earth, sheeld and all, and when the Admiral felt himself
hurt and wounded, he would have fled away, but Huon sitting upon the Mare,
who was the swiftest of pace in all the world, ran after him, and when Huon
had overtaken the Sarazin, he gave him such a stroke upon the head, that he
claue it to his teeth, and so he fell down ^^ad to the earth, whereby the
Paynims and Sarazins were ^o affrayde, that after that they durst not assemble
together. This was showed unto the Souldan, how the Giant was slain and five
other Kings and Admirals, and his Brother also slain, and all by the hands of
one Knight, and also he saw his Battle sore broken, and how they began to
fly: wherefore he saw well that if he tarried there long, he should be either
slain or taken, then the King of Antiphoney, who was near pa^ent to the
Souldan, came unto him and said. Sir, think how to save thy life, for if thou
tariest long here, there is none can save thee, for if the Knight that is with
the Admiral of Persia happen to come hither, thy life is lost: therefore I
counsel thee to depart and save thy self, or else thou art but dead. Then
the Souldan and about Twenty men with him departed, and took the way by the
Seaside to go toward Acres, the which as then appertained unto the Sarazins,
and Huon who was mounted upon the puissant Mare, beating down his enemies, so
that none durst abide his strokes, and the Admiral of Persia following him,
regarding that by the hye prowess of Huon his enemies were confounded and
discomfited, and saw well how that there was no humane body that had any power
to resist against him, and escaped without death: then he said unto all his
Lords and to Barnard. Sirs, (quoth the Admiral) yonder before you ye may see
maruailes and things incredible to be declared, for you may see that there is
none so puissant and strong that can resist against my Friend Huon, I would to
God that he were unmarried, then he should never depart from me, for I would
then give him my Daughter in marriage, I shall be very sore displeased and
discomforted when he shall depart from me.

Thus as ye have heard the Admiral of Persia and Media said unto his
company, and so slaying and beating down the Paynims and Sarazins that
fled, the Admiral and Barnard followed Huon, but by reason of his good horse
he was so far before them, that they could not overtake him, for he desired
nothing so much as he did to overtake the Souldan, who was flying as fast as
he might toward the City of Acres. When the Admiral saw that he could not
overtake Huon, then he and Barnard entered in among the Sarazins who were flying
away, the Admiral and Barnard slew and beat them down, that great pity it
was to see and behold them, for with the blood of the dead Paynims and Sarazins
their swoordes were taynted all red, if I should show all the hye Prowess and
maruailous deeds that were done there that day, it would be ouer-long to
rehearse, but I dare well say, that by the great prowess of Huon, the Battle
was vanquished and clean discomfited, the Persians and Medians chaced the
Paynims and Sarazins, and slew and did beat them down: the chase endured more
then four Leagues, and the Admiral had great marvel that he could not
overtake nor hear any thing of Huon, who chaced still the Souldan and followed
him so long, that Huon found the Souldan all alone, for his men could not
follow him so fast, because their Horses were so weary that they could not
go no further, the Souldan road upon a puissant and a goodly horse, and Huon
who followed him upon the puissant Mare, anon ouertooke him, and when he came
near to the Souldan, he said. Oh thou traitorous Souldan, great shame and
reproach thou may have, when thou flyest away thus all alone without any
company, turn thy sheeld against me, or else I shall slay thee flying. When
the Souldan had well heard Huon, he had great marvel and was greatly
feared, for he knew well that it was he by whom he had received so great
loss and damage, and by whom many Kings and Admirals had been slain, and
thought to himself, if he returned not, that he should be slain, wherefore
he took courage to himself, seeing that Huon was alone as well as he, and also
he thought, that it should not be long before he was succored with some of
his men that followed him: and therefore like a hardy Knight he turned his
horse head toward Huon, who fiercely ran one at another, and gave each other
great strokes. But it had been unto the Souldan but small profit if he had
not been rescued by his men, for if they had not come when they did, Huon had
slain him: but thither came about forty Knights Sarazins, and they all ran
at Huon, who was sore dismayed and abashed when he saw himself so enclosed
with his enemies: howbeit, he might have saved himself well enough if he had
listed to have fled away, but for any fear of them he would not fly, and
he dealt such strokes among them, that there was none so hardy that durst
approach near unto him, so sore they feared him, for he struck none with a
full stroke, but that his head was cloven to the brains or to the teeth, so
that he needed after no Surgeon.

When they saw that they could not take nor slay him, they were right
sorrowful and angry: then the Souldan cried and said. Sirs, upon him, great
shame it is unto you all, when by the body of one man you are so put bark,
and you see well that he has no succor, go and slay the Mare that he rydeth
upon with spears and darts, then he shall be soon overcome, and you know
well that it is he whom I have suffered at my great loss and damage, it is
he that has slain my men, and by him I have lost the Battle, if he escape
from you, ye ought never to be seen in any Princes Court. When the Paynims
and Sarazins had well understood their Souldan, then they sore oppressed Huon,
who did great maruailes in arms, but his puissance and virtue should but
little have auailed him, if he had not been shortly aided and succored, and
also by reason of the rich stones and pearls that were upon him: then the
Paynims and Sarazins who of forty were left alive but twenty eight, they saw
well that they could not overcome Huon, without they slew the Mare first that
he road upon: therefore they cast at her Darts and Iauelins in such wise,
that finally they slew her under him, whereof Huon was right sorrowful and
sore displeased, and was as then in great fear of his life, then he called
upon our Lord Jesus Christ to have pity and compassion of his soul, for he
saw that his life was at an end, and said. Dear Lord Jesus Christ, I pray thee
by thy sweet mercy to have pity and compassion of my Wife Escleremond, who is
in great perrill and poverty for the love of me, without any desert of her
part, and also I recommend into thy sauegard my little Daughter Clariet. After
that Huon had made his prayer unto our Lord God, he took his sheeld and his
sword in his hand afoote, and he saw where there grew a bush, he went thither
and set his back thereunto, that the Sarazins and Paynims should not come
behind him, and so he stood at a bay like a wild Boar baited with Hounds,
there was not so hardy a Paynim or Sarazin that durst assail him, they cast at
him spears and darts, but they could never hurt his flesh, he covered himself
so well and so surely with his sheeld, that nothing could pierce him.

The Souldan seeing that nothing could hurt him, he said to his men: Ah ye
false and untrue Cowards, of Mahomet be ye cursed, when ye cannot slay nor
take one man alone, and then the Souldan approached unto Huon, and gave him a
great stroke, so that he brake his sheeld in two pieces, whereof Huon then was
in great fear of death. Then the Souldan drew back, and looked behind him
into the playnes of Rames, whereas the great Battle had been: and then he
saw coming the Admiral of Persia with twenty Thousand men, and they came to
seek for Huon, and when the Souldan saw that succor was coming unto Huon,
the which he knew by reason of the great baner of Persia: then the Souldan said
unto his men. Sirs, let us leave this enemy, who by force of arms cannot be
overcome nor vanquished, let us save our lives, for yonder I see coming the
Admiral of Persia, and if we tarry long here we shall be all slain and
destroyed. Near unto them was the seaside, about a League from Iaffe the way
toward Surrey, there was ready a Galley, the which the Souldan had sent
thither from the City of Escalonne, the Souldan road thither, and his men left
and did forsake Huon, who was right weary and could not long have endured, nor
had not endured so long but for the virtue of the rich stones and pearls
that were about him. The Souldan to save his life, he and his men did so much,
that they came unto the place whereas the Galley was, and entered into it in as
great have as they could by any means for the sauegard of their lives, and
they did forsake their horses upon the Seaside.

Chap. CXXVIII.
How the Admiral of Persia and of Media found Huon, whereas he had fought with
Forty men Sarazins, and how the Souldan fled to Acres, and how the Admiral of
Persia and Media besieged him there, and of the strange Vision that Huon had in
the night.

AFter that the Souldan was thus fled and departed, the Admiral of Persia and
Media came to the place whereas Huon was sore weary of travail, and saw
lying about him a great number of men slain, whereof they had great marvel,
the Admiral seeing Huon alone, began sore to weep for pity and for joy that
he had, and said. Oh right noble and valiant Knight, most excellent of all
other living in the world, to whom in Prowess and valor none can be
compared, you are the mirror of all Knights, the Temple of truth, the comfort
of widows and Orphelings, to whom God has given so great virtue and grace,
that none can report the bounty that is in you, by whom the honor of the
Persians and Medians this day is saved and kept, I desire you right heartily my
dear Friend, to show me if you have any hurt, whereby you should be in any
peril or danger. Sir, (quoth Huon) it appertains not unto me to have such
hie words or praises to be given, I ought to have none other praise but as one
of your other Knights, whereof you have so many noble and valiant that they
cannot be numbered: but Sir, know for troth, this grace and glory comes of
our Lord God, who has aided and succored you, reporting how that you have in
him perfect affiance, and then the Admiral alighted, and came and embraced
Huon, and after him came Barnard, sore weeping for compassion and for joy that
he had found his Coozen Huon in sauegard, and came and kissed him more then ten
times and said. My right dear Lord and Master, well you may thank our Lord
God for his goodness always toward you, who has saved you from so many
perilous and dangerous adventures, whereof I thank our Lord Jesus Christ that
has given you such grace, and then he was of all the Barons greatly feasted,
and they had al great marvel of the perils and adventures that Huon had
escaped: wherefore they said, that they ought greatly to laud and praise God,
in that Huon was arrived in their Country, by whom they were reduced and
brought to believe in the faith of Jesus Christ.

Thus devised the Lords and Barons among themselves, and beheld the dead men
that lay about Huon, and when they had been there for a season, and saw that
the Souldan was fled, then a Horse was brought unto Huon and he mounted
upon him, and then they departed from thence, and came unto the place whereas
the Battle had been, whereas they found threescore and fourteen Thousand
men lie dead upon the earth, beside them that were slain in the flying in
that chase, whereas there were slain twelve Thousand men, besides the
Prisoners: Great goods the Persians and Medians wanne there, the which was
parted and divided to such as it appertained, so that they were all made rich.
Then the Admiral and Huon departed from the playnes of Rames, and then they
went and lodged in the Town, and in the morning they determined to tarry there
three days to refresh them, and upon the fourth day they departed, because it
was showed them how that the Souldan was departed from Sayre, and gone by sea
with a small company to the City of Acres. Then the Admiral and Huon drew
their Host toward Napelous, and there tarried two days, and from thence they
went to Iene, and so to the City of Nazareth, and visited that holy place,
whereas the Angel brought the salutation Angel-like to the Virgin Marie. Then
from thence they went to the Castle of Saffet, and took it with assault, and
slew all them that were within it, except such as would believe in our Lord
Jesus Christ: and then from thence they went and lodged within half a League
of Acres, and there pitched up their Tents and Pauillions, and when they were
all lodged, their Foragers ran abroad, and brought to the Host great plenty
of victuals, often times they skirmished before the City of Acres. But they
could neither find man nor woman that durst issue out to do any deed of
arms, there they lay eight days, and no man did them any damage, for the
Paynims and Sarazins were so afraid for the great loss and damage that they
had suffered, that they durst not stir nor make any semblance. And the
Souldan who was within, wrote Letters into all his Countries, as well into
Arabia, Egypt, Barbary and Europe, as to all other his Friends, that they would
come and succor him at his need, he sent diverse Messengers both by land and
by sea, and also he sent into Antioch and into Damas, and to all other places
whereas he thought to have any aid or succor: and upon a day two Foragers of
the Admirals went forth upon the Seaside, and they found by the way
Trampoiguiffle the Souldans Messenger, they took and brought him into the
Admirals Tent, and there he was examined, and his Letters taken from him, the
which were seen and read before the Admiral and Huon, the which when they
heard it and the contents thereof, thereby they knew somewhat of the Souldans
counsel, then they took the Messenger, and brought him before the City of
Acres, and made there a pair of Gallows, and hanged up the Messenger within
the sight of the Souldan, and of them there within the City.

The same day the Admiral assembled his Lords and Barons in his Tent, and
said unto them. Sirs, all you that be here assembled, know, that I have great
desire to know what thing is best to be done, and how we shall use our selves
in this war that we have begun, you know well that the Victory by the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the hye prowess of Huon we have now
obtained, and have here our enemy enclosed, who cannot fly except it be by
the sea: therefore I desire you all, that every one of you will show your
advise what is best to be done, and that to morrow about this time to give me
an answer. Then all the Lords and Barons advised together, and so among
them was diverse opinions and reasons, howbeit, they departed every man to
their own lodging, because they had day of answer, and the next day
following: thus the day passed without any thing done, and at night every man
went to rest, except such as had the charge of the watch that night, who went
not to bed as is the order and custom of the wars. Huon tarried all that
night in the Admirals Tent, and about the hour of midnight Huon dreamed in his
sleep, and thought that he was at the City of Mayence in prison, and saw the
Emperor of Almaine take Escleremond his Wife out of prison, and she seemed
unto him pale and lean and ill colored, and how she was in her Kirtle, and
her hair hanging about her shoulders, and ten men leading her out of the Town
to be burnt, and he thought that she made pitious complaints for Huon her
Husband, and for Clariet her Daughter. And also he thought that he saw pass
through the streets three Hundred Genlemen, who had been taken at Bourdeaux
when the City was taken, and he thought that he saw diverse Gallows made, and
how the Emperor had sworn to hang them all, so that he thought that he was
right sorrowful and sore grieved in his mind, to see that company led toward
their deaths, for in his sleep he thought verily that all this had been true
and that he could not help it.

Thus as Huon was in this pain sleeping, he gave an horrible cry, so that the
Admiral and Barnard awoake therewith in have, thinkinge it had been their
enemies that had entered to have slain them: then they heard Huon say. Oh good
Lord, I pray thee even for thy Sons sake and by thy pity and grace to succor
and comfort my good Wife, for certainly I cannot tell but my heart thinks,
that the false Emperor will cause her to die and all the other Prisoners. Then
the Admiral and Barnard arose up and came unto Huon, and had well heard his
complaints, and said. Ah Sir, discomfort not your self, nor give no faith nor
credence to dreams, for the Emperor will never do such a villainy, as to put
to death so noble a Lady, it is nothing but your thought and remembrance
that you have daily, the which in the night represents unto you sleeping. Ah
Sir, (quoth Huon) I cannot believe but that my Wife has somewhat to do. Alas
too long have I tarried here, but if your wars were at an end I would gladly
go my way, for I shall never have joy at my heart until I may know the troth.
Then they arose for it was day, and the appointed hour was come that al ye
Lords of the counsel should assemble together in the Admirals Tent, and
every man sat down upon benches well covered with cloth of gold, and other
rich clothes of silk, and when they were there assembled, the Marshall arose
up, for he was a right sage and wise man, and said. Sir Admiral, we have
communed together, and debated the matter at length, and we have had diverse
opinions, but we be all concluded to say nothing, until that Huon who is
there by you has showed first his opinion, what he thinks is best to be
done in this matter, for it is good reason that he be heard to speak first,
and then the Admiral beheld Huon, and said. My dear Friend, you hear what my
Lords and Barons have concluded together, and how they all rest upon you,
that first you shall say your advise: wherefore I require you for the love of
our Lord God, to show me what I ought to do as you think best.

Chap. CXXIX.
How Huon of Bourdeaux counseled the Admiral of Persia, to raise up his siege
before Acres for diverse reasons, and to return into Persia.

WHen Huon had well understood the Admiral, and that he had well heard the
Lords and Barons, that their opinions was that they would not speak until
he had first showed his advise and opinion: then he said unto the Admiral.
Sir, if it be your pleasure, I ought not to begin first this reason, for you
have many Lords that can speak better in this matter then I, but seeing that
it is your pleasure and theirs, I shall show unto you shortly mine advise, and
as I would do if I were as you are. Then Duke Huon of Bourdeaux said: Sir
Admiral of Persia and of Media, it is a long season since you departed from
your Country, Lands and Signiories, and not without great travail and much
pain, and that God has done you that grace, that with one Army all you have
passed and taken Castles, and have slain and destroyed the Countries, and men
of the Souldans of Babylon and of Egypt, and have been at the holy City of
Jerusalem, the which is in the midst of his Country, and after that the
Souldan has fought with you with people innumerable, whom you have discomfited
and slain almost all they that were with him. And also God has given you the
grace, that you are safely escaped with little loss or damage, and now you
have in this City before us besieged and enclosed in, the Souldan your enemy,
who night and day does imagine how he may recover his loss, as you may well
know by his Letters sent by his Messengers, the which you have seen and red
the contents of the same. And Sir, you may well think, that he has sent
diverse other Messengers as well by Land as by Sea to his Friends, to seek for
succor and for aid, in the intention to be revenged of you: wherefore I
counsel you, seeing you are so far off from your Country, as shortly as
you can to depart from hence, and to raise your siege and to return into your
own Country, your men be weary and sore travailed, and the Souldan is in his
own Country, he will always assemble great numbers of people, and always
he may have succor and victuals, the which you cannot do nor have, for here
without great pain you shall have no victual, for the Country is sore fowled
and oppressed, and you can have no succor from any part, wherefore of
necessity you must depart, the which you may do without any loss. For you
may pass the River of Euphrates, before his people be assembled to do you
any damage, and when the spring time of the year comes, if it be your
pleasure, you may return with such number of men as you shall think best, for
you are of puissance so to do. Sir, this that I say, is for nothing that I
would forsake or leave you as long as you be in these parts, I had rather die,
although it be so as you well know, that the thing that I ought most to
desire, is to depart from you and to go into my own Country, whereas I have
left my Wife, my Daughter and my Country in great poverty and danger of
death and destruction.

Chap. CXXX.
How the Admiral of Persia agreed well to the counsel of Duke Huon of
Bourdeaux, and praised his saying: and of the fair offer that the Admiral of
Persia made unto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux.

WHen the Admiral had well heard and understood Huon, he beheld his
Lords, and all weeping said. Sirs, all you that be my men, you have all well
heard Duke Huon, who has showed his advice and opinion: and therefore I
command and desire you all to show me what you think by the saying of Huon:
then they all with one voice said. Sir, a more noble or profitabler counsel
no mortal man can give, for your wealth and suerty of your person and of us
all, there was never man spoke better, and therefore all we pray and counsel
you to uphold the counsel that he has given you. Then the Admiral seeing
that all his Lords and Barons agreed to the counsel that Huon had given him,
he said: Sirs, as for me since yo^ ^re agreed thereunto, I am ready to
believe all good counsel, there was never a higher counsel given unto any
King or Prince, and when the Admiral had said, how that he would believe
the counsel that Huon had given him, he called then Huon unto him, and said.
Sir Duke of Bourdeaux, the pillar, sheeld, and sword of the Christian faith,
and the Defendour of the Persians and Medians, I know well that by right I
ought not to keep you, for it is good reason that you return thither where as
you were borne, and to aid and comfort your true Spouse and Wife, for whom
you be in great discomfort and not without cause, and therefore for the
goodness and honor that we have found in you, we offer to go with you in
our own proper persons, with all our Army and more, to the number
inestimable, and to aid to revenge you of the false Emperor of Almaine, who
has done to you so much ill and damage, or else if you will return unto us
into Persia at this next spring time, we shall deliver unto you such
puissance, and my self to go with them into Almaine, so that the Valleys and
Mountains shall be full of people, and we shall do so much by the grace of
our Lord God, that we shall deliver the Emperor into your hands, to do with
him at your pleasure. When Huon had well heard and understood the Admiral of
Persia and of Media, who offered him so great an offer, he said. Sir, of the
courtes^e and kindness that you offer me, I thank you with all my heart, God
forbid that I should be the causer of destruction of Christian blood, first I
will assay with all sweetness and reasonable offers, as much as in me is
possible to do, to present and offer unto the Emperor, to the intent that I
may attain to his love and to have peace, the which thing I will and desire
to do with all my heart. And if it be so, that he will not incline neither to
right nor reason, then Huon will come to you, and unto all other that I think
or know to be my Friends, and then desire you all of your courtesies for aid
and succor.

Chap. CXXXI.
How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux took his leave of the Admiral and of all the
other Lords of Persia, and went and took shipping at the Port of Thesayre,
and how he arrived at Marsellis, without finding of any strange adventure.

WHen the Admiral had well understood Huon, he said. My right dear and
wel-beloued Friend, I give you good thanks of that you say, you may be sure
that if you have any need, and that you can make no appointment with the
Emperor, the offers that I have made unto you I shall uphold, and succor you
in mine own^ person. Sir, (quoth Huon) I most heartily thank you, for I am much
bound unto you: wherefore I am yours. Then the Admiral took Huon by the
hand, and said. Sir, I see well that we two must part, the which greeneth me
sore, but since it is thus I must suffer it, and I know well that you think
long until you be gone, the service that you have done unto me I cannot
recompense it, for our tw^^ ways are contrary, yours is by water, and mine is
by land. And therefore at the Port of Thesayre there is a rich Ship, the
which was won upon the Souldans men, I give her to you, enter into her at
your pleasure, and therewith I give you ten Summers charged with gould, and
Ten other charged with clothes of gold and silk, and you may take with you
all the French men that be in this host, such as followed us when we departed
from Jerusalem, let them go with you into their Country, and after that you
are departed, I shall raise my siege and return into Persia. Sir, (quoth Huon)
of your gift and of your courtesy I thank you. Then the Admiral sent these
Summers to the Port of Thesayre, and there all the riches were put into the
Ship that were given unto Huon, and then he delivered to Huon to serve him,
all the Pilgrims that were there of France, and the Admiral gave them rich
gifts, whereof they were right joyful, and of the fair adventure that was
fallen unto them, for they had more monney at their departing, then they had
when the came out of their own Country, whereof they thanked the Admiral,
and promised to do true service unto Huon, and not to leave him until he had
achieved all his business.

Then Huon made him ready, and took with him t^^ great Griffens foot, and
the Admiral and his Constables and Marshals and the other Lords of the Host
leapt upon their Horses, and conuayed Huon and his company to the Port of
Thesayre, whereas his ship was ready fournished, with victual and other
things appertaining thereto: then Huon all weeping took his leave of the
Admiral and of the other Lords and Barons, for whose departing they were right
sorrowful, and so returned to their Host before Acres, devising of the great
valor, prowess, and courtes^e that was in Huon. Then the Admiral commanded
privily the next morning to dislodge and depart, the which was done.

Thus the Admiral departed from the City of Acres, and took his way toward
Persia, and he found upon the City of Euphrates all his ships, and so with
them he sailed into his own Country. And Huon and Barnard his Coozen, and
diverse other Knights and Squiers of France, and when they were in their
ship, they weighed up their anchors and made sail. Then they passed the
Gulf of Sathale, and then passed by the Rhodes, and by Sardaine, and so long
they sailed without danger or let, that they came and arrived at the Port of
Marsell^s, and there they went a shore with great joy, and discharged the
ship, and then Huon gave the ship to the Patron that had brought them
thither, whereby the Patron was rich and thanked Huon. When they were all a
land, they conuayed all their baggage into their Lodging in the Town, whereas
they rested about eight days. Now let us leave to speak of Huon and of them
that were with him, and let us speak of the Abbot of Cluny.

Chap. CXXXII.
How the good Abbot of Cluny laid an ambushment of men of arms, between
Mascon and Tournous, against the Emperor of Almaines Nephewe, who was there
slain and all his men, whereof the Emperor was so sore vexed and troubled,
that he took the Duchess Escleremond out of prison to have burnt her, and
the three Hundred Prisoners of Bourdeaux, to have hanged them all.

YE have well heard in this History, how Barnard departed from the Abbey of
Cluny, to go and search for his Nephew Huon, and the Abbot seeinge that he
could hear no news of Huon, nor of Barnard his Coozen who was gone to seek
for him, he was right sorrowful and sore displeased, that he could have none
other knowledge, but the thing that caused him to pass the matter the more
easier, was because of Clariet Huons Daughter, whom he kept, and she was all
his comfort, she was so fair and so sweet, that none were like her in beauty
and in good virtues, and again when he remembered the Duchess her mother
Escleremond, whom he knew was in great poverty and misery, he was therewith
so sore displeased, that all his members trembled. So upon a day it was
reported unto him by a notable man, that as he came from Saint James and by
Bourdeaux, how that a Nephew of the Emperors should go from Bourdeaux to the
City of Mayence, to his Uncle Tirrey the Emperor of Almaine, and how he
should have with him a great number of the Burgesses of the City of Bourdeaux
as Prisoners, because upon a day they spoke of Huon their natural Lord, and
also how that he should carry with him, the Tribute and monney of the Rents and
Revenues of the Country of Burdeloys, and such monney as every man was bound
to pay unto the Emperor.

When the good Abbot of Cluny was advertised of the coming of the Emperors
Nephew, whom he reputed as his enemy, he assembled a great number of noble
men, the most part appertaining unto the Duke of Burgoyne, who as then was
Father to Gerard of Roussellon, being at that time but three years of age, and
when the Abbot had assembled a great number of men, he chose the Lord of
Vergier to be Captain and leader of that company, and then he sent out his
Spies to know certainly which way the Emperors Nephewe should come, and at
the last he had certain knowledge that he was lodged at Mascon, and the next
day he should depart to Tournous, and then the Lord of Vergier and diverse
other, by the commandment of the Abbot of Cluny, went and laid their
ambushment between Mascon and Tournous in a Valley, so that by their Spies who
lay upon a Mountain, they saw the Almaines coming about the number of two
Thousand horses, and the Lord of Vergier had in his company above three
Thousand horses, defencibly apparelled, and they were right joyful when they
heard by their Spies that their enemies were coming: then they apparelled
themselves to abide their enemies, who were come so forward, that they were
past their first ambushment, and were entered into the Valley. When they of the
first ambushment and they of the second ambushment saw their time, they issued
out, and brake upon their enemies, and made a great cry, so that within a
short space their enemies and the most part of them were slain, not one that
escaped, but either he was slain or taken, they could not save themselves,
because upon the one side was the Mountain and upon the other side the River
of Some, and before and behind their enemies were they themselves. The same
time the Emperors Nephewe was slain, who was a goodly Knight, and the
Emperor had before sent him to Bourdeaux, to govern the Land and Country of
Burdeloys, and he had been there the space of four years, of whose death the
Lord of Vergier was sorry, for he had rather that he had been taken Prisoner,
then they took his body and buried him in the chief Church of Tournous,
whereas they lay all night with their Prisoners, who were to the number of
eight Hundred, they of Bourdeaux that were taken as Prisoners were right
joyful, when they were thus escaped from the hands of the Almaines.

After this discomfiture they returned to the Abbey of Cluny, whereas they were
received with great joy of the Abbot and of the Covent, then the Lord of
Vergier showed the whole discourse of their discomfiture, and then the booties
were divided amongst them that had won, and all the men of war departed
except a Thousand men, whom the Abbot retained for the sauegard of the town
of Cluny, who made many skirmishes with the Emperors men. And after this
discomfiture, the news thereof was presently brought to the City of Mayence
to the Emperor Tirrey, who was right sorrowful for the death of his Nephew
who was his sisters son, by reason of the sorrow and great displeasure that
he had, for he was three days after before he would come forth of his
chamber, and on the fourth day he sent for all his Lords and Council, and to
them he made his complaints, how by the occasion of Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, he
had lost four of his Nephews and his Bastard son, and said. I ought greatly
to be grieved, when I cannot be revenged of Huon, I think he shall never
return again, but seeing it is so that I can take no vengeance of him, I
shall take it upon his Wife Escleremond, and upon the three Hundred Prisoners
that I brought out of Bordeaux, but by the same Lord that made and fourmed me
to his semblance, I shall never have joy at my heart nor eat nor drink,
until I have seen Escleremond burnt in a fire, and the three Hundred
prisoners hanged and strangled, and I will that each of you know, that he that
speaks to me first to the contrary, I shall hate him ever after. When the
Lords had well heard the Emperor make that promise, there was none so hardy
that durst speak one word: then the Emperor commanded in have great plenty
of thorns to be carried out of the City, unto a little Mountain there beside,
and there by to be reared up certain Gallows, to hang thereon the three
Hundred Prisoners.

All this was done as he commanded, for more then ten Load of thorns were
carried out to burn the noble Lady Escleremond, and she was sent for out of
the prison by four hangmen, and the Prisoners with her were brought into the
City, and all to be beaten by the way. When the noble Lady saw how she was
dealt withal, she pitiously complained for her good Husband Huon, and for her
Daughter Clariet, and said. Ah my right sweet Lord and Husband Huon, at this
time shall be the departure of us two, and then she called upon our Lord
Jesus Christ, praying him by his grace and pity to bring her soul into
Paradise: thus crying and complaining, the noble Lady was led through the
Town, and then Ladies and Burgesses and Maidens of the City ran to their
windows and doors, and beheld the dolourous and pitiful company leading
toward their deaths: then they said a high. Ah right noble Lady, where is
become the great beauty that you were wont to be of? for now your Visage is
pale and discolored that was wont to be so fair, and now so loathed and
disfigured, where is become your fair hairs that now be so black and
rugged, for the great poverty that you have endured? Alas noble Lady, great
pity and compassion we have to see you in this estate if we could amend it:
thus as this Lady was led through the Town, she was bemoned of them that saw
her, the three Hundred Gentlemen were also led forth, and the Emperor Tirrey
and his Lords road after them, for his desire was to see the noble Lady burnt,
and the other Prisoners hanged: he made have, because of the sorrow that he
had for the death of his Nephewe and of his men, who were newly slain by the
means of the Abbot of Cluny.

When they were issued out of the City of Mayence, Duke Hildebert a near
kinsman of the Emperors, was coming into the City the same time that the
Lady was led forth, and he saw how rudely they dealt with the Lady: and
when he saw her, he knew well that it was the fair Lady Escleremond, but
when he saw her at that point, the water was in his eyes, and he said unto
them that led her. Sirs, go not too fast, until I have spoken with the
Emperor, the which they did gladly. When the noble Lady Escleremond had well
heard and understood the Duke, she had some little hope, she turned her eyes
toward him, and said. Ah right noble Prince, have pity and compassion of
me, for I have done nothing whereby I should deserve to die. When the Duke
had well understood her, he had such pity that he could speak no word, his
heart was so full of sorrow, and then he road as fast as he might to meet with
the Emperor, and passed by the three hundred prisoners, and had great pity and
compassion of them, and so he came unto the Emperor all weeping, and said. Ah
right noble Emperor, I require you in the honor of the passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ, have pity and compassion of this dolourous company, that are
likely to die this day, remember that it is now in the holy time of Lent,
wherefore I require you to respite their lives until it be past Easter, and
Sir, humbly I require you, for all the service that I and mine have done unto
you, grant me but this request for my reward, the which is both reasonable and
just, great wrong you do to revenge your anger upon this noble Lady, you
have chaced her out of her Country, Lands and Signiories, the which you hold
in your hands, and take the Revenues and profits thereof* if you be not
sufficed with this, I doubt that our Lord Jesus Christ will be sore displeased
with you. When the Emperor had well heard the Duke his Cozen, he stood still
and spoke hastily, and said. Fair Coozen, I have well heard you, and therefore
I answer you in brief words, how that if all the men that be in mine
Empire, and all the Priests and Friars were here, and did preach unto me a
whole year, desiring me to respite this Ladies death and the other that be
with her: I would do nothing for all them, and therefore speak no more to me
in that matter, for by the beard that hangs under my chinne, since I cannot
have Huon her husband at my will, I shall never eat nor drink until I have
seen her burnt and the other persons hanged. For when I remember the death of
my Nephews and of my dear Son, the which have been slain by Huon, there is
no member in my body, but that trembles for sorrow and displeasure.

When the good Duke Hildebert understood the Emperor, he had great sorrow at
his heart, and departed without any word speaking and without any leave taking,
but returned from thence, and he became full of ire and displeasure, then the
Emperor Tirrey cried with a hye voice and said, how that he would shortly
dispatch the matter, to see ye Lady burnt, and led to the hill whereas the
fire was ready. When the Lady perceived the place whereas she should die in,
she cast out a great cry, and made a pitiful complaint to our Lord Jesus
Christ, and said. Ah right sweet Lord Jesus Christ, thou know that for the
love of thee I am christened, to believe in thy Laws wherein I will live and
die, and I see well that my days are but short, and thou know well that
there is no cause wherein I have deserved death: therefore I require thee
humbly to have pity and compassion of my Soul, and that thou will vouchsafe
to keep and preserve my Husband Huon, and my Daughter Clariet. Thus as ye
have heard the noble Duchess Escleremond made her complaints, her hands bound
and kneeling upon her knees before the stake, abiding for the hour of her
death. Now let us leave to speak of this noble Lady, until we have occasion
to return again: and speak of the noble King Oberon and of his company.

Chap. CXXXIII.
How King Oberon sent two of his Knights of the Fayrie, that is to say
Mallabron and Gloriand, to deliver the Duchess Escleremond, who should have
been burnt, and the three Hundred Prisoners that should have been hanged, who
were all delivered by the said Knights.

Now shows the History, that the same day that the Duchess the fair Lady
Escleremond should have been burnt, King Oberon of the Fayrie was in his
Pallaice of Momur, whereas he had holden a great Court and a sumptuous, for his
Mother the Lady of the privy Isle was there, and also the noble Queen
Morgue^^ say, and the Damsel Transeline her Niece, with diverse other Ladies of
the Fayrie, and diverse Knighte^ of the same making great joy. King Oberon was
sitting (...) throne, garnished and bordered with fine gould and precious
stones, and as he sat, he fell in a great study, and therewith the drops
of water fell out of his eyes, and he began to weep and complain so sore, as
though he should have been drowned with drops of water: and when these
Queens, Ladies, and Damsels saw him make such sorrow, they had great marvel,
and there was Gloriand the good Knighte of the Frayrie, and Mallabron, who were
right privy and wel-beloued with King Oberon, and when they saw the King make
such sorrow, they were sore dismayed and abashed, and Sir Gloriand said. Sir,
what man is living in this world, that has displeased you or done any thing
against you? Gloriand, (quoth the King) the displeasure that I have is for the
fair Lady Escleremond, wife unto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux my very good Friend,
she is as now led out of the City of Mayence, and brought unto a great fire,
wherein the Emperor Tirrey will burn her, and other three Hundred poor
Prisoners to be hanged, and I may not aid nor succor them, and I am right
sorry thereof for the love of Huon, who is as now passed the Sea, and is in
the way returning home-ward, and he has had such adventures, that there is no
humane body could suffer, nor bear the pains and travails that he has
endured, nor the maruailous adventures that he has borne, and he has had so
many Battles, that it were great marvel and wonderful to hear them
rehearsed. And now whereas he thought to have had rest, and to have found his
Wife the fair Lady Escleremond alive, who shall now be burnt except she be
shortly aided and succored, I am sure that he will die for the sorrow and
grief that he will have at his heart.

When Gloriand and Mallabron had well heard and understood King Oberon, they
kneeled down before the King, and said. Sir, we desire you to succor this
noble Lady, for the love of her good Husband your dear Friend Huon. Gloriand,
(quoth the noble King Oberon) that will I not do, but I am well content, that
hastily you go and deliver the good Lady, and the other Prisoners that be
with her, and say in my behalf to the Emperor Tirrey, that he be not so
hardy as to do any ill to the Lady, or to any of her company, but say that I
will and command, that he respite their lives until the holy Feast of Easter
be passed, and that the Lady and the other Prisoners he cause to be returned
again into the City of Mayence, and that the Lady be set in a Chamber at her
liberty and pleasure, and let her be bathed and washed and new arrayed, and
let her have four noble Ladies to se^ue and accompany her, and that she
have meat and drink as good and as plentiful, as though she were his own
proper Daughter, in like wise let all the other Prisoners be served, and say
that I will and command that he does thus until the time that Easter be
passed, and show him that he be not so hardy to break or trespass against my
commandment. Then Gloriand and Mallabron took leave of the King, and of all
other that were there, and then they wished themselves in the place, whereas
the Lady and the other prisoners were, where the Lady as then was upon her
knees before the fire sore weeping and complaining, and abiding the hour of
her death, the which had been near unto her, if she had not been shortly
succored, for they were about to have bound her to the stake. When Gloriand
and Mallabron came braying in the air like thunder, and they were not seen of
no person but alonely of the Lady, and when they were come and saw the fire a
kindling, they took the ten Villains that would have cast the Lady into
the fire, they took them, and cast them all Ten into the flaming fire, whereas
they were shortly burnt, and beside them there were diverse other burnt, whereof
such as were there had so great fear; that none durst abide there: then the
two Knights came to the Lady and loozed her, and said. Madame be of good
comfort, we are two Knights sent hither from king Oberon, to succor and to
bring you out of the peril and danger that you be in. Sirs, (quoth the Lady)
it is not the first time that the noble King Oberon has succored us both me
and my husband, God of his grace reward him. Madame, (quoth Gloriand) be
merry and make joy, for your good husband Huon is come on this side of the
Sea, whom you shall see within short time. When the good Lady had well
understood Gloriand, she had such joy, that of a great space she could speak
no word she was so ravished, but at last she said. Sir, I ought greatly to
love you for bringing me such tidings: and then they said unto her. Madame,
rest you here a season, until we have delivered the other Prisoners, whom
we see yonder leading toward their deaths, and shortly we shall return again
unto you.

Therewith they departed from the Lady, and left her upon her knees holding up
her hands unto Heaven, and devoutly rendering thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ,
for the succor and aid that he had sent her. Then Gloriand and Mallabron came
to the Gallows, and there vnloozed the three Hundred Prisoners, and s^ew
diverse of them that were sent thither to do execution, whereof all they that
were there present had great marvel, and did wonder thereat, when they saw
their company slain and could not see them that did it, but they thought that
there were a Thousand Knights, by reason of the great brute and noise that the
two Knights of the Fayrie made, whereof they had such fear, that they fled
away and ran to the Emperor, who was sore dismayed and abashed of that
adventure, for it was also showed unto him, that the Lady was rescued, and
they could not tell by whom, but they said that they heard a great brute and
noise: then also the Emperor saw, how the people came running toward him
flying from the Gallows, and they showed to him all that they had seen and
heard, whereof the Emperor and all his Lords had great fear and were sore
abashed. Ah Sir, (quoth the Duke of Austrich) it had been better for you to
have believed Duke Hildebert your Coozen: know surely, that you have greatly
displeased our Lord Jesus Christ, since that you would do such cruel justice
in the holy time of Lent. Thus after these two Knights of the Fayrie had
rescued the good Lady and the other Prisoners, they took them and the Lady
and brought them unto the Emperor, and showed themselves openly, and when they
were in the presence of the Emperor and the Prisoners with them, and the
Emperor saw that there were but two Knights armed upon horseback, he set
little by them, and said. How are you so bold and so hardy, to deliver and to
take out of my men's hands those that are condemned to die by justice? and
besides that you have slain many of my men, and now bring them into my
presence whom I have condemned to die: wherefore I will that you well know,
that before I eat or drink you and all they shall be hanged, and the Lady
Escleremond burned, nor I shall not depart from hence until I have seen you
all dye the death.

Then Gloriand and Mallabron lifted up their visors, and showed their faces,
and they seemed unto all them that saw them, that they never saw before two
so fair Knights in all their lives. Then Gloriand said unto the Emperor:
Sir, of you nor of your threatninges we make thereof but little account: but
Sir, know for troth, that the noble King Oberon commands you by us, in as
much as you fear your life, that you be not so hardy, any further to do any
ill or injury, nor command to be done unto this noble Lady that is here
present, nor to these other Prisoners, until Easter day be past. And also
King Oberon commands you, that you do keep this Lady in your house,
clothed and apparelled, and as well governed, and to be accompanied with
Ladies and Damsels to serve her honorably, as well as if she were your own
proper Daughter, and that in like wise these Prisoners to be newly arrayed and
ordered, as well as other Knights of your house, and Sir, we warn and charge
you, that in this that we have said, that you do not the contrary for any
thing that may fall, for if you do otherwise, there is no mortal man shall
save your life: thus the right noble King Oberon commands you to do, who
is Sovereign Lord and Governor of all the Realm of the Fayrie.

When the Emperor Tirrey had well heard these Knights of the Fayrie thus
speak unto him, and saw how they were armed with their Swords in their
hands, taynted with the blood of his Almaynes, he had great fear and beheld
his Barons, and said. Sirs, I pray you to give me some good counsel in this
serious business, we have well heard much speaking of King Oberon, and of his
great Acts and deeds: wherefore I fear him much, ye may well see what two of
his knights have done, they have rescued them that I have condemned to die, and
slain diverse of my men. Also you hear, what word he sends me by his two
Knights, that I should keep this lady and the other Prisoners honorably, and
that I should not be so hardy, to put them to any danger until Easter be
passed. Then an ancient knight said: Sir, know for troth that King Oberon is
puissant and wise, for there is nothing in the world but that he knows it,
and also as often as he list, he can be whereas he will wish himself, and
with as great number of people as he list: and therefore Sir believe surely,
that if you do otherwise then he has commanded you to do, these two
knights of his that be here present, have puissance sufficient to destroy
you, and King Oberon to sit still at home: therefore Sir mine advise is, that
you answer these two knights, that all that King Oberon has commanded you
to do by them, that you will do it surely: and then all the other Lords gave
the Emperor the same counsel. When the Emperor had well heard and
understood his Lords and Barons, he turned him unto the two Knights of the
Fayrie, and said. Sirs, ye shall salute me to King Oberon and say, that as for
me, I shall do every thing as he has commanded me to do to the best of my
power. Sir Emperor, (quoth Gloriand) if you will do as you say, the king will
take you for his Friend, and therevppon we commend you to God.

Thus the two knights departed, so that the Emperor nor none other person knew
not where they were become, whereof every man had great marvel and were sore
abashed. And thus Gloriand and Mallabron within a while came to the City of
Momur, whereas they found king Oberon, to whom they showed all that they had
done. Well, (quoth king Oberon) as now the Lady Escleremond and the other
Prisoners are at their ease and well served, but before a Month be passed,
they shall dearly ab^y the ease that they be in now, for the Emperor hates
them so sore, because of the malice that he bears unto Huon of Bourdeaux,
that he will set them all again into Prison in great poverty and misery, and
when Easter is passed, he will burn the Lady Escleremond, and hang up all
the Prisoners except they be rescued again. Sir, (quoth Gloriand) I cannot
believe that the Emperor dare do it, or think so to do. Gloriand, (quoth
the noble king Oberon) know surely, that the great hate that is rooted in the
heart of the Emperor, shall constrain and urge him thus to d^e. Now let us
leave speaking of the noble king Oberon, and speak of the Emperor Tirrey.

Chap. CXXXIIII.
How the Emperor Tirrey made the noble Lady Escleremond to be well served and
apparelled, and all the other Prisoners, but about three Weeks after, he made
the noble Lady and the said Prisoners to be put again into prison, whereas
they were in great misery.

Now shows the History, that after the two knights of the Fayrie were
departed, and vanished away out of the presence of the Emperor, and that the
Emperor was returned into the City of Mayence, with the lady Escleremond and
with the other Prisoners, whereof the Burgesses, Ladies, and Damsels of the
city had great joy of their good adventure, and the Emperor had them into his
Pallaice, and delivered unto them Chambers well dressed and hanged as it
appertained thereunto, and the noble Duchess Escleremond had four ladies to
serve her, and she was bathed and washed, and new apparelled, as well and as
richly as though she had been the Emperors own proper Daughter, so that
within a short space she came again to her beauty, and to be as fair and
well favored as ever she was, and in like wise so did all the other Prisoners,
who were kept also in fair and rich Chambers and new apparelled, and had their
ease and pleasures as other knights of the Emperors Court had. But as soon as
three weeks were passed, the great hate that the Emperor had unto the noble
lady and to the other Prisoners, constrained him to take from them the joy and
ease that they were in: and turned the same into pitiful weepinges and great
lamentations. And the Emperor Tirrey swear, that for all king Oberon, or for
any thing that he could do, he would never be in peace in his heart, until
he had set all the company again intd prison, and besides that, he swear that
Easter should not be no sooner past, but that the Lady Escleremond should be
burnt and all the other prisoners hanged, and upon them to take vengeance in
the despite of Huon of Bourdeaux, who had done him so much trouble that he
could not forget it.

Then he commanded to take again the Duchess Escleremond, and to put her
and all the other prisoners into the prison again, the which was done
according to his commandment. Then the Duchess Escleremond and all the other
Prisoners were right sorrowful, and were in great fear, and said each to
other. Alas now our deaths approach, and when that the Lady saw that she was
set again in prison, she began sore to weep and complain for the Duke Huon
her Husband. Too long (quoth she) you tarry, for I see none other way but
that my death approaches, for you shall not come in time, well may I curse the
hour that ever I was borne, for in all my life I have had but sorrow and
heaviness and dolours in supportable, better it had been for me to have been
dead, then to spend my life in this dark Prison, right devoutly she called
upon our Lord Jesus Christ to have pity and compassion of her. Thus was
this noble Duchess set again in prison, and also the three Hundred Prisoners,
whereas they suffered great famine and poverty, for other thing had they not
to live by, but Barley bread and clear water. Now we will leave to speak of
them, and speak of Duke Huon, who was arrived at Marsellis.

Chap. CXXXV.
How Huon departed from Marsellis, and came to his Uncle the good Abbot of
Cluny in habit disguised, and unto him discovered himself, whereof the Abbot
had great joy, and so had Clariet his Daughter.

AS ye have heard here before, how Huon was at Marsellis, and after that he
had iourned there four days, he made him ready to depart, and bought Mules
and horses for himself, and for Barnard and for his company, and then he
charged his Summers, and upon one of them he trussed the Griffens foot, the
which was great and horrible, and covered it because every man should not see
it. When he was ready and every thing trussed, he departed from Marsellis,
and road so by his iourneys, that he passed by Prouence, and came unto
Masconoys, and upon a Thursday at night he arrived at the Town of Tournous.
And when they had supped, he called Barnard his Coozen, and said. Coozen, I
pray you to stay here, for I will go to see mine Uncle the good Abbot of
Cluny, and Clariet my Daughter, whom I sore desire to see, and shortly I shall
return again unto you, I will go privily disguised, to the intent that I
will not be known. Sir, (quoth Barnard) seeing that it is your pleasure, we
must be content. Then they went to bed, and in the Morning Huon arose up, and
apparelled himself like a Pilgrim, with a staff in his hand and a bag about
his neck, and with great boots upon his Legs, he had a great beard and
long hair: wherefore he seemed well a Pilgrim that came out from a far
Country, and so he had done indeed.

When Barnard, and his company saw him so apparelled, they laughed and said.
Sir, it appears well by your manners, that you are escaped out of some good
place, it seems to us, that if you will shake your staff, you will make the
money to avoid out of men's purses, you are so bold a beggar. When Huon heard
them, he laughed, and took leave of them, and departed all alone with his
bag about his neck, so afoote he went until he came unto Cluny, and then
he came unto the Abbey gate, and called the Porter unto him, and said. Friend,
I pray you to let me enter, then he opened the wicket and beheld Huon, who
seemed to him to be a tal and a goodly man, and said. Pilgrim, enter when you
please. Then Huon entered in at the wicket, and said unto the Porter. Freende,
I come straight from beyond the great Sea, and have kissed the holy Sepulcher,
and have suffered much pain and poverty, and because before this time I have
been here with the Abbot of this place, therefore I thought that I would not
pass by without speaking with him, I pray you to show me that courtesy,
that I may speak with him, for he will soon know me. Sir, (quoth the
Porter) it seems unto me by your manners, that you seem to be a man of a
good place: therefore I give you leave to go into the house at your pleasure,
and you shall find our good Abbot in his Hall, whereas he is communing with
his Brethren, certainly, I know well that you shall be welcome unto him, if
he have of you any knowledge, for a more noble man, courteous, and liberal
you shall not find upon this side of the Sea. Friend, (quoth Huon) your
courtesy may avail you.

Then Huon went into the Hall, whereas he found the Abbot with his Brethren,
and then he saluted the Abbot and all his Covent. Friend, (quoth the Abbot)
you are welcome, I pray you to show me from whence you come? Sir, (quoth
Huon) I shall show you the troth, I come now from beyond the Sea, from the holy
City of Jerusalem, whereas I have kissed the holy Sepulcher, and where our Lord
Jesus Christ was quick and dead, I have been in those parts more then Seven
years, and the cause why I am come hither to see you is this, I found there a
young Knight of mine age, named Huon of Bourdeaux, and he said that he is your
Nephew, and when he saw that I would depart from thence to come into his
Country, he humbly prayed me to recommend him unto you: and therefore I am
come unto you to do his message, for he and I has been together in diverse
Battles, and great amity have been between us. When the good Abbot had well
heard and understood the Pilgrim, many tears fell from his eyes and trickled
down his cheeks, when he heard his Nephew Huon named, and said. Freende, I
pray you (if it be true as you say) to show me the troth if you have seen my
Nephew Huon, for it is he that I love best in all this world, and desire most
to see him, and I pray you to show unto me what is his mind, either to
return hither or else to abide there still? I would to God that I were in debt
to pay a thousand Marks of gould, so that he were as now here in this Hall.
Sir, (quoth Huon) your Nephew whom you desire so much to see, before a Month
be past he will (by the grace of God) be here with you, and Sir, he showed
me at my departing from him, that he has a Daughter whom you have nourished
and brought up, and he charged me greatly that I should desire of you to see
her before I departed from you, he knows not whether she be alive or dead, I
would gladly see her if it were your pleasure. Friend, (quoth the Abbot) right
gladly you shall see her, I shall cause her to come hither, and then you may
see her at your ease, and I dare well say unto you, that in all the world you
shall find no fairer nor a sweeter creature, nor more wiser of her age nor
better learned, and yet she is but Ten years of age.

When Huon understood the Abbot, you may well know that he had great joy at
his heart privily, and thanked our Lord Jesus Christ. Then the Abbot called
unto him a right notable Knight named Sir Emerie, and commanded him to go and
fetch thither his Niece Clariet, the Knight went into the chamber, whereas the
fair Lady was with other four noble Ladies, who had brought her up: then Sir
Emerie saluted the Lady and the other that were with her. When the young Lady
perceived Sir Emerie, she arose up and rendered to him his salutation, and right
humbly saying. Sir Knight I am joyful of your commig, I pray you to show me
of your news and tidinges. Certainly fair Lady, (quoth the Knight) hither is
come a Pilgrim, who is come from beyond the Sea, and he has showed unto the
Abbot your Uncle tidinges of your Father Duke Huon: therefore your Uncle
desires you to come and speak with him. When the Lady heard speaking of her
Father, with all her heart she desired to know some certain tidinges, and
then she and her Damsels departed out of the Chamber, and came into the Hall
to the Abbot her Uncle, accompanied with two notable Knights, then she
entered into the Hall richly apparelled, no man could describe her beauty, for
she was so well fourmed, that nature her self could not amend her, her skin
was as white as the flower in the meadowe, and colored like the red Rose, her
haunches low, and her pappes somewhat rising, her throat smooth and clear,
her chinne vaunted, her mouth as vermeill as a Rose, her teeth small and well
ranged and white, her face white and well colored mingled white and red, her
eyes smiling, her cheer amourous to behoulde, her nose straight, her forehead
white, her hair yellowe, and her ears gentle and close, I cannot devise the
tenth part of her excellent beauty, none could regard her nor look upon her
but that praised and loved her, all her beauty and sweet demeanor, and great
humility that was in her, if I should here describe it, it would be
ouer-long to rehearse.

When Huon had well seen his Daughter Clariet who was so fair, he gladly
beheld her without making of any knowledge. Then the Abbot took his Niece by
the hand, and led her unto Huon, and said. Pilgrim, how say you by her, she
has not been sore travailed nor much come in the Sun, I have kept her a
long time, and if she be garnished with beauty, in like wise so she is with
wit and bounty, she is Daughter unto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, the man that I
most love in this world, I would to God that I did see him as I do you now,
but if God send me life and health, this Lady shall be richly married, I will
give her goods that she shall be rich and puissant. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray to
our Lord Jesus Christ to give her good fortune, and that she may be so
married, that her blood thereby may be lifted up and exalted: then the fair
Lady Clariet said unto Huon. Sir Pilgrim, I pray you to show me, if you know
any tidings of my Father Duke Huon of Bourdeaux. Fair Lady, (quoth Huon) he
and I together have been a long time beyond the Sea, and Companions together,
and we sought the Souldan of Babylon that now is, it is not he that was set
there by Huon, after that he had slain the great Admiral Gaudise, it is
another, who since that time conquered both the City and the Country of
Egypt, many adventures Huon and I have suffered, but at the end we discomfited
the Souldan, and his men are slain and destroyed. Pilgrim, (quoth the fair
Lady Clariet) I require you to show me if you know, whether my dear Father
will return hither again or no? the which is the thing in the world that I
most desire? Fair Lady, (quoth he) I answer you, that before two Months
be passed, you shall see him here in good health. I pray unto our Lord God
(quoth the Lady) that it may be so, that he may deliver my Mother out of the
prison, whereas she is in great poverty and misery.

When Huon had well heard and understood his Daughter, he would no longer hide
himself, but said. My right dear Daughter, before August be passed, I shall
deliver her or die in the pain, for I shall make such war against the
Emperor Tirrey, that yet before I die I shall strike off his head from his
body, whatsoever fall thereof. When the Lady heard Huon, how he said that he
was her Father, she changed color, and blushed as ruddie as a Rose, and
thought to her self by the words that he spoke, that he was her Father,
whereof she was right joyful, and said. Ah Sir, I pray you if you be Duke
Huon of Bourdeaux my Father, to show me. My right dear Daughter, believe it
surely, for I will no longer hide it from you. When the Lady heard that he was
her Father, she clipped him and Twenty times kissed him. Then the Abbot came
and embraced him and said. My right dear Nephewe, the joy that my heart has
of your coming, is to me so acceptable, that I cannot tell whether I dream
or not that I see you here, and then again he embraced him, making the
greatest joy in the world. Also there was Clariet his Daughter, who embraced
and kissed him: then all that were in the house came thither to make great
cheer and feasting. Fair Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) I am sore abashed that
you be returned with so small a company. Good Uncle, (quoth Huon) it could be
none otherwise, I have had such fortunes upon the Sea, that the most part of
my men are dead and perished, and some by malady, and some are returned into
their own Countries, and especially they that went with me are abiding at the
Rock of the Adamant, and there all be dead by famine, and they that were my
Guides to have brought me unto Euphame, are in like wise dead there.

Then Duke Huon began to show unto the Abbot all the adventures that he had,
since he departed from the noble City of Bourdeaux, there were some that heard
it, that took it for a mock and a lie, he showed of so many great maruailes,
they thought that the most part of them were lies, and one said to another:
Great advantage have these Vagabounds to lie, because they find no man to say
them nay, and if any man say nay, their answer is ready to say, go and see:
then the good Abbot said. Fair Nephew, if I were of the age to bear armor,
gladly I would go with you to aid you to destroy this Emperor, who has done
you so much ill, I shall send for such a number of men of war, and pay them
with my Treasure, the which I have long time gathered together, and shall aid
you to make such war, that it shall always be had in remembrance, or else I
would die in the pain and all they that should go with me, and to cause him
to make you amends, of all the ils and damages that he has done unto you, yet
somewhat I have done already, for it is not long since, that one of the
Emperors Nephews were slain by my men, and all they that were with him
slain or taken, for Nephewe, I have gathered together a great Treasure, that I
may therewith entertain a hundred Thousand men for two years, without selling
or laying to pledge any foot of Land appertaining to my Church, but as now I
am so old that I cannot ride out, for I am a hundred and fourteen years of
age: and therefore seeing that I cannot go with you, I shall abandon unto you
all my Treasure, and take thereof as much as it shall please you. Sir, (quoth
Huon) you make me so great an offer, that once before I die, I trust to render
unto you the double value, by the grace of God.

Chap. CXXXVI.
How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux showed to his Uncle the Abbot of Cluny, all the
adventures that he had, since he departed from the noble City of Bourdeaux:
and how he gave the Abbot the Apple of youth, whereby the good Abbot became
again to his beauty, that he had when he was but of Thirty years of age.

WHen Duke Huon of Bourdeaux had well understood the good Abbot his Uncle, and
saw the fair offer and service that he had offered unto him, he said. Sir,
of your courtesy and Larges, and all the good that you have done unto me and
to my Daughter Clariet, God reward you for it: true it is, after that I had
fought with the Griffens, I came unto a fair Fountain, and there by was a
Tree growing charged full of fair fruit, the Tree was called the Tree of
youth, of the which I gathered three Apples, whereof you shall have one and
shall eat it, and as soon as you have eaten thereof, thereby you shall become
as young and as strong and lusty, as you were when you were of the age of
Thirty years. Then there was a Monk in the house, called Dan Johan Saliuet,
who began to laugh, and hasted him to speak and said. Ah Sir, what is it
that you say, these two Thousand years there was never man at the Tree of
youth, therefore this tale is not to be believed, and when Huon heard the
Monk, he waxed red for anger, and lifted up his staff, and would have stricken
therewith the Monk, and if he had not skipt back, and said. Ah thou false
Monk, thou lie falsely, I have been there, and that thou shall see the
proof thereof, whether I say true or not. Then the Abbot came betwe^ne them
and stopped the stroke, and said unto Huon. (...) ^ight dear Nephewe, appease
your self, and then he said to the Monk. Ah thou rude Groom, by the faith
that I owe unto my Lord Saint Bennet, for thy words thou shall be sore
punished, then he caused the Monk to be set in prison, and then the Abbot said
unto Huon. Sir, I pray you to be no longer displeased. Then Huon took one of
his Apples, and gave it to his good Uncle the Abbot, and said. Sir, take this
Apple, the which I gathered of the Tree of youth, I gathered thereof three, and
one I gave to the Admiral of Persia, and another I kept for my self, the
which I give you, and I would have gathered more, but I was forbidden by an
Angel sent from our Lord Jesus Christ: and Sir, know for troth, that the
Admiral of Persia before I gave him the Apple, he was of the age of Six-score
years and more, but as soon as he had eaten thereof, he became as fair and
as strong, as when he was of Thirty years of age, and he is as now one of
the fairest Princes in the world. By the which Miracle, he and all his people
of his Realm did forsake the false and detestable Law of Mahomet, and took
upon them the belief of our Lord Jesus Christ, and were christened, and they
that would not were hewn all to pieces, and after that for the love that he
bare unto me, he passed the Sea with me with great puissance, and we entered
into the Souldans Land, whereas we discomfited him in plain Battle.

When the good Abbot had well heard and understood his Nephew, he had great
joy, and took the Apple, and made thereon the sign of the Cross, and did eat
it up every whit, whereby incontinent in the sight of all them that were there
present, he became into his first youth, as he was when he was but of the age
of Thirty years, his white beard fell away and a new beard came, his jaws
that were lean and pale, the flesh grew again new quick flesh, so that he
became a fair young man, and well fournished of body and members, a fairer
man could no man see, nor lighter, nor lustier, whereof he had such joy at his
heart, that he ran and embraced Huon, and kissed him more then Ten times.
When they that were there present saw that great marvel, they were greatly
abashed, and said one to another, that Huon was worthy to be believed, for out
of such a Princes mouth (quoth they) never issued a lie, there was much joy
made, the Tables were set and they went to dinner, there satte the Abbot and
Huon and Clariet his Daughter: Of their Service and meats I will make no
rehearsal, for they were richly served. After that they had dyned and grace
said, all the Monks of the Covent came and kneeled down before Huon, and
humbly required him of pardon for Damp Johan Saliuer, who was too hasty to
speak, and all was through negligence of youth and ill advised. When Duke Huon
saw all the Monks before him upon their knees, desiring him to pardon the
Monk of his folly, he said unto them. Sirs, I am content to fulfill your
desires, for I am not come hither to trouble any man. When the good Abbot had
well heard Huon his Nephew pardon his Monk, he thanked him and said. Sir, by
Saint Bennet, if you had not pardoned him, he should not have come out of
prison this year. Then the Monks went to the Prison, and they showed unto the
Monk that was in prison, what maruailes were done in his absence, and how
their Abbot who was a Hundred and fourteen years of age, was now become of
the age of Thirty years. Sirs, (quoth he) I am glad of my deliverance, but I
cannot believe that it is so as you say, nor I will not believe it until I see
it: then he went into the Hall, whereas the Abbot and Huon were together, and
when he saw the good Abbot young again, then he kneeled down and cried
Huon mercy, and ^equired him of pardon, the which Huon granted.

Then there was great joy, and the Abbot said. Nephewe, send for men of war
on all sides, and I shall pay their wages to the number of twenty Thousand
men, for I have gould and silver enough, and let us send for all our Friends,
and we shall be a great number of men able to fight with the Emperor, who
has wrongfully and without cause disenherited you, and keeps your Wife in
prison, whereof my heart is so sorrowful that I can no longer endure it. Sir,
(quoth Huon) if I can find any other way to come to peace with the Emperor,
then my Spear and sheeld and no man slain, I would think then that I had
well sped, for if I might do so much with the Emperor, that he would render
unto me my Lands and Signiories, and my Wife and men, and that thereby I might
become his Liege-man, I would then think that I had made an honorable end,
for I have done him great damage. Fair Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) I would
feign know by what manner you could bring this matter about. Uncle, (quoth
Huon) this night I will study upon the matter, the which I trust in our Lord
Jesus Christ to bring to a good and prosperous end.

Chap. CXXXVII.
How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Cluny, and went to the noble City of
Mayence upon a Friday: and how he came nere unto the Emperors Oratorie.

After that Huon and the good Abbot had devised together of diverse things, Huon
wrote a Letter unto his men being at Tournous, that they should come unto him
to the Abbey of Cluny, he sent a Gentleman of the Abbey to fetch them, and
when he was come to Tournous, and had delivered his Letters unto Barnard, they
made them ready, and trussed their Summers and departed from thence, and they
road so long, that they came in at the gates of the Abbey of Cluny, the same
time Huon and the Abbot were leaning out at a window, the Abbot saw fifteen
Summers charged, and seven Mules and Mulets, whereof he had great marvel of
whence they were, and said to Huon. Fair Nephew, can you tell unto whom
appertain these Summers, or what be they that brings them? Sir, (quoth Huon)
know for troth that I have conquered them, and they are mine, and yonder is
Barnard that does conduct them, who has had much pain and trouble before he
could find me. Fair Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) great joy I have at my heart,
that he has sought you so long to find you at the last, nor I could not have
sent a more noble man, you ought greatly to love him, and also he is our
Kinsman, and always he has been unto you true and faithful. Sir, in him I
have found all that you say: and Sir, the great Somer that you see yonder with
two great Coffers well banded, they be full of precious stones, and Jewels
more worth then four good Cities, I will leave them here with you to keep
for the marriage of my Daughter, and with those words he kissed her. Dear
Nephew, (quoth the good Abbot) and besides that you will give her, I shall
depart with her largely of my Treasure.

Therewith Barnard came thither and all the other of his company, and when the
Abbot perceived Barnard, he came unto him right joyfully with his arms abroad
and clipped and kissed him, and made unto him great feast and cheer and to all
his company. Then Duke Huon and the good Abbot his Uncle, and the fair Lady
Clariet his Daughter, went into their Chamber and discharged the Summers, and
opened every Coffer. When the Abbot had seen the riches that were in them, he
was never so abashed and said. Ah Duke Huon fair Nephewe, I think you have
brought hither riches to buy therewith the whole Realm of France. Then Duke
Huon took a Collar of gould full of precious stones, that the clearness of
them illumined all the house, and Huon did put the Collar about his Daughters
neck, and kissed her mouth and said. My dear and loving Daughter, I give you
this Collar, I never gave you any thing before, it is so rich that the stones
therein are worth a Realm or a Duchy. When the Lady saw the rich Collar,
she was right joyful, and kneeled down before her Father, and humbly thanked
him: then Huon showed all his Treasure unto his good Uncle the Abbot, and when
all had been seen and viewed, the Abbot did put them into the Coffers. Then
Huon apparelled himself with rich apparel, and he seemed then to be a Prince
of high degree, he was so fair to behold, that all such as saw him had great
pleasure to behold him, there he made good cheer and feasting for the space
of right days, and upon the ninth day in the Morning, he departed from thence
privily, and took Barnard with him without the knowledge of any person except
the Abbot, unto whom he said. Fair Uncle, I and Barnard will depart, and I
require you to let no man living know of my departing, as long as you can keep
it secret, until you do here from me some tidings. Sir, it shall be done,
(quoth the Abbot) and I commend you to the sauegard of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and I beseech him humbly that you may have peace with the Emperor Tirrey.

Then Huon and Barnard departed before any man were rising, and they took
their way toward the City of Mayence, and rested not until they came to
Coleyne, and the next Morning they road until they came within a League of the
City of Mayence, and then they entered into a wood, and there they alighted.
Then Huon apparelled himself like a Pilgrim in habit hose and shoes, and he
took a herb and rubbed therewith his Visage, in such sort, that he seemed
that he had been in the Sun Ten years, so that he was unknown, and
Barnard that was with him could not know him by the face, and then Barnard
laughed: then he took his staff and scrippe, and said unto Barnard. Sir, go
your way before into the City with our horses, and take none acquaintance of
me though you see me, and take up some small lodging, so Barnard went on
before, and Huon fair and easily went after him, and so entered into the City,
and he had with him the Thirty rich stones in his bosom. When he was entered
into the City, he rested not until he came to the Pallaice, and as he went
up the stayres, he met the Steward of the Emperors house, unto whom he said.
Sir, I pray you in the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ to give me some meat,
for I am so hungry that I can scarce go upon my Legs, nor I have no monney
to buy me one morsel of bread. When the Steward had well heard and understood
the Pilgrim, he beheld him well, and saw how his staff shaked in his hand,
the which he thought had been with feebleness and poverty, and had of him
great pity and compassion, and demanded of him from whence he came? Sir,
(quoth Huon) I come straight from the holy Sepulcher, and I have endured much
poverty and misery. Friend, (quoth the Steward) I pray you to tarry for me
here a little season, until I have been in the Prison to carry meat unto the
Duchess Escleremond, and to the other Prisoners, who cry out through famine
and rage that they be in, for if they be long in this case that they be in
now, they cannot endure it, for the Emperor has taken such an inward hate
against her, and against them that are in prison with her, that he has made
promise, that as soon as Easter is passed the Lady shall be burnt, and the
other Prisoners al hanged, and this day is Shroue Thursday, so that they have
to live but five days, and I am right sorry for the noble Lady, that our
Emperor will put her to death without a just cause.

When Huon had well heard that, he had no member nor joint but that
trembled, and he cast down his Visage, and began pitifully to weep, and
suffered the Steward to pass and spoke no word unto him, but returned into
the Town, and went and lodged in the Town right heavy and sorrowful:
howbeit, he was right joyful, in that his Wife was alive, for he greatly
feared that she had been dead. He lodged in a notable Burgesses house, who
received him well for the love of God, but whatsoever he had there he could
neither eat nor drink, for the sorrow and grief that he had at his heart:
then he said unto his Host. Sir, to Morrow is good Friday, the which day I
think the Emperor will give great Alms. Friend, (quoth his Host) you may
surely believe, that the Emperor will give as to morrow great Alms, he will
give of his goods so largely unto all poor men, that if they come unto him
that day they shall be all satisfied, you shall not find a Prince that does
give greater Alms, and of one thing I advertise you: the Emperor has one
custom, that the first poor Pilgrim that comes unto him to morrow shall be
happy, for there is nothing in the world be it never so dear, but if he
demand it of the Emperor, it shall not be denied him, it must be at the
same hour and time that the Emperor goes unto his Chapel to say his
Orisons. When Huon had well understood his Host, he began to rejoice, and
thought within himself, that if he could in any wise, he would be the first
that should demand Alms of the Emperor, but that should be neither gold nor
silver, it should be his Wife and his men that he has in Prison: and also if
he may he will ask therewith his Lands and Signiories.

Then the Host went to his rest, and Huon abode in his Chamber alone, and slept
not of all the night, but thought how he might deliver his Wife, and the other
Prisoners that were with her, and all the night he was at his prayers, humbly
desiring our Lord God to counsel and to aid him to recover his good Wife
Escleremond. Early in the Morning he arose and made him ready, and took his
scrippe and staff, and went straight to the Pallaice, and sat down upon the
greeces whereas the Emperor should pass: at which time the Emperor was new
risen, and there were many other Pilgrims that were there abiding for the
Emperors coming, and every man coueted to have the first gift, but Huon did
so much by his subtlety, that he was the first that entered into the Chapel,
and none other perceived him, and he did hide himself closely in a corner
near unto the Emperors Oratorie, and there he sat still without any word
speaking, abiding there for the coming of the Emperor.

Chap. CXXXVIII.
How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux did so much with the Emperor Tirrey, that he had
peace with him, and his Wife rendered unto him, and all his Lands and
Signiories: and how the Emperor brought him unto the Abbey of Cluny, whereas
they found the good Abbot in armor, not knowing any thing of the Peace that
was made.

Now shows the History, that anon after that Huon was entered into the
Chapel, the Emperor came in and kneeled down before the Altar, and made
his prayers, and many poor men were there abiding the end of his prayers, and
no man saw Huon whereas he was hidden closely in a corner hard by the
Emperors Oratorie. When the Emperor had made his prayers, he arose and
turned him to have gone into his Oratorie, and Huon who had great desire to be
the first, and to have the first gift of the Emperor, he drew out of his
bag a rich stone, the which was of such virtue, that whosoever did bear it
about him could not be overcome with his enemy, nor could not be drowned nor
burnt, the stone had such great virtue, that none could esteem the value
thereof: and besides that it cast such clearness in the Chapel, that the
Emperor was abashed thereat, nor he knew not from whence that light should
come. Then he beheld Huon, and Huon did hold the stone in his hand, and
showed it unto the Emperor: and when the Emperor saw the rich stone, he
greatly desired to have it, and advanced himself, and took it out of the
Pilgrims hand, who presented it unto him. When the Emperor had the stone in
his hand, he had great joy at his heart, for he was cunning in the descrying of
stones, and swear to himself, that the Pilgrim should never have it again for
any thing that he could do, but he thought within himself that if he would
sell it, he would give him as much gould and silver as he could reasonably
demand, or else he thought to keep it still whatsoever fell thereof: and then
the Emperor said unto Huon. Pilgrim, I pray thee to show unto me where thou
have gotten this rich and bountiful stone? Sir, (quoth Huon) I have brought it
from beyond the Sea. Friend, (quoth the Emperor) will thou sell it, and I
shall give thee for it whatsoever thou will have? and to be in the more
suertie to bear away my gift that I will give thee for it, I shall cause thee
to be conducted into thine own Country wheresoever it be. Sir, (quoth Huon)
I will give it unto you with a good heart, so that it be true that mine Host
has showed unto me this day, for he has showed unto me that your custom is,
that the first person Pilgrim that comes unto you upon this day being good
Friday, should have of you a gift such as he would demand, after that you
have made your prayers to our Lord God. Pilgrim, (quoth the Emperor) he that
showed thee that, said that which is true: and therefore whatsoever thou
demaundest, either Borough, Town or City, or what thing soever it be, I
promise faithfully to give thee, whosoever be displeased therewith I grant it
to thee, therefore demand whatsoever thou will.

Sir, (quoth Huon) of your grace and fair gift, I most heartily thank you:
therefore Sir, with a good heart I give you that stone, the which I delivered
unto you but even now, in the recompense of the courtesy and gift that you
have granted unto me, the which shall be neither gould nor silver: and Sir,
because I know certainly, that the renown is over all the world, that you are
a just and a true noble man, and that which you promise you will uphold and
keep, and never swerve from your promise, and because that I know surely, that
the promise that you have made unto me you will uphold, of whatsoever gift I
desire to have. Friend, (quoth the Emperor) I will that you well know, that
if you demand four of my best Cities, I shall give you them, seeing I have
made that promise, and if God be pleased I shall not go from my promise, for
I had rather that one of my hands were cut off, then I should be found false
in my words: and therefore demand, and surely you shall have your demand
without any denial. Sir, (quoth Huon) I heartily thank you, and would have
kissed his feet, but the Emperor would not suffer him but took him up. Sir,
(quoth Huon) first, and before all other things I desire of you pardon, of all
the ill deeds and trespasses that I or my men have done against you, and if
you have in your Prison either men or women appertaining unto me, or of my
lineage, that you will deliver them all unto me: and also if you have any
thing of mine, either Town or City, Borough or Castle, I require you by the
promise that you have made unto me, to render them unto me quite: Sir, any
other thing I demand not. Pilgrim, (quoth the Emperor) make no doubt to have
that which I have promised unto you: therefore I grant all your desire, but I
require you humbly to show unto me what man you be, and of what Country, and
of what Lineage, seeing you have desired of me such a gift? Sir, (quoth Huon)
I am he that sometime was Duke of Bourdeaux, whom you have so much hated, I
come now from beyond the Sea, whereas I have endured much pain and poverty, I
thank our Lord Jesus Christ that I have done so much, that I am now agreed
with you, and I shall have again the Duchess Escleremond my loving Wife, and
my men, and my Lands and Signiories, if you will be as good as your word, and
uphold your promise.

When the Emperor had well heard and understood Huon, all his blood began to
change, and he was a great space before he spoke any word, he was so sore
abashed, but at the last he said. Ah Huon, are you he by whom I have
suffered so many illes and damages, and have slain so many of my Nephews and
other of my men? I would not have thought that you would have been so hardy,
to have showed your self before me, nor to have come into my presence, you
have well overcome me and enchaunted me, I had rather have lost four of my
best Cities, yea* and all my Country burnt and destroyed, and my self
banished out of mine own Country for three years, rather then you should
have thus come to my presence: but seeing that it is thus, know for troth,
that which I have promised unto you I shall uphold and keep, and from
henceforth in the honor of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of this
good day, upon the which he was crucified and put to death, I pardon you all
mine ill will and good will, I shall not be perjured, your Wife, your Lands
and Signiories, and your men, I shall render them into your hands, speak
thereof who list, otherwise it shall not be, nor I will never do the
contrary. Then Huon kneeled down before the Emperor, and right humbly
thanked him, and desired him to forgive him all his trespasses. Huon, (quoth
the Emperor) God forgive thee, and as for me, with a good heart I do pardon
you. Then the Emperor took Huon by the hand, and took him up and kissed him
very kindlye, in token of good peace and amity. Sir, (quoth Huon) great grace
have I found in you seeing you keep and uphold your promise: but Sir, if it
please our Lord God, your guerdon shall be double. Huon, (quoth the Emperor) I
require you to show me of your news and adventures that you have had since you
departed from the City of Bourdeaux. Sir, (quoth Huon) with a good will after
that your divine Service is done, and the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ
read. Huon, (quoth the Emperor) I give you good thanks for that you say. Then
the Emperor took Huon by the hand, and led him into his Oratorie with him,
whereas they heard the divine Service, whereof many Knights and Lords were
sore abashed, and had great marvel what Pilgrim it was that the Emperor did
so much honor unto. After that the divine Service was done, the Emperor
returned into his Pallaice holding Huon by the hand, and dinner was made
radie, and they washed their hands and sat down to dinner: and when dinner
was done, and the Tables taken up, then in the Emperors presence, and of all
the other Lords there, Huon showed all his adventures.

First, he showed how he had passed the Gulf and spoken with Judas: and
afterward how by fortune of the Sea he arrived at the Castle of the Adamant,
and how his Company dyed there by famine: and declared the beauty of the
Castle, and of the great riches therein: and afterward how he was carried from
thence by a Griffen to a great Rock, and how he slew five young Griffens, and
the old Griffen that brought him thither, whereof he has left at Cluny the
foot of the same: then he showed of the Fountain, and of the Tree of youth,
and how he gathered thereof three fair Apples, and more he would have
gathered, but that our Lord God commanded him by his Angel, that he should
not be so hardy as to gather any more. And after that he showed, how that he
passed the Gulf of Persia in ^reat perrill and danger, and said furthermore.
Sir, when I was passed that Gulf, I gathered many precious stones, that which
I have given you was one of them, the which stone is of great virtue: and then
I came to the great City of Thauris in Persia, whereas I found a noble
Admiral an old ancient Knight, and he showed to me great courtesies, and I
gave him one of mine Apples to eat, and as soon as he had eaten thereof, he
became to be as young as he was when he was but of Thirty years of age, and I
think that from thence hither cannot be found a fairer Prince, and he was
before of Six-score and Seven years of age: and Sir, because I desire with
all my heart to have your good grace, and that good peace and firm may be had
between you and me, I will give you the third Apple, the which I kept for my
self, by the which if you do eat it, you shall become again as young and as
lusty and as strong, as you were when you were but of the age of Thirty
years.

The Emperor, when he heard that the Apple that Huon would give him to eat,
should cause him to return to his young age again, he was so joyful, that
he never made such cheer before in all his life to any man as he did then
unto Huon, and said, how that he would be his Friend for ever, and never
fail him, and said. Friend, I abandon my body and goods at your pleasure, and
I give you two good Cities to increase your Signiorie, and besides that I
promise you, if you have any business to do, I shall succor you with forty
Thousand men, and shall aid you as the Father should do the Son. Therewith
Huon would have kneeled down to have thanked the Emperor, but he would not
suffer him: and then Huon took the Apple out of his bag, and delivered it
unto the Emperor, the Emperor who was sore desirous to know if he should
wax young again, by reason of eating of the Apple, he called unto him his
Lords and Barons, to the intent that they should see that marvel, and when
the Emperor had the Apple in his hand, he put it into his mouth, and did eat
it every whit, and as he was eating thereof, his age changed into youth, and
by that time he had eaten all the Apple, his white beard fell off, and the
skin changed like a man of Thirty years of age, and also his face and all
his body that before was all wrinkled and rugged and pale, became then as
white and as ruddy, and felt himself as light and as fresh, and a^ quick to
do any thing and as strong, as he was when he was of the age of Thirty
years, whereof all that were there present had great marvel, and were right
joyful of that adventure, that was fallen unto the Emperor whom they loved,
then they said. Sir, such a gift was never given to any Emperor or King, well
you ought to praise our Lord God, whatsoever loss you have had or received,
that ever you were acquainted with Duke Huon.

Chap. CXXXIX.
How the Emperor made good cheer unto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux.

WHen the Emperor saw himself wax young again, he was so joyful that he
wist not what to do, then he clipped and kissed Huon more then Ten times,
saying. My right dear Friend, I pray you to forgive me all the illes and
damages that I have done unto you, and for the pain and sorrow that I have
caused your noble Wife and men to suffer: then the Emperor called unto him two
of his Lords, and said unto them. Sirs, I will that all the poor people that
be in my Chapel this day be newly apparelled, and to have meat and drink
sufficient, for the love of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, who this day
has done me that grace that I am returned from age to youth. Sir, (quoth
they) your commandment shall be done: then they went and executed his
pleasure. Then Duke Huon approached unto the Emperor, and said. Sir, I humbly
desire your grace to deliver my Wife Escleremond, and my men out of Prison.
Sir, (quoth the Emperor) it is good reason that I do it: then he sent for the
Iaylour, who had the Lady and the other Prisoners in his keeping, and
commanded him that the Lady Escleremond and the other Prisoners should be
brought into the Hall, the Iaylour went to the Prison and Huon with him, and
when they came thither, Huon went to the door and cried out aloud, and said. Ah
my right sweet Sister, I believe that you have been but ill lodged here, I
have great fear that by reason of the pains that you have endured, you cannot
long continue, certainly if you die I shall never have joy at my heart. When
the Duchess Escleremond had well heard the voice of him that spoke at the
door, she stood still and studied what voice it might be, for she thought
within her self* that she had heard that voice before that time, and when she
had muzed a little while, she thought that it should be the voice of Huon her
Husband, whereof she had such joy and mirth at her heart, that of a great
season she could not speak but fell in a swound in the Prison: and when she
revived and came again to her self, she cried out and said. Ah my right
dear Lord and Husband, long have you left me in pain and misery, all alone
in this stinking and horrible Prison, in the hands of them that love you
nothing, and have suffered much pain, cold, and hunger* and have endured great
poverty, and in great fear of death and desperation.

When Huon had w^ll heard and understood his dear Wife, who spoke so
pitiously, (sorrow and grief so closed his heart) that he had no power to
speak one word, and the tears fell from his eyes, and trickled down his
cheeks for the pity that he had of his loving Wife Escleremond: and also the
Iaylor for very pity that he had was constrained to weep, and so went down
into the Prison and brought the Lady up: and then Huon and she beheld each
other, and could speak no word of a great space, but renew and embraced and
kissed each other, and so fell down to the ground both in a trance, and they
lay until other Knights came thither, fearing that they had been dead, there
was none but that wept for pity. Then the Emperor came thither himself, and
sore wept and repented himself of the illes that he had done to the Lady and
made her ^o suffer: and then the Knights and Lords revived them, then they
clipped and kissed together, and Huon said. Fair Lady I require you to pardon
me in that I have tarried so long from you, and have left you in such poverty,
pain, and danger of death, and have escaped, for the which I humbly thank
our Lord God of his grace. Sir, (quoth she) we ought greatly to thank
almighty God, when he has sent us that grace to see each other, and to come
together again, and that you have peace with the Emperor. Then the Iaylour
went to all the Prisons, and took out all Huons men and brought them unto him,
and they had great joy when they saw their Lord and Master in sauegard, and
thanked our Lord God, and humbly saluted Huon, and said. Sir, blessed be the
hour of your coming, whereby we are delivered from the pains, travails,
and pouerties that we have been in. My right dear Friends, (quoth Huon) thus
goes the world, you and I are bound to thank our Lord God for that he
sends unto us. Then the Emperor took Huon by the one hand, and Escleremond
by the other, and led them into his Pallaice, whereas the Tables were set,
and there sat down together the Emperor and Huon and the Duchess, and all
the Prisoners at another Table, and were all richly served: Of their meats and
Services, and joy that they made, I will make thereof but small rehearsal. And
when they had all dyned, the Emperor ordained Lad^es and Damsels to serve the
Duches Escleremond* and ordained Chambers for the Duke and her, and for all the
other, they were there served of all things that they desired, and they had
new apparel according to their degrees.

Anon the news and tidinges were known in the City, of the Peace made
between Huon and the Emperor, and how he had his Wife the Duchess
Escleremond rendered unto him, and his men delivered out of prison, whereof
B^rnar^ (as he was in the Town hearkening for news) was right joyful, and
went in have unto the Pallaice, whereas he found Huon in his Chamber with his
Wife the fair Es^leremond and as soon as he saw the Duchess, the water fell
from his eyes for joy: then he saluted Huon and the Duchess, and the Lady
knew him incontinent and said. Ah sir Barnard, well I ought to love and cherish
you, that ye have so sought for my Lord and husband, as that now at last
through your tedious travail you have found him and brought him hither. Madame
quoth he, I have done nothing but what I was bound in duty to do, I am sorry
for the great pains and travail that my Lord has suffered, and then he
showed such news as he knew, whereof many great Lords and knights had great
joy to hear him for she maruayles that he discoursed unto them. Then when they
had been there the space of Eight days, and that their men were well
refreshed, the Emperor assembled all his Lords and said* Sirs it is my will,
to lead and conduct Duke Huon and the Duches to Bourdeaux, and to set them in
possession of their Lands and Signiories, and I will have Ten Thousand men to
go with me and them, and to bring me again hither to Mayence, according to
his commandment the men were made ready, and when the Emperor had ordained
for Huons estate as it appertained for him, and his Wife and his men, and when
every thing was ready, they all mounted upon their horses, and the Duchess
had a rich Littour, so they departed from the City of Mayence, and ceased not
till they came within two Leagues of the Abbey of Cluny. The good Abbot, who
knew nothing of the agreement made between the Emperor and Huon, had gathered
together of men of war about twenty Thousand, and they were lodged in the
Town of Cluny, and the Abbot was advertised of the Emperors coming into
those parts, and he heard no news of Huon, whereof he was right sorrowful and
sore displeased, and thought that the Emperor had taken Huon Prisoner: then
he issued out of the Town, and ranged his men in good order of Battle,
without the Town in a faireplaine, and there abiding for the Emperor whom he
saw coming.

Chap. CXL.
How the Emperor arrived at Cluny, and how the Abbot set upon him, and of the
peace that was there made, and how the Emperor conveyed Huon to Bourdeaux, and
rendered to him all his Lands, and of the parting of them and the Emperor, and
how Huon made his provision to go to king Oberon.

WHen the Emperor saw the Town of Cluny, he demanded of Huon if he could
tell him to whom that town appertayned. Sir quoth he, it belongs to an
Uncle of mine who is Abbot thereof, and we must pass that way, and also I
must needs speak with him before I go to Bourdeaux. The same time the Abbot,
who was then mounted on a puissant and strong Courser well armed at all points,
saw the Emperor coming toward Cluny, and then he said to his men. Sirs,
think this day to do well and valiantly, for yonder before us we may see the
Emperor our enemy coming, wherefore we cannot escape the Battle, I am
sure he has taken Huon my Nephew, but by the faith that I owe to my Lord and
to Saint Bennet my Patron, that taking shall be dearly bought: then they couched
their spears and spurred their horses, and came running toward the Emperor:
and when the Emperor saw them, he called Huon and said. Sir, yonder ye may
see men of war all armed come running against us, I wot not what they mean
to do, but they seem to be our enemies as far as I can perceive, and they are
a great number, and therefore they are to be doubted and feared. Sir quoth Huon,
it is mine Uncle the Abbot of Cluny, who has raised up his men to succor me,
for he is not advertised of the Peace made between you and me, surely he
thinks that you have taken me prisoner, and therewith the Abbot dashed in
amongst the Emperors Company, and the first that he met he ran him clean
through with his spear, and so he served the second, third, and fourth, and
when his spear was broken, he drew out his sword wherewith he beat down the
Almaines that it was marvel to behold him, and then came in his men, and
they did such deeds of arms, that perforce the Almaines were feign to retire
back, and many were slain and destroyed, and cast down to the earth.

When the Emperor saw that, he was in great rage, and said unto Huon. Sir,
you are greatly to blame, to suffer your Uncles men to slay mine. Sir, (quoth
Huon) I am right sorry for that they have done, I am ready to make you
amends in whatsoever it shall please you: therewith Duke Huon road unto the
good Abbot his Uncle, and in great displeasure said. Uncle, you have done great
evil, and when the Abbot saw and perceived Huon, he was right joyful, and he
embraced him, and said. Fair Nephew, I thought that the Emperor had taken you
Prisoner, and would have put you to death, I knew not that you had Peace with
him: then he made his men to retire back from the Almaines, and then he and
Huon together came unto the Emperor, and the Abbot saluted him, and said. Sir,
I pray you to pardon me, in that I have thus come against you, for certainly, I
had thought that you would have hanged and slain my Nephew Duke Huon of
Bourdeaux, nor I knew not that there was any Peace between you: therefore Sir,
I require you to pardon me, and I offer my self to make you amends by the
advice of your counsel. Sir, (quoth the Emperor) I pardon you for the love
that I bear unto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, whom I take for my faithful and
special friend.

Thus as ye have heard the Peace was made between the Emperor and the Abbot
of Cluny. Then they road together until they came unto Cluny, where the
Emperor was received with great joy. When the good Abbot had received the
Emperor and lodged him in the Abbey, then he came unto the Duchess
Escleremond, and embraced and kissed her, and said. My right dear Niece, your
coming unto me hither is greatly acceptable, well I am pleased to see you
whole and in good health, and I am sore displeased for the great evils and
pouerties that you have endured, if I might amend it, but since it is the will
and pleasure of our Lord Jesus Christ, both you and we all ought to be
content, blessed be his name. Good Uncle, (quoth the Duchess) greatly we
ought to thank and to cherish you, for you have been Father and refuge of my
Daughter Clariet, whom I desire greatly to see: then the good Abbot led the
Duches Escleremond into the chamber, whereas her Daughter Clariet was, who came
and kneeled down before her Mother, and when the Duchess her Mother saw her,
it was no marvel though she was joyful at her heart, for when she saw her
so fair, and so well educated, you may well think that her joy exceeded all
other, she embraced and kissed her more then Twenty times, and said. My dear
Daughter, since I saw you last I have endured great poverty and misery, but
thanks be given to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to his sweet Mother, your
Father and I are come together in sauegard, and have Peace with the Emperor:
then they went into the Chamber, whereas their dinner was prepared ready for
them, and there dyned together with great consolation, and all that dinner time
the Duchess could not cast her eyes from the regarding of her Daughter
Clariet, for the great beauty that she saw and perceived in her, and when they
had dyned, the Lords and Knights, and Squiers came to see the Ladies as they
were accustomed to do, and as they were devising together, Huon entered into
the Chamber and the good Abbot his Uncle with him, and they said unto the
Duchess. Fair Lady you must come unto the Emperor, and bring your Daughter
with you, for he desires greatly to see her: then the Lady (who was ready to
do her Husbands commandment) went into the Hall and her Daughter with her,
whereas they found the Emperor, who received them with great joy, and took
the young Lady Clariet in his arms and kissed her sweetly, and said. My right
dear Daughter, your coming hither is to me right acceptable, god perform in
you that which wants, as for beauty you want not. Huon, (quoth the Emperor)
great thanks you ought to render unto our Lord Jesus Christ, that he is so
freendly unto you, as to send you such a Child as this Lady that is here
before me, for I think that of beauty, this day there is no Lady nor
Damsel that is living in this world, that is able to compare with your
Daughter. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray unto our Lord God to perform in her that
which she wants: great pleasure had the Emperor to behold the Damsel, and
so had all other Lords, Ladies, and Damsels that were there present.

Thus as ye have heard the Emperor was received at Cluny, and was greatly
feasted by the Abbot there, for as soon as the Emperor was come thither, the
good Abbot sent over all the Country for Ladies and Damsels to feast the
Emperor, and there they were three days with great Iusts and sports, and when
they departed, there was neither Lady nor Damsel, but that the Emperor gave
her some gift: the fourth day after that the Emperor had heard Service, and
his baggage and carriage ready, then he and Duke Huon, and the Duchess
Escleremond, and Clariet her Daughter departed from Cluny, and with them the
good Abbot, who brought them unto the City of Bourdeaux, for he loved so well
Huon and the Duchess, and Clariet whom he had brought up, that he would not
abandon them so soon. Huon sent Barnard before unto the City of Bourdeaux,
signifying unto them of the City of the Emperors coming and his, and of the
Peace made between the Emperor and him. Barnard departed, and was well
received at Bourdeaux: then he assembled together all the Burgesses of the
City, and showed unto them of the Emperors coming thither, and with him Duke
Huon, and the Duchess Escleremond, and Clariet their Daughter, and of the
Peace that was made between the Emperor and Duke Huon, this news was sent
incontinent to Blaye and to Geronnill, and over all the Country of Burdeloys,
and then all the noble men as well as Burgesses came hastily unto the City of
Bourdeaux, for to receive their rightful Lord Duke Huon, and when they were
there assembled, they mounted upon their horses, and road forth to meet the
Emperor and Duke Huon their natural Lord, they were together about six
Thousand horses: when they approached near unto the Emperor, they saluted
him, unto whom the Emperor said openly. All ye Sirs, noble men and
Burgesses, that have before this time made unto me fealty and homage, I
deliver you quite into the hands of your right natural Lord, as you have
been before time, and I quit clearly your homages and fealties done unto me:
then they all thanked the Emperor of his good justice and reason, that he had
always done unto them in the season whiles they were under him, the Emperor
was right joyful that they so praised him before Duke Huon, and then they came
unto Duke Huon, and to the Duches Escleremond his Wife, and to Clariet their
Daughter, and did unto them their reverence accordingly. Thus they came unto
the City of Bourdeaux, whereas they were joyfully receceiued, and a cloth of
estate was borne before the Emperor, under the which he road, still holding
Huon by the hand until they came unto the Pallaice, the streets were strewed
with green herbs and rushes, and hanged richly, the windows garnished with
Ladies and Damsels, Burgesses and Maidens, melodiously singing, whereof the
Emperor was right joyful, the Children running in the Streets and crying
noel, noel, for the great joy and mirth that they had of the coming of their
Lord and Lady.

When they were come unto the Pallaice, they alighted and went to their
Chambers ready appointed for them, if I should rehearse the joys, and sports,
and solemnities that was made at the noble City of Bourdeaux, it would be too
tedious and ouer-long to declare it, for the feast and cheer was such, that no
man as then living had seen any such, the which endured for the space of Eight
days, during the which time, the Emperor declared unto them of that Country,
the Peace that was made between him and Duke Huon, and how he would deliver
all his Lands and Signiories into his hands, and clearly acquit every man
of their fealty and homage to him made, whereof every man was joyful, and
upon the Ninth day that the Emperor should depart, he called Duke Huon unto
him, and said. My right dear Friend, he that I love best in this world, if any
war or business happen to fall unto you, let me have knowledge thereof, and
I shall send you forty Thousand men at arms, and my self in person to come
to aid and succor you. Sir, (quoth Huon) of the courtesy that you offer me
I heartily thank you, and always I shall repute my self as your true Servant
and faithful Friend. Then the Emperor went to the Duchess Escleremond, and
took his leave of her, and of the fair Lady Clariet her Daughter, and
embraced and kissed them at his departing, and so he did all the other Ladies
and Damsels, and gave every one of them some gift, he gave rich guiftes unto
the Duchess and to her Daughter, and then he took his leave and mounted upon
his Horse and so issued out of the City of Bourdeaux, and Duke Huon and the
good abbot of Cluny conuayed him about two Leagues: then they took their
leave of the Emperor and of his Lords and Knights, and returned unto the
noble City of Bourdeaux. Then after that Huon had soiourned there about Eight
days, he road unto Geronnill and to Blames, and unto all other towns and
Castles, where he was received with great joy and mirth, and set Officers in
them: then he returned again unto the City of Bourdeaux to the Duchess
Escleremond his Wife, and after that he had tarried there about a Month, Duke
Huon devised with his Wife in the presence of the good Abbot his Uncle, and of
Barnard his Coozen, and said. My right dear wife, he that remembers not the
goodness done unto him, may be reputed as ungrateful, I say it, because you
know well that King Oberon has done unto us great good, and has delivered us
out of many great perils of death, and as you saw but lately by the two
Knights that rescued you from the death, and from the danger that you were
in, and you know well that the last time that King Oberon departed from
Bourdeaux, he gave me all his Realm of the Fayrie, and the puissance that he
has there, and he made me to promise him, that after that Four years were
passed, that I should come unto him, and that he would then put me in
possession of his Realm, and he said that if I failed my day, he would
utterly destroy me, you know well what has fallen unto me (before this) by
breaking of his Commandment: and therefore dear Lady and Wife, it is
necessary that I go unto him, and I shall leave with you Barnard, who shall
have the keeping of my Lands and of you, and as for my Daughter, I will leave
her with the Abbot here mine Uncle, who I desire here before you, that he
will keep and govern my Daughter Clariet, and with him I will leave all my
riches and precious stones that I brought with me, to the intent to marry
her, so that it be to a man of great valor, but I will not that she be
married unto any person for riches, but a person that is worthy and valiant I
would should have her, for she has and shall have riches enough for her self,
and for a man of great authority. Fair Nephew, (quoth the Abbot) your going
shall be displeasing unto me, if I might amend it, if God will, no man living
shall have your Daughter my Niece in marriage, except he be a man of a high
Parentage, and garnished with virtues and good manners, and as for your riches,
pearls, and Jewels, she shall not need to have any thereof, for I have
Treasure and riches enough to marry her nobly.

Chap. CXLI.
How Duke Huon devised with the Duchess his Wife of his departing, and how
she said that she would go with him: And how he left his Daughter and Land
and Signiories in the keeping of his Uncle the good Abbot of Cluny, and of
Barnard his Coozen.

WHen the Duchess Escleremond had well heard her Husband the Duke make his
devises, to go unto King Oberon, you may well believe that she had great
dolor and grief at her heart: and then all weeping she kneeled down before
her Husband, and said. My right dear Lord, and if God will, you shall not go
on foot but that I will go with you, if you take any ill or annoyance I will
have my part, and if you have any good adventure I will have my part with you,
for your long absence has been right hard for me to endure. Fair Lady,
(quoth Huon) I pray you to forbear your going, and abide here with your
Daughter, for the Voyage shall be sore for you to do: here I shall leave
Barnard my Coozen, and mine Uncle the good Abbot, and they shall be unto you as
Fathers. Sir, (quoth she) I shall have many sorrows to abide here without you,
I had rather to endure whatsoever God shall send us together, then to abide
here without your company. Thus ye have heard here before, that for any
excuse or reason that Huon could show unto the Duchess his Wife, he could not
turn her from her opinion, but that she would in any wise go with him. When
Huon saw that, he said. My right dear Lady, since it is your pleasure to go
with me, and to be content whatsoever God does send us either good or evil,
your company pleases me well, and I am right joyful thereof. When the good
Abbot and Barnard had well heard and understood the will and pleasure of Duke
Huon, and of the Duchess Escleremond his Wife, they were sore displeased
therewith, if they could in any wise have let them, but they could not turn
him for any thing that they could do: then Huon said unto the good Abbot.
Fair Uncle, I leave with you my Lands, Signiories, and my Daughter until I
return again, the which shall be as shortly as I may. But of force now I am
driven, to go and take possession of the Realm that King Oberon has given
to me: Therefore fair Uncle and Coozen Barnard, unto you I recommend my
Daughter whom I love entirely, and all my Lands and Signiories, I leave all
in your keeping until my return, and with you mine Uncle I leave all my
precious stones and Treasure, for the marriage of my Daughter whom I leave in
your keeping. Fair Nephew, (quoth the good Abbot) seeing that it is your
pleasure, I shall keep her as well as though she were mine own Child. Good
Uncle, (quoth Huon) I pray you that the Griffens foot that I brought with me,
may be sent unto the young King Lewis of France, and salute him from me,
and present it unto him to do therewith his pleasure. Sir, (quoth the good
Abbot) before Easter be come your Message shall be done, and that being
done, the young King was joyful thereof, and caused it to be hanged in his
Pallaice: and afterward by King Phillip it was hanged in the holy Chapel,
whereas it is until this day. Now let us leave speaking of the Griffens foot,
and return to our former matter.

Chap. CXLII.
How Huon took leave of his Daughter, and of the good Abbot his Uncle, and of
Barnard his Cozen, and entered into the River of Gerone, and the Duchess with
him: and of the strange Fortunes that they had.

WHen the good Abbot and Barnard had well understood Huon, and had heard his
will and pleasure, they answered, that as for his Lands and Signiories, and
for his Daughter he should not need to care: but they said, that it greatly
displeased them the Voyage that they were in mind to do, but since it was his
pl^asure so to do, it was reason that they should be content: and then he
ordained that Barnard should make ready a little Ship, apparelled and
garnished with victuals and other things necessary, and that another great
Ship to be made ready at the mouth of the Sea, to enter into it when they
were out of the River of Gerone, the which thing was done. Then he took six
Knights and a Dozen Servants of his own, and when Huon saw every thing
ready, and had showed his Enterprise unto his men, and to the men of his
Country, and that every thing was ready fournished: then he took his
Daughter in in his arms, and kissed her more then Ten times, and in like wise
so did Escleremond her Mother, and her heart was so closed with sorrow and
grief, that she could speak no word, for the departing from her Daughter,
you may well think that great was the sorrow there at their departing, for he
that had been there, and seen the dolor and pitiful complaints that the
Lady Clariet made, for the departing of her Father and Mother, with whom she
had not been no long season, there is not so hard a he^rt, but that needs he
must have taken part of her sorrow, for there was never seen so heavy a
departing.

Then Huon all weeping embraced the good Abbot his Uncle, who gave Huon at his
departing a hollowed stool, the which afterward did good service unto Huon and
to Escleremond. Also Huon took leave of Barnard his Cozen, then the Duchess
said unto the Abbot and to Barnard. Sirs, unto you two I due recommend my
Daughter. Thus Huon departed, and they went to the Posterne, and there they
found ready their little Ship, and they entered into it, and so made sail
down along the River of Gerone, and when they came to the mouth of the Sea,
they took their great Ship, and so made sail and had good wind, so that
shortly they were far off from any land, and were in the hye Sea for the
space of Six days, and upon the Seventh day a wind arose with such an
horrible Tempest, that they were driven into the great Spanish Sea, and were so
far from any land, that they wist not where they were, and ever the Tempest
increased in such wise, that there was never none such seen nor heard of
before, the waves were like Mountains, and like to have swallowed up the ship,
so that sometime there entered into the Ship a Tun of water at once.

Chap. CXLIII.
How Huon lost all his men, and the Ship brake in peeces^ and how he and the
Duchess saved themselves upon a board, and came and arrived at the Castle of
the Monks.

WHen Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and the Duchess Escleremond his Wife saw these
great and sudden tempests, they were in great fear of death: and they
greatly complained for their Daughter Clariet, whom they had left at
Bourdeaux. Then Huon, who had with him in his bag Nine of his dear precious
stones, he drew out two of them, and knew the virtue and bounty of them, and
gave his wife one of them and said. My dear and loving Wife, hold this stone
in your hand and have no fear, for the virtue of the stone will not let you
perish, nor me neither: he that had heard the cries and lamentations that the
Mariners made, would have had pity and compassion of them, for they saw well
that they should all perish. And Huon and Escleremond were upon their knees
sore weeping, holding each other by the hand, humbly praying to our Lord Jesus
Christ to have pity and compassion of them, and to bring them unto some Port
in sauegard of their lives: great and horrible was the Tempest and long
endured, so that the healme, Man, and sails burst all to pieces: and when the
Ship was without a stern to guide it, the great waves entered into it, so
that the Ship was full of water, whereby it was constrained to sink into the
Sea, in such sort, that it was all covered with water, and all that were within
were drowned and perished, except Huon and Escleremond, who satte together upon
a Table floating upon the Sea, so that by the grace of our Lord God, and by the
great bounty and virtue of the precious stones that were upon them, they were
saved. And when they saw their Ship all to pieces, and their men drowned and
perished, and themselves floating upon the Sea, whereof Huon had such
sorrow and gree^e at his heart, that great pity it was to see him, and
said. Ah good Lord, why was I ever borne into this world, when I am so
unfortunate, that I can have no men to serve me, but at last they end their
lives in my service miserably? Ah my God, why do then suffer me so long to
live? Then the Duchess comforted him as much as she could, and said. Ah Sir,
leave your sorrow, and pray unto our Lord God for his mercy and his grace,
and to have pity and compassion of us, that we might arrive at some good
Port.

Thus the noble Duchess Escleremond comforted Duke Huon her Husband, howbeit,
she was in as great fear, and not without a cause: and thus they floated
upon the Sea, greatly bewailing the death of their men, whom they saw perish
before their eyes. Then Huon as far off as he might see, he saw a Castle
standing upon a Rock, the which seemed dark and black: and then he lauded
and praised our Lord God, praying him humbly to bring them thither in sauegard.
Then the Sea was peaceable, and the Tempest ceased, and the wind fresh, the
which drove them in a short space unto the Port under the Rock: and when they
were near to the land, Huon and the Duchess waded unto the land, holding
each other by the hand. When they were upon the dry land, they kneeled down
and lifted up their eyes unto Heaven, and made their devout prayers unto our
Lord Jesus Christ, desiringe him to have pity and compassion of the Souls of
their men that they saw drowned and perished: then they arose up and saw a
little path way lying straight toward the Castle, and they entered into it, and
when they were near unto the Castle, they saw a great River running round
about it, and saw that the Castle was of maruailous great beauty, thinkinge
that they never saw none such before, the Towers were covered with glistering
gould, shining so bright as though the Sun did shine thereon: Also they saw
an ancient Church adjoining to the Castle, with a goodly Steeple full of bells,
the which began to sound, whereof Huon had great marvel, for he saw
neither man nor woman coming nor going, and when he had well regarded the
Castle, he came unto the gate, and saw how that there were three bridges to
pass before he could enter. When Huon saw that, he said. Ah good Lord, in all
my life I never saw so fair a Castle, he that is Lord thereof seems to be
a great and a noble man, for if there were within it but Forty men to keep
it, and garnished with victuals, it would never be won for any man living. So
long Huon beheld this Castle, that he had forgotten his sorrow, the Castle
pleased him so well, and said unto the Duchess his Wife. Madame, I believe
surely that this is the Castle of Momur, appertaining unto King Oberon, we may
well thank our Lord God that he has brought us hither, we shall see him, you
know well that he has promised to give me his Realm and all his dignity.
Sir, (quoth the Duchess) I have heard say before this, that Momur is a great
and a noble City, and full of people of all sorts: wherefore, you may well
perceive that this is not that City, it may well be that this Castle is his.
Madame, (quoth Huon) the King has that puissance, that he may make City or
Castle at his pleasure. Sir, (quoth she) I believe it well. Then Huon took
his way to the gate, and as he went devising with the Duchess Escleremond his
wife, he saw before him four Monks in white apparel: and when they came
unto him, they said. Sir, Duke of Bourdeaux, of your coming we are right
joyful, for a more noble man came not here of a long season. God bless you
and the Duchess your Wife. Sirs, (quoth Huon) God save you, I pray you to show
me what you be? and who has showed you my name, and who is Lord and Governor
of this Castle? Sir, (quoth one of the Monks) this Castle is ours, and here
is no Governor but I and my Brethren, we make none answer unto any Lord
living: therefore if it please you to enter, we shall make you as good feast
and cheer as we can, if it please you to tarry Eight or fifteen days you
shall be welcome, and when you depart, we shall give you to carry with you
meat and drink, sufficient to serve you and your Wife for Fifteen days, and
you shall have need thereof, before you find out King Oberon. Sirs, (quoth
Duke Huon) of your courtesy I most heartily thank you.

Then Huon entered into the Castle with them, and came into a great Hall, well
garnished and adorned with rich Pillars of white Marble, vawted above, and
richly painted with go^ld and Azure, and set full of rith precious stones, the
which cast a great light, for by reason of the precious stones, at midnight it
was as bright as at noone days. Huon and Escleremond thought that they never
saw so rich a thing. Madame, (quoth Huon) this place is delectable: then they
were brought into a rich Chamber, whereas the Tables were set, and garnished
with every thing that a man could wish for. Then there came in many
Servants, some brought in the Basins of gould adorned with precious stones, and
some brought in the Towell and water, and they gave the water unto Huon and
Escleremond to wash their hands: then they satte down at the Table* and did
eat and drink at their pleasure, for they had their meat and drink at their
wish. When they had eaten at their pleasure, and the clothes taken up, then
there were Spices brought, and Huon did eat thereof, but Escleremond would not
so much as taft thereof: then they were brought into a Garden to sport them,
and when they were there, they thought that they had been in Paradise, for the
sweetness of flowers and fruits upon every Tree, and they heard diverse kind
of birds sing melodiously. Sirs, (quoth Huon unto the the Monks) well you
ought to thank our Lord Jesus Christ, that he has given you such a place to
serve him in: and Sirs, I pray you when it is midnight, awake me, to the intent
that I may rise to go and hear your Service when you do it. Sir, (quoth one
of them) I shall awake you when the time is, that you may come and here us.
Sir, (quoth Huon) therein shall you do me great pleasure.

Then Duke Huon and ye Duches Escleremond were brought into a rich Chamber,
well fournished with clothes of gold and silk, wherein was a rich and
sumptuous bed, wherein Huon and the Duchess his Wife lay together: the
Chamber was fair and rich, for all the night it was as clear as though the
Chamber had been full of Torches, by reason of the shining of the precious
stones, for there was no bench nor Post, but that were set full of rich
stones, the riches of that Chamber could not ^e described, and therein was
painted with gold and azure all the Battles of Troy. And in this rich
Chamber and bed they slept, until the hour of midnight was come: and then all
the Monks arose, and the bells began to ring to Service, then there came a
Monk unto Huon, and awaked him, and said. Sir, it is now time that you
arise, for it is past midnight, make you ready to come and hear our Service.
Then Huon arose, and called up the Duchess Escleremond his Wife, then she
arose, and thus they made them ready and went unto the Church, the which was
paued with a white Marble, powdered with flower deluces of gould, intermedled
with red Roses, and the Vault was checkered with Amber and Crystal, and at
every point a rich stone, whereby there was such clearness, that there needed
no Candle light.

When Duke Huon and the Duchess Escleremond had well seen and beheld the
great beauty and riches of the Church, they were sore abashed, and made the
sign of the Cross upon their foreheads, for the maruailes that they saw
there: then they entered into the Quier, and kneeled down before the hye
Altar, and made their prayers unto our Lord God, desiring him to be their
sauegard, and to conduct them surely unto King Oberon. Then the Abbot began
Service, and read the first Lesson, and when he was in the half thereof, he
held his peace, and departed clean out of the Church, then the Priour began
another Lesson, and in like wise left it in the midst and departed out of the
Church, thus every Monk did one after another, and there were two and
Thirty Monks, and in the midst of every Lesson and Psalm, they departed
out of the Church one after another. When Duke Huon saw and heard that, he was
sore dismayed and abashed, and swear that before the last Monk departed, he
would know the cause why they did so: and then he went unto the last Monk,
who would have gone out of the Church, and Huon took the hallowed stole that
he had in his bosom, and did cast it about the Monks neck, and held it fast
with both his hands. When the Monk saw how he was holden, he was sorrowful
and angry, and did what he could to have escaped, but he could not: and when
he saw that he could not escape, he embraced Huon, and prayed him humbly to
let him go after his Brethren. Certainly, (quoth Huon) out of my hands you
shall not escape, until you have showed me why you sing your Service after
the manner that you do, and ever to leave the one half vnsonge, and why the
Abbot and the other Monks do depart one after another, without any word
speaking unto me, and except you show me the troth, with my sword I shall
strike thy head to the brains. Then simply the Monk fained to weep, and
prayed Huon to suffer him to depart, and said. Sir, I am he that yesternight
brought you to your Chamber and made your bed. Then Huon (who had his Sword in
the one hand, and the stole in the other hand) said: Except thou show unto
me my demand shortly, I shall strike off thy head. When the Monk heard that,
he was in great fear, and stood still as though he would give none answer.
And when Huon saw that, he lifted up his Swoorde to have stricken him, but then
incontinent the Monk joined his hands and cried for mercy, and promised him
to show him the troth of his demand.

Chap. CXLIIII.
How Duke Huon made se^blance to have slain the Monk, holding him fast with
the stole, to the intent that he should show unto him the troth.

THen Huon put up his sword, and the Monk began to speak, and said. Sir,
know for troth, that all we that be here are of ye evil Angels, that were
chaced out of Paradise with Lucifer, who by his pride would compare with God,
he made us believe, that we should be as good as God himself, and we
believed him, but as for us that be here in this house, God was with us
displeased, and thereby we were condemned to be conversant abroad in the
world, among men and women when we list, and some be in the likeness of Bears,
and some like wary woolues, and thus we shall be until the day of judgment,
and some other there be that be Tempters of men and women, desiring to bring
them to damnation, and some there be in the air, and follows the
Thunderinges and Tempests, and some be upon the Sea, and drown many a man,
and perish the ships, whereof but lately you were in ieopardy, for if it had
not been for the great virtue and bounty that is in the precious stones, that
you and your Wife bear about you, both you and your Wife had been perished for
ever. And other there be that are in the bottom of hell, whereas they torment
the poor Souls, and there is Lucifer, and they that be most evil with him,
and though they were once fair, now they be foul and misfigured, and they
shall never depart from thence, but we that be here yet, we hope to come
unto Salvation, but thus we shall be as long as it pleases God. Then Huon
demanded the cause, why they began the Lessons in their Service, and to
leave it in the midst, and every Monk to depart so one after another. Sir,
(quoth the Monk) our Lord Jesus Christ as yet has not given us that dignity
nor power, to make an end of our divine service, but we have that grace in this
world, that we have all our desires, and to be conversant among the people as
well as they of the Fayrie, there is nothing but by wishing we can have it
incontinent, and when we will it is in our power to make Town or Castle set
upon hye Rocks closed in with Rivers bearing ships, and we have Minstrils,
Hals, and Chambers, garnished and ordained as you have seen here within. Also
we have wine and victuals, and fish and flesh at our pleasure, this Castle
and Church that you see, was yesternight made by the Fayrie, but one hour
before that you came hither, here was neither Tower nor wall, nor water nor
Rock, and nothing but a fair great meadowe, the which you shall soon
perceive: and Sir, we be those that have the conduct of all the Fayrie in the
world.

Now Sir, I have showed unto you what we be and all our secrets, the which was
never showed before unto any mortal man, whereby I shall suffer of our Abbot
such punishment, that there was never so ill adventure that fell unto me
before: therefore Sir, now I have showed unto you every thing, suffer me to
depart unto my company. Monk, (quoth Huon) I will not let thee go, until
thou have showed unto me, by what manner of way I may go until I have found
King Oberon: thus Huon and the Monk talked together, until it was fair day
light. Then Huon looked round about him, and saw neither Castle nor Church,
Rock nor River, but he saw that they were in a fair meadowe, whereof Huon
and Escleremond were sore abashed, and blessed them, having great marvel of
that they had seen: then the Monk desired Huon to let him go. Monk, (quoth
Huon) to draw or to struggle cannot avail thee, for thou shall not escape out
of my hands, until thou have showed me the City of Momur whereas King Oberon
is. Huon, (quoth the Monk) I am content to do it, but first, I pray thee to
take from my neck the stole. Monk, (quoth Huon) thy reasoning cannot avail
thee, for thou shall not escape from me, until thou have set both me and my
Wife near unto the City of Momur, for thou shall go with us foot by foot.
Well, (quoth the Monk) since it is thus, I am content to fulfill your
pleasure, but one thing I say unto you, you never did a wiser deed, then that
you would not let me go away, for if the stole were not, wherewith you do
hold me, and the precious stones that you have about you, you should never have
departed from hence, I thought to have beguiled you, so that you might have let
me gone my ways whether I would go. Monk, (quoth Huon) if I can, you shall
not depart from me, until you have set me and my Wife within the City of
Momur. Sir, (quoth the Monk) that will I not do, nor I cannot do it though I
would, but I shall set you both upon the Mount of Hircama, and from thence
you may well see unto the City of Momur, and all the country of the Fayrie,
and then I will return unto my company, who by this time are passed the great
Sea of T^rta^y. Monk, (quoth Huon) I am content, so that thou will set us in
that place, whereas we may see the City of Momur.

Chap. CXLV.
How the Monk bare Huon and Escleremond over hills and Valleys in the air,
until he came into the Country of King Oberon.

THen the Monk took Huon upon the one arm, and Escleremond upon the other,
but always Huon held the stoale still about the Monks neck, to the intent
that the Monk should not beguile him, and thus by the Fayrie and
enchauntment, the Monk bare Huon and Escleremond unto a hye Rock to rest
them, and from thence he bare them as fast as the bird flies in the air, at
last they alighted in a fair meadowe: then the Monk said. Sir, in an evil
hour I met with you, for you have caused me to suffer great pain, and now
Sir, I can go no further, for you are now in the Land of King Oberon whereas
we have no puissance, but first I will bring you unto your lodging whereas you
shall rest: then before them they saw a Castle newly made, the which was so
fair, rich, and strong, that if I should describe it to the uttermost, it
would be ouer-long to rehearse. Then the Monk took his leave of Huon, and of
the Duchess Escleremond his Wife, and left them in the Castle that he had
made. Huon suffered him to go, and thanked him of his courtesy, the Monk
suddenly vanished away they wist not whether, and then Huon and his loving
Wife entered into the Castle, and came into a rich Chamber well fournished, and
there they found a Table set with diverse meats and drinks, but there was no
man to speak unto: then they sat down at the Table, and did eat and drink at
their pleasure, and then they went from thence, and when they were gone a
little way, they looked behind them, and saw neither Town nor Castle, whereof
they were sore abashed, and recommended themselves unto our Lord God: then they
went forth into the meadow, and could see neither Town nor Castle, House nor
Village, nor man to demand the way of: and they went so long, that they came
to the foot of a Mountain, whereon they mounted with great pain and
travail, and when they were upon the top of the hill, they rested them, and
then within a little season, Huon saw appear before him a great City, and
upon the one side thereof a fair and rich Pallaice, the walls and Towers of the
City and the Pallaice, were al of white Marble pollished, the which did shine
so bright against the Sun, as though it had been all of Crystal: then Huon
said unto his Wife. Madame, yonder before us we may see the noble City of
Momur whereas King Oberon is. Sir, (quoth Escleremond) our Lord God has done
unto us a great grace, in that he has brought us hither in the sauegard of
our persons.

Then they went forth until they came near unto the City of Momur, and
before the City they saw a maruailous great River and very deep, and two
bow shoots in largeness, and it was maruailous pleasant to behold, and when
they came to the Riuer-side, they found there a man with a little Vessel,
awaiting upon all them that would come unto the City to pass them over.
Then Huon and Escleremond his Wife entered into the little Ship, and saluted
the Guider thereof, but he would give them none aunsweare, but maruailously
beheld them, and when they were over, the Mariner who was named Clarimodes,
and he was Son to a Damsel of the Fayrie, then he demanded of Huon, what he
and his Wife were, and said, me thinks you be none of the Fayrie, wherefore I
am not content that I have passed you over. Then Huon gave him none aunsweare,
but went forth and entered into the City, and as they passed, they were
greatly regarded of them within the City, and said one to another, it is great
marvel to see these two persons enter into this City, for King Oberon (who
lies sick in his bed) gave great charge unto Clarimodes, that no stranger
should pass the River to enter into this City. Huon heard them, and was
thereof right sorrowful, when he heard that the King lay sick in his bed,
so he passed forth and came unto the Pallaice, every man there beheld him and
his Wife, and had great marvel to see any mortal persons to enter into that
Pallaice, and they were thereof abashed and wist not what to think. At the
same time, Mall^bron and Gloriand were walking together in the hall, they saw
Huon and Escleremond entering into the Hall, and incontinent they knew them, and
came unto them and embraced them, and said. Ah noble Duke Huon and Duchess
Escleremond, you are welcome, of your coming we are right joyful: then
Mallabron went from them, and went into the Chamber whereas the King lay sick,
and said. Right dear Sir, your good Friend Huon and Escleremond his Wife, are
come into your Hall. When the King heard that Huon and Escleremond were come,
for the great joy that he had, he quickly arose out of his bed. Therewith
Gloriand, Huon, and Escleremond entered into the chamber where King Oberon was:
and when the King saw them, he came unto them, and said. My right dear
Freende Huon, and you my dear Love Escleremond, of your coming I am right
joyful, then he embraced and kissed them both more then Ten times, and
said. Huon, my right dear Friend, for the great truth and nobleness that I
find in you, I shall make you King of all the Fayrie, and your Wife Escleremond
shall be Lady and Queen of the same, and besides that, I will give unto you
all my dignity.

When the King had well saluted them, then he sat down upon a Couch, and
made Huon and Escleremond to sit down before him, and then he commanded
Gloriand, that incontinent he should fetch unto him his bow, and when he had
it in his hand, he took an arrow and did shoot therewith: then incontinent it
seemed that all the world had arrived in the Town and Pallaice, there came
thither so many Knights and Ladies of the Fayrie, that all the Town and
Pallaice was full: and when they were all assembled together in the Pallaice,
King Oberon commanded to carry him into the great Hall in his rich Couch,
then he commanded silence to be kept among them all, and then he said. Lords
and Lady that be here assembled, all ye know, that every mortal thing
cannot long endure, I speak it for my own self, because I am Son to a
mortal man, and was engendered upon the Lady of the prime Isle, who can never
die because she is one of the Fayrie, engendered of a man of the Fayrie, and
Daughter to a woman of the Fayrie, and whereas it is so, that Julius Caesar was
a mortal man, therefore it behooves me to pass out of this world by the
commandment of our Lord God, who has ordained that it should be so. And
because of my love, during the time that I have been conversant here with you,
therefore I will not leave you without a Lord, but first in my life days I
will puruay you of one, who shall be Duke Huon, whom I love well and dearly,
and also I will that his Wife the Duchess Escleremond shall abide with him,
for in no wise I will separate them asunder: therefore I ordain, that Huon who
is here present, be your King and Lord, and Escleremond your Que^ne and Lady,
and from henceforth I put my Realm and dignity into his hands, and I will
that he use it as I have done in my life time, howbeit, King Arthur has sore
pressed upon me to have my Realm and dignity, but I will that none shall
have it but alonely Huon of Bourdeaux, who is here present, and whom I will
crown King in all your presence.

Chap. CXLVI.
How the noble King Oberon crowned Huon and Escleremond, and gave them all his
Realm and dignity that he had in the Land of the Fayrie, and made the Peace
between Huon and King Arthur.

WHen the people of the Fayrie both Knights and Ladies, had well heard and
understood King Oberon, they were right sorrowful, in that he should leave
them, and said. Sir, since it is your pleasure, and that it is your will, o^
reason we must be content to receive Huon of Bourdeaux for our king, and
Madame Escleremond his Wife for our Queen. When the King understood his Lords
and people, then he caused to be brought thither two Crowns, the one was set
upon Huons head, and the other upon Escleremonds head: then Oberon sent for
his Horn. Napkin, and Cup, and the good Armor, and he delivered them unto
Huon, to do with them his pleasure, great joy and feasting was made in the
Pallaice, by the Knights and Ladies of the Fayrie. Then king Huon looked out at
a window, and saw upon the Mountain that he passed over at his coming
thither, a great number of Tents and Pauillions: and he said unto King Oberon.
Sir, upon yonder Mountain I see a great number of men assembled, and many
Tents and Pauillions picht up. Huon, (quoth king Oberon) know for troth, that
it is king Arthur, who meeneth to have my Realm and dignity, but he comes
too late, for the promise that you made unto me you have kept, therefore he
fails and comes too late: for if you had not come, I had given him my
Realm and dignity, I know well, that he will be here soon to see me, and
he will be sorrowful and angry of your coming hither, but if I can I shall
do so much, that you shall be both in peace and rest, for good reason it is
that he do obey you.

Therewith king Arthur and all his Chivalry entered into the City of Momur,
and came and alighted at the Pallaice, and with him his Sister Queen Morguele
Fay, and Transeline their Niece, they came and saluted king Oberon, who
received them with great joy, and said. Great king Arthur, you are welcome,
and Morgue your Sister and Transeline your Niece, and Sir, ^^ray you to show
me, what fair Child is that I see there before your Sister Morgue? Sir,
(quoth Arthur) he is called Marlyn, and is Son to Ogier the Dane, who has
wedded my Sister Morgue, and I have left him in my Country, to rule it until
I return. Sir, (quoth king Oberon) the child shall have good fortune, he
shall be in his time feared and redoubted* for Ogier his Father is a good and
a valiant knight: And noble king Arthur, you are welcome, and of your coming
I am right joyful, I have sent for you, to show you the pleasure of our Lord
God, that I shall depart out of this world, and to the intent that you should
be content, in that I have given you heretofore in the Fayrie so much dignity
and puissance, wherewith I desire you to be contented, for behold here Duke
Huon of Bourdeaux, and his Wife the Duchess Escleremond, unto whom I have
given my Realm and my dignity, to use it as I have done heretofore: and
therefore I pray and command you, that you will obey him as King and
Sovereign of all the Fayrie, and you to live together with good love and peace.

When King Arthur heard King Oberon, he answered fiercely, and said. Sir, I
have well heard you, and you know well, that your Realm and dignity you gave
me after your decease, and now I see well, that you have given it to Duke Huon:
Sir let him go into his own Country, and unto his City of Bourdeaux,
whereas he has left his Daughter Clariet, and let him go and marry her, for
as here he has nothing to do, I had rather to be clean exiled for ever
and chaced out of my Realm, then I should obey him or do unto him any homage,
for he shall have nothing to do over me, without he win it with the point
of the Sword. When King Huon had well heard King Arthur of Britain, he
answered fiercely, and said. King Arthur, know for troth, for all your words
and threatninges I will not spare to say unto you, that whether you will or
not, it must behooue you to obey and to be under me, since it is the pleasure
of my Lord King Oberon here present, or else you may depart, and go and dwell
in the Country of Britain. Then King Oberon seeing appearance of great war
to be moved between these two Kings, he spoke and said, that he would
have their evil will laid down, and never to have war between them: and said
unto King Arthur. Sir, I will that you hold your peace, for if you speak one
word more against Huon the Sovereign King of the Fayrie, that he would
condemn him perpetually to be a warre-wolfe in those parts, and there to end
his days inpaine and misery, but if he will believe him, he would agree
them together: then King Arthur stood still and would speak no word. Then
Morgue and Transeline fell down upon their knees, and desired King Oberon to
have pity of King Arthur, and to pardon him of all his ill will, and after
that Morgue had spoken, then King Arthur kneeled down, and said. Right dear
Sir, I pray you to pardon me, in that I have spoken so much against your
pleasure. Arthur, (quoth King Oberon) I will that you well know, that if it
were not for the love of your Sister, who has desired me to pardon you, I
would have showed you the power that I have in the Fayrie, the which from
henceforth I give unto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and all the dignity and
puissance that I have used in all my life. Then Duke Huon thanked King Oberon
right humbly of his courtesy.

Chap. CXLVII.
Of the Ordinances that the noble King Oberon made before he dyed.

WHen King Oberon had deposed himself of his Realm and dignity, and that he
had put all his puissance into the hands of Huon, then he said unto King
Arthur. Sir, because I desire with all my heart, that after my decease Huon and
you should live together in good peace and love: I give you all my Realm of
Boulquant, and all the Realm that S^billa holds of me, to do therewith at
your pleasure, and of all the Fayries that be in the plain of Tartary, I will
that you have so much puissance there, as Huon has here. Provided, that here
before me you make homage unto him, and that good peace and love may be
between you. Then Arthur, Morgue, and Transeline, and all the other Lords and
Ladies that were there, thanked King Oberon and said, how that they never heard
nor saw so rich a gift given before, as that King Oberon had given unto King
Arthur. Then King Arthur in the presence of King Oberon, came and made homage,
and kissed Duke Huon, then King Oberon and all the other had thereof great
joy, because of the Peace made between those two Kings, and great feasting
and joy was made in the Pallaice: for all the most noble Lords and Ladies of
the Fayrie were there assembled, there was great solemnity made.

Thus as they were in this great joy, king Oberon feeling that his last end
approached, for he knew the day and hour, then (seeing that in his life time
he had provided a King for his Realm) he humbly thanked our Lord God, of the
graces that he had given him in this world: then he called before him Huon of
Bourdeaux, and king Arthur, Gloriand, and Mallabron, and said. Sirs, I
advertise you, that long I shall not abide among you, therefore Huon, for your
bounty and nobleness wherewith you have been always endued, I have chosen
you among other to have the keeping and Signiorie, and the ministration of all
the Fayrie, as well of the Country of warrewolues, as of other things secret
reserved, and not to be showed to any mortal men: and also I have given you
my dignity and puissance, to do therewith as I have done in my time, and
because I have thus chosen you, therefore I will, that when I depart out of
this world, that you do make a new Abbey of Monks, the which I will be set
in the meadowe here before this City, because all my days I have loved this
City, and I will that in the Church of the same Abbey, you do bury my body
as richly as you shall think convenient, and I recommend unto you all such as
have well served me, and I will that you retain them into you Service. When
King Oberon had said as much as pleased him, Huon answered and said. Dear
Sir, of the great goodness and honor that you have done unto me, I thank
you, and all that you have ordained or will do, by the grace of God it shall be
done, in such wise, that my soul shall bear no charge for it at the day of
Judgment. When the Lords and Ladies that were there assembled heard the words
of king Oberon, and saw well that his last end approached near, she cries and
clamours that were there made was great marvel to hear, and especially there
was such weepings and lamentations in the City, that great pity it was to
hear it, for they were aduertized that king Oberon drew near unto his last
end, who lay in his rich Couch in the midst of his Pallaice, making his
prayers unto our Lord God, and holding Huon by the hand, and at the last, he
said. My right dear Friend Huon, pray for me, and then he made the sign of
the Cross, and recommending his Soul unto God, the which incontinent was
borne into Paradise, by a great multitude of Angels sent from God, who at their
departing made such shining and clearness in the Pallaice, that there was
never none such seen before, and therewith there was so sweet a sm^ll, that
every man thought that they had been ravished into Paradise, whereby they
knew surely that king Oberons Soul was saved.

When king Huon, and king Arthur, and Queen Escleremond, Morguele Fay, and
Transeline, and king Carahew, Gloriand, and Mallabron, and all other knights
and Ladies, knew that king Oberon was dead, there is no humane tongue can tell
the cries, weepings, and complaints that were made there for the death of king
Oberon: ^hen his body was taken, and borne to the place where his Sepulcher
was devised, the which king Huon caused to be made right richly, and sounded
there an Abbey as king Oberon had devised. After the Burial, they returned to
the Pallaice, whereas the Tables were set, and there sat three crowned kings,
and two excellent Queens full of great beauty, at the upper end of the Table
sat king Huon, and next unto him king Arthur, and then king Carahew and the two
Queens, and the other Ladies departed, and went and dyned in their Chambers,
and they were all served of every thing that was necessary. And after dinner
and grace said, king Arthur, and king Carahew took their leave of king Huon,
and of Queen Escleremond, and so departed every man into his own Country,
and Morgue and Transeline tarried a certain space with Queen Escleremond in
great joy and solace. Now let us leave speaking of king Huon and Queen
Escleremond, who tarried still in the Fayrie, and shall do until the day of
Judgment, and ^et us return unto our former matter, and speak of fair
Clariet Daughter unto King Huon, who was at the noble City of Bourdeaux.

Chap. CXLVIII.
How the King of Hungary, and the King of England, and Florence Son unto
the King of Aragon, desired to have in marriage the fair Lady Clariet, and
how she was betrayed by Brohart* and how Sir Barnard was drowned, and of the
evils that the Traitor Brohart did unto the fair Lady Clariet, and how he
dyed at the last.

YE have heard here before, how King Huon and Queen Escleremond when they
departed from the City of Bourdeaux, they left their Daughter in the keeping
of the good Abbot of Cluny her Uncle, who grew and daily amended, in such sort,
that when she came to the age of Fifteen years, for her excellent beauty
her renown was so great in every Country, that there was neither King nor
Duke but desired to have her in marriage, so that the Abbot and Barnard her
cozen, had great business to give each of them their answer to be content.
One was the King of England, another the king of Hungary, and the other was
Florence Son unto the king of Aragon, but especially the king of Hungary
would have had her: the good Abbot answered the king of Hungaries
Ambassadors, and so to all the other, that until he had heard some news from
Duke Huon her Father, he could not agree to any marriage for her: but if they
would return again by the Feast of Saint John next following, then he would
be content, to hold a day of communication of marriage in the Town of Blay,
whereto the king of Hungary was content, and so were all the other
Ambassadors. And when the day came, the good Abbot took his way unto Blay, to
be there against the coming of the Kings of England, Hungary, and Florence
Son to the king of Aragon: the good Abbot left the Lady Clariet in the
keeping of Barnard her coozen, who loved her entirely, and when the Abbot was
come unto Blay, he made the Town to be hanged richly for the coming of the
said kings. And the third day after the Abbot came thither, first came to the
Town the king of England, who anon after he was alighted and somewhat rested,
he leapt upon his horse again, and went a hunting into the lands, then
afterward came the king of Hungary, in goodly array, he alighted at the
Pallaice, whereas the Abbot received him with great joy, then afterward entered
Florence with a noble company. The Abbot did salute them all one after
another, saying, how that he and the whole Town were at their commandment,
and they thanked him.

There was a false Traitor borne in Bourdeaux, who had heard all the
conclusion that the Abbot had taken with these Princes, and that was, that
they should see the Lady, and he that pleased her best, should have her in
marriage, this Traitor that heard that conclusion, thought within himself,
that he would let that matter if he could, and have her himself: this
Traitors name was Brohart, he departed from Blay, sore desiring to attain to
his false Enterprise, he took a little Ship, and sailed incontinent unto
Bourdeaux, then in have he went on shore, and feigned himself as though he had
great business to do, so he came to the Pallaice, whereas he found the fair
Lady Clariet and Barnard leaning in a window devising together. Then Brohart
saluted Barnard and the Lady all smiling. Brohart, (quoth Barnard) the matter
must be good that I see you come smiling, I pray you to show unto me how does
the good Abbot of Cluny my Coozen, and how has he received the Princes that be
come to Blay? Barnard, (quoth the Traitor) know for troth, that in all your
life you never saw such nobleness as is now in the Town of Blay: and
therefore Sir, hastily before the matter goes any further, the good Abbot of
Cluny (who is Uncle to my Lady here present) sends you word by me, that
incontinent as soon as night comes, that privily my Lady Clariet be made
ready, and apparelled and disguised like a man, and you and I to bring her
unto Blay to her Uncle the Abbot of Cluny, and that to morrow about noone you
ordain Damsels to come after, and to bring with them all her rich roabes and
apparel, to array her therein when time shall be, and that we take with us
some of her apparel to put on when she comes there, until all her other
apparel comes, and the cause why that her Uncle sends now for her so
privily, is that she should see all them that desires her in marriage, for out
of the Chamber whereas she shall be in, she shall see them all one after
another out at a secret window. When Barnard heard the unhappy Traitor,
weening that all that he had said had been true, because he was a man of
credence, therefore he believed his words. Alas, why did he so? for a more
vild Traitor there was not from thence to Rome, his Father and his Brethren
were so all, but Barnard believed him, because he went with the Abbot: then
Barnard said unto Clariet. Lady, you must make you ready, to depart as soon as
night comes, and you must be apparelled as Brohart has showed, to the intent
that you be not perceived, until you come to Blay to your Uncle the Abbot.
Barnard, (quoth the Lady) since it is the pleasure of mine Uncle and of you,
it is great reason that I do it, then she went into her chamber, and
apparelled her with her privy Damsels, and they laughed at her when they saw
her in man's apparel, and the cruel Traitor did so much, that he got a
little Ship, and brought it ready to the Posterne of the Pallaice, and he
had gotten ready a great stone, and tied thereto a cord, then he came unto
Barnard, and said. Sir, it is full time to depart, that we may be at Blay
before it be midnight. Then Barnard came to the Lady, whom he found ready
to depart, and said all smiling. Fair Lady, you resemble well to be a
gentle Squier, Barnard put his sword about him, and took the Lady by the arm
and said. Come on Companion, it is time we go. Brohart went on before, and
Barnard and the Lady went after arm in arm, and so went on to the Posterne
so primly, that no man perceived them, then Brohart entered into the Ship
first, and took Clariet by the hand, and led her to the end of the Ship, and
then Barnar^ entered, Brohart softly did let the stone slip into the water, and
held the cord still in his hand, and said unto Barnard. Sir, I do this,
because the Ship shall not go too fast, until we be past the middle of the
stream, and said unto Barnard. Sir, hold you this cord in your hand, until
we be past the hye stream, and then we shall draw it up again. Barnard (who
thought none ill) did as the Traitor said: then they took the healme in
their hands, and so departed a long the River of Gerone.

Chap. CXLIX.
when the Traitor Brohart drowned Barnard, and of their adventures, and how
Brohart was slain.

WHen Brohart saw that they were far off from the Town, and that the night
was dark, he came unto Barnard and said. Sir, quickly draw up the stone by
the cord out of the water, then Barnard stouped down low to draw it up, and
Brohart took Barnard by one of his legs before he was aware, and with all
his strength he tumbled him over the shipboard into the water, whereas he
was drowned: the which was great pity, for a more truer Knight could not be
found. When the fair Lady Clariet saw that Brohart had cast Barnard over the
shipboard, she gave a great cry, and she came unto Brohart and drew him by
the hair. When that the Traitor saw that the Lady tare his hair, he took
her by the arms so fiercely, that he cast her to the bottom of the Ship,
and did beat her cruelly, and said, that her cries and weepings could not aid
her, for whether she would or not he would have his pleasure of her. When the
Lady heard the false Traitor, she was in great fear and began sore to
tremble, making her prayers to our Lord God, to defend her from dishonor, and
to bring her out of the hands of that false Traitor her enemy, then the
unhappy Traitor came unto her and said, that it were better for her to
fulfill his pleasure with good will and love, rather then by force, or else he
would cast her into the River of Gerone. Oh false Traitor, (quoth she) as long
as thou live thou shall never have joy nor pleasure of my body: then the
false murderer did beat the Lady that pity it was to see, and so he left her
in a manner lying dead.

When he saw that it would be no better, he was weary and so fell a sleep,
the Ship went forth by force of the stream, and by that time it was fair day,
so far the ship went that night, that they were near to the end of the
River of Gerone, and the Lady sore weeping, beheld the Traitor how he slept,
and saw lying by him a loaf of bread, the famine that she was in constrained
her to take and to eat it, for she had such famine that she could forbear it
no longer, then she made her prayers all weeping to our Lord God, requiring him
to keep and defend her virginity, and to preserve her from that false Tirant
who had betrayed her. So far went the Ship, that it entered into the Sea,
the wind was great, and they had neither healme nor sail to aid themselves
withal, then the wind took them, and drove them to a little Port under a hye
Rock in a little Isle: then Brohart awoake, and was glad when he saw that
they were arrived near to the Land, for he knew right well the country, and
then he said to the Lady. Thou ^eest well that thou have no puissance to go
against my will, the which thou must needs fulfill, for thou can not have any
succor of any man or woman living, nor all thy defense cannot avail thee,
thou see well we be in an Isle whereas the Sea goes round about it,
wherefore I have great doubt that we shall never depart from hence: therefore
dismay you not, for as now I will do thee no hurt. This thief when he saw
that he was in this Isle, he began to curse God, and the hour that ever he saw
Clariet, for the false Traitor saw well that he should die there by famine
and rage, for there was no ship to enter into the Sea, therefore he had then
no mind to do any harm to the Lady, the which was by the grace of God, who
would not that the Lady should be dishonored: and when she saw that they
were so near the land, sore weeping she issued out of the boat, and ran up
the Rock. Now God defend her, for the same time there was upon the Mountain
six Thieves, who lay to espy the Marchaunts, and they had a little Galley
lying in a little corner of the Rock near to them, and had covered it with
bows and green leaves. When Brohart saw the Damsel run away, he cried as
loud as he could and said. By God Madame, your flying shall not avail you, for
whether thou will or not, this night I will have my pleasure of thee, the six
Thieves who were upon the Mountain eating of their meat, when they heard
Brohart crying after the Damsel, they were sore abashed, and were in great
fear that they had been espied.

Then the Damsel who ran upon the Mountain, when she saw them, she
said. Ah Sirs, I pray you have pity of me, and aid and succor me against
this false Traitor, this night passed he did steal me away out of the City
of Bourdeaux, and I am Daughter to noble Duke Huon. When these Thieves heard
the Damsel, they arose up all, and thought that it had been some feigned
matter to have beguiled them: but when they saw Brohart follow the Lady, then
the Master of the Thieves stepped forth and said. How is it that thou art so
hardy to come upon us, thou art come hither to epsy us, but we shall never be
accused by thee, thou art but ill come to this bridale. When the Traitor
Brohart saw the six Thieves, he was sore abashed, and saw well that he should
be feign to defend himself, then he drew out his sword, and struck the
Master Thief such a blow upon the head, that he claue him to the teeth: and
when the other five Thieves saw their Master slain, they were right
sorrowful and angry, then they assailed Brohart on all sides, and he
defended himself so well, that before he was stricken to the earth, he slew
four of them, and in the mean time whiles they fought, the Lady Clariet came
to the place whereas the Thieves had been, and there she sound meat and drink
plenty: and when she saw the meat, she was right joyful and thanked God
thereof, and did eat and drink at her pleasure, and she saw that the Thieves
had cast Brohart to the earth, whereof she was joyful: howbeit, she knew not
what company she was come into, nor in whose hands she was arrived in. When
the Thieves had cast Brohart to the earth, they made him show where he had
taken the Damsel, and he showed them all the matter, and how he had taken her
to the intent to have dishonored her, and to have had her to his Wife, and
to have carried her into some strange place unknown. When the Thieves heard
what Brohart had said, they said. Oh thou untrue and false Traitor, there is
no torment in the world so cruel, but that thou have deserved a worse pain,
and therefore by us thy desert shall be rewarded, then they took him and bound
fast his feet, and hanged him up by the feet upon a Tree, then they made a
fire, and under his head they made a great smoke, and so made him to die in
great dolor and pain: thus ended the Traitor Brohart miserably his days.
Then the two Thieves came to the place whereas Clariet was, and they demanded
of her estate, and she showed them all the manner, and how she was taken by
the Traitor Brohart, and she declared unto them what she was: then the
Thieves caused her to put off her clothes that she was in, and to put on her
other rich apparel, and when they saw her (...) apparelled, they thought that
no Lady nor Damsel in the world could pass her in beauty, for she was come
again to her beauty, and she thought her self well assured, because she was
delivered from the false Traitor Brohart. When one of these two Thieves saw
the great beauty of this Damsel, he said unto his fellow: this night I will
have my pleasure of her, the other said, that he would not suffer that, and
said how he was the first that overthrew Brohart, who had stolen her away:
then the other drew out his dagger, and struck his fellow into the body to
the heart, and when he felt himself stricken to the death, he took courage on
him, and drew his Sword, and struck the other upon the head to the brains,
and so he fell down dead, and the other that was wounded to the death, fell
down in like wise by his fellow dead, and so thereby the fair Lady Clariet
was left there all alone. When she saw her self so all alone in the Isle,
whereas no habitation was, she began then pitiously to weep and complain,
saying. Oh good Lord, I pray thee by thy grace to have pity of me, and I
require thee humbly wheresoever I go, to save and defend my virginity, and
aid me that I may come to sauegard. Now let us leave speaking of the fair
Clariet, and return to speak of the Kings and Princes that were at Blay,
abiding the coming thither of the fair Lady Clariet.

Chap. CL.
Of the great sorrow that was made at Blay, by the Abbot of Cluny, and by the
Princes of the noble City of Bourdeaux, for the fair Lady Clariet that was
stolen away: and of the sorrow that was made, when they saw Barnard brought in
dead by Six men. And of the punishment that was done to the Lineage of the
Traitor Brohart.

WHen these Kings and Princes were arrived at Blay, and had spoken with the
good Abbot of Cluny, they concluded between them three that the Lady Clariet
should be sent for, and he that she would freely choose, should be her
Husband, for each of them thought themselves most fair, and thought that there
could not be found three goodlyer young Princes then they were, but especially
Florence Son to the King of Aragon was the most fairest. And the same time
that they were determined, to send to the City of Bourdeaux for the Lady
Clariet there came thither the Knights, Squiers, Ladies, and Damsels appointed
by Brohart, thinking to have found there the fair Clariet, and they brought
her roabes and Jewels to apparel her withal, (as Brohart had devised) they
came and alighted at the Pallaice, the Abbot of Cluny being at the gate, and
seeing the Ladies and Damsels coming, thought that it had been his Niece the
fair Lady Clariet, he went incontinent unto them, and demanded where his
Niece Clariet was. Sir, (quoth the Knights) we think to find her here with
you, for yesternight late the Lady departed from the City of Bourdeaux to come
to you, and Brohart came for her, who with Sir Barnard went with her, and they
commanded us that we should not fail to be here with you at this hour: then
they showed all the manner how Brohart came, and what he had said unto them.
And when the good Abbot of Cluny heard them, he fell suddenly to the earth in
a swound, so that all that were there present thought that he had been dead,
then at last he revived, and cast out a great cry and said. Ah my right dear
Niece, I ought to be sorrowful thus to loose you in this manner, I would to
our Lord God that I were under the earth, for I would live no longer in this
world. Ah thou false Traitor Brohart, thy kindred did never good: Oh Barnard,
where is become your nobleness? yet I cannot believe that you be any thing
culpable. Anon these news were known in the Town, so that all the Kings and
Princes were advertised of the matter, and they came hastily (...) the
Pallaice, whereas they found the Abbot in sore wee^inges, whom they had
slain, if it had not been for the good renown that they knew to be in him,
therefore they forbear him: then every man mounted upon their horses and
road toward the City Bourdeaux, whereas they found the Burgesses and the
common people in great cries and weepings, bewaylinge for the noble Duke Huon
and the Duchess Escleremond his Wife, and for Clariet their Daughter, who was
lost and betrayed by Brohart.

When the Abbot of Cluny and the other Princes were entered into Bourdeaux, and
saw such sorrow made there, they all (...) to weeping, and as they were in this
sorrow, there came thither Siremen, bringing with them Sir Barnard dead, who
they had found drowned in the River of Gerone, if the sorrow was great before,
then it was more renewed when they saw Barnard dead: if I should rehearse the
sorrow that was made that day in the City of Bourdeaux, as well of the Princes
as of the Abbot and common people, it should be too long to rehearse. Then the
Kings and Princes, well advertised of the Lineage and Parents issued of the
blood of Brohart, and how always they have been full of treason, they were
searched out in every place of the City, as well men as women and Children,
there were found out to the number of Threescore and ten persons, and they
were all taken and cast into the River of Gerone, to the intent that none
should be left alive of that kindred, and never more to be had in remembrance.
After this was done, the Kings and Princes departed out of the City, and road
into their own Countries, right sorrowful and sore displeased for the loosing
of the Lady Clariet, and the Abbot abode still at Bordeaux, and buried
Barnard, who were sore complained for of the people. Now let us leave speaking
of them, and return to the fair Lady Clariet, who was all alone upon the
Mountain.

Chap. CLI.
How the Lady Clariet all alone came to the Seaside, whereas arrived the King
of Granado in a Ship, who took away Clariet, and of other matters.

Now shows the History, that after the Thieves were slain and Brohart
dead, the Lady Clariet abode alone upon the Mountain with the dead men, she
wept pitiously, and said. Ah good Lord, in what hour was I borne in, alas,
what ill hap and destiny have I* it had been better for me never to have
been borne, for I see well that here I must dye: Alas, I wot not whether to
go, for in this Isle is neither man nor woman, to whom I may go for any
refuge. Thus sore complaining, the Lady went down the Mountain, and by that
time the Ship that she came in was floated away, and as she looked into the
Sea, she saw a great Ship coming toward the Port, for fresh water and for
wood: and when she saw that, she was right joyful and thanked our Lord Jesus
Christ, and she thought that they had been Christian men, but they were
Sarazins and Paynims, and with them was a King, who was their Lord and
Sovereign, he was king of Granado, and was returning into his Country, but
he had such fortune upon the Sea, that he was constrained to come thither:
then they cast anchor an^ took land, and the King when he saw the Lady upon
the Seaside, he demanded of her what she was, and of what Country* Sir,
(quoth she) seeing you will know of mine estate, I shall show you: then the
Lady showed before all them that were there present, how she was Daughter to
Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and showed all the adventure that was fallen unto her.
When the Sarazin King heard that, he was right joyful, and said. Fair
Lady, it is happy for you that I have found you, for I have no Wife, you
shall be my Wife, and ly with me this night, but first you must deny your
Law, and believe upon the Law of Mahomet upon whom I do believe. When the
fair Lady heard the Paynim King, she said. God forbid that I should leave
the Law of Jesus Christ to believe in the Law of Mahomet, I had rather have all
my members drawn one piece from another with wild horses, then to be wedded
wife to such a kind of man as you be.

When the King heard the Damsel, that she set so little by him, he had great
displeasure thereat, and lifted up his hand, and gave her upon the cheek such
a blow, that the blood ran out of her mouth and nose, so that she fell to the
earth, whereof he was sore blamed of his men, and he said unto them. Why Sirs,
did you not hear how she despised our Law, and set no more by me then if I
had been but a boy? then he commanded that they should take and cast her into
the Sea, and he departed from her, in great displeasure that she answered him
so rudely. Then the Sarazins came and took the Lady rudely, and carried her
into the Ship, and so saved her, but the King knew not thereof. Then when the
King came again to the Ship, they drew up their anchors, and hoysed up
sail, and had good wind, then as the King walked up and down in the Ship,
he saw the Damsel within the Ship, whereof he was sore abashed, for he
thought that his men had drowned her, then he looked upon her, and thought
that he never saw so fair a Lady, and so he desired her with all his heart,
and said unto her. Fair Lady, now you be here, your denial shall not avail
you, for this night you shall lie with me. When the fair Lady Clariet heard
the Paynim King, devoutly she called upon our Lord God, and humbly required
him to preserve her virginity, and to bring her out of the hands of the
Sarazins, and then she kneeled down before the King, humbly desiring him to
have pity of her, and said, how she was content to follow his pleasure,
as soon as he came into his own Country. Well quoth the King, whether you
will or not you must suffer my pleasure, for I will not depart from you until
I have line with you one night, and that I may hold you in mine arms: and when
she understood him, she began sore to weep, desiring God to aid and
succor her at that time, for otherwise she saw well that she was but lost.

Therewith there arose so great a wind and so horrible, that the Sea that was
calm and peaceable, began to arise, and the wind was so great, that whether
the Sarazins would or not, it behooued them to abandon their Ship to the
wind, whereof they were in such fear, that the King and all other had great
doubt of their deaths, for their sails were all to torn with the wind, and
near hand the Ship perished, they cried and called upon their God Mahomet
for succor and aid. The King was in such fear, that he had now no list to
desire the fair Lady Clariet of her love, who was sore afraid and pale for
fear: this torment and Tempest endured all the night, and they were driven the
same night beyond Valencia the great, and in the morning they saw the Town of
Tours, to the which Port the wind drove them: and when the Paynims saw that
they were arrived there, they were right sorrowful, for they knew well that
the Town was christened, they saw no way how to eschew it, but they had
rather to ^e as slaves all their lives, then to be drowned in the Sea.

The same time there was arrived at the same Port, a noble Knight named Sir
Peter of Aragon, and when he saw the other Ship coming to the Port by
constraint of the wind, and saw well (without it were succored) the ship
should be perished against the Rock, whereby they within and all the riches
should de perished and drowned, then he cried to the Galleys that lay in the
Port, to go and succor that strange ship, and then the Mariners went to the
Sea and came to the Ship. When the Sarazins saw that, the were in great fear
to be slain: then there came two Paynims to the Damsel, to have taken her
and to have cast her into the Sea. Then she took the Mask of the Ship in her
arms, and held it so fast, that they could not draw her from it: then the
Aragonoyse began to approach to the Ship, and cast their hooks to join
together. The Lady in the Ship had great fear, the which was no marvel,
howbeit, she was joyful, when she knew that they that came were christened,
then the Aragonoys by the cords and roapes entered into the ship: and when
Peter of Aragon and his company were entered into the Ship, he saw the Lady
sore weeping, then he demanded of the Sarazins, where they had gotten that
Princess, right now (quoth he) I saw, how you would have taken her and cast
her into the Sea, if I had not come hastily: then one of them said. Sir, we
be of Granado, and fortune of the Sea has driven us hither, we be ready to
be your slaves, or else to pay ransom at your pleasure. Paynims, (quoth
Peter) all the gould in the world shall not save your lives, none of you shall
escape, then he commanded that they should be all slain, and that none shall
escape alive, the which was done incontinent, all were slain except the King,
of whom Peter of Aragon demanded, why he would have drowned that noble
Damsel, and where they had found her. Sir, (quoth the King) we know her not,
nor what she is, for we found her all alone upon a Rock in an Isle within the
Sea. And when I saw the great beauty and bounty that was in her, I coueted
her, and caused her to be put into my Ship, thinking to have had my pleasure
of her, but she would in no wise suffer me, wherefore I was displeased with
her. Well, (quoth Peter) you shall be slain and go after your men, without
you will believe in Jesus Christ, and renounce the Law of Mahomet. Sir, (quoth
the Paynim) I had rather to be slain all quick, then to leave my holy Law
and to take that belief that you are of. When Peter heard him say so, he gave
him with his sword such a stroke upon the head, that he claue it to the teeth,
and the King fell down dead, whereof the Lady Clariet was right joyful.

Then Peter came unto her, and demanded what she was, and where the Paynims
had found her? Sir, (quoth the Lady) I was borne in a part of France, in a
Town called Naunts in Britain, and my Father was of L^sborne, and he had
great desire to see his Friends, so he entered into a Ship, and two of my
brethren and my self, and diverse other Merchants together, and when we had
thought to have entered into the Haven at Lisborne, a great horrible wind took
us, so that we were feign to abandon our ship, and to let it go by the grace
of God, and at the will of the wind and weather, then we passed the straights
of Maurocco, and there our Ship ran against a Rock and burst all to
pieces, so that my Father and all that were in the Ship were drowned, and by
the grace of God I sat upon a sack of woll, and held me fast, and then the
waves brought me to the land-side, whereof I thanked God, and within an hour
after, this heathen King arrived there with his company by fortune of the
Sea, and so they took me into their Ship, and the King enforced himself to
have had his pleasure of me, and then by fortune of another Tempest we arrived
here, whereas you have slain him and all his men. Fair Damsel, (quoth Peter
of Aragon) you may thank God that you be come into my hands. Sir, (quoth
she) I know well that if you had not been, I had been lost for ever: and
therefore Sir, as long as God shall give me life, I will be glad to serve you,
as the most lowliest Chamberlain in your house, and put my body and honesty
into Gods hands and yours. Fair Damsel, (quoth Peter) as long as I live you
shall not lack, for by the grace of God, your body and your honor shall be
well saved, and peradventure you shall have such a Husband, that you shall
think your self right happy, our lord God did unto you a great grace when
you fell into my hands.

Then Peter of Aragon took the Damsel by the hand, and commanded to hoyse
up the sails, and to return unto Taragon a City between Barselona and
Valencia the great, whereas then was the King of Aragon, and so long they
sailed night and day, that at the last they saw the Towers of Taragon, whereof
they thanked God, and as they approached near to the City, the King of
Aragon was in his Pallaice looking out at a window, then he saw coming in
the Sea six Galleys and a great Ship, whereof he was abashed, and maruailed
what it might be, for he knew them not because of the great Ship, then they
that knew them, came to the King and said, how that it was his Coozen Peter
of Aragon, who is come home in safety thanked be God. Then the King and his
lords with him went down, and went to the Seaside, whereas he found the
noble man Peter of Aragon his Coozen, and all his company with him. Then the
King embraced him, and said: Coozen, you are right heartily welcome, I am
joyful of your good adventure. I pray you (Cozen) to show me where have you
gotten this great Ship, that seems to be so rich? Then Peter showed unto
him all the adventures, and how he res^ued the Damsel out of the hands of
the Sarazins, and he showed her unto the King, and said. Sir, I believe in
this world there is not a fairer, sweeter, nor more gracious creature, nor none
that seems more to be extract of a higher lineage. The King beheld the
Damsel, and she kneeled down before him. Fair Damsel, (quoth the King) I
pray you to show me what you be, and of what lineage, and from whence you
come? the Lady who was in great fear to name her self truly, for fear
least she should be in ill hands, cast down her head presently and began to
weep, so that the tears fell from her eyes, and said. Sir, I require you
desire no such thing of me at this time, for I know not who is my Parents, nor
of what lineage I am of. When the King understood the Damsel, and saw how
she wept, he had great pity of her, and comforted her as much as he could:
then Peter showed unto the King all that the Damsel had showed him before, and
she was found by the Sarazins (quoth he) whom I have slain, she was happy
that she fell in to my hands, for by the grace of God I shall see her well
married and set forth.

Then the King and Peter went from the Ships into the Town, and caused the
Damsel to be brought after them, with two Gentlemen into Peter's lodging, and
as she passed through the Town, she was regarded with Ladies and Damsels, and
they all praised her beauty, saying one to another, that there was never a
fairer Lady borne, nor more likely to be come of a noble blood. Great feasting
was made in the City, for the coming home of Peter of Aragon, and of the
Damsel that he had brought with him. The same time, Florence the Kings Son
had been a hunting, and came home, and when he was in the Town, and saw the
streets hanged, and the Ladies and Damsels and other making so great joy and
feasting, he was abashed, and demanded of a Burges, if there were any new
wedding, and wherefore it was that the people made so great joy and feasting?
Sir, (quoth the Burges) the feast that is made now and the joy, is for the
coming home of Peter of Aragon, who has been so long out, for that God has
sent him good adventure, for he has won and conquered the great Ship of
Maliga, wherein was the King of Granado, great riches he has won, and he
has slain all the Sarazins that were in the Ship. Then Florence rested not,
until he came to his Cozen Peter of Aragons lodging, and made him good cheer,
and said. Cozen, you are welcome home, and I am right joyful of your good
adventure. Sir, (quoth Peter) I thank God I have had good fortune, and Sir, I
shall show you one thing that I have won, whereof I am most joyful: then he
showed him the Damsel, who was sober and sad, and showed him how he wanne
her. When Florence saw the Lady, his heart sprang for joy, and the more he
beheld her, the more fairer she seemed: and the Damsel beheld him right
humbly, and she thought that she never saw a fairer young man before, nor
better made nor fourmed of all his members. Florence so beheld the Damsel, by
reason whereof the dart of love struck him to the heart, whereof the wound
could not be lightly healed, I may well say, that in all the world in that
time could not be found again two such persons, for the great beauty wherewith
they were garnished could not be described, for God and nature had forgotten
nothing in forming of them, sweetly they regarded each other, at that time if
Florence had known, that she had been the fair Clariet of Bourdeaux, he
would have married her incontinent, she was greatly taken in the love of
Florence, and so was he with her: then he desired with all his heart to know
what she was, for his heart gave him that she should be come of some noble
blood, and said unto himself, that he desired much to know it, and that in
all the world there was nothing he loved so well, and thought that without her
love he could not long endure, thinking to desire her to take him for her
Lover, and that if she refused him, that short should be his life, but thought
to be so bold as to speak to her.

Thus Florence taken with the fire of love, took the fair Damsel by the
lilly white hand, and caused her to sit down by him: then he drew her a
little apart, to the intent that none should hear him, and then he said.
Fair Damsel, you be welcome into these parts, I pray you to show me what you
be, and of what Lineage? Sir, (quoth the Damsel) little shall you win when
you know the certain what I am, but since it pleases you to know I shall show
you. Sir, know for troth, I am Daughter to a poor honest man of the Country,
and in times past was one of the Chamberers with the Duchess Escleremond of
Bourdeaux, and Sir, by great treason I was stolen away, whereby since I have
suffered much poverty, so that if God and this noble man Peter of Aragon had
not rescued me, I had been lost for ever, and therefore Sir, since I am poor
and desolate, I require you in the honor of our Lord God, that you will not
require me of any villainy against my body and honesty, neither in word nor
deed, and sir I believe suerly no more ye think to do, for I had rather be
hewn all to pieces, then any creature should have pleasure of my body without
I were married. Fair Damsel, (quoth he) I swear by God that me created,
that of me nor of any other man living, you shall not be desired against your
honor, for I know no man living, that would require you of any dishonor, or
say any thing that should not be agreeable unto you, but I shall make him to
die of an ill death, and I will that you know, that from henceforth I will be
your true Lover, and none shall make departure of us two, and if it were so
that my Father were dead, I would never have other Wife but you. Sir, (quoth
the Lady) I pray you to forbear speaking of any such words, for it were not
meet for the Son of a King, so to debase himself, as to set his love upon
so poor a Maid as I am, beware how you set your heart to love, for if the
King your Father perceive any thing, that you should set your love upon me,
he would soon put me to death, therewith she cast down her head, and said to
her self. Ah good Lord, if this young Prince knew surely what I were, it
might well be that he would have me in marriage, as yet in all my life, I
never set my love upon any person, but this young man whom I never saw
before, it makes me to think that which I never thought before, that it
makes my blood and all my members to tremble, I am in worse case for his love,
then he is for me, therewith she began sore to weep. When Florence saw her,
he was right sorrowful, and said. Fair Damsel, I require you to take me
for your true and faithful Servant, otherwise I cannot see how I shall live
long. Sir, (quoth she) I am well content to grant you my love, so that your
deed and thought be upon goodness and honor, for if I may perceive in any
manner, that your thought be otherwise, you have lost my love for ever. Fair
Love, (quoth Florence) have no doubt thereof, that ever I shall have any
thought of villainy against you. Thus as ye have heard was the first
acquaintance between these two Lovers, that is to say, the fair lady Clariet
Daughter to Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and of Florence Son to the King of Aragon.

Chap. CLII.
How the King forbad his Son Florence, that he should not be so hardy as to
fall acquainted with the fair Lady Clariet, and how Florence promised the
King his Father, to deliver into his hands the King of Navarre Prisoner, in
case that he would be content at his return, that he might have the new found
Damsel, the which thing the King promised, but he did it not, for he made
the Damsel to be taken, and had drowned her, if Peter of Aragon had not been,
who rescued and saved her from the death.

WHen Florence had long devised with the Damsel, he took his leave of her,
and of Peter of Aragon his Cozen, and then he returned to the King his Father,
and the next day he went again to the Damsels lodging. So often he resorted
thither, that great brute ran in the Pallaice, and also in the Town, how
that Florence was amorous of the Damsel, that Sir Peter of Aragon had brought
thither, and the matter at the last was showed to King Garyn his Father,
wherewith he was so sorrowful, that he was all in a rage, and said within
himself. Ah good lord, this new found Damsel will win my Son if she can,
and get him from me, I know well, that by reason of the great beauty that is
in her, my Son will be enamoured of her, but by the God that I believe upon,
if I see that my Son either go or come unto her, (as it is said he does)
that acquaintance shall be dearly bought, for with mine own hands I shall
slay her. Right sorrowful and angry was King Garyn with his Son Florence*
and with the Damsel, then he sent for his Son, and when he was before him,
the King demanded of him fiercely, from whence he came* Sir, (quoth Florence)
I have been a sporting in my Cozen Peter of Aragons house, and have passed the
time there with the new come Damsel, the most fairest that ever was borne,
and the most gentlest and best taught, right fair and sweet are her devises.
Florence, (quoth the King) I charge thee in as much as thou fear my
displeasure, that thou come no more at her, beware that thou fallest not
enamoured of her, if thou do, thou were never so ill acquainted with any
Love, nor there never came so ill adventure to the Damsel, if she draw thee
to love her, for if I may know that thou go thither any more, I shall set
her in such a prison, whereas I shall cause her to end her days miserably.
Father, (quoth Florence) me thinks that you do us great wrong, to forbid us
to play and sport together in all goodness and honor, and God defend that I
should entend any ways to deceive her: Dear Father, remember that you have
been young, therefore suffer that youth may pass their time in goodness and
honor with us, as it has done with you, now you are about Four-score years
or more, you ought to think of nothing but to serve God, and eat and drink
and sleep, it ought not to trouble you, though our youth pass the time in good
works, you ought to be content, that we love by amors as you have done
before this, for to the Damsel I bear all honor, and I will love her,
howsoever it be taken fair or foul, there is no man living that shall let
me as long as life is in my body, she is fair and gentle, and it is said
that I am fair, and that it were a meet couple for us two to be joined
together in marriage, and therefore Father, I pray you to blame me no more nor
the Damsel, for in all that I can do, I am her Lover and she is mine.

When the King had well understood his Son, in great ire and displeasure,
he said: Oh thou ungracious Son, little thou prizest or honor me, in that
thou will do thus against my will: know for certain, if I may live but till
to morrow in the morning, I shall make a departure of your two loves. When
Florence heard his Father, he said. My dear Lord and Father, if God will you
shall not do as you have said, for if you do, with mine own hands I shall
slay my self, for I will not live one day after. When the King heard that,
he was right sorrowful for fear of loozing of his Son, and studied within
himself what to do, then he said. Fair Son, take thine armor, and go and
seek adventures as I have done in my time, then I shall marry thee to some
Wife, such a one as thou can find in any Country, although she be never so
great or noble, I shall cause thee to have her, i^ thou will forsake and leave
this new found Damsel, for by her no wealth nor honor can come unto thee, it
should be a great evil unto thee, that after my days it should be said,
that a new found Damsel should be Lady and Queen of my Realm. Thou
know well, how thine Uncle the King of Navarre makes me great war, for a
debate that is lately fallen between him and me, I know well that now at this
Month of April, he will come and invade my Realm, and therefore good Son,
seek for some other Wife, and let this folly pass: then I shall make thee a
Knight, and then help to aid and defend my Realm against the King of Navarre
thine Uncle, thou art big and strong enough to defend my Land. Good Father
(quoth Florence) speak no more unto me, for I will never have no other Wife
but this fair Damsel, whom I love entirely. Son quoth the King, thou
abasest thy self over low, nor there is no friend nor kindred that thou have,
that will keep any company with thee, but they will clean fly from thee:
therefore good Son, put away from thee this folly, beware, in as much as thou
think to have my Realm after my decease, and upon the pain to be
banished out of my Country, take not her against my will.

Then the King called unto him his Cozen Peter of Aragon, and charged him,
that if Florence his Son came any more to his lodging, that he should
incontinent tell him of it, for I promise (quoth he) by the faith that I owe
unto our Lord God, if he come thither any more, I shall cause the Damsel that
is in your house to be slain. Florence was right sorrowful, when he heard to
the pleasure of the King his Father. Thus as the King rebuked his Son, there
came in a Knight and kneeled down, and said. Sir, I have brought you ill
tidings, for the King of Navarre is entered into your Realm, and sets all
your Country in flame and fire, and near to your City they be to the number
of more then Thirty Thousand men, besides the great Battle that comes
after, wherein there is about threescore Thousand men, they exile your
Country, and they slay men, women, and Children, they spare neither young nor
old, it is great need that you make have, and to bring your men together to
resist your enemies. When King Garyn heard the Messenger, he was right
sorrowful, then he called unto him his Cozen Peter of Aragon, who was his
chief Constable, and said. Sir, make ready our men to resist our enemies,
then he called unto him Florence his Son, and said. Fair Son, take thine
armor, and show thy virtue against thine enemies, who waste my Realm, and
take upon thee the chief charge, and lead mine Host, for I have no puissance
nor strength to do it, because of the great age that I am of, I have lived so
long that I can no more ride: therefore defend thou the Land that thou shall
hold after me, and then thou do as a wise man should do. Father, (quoth
Florence) by the grace of God I will put no armor upon my back to defend
your Land, except you will give me in marriage the fair Damsel that is in my
Cozen Peter of Aragons house, if you will do me that courtesy, and promise
me to do it, I shall deliver into your hands your enemy as Prisoner, to do
with him your pleasure, otherwise look not that I shall do any thing. When
the King saw that his Son would do none otherwise, then he commanded all
his other men every man to arm himself, and to go and resist his enemies:
the which they did incontinent, and they issued out into the fields more then
ten Thousand men, and Sir Peter of Aragon had the leading of them, and they
were not out of the Town above two Leagues, but they encountered their
enemies, there were many spears broken, and many a Knight beaten down to the
earth and slain, and their bodies lying without souls among the horse feet,
right valiantly did Sir Peter of Aragon behave himself that day: but he had
not strength enough sufficient, for his enemies increased, wherefore he was
constrained to retire back toward the City, howbeit, before he entered, he
did great loss and damage unto his enemies.

When the Nauarnes saw the Aragons retire into the City, then they pitched up
their Tents and Pauillions about the Town, and when king Garyn saw his men
returned, then he called his Son Florence, and said. Son, take thine armor
and aid to defend the Land, the which appertains to thee after my decease.
Sir, (quoth Florence) that will I never do, without first you promise me, to
give me the fair Damsel in marriage, by that covenant, that I shall deliver
into your hands as Prisoner mine Uncle the King of Navarre. When the King his
Father heard him, he muzed a litttle, and said. My Son, I grant thee thy
desire, so that thou will deliver me thine Uncle the king of Navarre, to do
with him at my pleasure, therefore take thine armor and make thee ready,
thine armor is good, and thy swoorde is with the best, and if thou can do as
thou say, thou shall have the fair Damsel, howbeit, he said to himself
privily, that he had rather to loose one of his hands, then a stranger should
be Queen after him, for as soon as my Son (quoth he) shall be issued out of
the City, I shall cause the Damsel to be drowned in the Sea, for I will not
suffer her to live, although I should be disenherited for it. Then Florence
hearing his Father, promising to him to have the Dams^ll, he was right joyful:
but he knew not the inward ill will of his Father, then he said. Sir, then I
require you to send for my Love hither, to the intent that she may guird my
sword about me, whereby I shall be the more bold and hardy when I come into
the Battle. The king did as his Son required, but the Son knew not the
Fathers thought, the King sent two knights for the Damsel, and when she
came there, she was greatly regarded of them that were there, for they had
never seen a fairer, nor one that seemed to be extract of a hye generation.
When Florence saw her in the Pallaice, his heart rose up, and he ran unto
her and embraced and kissed her, and the Lady suffered him with a good will:
wherewith the king had at his heart such sorrow, that he had near hand run
upon them, but he forbear it, because he saw his Son ready to go against his
enemies, then he helped to arm his Son richly, and in like wise so did the
fair Damsel.

When king Garyn had made his Son ready, the Damsel did guird his Sword
about him, then the king drew it out of the sheath, and therewith made him
knight, and then his horse was brought unto him, and he leapt lightly upon
him, with his Spear in his hand, and helmet upon his head, and sheelde about
his neck. Then Florence said unto the king his Father. Sir, I leave with you
my Love, whom I love best in all this world, I leave her in your keeping, for
if our Lord God give me the grace that I may return, I shall bring unto you
mine Uncle the king of Navarre as a Prisoner. The king granted unto his Son
all that he would desire, but he knew not the inward intention that he was
purposed to do. Then the king commanded Ten of his knights to see the guiding
of the Damsel, and to honor her as much as they might, until his Son were
out of the City, and then to drown her in the Sea, to the intent that never
more tidinges should be heard of her.

Chap. CLIII.
How Florence went to fight with his enemies, and how Sir Peter of Aragon
returned toward the Town, to bring thither Prisoners: and how he rescued
the fair Damsel Clariet from drowning, and how afterward King Garyn caused
the Damsel to be closed up in a prison.

WHen Florence was armed and mounted, he took up his horse freshly before the
Damsel, and blessed him, and took his leave of the king and of his Love, and
so departed and road to the gate: and all that saw him said, how they never
saw so goodly a knight, nor more seeming to be feared, then he issued out of
the gate, and road toward the Tents of his enemies, with ten Thousand good
knights and hardy: the Ladies and Damsels went to the walls of the City to
behold the young knight. When the Nauarnes saw him coming, there came against
him more then fifteen Thousand men, and they came down in a Valley by covert,
to have cut him the way between the Host and the Town, but the valiant
knight Sir Peter of Aragon (who was with Florence) espied them, and so made
have to be before them: and when he saw his time to set upon his enemies,
Florence (who was sore desirous to fulfill his promise to the king his Father)
took his Spear, and encountered with a knight with such virtue, that he ran
him clean through, and with drawing out of his Spear, the Nauarnes fell down
dead, then Florence said. God has given me a good beginning, then he drew
out his sword, and struck another upon the helmet, in such sort, that he claue
his head to the teeth, and the third and fourth he made dolorously to die, and
he never ceased until he had slain Ten of his enemies. Thus under the
meadows of Courtoys, was a horrible Battle between the Nauarnes and Aragons,
where there was upon both parts such slaughter, that it was great marvel to
behold it. Anon Florence sword was well known, for by the force of his arms
he brake the great preasses, for upon whom soever his stroke lighted, he was
either slain or cast to the earth, every man feared him so much, that none
durst abide nor approach near unto him.

The same time that Florence was in the Battle doing of maruailes, the fair
Damsel Clariet was upon the walls of the City, with other Ladies and Damsels,
regarding the hye Prowess that Florence did in the field, and the joy that she
had thereof, was soon turned into sorrow and weepings, for king Garyn (who
could not forget the mortal hate that he had to the Damsel) called unto him
Ten knights of them that were secret with him, and said. Sirs, this new found
Damsel, with whom my Son Florence is in hot amors, she displeases me so
much, that I cannot find in my heart to look upon her, my Son thinks to
have her in marriage at his return, but as long as he lives, he shall never
see her more whatsoever fall thereof, therefore go your way, and take and cast
her into the Sea, among the greatest waves that you can find. When these
knights understood the King, who commanded them to do this murder, they were
right sorrowful at their hearts, but they durst not say nay, nor do against
his will, for if they had, they knew well that they should die, and they knew
that there was neither mercy nor pity in him: therefore they durst make no
semblance to the contrary, they feared so much to displease him. Then they
went and took the Damsel whereas she was. Sirs, (quoth she) what will you
do with me? wherefore do you take me? let me go, if you will have any
thing with me, show me? They said, Damsel speak no more, for your end is
come, you shall never see fair day more: and when she saw that she was so
taken with Ten men, who went threatening to slay her, then she cast out a
great cry, and desired God to aid and succor her. Then they bound the Damsels
hands with a cord, in such manner, that her white tender skin burst, and
they bound her so sore that the blood dropped out at her nails. Sirs, (quoth
she) I cry you mercy, little shall you win to slay me, you shall do great
sin, seeing I have not deserved it. Madame, (quoth they) your words cannot
avail you, the King will not that you shall make auaunt to have his Son in
marriage, for you shall be drowned in the Sea whether you will or not, your
weeping shall not aid you. Then four Ribaulds took and bound her, and drew
her by the hair of her head, and led her toward the Seaside to have drowned
her, but often times it is said, that which God will have saved, cannot be
perished.

The same season Florence was in the Battle, whereas he fought with his
enemies, and Sir Peter of Aragon had taken many Prisoners, and he came unto
Florence, and said. Ah Sir, I require you to let us return to the City, and
be content with that you have done this day, for yonder you may see coming all the whole Host of the Nauarnes, against whom it is not possible for us to
endure, for they are more then threescore Thousand men, and they all hate us to
the death, you have done enough and ought to be content, if they take you, none
can save your life. Coozen, (quoth Florence) I pray you before I depart, let
me Just once with mine Uncle the king of Navarre, whom I have promised to
yield as Prisoner unto the king my Father, and thereby I shall have in marriage
the fair Damsel my Love, and for the love of that fair Damsel I shall make
many a Nauernoys to loose their lives. Sir, (quoth Peter) since you desire your
own death, I am right sorry thereof, but I will no longer tarry here, for it
is not possible for us to tarry here, without we will be slain wilfully, and
I have here many Prisoners, I will go lead them into the City, and then I
shall return again unto you, to the intent that if either I or you be taken
Prisoner by them, we may be redeemed again. Then Peter went to the City
with all his Prisoners, and when he was come into the City, he heard a great
noise about the Market place, whereof he had great marvel, and went thither,
and then he saw there four foul Villains, drawing the fair Damsel
Clariet toward the Seaside to drown her. When he saw that, he was never so
sorrowful in all his life before, and incontinent did let go his Prisoners,
and drew out his sword, and cried unto them that led the damsel. Ah ye false
Thieves, let the Damsel go, whom I brought from beyond the Sea, ye did never
such folly in all your lives, and therewith he struck the first with his
Sword, in such sort, that his head slew from his body, and the second he
claue to the teeth, and the third and fourth he slew. When the fair Lady
saw the Earl Peter, right pitifully she began to cry, and said. Sir, I
require you to have pity of me, and help and aid me as you have done before
this time, neither Lord nor Master I have none but you. Sir for Gods sake
unbind me, and put me out of this pain that I am in. Then Peter went to the
Damsel, and cut the cords asunder wherewith she was bound, and for the sorrow
that she was in, she fell down in a swound: then Peter took her up and
said. Fair Damsel, be of good cheer, for I shall help to save you: the
fair Lady wept pitiously, and said to her self. Ah Huon of Bourdeaux my
dear Father, the great pains and pouerties that you were wont to suffer, you
have left me now Inheritour to the same, alas, I know not where you nor my
Mother is, I believe that I shall never see you more. Then Peter of Aragon
took the Damsel by the hand, and led her to his lodging in the Town, then he
went to the Pallaice, whereas he found King Garyn, unto whom he said. Ah
thou old doting fool, wherefore, or for what cause would thou have slain
the Damsel, and she is none of yours, she is mine, I wanne her upon the Sea
and saved her life, you can make no claim to her?

Thus as Peter spoke to the King, there entered into the Pallaice two Knights,
and they said to the King. Sir, before you is the Earl Peter your Coozen, who
has delivered and rescued the newfound Damsel, and has slain the Four men
that should have drowned her in the Sea. When King Garyn saw the Earl before
him, he said. Why were thou so hardy, as to slay my men for doing of my
commandment? Then he cried to his men, and said: Sirs, I charge you take
this Villain here, who has done me this offense, for I shall never have joy
at my heart, until I see him hanged a hye upon a Rock. Then his men stepped
forth to have taken the Earl Peter, and when he saw that he approached near
unto him, he drew his sword, and claue the head of the first to the teeth, and
he slew the second, third, and fourth, he beat down more to the earth, then ye
other that fled away, so that there was none that durst approach near unto
him, for they were all unarmed and he well armed: then he came to the King,
and said. Ah thou false old Dotard, full of sin and outrage, how dare you
think to be such an outrage? you are not worthy to bear a crown, your Son
Florence ought to have it, for a Traitor ought to hold no Realm, full
dearly you shall abuy the ill will of the Damsel, and the more to make him
abashed, he made semblance to run upon the King with his sword, who for
fear of him ran into his Chamber, and shut fast the door after him, and the
Earl Peter standing without, sore threatened the king, then the King said.
Coozen Peter, I cry you mercy, if I have done evil, I am ready to make
amends at your pleasure, I was sore displeased with my Son, and therefore I
thought to be revenged upon her that has caused all this, I shall make
amends, but by the grace of God my Son shall never have her in marriage to
die: therefore I will never consent, that a newfound Damsel should be
Inheritour of such a Kingdom as the Realm of Aragon is. Then Sir Peter
answered and said: Sir beware, blame her no more, be content with that you
have done already, it may be that the Damsel is of as hy a Lineage as your
Son, wherefore such time may come that you may be dearly rewarded,
peradventure the Damsel was stolen away by some ill Tyrant, she has been
ill entertained with you, when you would so cruelly have slain her. Cozen,
(quoth the King) the matter is ill come to pass, for her sake you have slain
many of my men, the which I pardon you, but as for the Damsel, I will set her
in prison in a Tower, out of the which she shall not depart, and I will show my
Son that she is drowned in the Sea, and I will keep her in prison till my
Son has forgotten her, or else has taken another wife, then I will deliver
her, and send her into some other Country whereas she shall be better
entertained.

When the Earl Peter heard the King say so, he agreed to his saying, and
thought that advise to be good, and was content with that he had saved her
life, then the King opened the chamber door, and so came into the Pallaice,
then he sent for the damsel, and then she was set in prison in a Tower, and
the King commanded to a secret Servant, that he should see that the Damsel
should want nothtng for her living, and charged him upon pain of his life to
keep the matter secret, and he charged all those that knew thereof, in any
wise to show Florence his Son nothing of her. Then he closed up the door
with stone, to the intent that she should not issue out, and left nothing
open, but a little window toward the Town of Courtoys, wherein her meat was
put, other windows there were opening upon the fields, the which gave great
ligght into the house. Thus the fair Lady Clariet was closed up into the
Tower, whereas she had good leisure to weep and wayle. Now let us leave
speaking of the Lady, and speak of Florence who was in the Battle.

Chap. CLIIII.
How Florence discomfited his enemies, and took the King of Navarre, and led
him into the Town, and delivered him to the King his Father, and how Florence
delivered him again quit, because that his Father showed unto him that the
fair Damsel was drowned.

YE have well heard here before, how the Earl Peter of Aragon departed from
Florence, and returned into the City, for he could not cause Florence to leave
the battle, whereas he did maruailes, for the love of the fair Lady
Clariet whom he trusted to wed: he slew so many of his enemies, that ye
fields were covered with the dead bodies. When the king of Navarre his Uncle
saw that, he was right sorrowful to see his men so slain, then he came
against Florence his Nephewe, and said. Ah thou unkind Nephewe, cursed be you,
I shall never have joy at my heart, as long as I see thee alive, thou have done
me this day great damage, I had rather dye an ill death, then not to be
revenged of thee: wherefore I require thee to Just with me, I challeng thy
Land, the which shall be mine, thou shall never be Lord thereof. Florence
answered and said: I shall not refuse the Iustes, then he put up his sword,
and took a great spear, and so ran against the king his Uncle, and the king
came against him, and they met together so rudely, that the Kings Spear brake
all to pieces, but Florence Spear was big, wherewith he struck the king so
rudely, that he fell to the earth with his feet upward, and he fell so
suddenly, that he lay in a trance, and before he could be recovered Florence
took him by the ventale of his helmet, and said. Navarre, before I sleep I
shall deliver you Prisoner into the hands of a fair Damsel, whom I love
entirely, for in all the world there is none like her in beauty, if you refuse
thus to do, with my Sword I shall incontinent strike off your head from the
shoulders: the king said, he was content to fulfill his pleasure and to yield
himself Prisoner. Then Florence took his Sword from him, and made him to
mount upon his horse, and to ride before him toward the Town, and delivered
him to the keeping of Ten knights, and Florence road after with his sword in
his hand all bloody, the cry and noise began to be great among the
Nauarnes, they enforced them on all parts to have rescued their king, but they
could not come in time, for by that time, Florence was within the gates of the
City, whereas he was right joyfully received.

When the Nauarnes saw how they lost their labor, and how their king was
entered into the City, they were right sorrowful, and came before the Barriers
and skirmished, and wan but little, and so returned with small profit, and
sorrowful for the loss that they had received that day, for the fields were
covered with dead men. Thus they returned to their Tents and Pauillions, and
the Aragons entered into the City of Courtoys with great joy, and when they
were in the City, then Florence took the king of Navarre his Uncle by the
hand, and led him to the Pallaice, and there alighted and went into the Hall,
whereas he found king Garyn his Father, who had great joy of his coming.
When he saw his Son Florence bring his enemy Prisoner, he embraced his
Son, and said. My right dear Son, I am right joyful of your coming.
Father, (quoth Florence) I have done so much by the aid of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that I have taken your enemy Prisoner, whom I render into your hands,
to do with him at your pleasure. Now I will that you keep your promise with
me, seeing I have quit mine, now it is time that you deliver unto me the
Damsel, whom I shall make Queen and Lady after your decease. When the king
understood his Son, he was all in a rage, and said. Fair Son, leave thy
folly, and take such a Wife according to thine estate, and think no more of
that new Fondling: for know for troth, I have caused her to be cast into the
Sea, whereas she is drowned. Thou art a Fool to think that I will suffer
after my decease, that a poor Caitiffe newfound, should be Lady and Queen
crowned of such a Realm, beware, in as much as thou think to displease me,
that thou be not so hardy as to speak, or remember any more the newfound
Damsel.

When Florence heard the King his Father say, how the Damsel was drowned in
the Sea, his blood mounted into his face, and his heart was so oppressed and so
heavy, that he had no power to speak, and such a maruailous cold sweat took
him, that there was no vain nor member in his body, but trembled for anger
and sorrow that was in him, so that he had no power to sustain himself, but
fell down to the earth in a great trance, in such sort, that every man there
thought he had been dead, and every man complained for him, and especially
the king his Father was right sorrowful, and would as then that he had never
begun that matter. When Florence came again to himself, he said. Oh good
Lord, the earth ought to be cursed, when it sustaineth such a traiterous
king, that has done such a deed, great peril it is to be conversant with
him: then Florence looked upon the knights about him, and said. Sirs, I
require you, for the love you ought of reason to bear me, bring me to the same
place, whereas she whom I loved perfectly was perished and drowned, for other
Sepulcher I desire none, but the same that she has, for the love of her it
shall please me well to be under covert, under the waves of the Sea, whereas
my Love is, to the intent that of me there be heard never more remembrance.

Then he beheld the king of Navarre his Uncle, whom he had taken Prisoner,
and said. Sir king of Navarre, thou art my Prisoner, but if thou will aid me,
to be revenged of this treason that my Father has done: I shall then let thee
go again free and quit. Fair Nephew, (quoth he) leave that folly and speak
no more thereof, for it touches much your honor, and you shall be blamed of
all them that hear speaking thereof. Sir, (quoth Florence) what is that you
say? you know well that you are my Prisoner, and that it lies in me whether
you shall live or die? Fair Nephew, (quoth the king) I will well agree to your
words, but if you will believe me, believe the king your Father, and leave to
do after your own will. What? (quoth Florence) you know well, that in me it
lies to strike off your head, without you will agree unto my will and
pleasure, the which thing I will do, except incontinent you swear the death
of king Garyn my Father, and that never to take peace with him, until you
have brought him to the death, upon this condition I shall set you in sauegard:
for the Traitor has deceived me, of ye thing that I love best in all this
world. Then the king of Navarre said. Dear Nephewe, you are as yet young, I
cannot tell whether your words and promises are stable and firm or not, for
the youth that I see in you, and also for the great displeasure that you be in
now: and therefore fair Nephew, I have great fear that you should beguile me.
Sir, (quoth Florence) God forbid that I should be so deceiuable of my
promise, to promise you any thing and fulfill it not, whatsoever should fall
thereof.

At this time there were but few persons in the Palace with the king, for all
the Lords and knights were gone into the Town to their Lodgings, to refresh
them of their travail and wearines: therefore the king was in his Pallaice
with a small company, the which Florence had well espied, and there was
certain of Florence knights about him, unto whom he said all weeping. Sirs,
incontinent go and get me my horse, and also the king of Navarre his horse
ready at the gate, the which was done, and when they were come, then Florence
said unto the king of Navarre his Uncle. Good Uncle, if there be any courage
in you, to be safe and out of seruage, take this sword in your hand, and let us
leave this unhappy king, to use his days in sorrow, and come and follow me.
Fair Nephew, (quoth the king of Navarre) I have great fear that you will
beguile me. Sir, (quoth Florence) think it not, but come after me, and you
shall see what I will do: then Florence departed, and the king of Navarre
with him, they leapt upon their horses, and when they were upon their good
horses, there was no man at that time in the Town abroad to let Florence of
his Enterterprize, but thus they passed both until they were without the
Town, then Florence said to the king his Uncle. Sir, now you know well that
I have brought you out of this Town, and therefore I require you again, that
you never take peace with the king my Father, until you have slain him. Fair
Nephew, (quoth the king) that which you require me to do I shall fulfill it,
and thus I recommend you to God. When the king saw himself so well
delivered, he was joyful, and so road until he came to his Host, whereas
his men received him with great joy, and they demanded how he was escaped out
of the hands of Florence, then the king showed all the manner how Florence
delivered him, whereof they had great marvel, and had great joy of his
coming: and to accomplish his promise to Florence his Nephewe, he sent to all
his Realm of Navarre, to his Friends and other to come and aid him. Now we
shall leave speaking of the king of Navarre, and speak of Florence his Nephew.

Chap. CLV.
How King Garyn put Florence his Son into a Tower in prison, and how the
Damsel escaped out of the Tower, and spoke with Florence her Lover at an arch
upon the Garden-side, and how they were espied, and how she thought to have
drowned her self.

WHen Florence had delivered the king of Navarre his Uncle, whom he had taken
before in the Battle, then he returned again into the City, and so road
till he came to the Pallaice, whereas he found the king his Father, and said as
a man almost out of his wits. Oh thou false Traitor, thou have done so much
through thine illness, that I rather desire thy death then thy life. Then he
said to the Knights that were there present: Sirs, I pray you bring me to
the Sea, and cast me therein, in the same place whereas my Love was cast, for
I will not live one hour longer, if you do not this, I shall slay my self
with mine own hands. When king Garyn heard his Son say so, he was right
sorrowful, and spoke fiercely unto his Son, and commanded to take him, and
to set him in prison in the Tower, in such wise that he may be sure of him,
and said. Well I ought to be angry in my heart, when this boy mine own Son
thus deals with me: but by the faith that I owe unto our Lord God, the
displeasure that he has done unto me he shall dearly abuy it, for as long
as he lives, he shall have no foot of my Land. Sir, (quoth Florence) by you,
nor by your Land, nor by any thing that you can do, I set not thereby a
button, for I had rather die then live. There was no man present but that
wept grievously for pity, and when Florence saw them weep, he said unto them.
Sirs, come unto me, take off my Armor, and put me into the hands of the king
my Father, for I will not that any of you should have any displeasure for my
sake, let me bear the blame my self, seeing that I have lost the thing that
I love best.

Then the Knights came unto Florence, and unarmed him, and delivered him to
the King his Father: then the king took him by the hand, and led him forth
rudely, and said: how he would set him in such a place, out of the which
he should not come of a long space. The Earl Peter of Aragon had great sorrow,
but he durst speak no word, the king himself led him to the great Tower, and
there left him sore weeping, and making great sorrow for his Love whom (...)
had lost, he made such sorrow that pity it was to hear, and when the night
came, and that he remembered the Damsel, his sorrows began to renew. And
as well as he made sorrow for his Love, the fair Damsel Clariet, who was in
the same Tower immured up in prison, thee heard the complaints that Florence
made, and so long the hearkened, that at last she thought that she knew the
voice, and said. Oh good Lord, what may this be? who is this that I hear thus
complain? me thinks I have heard that voice before this time, and me
thinks it should be he that loved me so well, I will not leave searching
until I may know the troth. Then the Damsel came to the door that was newly
immured up, whereby the mortar was not fully dry, and she scraped with her
fingers, and with a little knife that she had, so that at the last she scraped
out a stone. Then she assayed to pull out more, and so much she did with her
fingers and the knife, that she made a great hole in the new wall, so that
she creeped out and went into the Garden, the which joined to the Tower, and
then she felt by her a Roster, under the which she sat down, the Moon
shone bright, whereby the Garden was as light as though it had been clear day.
Then she took a fair Rose in her hand, the which smelled sweetly, and said.
Ah good Lord, I would that it were thy pleasure that my Lover were here with
me, I think he be not far from hence, I wish with him this sweet Rose, so
that he knew that it came from me, I will not leave searching until I have
found him, and if I cannot find him, in dolor and misery I must end my days.

The same time that the Damsel complained thus in the Garden, Florence, who
was in the Tower, and heard the fair Damsel in the Garden, he kn^we her well
by the voice, and said. Oh good God, what is it that I hear yonder in the
Garden? Dear Lover, (quoth the fair Lady) it is she whom you do love so
well, I am issued out of the Tower, wherein I have been in great misery, and
I cannot tell what will fall thereof, comfort me, or else I shall die here in
great sorrow. When Florence heard the voice of his Love, he had such joy at his
heart, that he forgot all his dolor, when he saw that she was not dead, then
he said unto her. Ah my right sweet Love, whether will you go? for if the
King my Father know, that you be escaped out of the Tower, incontinent he will
slay you, he will have no pity of you, and I cannot succor you. Sweet Love,
I pray you to gather me some flowers, and cast them in at this window, then I
shall pass my dolours the better, when I have in my hands any thing that
comes out of yours. Then the Damsel gathered Roses and flowers, and did cast
them in to her Lover, whereof Florence had great joy, when he had received
them from her, and kissed them oftentimes: then he came to the window,
thinking to have taken his Love by the hand, but he could not the wall was so
thick, whereof they were both sorry.

The same time whiles they were thus devising together, the watchmen came
about, whom the King had sent thither to epsy and know, if Peter of Aragon
did send unto those Prisoners any comfort or aid, and when they came thither,
they hearkened, and heard the voices of those two persons, and heard well their
words, and wept for mere pity of them: then sweetly one watchman called unto
them, and said. Hold your peace, for if you be spyed you cannot escape the
death, I have great pity of you both, I pray God to preserve you, for I cannot
comfort you. Then they held their peace, and so went asunder, to the intent
that they should not be heard nor seen, then there came thither two other
watchmen, sent thither by the King, to see if any body came to the Tower, to
aid or comfort the two Prisoners, and when they were come near to the Tower,
they saw the new made wall broken, then they said each to other: surely the
Damsel is fled, and has broken out of prison, then they cried out, and made a
great cry and said, the Damsel is fled out of the Tower. When the Damsel
(being in the Garden) heard the noise that the Spies made, she was in great
fear and doubt, the which was no marvel, then incontinent as privily as she
could, she went from the Tower, and went to the end of the Garden, whereas
there was a hye Rock, and under the Rock a great water and deep, she did
clime upon the Rock, and said. Ah Florence my dear Lover, this day shall be
the departing of us two, it must behooue me to die for your sake, she saw in
the Garden a great number of Torches light, and men seeking all about for her,
whereof she was afraid, and not without cause, for she knew well that if she
were taken, she were lost for ever. Right sweetly she called upon our Lord
God, and on the holy Ghost for aid and comfort, and said. Alas, if I be taken,
I cannot escape from the martyrdom of death, but since it is thus, that we
must needs depart for ever, I had rather be drowned then be taken, therewith
she made the sign of the cross, recommending her self to our Lord God, and
therewith tumbled down the Rock, to have fallen down into the water, but as
she fell, she lighted in a great bush by the way, whereby she was pricked in
diverse places on her face and hands, so that the blood followed, whereby she
felt such pain that she swounded. Then the noise ran through-out the Pallaice,
that the Damsel was escaped out of the Tower, in such sort, that the King was
advertised thereof, who was sorrowful, and made promise that Earl Peter of
Aragon should loose all his Lands and goods, for he thought that by his means
she was escaped the prison.

Cbap. CLVI.
How the first Watchman found out the Damsel, and led her into a great wood
there by, and afterward the same Watchman delivered Florence out of prison, and
showed him the place where the Damsel was: and how Florence and Clariet entered
into the Sea, and how the King went after his Son, and the Watchman taken.

THus as the brute was in the Pallaice, for the escaping of the Damsel, the
first Watchman that first espied the two Lovers together went all about in the
Garden, to see if he could find the Damsel, he sought so long that he found
the Damsel, whereas she lay in the bush in great peril to be drowned. This
Watchman was a wise man, and as privily as he could he issued out of the
Garden, and went down to the water side, and there he found a little boat, and
entered into it, and so passed the vine Garden as privily as he could, so that
none heard nor saw him: and when he was against the bush whereas the Damsel
was, he spoke to her softly, and said. Fair Damsel, be not abashed, for if I
may in any manner of wise I will aid you, come down, and enter into this boat,
and I shall set you in the Forest, and tarry there until I bring to you
Florence your Lover, the which I shall do by the grace of Jesus, for if I can
by any manner of means, I shall bring him out of the danger that he is in,
because I have always loved him, and for the goodness that he has done to
me, I shall now reward it.

When the Damsel heard the Watchman, for joy thereof she forgot all her
sorrow, and incontinent as well as she might she issued out of the bush, and
went down the River side: then she entered into the boat, and the Watchman set
her over, and left her in the Forest, the which joined to the water side, then
he took his leave of her, and said. Fair Damsel, tarry here until I return
again to you. Freende, (quoth the Damsel) I pray to God that you may so speed
as to bring hither my Lover, and to set him out of danger, and so he departed,
and entered again into the Garden, hearkening toward the Pallaice, whereas
there was great brute made for the escaping of the Damsel: But there was no
doubt made of Florence, because the Tower that he was in was strong and
thick. Also the Chamber that he was in was not toward the Pallaice, but it lay
open against the Garden: then the said Watchman came to the wall side, whereas
there was a straight loope hole into Florence Chamber, and he had two Goats
feet in his hands, then he called Florence, and said. Sir, if you will be
with your Love, who tarieth for you in the Forest, whereas I have l^^t her in
sauegard: help your self that you were out of this Tower, take here this
Goats foot, and do you so much there within to enlarge the loope, that you
may issue out, and here without I shall make the hole wyder. When Florence
understood the Watchman, he was never so joyful in all his life, when he
heard the man say that his Love was in sauegard, and they labored so sore,
that they made the loope so large, that Florence issued out, and then the
Watchman brought Florence to the Stable, whereas some of the Kings horses
stood, especially there was one, whose like could not be found. This Watchman
(who had great affection and desire to do service to this young Lord) did so
much, that he brought unto Florence his Armor, his sheeld, his helmet, his
sword, and a good Spear, and so Florence armed him, and leapt upon the good
horse, then the Watchman showed him the place in the Forest, whereas as he
had left the Damsel, and then he took his leave of Florence, who said.
Friend, the service that you have done me, shall be well rewarded in time to
come: then he road forth, and left not until he came whereas his Love was:
and when he saw her, his joy was renewed, then he alighted, and kissed his
Love, and when he saw that she was so bloody, he had great pity of her,
and said. Dear Love, it is needful that we depart before the day come:
Therefore make you ready and leap up behind me, and then Florence mounted,
and she leapt up behind him, and so departed as soon as they might.

When they were in the fields, the Damsel looked back toward the City, and
she saw a great number of men yssuing out, then she said unto Florence. Sir,
I see well that we be lost, for I see much people yssuing out of the City,
it is not possible for us to be saved, but that we shall be taken, and especially
I cannot escape, I see well that now our love shall depart, your Father is
fell and cruel, I know well that he will slay me. Then the Watchman came
running after Florence, for fear that he had of the king, but he could not
overtake Florence who fled with his Love behind him as fast as he might toward
the Seaside, for Florence knew well the privy ways, because he had often
times used the ways, when he was wont to go a hauking or hunting. So long he
road, that he came to a little Port, where there was a Ship ready to depart,
then Florence alighted and his Love with him, and tied his horse to a Tree, and
then he took the Damsel by the hand, and came to the Master of the Ship,
and agreed so with him, that he and his Love entered into the ship, then they
hoysed up their sails, and so sailed from the land, the Watchman came to the
Seaside, trusting to have found Florence there, and he was right sorrowful
when he saw them so far on the Sea, he was in great fear of loosing of his
life. Then King Garyn came thither with a great number, and when he saw the
Ship so far in the Sea, he said. Ah good Lord, now have I lost my son, for I
know well he is gone inyonder Ship, and the Damsel with him, but by the faith
that I owe unto our Lord Jesus Christ, this Watchman shall loose his head:
then the Watchman was taken and fast bound, so that the blood came out at his
fingers ends, and said all weeping. Ah good Lord, in an ill hour I was
acquainted with Florence and his Love: Alas for the goodness that I have done,
I shall have a small reward this day, I am like to loose my life for love of my
Lord.

Chap. CLVII.
Of the great debate that was in the Pallaice for the VVatch-mans sake, whom
the King would have had to be hanged, and how the king of Navarre took the
City of Courtoys, and how he departed from thence.

WHen the Earl Peter of Aragon saw the Watchman taken, by whom Florence and
his Love were saved, he was sorry to see the man so sore beaten and
threatened, then he went in have to the King, and said. Sir, you show well by
your works that you have but small reason, to suffer thus this poor man to be
beaten, and that you would put him to death, for the goodness that he has
done to your Son, he has done therein but as he should do, and like a true
Servant, you ought the better to love him, you shall do ill to put him to
death, I will that you know, that if you put him to death, I will not serve you
one day longer, but I will rather go to the King of Navarre, and help to
maintain his war against you. When the King heard him so to threaten him, he
swoore by God that he should repent it, and how there should no man save the
Watch-mans life. Then the poor man embraced the Kings Leg, and cried for
mercy, but the King swear and made promise, how he should be hanged without
mercy. When the Earl Peter heard that, he was very sorrowful: the poor man
wept, and beheld the people that were there assembled, and desired them to pray
for his soul, saying, how he should die for saving of his Lord, there was many
of the poor man's kindred, they kneeled all down before the King, desiring him
to pardon him, the king answered that he would not. When the Earl Peter
heard that, he said to the King. Sir, surely he shall not die, without it be by
judgment as your Lords and Counsel shall ordain. When the King heard that,
he was sore displeased, and so entered into the City, and set the Watchman in
prison, then he went to his Pallaice, and Peter followed him, and accompanied
with many other Knights such as loved him, and in like wise so did the poor
man's kindred. When the King was in his Pallaice, he commanded a Scaffold to
be made, whereon he would have the Watchman to loose his head. When his
Kins-men heard that, they cried for mercy, but the king would do nothing at
their desire. When the Earl Peter saw the ill will of the king, he made a
token to the Watch-mans friends, (who were in number about a Hundred and
Fifty) that they should go to such a Tower, where there was great plenty of
Armor, and to break it up and to arm them, and so they did, and came again
to the Pallaice: and when the king saw them coming armed, he cried to his
men, that they should arm them, and take them that were so bold to come into
his presence all armed, and when every man was armed, they came again to the
Pallaice to have taken the Watchman and all his kindred, but the Watchman and
his Friends (who were ready in armor) set upon the kings men, and also
Peter of Aragon and his company aided them, so that there was so great a
Skirmish in the Pallaice, that it was pity to see it, they cut off arms,
legs, and heads each of other. Finally, the king and his men were so sore
constrained, that of force they abandoned the Palace and fled away, and the
king fled into his Chamber for sauegard.

Anon the news ran in the Town, that the king was sore assaulted in the
Pallaice, and in ieopardie of his life. Then all the Communaltie went and armed
them, and sounded the larum bell, there was such a noise and brute, as though
all the world had been lost. Then a Spy went out, and showed the king of
Navarre, how king Garyn was assembled in his Pallaice within the City,
because of a Watchman that the King would put to death, in that he had
delivered out of prison Florence and the Damsel his Love. Then the King of
Navarre right joyful of those news, commanded hastily his men to be ready in
Armor, for he said that it was then time or else never to assail the City.
Great desire I have (quoth he) to be revenged of this King, who had wedded my
Sister, whom he has slain, I shall never have joy at my heart, until I be
revenged: then every man armed them, and so assembled together with banners
displayed, and so came in good order toward the City to assail it, but when
they within the Town heard the cry and noise without, and saw their enemies
coming toward them, they went and showed it at the Pallaice, whereby the
strife there ceased, and then the king and all his Lords with all his people
issued out in Battle. Then there began a sore Battle, and many a man slain
and maimed, but there were so many Nauarnes, that whether king Garyn would or
not, perforce they were feign to abandon the Victory to their enemies, and
were feign to retire into the Town, but their enemies followed them so near,
that the king of Navarre and his men entered in with them. Then the king of
Navarre commanded that none should be slain, without they were found in
defense, for he said that he cared not, so he might be revenged of the king.

Then the Nauarnes spread abroad in the City, taking prisoners, then king
Garyn fled to the Minster-church, then he stood in the Church door to make
defense, but it could not avail him there was so many of his enemies, that he
fled to the hye Altar for sauegard, but the king of Navarre (who was entered
into the Church) commanded his men to take king Garyn, the which they did.
Sirs, (quoth king Garyn) ye do me great wrong to take me in this holy place,
whereas every man should be saved above all things, the house of God ought to
be refuge for every man. Then the king of Navarre (who was holden for a good
holy man) hearing what king Garyn said, he knew well that he said the truth,
and repented himself, and said. Fair Nephewe, for the offense that I have
committed against our Lord God, I shall amend it to the double, so that you
will pardon the Watchman, that has delivered my Nephew Florence out of your
prison, I shall then show you this courtesy for the offense that I have made,
I and all my men shall issue out of this City, without taking of any prisoner,
or any manner of goods, for the love of my Nephewe Florence whom I love
entirely, and for the goodness of the people, I shall go to my Tents without,
and I will grant you a Truce to endure for a Month, and I promise you the
Month once expired, I shall approach again so nere to this City, that as
long as life is in my body, I shall not depart until I have taken this City
and you, whom I take for mine enemy, to have you as my prisoner, for I shall
never have joy at my heart until I have revenged the death of my Sister your
Wife.

Then King Garyn said. King of Navarre, of the courtesy and bounty that you
show unto me I thank you, and as for the Watchman, I do pardon him all mine
ill will, and whereas you say that you will come so near my City to win it,
when that comes (by the grace of God, and by the help of my true Subjects) I
shall do the best I can to defend my self and my City. Then the King of
Navarre issued out of the Church, and leapt upon his horse and road to the
gate, and tarried there until all his men were clean avoided out of the City,
to the intent that neither Prisoners nor goods should be carried out of the
City, whereof his men were angry, and especially they that were poor, the
other cared not greatly, because the two Kings had been so long friends
together, wherefore the war displeased them, and they were sorry that it
endured so long. When the King of Navarre saw that all his men were issued out
of the City, then he withdrewe him into his Tent, and he closed in the City
with a siege, abiding until the Truce was expired. Now let us leave to speak
of this war between these two Kings, and speak of Florence, who sailed
upon the Sea with his Love Clariet.

Chap. CLVIII.
How the Ship wherein Florence was and his Love, was taken by the Sarazins,
and all their company taken and slain, and led to the Castle of Anfalerne.

THe History shows, that after that Florence was departed out of his
country with his Love Clariet, howbeit, he knew not what she was, so it was,
that the Master of the Ship that he was in was of Marsellis, and when he
knew that Florence was Son to King Garyn of Aragon, and that he had put his
trust in him, then he came unto Florence, and said. Sir, the goodness and
honor that I see in you, causes me to say unto you that which I would not do
to another: I well perceive by you, that you are in great doubt of the King
your Father, least he should follow you to get you again, but Sir, to the
intent that you shall be well assured of me and of my Mariners, I put into
your hands my self, my Ship, and all my Mariners, and I will that they
obey you as they have done me, and that you are Master over us all: and Sir,
never think that the king of Aragon your Father shall trouble you, we are
far enough from him, by the grace of God we shall so conduct you, that we
shall bring you to the holy Sepulcher, and afterward bring you back to
Marsellis, and then from thence you may go whether as it please you. Sir,
(quoth Florence) of the honor and great courtesy that you offer me, I thank
you: then all they that were within the Ship said. Sir, refuse not to be our
Master, for if the wind had not been against us, we had been far off by
this time: Sir, have no doubt, we shall all obey you and do as you command
us, since it is so our Masters pleasure. Sirs, (quoth Florence) I thank you
of your offer, God suffer me to d^ser^e it.

Florence was joyful of the good adventure that God had sent him, and thus he
and his Love sailed joyfully in the Sea of Affricke. So long they sailed, that
they passed the Isles of Corsia and Sardania, and Cicilie, and ^n a Wednesday
betimes, they arrived near to the Isle of Candy, there arose upon them a
maruailous great wind and Tempest, so that perforce they were driven to the
coast of Barbary, the Tempest was so great, that every man was in fear of
drowning, ye waves were great and fearful, and the Damsel was in great doubt
when she saw the mariners in such fear, and she called devoutly upon our Lord
Jesus Christ, desiring him to have pity of her, and to bring them to a good
Port. When Florence perceived his Love, and all the Mariners in such fear as
they were, he comforted them the best he could, but it auailed not, for the
wind drove them whether they would or not toward Bongy, near to a City named
as then Anfalerne, whereas they were feign to cast their anchor, in great fear
of loozing of their lives. Then there fell on them a Galley, wherein were a
Hundred Sarazins, and another great Ship, wherein were more then four Hundred
men, and they all fell upon Florence Ship. When Florence saw both the Ship
and Galley set upon his Ship, the Master of the Ship and the Mariners began
to weep, and said unto Florence. Ah Sir, you and we all are lost, we shall be
all slaves with the Sarazins, yonder Galley and ship are full of Sarazins,
and they are ready coming to set upon us. When Florence heard that, he
said. Sir, be not abashed, he whom God will save cannot be perished, no
mortal man can hurt him, let us put our trust in him, and take such grace as
he will send us, the great number of people cannot hurt us, if God will aid us,
let us show our selves like men, they be without law and without faith, and
we believe in God, by whom we trust to be saved, let us arm our selves, and
show our selves like men to defend our lives.

When the Master and the Mariners heard Florence, they said. Sir, into the
sauegard of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to you we commit our selves: then they
all armed them, and every man stood at their defense, and Florence said.
Sirs, let us all think, that we now do fight for our lives, and therefore let
us not be abashed, every man think to do his best that he can, I love by
amors, behold her here, by whom I am so moved to do well, and to defend
both her and me. Sir, (quoth they) shame have he that faints: then the Ship
and Galley came near to Florence Ship, then the shot of both parts flewe
so thick as though it had been snow, there was a great Battle between
them, great hurt was done with casting out of bars from the tops, two times
Florence entered into the Ship of his enemies, whereas he did maruailes, and
slew so many Sarazins, that the water was red with the blood of them that were
slain on both parts, there was an horrible Battle, many of Florence men were
slain, the good Master was slain, and the most part of his men. Also from
the land there were shot Bombardes and Gunnes at Florence ship, so that
thereby, and with the great bars of iron, the ship was sore impaired, for
it was stricken through in a hundred places, in such sort, that the Sea entered in
with great abundance. When the Damsel saw that mortal discomfiture, how their
company were slain, and their ship near full of water, and saw no more
persons left alive with Florence but six, she was then in great fear, and she
thought that she had rather enter into the Sarazins ship, then to be drowned
in the Sea, she saw the Galley, the which lay joining to the ship, she
leapt into the Galley to save her life.

When Florence saw his Love in the Galley, he was near out of his wits for
sorrow, and he saw well, that if he tarried still in his own ship he
should be drowned, then he leapt into the Galley whereas his Love was, and
there he slew many a Sarazin, but there was so much people, that with force of
Darts and spears he was borne down, then they took and bound his hands so
sore, that the blood ran out at his nails.

Thus Florence was taken, and all his men slain and drowned, except some that
were taken, then Florence wept for pity of them, and said. Ah my Father, how
falsely have you wrought against me, thus by your folly I am in great danger, I
shall never return into my Country without God help me, often times he
beheld his Love, whom the Sarazins did sore beat and ill threaten, whereof
Florence had such displeasure, that he was near hand out of his wits. Alas,
(quoth he) I ought to be sorrowful, to see her that I love best so sore beaten
and tormented before my face. Oh cursed death, why suffer thou me to live to
see this day, that my Love should be thus dealte with, and yet I cannot help
nor succor her? therewith he wept, and suddenly fell in a swound among the
hands of the Sarazins. When the Damsel saw her Lover fallen in a trance,
and saw him so pale of color, she came unto him, and she thought surely that
he had been dead, and also the Sarazins said the same. Then she cried out, and
said. Oh good Lord, why do^st thou consent the death of my Lover? seeing that
we must thus depart for ever, it is nothing the pain and ill that I suffer,
but my sorrow is for the death of my Lover here before me, I ought to be
sorrowful, when the most fair, sweet, and gentlest creature of all the world
is thus dead and lost for ever, and the most valiant Knight that ever was
borne: and therewith she fell down in a trance by her Lover, and all that saw
them thought surely that they had been both dead without any recovery, and had
great pity and compassion of them, then he that was the Captain of the town
and Castle, who was named Sorbarre, came into the Ship, and saw where
Florence and his Love lay one by another as dead, he had great pity of them
for he was a good Christian man, but he durst not be to know thereof for fear
of slaying, he loved God well, and did afterward good service in christendom,
for by him the said two Lovers were saved from the death, as ye shall hear
hereafter. When these two Lovers were come again to themselves, the Sarazins
delivered them both into the Captains hands, and when Florence saw his
sweet Love by him, he embraced and kissed her sweetly, the Captain
Sorbarre, when he saw the youth of these two Lovers, he had great pity of
them, but he made thereof no semblance, he took them both into the Castle
with him, and the other Prisoners such as had taken them, brought them into
diverse Towers, whereas they were kept in great misery, for the Sarazins had no
pity of them, because they were christened.

Chap. CLIX.
How Sorbarre the Captain comforted Florence and Clariet: and how there arrived
four Ships with Christian men by fortune of the Sea, and how Florence was
known by them.

WHen the Captain of the Castle was within the Castle, and Florence and his
Love with him* he said to them. Friends I have great pity of you, show me what
ye be? and what fortune has brought you hither, seeing you be so young? how
is it that you would adventure upon the Sea, wherein are so many perils? if
ye show me the troth, ye shall looze nothing thereby, for if I can I shall
set ye in such a place, whereas ye shall be in sauegard? Sir, (quoth
Florence) I shall show you all mine adventure, whatsoever fall thereof. Sir,
know for troth, that I am Son to King Garyn King of Aragon, and I am
departed from him in displeasure. Thus Florence showed Sorbarre al his whole
adventure, and how he was taken by his Father, and how he escaped and his Love
also, then he said. Sir, I have showed you the troth, and I commit my body and
my Loves here into your hands, for in you lies our lives and deaths, you may
do with us at your pleasure, and therewith he kneeled down, then Sorbarre
took him up. and said. Fair Son, be not abashed, for I have been before
this time in as great adventure, have no doubt, I shall so order the matter,
that you shall be out of all peril but keep every thing secrette to your
selves, then Sorbarre called unto him Four of his servants, and said. I
command you to use well this Prisoner, and this Damsel, and let them have
flesh, bread, and wine at their pleasure, as I had when I was prisoner at
Terrascon. Fair Son, (quoth Sorbarre to Florence) know for troth, that I was
once king of Belmarin, and once I fought with Aymerie of Narbone, and I was
taken by the hands of Reynalt of Beanland, then I was brought to the City of
Bourdeaux, whereas I saw a noble Prince named Duke Huon, who had wedded a
noble Lady called Escleremond, Daughter to the Admiral Gaudise, and they had
a Daughter well beloved of them, she was the fairest Lady that ever I did see,
she was not above at that time Six years of age, and as I heard say since,
there came to Bourdeaux diverse Kings and great Princes, for to have had her
in marriage, then I came privily to mine Uncle, who gave me this Castle to
keep, when he saw that I had lost all mine own Realm, and because I was
well entertained among the Christian men, I will that these Prisoners be well
dealt withal. Sir, (quoth his Servants) seeing that it is your pleasure, we
shall accomplish the same.

Then they took Florence and the Damsel, and did set them in a Tower each of
them in a Chamber apart, whereof they were right sorrowful. When the fair
Damsel saw that she was put from her Lover, she was right sorry, then she
began to complain, and said. Ah my right dear Father Duke Huon, and dear
Mother Escleremond, I may well hate the acquaintance that ye have had with
King Oberon, for by him I have lost you both, ye have forgotten me in this
world, when ye leave me in this prison. Ah King Oberon, thou have done me
great ill and damage, when thou did give my Father thy Realm, whereas is
the City of Momur, and whereas now is the Duke my Father, and the Duchess my
Mother, I have lost the flower of all my kindred, and I am sure that I shall
die in this Tower with sorrow: Ah false death, thou did me great ill, in
that thou tookest not me when I was young and little, I yield my self to God,
whom I require to have pity of me, and would to God that I were in company
with my Lover Florence, the Captain has done ill thus to separate us asunder,
for if I were with him, I should the better pass the time, if his Father knew
of what lineage I am of, and whose Daughter I am, he would not have refused to
have given me his Son in marriage, but he shall not know for me whatsoever
pain I suffer. Florence, who was above in the Chamber next unto the Chamber
whereas the fair Damsel Clariet was, who had well heard the complaints
that she had made before, and understood every word that she had spoken,
whereof he was the ^^^fullest man at his heart living, for if he loved her
well before, then he loved her much better, and then he looked out at a window,
whereas he saw Sorbarre walking up and down in the Court of the Castle. Then
Florence required him, to have ^ity and compassion of the Damsel being in the
Tower alone. Friend, (quoth Sorbarre) suffer for a time, I shall set you both
in such a place before it be night, that you shall be both joyful, be not
abashed, for the love of you I shall leave the Law of Mahomet, and believe in
our Lord Jesus Christ, for when it is night, and every man in bed, we shall
enter into a Galley that lies here by, but as for your other men, that be
Prisoners abroad in the Town, it would be hard for me to get them out of
prison. Then I pray to God (quoth Florence) to aid and succor them in their
great need.

Great pity had Sorbarre, when he heard Florence so pitiously pray for the
sauegard of his men, whom he must leave behind him, if God succor them not:
then Sorbarre saw coming toward the Port four great Ships, wherein there
were more then Two Thousand Pilgrims, who were coming from the holy Sepulcher
at Jerusalem, but by fortune of the sea and force of the wind, they were
constrained to arrive there. Then the Captain Sorbarre went up into the tower
to see Florence, whom he ^ooke by the hand and said. Freende, yonder you may
see so^e great Ships full of people, coming hither by force of the wind,
let us go down and see what they be, and who is their Captain. Sir, (quoth
Florence) I am ready to follow your pleasure, my body and my Loves I commit
to your sauegard: then the Captain sent for the Damsel, and when Florence
saw her, he was right joyful, and said. Dear Love, be nothing afraid, the
Captain and I will go down to the Seaside, to know what people they are
that comes in yonder Ships, and anon we will return again unto you. Sir,
(quoth the Damsel) God be your guide. Sorbarre and Florence went down to the
Hauen-side, and when the Ships arrived, they saw well that there was many
people, and perceived well that they were Christian men. Then Sorbarre saluted
the^ and said: Sirs, ye be welcome, I pray you to show me from whence you
come, and what ye seek for in these parts, and what ye be? Then the chief
Master of them answered and said. Sir, we be of the Realm of France, and we
come now from Jerusalem, from the Pilgrimage of the holy Sepulcher, and the
force of the wind has caused us to arrive here, and if we ought to pay any
thing for coming hither, we are ready to pay it. Sirs, (quoth Sorbarre)
seeing that this is your adventure, ye are welcome hither to me, since ye be
here arrived, it is reason that I be comforted and aided by you, and I say
unto you* that I believe upon Jesus Christ, but as yet I was never christened,
I shall show you (Sirs) what ye shall do, if you will believe me, you never
came to so fair adventure, ye shall go with me into the Castle here above,
in which place I shall fournish you all with horse and Armor, and ye shall
abide in the Castle, and make no noise nor show your selves, and I will go to
the Haven, and garnish a Galley with all things necessary, in this Town there
are many French men Prisoners, who were taken but lately in this Haven, and
many were slain, and such as be taken are prisoners in this town, and early in
the Morning we will issue out of the Castle into the Town, and set fire in
diverse places, then the Sarazins will have great business to rescue and stanch
the fire, and then we will enter into their houses, and take all their goods
and all the Prisoners, and all the riches that we can find in the town we
shall put it into our Ship, and if the Sarazins come to assail our Ship with
Boats and Barges, then let us defend our selves as well as we can, and first of
all let us go and take all the Ships that be in the Haven.

When the Captain of the four Ships heard Sorbarre, they praised his advise
and good counsel, and they all with one accord concluded to do his pleasure.
Sir, (quoth Sorbarre) to the intent that ye shall believe me, and to have of
me no manner of suspect, if ye will have knowledge what I am, this young man
that you see by me can inform you. Sir, (quoth the Patron) by your visage it
appears well that all troth is in you, and that you are a noble man:
therefore Sir, we all commit our selves into your conduct and grace, but Sir,
if it may be your pleasure to show to us, what young Gentleman this is that we
see there by you? truly Sir, you should do me a great pleasure, for ^e
thinks I should have seen him ere this. Patron, (quoth Sorbarre) since you
will know it, gladly I shall show you, seeing he has discovered himself to
me, know for troth, that he so Son to King Garyn of Aragon, who by fortune
of the sea arrived here, and here perforce he was taken, and his men most part
slain, and with him was taken a noble Damsel, who is above in my Castle. When
the Patron and they that were with him, understood that it was Florence Son to
the King of Aragon, they were thereof right joyful, for they were all of the
Realm of Aragon, and sent forth by the King to search for Florence, they
thanked God of their good adventure, that he had sent them to find Florence
there, whom they were sent to search for: then they came to Florence, and
kneeled down before him and said. Ah Sir, you ought to thank God that we have
found you, we have marvel why you hide your name from us, for we be all sent
from King Garyn your Father to search for you, for if God had not sent you this
good fortune, we should never have heard any tidinges of you, nor have showed
the King your Father any thing to his pleasure.

Chap. CLX.
How Sorbarre and Florence and their company went into the Town, and robbed
and spoiled it, and so took the Sea with great joy and triumph, and the fair
Lady Clariet with them, and took their course to sail toward the Realm of
Aragon*

WHen the Patron and his company knew and saw Florence, the joy that they made
could not be recounted, nor the cheer that they made to Florence when they
were entered into the Castle, whereof Sorbarre had great joy. The same season
whiles they made this great joy and feasting, there was in Sorbarres company a
Sarazin, who understood the French language, and had well heard the Enterprise
that the Christian men were determined to do, and also he saw well, how
Sorbarre was joined to their company: then privily he departed, and hastily he
went into the Town, and showed the Burgesses and Commons of the Enterprise,
what the Christian men had concluded to do, and how that Sorbarre was become
a Christian. When the Sarazins understood that, incontinent they went and armed
them, and came to the Castle thinking to have won it, but they found there such
defense and resistance, that that which they did there was small to their
profit, yet the assault endured until the next day, and at last they were
constrained to withdraw from the Castle a great space. Florence, who was within
cried to them and said. Ah ye false Villains, ye have slain my men, but if
God suffer me to live, their deaths shall be dearly bought. When the Paynims
saw that they could not attain to the Castle, they blew the retrait, and
every man returned to their own house. Then Sorbarre said to Florence and his
company: Sirs I advise you to leap on your horses, for now the Paynims are
returned to their Lodgings weary of their travail, and many of them sore
hurt, and they are in great fear, I know their conditions well enough, and
because that after travail and labor a man is feeble and full of fear, and
now every man is in his own house and unarmed to be at their ease: therefore
I counsel, that incontinent we issue out and set upon the Town. Then
Florence and all the other said. Sir, as you have devised, we are ready to do
it, for a more noble counsel was never given.

Then every man made him ready, and issued out of the Castle, and Florence
and Sorbarre went before them, and rested not until they were entered into the
Town, for their entering could not be defended, because the Castle joined to a
corner of the Town: then they made a great cry, and spread abroad in the
Town, and put in fire in diverse places, and slew down the Paynims in the
streets and Market places, finally, they did so much by force of arms, that
they brought the Town under their sub^ection, and the Inhabitants thereof all
slain, and all the Christian Prisoners rescued, who had great joy when they
saw Florence their Lord, whom they thought had been dead. Great riches that
day was won in that Town, the which was given and parted unto them that had
deserved it, and Florence gave to the Christian Prisoners great riches. Thus
when the Town was won, and the riches thereof put into their Ships, they
all departed, and set fire on all the City, then they went into the Castle
whereas the Damsel Clariet was, who had great joy when she saw Florence her
Lover: and then Sorbarre (who had great desire to depart from thence) took all
the Treasure and riches and had it into their ships, and victualled them with
all things necessary, then when it was day in the morning, they departed from
the Castle, and went to their Ships with great joy, Florence holding his Love
by the hand, said unto her. Dear Love, king Garyn my Father has sent to
seek for me, all about both by land and by water, and these that be come
here with these Ships, were sent forth by the King my Father to search for
me. When the Damsel heard that Florence would bring her again to his Father,
she had great fear and said. Sir, y^u know right well the great hate and
displeasure that your Father has to you and me, for God sake sir, let us go
some other way. Dear Love, (quoth Florence) have no fear of my Father, for if
you had showed your n^me, and what you be before this time it had eased us of
much pain. Ah Sir, (quoth she) it is not as you ween it were. Well* (quoth
Florence) it is sufficient for me as it is: then they (...) up their sails,
and so sailed until they were far off (...) that Land, and Sorbarre was
right joyful, in that he had saved the Christian men, and for the love of
Florence he forsook his own law and his country, then he said unto
Florence. Sir, my body and goods I abandon to you in such wise, that I shall
never leave you for life nor death. Sir, (quoth Florence) of the goodness and
troth that you have showed me, I thank you, and I shall never have penny
worth but the half shall be yours. Now let us leave speaking of them, sailing
joyfully upon the Sea toward Aragon, and let us speak of king Garyn, who was
besieged within the City of Courtoys, by his brother in law the king of
Navarre.

Chap. CLXI.
How King Huon King of the Fayrey, sent two of his Knights to the two Kings:
and how he appeared between them with a great number, and of the Peace that he
made between them.

WEll have ye heard before, how that after the King of Navarre had taken King
Garyn prisoner, and that Truce was taken for a certain space, and then each of
them to show their powers: so it fell, that two days before the breaking up of
the truce, and that their ayds and puissances were assembled together, the one
party within the City, and the other without with the King of Navarre, who
sore threatened King Garyn, because he had banished away his Son Florence his
Nephew, and said, that he had rather die then such an ill King should not be
punished: this King of Navarre had assembled such a number of people, that the
Valleys and Hills were covered with men of war, and the night before the Truce
brake up, there was heard in the air a fearful voice, the which when it
began to speak, the earth trembled, and thundered and lightened, in such sort,
that all they that were assembled as well they within as without, had such
fear, that they were likely to have run away. Then the voice began to speak,
and said. Sirs, ye that be here in the field ready to fight, of both parties,
make no have to join together in Battle, for such aid and succor shall be
sent to you both, that ye shall be all joyful. Therewith the voice passed away,
and was heard no more, whereby both parties were abashed, and all the night
they were at their prayers, beseeching God to aid and succor them. King Garyn
was sore abashed when he heard the voice, and said. Oh good Lord, if these
people that are assembled be slain by my means and for me, my soul shall be
lost for ever. Alas my Son Florence, I was ill counseled when I chased you
away from me, and I did great sin when I put you in prison, I am weary of my
life, it is no matter though I die, and I am more sorry for you, (my dear
Son) whom I have betrayed and driven away without a cause: alas, by my
means this Realm will be wasted and destroyed, the which you ought to have
after me.

Therewith he swounded among his Lords, so that they all thought he had been
dead, whereof they sore complained, and at last the king came again to
himself: then his Lords comforted him, and so bad him to hear Service, and
after service, there appeared suddenly before him two goodly young Knights, the
one was Gloriant, and the other Mallabron; they were two Knights of the
Fayrey: then they all smiling saluted the King, and said. Royal King, Huon of
Bourdeaux saluteth thee by us, he is King of all the Fayrey, and he will come
to aid thee and to defend thy land: also he will that thou know, that he is
Father to the fair Damsel Clariet, whom thou namest the newfound Damsel,
and because thou have banished from thee thy Son Florence, he will come to
thee, to make the Peace between thee and thy Brother in law the King of
Navarre, and he will make the Marriage between thy Son Florence and Clariet
his Daughter. When king Garyn heard the Knight of the Fayrey, he had such
joy at his heart, that he wist not what to do or say, and he came to the
Knight and embraced him all weeping, and said. Sir, know for troth, my body, my
life, and all that I have, I submit into the hands of the good King Huon, to
do therewith at his pleasure. With those words the two Knights vanished away,
no man wist how nor whether, so that every man had great marvel. King Garyn
and his Lords lifted up their hands to Heaven, making the sign of the cross,
recommending themselves to Jesus Christ, and the two Knights rested not,
until they came to the City of Momur to King Huon, and showed him what they
had done and said to King Garyn, and showed Huon of the day of Battle, that
was taken between the two Kings, and said. Sir, have pity of Florence, and
of Clariet your Daughter, who are as now on the Sea in a great Tempest: then
Huon said. Surely, I and they shall be shortly before the City of Courtoys,
with a number of people, that the earth shall be covered with them, to the intent
that if either of those two Kings do contrary to my will, I shall destroy him
for ever, for shortly I will, that my Daughter Clariet shall be Duchess of
Bourdeloys, and she is so fair that there is none like her, and I will show
the great love that I bear to her.

Then Huon called to him Escleremond and said: Lady you shall see this day the
thing that you much desire to see, that is your Daughter Clariet, to whom I
give her the gift, that she shall be beloved of every man, and I will that from
henceforth she shall give large guiftes and rewards to Ladies, Damsels,
Knights, and Squiers, for I will that from henceforth she have her pleasure,
without suffering of any more ill or peril, for she has suffered enough. This
day was fair and clear, and within the City of Courtoys there was many
people assembled, and they were in great devotion, some made service to be
song, and some were confessed, and ordered themselves toward the Battle.
Then King Garyn commanded every man to leap upon their horses ready armed,
and the King himself mounted: then they issued out of the City, and commanded
his Constables and Marshals to ordain Three Battles in the name of God. King
Garyn had assembled a great number of men, he had more then Fifty Thousand
men, there ye might have seen Ladies, Damsels, and Burgesses that wept for
fear of their Friends, whom they saw going toward the Battle, and they
went all to the walls, Colleges, and Churches to pray to God for the good speed
of their King, and of their Friends.

Now let us leave speaking of these two Kings, who were ready in the fiel^s
ranged in order of Battle the one against the other, and let us speak of
King Huon, who called before him all his Lords of the Fayrey, there was the
fair Escleremond, and Gloriant and Mallabron, and many other Knights of the
Fayrey: then King Huon said. Sirs, ye all know well* that by the will of God,
King Oberon whiles he lived gave me all his Realm, and Signiorie, and
puissance that he had over all the Fayrie of ye world, thereby then I may have
all my commandments fulfilled, and since God has given me this gift, I will
not suffer the manslaughter and murder, that is like to be between the Two
Kings of Aragon and Navarre: therefore I wish my self with Two Hundred
Thousand men well armed, and richly by seeming and all mounted on good horses:
and also I wish to have as many ^^urnished with bows and Crosbowes on foot.
Also I wish a Hundred Thousand to be apparelled in Gowns of cloth of gould
and silk, and also I wish for my Daughter Clariet, whom I have left a long
time in pain and misery, whereof I repent me, for mine intention is to marry
her to Florence, Son to King Garyn of Aragon, the which Florence is so
fair, so hardy, and so humble and courteous, that in all the world there is
none like him, I wish him and all his company, and Sorbarre with him, to be at
the Haven of Courtoys. Also I wish my Tent in the meadow between the hoasts of
the two Kings, and I will that my Tent be such, that there be none like it in
all the world, and upon the top thereof I will there be pitched a Dragon of
fine gold. King Huon had no sooner made his wish, but he and all his company
were there as he had devised. When the king of Navarre saw so many people, and
so many Tents and Pauillions so near him, and that he saw the rich and
puissant Pauillion of King Huons with the flambing Dragon, he was greatly
dismayed. Then he called his Lords and Knights, and said. Sirs, behold what
people yonder are before us lodging, me thinks I never saw so many together
in all my life, I wot not what it should be, I am in doubt: then he called unto
him two knights and said. Sirs, go thither, and know what people they be, and
what they mean, and whether they be Friends or enemies, and who is chief
over them. Sir, (quoth the two knights) we will not go thither, for we know
not whether they be our enemies or not.

When the King of Navarre understood that those knights nor none other would
go thither, he was sorrowful, and as the king was thus devising, thither
came the two knights of the Fayrey Gloriant and Mallabron, and Gloriant said.
King of Navarre, King Huon of Bourdeaux has sent us to you, and commands
you that you make peace between you and king Garyn, for he will give his
Daughter Clariet to your Nephewe Florence, who is the fairest Lady of the
world. When the king of Navarre understood these two Messengers sent from
king Huon, he was right joyful, and commanded al his Lords to go with him to
king Huon, they obayed his commandment, and road with him until he came to
the rich Pauillion of king Huons, whereas they alighted and were well received,
then the king of Navarre saluted king Huon, who said. Sir, you be welcome: and
then the king of Navarre kneeled down before king Huon, and said. Sir, I am
ready to fulfill your pleasure. Then Gloriant took the king of Nauar by the
arm and raised him up, and set him down by king Huon and Escleremond: then
king Huon sent for king Garyn, who incontinent came to him, accompanied with a
Thousand knights, and when he was come, he saluted king Huon, and said. Sir,
you are welcome into my Country of Aragon, the which I offer you to do
therewith at your pleasure, and Sir, all that you have commanded me to do by
your two knights, I am ready to accomplish, and there he showed to king
Huon all weeping, the occasion of the war and of his Son Florence, who for
the love of a newfound Damsel was put in prison, whereof he repented him, for
he said that there was not a fairer Damsel in the world, and for the love of
her, Florence my Son is departed from me, and I think I shall never see him
more. King Garyn, (quoth Huon) know for troth, that shortly you shall see
them both come hither to me, for I will marry them together, the Damsel is my
Daughter, and her name is Clariet, and I will you know that she is noble, and
issued of a royal Lineage, there is none more noble in this Country, and she
has bought her desteny right dearly. When king Garyn knew, that the noble
Damsel was Daughter to king Huon, and that he would make a marriage between
her and his Son Florence, and that they should come thither shortly, he was
never so joyful in all his life before: then he kneeled down before king
Huon, and cried him mercy, and said. Ah Sir, how may it be, that in my old
days such a grace may come to me, as to have again my dear Son, and that
the noble Damsel (whom I have done so much ill unto) shall be his wife. Then
King Huon rose up and said. Noble king, have no doubt but that you shall have
your Son, for I cannot so soon wish for him, but they shall be both here,
wheresoever they be in the worid, whereof all they that were present had great
marvel. Sir, (quoth the Queen Escleremond) when shall the hour come that I
may see my Daughter Clariet? and Sir, you know well that I came hither with
you for none other cause. Madame, (quoth Huon) you shall see her shortly.

Chap. CLXII.
How Florence and Clariet arrived there with their company, and came to king
Huon, and of the great joy that was made at their coming, and how there they
were wedded together: and the Peace confirmed between the two Kings.

WHen King Huon saw the Queen his wife weep, his heart tendered and said. Ah
my dear Daughter Clariet, great pity I have of you and of Florence the hardy:
I wish you both and all your company here at the Port on the Seaside, as
richly apparelled, as ever was Queen or Prince departing out of their house to
be married, and that with you there be Ladies and Damsels richly apparelled,
and of the fairest that be in my Realm of the Fayrey: he had no sooner made
his wish, but that Ships and Galleys arrived at the Port, and anon Florence
and Clariet were in the Meadow, richly accompanied with Trumpets, Harps, Viols,
and Lutes, and all other Instruments, the which sounded so melodiously, that it
seemed to all the hearers that they were ravished into Paradise, and also there
were Ladies and Damsels, and knights of the Fayrey singing right sweetly, the
hearers thought them to be Angels of Paradise, and they were apparelled
richly, and garnished with precious stones, so that with the Sun shining upon
them, they glittered in such wise, that whosoever had seen them, would have
thought that God and all the Court of Paradise had been there assembled.

Thus Florence came with 3 Thousand men making great joy. After him came riding
the fair Clariet, upon a rich Palfray ambling so freshly, garnished and richly
apparelled, that in all the world there was none such, the armor hanging full
of silver bells, making so sweet a noise, that it was marvel to hear them, if
I should discribe the beauty and riches that was on her Palfrey, it would be
too long to rehearse. This Lady Clariet was accompanied with two notable
Ladies of the Fayrey, the one was Morgue, and the other Glorianda, who came
singing after Clariet: then after came the Lady Transelina, with many Damsels
of the Fayrey, great joy there was made, and then king Huon said to Escleremond
his Wife. Madame, it is time that you depart, for yonder I see coming toward
us my Daughter Clariet and Florence. When Escleremond heard that, she was right
joyful, for the great desire that she had so see her Daughter: the Queen went
forth nobly accompanied. Then king Huon and the other two kings with all their
companies, with banners displayed, with great joy and triumph, went to meet
Florence and Clariet: ye may well think, that king Garyn had great joy of the
coming of his Son, and saw such an assembly meet there together to receive
him, that he devoutly thanked our Lord God.

Thus these kings and Princes went to meet these two young persons richly
accompanied, and great joy had Clariet, when she saw the Queen her mother
before her, and she wept for inward joy that she had, and when the Queen saw
her daughter, she embraced and kissed her often times, and of a great season
none of them could speak to other for joy: then King Huon came and took his
Daughter out of the Queens arms, and kissed her more then twenty times. Then
king Garyn came unto Florence, and said. Dear Son, I have much trespassed
against you, in that wrongfully I put you into my prison, and I complain
greatly to you of your Uncle the king of Navarre, who has wasted your
Country. Sir, (quoth Florence) I require you to pardon mine Uncle, it is
reason that I should be content that peace be made between you, and Sir, I
desire you to give me this Damsel in marriage. Son, (quoth Garyn) be in
suertie that you shall have her and none other, for a more noble Lady cannot
be found in Ten Realms. Sir quoth Florence, I thank you: and thus these
Two companies joined together, and the King of Navarre came to his Nephewe
Florence, and embraced him and said. Fair Nephewe, of your return I am right
joyful. Sir, (quoth he) I am well pleased with the peace that is made between
my Father and you.

Thus they road until they came to the Tents, and there alighted, then king
Huon called the other two kings, and said. Sirs, how say you? will ye abide
by mine advise, and put into my hands the discord that has been between
you? they answered, that they were content to do as he would have them.
Then king Huon said. Sirs, then my will is, that peace and accord be between
you and all yours: and they liberally agreed thereto, whereof king Huon was
joyful. Then king Huon desired Florence to show his adventure, and how he was
rescued by Sorbarre. Then Florence showed al his adventures, and the other
kings were right joyful to hear it, and all other that heard it did greatly
praise Sorbarre for his deed, and much honored him, and made him great
feasting and cheer, and caused him to be christened: then king Huon said to
the two kings. Sirs, I will that presently each of you do pardon other of all
ill will. Sir, (quoth they) we are ready to do it, and so each of them
embraced other, whereof king Huon had great joy, and so had all other Lords
and Knights that were there assembled. King Garyn, (quoth Huon) incontinent I
will, that your Son Florence have my Daughter in marriage, and I give them the
City of Bourdeaux, Blames, and Geronnill, and all the appendants thereto
belonging. When king Garyn heard the offer that king Huon had made to his Son
Florence, he thanked him heartily, and so did all the other Lords, who allowed
greatly that marriage. When king Garyn saw the honor, love, and courtesy
that King Huon did to Florence his Son, he kneeled down, and said. Sir, my
Child and yours I commit into your hands, use them at your pleasure: then by
consent of both Fathers, they were wedded and spoused together all in one day,
the Feast and Solemnity of this marriage endured Eight days, the king of
Navarre gave unto Florence his Realm of Navarre to possess and enjoy after
his decease: Of the Feasts, Iusts, and Tourneys that was made on those Eight
days, I make no mention thereof, for it were ouer-long to rehearse.

Then king Huon gave his Daughter Thirty Summers charged with gould and great
riches, whereby the joy increased of all parts: then the Lords and other
people of Aragon came to king Huon, and all weeping, they desired him to have
pity and compassion of them, and that he might find some means, that they
might have some recompense for the great hurts an damages that they had
received, by reason of the war between these two kings, whereby they were
near hand destroyed by the Nauarnes. When Queen Escleremond heard the people
complain, she embraced her Husband and said. Sir, I desire you (for the love
of your children) to have pity of these people, who requires for aid, for in
you is all their trust. Madame, (quoth Huon) I shall incontinent show what grace
I will do for the love of you. Then king Huon commanded all the people to
kneel down, and then he said. Sirs, all ye that be here assembled, to the
intent that you shall not think, that the thing that I will do should be any
witchcraft or illusion, but that it is by the will of Jesus Christ, the gift
that king Oberon gave me before he dyed, the which was all the puissance and
dignity that he had in all the Fayrey of the world: therefore know, that by
the puissance and dignity that our Lord God, made king Oberon my Predecessor
to give me, I will that this Realm of Aragon, whereas it has had damage by
reason of the war, so that the Realm is sore burnt and wasted: and I will
that it be again in the same case, as it was before any war began, and that all
Castles and houses burnt or beaten down, be better three times then they were
before, and I will that from henceforth every man serve God, and thank him of
this grace that he has sent you, then he lifted up his hands, and blessed all
the people with the sign of the cross: and as soon as he had done his
blessing, every thing was as he had devised throughout all the Realm. Thus was
the will of Jesus Christ, at the instance and prayer of the noble king Huon.

Chap. CLXIII.
How King Huon and Queen Escleremond departed, and how he gave great rich
guiftes unto the two Kings, and to all other Lords, Ladies, and Damsels: and
of the sorrow that was between the Mother and the Daughter, at their
departing.

WHen King Huon had made his prayers to our Lord God, and that his request was
granted, he thanked God: such Feasts, Iusts, and Tourneys as was made there
during the Feast, was never seen nor heard of in any Cronicle here before.
Then king Huon made him ready to depart, and he gave gifts before he departed
to them that were there, and especially to Sorbarre, to whom he recommended
his Daughter Clariet, and desired him not to leave her. Sir, (quoth Sorbarre)
the great love that I have to you, constrains me never to forsake her, nor
them that shall come of her as long as life is in my body. When Queen
Escleremond understood the departing of her Lord Huon, and saw that she must
leave her Daughter, she had great sorrow at her heart, and so all weeping
she came to her Daughter, and said. Right dear Daughter, you ought greatly to
thank our Lord God, in that he has cast you out of so many perils, and now
to have great honor, and to be exalted like a rich and puissant Lady:
therefore always set your heart on God, and serve, fear, and love him, be
liberal to them that be poor, nor mock no body, neither be no Iangler
against your Husband, nor hearken to none ill liars, fly from Flatterers, love
your Husband, keep your self always true, to the intent that none ill report
be made of you. Mark well this doctrine, for I cannot tell whether ever I
shall see you again or not. When the fair Clariet heard her Mother, suddenly
she began to weep, and said. Oh my right dear Lady and Mother, the departing
of you and of the king my Father from me, ought sore to grieve me, since we
have been together so small a time, for your departing is to me so greeuable,
that it is great pain for me to bear it. Then the Mother and the Daughter
clipped and kissed each other more then Twenty times, and oftener would have
done if king Huon had not been, for then he took his Daughter Clariet in his
arms, and kissed her often times tenderly weeping, because he knew well that
he should never see her again: then he lifted up his hands, and gave her and
her Husband his blessing, and showed them many fair examples and doctrines.

Then the noble Queen Escleremond kneeled down, and prayed king Huon her
husband, that he would counsel and aduertize them what they should do.
Madame, (quoth Huon) rise up, for such pity I have of them and of you, that my
heart near hand fails me, and I tarry here too long, for I must needs
depart: come hither my dear Daughter and kiss me, and Son Florence, with you
I leave my Daughter, and keep her well as long as God will suffer her to be
with you. Then king Huon took leave of the two kings, who were right
sorrowful of his departing, and he desired them always to be good Lovers
together, and so took his leave, and said, I wish my self my Queen, and all
my company, to be in my Pallaice at Momur: he had no sooner spoken the words,
but that he was there, and sudenly vanished from the two Kings, whereof they
and all other were greatly abashed, so that they wist not what to say, and they
had thought it had been but a dream, but by reason of the great gifts and
riches that he had left behind him among them. Then after all these things
done, the king of Navarre took leave of king Garyn and departed, and his
Nephewe Florence road with him four Leagues, and then returned to Courtoys to
Clariet his wife, and there they tarried two Months in great joy and solace.
Then after a certain space, king Garyn (who was very old and ancient) took a
sickness, whereby he passed out of this world, for whose death, Florence his
Son and Clariet wept many a salt tear. Then he was buried with great
solemnity, and then by all the Lords and Peers of the Realm, Florence was
chosen and crowned King, and Clariet Queen: great solemn^ty and joy was made
at their crownation. Thus with great joy and gladness, Florence and Clariet
were together, so that at the last Clariet was great with child, whereof
Florence and all the noble men and Commons of the Realm were joyful, and
thanked our Lord God, and when the time came, the Queen was brought to bed of
a fair Daughter, whereof both Father and Mother were right joyful, the which
joy within a while after turned to sore weeping and great heaviness, as ye
shall hear hereafter.

Chap. CLXIIII.
How Queen Clariet was brought to bed of a Daughter, at which deliverance
the Queen dyed* and how when the young Damsel came to the age of Fifteen
years, the King her Father would have had her in marriage, wherewith all his
Lords were sore troubled.

WHen King Florence was advertised, that his Queen was delivered of a
Daughter, he thanked God, the Child was borne to the christning into the
chief Church, and was named I Would, the joy of the coming of this Child, cost
^eerely to the Queen her Mother, for by reason of the pain that she endured,
she departed out of this life, and so dyed. The Child was brought to king
Florence, and when he saw her, he was joyful, and demanded how her mother
did, and they thought that the matter could not be hidden nor kept secrette,
they said. Sir, your Queen is departed to God. When the king heard that, he
fell down in a swound, so that every man feared he had been dead, and when
he came to himself, he said. Ah my right dear Love, in an ill hour were you
borne, for your sake I had forgotten all pain, and thought to have lived in
rest with you, me thinks you be ravished and stolen away from me. Ah false
death, thou art hardy to take from me that thing which I loved best, the most
fairest, truest, and sweetest creature living. Then his Lords came and
comforted him, the cries, complaints, and weepings rose through-out the City:
all Ladies, Damsels, Burgesses, and Maidens, and all the Commons made great
lamentations: that night the Queen was watched, and the next morning, with
great cries and weepings the Queen was brought into the chief Church, her
obsequie was done notably, and so laid in a rich Sepulture, the sorrow that
the king made was never none such seen.

The king was visited by the Lords of his Realm, but they could not cause him
to take any solace, but a lonely now and then to go to see his dear Daughter
the Lady I Would, and ever when he saw her, his sorrow renewed, and she was well
nourished and brought up: and when she came to the age of Fifteen years, she
was beautiful, wise, and sage, for she was brought up with Four noble Ladies,
and ordered as it appertained to a Kings Child, and her Father King Florence
loved her so well, that he could never be satisfied with looking upon her,
often times he kissed her holding her in his arms, he would never marie
again for the lone of her, so much grew and increased this noble I Would, that she
came to the age of Fifteen years complet, the fresh beauty and bounty that
was in her, if I should discribe it, it would be ouer-long to rehearse: but I
dare well say, that in beauty as then she passed all other women of the world,
for God and nature had employed all their study to form her, there was
never any man that saw her but loved her, and so did her Father, so that on a
day the king had his Lords about him, and Sorbarre was among them, whom the
king loved dearly, and the king seeing his Daughter I Would grow and increase
in all virtues, he said to his Lords. Sirs, it were good that there were some
Wife found out for me, whom I will marie, if any such can be found, in all
conditions like to her that I had before. When his Lords heard him, they were
joyful, in that the King would marry again: Alas, they knew not the kings
inward intention, but shortly after the king knew it, whereby much ill and
mischief came afterward, and many a man slain, and many a Church burnt, as
ye shall hear hereafter.

Then the king wrote, and sent to all his Lords and knights of his Realm, to
come to his Court at a day assigned: and when they were all come to the
Pallaice, there they found the King, who humbly received them, and made them
great feasting, and had them to diner with him. When the dinner was done, the
king and all his Lords went into a Garden, whereas the king would keep his
Counsel, and when they were all there, and the king set in his seat, he said.
Sirs, you know well I have no more Children but a Daughter, who has been
desired in marriage by diverse kings and Princes, but I would not consent to
marry her, nor I thought not to marie my self, for the love of her Mother
whom I so dearly loved, but now I am minded to marie and to take a Wife, so
that she be semblable to her that is departed: and therefore I have sent for
you to show you my will and pleasure. When his Lords heard him, they were
joyful and said. Sir, know for troth, there is no woman living in
Christendom, but if you will have her you shall, if she be never so fair or so
hye of Lineage: and therefore Sir, think in your self, whether you will that
we shall go to get you a Wife. Sirs, (quoth the king) in this matter you
shall not need to take any pains, for the Wife that I will have is not far
from hence, it lies in me to have her if I list. Sir, (quoth the Lords) will
it please you to name her that shall be so happy. Sirs, (quoth the king) it
is my Daughter I Would whom I will take to my Wife, for the great love that I had
to her mother. When the Lords heard that, they beheld each other, blessing
themselves at the horrible and detestable words of the king, and looked on him
maruailously. Then Sorbarre, (who was of the kings privy counsel) began to
speak, and said. Ah Sir, God forbid that such a shame should come to you, for
it is worse then heathen to him that will polute his own proper Daughter by
himself engendered, you should not be worthy to sit in a royal Chair, and
you ought to be the mirror and example to other men how they should live,
will you then break the Law that God has given us? put from you that
cruelty, you shall find no man that will praise you, in so doing or thinking.
When the king heard Sorbarre, he beheld him angerly and said. Sorbarre, (know
for troth) but that I hold my self much bound unto you, I would strike off
your head, and there is no man that speaks to the contrary, but I shall put
him to death.

Then all the Lords together said to the king. Sir, do as you please,
Sorbarre has said as a noble man ought to do, for if you do otherwise, you
are not worthy to bear a Crown, and so held their peace, they durst speak no
more for fear of him: and also because they thought surely, that the Devil
was within him to motion any such matter. When the king heard the will of his
Lords, he sent for his Daughter hastily, who came with a smiling countenance,
not knowing of the unreasonable will of the king her Father, and when she came
before him she kneeled down, the king took her up and set her between his
arms, and kissed her more then Twenty times. The Lady knew nothing of her
Fathers intention, none otherwise but that she thought he did it, but as a
Father ought to do with his Child: then the Lords said softly one to another.
Oh unhappy King, his thoughts be far unlike to his Daughters, for if she
were here alone, he would dishonor her although she be his own Daughter. The
King seeing his Daughter I Would so excellent fair, he said to himself, that
without he had his Daughter in marriage, he should die with rage, and the
King beheld her, and made her to sit down by him, and said. My dear Daughter,
you are as an Orpheling on the Mothers side, wherefore I have great pity of
you that you have lost her, and you resemble so much your Mother, that I think
when I see you in the face, that I see her before me, and therefore I love you
the better, and for this cause it is my will to take you to my Wife, for I will
have none other in marriage.

Chap. CLXV.
Of the great sorrow that the Damsel I Would made, when she heard her Father, how
he would have her in marriage: and how by the means of a noble Lady and
Sorbarre, she departed at midnight, and went at the adventure that God would
send her.

WHen the Damsel heard her Father, her fresh red color became pale and wanne,
and she cast down her looks to the earth, and said. Ah my right dear Father,
take heed what you say, for if you be heard of them that be here present,
you shall be greatly blamed. Then the Damsel would have risen up to have gone
from her Father, but the King took her by the hand and said. My Daughter, make
no danger nor refuse to follow my will, for you slay me for the love that I
bear you: then all the Lords kneeled down before the King, and held up their
hands, and desired the King for his own wealth and honor, that he would have
pity of himself and of his Daughter, and that he would never think to do
such a deed, for if he did, he should never be set by after. When the king
heard his Lords, and how they reasoned with him to have turned his mind, he
answered as a man full of villainy and ire, and said, that in despite of them
all, and whether they would or not, he would have her to his Wife, and that if
there were any so hardy as to speak to him to the contrary, he would cause
them to die a shameful death, and he sore rebuked them. When the Damsel heard
her Father to speak unto the Lords and Knights, then she saw well the
inordinate love of her Father, and she began to weep, and said. Oh good God, I
shall be shamed and lost for ever if he take me to his Wife, for both of us
cannot escape without damnation: then she thought within her self, that if
she could in any wise escape, she would fly away so far off, that there should
never any tidings be heard of her.

Then the King sent her into her Chamber with her Maidens, who were sorrowful
and discomforted when they heard of that matter, for the King had commanded
them to keep her well, and to ordain a rich bed for her, because the next day
he would marry her. When the Damsel I Would was in her chamber, she called to
her an ancient Lady, who had been her Mistress, and then she avoided all
other out of her Chamber, and made semblance to sleep: and when she saw that
al other were gone, she kneeled down, and held up both her hands before the
Lady, and all weeping said. Ah my right dear Lady and Mistress, I come to
you as a poor Orpheling without Father or Mother, my Mother is dead as you
know well, but he that should be my Father, would be my Husband, the which is
a thing that the earth ought not to bear, nor sustain them that would live
in such manner: and therefore (dear Mistress) counsel and aid this poor
discomforted Orpheling, and help me, that I may be out of the sight of him
that ought to be my Father, for I had rather go into some far Country, and
there to live in poverty, then to end my days with him in doing of such a
deed, and at the end to be damned and lost. When the old Lady (who was
right noble and sage) heard the pitifu^l complaint of the Damsel I Would, whom
she had nourished and brought up, she answered and said. My right dear
daughter, for the great love that I bear you, I shall aid and counsel you,
and bring you out of this doubt, as sometime did my Brother Peter of Aragon to
the Lady Clariet your Mother, he rescued her out of the hands of the
Sarazins, when she was in ieopardie of her life, for all your Father I shall
not let to aid you. When the Damsel I Would heard the good will of the Lady, how
she would aid her, all weeping she kissed her, and said. Ah my right dear
Mother, the goodness that you do to me God reward you for it, for it lies not
in me: then the old Lady issued out of her Chamber, and left the Lady I Would
very pensive, and went into Sorbarres Chamber, who was as then in ye Pallaice,
for he was one of the kings privy Counsel, and when he came to his Chamber,
and found the Lady there, he demanded what adventure had brought her thither,
the Lady drew him apart, and showed him the request and prayer of the Damsel
I Would, whereof Sorbarre (for the great pity he had of her) began to weep, and
avoided his Chamber, the better to speak with the Lady at his ease, and they
devised together of diverse things, and at last they concluded, for the sauegard
of the damsels body, that this ancient Lady should bear to her the apparel
of a man, and that at the hour of midnight, she should array her therewith,
and then show her and let her go out of the Pallaice, and come to the stable,
whereas she shall find me ready, with the best horse that her Father has,
ready for her to leap upon.

When the ancient Lady understood Sorbarre, she was right joyful, and thought
his counsel good, and then she departed, and made ready all the apparel
belonging to a man: then she came to the Damsel Ides Chamber, and showed her
the conclusion that was taken between her and Sorbarre. When the Damsel heard
that, she had great joy at her heart, and she clipped and kissed her: the Lady
was glad when she saw her somewhat comforted, and said. Fair Lady, the King
your Father has ordained a bath for you: therefore go thither and has with
other Damsels, to the intent that the King do not suspect any thing, and
when you have bathed you a certain space, let your bed be made ready, and
when you are in your Chamber go to your bed, and then command me and all the
Damsels to go and bath us, and I shall keep them there so long a space, that
they shall have good list to sleep, and I shall leave here by your bedside
all your man's apparel, and array you therein, and then guird this sword about
you, and put on your spurs, and when you are out of the Pallaice, go to the
Stables, where you shall find a horse ready for you. Then they went into the
bathing Chamber, and she in her smock ready to go into the bath, and all
the other Damsels were joyful, when they saw her come thither, for they
thought she had been gone to sleep, because of the displeasure that she had
at her heart: then they said one to another, it seems that our Lady is well
appeased of her sorrow, me thinks to morrow she shall be Lady and Queen, and
she shall be wife and Daughter to the King her Father, the which is a thing
unreasonable: then they came to her and bathed her, and feasted her as much as
they might.

When the Lady I Would thought that it was time to depart, she said to her
Mistress and to the other Damsels, how she had bathed her enough, and that
she would go into her Chamber to sleep, and bad all the other to go and bath
them, and that there should no more go with her, but two of them to have her to
bed, and she said to her Mistress, that she should go and bring her with the
Damsels, the which thing they did joyfully: the damsel departed and went into
her Chamber, wrapped in a Mantle of sca^let. When the two Damsels had brought
her to bed, they took leave of her and departed, and closed the door after
them, and then they went and bathed them with others: and when the Damsel I Would
felt her self all dry, she rose and arrayed her in the man's apparel as well as
she could, and took the sword and guirt it about her, and put on her spurs,
and then she went to a great low window on the Garden-side, and there she leapt
out into the Garden as privily as she could, and so went along by the wall side
until she came to the Posterne, then she went out toward the Stable, and
when she came there, she found a horse ready in Sorbarres hand, and at the
pommell of the saddle, a bag full of bread and flesh, and two bottels of good
wine. Then the Damsel took the horse, and without any word speaking, she
leapt up quickly: then Sorbarre all weeping said. My dear Daughter, God be
thy guide and bring thee to sauegard, go thy way, and keep the way upon thy
left hand, and follow the Seaside. Sir, (quoth she) for the goodness you have
showed me God reward you, into whose sauegard I commend you: thus departed this
noble Lady I Would, to eschew and fly from the ill and dishonorable will of her
Father, and she entered into the Forest keeping no hye way, and so she road
three days along the wood, until she thought well that she was far from her
Country. Now let us l^aue speaking of her, until we have occasion to
return to her again: and let us speak of King Florence her Father.

Chap. CLXVI.
How King Florence was sorrowful, when he was advertised of his Daughters
departing, who was apparelled like a man, and how she came into Almaine: and
how she found certain Thieves in a Forest, and how she came to Rome to the
Emperor like a Squier.

YE have heard here before in this History, how King Florence of Aragon would
have his own Daughter the Damsel I Would in marriage, against the will of al his
Lords and people, after that he had spoken with her, and commanded the bath to
be ordered for her, to the intent that the next day to have her in marriage. The
night approached, and after Supper the King went to his bed, and the next
morning betimes, tidings was brought to the King, how the King of Navarre was
come to see him, the King went to meet him, and made him great cheer, and so
came together to the Pallaice, and then incontinent it was showed the King, how
his daughter was fled away, whereof the King was so sorrowful and angry,
that no man durst speak a word to him, and he went into his Daughters
Chamber, and there he found the Ladies and Damsels that had the keeping of her,
the King would have run upon them, if the King of Navarre had not been, who
let him and blamed him much, when he knew the cause of her departing, and
what the King would have done: then came the Horse-keeper to the King, and
said, how his good horse was stolen away the same night. Then the King as a
man desperate, commanded on all sides men to ride after her, and whosoever
could bring his Daughter again, or else sure tidinges of her, he promised to
give him a Thousand Florents of gold. There were many, that for love of that
monney road forth, to the number of three hundred, they road diverse ways, but
there was none of them that could bring any tidinges of her, and so returned to
the King, who was sorrowful when he could hear nothing of her. Great
lamentations there was made in the City, for the going away of the Damsel,
because of the fear that she had of her Father, and road upon the good horse,
in the day time she would rest her in the woods, and in the night she would
ride forth.

Thus she pa^^ed all the Pr^uinces of Aragon, and she passed into Lombardy, of
her iourneys and adventures I will make no mention, because she found nothing
in the way to let her, she road so long, that she approached to the Country
of Almaine, and when she came there her monney failed her, whereby she was
constrained to sell her horse for money to live withal, and so went a foot,
and at the last came to the City of Basile, and there she tarried a season,
and there spent her monney, so long she lay there, that she heard the
Emperor of Room sent for men all about, to aid and succor him against the
King of Castile, who made him great war. When she said that many noble men
were going to Room, to succor the Emperor, she was joyful, and said to her
Host, that if she had horse and armor, she would go with other into the
wars, and thought within her self, that she would gladly be acquainted with
the Emperor of Room, who was named Othon, and she thought if she might she
would take counsel of him, and she did so much, that she fell in acquaintance
with some of the Almaines, so that they were glad to see her, she seemed to
them to be so fair and a young Squier, then an Almaine that was there said
unto her. Friend, come hither to me, and show me what thou art? Sir, (quoth
she) I am to him that my service may please, for I desire nothing but to serve
some noble man, but of late I was in Aragon, and there I served a Lord that is
dead, wherefore I am come hither for the displeasure that I have of his death,
and I can well serve a Gentleman, and keep his horse, and if need be to drive
his Sompter-horse, and if I come in Battle or in Skirmish with my Master, I
think he shall have a worse then I am in his company. The Almaine hearing her
so to speak, said: Fair Son, that thou say proceeds of a good courage,
therefore good must come to thee, yet I pray thee show me thy name? Sir,
(quoth she) I am called I Would. Brother, (quoth the Almaine) I entertain thee
into my service, take heed of my horse. Sir, (quoth she) I am ready to do you
the best service that I can, so the Almaine had her to his Lodging.

Thus she then served, that was wont to be served, for she feared if it
should be perceived that she were a woman, it would be to her trouble, therefore
she kept her self close and secret, and she continued three days with her
Master, after the other company were gone toward Room, but her Master might
not depart so soon as the other did, for his business was not ready: and
then three days after they departed to go to Room, and she was armed after
the custom of the Country, she served her Master so well, that he praised
her. So long they road, that they came and approached near to the Country of
Rome, so that on a day they entered into a great dark Forest, wherein lay in
ambushment about Seauen-score Spaniards, lying there to abide their adventure,
they lay in a dark Valley: and when they saw the Almaines, they despised them
to the death and ran upon them. Then I Would (who road before her Master)
couched her Spear, and struck a Spaniard therewith clean through the body,
and with the drawing out of her Spear, the Spaniard fell down dead, of the
which course her master praised her, then the Spaniards ran in among the
Almaines, who right valiantly defended themselves, but their defense could not
avail them, for at the end they were all slain, so that none escaped alive,
but alonely I Would, who did bear her self so valiantly, that she slew Four of
the Spaniards, but when she saw that her master and all his company were
slain, with her sword in her hand all bloody, she fled away, and road out of
the way, and took a little path, the which brought her to a Rock, and there
she alighted, and tarried in the wood all that night until the next morning,
she had so great hunger and thirst, that she was near hand famished, for she
had ridden all the day without meat or drink, and in the morning she looked al
about her, and saw in an arbor about Thirty Thieves, sitting at a Table
eating and drinking at their pleasure: and when the Damsel saw them, for the
great rage of hunger that she suffered, constrained her in such wise that she
forgot all fear and went unto them. When the Thieves saw her, one of them said
to his fellows, I see yonder coming a Squier mounted upon a good horse, the
which shall be ours: and when I Would approached to them, she humbly saluted the
company and said. Sirs, if it may please you to let me eat and drink with
you, I will pay for my shot. Freende, (quoth one of them) is there any man
that has been your guide in this Forest? Sirs, (quoth I Would) God has been my
conduct and none other: then one of the Thieves stepped forth, and took her
horse by the bridle, and said to his company. Sirs, lay on, strike him down,
he shall never eat nor drink more, his horse shall not escape me. When the
Damsel saw that she was taken, she was in great fear, and she durst make no
countenance to defend her self, there were so many Thieves upon her, and she
thought to humble her self which should be more profit, and said. Sirs, why
make you that have to slay me? little shall ye win thereby nor looze, hold
here my sword, I yield my self into your hands, and I pray you (in the
honor of Jesus Christ) to give me some meat and drink, for I am so hungry,
that I am almost famished. Then the master Thief said: Squier, have no fear
to be stricken, thou shall have no more hurt then my self, but thou shall have
all that thou lackest, go thy way and sit down, and eat and drink at thy
pleasure. Sir, (quoth I Would) I thank you. Then the Damsel sat down with them,
and did eat and drink at their pleasure: and when they had all eaten and were
risen up, the Thieves began to strive among themselves, saying to their
chief master, how he had done ill that he would not suffer them to slay the
Squier: then another answered, and said. how there should be no hurt done unto
him, because he was so fair a young man and so courteous, and said, that it
should be great damage to slay him, and that it were better to keep him still
with them, and to learn him to steal and to murder men, and if he will not so
do, then it were good reason to slay him.

When I Would understood the Thieves, she was in great fear, and called upon our
Lord God, praying him humbly in her great need to aid and succor her: then
the chief master demanded what was her name, then she answered in great
fear to be slain, and said. Sir, my name is I Would, and I am of the Realm of
Faunce, and we were in company when we departed out of our Country about
forty Gentlemen, we were going to have served the Emperor of Rome, who has
now war with the King of Spain, and we found in our way about seven score
Spaniards in ambushment, lying in a Valley, so they set upon us, and slew all
my company, none escaped but my self: and therefore Sirs, I pray you let me
have again my horse and my sword, and show me the way to Rome, it would be a
great alms deed to show me that courtesy. Nay, (quoth the master Thief)
that we will not do, but thou shall tarry with us, and learn to be a Thief
and a Murderer, and if thou will not thus do, with my Sword I shall strike off
thy head. Sirs, (quoth I Would) you would have me to do a thing that I was never
accustomed to do, nor none of my Lineage, nor I have no intention to do any
such works, therefore I pray you let me have my horse and my sword, then you
do me great courtesy, and when I am mounted upon my horse, if one of you will
defy me, and if I defend not my self from him, then strike off my head. I
have bought my meat and drink very dear, if I should looze my horse: then
the master Thief said. Because I see that thou art so hardy, I will wrestle
with thee, upon this covenant, that if thou cast me, thou shall be one of our
company, and if thou be cast to the earth, then I will have thy horse and thy
Sword, and spoil thee of all thy clothes. Then I Would said: I am content thus to
do, so that you withdraw your men from me, and set my horse by me, and my sword
tied to my saddle bow, for it is a common proverb, that a man is taken for a
Fool that puts his trust in a Thief. When the Thieves heard that, they
could not forbear laughing, and they had great desire to see this wrestling
betwixt them, then they withdrew back, and set his horse there by him: then
the noble Damsel I Would quickly took the Thief, who thought to have borne her
to the earth, but she drew him so sore to her, that he could scarce have any
breath, and therewith she cast him so rudely to the earth against a stone that
he was therewith in a swound, and with the fall his teeth burst in his mouth.

When I Would saw the Thief in that danger, she went quickly to her horse and
mounted up: then she drew out her sword* and said. Ah ye vilde Thieves, your
treason shall not avail you, for ye have all thought violence and treason
against me, go and help your master who lies yonder, I think he shall
ever remember this wrast^ing between us, and I have now no doubt of you all,
though you were a Hundred more, for if I can I shall make you all be hanged
and strangled, then the quickest and the lightest Thief among them stepped
forth and took him by the bridle of his horse: and when she saw that, she
lifted up her Sword, and struck the Thief upon the hand, so that the hand flew
from his body and hanged still upon her bridle, then he ran away, thinking
to die with the pain of his hand: and then she dashed in among the Thieves,
for they had no weapons about them to defend themselves withal, but they were
there to their folly, nor they had no fear of that which fell, nor they
believed not that such a young Squier should have had such hardness and force:
then she fought fiercely among them, and cut off arms and shoulders, and
claue some to the brains, she did so much, that she slew five of the Thieves
before she dep^rted, and when she saw time to depart, she spurred her horse,
for by that time the residue of the Thieves had gotten weapons, and they
followed her to have slain her or her horse, then she departed with the
spurs, her horse was good, therefore anon she was far from them, then the
Thieves saw they lost but their labors to follow any further: therefore they
let her go. When I Would saw that she was escaped their hands, she humbly thanked
our Lord God, desiring him to aid and conduct her into some sauegard, and she
road so long, that she issued out of the great Forest: Of her iourneys and
lodging I will make no mention, but she sped so in her journey, that she
arrived at the noble City of Room, and she took up her lodging near to the
Pallaice, whereas the Emperor was devising with his Lords of the Feats of
war: then I Would went thither, and kneeled down and saluted the Emperor and
all his Lords. When the Emperor and the Romans that were there saw the
goodly young man, who so humbly saluted them, they regarded him much, for the
beauty that they saw in him: then the Emperor said unto him. Fair Son,
show me what you be, and from whence you come, that thus comes hither to
me? Sir, (quoth I Would) I am a Squier, that came now straight from Almaine,
whereas I have served a certain time, and little there I have won, whereof I
am sorry, and but lately I was in place where diverse Spaniards and other were
in company, and they had great desire to make war, and they went to the king
of Spain your enemy, but before they had gone far, they that were in my
company met with them, and there we fought together and slew the most part of
them, and there I was a little hurt: and now Sir, I am come to you to serve
your grace, if my small service may please you, and in the best wise that I
can, I shall serve you truly.

Chap. CLXVII.
How the Damsel I Would was entertained with the Emperor of Room, and how the
Lady Olive his Daughter was enamoured of I Would, weening she had been a man: and
how the King of Spain came before the City of Room: and how the noble
Damsel I Would took the King of Spain in battle, and discomfited him.

WHen the Emperor heard I Would speak, he beheld her well, and saw how she was
big and great, and thought that in all his life he never saw so fair a young
man, and as the Emperor was talking with I Would, there came to them Olive the
Emperors Daughter. Then all the Lords rose up at her coming, and she sat
down by her Father, and greatly beheld the young Squier, and much she praised
him in her courage, because of the maruailous great beauty that was in her,
weening that she had been a man. This Olive was so fair, so sweet, and so
meek, that (for her bounty and humility) she was beloved of every man: then
the Emperor demanded of I Would what her name was, and from whence she came? Sir,
(quoth she) my name is I Would, and I was borne at Terrascon, and I am kin to
Duke Naymes of Bauier, and to Aymerie of Narbon, and to Gillerme the Scot: but
by the kinsmen of Ganelon, I was chased and banished out of my Country, and
since I have endured much pain and poverty. Then the Emperor said: Friend,
thou art of a good kindred, I entertain thee into my Court, for the bounty
that I think to be in thee, and also for thy good Lineage. Sir, (quoth I Would)
God give me grace that I may do you such service, that it may be to your
pleasure. Daughter Olive, (quoth the Emperor) for the love of you, I have
entertained this Squier to serve you. Father, (quoth Olive) I thank you, for
it seems that he is come of a good Stock, and I had no Servant a great
season that better contented me: then the Emperor said unto I Would. My Friend,
serve me well, behold here my Daughter whom I love entirely, and to whom I
deliver you to serve her, I have no more Children but she, and therefore serve
her truly, as a man ought to do that is come of such a Lineage as you are, if
you serve her well and truly, you had never in all your life so good
adventure. Sir, (quoth I Would) I shall do so much, that by the grace of God, you
and she shall be well content, and Sir, there is nothing lightly but I can
do it, to serve a noble man, and in the war I shall defend my self I trust
as well as another, and also I can serve at a Table before a King or Queen.
Friend, (quoth the Emperor) if you can do thus as you say, you are welcome
hither, and you shall fare the better, and I am joyful of your coming to
serve me, you shall never have need to go out of my service.

When I Would heard the Emperor, she humbly thanked him: and thus was I Would
entertained with the Emperor, whereas she did so much by her good service, that
the Emperor and his daughter, and all they of the Court, loved and praised her,
and the Damsel Olive often times gladly regarded I Would, and began in her heart
sore to love her, and I Would (who perceived her) prayed our Lord God, that he
would so deal, that she be not accused neither of man nor woman. She gave
alms often times to poor men, and she visited gladly the holy Church, she
demeaned her self in such wise, that of every man she was beloved and
praised: often times she prayed to God for King Florence her Father, although
she was chased and fled out of her Country by his occasion and cause, yet she
always prayed to God that she might be agreed with him.

Thus this Damsel I Would was in this danger, serving ye Emperor and his Daughter
Olive the space of two Months, and on a day she was in the Pallaice with the
Emperor, and thither came in great have a Messenger, and came and saluted the
Emperor, and said. Sir, know for troth, that the King of Spain with great
puissance is entered into your Empire of Rome, and wastes all before him with
fire and sword, and many a Roman he has slain, and he has sworn by his
Law, that before a month be passed, he will be within your City of Rome
with all his puissance, and he says, that he will have his pleasure of your
Daughter, and to make you to die a shamful death, because you have refused to
give him your Daughter in marriage. Sir, it had been better for you that he had
married your Daughter, then so many men should have been slain, and so many
Towns burnt and destroyed, and Castles beaten down. Sir, go quickly against
him, and defend your Country, or else you shall see him shortly pitch up his
Tents and Pauillions before this City. When the Emperor heard ye messenger, he
studied a great season, and looked upon I Would, and said. Friend, counsel me,
for I thought full little, that these men of war would have come upon me,
and now they wast and destroy my Land. Sir, (quoth I Would) trouble not your self
for it, comfort your self, and rejoice your Lords and Servants, and let me
have men to fight with them, and I will look upon them before they come any
nearer, and by the grace of God, I shall cause them to buy dearly the
destruction that they have made in your Country, if God save my life, and my
sword hold. When the Emperor heard the valiant courage of I Would, he praised her
much in his heart, and said. Friend, your reason pleases me well, and
therefore I shall do you that honor, as to make you a Knight, whereby your
Prowess and hardiness shall increase. Sir, (quoth I Would) of the honor that you
will do to me, I am right joyful, and I thank you thereof: then the Emperor
came unto I Would, and guirt about him a good sword and a rich, it was so good,
that there was none like it in goodness, neither sharper nor harder, and then
the Emperor gave her the necke-stroake of Knighthood, and said. I Would, remember
this order the which you have received this day, and I pray God that it may be
to the increase of your honor, and eue^ beware that your thoughts be not light
nor wavering, but rather sage, discreet, and temperate, and be hardy in
Battle, and cast away from you all fear, and when you have won any goods
or riches, keep them not locked in your Coffers, but distribute them to poor
Knights, the which shall increase and exalt your honor, and always love the
holy Church, if you do thus, you cannot fail to come to great honor, and ever
show your virtue against your enemies. Sir, (quoth I Would) by the grace of God I
shall so do, and there is no Spaniard but that shall wish himself to be on
the other side of the Sea: then every man arrayed them in the Pallaice and in
the City, and then Trumpets, Drums, and Horns began to sound in the
City, so that all the Chivalry and Communaltie of the City were ready armed:
then they came all before the Pallaice, and presented themselves to the
Emperor, who did command them that day to follow and obey the commandment of
I Would, whom he committed that day to do and be as chief Captain, and said.
Sirs, look that you do as much for him as you would do for me, and ye know
well, that I am old and feeble, and can bear armor no longer, nor I am not
able to ride as I might have done before this time: wherefore I desire you, and
also command you all on pain of your lives, to do every thing as he
commands in stead of me, as well as though I did command you in mine own
person, for he that does the contrary, he shall lose his head without any
other redemption. Then they all said they would so do since it was his
pleasure.

Then the noble Emperor caused I Would to be richly armed, and then delivered him
his own horse, who was so good that his like could not be found in any
Country, then I Would mounted up quickly with helmet, sheeld, and a good Spear:
and I Would took leave of the Emperor, and of the Lady Olive, and so road through
the City of Room with all his Host, and when they were without the City,
I Would ordained Three Battles, the two first battles were led by two great
Lords, and the Third I Would did guide: and thus with banners displayed, they
advanced forth toward their enemies. The Spaniards thought surely that all
had been theirs, because they saw of all the way that they had come, no manner
of defense made against them, but it is an old saying, yt many things remains
of foolish thoughts as it did with the Spaniards, for they thought surely that
the City of Rome was won, but if God aid and succor the Damsel I Would and
her Chivalry, she should take from them ere it were night, their hope to have
any Victory. She road by her Battles and encouraged her men, and moved them
to do valiantly, and thus they approached toward their enemies. Great joy and
noise there was when the Battles encountered together, the shot flew so thick
on both parts, that it seemed to be snow and hayle. I Would encountered with a
Knight Nephew to the King of Spain, he received such a stroke, that for all
his armor, Ides Spear went clean through his body, so that ye Knight fell
to the earth with his feet upward, and so dyed miserably among the horse feet:
then I Would said, of God be thou cursed, in an ill hour thou camst hither to
receive such an offering, I challenge from you all the Empire of Rome, then
she said to her self. Good Lord God, I require thee humbly this day to aid
and succor me a poor fugitive: therewith she spurred her horse, and with the
same spear she slew another great Baron of Spain, and so slew with the same
Spear diverse other, and when the Spear was broken, she drew out her sword,
the which the Emperor had given her: then she came to a notable Duke of Spain
Uncle to the King, to whom she gave such a stroke with her good sword, that
she claue his head to the teeth, and so he fell down dead, then she dashed
into the thickest press, and ever did choose out the greatest personages, and
slew many of them, for she thought the more that were slain of the great men,
the more should her enemies be afraid: therefore she chose out such one after
another. And also the Romans fought valiantly, so that by the hye Prowess of
I Would, and of the good Chivalry of the Romans that were with her, they made the
Spaniards abashed, and caused them to fly away, and had never returned again
if the Duke of Argon, with three Thousand Knights in his company had not
been, who made them that fled to return again. Then there began again a
fierce Battle, and many a man slain, the Romans did valiantly, by the aid
and comfort of I Would their Captain, she road into the thickest of the press,
and bare down the Spaniards on all sides, that it was pity to see, great was
the noise, pitiously cried out the hurt men lying among the horse feet, which
were beaten down to the earth, then the King of Spain came into the Battle
with his sword in his hand, and encountered with a great Lord of Rome which was
Coozen to the Emperor, the King gave him such a stroke upon the helmet, that
he claue his head into the brains, and then the King slew another: then I Would
(who saw that) was sorrowful, and said. I ought little to be praised, without
I revenge the death of these two Lords slain by the King of Spain: then she
road to the King, and gave him such a stroke upon the helmet, that all the
circles with stones and pearls flew down to the earth, and stroke away part
of his coife, hair, and skin, and if the King had not turned his head, it
had been cloven to the teeth, and the sword glaunced and lighted upon his horse
neck, and struck it clean asunder, and so the horse fell down dead and the
King to the earth, whereof the Spaniards were sore abashed, thinking their King
had been slain, so they fled away, and left him there lying on the earth in a
trance, in such sort, that he could neither see, hear, nor speak one word:
then the Damsel I Would took him, and delivered him to two noble Lords of the
Emperors Court, and when he revived, he was made to swear and promise to be a
true Prisoner. Those two Lords went with the King of Spain into the City of
Rome, and presented him unto the Emperor from I Would, whereof the Emperor
thanked God that he had sent I Would thither to serve him: then the King was set
in a strong Tower, and I Would was without still doing maruailes in arms, so that
every man was abashed thereof, and the Spaniards made her way. Finally, by the
hye Prowess of the Damsel I Would, the King of Spain was taken and all his men
discomfited, happy was he that might escape to save his life, the chase
endured long, wherein many were slain and taken. Then I Would and her company
returned to their Tents and Pauillions, and there they found great riches, the
which was brought out of Spain, and was given and distributed to them that had
deserved it. Great joy was made in the noble City of Rome, for the Battle
was well seen over the walls, and especially the Lady Olive, had well regarded
the hye prowess of I Would, whereby she loved her so in her heart, that she smiled
with joy, and said to her self. To yonder young Knight I do give my love, the
which I never granted before to any man living, but it is good right and reason
that I grant my love to I Would, such like words Olive said to her self.

Chap. CLXVIII.
How the Emperor of Room highly received the noble Damsel I Would, and of the
honor that was made unto her, and how the Emperor made her Constable of his
Empire: And how the king of Spain was delivered out of prison, and made homage
unto the Emperor.

AFter that the Battle was done and finished, and the booty distributed, I Would
with great triumph accompanied with Lords and Knights entered into the City
of Room, and the Emperor was infourmed of the coming of I Would, and of her
valiant deeds, by whom the Victory was obtained, and how that none could
endure against her, whereof the Emperor had such joy at his heart, that he
wist not what to do, and he thanked our Lord God, that the matter went so to
his honor and glory, therewith I Would came to the Pallaice, whereas she was
received with great joy with all the Colleges of the City, and when the
Emperor saw her, he arose and embraced her, and said. My true Friend I Would, of
your coming I am right joyful, for this day you have done such honor to our
Empire, that you ought to be honored for ever, and because you have done us
such service, we will that you shall be the mirror for all other Knights,
to encourage them to do well: we therefore make you our first Chamberlain,
and high Constable of all our Roman Empire, and all my Lands and Signiories I
abandon, to be at your commandment in all things that you think reasonable to
be done, for I will and command that all my Lords do obey you. Sir, (quoth
I Would) of this honor I thank you, God give me grace that I may always
persevere, to do that thing which shall be to you agreeable, and profitable to
your Countries and Signiories. Then the Emperor sent for the King of Spain
out of prison, and when he was come, he kneeled down and said. Sir, I
require you to have pity of me: the Emperor answered ^^ercely, and said. King
of Spain, for what cause are you come out of your Country of Spain, and thus
to destroy and wast mine Empire? you have slain many of my Lords and
Knights, who never did you any displeasure, and besides that you have burnt
many of my Towns, and beaten down my Castles, whereof I am sorry, seeing
that I nor none of mine did you never any displeasure: and because that all
evil ought to be punished, and all good deeds rewarded, before ever I drink
any wine, I shall cause your head to be stricken off, for any man's speaking to
the contrary, I shall not fail to do it. When the King heard that, he was in
great fear, and humbly prayed him to have pity him, and said, how he was
ready to make amends for all his trespasses, and to repair again all the ill
damages done by him, or caused to be done within the Empire, and therewith to
do homage and feaultie unto him, and to hold the Realm of Spain of him:
promising also, if any war were made against the Emperor, he would come and
succor him with twenty Thousand men at his own proper costs and charges,
and to be with him against all men that would trouble him: then the Emperor
said. King of Spain, know for troth, that for all your promise and words, I
will do but little for it, for you shall not escape from me: then the damsel
I Would stepped forth, and said to the Emperor. Sir, I have often times heard say,
that he that humbles himself and cries for mercy, then reason requires
that he should have mercy granted him: and therefore Sir, I require you to
receive this ^ing to your grace, and pardon his trespass, seeing the offers
that he has offered to do, yt he will become your Liege-man, and hold his Land
of you, and amend the damages that you have suffered: he that reason offers,
ought to have have reason, and you ought to thank God, since such a man as he
is, puts himself into your hands. When the Emperor understood I Would, he
said. Friend I Would, your wit and courtesy is to be allowed* and because I know
that the counsel that you give me is reasonable, I will do as you will have
me, take you him, and by you he shall be delivered. Sir, (quoth I Would) I
thank you. When the King of Spain saw that he should have grace, and that
with amends making he should be delivered, he thanked God, and did homage to
the Emperor, and delivered sufficient pledges to make restitution as he had
promised: then the Emperor gave him a safe conduct until he came into his
own Country, and all the other Prisoners were delivered, such as were taken
in the Battle by the Romans, then the King of Spain was joyful, and often
times thanked the Damsel I Would, by whose means this bounty and courtesy was
showed him. Then he took his leave of the Emperor and of I Would, and of all
other Lords and Knights that were there present, and so he returned into his
Country of Spain, whereas he was received with sore weepings, for the great
loss that he had received. Now we shall leave speaking of him, and return to
our matter.

Chap. CLXIX.
How the Emperor gave his Daughter Olive in marriage to the Damsel I Would,
knowing none other but that she had been a man, and how she was appeached by a
Varlet, that heard their devises whiles they were in bed together, whereby
the Emperor would have burnt the Damsel I Would.

AFter that the King of Spain was departed from Room, the Emperor honored
and praised much I Would for the good service that she had done, who ever better
and better perseuered in good service doing, for she did so much by her wit,
that all discords and debates that were in the Empire between Lords or
Neighbors, she set them in peace and accord, wherefore the Emperor loved her
in such wise, that without her he did nothing, and the Emperors Daughter Olive
loved her in such wise, that she could not live one day without the sight of
her, she was so taken with love, thinking that she never saw so goodly a young
man. And so on a day, the Emperor assembled his Lords and his privy
Counsel, to whom he showed, and said, that he had but one Daughter, the
which as then was of lawful age, wherefore he would that she should be
married, to the intent that she might have heirs to enjoy his Lands after his
decease, and said. Sirs, I think if all the world should be searched, there
could not be found a man so worthy to have my Daughter Olive in marriage, as
our well-beloved Constable the valiant I Would, by whom so noble service has been
done unto us and to our whole Empire, for I would before I die that she should
be married, and I think I cannot better bestow her, for in all the world
there is not a more valiant Knight then I Would is, nor that is more worthy to
govern an Empire or a great Realm. When the Lords understood the Emperor,
they all allowed his mind, and counseled him to do the same: then the good
Emperor called to him I Would, and said. My dear Friend, for the great service
that you have done, I will reward you as by reason I am bound to do, and I
cannot give you a more richer thing nor that I love better, then Olive my dear
Daughter, whom I will give you in marriage, and I will that you take her to
your wife, to the intent that after my days you may govern mine Empire, for
now I feel my self aged and feeble, wherefore I shall be content, that from
henceforth you have the governing thereof, and now I deliver to you my Land in
keeping, to govern it as your own. Ah Sir, (quoth I Would) what is that you say?
you know well, that I am but a poor Gentleman, banished out of my Country,
and I am worth nothing, great damage it should be to so noble a Damsel, to
be assigned to such a poor man as I am. Sir, I cry you mercy, humbly
requiring you to take advice, that your Daughter (who is so fair) may be
married to some hye Prince and puissant, to the intent that if you should have
any bus^nesse, that he might be of power to aid and succor you, for I am poor,
and ought always to travail and to take pains, to get honor for me, and to
increase my Lineage. What, (quoth the Emperor) are you so hardy as to refuse
my Daughter, by whom great wealth and goodness may come to you? Sir, (quoth
I Would) since it is so, that it pleases you to show me this honor, I will not
refuse it, but Sir, I say it to this intent, that you should take good advise
therein, and seeing you are content that I shall thus do, and that it is your
pleasure, I am content, and I humbly thank your grace of the honor that you
bear me.

Then the Emperor sent for his Daughter, who came unto him with a glad heart,
for she had been advertised of the matter why her Father sent for her, and
then the Emperor said. Daughter, you must promise me to do as I shall show
you. Dear Father, (quoth she) it is not in me, nor I will not refuse any
thing that is your pleasure. Daughter, (quoth the Emperor) you do well so to
answer me, and because I have no more but you, that ought to have my Realm
after me, therefore I will that you take a Husband to the intent that your
Lands and Signiories may be defended by him, and therefore, I will that you
take to your Husband our Captain the valiant I Would, whom I love entirely, this
is my pleasure and agreement of all my Lords, if it be your pleasure to have
him, he shall be King and you Queen after my decease. Sir, (quoth the Lady) I
am ready to fulfill your pleasure and to obey your commandments, and I thank
God of this fair adventure that is fallen to me this day, for I shall have
him that I love best, I have not now lost my time, when I shall have at my
will him whom I love best in all the world*then she kneeled down before her
Father, and thanked him of his guilt: and then she rose and kissed her Father,
and said. Right dear Father, I require you to hasten that this may be done,
let us go to the Church to be wedded, for me thinks we ought so to do. When
the Lords heard the Lady, they laughed at her have: and then the Emperor
said. Daughter, come forth and fiance your Husband, and you I Would approach
near, and now after my death I give you all mine Empire, and I give you my
dear daughter, in recompense of the good service that you have done me. When
I Would understood the Emperor, all her blood changed, and she wist not what to
do, all her body trembled for fear, and she called upon our Lord God right
pitiously to her self, and prayed him to have pity of her, and to counsel
her what was best for her to do, for she saw that perforce the Emperor would
marry her to his Daughter, and said. Ah my Father Florence, by you and by your
disordinate rage, I am now brought to this case, when you made me to depart,
because you would have had me to your wife, but before I would have consented
thereto, I had rather to have been burnt: therefore I fled away to eschew that
shame, whereby I have been since in many perils, from the which by the will of
God I have escaped, whereof I ought to thank him, and I thought to keep my
self within Room secret, and that no man should know that I am a woman: but
I shall be accused by the Emperors Daughter, whose love is so much set on
me, that I have no power to escape, without I steal away privily from them
all: and if I show them what I am, I may then have some villainy and be
accused, and sent unto the King my Father, or else to send him word where I
am, and then in great have he will send for me, or else if I will escape, I
must fly away over the Sea, howbeit, I speak but like a Fool, seeing this
fortune is fallen unto me, to have the Emperors Daughter in marriage and his
Empire, I will wed her, and do as God will give me grace to do. All this the
Damsel I Would spoke to her self.

Then she said to the Emperor: Sir, since it is your pleasure to give me your
Daughter in marriage, I am ready to take her. Then they were led to the
Minster-church, and there they were fianced, whereof great joy was made in
Room, then the day of marriage came, and the fair Olive was led to the
Church between two Kings, and I Would went before very sadly, and so came to the
Church, and there they were wedded. Then great was the triumph and joy in the
City of Room, many a rich garment of gould and silk was worn that day, and
every man ran to see the new Brides: then they went to the Pallaice and so to
dinner. Of the Feasts, sports, and rich meats that were there that day, if I
should show it, the time would be ouer-long to rehearse it, but since Room
was first founded, it was not known that there had been such a Feast as this
wedding, for no body thought but that I Would had been a man: and after Supper,
when it was time to go to rest, the Brides were brought into their Chamber,
then the Lady Olive went to her bed, then came I Would, and the Chamber avoided,
and she locked fast the door, to the intent that none should hear them, then
she came to bed, and laid her down on the bedside, and said to Olive. My
right sweet Love, God give you good night, for as for me, I can give you no
good, because I feel such a disease, the which greeueth me sore, and therewith
she kissed Olive, who answered and said. My sweet Lover, you are the thing
in the world that I most desire, for the bounty and sweetness that I know in
you, then do with me as it shall please you, and to the intent that you shall
not think, that I have so great desire, that you should do the thing which of
right ought to be done between man and Wife, I am content to forbear it
Fifteen days, and because that diverse folks are here about to hear us, I
am content to give you truce, for we shall have time enough hereafter to sport
us, and I know such nobleness in you that I am sure you will take none other
Wife, nor touch none other, but that you will keep your faith and troth to me,
for I am chaste and so shall you find me, it suffices me to kiss you, and as
for the privy love, I am content for this time (since it is your pleasure) to
forbear it. Then I Would answered: Fair Lady, I will not refuse your will, thus
they passed that night with clipping and kissing. Then in the morning they
arose and made them ready, and came into the Pallaice, the Emperor beheld
Olive his Daughter, to see if she were any thing changed, and said. Daughter,
how is it with your new husband? Sir, (quoth she) even as I desire, for I love
I Would my Husband better then I love you, although you are my Father, at that word
the Emperor and all his Lords laughed: so great joy and feasting was there
made, that it endured Eight days. Then every man took leave and went whether
as they listed, and after the Fifteen days were expired, that I Would had layne
with Olive, I Would touched her not but with kissing, whereof Olive was sorrowful,
and said to her self. Oh good Lord, I was engendered in an evil hour, when I
have married with the goodlyest person of the world, and the most worthy, and
hardy that ever was guirt with a sword, or road on horse, he makes no
semblance to do that thing which I have so sore desired: then she drew near
to I Would and touched her, and I Would (who knew well what her desire was) turned
toward her, and would hide himself no longer from her, but all weeping cried
her mercy, and showed her from the beginning to the ending the manner of all
her adventure, and how that she was a woman, and was fled away because her
Father would have married her himself. And when Olive understood I Would, she was
right sorrowful, howbeit, she comforted I Would, and said. My right sweet Lover,
discomfort not your self, for you shall not be accused by me neither to no man
nor woman living, we are wedded together, and I will be good and true to you,
since you have kept your self so truly, with you I will use my time, and
pass my destiny since it is thus, for I see well that it is the pleasure of
our Lord God.

Thus as Olive and I Would were devising together of their secrets, a Page being in
a Chamber that joined close to their Chamber, heard well all their secret words
and communication, what each of them had said to the other, then he in all have
went to the Emperor, and showed him all that he had heard between the two
Lovers. When the Emperor heard that, he was right sorrowful, and said. Fellow
beware what thou say, look that thy report be true, for if I find it
contrary, thou shall die an ill death. Sir, if it be not as I have said, and
that I Would be not a woman whom you take for a man, strike off my head. Then the
Emperor made him to be taken and kept, to the intent to prove the troth, for
he thought that matter strange to believe: then he called to him the Lords of
his privy Counsel, and he showed them the matter, whereof they had much
marvel, seeing the great virtue and hye Prowess that was in I Would, and they
greatly complained of the matter and were sorrowful: then the Emperor (who
was right pensive) swear and made promise, that if he found the matter in that
case, he would cause both his Daughter and I Would to be burnt, because of hyding
of that strange case, and said. If I Would had discovered the matter to me
betimes, my Daughter should never have married her, and the matter now kept
close from me, I shall never have joy at my heart until I know the troth.
Then he commanded a bath to be made ready in his own Chamber, wherein he
would have I Would to be bathed, to the intent that he might know the troth before
she escaped away, for he said that he would not suffer no such falsehood to be
used: the bathing was made ready, and I Would was sent for, who knew nothing of
that matter, then the Emperor said to her. I Would do off your clothes, for you
shall bath you with me. When I Would heard the Emperor, she was sore abashed, and
said. Sir, I pray you to forbear it for this time, because I have not been
accustomed to be bathed: then the Emperor said. I will not forbear it, because
I will see you naked, for if I find that true which has been showed me, both
you and my Daughter shall be burnt. When I Would heard that, she saw that she was
betrayed and lost, then she kneeled down before the Emperor and cried him
mercy, and required him to have pity of her, and the Emperor in great have
sent for his Lords, who were in the Hall talking together, and were sorrowful
for I Would whom they loved entirely, so they came to the Emperor, and found I Would
before him on her knees sore weeping, in such sort, that for pity of her they
wept all, then the Emperor showed them all the deed: wherefore ye must needs
see justice to be done upon I Would, who then by the Peers and Lords of Room was
judged to be burnt. Then it was commanded, the fire to be made ready to
burn her, the which was done: and I Would before the Emperor abiding her
judgment, with her hands joined lifted up toward Heaven, making pitiful
prayers to our Lord God, and to the holy Ghost, praying them to have pity of
her soul, and to receive it into the holy Paradise, for she saw well that
the end of her life was come.

Chap. CLXX.
How our Lord God made great Miracles for I Would, for God made her to change from
the nature of a woman and to become a perfect man, whereof the Emperor and his
Daughter Olive had great joy, and so I Would and Olive lay together, and engendered
a fair Son named after Croissant. And of the death of the Emperor.

THe same hour that I Would was in her prayers, there appeared suddenly in the
Chamber a great clear light, and therewith a maruailous sweet odor, that it
seemed all the Chamber to be full of essence and spices Aromaticke: then
presently after they heard an Angel-like voice sent from our Lord God, and
said. Thou Emperor of Rome, our Lord God commands thee by me, that thou be
not so hardy as to touch I Would, to do her any hurt, for our Lord God has given
her the grace for the goodness that is in her, he does consent and will by his
divine puissance, that she be changed in nature, and to become a perfect man,
as all other be without any difference: and also God commands, that the Page
whom thou have in prison, that thou set him at liberty, for ye which he
showed thee was of troth, this morning I Would was a woman, but now she is a man.
Also God commands thee to make thy self ready, for thou shall live here in
the world but Eight days longer, therefore from hence forth let I Would and Olive
thy Daughter have the governing of thy Empire, who before this year be passed
shall have between them a Son, who shall be named Croissant, who shall do
maruailes when he comes to age, many adventures and pouerties he shall
suffer in his youth, but afterward he shall have joy and wealth enough: and
with those words the Angel vanished away, and left the Emperor and his Lords
and all the people of Rome in great joy, for the evident Miracle that our Lord
God had sent by the prayer of I Would, who with Olive his Wife had great joy, and
thanked our Lord God. Then the Feast and triumph began again at Rome, that
day passed, and the night came, and I Would and Olive went to bed together, and
took their sport in such wise, that the same night was gotten and engendered
the fair Croissant, whereby the joy doubled in the City of Rome, and the next
day I Would came to the Pallaice with other Lords. And the Emperor was in his
Chamber making of his Testament, for he had not forgotten the words of the
Angel, so he lived Eight days longer, and on the Ninth day he dyed, and he
was borne into the great Church of Saint Peter, where his obsequy was done
solemnly, and laid in his Tomb the which was ordained for him as it
appertained, his Son in law and his Daughter mourned, according to the
custom then used, and then after Eight days were passed, all the noble Lords
of the Country came to the Court, and crowned I Would Emperor and Olive his Wife
Empress, great joy and feasting was made at their Coronation. And when Olive
the Empress approached her time, she was delivered of a fair Son, and when
he was christened, he was named Croissant, that is to say growing, because the
Moon the same time was increasing. Of the cheer that I Would and his Lords made
at the birth of his Child, need not to be rehearsed, for you may well think
it was as great as ever was any before. Then the time came that the Empress
was churched, whereof great joy was made, this Child was well nourished, and
two notable Ladies had the keeping of him until he was Seven years of age:
then a noble Knight and an ancient was set about him, and a wise, and a great
Clarke to teach him cunning, for commonly it is said, that a King without
learning or cunning, is compared to an Ass crowned: Often times the Father and
the Mother would visit their Child, he was kept to School until he was
Fifteen years of age, and he was so good a Clarke, that there was none in the
City of Rome, but that he could well dispute with him and assoile his
questions: of his beauty, greatness, force, humility, and good virtues,
wherewith he was endued, if I should describe them, it would be ouer-long to
rehearse, whereof I Would and his Mother Olive had such joy, that they wist not
what to do, but alonely to thank God of his grace, for their Child grew so in
bigness and strength, that every man was thereof abashed, in such wise, that at
that time there could not be found in the City of Rome of his age none so
great, nor so hye of stature, whereof his Father, and his Mother, and all the
noble Lords, and Knights were right joyful.

Chap. CLXXI.
How King Florence sent two Knights to Rome to the Emperor his Son, desiring
him to come and see him, and leave the Empire of Rome to his Son Croissant,
and to set noble men about him to guide him: And also to bring with him the
Empress, the fair Olive.

THe Emperor and the Empress seeing their Son to grow, and amend every day
in all good works, they thanked God, praying him to give him the grace from
better to better to persevere: so it fell, that upon a Whitsunday the Emperor
and the Empress held estate Royal at their Pallaice, for the solemnity of
that day, and there was many Kings, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Duchesses, and
Ladies, and whiles they were in the midst of their dinners, there arrived Two
notable ancient Knights: and when they were entered into the Pallaice, they
came before the Emperor, and kneeled down, and said. God that created us, save
and keep the noble King Florence of Aragon, and of Navarre, and Duke of
Bourdeaux: and the same God save the right noble and excellent Emperor of Rome
his dear Son, and his fair Daughter the Empress Olive. When the Emperor
I Would heard speaking of his Father, he was fearful in his heart, because of
the shameful thing not faileable, the which he would have done against him,
right intentiuely he beheld the two Knights, and demanded how the King his
Father did, ever since he departed from him? Then one of the Knights
answered, and said. Right dear Sir, if the dolor, displeasure, and the great
rage wherein your Father was for your departing, if I should show it, too long
it would be to rehearse: but shortly I shall show you the substance of the
matter. The same Morning after your departing, tidings was brought to the King
your Father, how that the King of Navarre your Uncle was come to see him, then
your Father went and met him, and brought him into the City of Courtoys with
great joy and mirth, and they alighted at the Pallaice, and there tidings was
brought to the King your Father, how you were fled away, whereby such sorrow,
dolor, and displeasure took him at the heart, that there was none that durst
look him in the face, for he looked like a spirit, because of the foolish love
that he had on you, and he ran about in the Pallaice like a desperate man, so
that for fear of him, there was neither Lady nor Damsel that durst abide
him, for the great fury and displeasure that he was in, so that by reason of
his great ire, he fell into a grievous malady, wherein he thought that he
should have died, and so was confessed and made ready to receive the holy
Ghost. Then the King of Navarre and Sorbar, and diverse other Princes came to
visit him, and desired him to put the folly out of his mind, and to cry to God
for mercy, many notable Docttors were there, and they showed him many good
reasons and examples, and said, without he would leave and forsake his folly,
he should be condemned body and soul.

When the King your Father saw himself in that doubt, and knowing that he
had done ill to cause you to fly away, and that no tidings could be heard of
you, such a contrition and repentance took him, that great abundance of
drops fell from his eyes, in such sort, that all his face was wet, and he had
such dolor and grief in himself, that every man that saw him wept for
pity, and the King of Navarre had so great pity of him, that he was so
sorrowful, that a grievous sickness took him, so that the Fourth day he
died, whereof the King your Father was right sorrowful. At last his
sickness determined, and he was recovered, and in good health a certain
space, but by reason of the dolor that he had for you, could not be ceased,
but he fell again sore sick, and so he continues, and has no power to aid
and relieve himself, but he eats and drinks enough. And after now of late
it has been showed him all your life, and how by the grace of God it is
fallen to you, whereby such joy is come to his heart, that there was never so
much joy in no man's heart, and yet he says, that he shall never have perfect
joy at his heart until he may see you: and therefore he has sent us hither
to you, and he desires and commands, as much as the Father can command his
Child, that both you and the Empress your wife, should leave this your
country in the guiding of your Son, and to leave notable persons about him,
to keep and conduct him, for it shall be to you more profitable and better, to
use your life in peace in the Realms of Aragon and Navarre, with the Duchy of
Bourdeaux the which to you appertains by just inheritance, and he has given
us in charge not to depart from hence, until you have showed us your will, to
the intent, that we may bring him some good news.

Chap. CLXXII.
How the Emperor I Would and the Empress Olive gave good instructions to their
Son, when they departed from Rome* and how they arrived at Courtoys, and
came to Florence, who with great joy received them as his Children.

WHen the Emperor I Would had heard this Knight report these news of the King his
Father, the water fell from his eyes for pity and joy that he had, and
answered and said. Sirs, I will that ye know well, that of your coming and
good news, I am right joyful, but I am sorry for the great sickness that my
Father is in, wherefore to recomfort him and to make him joyful, I will that
you return to him and say, how that I humbly recommend me to his good grace,
and that at Midsummer next I and my Wife will be with him: the Messengers
hearing that answer, were right joyful. Then after dinner they took their
leave of the Emperor and of the Empress, who gave them many rich guiftes, for
the honor of King Florence their Father, and so the Messengers departed. When
the Empress Olive understood the will of her Lord, she was right sorrowful
for to leave her Country, whereas she was borne and nourished, and especially
to leave her Son Croissant whom she loved: but since it was the pleasure of her
Lord so to do, she contented her self, for she loved her Husband so well,
that she would in no wise say against his pleasure, nor let him to do his
will. Right sorrowful were the Princes and Lords of that Country, and all
the people of Room: but in the best wise yt they could they comforted
themselves, because of ye young Prince Croissant, who should tarry and abide
with them, and whom the Emperor delivered unto them to be kept.

And then he spoke to his Son, and showed him many notable examples and
reasons, he commanded him to be gentle and courteous to his Lords and
people, and that he should not be light of credence, and that in any wise he
should not listen with his ears to hear Flatterers, nor the filth that
comes from them that will lie and flatter to please him withal, to the
intent to come to their intention, whereby many a Prince has been destroyed
and brought to Hell, and whereby they and their Lords also for believing of
them, have been damned perpetually. Son, look thou be served with
Gentlemen, such as are come of them that have been of good renown, love the
holy Church, give alms to the poor for the love of Jesus Christ, let thy
Chests be open to thy good Knights, beware thou be no Nigard, and beware thou
be not overcome with wine, lead an honest life, haunt and keep company with
the ancient noble men, and praise them if they be worthy, fly Flatterers and
Mockers, and beware thereof thy self, for thou can not do worse, because it
will abate thine honor. Thus the Emperor I Would said to his Son Croissant, and
showed him many notable sayings and fair instructions, then he called his
Lords, and said. Sirs, the most part of you know my will, the which is, that I
and my Wife will go into Aragon to the King my Father: therefore I desire you
all and command you, that ye will have my Son as recommended to you, I have
left him great treasure, to the intent that if any war or any other business
fall to him, that he shall have riches sufficient, to withstand them that would
do him or his Country any damage, and also the Realm of Aragon is not so
far from hence, but that anon I may have news from him.

When the Lords understood the Emperor, and how he had taken on him this
Voyage, they knew well they could not let nor stop him of his pleasure. Then
they all answered in general, and said, that as near as they could, they
would accomplish his commandment, and to serve truly his Son Croissant, and
to aid, keep, and defend his Country against all men that would annoy him.
Sirs, (quoth the Emperor) I thank you. Thus after the Emperor had spoken with
his Son and with his Lords, and showed them his will and pleasure, he made
ready for his journey, and took with him a certain number of Knights to
accompany him and the Empress his Wife* and he fournished two great Ships,
and caused them to be charged with victual and Artillery, as it appertained
for the defense of their bodies and lives, and took with him great riches,
apparel, and jewels: then he took his leave of the Pope, of all his Lords,
and of all them of the City, who made great sorrow for their departing. Then
they entered into the River of Tyber, accompanied with about five Hundred
Knights, at their departing they took leave of their Son Croissant, and
kissed him often times. When the Empress saw her Son, whom she must depart
from, she began to weep, but the Emperor comforted her as much as he could.
Then they took their Ships and so departed, and so long sailed in the River
of Tyber, that they came into the hye Sea, whereas they sailed night and day
with good wind, that without danger they arrived at the City of Courtoys,
whereas they were received with great joy, and so they came to the Pallaice,
whereas they found King Florence lying on a Couch, who when he was advertised
of their coming, he had great joy. Then the Emperor and the Empress entered
into the Pallaice, and came whereas the King lay, then they both kneeled down
before him: and when the King saw them, he had such joy that he could speak
no word, but made a token that they should approach near to him, and so they
did, and he embraced and kissed them oftentimes, and when he might speak,
he said. My right dear Children, of your coming I am right joyful, and of
the grace that God has sent to you, then again oftentimes he kissed the
Empress Olive, and said, how she was welcome into the Realm of Aragon: Of the
great joy, feasting, gifts, and presents that were given and done at their
welcomming, if I should show it at length, it would be ouer-long to rehearse:
and therefore I pass it over. Now let us leave speaking of the King, and of
the Emperor and the Empress his Wife, who took such pleasure to abide with
King Florence, that never after they returned to Rome, but they reigned
together all their lives in good peace and love, and they had no Child but
Croissant, whom they had left at Room, and of whom we shall speak now
hereafter.

Chap. CLXXIII.
How Croissant was so bountiful and so liberal, that he gave away all the
Treasure that his Father had left him, so that at last he had no more to give,
and so was constrained to go seek his adventure, he and a Varlet alonely.

AFter that the Emperor I Would and the Empress Olive were departed from the
City of Room, Croissant their Son grew and amended in all things, he
delighted to take his pleasure in all sports, and he made to be proclaimed
Iusts and Tourneys, and gave large guiftes to Ladies and to Knights, none went
from him without some gift, he took great pleasure to give gifts, so that
he was praised of every man: howbeit, diverse ancient and wise men said, if
Croissant our young Prince deal thus with the Treasure that his Father left
him, it will be much wasted, and such as now follow him will forsake him, when
they see that he has no more to give, as they did indeed as ye shall hear,
for he gave to them that were poor, whereby they were made rich, who after
would not give him one morsel of bread: he was so liberal and so great a
spender, that all the Treasure that his Father had left him, he gave it away,
so that many complained greatly of his bounty and Larges, for he gave away so
much, that he was forced to diminish his estate, and was forsaken of all them
that were wont to serve him, because he had no more to give them, so that when
they met him, they would turn to another way: and when he knew that, he had
so great shame, that he determined to depart privily out of the Country, and
to go seek his adventures, for he saw well that he had given away and lent
so much, that he could not then find one man that would lend him one penny.
Then with that which was left he bought two good horses, and mounted on the
one, and upon the other a Varlet and a Male behind him, and therein a Gown,
and his shirts, hose, and shoes, and he had in his purse no more but one
Hundred ^. for his expenses, and in a Morning he departed from Room, to the
intent he should not be perceived, and road so long by his iourneys, that he
was far off from the City of Room more then Four days journey. Now let us
leave speaking of him, till time shall be to return to him again.

Chap. CLXXIIII.
How they of Room sent to the King Guymart of Puylle, to the intent that he
should come and govern that Country, and to be their Lord, because that
Croissant was a Child, and had given and wasted all that he had: and how
Guymart came thither, and was received as Lord.

AFter that the Barons and Senators of Room were advertised, that their young
Lord Croissant was departed from the City, and that he had wasted and spent all the Treasure that he had: then they assembled at the Capitol, and there was
one said. Cursed is that land whereof the Lord is a Child, as ye may well
perceive by our young Lord Croissant, who has spent all and given away the
great treasure that his Father had left him, very badly should he govern his
Land and Country, when he cannot keep that which is closed fast in his
Coffers: and therefore mine advice is, that we send to King Guymart of Puille,
who is already of the mind to come and besiege us, because he knows well
that we be without a Lord, and therefore mine advice is, that we send unto him
a noble Embassage, desiring him to come to this City of Room, and say that
this City shall do to him obeisance, it is better to send betimes then too
late, to the intent that neither he, nor none of his do any damage to the
Lands of Room. All they that were there agreed to his saying, and so they
sent to him, who received the Ambassadors right honorably, and so he came to
Room, whereas he was received for their Lord peaceably. But before he entered
into Room, they went and met him, and with great joy brought him into the
City, with Trumpets and Drums blowing before him, until he came to the
Church of Saint Peter, and there he offered and kissed the Relics, whereof
he made his oath, such as Emperors are accustomed to make, he to defend and
keep Room and the Empire. Then he went to the Pallaice, whereas he was
received of the noble men and of the people: then he governed Room in good
peace and justice. Now let us leave speaking of him, and return to
Croissant.

Chap. CLXXV.
How Croissant arrived at Nise in Prouaunce, and came to the Earl Remon, who
was besieged by the Sarazins, and of the honor that the Earl Remon did to
Croissant, and how he gave him his banner to bear, and made him Knight: and
of the great envy that the Earls Son had at Croissant.

AFter that Croissant was departed from Room, and his Varlet with him, and had
well seen that in all Rome they set nothing by him, because he had no more
gifts to give them. Then he road through Romania and Lombardie, and passed
Piemont, and then came into Daulpheney: and when he came into the Town of
Grenoble, it was showed him that in Prouaunce there was a noble Prince, named
Earl Remon of Saint Giles, who was besieged by land and by water in the Town
of Nise, by the King of Granado, and the King of Belmarin, who day and night
made great assaults to the City, and they had sworn and made promise, that
they would never depart from thence until they had won that Town, and
slain the Earl Remon. When Croissant heard those good news, the hardy
prowess wherewith he was garnished and repleat, set him into so hye a will,
that he thought the Sarazins flew to the air, and that he would raise their
siege before it be night, and for the burning desire that he had, he thought
to go thither to prove his virtue against the Paynims: so when he had rested
his horse, he and his Squier mounted, and rested not until he came to Nise, in
an Evening late he there arrived, without perceiving of them of the siege, for
as then they were all in their Tents, because a little before there had been
at the gate a great Skirmish, wherefore the Sarazins were weary of their
travail, and also on that part that Croissant arrived, there were no Sarazins
lodged. Then he came to the gate, and prayed the Porter to let him enter: and
when the Porter saw there were no more but two persons, and that he was a
Christian, he suffered him to enter without any refuse. And when Croissant
saw that he was in without any danger, he was joyful, then he came to one of
the best lodgings in the Town, and there he alighted and supped with his host,
because it was too late to go that night to the Court: there he tarried all
that night until the next morning, then he went to the Palace, whereas he
found the Earl Remon, devising with his Lords and Knights of the deeds of
war, then Croissant saluted the Earl and all his Lords*

When the Earl saw the young man, he greatly beheld him, and thought that in
all his life he had never seen so goodly a person, and thought that he was
come of some noble Lineage. Then he took Croissant by the hand and demanded
what his name was? Sir, (quoth he) my name is Croissant. Croissant? (quoth the
Earl) you are welcome, you are come well at a point both for you and for me,
for I have great need to have men with me to aid me, and me thinks by your
personage, that you should atchieue great Enterprises, for of your age I have
not seen in my days, a young man more likely to be feared of his enemies,
and because I see by your apparel that you are no Knight, I shall make you a
Knight, to the intent that to morrow your Prowess and hardines may be proved,
for you may see here without this Town two Kings, enemies to our Christian
faith, and by the grace of God, I intend to morrow to give them battle, I
look this night for my Brother the Duke of Callaber, who brings with him
Thirty Thousand men of war, and Twenty Thousand I have already within the
Town, and considering your hye courage to come hither to serve me, I shall
do you more honor: after I have made you Knight, I shall give you my banner
to bear, and if you do as me thinks you should do, your pains shall not be
lost. Sir, (quoth Croissant) God give me the grace, that to morrow to him and
to you I may do such service, that it may be wealth to all christendom, and
that God may perform in me that which wants, for if you make me Knight, all
the days of my life after I shall be yours. Then the Earl incontinent sent for
a Son of his, who as then was no Knight, and diverse other whom he made
Knights with Croissant, then he said to Croissant. Friend, I pray to our Lord
God to give you such fortune to Morrow, that you may vanquish the Battle.
Sir, (quoth he) God give me the grace to render to you thanks, for the honor
that now you do to me, for as for me, by the grace of God to morrow I shall so
do, that your enemies shall curse the hour that they came hither to assail
you.

Whiles ye Croissant was thus made Knight with the Earls Son and others, the
same time came thither the Duke of Callaber, and he came to the Pallaice: of
the cheer that he had made him by his Brother the Earl Remon, I will make no
mention thereof, but he came at the same season that these new Knights were
made, and that a Quintaine was set up to prove themselves. Then the Duke of
Callaber and the Earl Remon his Brother went thither, very desirous to see
who did best, then the Duke demanded of the Earl, what young knight it was that
road by his Nephew, for he thought that he never saw so goodly a young person,
nor more puissant of his age: then the Earl said, how he was come thither to
seek for honor: but what he was, nor of what Lineage he knew not. Thus they
talked together of this young knight Croissant, and when they came to the place
whereas the Quintaine was dressed up, the Earls Son ran and brake his
Spear all to pieces, and then others assayed themselves, some brake their
Spears, and some fell to the earth by force of their stroke, but there was
none that could remove the Quintaine. When Croissant saw that all had assaied
themselves to overthrow the Quintaine, he had a great spear, and ran so
fiercely, that he struck the Quintaine, and overthrew it to the ground,
whereof every man had great marvel: the Duke said to the Earl, that he
never saw so goodly a stroke, and said, how he is greatly to be doubted that
give such strokes, he was greatly praised of the Ladies and Damsels that were
there present, and especially of the Earls Daughter who was a fair Damsel.
But whosoever was joyful, the Earls Son was displeased, he took against
him a mortal hate and an ill envy, so that if he durst, he would have run upon
Croissant to have destroyed him, and concluded in his courage, that if he might
live long, he would make Croissants life to depart from his body, and so he
had done, if God had not aided Croissant.

When Croissant had run his course, he road to the Earl, who said to him
right sweetly. Croissant, God increase your honor, and God give you grace to
persevere in your goodness, and I pray you humbly to show me the troth, what you
be, and of what Lineage? for I am sure that you are of some hye Lineage. Sir,
(quoth Croissant) since you would know it, I shall show you the troth. Sir,
know for troth, I am Son to the noble Emperor of Room, and I am departed
out of the country, for certain causes which I would not suffer, and
therefore I went to search mine adventures, such as God would send me. When the
Earl heard him speak, he was right joyful, and thanked God, and said. Fair
Son, you are welcome, I am joyful of your coming, and for the goodness that
I see in you apparent, I have a Daughter right fair, whom I will give you in
marriage, and as much of my goods and of my Lands and Signiories, that you
shall never be poor. Sir, (quoth Croissant) your fair offer that you make
me I will not refuse, and I thank you, but before I take a Wife, my will is
to do so much, that mine honor may be exalted, and that renown may run upon
me as it has done of my Predecessors, and that I may conquer Lands and
Signiories. Then the Earls son hearing his Father make Croissant such an
offer, as to give him his Sister in marriage, and a great part of his Land, he
was therewith so sore troubled in his heart, as he took against him a cordial
hate, and made promise within himself, that if he might return from the
Battle, he would cause Croissant to die an ill death, thinking not to be
disenherited by him.

After those words, the Duke of Callaber and the Earl Remon took between
them the young Knight Croissant, and led him by the hand to the Palace,
whereas he was received with great joy, and after dinner they came into the
Hall whereas all the Lords were. Then Croissant (who greatly delighted to be in
such a place, whereas he might show his Prowess) spoke on hye, and said to
the Earl Remon. Sir, you know well, that the enemies of our Lord God and
yours, have besieged you in your Town, the which is a thing not to be
suffered so long, without doing of them any annoyance: and therefore Sir I
counsel you, that before they knew much of your estate or puissance, or what
people you have, it were best you went to assail them, therefore without any
longer tarying, ordain your Battles, and your Captains to guide your
people, to the intent that when you are issued out of the Town, every man may
know what you are purposed to do, and then send to your enemies a Messenger,
and give your enemies knowledge of your coming, and we shall follow so fast,
that they shall have no leisure to arm them. When the Duke of Callaber and the
Earl Remon understood the noble Croissant, they much praised his counsel and
advise. Then they ordained their Battles and their Captains: and then they
issued out of the Town with all their company.

Chap. CLXXVI.
How Croissant did maruailes in the Battle, by whom the Sarazins were
discomfited and slain, whereof the Earl Remon and the Duke of Callaber were
right joyful.

WHEN the Earl Remon was without the Town, he ordained Three Battles. The
first Croissant had the leading thereof, and the Earl said to him. Friend, I
pray you this day to show from whence you come, and how that you be of the
Lineage Imperial, and of the good Line of the Duke of Bourdeaux, for I have
such trust in God and in the virtue of your arms, that me thinks mine enemies
do now fly away before me. Sir, (quoth Croissant) I shall do so much by the
grace of God, that our enemies shall have no leisure to grant us the Victory.
The second Battle the Earl Remons Son led, and his Father said to him,
that he should that day show forth his virtue and Prowess. The third
Battle the Earl Remon and the Duke of Callaber had the guiding thereof, and
they set in every Battle Fifteen Thousand men: then the Earl Remon went
before every battle, stirring and moving them to do well: and then the
Earl sent a Messenger to the Host of the Sarazins, to show them of the
coming of the Christian men, and they were before their Tents in Five
Battles, they were in number about a Hundred Thousand Sarazins, whereof there
were two Kings and Four Admirals. This Messenger did his Message, and when he
had done, he returned to the Earl Remon, and showed him all that he had
heard and seen. Then Croissant said to the Earl: Sir, I pray you to show me
what arms the two Sarazin Kings do bear? to the intent that I may know
them, for the sooner the great men be slain, the sooner the other will fly,
because that will abash them, and the sooner to be discomfited, for men without
a Lord, are as sheep without a shepherd. Then the Earl showed him their
arms and badges: Sir, (quoth Croissant) since I am hereof advertised, I shall
never rest until I have encountered them, if God will save mine arms and good
sword.

Then the Paynims (who saw well the Christian men coming) cast up a great cry
and so maruailous, that there was none so hardy, but was thereof abashed, for
it seemed that all the world arrived there. When Croissant saw the Sarazins
approach, he advanced his Battle, and when they joined, he couched his
Spear, and struck therewith the King of Belmarins Son, so that the
Speare-head passed through his body more then a foot, and so with drawing out
of his Spear, the Sarazin fell down dead among the horse feel, whereof the
Paynims had great dolor. When Croissant had slain the King of Belmarins
Son, there came before him the Nephewe of the King of Granado, and Croissant
bare him to the earth so rudely, that in the falling he brake his neck: then
he ran at the Third and the Fourth and slew them, and as long as his Spear
held, he ceased not to slay and to beat down the Sarazins, and when his Spear
was broken, he took his Sword, wherewith he claue the Sarazins to the
brains, and cut off arms and hands, he made among them such slaughter,
that there was not so hardy a Sarazin that durst abide his full stroke, but
they fled before him as the sheep do before the Wolf. Anon the tidings was
brought to the King of Belmarin, how his Son was slain by a young Knight, who
did maruailes in the Battle: and when the King knew that his Son was
slain, he wept for sorrow, and made promise that he had rather die, then the
death of his Son should be unrevenged, and therewith he preassed into the
Battle, and met at his coming the Duke of Callabers Seneschall, and struck
him with his Spear in such wise, that he ran him clean through, and so he
fell down dead, then the Battle began fiercely, and they of Prouaunce and
Callaber did valiantly. Then the Earl Remon came into the battle, and met
with the Admiral of Cords, and gave him such a stroke with his sword on the
helmet, that he claue his head to the brains, and so he fell down dead. Then
he saw the King of Granado, (who slew many a Christian man) and the Earl
Remon took a spear, and ran at the King, and struck him so on the visor of
his helmet, that he fell to the earth with his feet upward among his own men,
and had been there slain if his men had not succored him.

In another place was Croissant, and he saw before him the King of Belmarin,
who road about seeking for Croissant, to be revenged of him for the death of
his Son: and when the King saw Croissant beating down horse and men, and that
none could resist against him, he had great desire to be revenged, and said to
Croissant. Oh thou false Traitor that has slain my son, I ought greatly to
laud and praise Mahomet, if I may be revenged upon thee: then he couched his
spear, and struck Croissant in the midst of his sheeld, so that his spear
flew all to pieces, but for all the stroke Croissant removed no more, then
though he had stricken a stone wall, and Croissant sore displeased that the king
had given him such a stroke, let go the bridle of his horse, and lifted up
his sword with both his hands, and struck the king as he passed by on ye corner
of his helmet in such wise, that he struck it clean asunder, and if the
stroke had not glaunced, he had cloven his head to the guirdle, but the sword
turned and alighted upon the horse neck, so that he struck the neck clean
asunder, in such sort, that of force the king tumbled to the earth, sore
astonished of the stroke that he had received, and if he had not been quickly
rescued, Croissant had stricken off his head. Then the Sarazins remounted again
their King, and ran at Croissant, and cast darts at him and Iauelins to have
slain him, but they durst not approach near him, so much they feared him,
howbeit, they hurt him in diverse places, he held his sword in his hands,
wherewith he struck no man with a full stroke, but that he claue his head to
the brains. Then he saw the great Admiral of Spain, and he gave him such a
stroke, that his head was cloven to the chinne, and so he fell down dead.
Great sorrow made the Sarazins, and especially the King of Granado: and when
Croissant saw him, he knew him well by his arms, whereof he was joyful, and
Croissant approached to him, and gave him such a stroke on the helmet, that his
head was cloven to the brains, and so the King fell down dead: then
Croissant ran at him that bare the Sarazins banner, whereon was painted the
Image of Mahomet, he struck him that bare it with a reuerse stroke, between
the neck and the sholders, that the head with the helmet flewe in the field,
and laid on so in the thick preasse, that anon he made way, the Sarazins
would feign have raised up again their banner, but they could not.

When the Sarazins saw their king dead, and their banner lying on the ground,
their courage began to fail them: then they brayed and opened their array,
and began to loose place, and Croissant (who took heed of nothing, but to slay
the great Captains) at last saw before him the king of Belmarin, who had
slain many a Christian man that day, Croissant gave him such a stroke on the
right shoulder, that his arm and sheeld fell to the earth, and by reason of
the great dolor that the king felt, he fell in aswound among the horse feet,
whereas he died miserably. The Duke of Callaber and the Earl Remon, regarding
the hye deeds of arms done and achieved by Croissant, had great marvel of
his force and puissance, and they blessed the hour that he was borne in,
thanking God of his coming thither, they rested and beheld him how he made
their enemies to fly away, for none was so hardy to abide him. Finally, if I
should rehearse the hye deeds that Croissant did that day, it would be
ouer-long to declare, for by him and by his great Prowess, the Paynims and
Sarazins were utterly discomfited, for he was happy that could save himself.
Thus they fled on all parts toward the Seaside, and there were more slain in
the flying, then were in the plain Battle, for from thence to the Seaside,
the ways were covered with dead men, such as might save themselves in the
Ships were happy, but there were very few that escaped. After the chase was
done, they of Prouaunce and Callaber came to the booty, the which was
exceeding great, and the Earl Remon distributed so liberally thereof, that
every man was well contented, for there was such riches in the Tents of the
Sarazins, that it could not be valued, whereby all such as were at the
Battle were rich ever after, both the^ and their Friends.

Chap. CLXXVII.
Of the great honor that the Earl Remon did to Croissant: and how he would
have given him his Daughter in marriage, whereof the Earls Son was sore
envious, and thought the same night to have murdered the noble Croissant in his
bed, but he failed, for the noble Croissant slew him, and afterward fled away
as fast as he might.

AFter that the Battle was finished, and that the Sarazins were dead, the
Earl Remon with great reverence came unto Croissant, and took him by the
hand, and led him into the Town between the Duke of Callaber and himself,
and they did him as great honor as they could devise, and so entered into the
Town, and with great joy and solemnity they were received, and they came to
the Pallaice and unarmed them: and when they were refreshed, the Duke of
Callaber and the Earl Remon came to Croissant, and the Earl said. Oh right
noble Knight, repleat with all virtues and hie Prowess, to whom no man is
comparable, the strong arm, sheeld, and refuge of the Country of Prouaunce
and Languedoc, by thy hye Prowess this day thou have saved one of the quarters
of Christendom, whereby the faith of Christ is exalted, the which (if thou
^^^^est not been) had been abated and staunched, it is not in me to say nor
recount the goodness that you have done us this day, nor it lies not in me to
reward it, but if it were thy pleasure to abase thy self so low, as to take
my Daughter in marriage, the which I would gladly see, and I will give thee the
one half of all that ever I have, for a fairer jewel nor a richer I cannot
give, then my dear Daughter whom I love entirely: she is the most fair,
sweet, and the humblest Damsel that is now living. When Croissant had well
understood the Earl Remon, he said. Sir, of your courtesy and rich guiftes
that you offer me, I will not refuse it, but thank you heartily thereof, and
as for your daughter whom you offer to give me, I trust that I shall do her
that honor, that upon her head I shall set a Crown of gold, and make her
Empress of Rome, whereas she shall be served and honored as Lady over all
the Country.

When the Earl heard the answer of Croissant, he was very joyful, but his
Son (who was there present) was near hand in a rage with the displeasure
that he had, and said inragedly to him. By God Croissant, since thus by you I
shall be disenherited, and that my Father will give you that which of right
appertains to me, before I grant thereto, I shall make you to die of an ill
death, though I do it by treason, nor thou shall never have my sister in
marriage: thus thought ye Earls Son to work against Croissant, who knew
nothing thereof: and thus (without God helps him) he was likely to have been
slain pitiously. Then there began great joy in the Pallaice, the Earl Remon
went to see his Daughter, and said to her. My dear Daughter, know for troth, I
have given you in marriage to the most fair and hardyest Knight that ever was
guirt with a sword, that is Croissant who you see here, by whom we were all
delivered, and brought out of service into freedom, for we had been all lost
if his hye prowess had not been, by whom all the Paynims are discomfited.
When the Damsel heard her Father, she was right joyful, and thanked God, and
said. Sir, since it is your pleasure to give me to this noble Knight, I shall
not refuse him, but I am content to fulfill your pleasure: whereof Croissant
was joyful, for she was so fair that every man had marvel thereof. Then
the Damsel saluted Croissant, and said. Sir, of your coming and succors we
ought to be joyful, for by you we are restored to joy, the which was lost.
Lady, (quoth Croissant) so goes the works of our Lord God, for men make
Battles, and God gives the Victory.

Thus devising, they entered into the Chamber, whereas the boards were ready
spread: but Izacars the Earls Son would not come there, but went into a secret
place of the Town, and thither he sent for Ten of his affinity, in whom he
had perfect affiance: then he showed to them all his intention, and determined
that when Croissant was in bed and a sleep, then they to murder him in his
bed, and his Squier also. When these Ten Traitors understood their Master,
they answered and said, how they were all ready to do his commandment,
whatsoever came thereof. Thus they tarried the hour to accomplish their
ungracious Enterprise, and as they were in their communication, there was in a
Chamber there beside a young Squier, who had well heard their Enterprise, and
what they were determined to do: then he said to himself, that surely he
would advertise Croissant of their malicious Enterprise, to the intent that he
should not be surprised: then he departed as privily as he could, and so came
to Croissant, and showed him, how the Earls Son with Ten men were determined
to murder him, the very same night in his bed sleeping, and how that each of
them had a sharp knife, and he said. Sir, be ready armed to defend your life,
for they all have sworn your death. When Croissant understood the Squier, he
waxed as red as a burning coal, and said. I cannot believe that such a treason
should be in the courage of a noble man, as to murder him that never did him
trespass. Sir, (quoth the Squier) you may do as you please, but except you
find a remedy, you are but lost.

When Croissant heard that, he trembled for the displeasure that he was in,
and he thought within himself, that he would not show the matter to any person
living, but he swear, that if any came to do him displeasure, with his Sword
he would cleeue his head to the brains. Thus the matter rested until it was
night, and so he went into the Hal among the other Lords, and there he found
the Earl, who made him great cheer, and Supper was ready, then they satte
down: of their service I make no rehearsal. After they had supped diverse
sports were showed in the hall, and when the hour requisite came, every man
went to bed, and the Earl Remon had prepared for Croissant a fair Chamber,
with a rich bed for him, and a Couch for his Squier. Then Croissant took leave
of the Earl and of the Damsel, with whom he was enamoured: and then he came to
his Chamber well accompanied with Knights and Squiers, and within a while they
took leave of him, and then he was alone saving only his Squier, whom he
made to lie in the Couch, and showed him nothing of that he thought to do.
Then Croissant armed him at all pieces, his helmet on his head, his sheeld
about his neck, and his sword about him, and so laid him down in his bed, and
hid him with clothes, that his armor should not be seen by them that would
come thither, so there he lay as privily as he could: and then about midnight
the Earls Son entered into the chamber al unarmed, with his sword in his hand,
and his ten companions with him, each of them with a sharp weapon in their
hands, then they approached to Croissants bed, and the Earls Son lifted up
his Sword, and str^ke Croissant such a stroke on the helmet, that the sword
swarned in his hand, whereby he perceived that he was armed, and that he had
warning of their coming, whereof he was right sorrowful, then he recovered
again another stroke, thinking to have ^^aine Croissant, but he could not his
helmet was so good: then the other Ten struck at Croissant, but they could
do him no hurt, his armor was so good. Then Croissant rose up quickly (as a
hardy Knight) with his sword in his hand. When the Earls Son saw that, he
was never so afraid in all his life, and thought to have fled away, but
Croissant was before him, and gave him such a stroke on the head with his
sword, that he claue it to the chin, and so he fell down dead, and the other
had slain Croissants Squier, whereof he was sorry, then he ran at them like
a man desperate, and did so much, that within a short space he had slain Five
of them, and the other fled away into another Chamber, and durst not speak
one word.

Chap. CLXXVIII.
How Croissant depated from Nise with his sword in his hand: And how the
Earl R^mon was sorrowful for the death of his Son, and chased after
Croissant, but he could not be found.

WHen Croissant saw himself so enterprized, and that he had slain the Earls
Son, he was in great fear, for he knew well, that if he were taken, he
should be in danger of his life, therefore hastily he departed out of the
Pallaice: and when he came to the Stable where his horse stood, he found a
great iron chain before the door, to the (...) that the horse should not be
taken out in the night time, and when he saw that, he was sore discomforted,
and said. Oh good Lord, now by thy grace aid me, I ought well to be sorry when
I must leave my horse. Alas, now I cannot tell how to (...) mine armor,
certainly, except God succor me, I see no way how I can escape alive: Alas,
I thought to have been married to the Earls Daughter, but now I am far from
it, (...) I have slain her Brother* I was not minded to have returned into my
Country so soon, until I had conquered some ^^^our and Lands, whereby I
might have been received honorably of them that did set nothing by me: then
he began sore to weep, so he went through the town as he might, for he
could not travail long in his armor, but he beheld a void house in a
corner of a street, and he went thither and unarmed him of all his armor,
except his sword, and so he was in a white Iacket, and then he rested not
until he came to the gate, and called the Porter, and desired him to open the
gate, saying, that he had business to do a little without the Town, the
Porter answered stubbornely, and said, there rrquireth no have, he might well
abide, for he said that he would not open the gate until it was fair day.
Friend, (quoth Croissant) I pray thee show me this courtesy: the Porter
answered him fiercely, and said. Thou do but loose thy labor, for the gate
shall not be opened until the Sun rise. When Croissant saw, that the Porter
would not open the gate by fair means, he set his hand to his sword, and
said. Thou false Traitor, except thou do open ye gate incontinent, with my
sword I shall slay thee. When the Porter saw that Croissant held a naked sword
in his hand to strike him, he had great fear, and he came forth in have with
the keys in his hand, and said. Sir, I shall open the gate with a good will,
howbeit, he was so afraid, that all his body trembled for fear, then he came
to the gate and opened the wicket: and then Croissant issued out unarmed, and
had on but a Cloak over his Iacket and a sword about him, and a little purse
at his guirdle, and therein Twenty Shillings in monney and no more.

Thus as ye have heard, Croissant issued out of the Town of Nise in
Prouaunce, and took the way toward Room, but before he had gone two Leagues,
the Five Traitors that fled from him and were hidden in a Chamber, when they
thought that Croissant was departed, for they thought he would not tarry,
because he had slain the Earls Son: then they went out of the Chamber,
making great brute and noise, so that every man rose in the Pallaice, and the
Earl himself arose, and came into the Hall with his Sword in his hand, and
there he found the Five Traitors, who showed him, that for certain words
between Croissant and his Son, there was a Fray between them, whereby your
Son is slain by the hands of Croissant, the which he did wilfully, to the
intent to have all your Lands after your decease, because you have given him
your Daughter in marriage, and before we could come he was sled, but before he
departed out of the Chamber, he slew Five men besides your Son, for they
were not armed, but Croissant was armed and he seemed rather a spirit then a
mortal man, and when we saw that we could not approach to him, because he was
armed, we slew his Squier. When the Earl heard them, it was no marvel though
he was sorrowful: and then he went into the Chamber whereas his Son lay dead,
when he came there, for the great distress that he had at his heart, he fell
down upon his Son in a swound: and when he came to himself, he cried and
said. Ah Croissant, your acquaintance is to me very hard: then he commanded
his men to arm them, and incontinent to go after Croissant, who so pitiously
had slain his Son, and said: if I may take him, he shall never escape my
hands without death. Then in the Palace and in the Town every man armed
them, and the Earl himself armed him and mounted on his Horse, and issued out
of the gate with many people, and then they road abroad in the Country,
searching and demanding if any man met with Croissant, but he could hear no
certain news of him, except of one man, that said how he met him about five
Leagues from thence, and that he went a great pace.

When the Earl heard that, he saw well that it was but a labor lost to
fellow any further: then he returned to the town right sorrowful, and sore
displeased for the death of his Son, and yet again he greatly complained
for Croissant in that adventure, and said, that a more valiant Knight could
not be found, neither more courteous, nor more wise, I would to God that there
were between him and me good amity, so that he had my Daughter in marriage,
and that after my decease he might have my Land: then diverse of his men said.
Sir, let him go, he seems to be rather a Devil then a man, he is
fierce and cruel, he makes no more to slay a man, then some (...) to drink
good wine, let him go, he was borne in an ill hour: then the Earl entered
into the Town, right sorrowful and sore displeased for the death of his
Son, and als^ for Croissants adventure: and then he caused his Son to be
buried as it appertained, and great sorrow was made by the Earl, and by the
Duke of Callaber, and other Knights that were there, but they knew not the
troth of the matter: whosoever made sorrow, the Earls Daughter was sorrowful,
both for her Brother, and also for the noble Croissant, whom she had thought
to marry. Now let us leave speaking of them, and return to Croissant.

Chap. CLXXIX.
How Croissant arrived in the Subburbs of a little Town called Florencolle,
and lodged among Ruffians and Villaynes, and how they fell at strife: and how
Croissant slew them and fled, and was in great danger. And how he came
into the City of Rome, whereas there was no man that would give him one
morfell of bread: and how he went and lay in an old Pallaice upon a burden of
straw.

WHen Croissant saw that he was departed from the Town of Nise, and that he
was alone afoo^e, he made his complaints to our Lord God, requiring him humbly
to have pity of him: then he went forth, and so travailed Three days and
Three nights, without meat or drink, but a little bread and water, he had such
hunger and thirst, that he could scarce sustain himself on his feet, so at
last a little before the Sun was set, he came to a little Town called
Florencolle, whereof the gates were shut before he came thither, then in the
Subburbs he saw a house like a Tavern, and he swear though he should be
slain, he would go to that house to eat and drink, and to pay well for his
shot: it had been better for him to have passed by, for there he was in great
peril of his life as ye shall hear. Thus he approached to the house, and
heard how the Cooks were busy in the Kitchen, then he saw a great fire in a
Chamber, where there was the greatest Ruffians, and players at dice in all the
Town, and they had prepared flesh and fish for their Supper. When Croissant
saw the preparation that was made there for the Six Ruffians, he entered into
the house, and saluted the Host, and demanded if he might be lodged there: the
Host said yea, and how he should be there well served both of wine and of
meat, such as he would demand. Then Croissant went in, and the Ruffians met
him, and said, how he was welcome, and each of them pinched other, and wincked
with the one eye, and said softly to the master of them: this great Trauailer
is come well at a point, for before he depart, he shall pay for our shot and
expenses, and anon we will put the dice into his hands, whereby he shall leave
his Gown, Cappe, and monney if he have any. Croissant did not understand them,
because they spoke whisperingly: then Croissant said. Sirs, if I eat with you
paying my shot, shall it turn you to any displeasure? Friend, (quoth the
Master of them) it pleases me well that you eat with us: then they washed
all together, and sat down at the Table near to the fire, and they were well
served of every thing. When Croissant was set, he began to feed well, (his
hunger was so great) for in Three days before he had eaten nothing but bread
and water: and therefore he had the better appetite, and also he found there
good wine and fresh, and he drank thereof at his pleasure.

When they had well eaten and drunk, and were well chafed by reason of the
good wine, the Host rose up and said. Sirs, it is time to make reckoning, and
that every man pay his part, then the master Ruffian said. Sir, make you the
account, for you can do it better then we, and show us what we shall pay.
Every man alike Sirs, (quoth the Host) as near as I can reckon, ye must pay
in all Twelve shillings, and look every man pay his part. Then the Master
Ruffian began to swear blood and wounds, that they should play at the dice, to
see who should pay for all, then he said to Croissant. Friend, you must come
play with us, behold here Three dice good and square, we must do so, for one
must pay the whole expenses before we depart. Sirs, (quoth Croissant) we shall
not need to play at dice to know who shall pay for the shot, I will pay it all
together without any strife: then they said* that they were well content
therewith, and thanked him: then one of them, the falsest Villayne among them,
wilfully cast down a pot of wine upon the Table, whereof his fellows blamed
him, then he answered and said. Sirs, you need not to be angry therewith, for
there is none of you will drink thereof, it is better to have a fresh pot of
wine of a new Vessel: they said, well, that is true, so be it. Then their Host
brought them a new pot full of wine, and said. Sirs, this pot of wine is not
of the first reckoning, this is a pot of a new account: then the Master
Ruffian said to Croissant. Sir, take and cast the dice, for the first cast
shall be yours.

Croissant beheld them fiercely, and said: Nay Sirs, I will keep me from
that, for I never played at dice in all my life, be content with the twelve
shillings that I shall pay for our shot, for by reason of the long Voyage that
I have made, I am not well fournished of monney, for I have but Thirteen
Shillings in my purse: then the Master said. Thou art better arrayed then we,
and thou must use thy tongue otherwise, for thou shall not thus escape, thou
shall leave thy Gown to pay for our shot to morrow in the morning: then
another Ruffian said, and I will have his hose and shoes to morrow, to buy
fish for our dinner. When Croissant heard the Villaynes, he began to change
color, and was sore displeased, and said right fiercely. Sirs, leave your
clattering, yet I have xiij. s^. in my purse, the which I will give you, rather
then you should be displeased, me thinks this ought to suffice you: and Sirs, I
am a noble man, and lately I was made Knight, for if I were once again in my
Country, I would never come from thence to seek for such adventures, you
ought to bear my honor, since I show you that I am a Knight: the Ruffians
said, how his words nor his preaching should not avail him, but that he must
leave his gown, Iacket, hose and shoes. Then Croissant repleat with ire, did
off his surcot, the which was furred with armins, and cast it to them, and
said. Sirs, now you ought to be content with me, and I ought to be quit. When
the Ruffians understood him, they cried all at once, that he should put off his
hose and shoes, and his guirdle, purse, and Gown, and bad him quickly
deliver it to them, and then to avoid the house, for they said there was no
lodging for him, and the Host to please the Villaynes, said, how they said
troth. Then Croissant full of ire and displeasure, turned his visage to the
bench where his good Sword ^ay, whereof he was joyful that they had not taken
it away, then he stepped thither, and took it in his hands and drew it out,
and came to ye Villaynes, and they rose against him with their swords in their
hands, and he struck the Master Ruffian so maruailous a stroke, that he claue
his head to the teeth, so he fell down dead before the Chimney, and from
another he struck his head, and then he slew the Third and Fourth, and the
other Two had so great fear that they fled away. Then the Host began to cry,
a Thief, a Murderer: but Croissant would do him no hurt, and he issued out
of the house with his sword in his hand, and ran as fast as he could until he
was without the Subburbs, then he ran in the field over hedges and diches, to
the intent that none should follow him, and he hearkened toward the Town,
where he heard great crying, and noise of the Host of the house that he came
from, whereby all his neighbors, Taylours, Shoomakers, Drapers, and men of al
crafts, came to the house, and there was such a noise made in the subburbs,
that the Town gates were opened, and the Burgesses issued out, and came to the
house whereas the noise was: and when the Magistrates of the Town came
thither, and saw the men lie dead, they demanded of the Host who had done
that murder. Sir, (quoth the Host) a Vagabond has done it, who is big and
mighty, for I never saw with mine eyes a man better made nor fourmed, and he
is fled away with his sword in his hands on yonder hye way: but Sir, for God
sake come not too near him, for he seems no man when he is angry, but he
is like a man out of his wits without all fear and doubt.

Then the Magistrates commanded to follow him both on horseback and afoote,
and they all ran to armor, though the Captain were not greatly afraid, yet
he would not be the first that should go forth, he loved better that another
should take that advantage. Thus on all sides on horseback and afoote, they
followed Croissant, who kept not the high way, and it was far in the night: and
also there were many that would not chafe themselves over much to seek for
him, for they would make no preasse to receive his offering: because they feared
to find him: and when they had sought a long space in the fields and in the
high ways, and could not find him, they all returned to their Town, and
Croissant went ever from the Townward, with his sword naked in his hand: and
when he saw that he was two Leagues off, he entered into the high way, and
praised God that he was so escaped without danger, but he was sore
displeased, in that he had never a penny in his purse, and nothing but his
Sword, his Coat, and a rich purse at his guirdle, and also he saw that it was
Winter, frost and snow: also he felt the cold wind, the which did him much
ill. Thus he went forth all night, and the next day, until it was near
night, then he arrived at a Village, and there he was feign to sell his sword,
for lack of monney to pay for his shot, he came to a Lodge, where he was
served of every thing that he would have: then in the morning when he
departed, he sold his purse for as much as he could get, and he travailed so
long that he approached to Room, and he came to a Lodging without the gate,
and there he lodged that night, and in the morning he demanded of his Host, to
whom that Town appertained, and who was lord thereof, and what his name was
that governed the Town? The Host said: Friend, he that now is Lord here, is
named Guymart of Puille, but before he came hither, we had a young Lord, the
fairest young Gentleman that ever was seen, and he was Son to the noble
Emperor I Would, you somewhat resemble him, but he was of so ill rule, and so full
of follies, that all the riches and wealth that his Father had left him, he
spent and gave away to every man that would crave any thing of him, so that in
the end he left himself nothing to live by. And after I heard say, that he
had in himself such shame, that he departed privily with a Squier, and went to
seek his adventures: but no man knows where he is, nor whether he will ever
come again or not, and the Communaltie of the City made little thereof, for
after he was departed, they sent for King Guymart of Puille, whom they have
made Emperor of this Empire.

When Croissant understood his Host, he complained right pitiously to himself,
and said. Alas poor Caitiffe that I am, what shall I do, that thus have lost
al mine Inheritance without recovery? and besides that I have nothing to
spend, nor I have no trade to live by, it must behooue me to die through hunger
and cold, I have no more but five and Twenty shillings, for the which I sold
my purse. Thus as well as he could, he continued till Lent, then the season
began to be somewhat hotter, and every day in the morning he would hear
service, and every man that saw him, beheld him greatly for ye great beauty
that he was of, and there were diverse that knew him, but they would make no
semblance thereof, to the intent that they would give him nothing: and when they
saw him, they would shun the way, because he should not know them, there were
many of them that he had done much good unto, and given them in such wise,
that they were become rich, and he poor, and there was none of them that would
offer him one morsel of bread, whereof he was sorrowful, for then he saw
well his monney was gone, so that he had never a penny left, then he thought to
sell his Gown, rather then to die for hunger, and so he did: he sold it for
eight and Twenty shillings, and then he tarried in his Lodging as long as his
money endured, and he continued there until Easter, and by that time all his
monney was gone.

Then he thought that he would go into the streets, to see if he might epsy
any Burgesses, to whom he had done in times past some good unto, and to
demand of them some courtesy: and so he issued out of his Lodging, and walked
into the streets, and saw a rich Burgess, who was leaning out at a window in
his house: Croissant knew him well, for it was he that made him rich, and
before he was but poor: then he thought to acknowledge himself to that
Burgess. Then Croissant went and saluted him right humbly, and said. Sir, have
remembrance of a poor Caitiffe, to whom fortune is contrary, and who in time
past did you much good when you served him, if you be a good man as I believe
you are, of the goodness have you remembrance, and it may be so, if you do so,
you shall fare the better. When the Burgess heard Croissant, he beheld him
fiercely, and he knew him presently, and without making of any manner of
answer, he called his Page, and commanded him to bring him a pan full of
water to the window, and he did as his master had commanded him: then the
Burgess took the pan full of water, and he beheld Croissant who stood under
the window, and did cast the water upon his head, so that his fair hair,
coat, and shirt were all wet: Croissant without any word speaking made himself
clean, and afterward said to the Burges, that if he lived long, the offense
that he had done him, he should dearly buy it, but the Burgess (who was proud
and disdainful) set but little by his words. Croissant (who was right
sorrowful) took his way toward the Pallaice, before ye which there was an
old Pallaice, whereas no man had dwelled in of a long space, and he entered in
at the gate, the which was great and stood open, and there he saw a great
Pillar, whereas there lay two burdens of straw: then he laid him down and
slept, right sorrowful and angry with the Burgess that had so wet him with
water: the which Burges after he had cast this water upon Croissant, he went
to the Pallaice to the Emperor Guymart, to flatter and to please him, and he
found the Emperor leaning in a window and saluted him, and said. Sir, I bring
you certain tidings of Croissant, Son to the Emperor I Would, who of right
ought to be Inheritour of this Empire, whereof you are as now Emperor: he is
come into the Town in his doublet, without hose or shoes, he is arrayed like
a Vagabond or a Ruffian, coming from the Tavern, and he is so great and so
well made in all his members, that he seems more like a Champion ready to
fight, then ever I saw man in all my life: if you will follow my counsel,
strike off his head, or cast him into a pit, that of him there may never be had
any more memory. For if he live long, he may do you damage, and put you out
of this Empire which you hold, the which should appertain to him. When the
Emperor Guymart understood the Burges, he beheld him fiercely and said:
Speak no more to me of this matter, for thou do like a Traitor, thou
know well, that by him and his deeds thou and other be made rich, and thou
art like him that betrayed our Lord Jesus Christ: therefore I command thee from
henceforth come not in my sight, for I will have no acquaintance nor
conversation with a Traitor: if it be so that Croissant be poor, it is pity
and lamentable, and great sin to do him any ill, for I have done him great
ill, when I keep his Lands and Signiories wrongfully and without a cause,
wherefore I think my self greatly culpable against the almighty God, for the
sin that I have done him, in that I hold the honor and Signiorie, that of
reason ought to appertain to him, this day is Easter day, upon the which day
every good Christian man ought to humble himself to God, crying him mercy
and pardon for all their sins: it is reason that I make peace with God, and
do so that he may be content with me.

Chap. CLXXX.
How the Emperor Guymart spoke and rebuked the Burgess that spoke ill of
Croissant: and how the Emperor bare meat and drink to the place whereas
Croissant slept. And of the maruailous Treasure that he found in a Chamber in
the said old Pallaice: and of that which was showed him by two Knights whom
he found there.

WHen the Burgess understood the Emperor, he was in great fear, and so
departed right sore abashed, and thought he had been too hasty to report such
news, and so right sorrowful departed, and l^ft the Emperor alone in a window
right pensive, and said to himself. Oh very God, the poverty that Croissant
is in, is by my cause, for all that I have ought to be his, and I keep it
from him perforce, if I keep it still, I may well say that my soul shall never
come into Paradise, but shall be damned for ever. Thus the Emperor Guymart
complained to himself, and so went down into his Pallaice, and there walked
up and down by himself before the old Pallaice, the which was near to his
Pallaice, and he looked in at a gate, and saw a man lie sleeping on a burden of
straw, and he thought incontinent that it should be Croissant by the report of
the Burgess. When the Emperor saw him, he had such great pity of him that
he wept: and then he went into his Pallaice, and commanded one to bring unto
him a Towell with bread and flesh, and a bottell of wine, the which thing was
done: then the Emperor took a Mantle furred with grise, and did it about
himself, and took the wine and meat, and commanded his men that none should
follow him, then he went down the greeces, and came to the Pallaice whereas
Croissant slept, and the Emperor set the meat and wine near by Croissant, and
awoake him not: then he covered him with the mantle, and then he departed, and
as the Emperor was departing, he looked on his right hand, and saw a door
open all of iron, and banded very strongly with iron bars, and he saw a
cleerenesse within in such wise, as though there had been a Hundred torches
burning, and he went thither and entered into the Chamber, the which was great
and large, and he saw all about the Chamber great Coffers, the which stood
open and they were full of gould, and other Coffers full of jewels and rich
stones, the which did shine with such light that the Emperor greatly maruailed:
also he saw great pieces of plate and monney lying on the earth, and besides
he saw a great Vessel of Cups, and pots of gould and silver, and great pieces
of gould bordered with precious stones. Also he saw rich Gowns hanging on
pearches, of cloth of gould and silk, in so great number, that the Emperor
was sore abashed, and said: whosoever left this Treasure here, might well be
called a great Lord, for he thought if all the gould in the world, and all the
rich jewels were brought together, they might not be compared to the Treasure
that he saw there, and said he was happy to come thither.

Then he passed forth where he saw an Image of fine gold, and it was as big
as a Child of two years of age, and whereas the eyes should stand, there was
two great Carbuckles, the which cast so great cleerenesse, that all the Chamber
was light therewith. When the Emperor saw that Image, he thought to have taken
it, and to have borne it into his Pallaice, but he had much ado to lift it:
then he looked toward a little door, out of the which he saw coming two
Knights, well armed at all pieces with their swords in their hands, and they
came to the Emperor, and said. Beware Friend, be not so hardy to bear any
thing from hence, for the Treasure that is here is not yours, nor it belongs
not to you to have it: therefore set down again that Image, for without you
do it shortly, you shall dearly buy it. The Emperor seeing the Two Knights
threatening him, he was in great fear, and he set down the Image, and beheld
the Knights, and said. Sirs, you speak fiercely to me for the Treasure, the
which you warn me that I should not take any part thereof: by all right it ought
to be mine and none others, since I have found it: and therefore I conjure you
by the puissance of God, and of his Angels and Archangels, and of all Saints,
that you show me the troth, to whom this Treasure does belong, you ought to
know it, since you have the keeping thereof: then the Two Knights answered,
and said. Sir, this Treasure that you see here ought to appertain to
Croissant, Son to the Emperor I Would, who alone lies on a burden of straw
here by not far from this Chamber, he lies right poorly and naked, the
which Treasure was judged to him Five Hundred years passed, and never since
that time has there been taken from it the value of one penny, nor never
since it was laid here, there never entered any earthly man but alonely you.
Croissant (who sleeps without) is a valiant knight and full of troth:
wherefore if you will know to whom this Treasure appertains, I shall show you
the manner how you may know it: behold yonder heap of gould, go and take
thereof three Besans, and put them into your purse, then return into your
Pallaice, and cause to be proclaimed throughout Room, that all poor men come
to your Court, and that to each of them you will give a Florent of gould. When
Croissant shall hear that, he will not be behind, but he will come among other
to take that alms: and then the Three Besans that shall be in your purse, take
and cast them on the earth, one in one place, and another in another place,
whereas the people must pass to come to receive your alms: then Croissant
shall come the same way and find the three Besans, the which by reason of his
nobleness and bounti^, he will come and bring to you again, thereby you
shall know that the Treasure that is here before you, appertains to him, and
ought to be his. Then give him your fair Daughter in marriage: and bring him
hither, and you shall see that he may take of this Treasure at his pleasure,
for it is all his, no man shall say the contrary: and doing thus as we have
said, you shall have part of this Treasure.

Chap. CLXXXI.
How the two Knights that kept this Treasure, spoke with the Emperor Guymart,
and showed him the manner how he should know Croissant. And of the marvel
that Croissant had when he awoake, and saw the meat and drink by him.

WHen the Emperor had well heard the two Knights, he went to the heap of
gould, and took the three Besans and put them into his purse: and then he
took his leave of the two Knights and departed, and when he was issued out,
he looked behind him, and he saw the door fast closed, whereof he had great
marvel, and found Croissant still sleeping, and so he passed by and would not
awake him, and then he went to his Pallaice, and his Lords demanded of him
where he had been that he tarried so long, but he would not show them any
thing of the matter. Then the Emperor went to dinner, and was richly served:
and then Croissant (who lay and slept in the old Pallaice) suddenly awoake,
and had great marvel of the furred Mantle that he found upon him, and he saw
also lying by him a Napkin, and therein wrapped good white bread, Capon, roasted
Fesant, and Partridge, and thereby he saw lying a great bottell full of wine:
and when he saw this good cheer, he thanked God of that adventure. Then he
did eat of the meat, and drank of the wine at his pleasure: and when he had
well eaten and drunk, he departed from thence, and left the rest behind him,
and took nothing with him: and also he left the furred Mantle, for he durst
not wear it, but said to himself, that he had no right thereto, because it
was a thing that was none of his, and so he went down through the streets of
the Town.

Chap. CLXXXII.
The proof that the Emperor Guymart made to know Croissant, unto whom he gave
his fair Daughter in marriage, and delivered him all his Signiorie and
Inheritance, whereof great joy was made at Rome.

WHen the Emperor was risen from dinner, he called to him Four of his
servants, to whom he gave in charge, that they should cause to be proclaimed
in every Street of the Town, that all poor men that would come to the
Emperor, should have in alms every man a Florent of gould, of the value of
Ten Sons, the which cry was made in every street and Marketplace in Room,
whereby every poor man drew toward the Pallaice. When this cry was made,
Croissant heard it, whereof he was joyful and said. how he would go thither
among others, to have the Emperors alms, wherewith he thought he would pay
his Host, and then in have he went thither. The Emperor (who was there ready)
thought to see and prove whether the two Knights sayings were true or not: and
so drew out of his purse the Three Besans of gould, the which he did cast in
diverse places, in the way as the poor men should come to the Pallaice, but
many poor men passed over them, and perceived them not: and then Croissant
came among others, and he saw among the men's feet one Besan of gould fair and
bright, and he stouped down, and took it up, and then he went forth: and
within a little while after, he found the second Besan, the which also he took
up: and a little further among the men's feet, he espied the Third Besan, the
which also he took up: then he thought within himself, and said. Alas, what
a Caitiffe am I? if these had been silver, they had been mine, but they are
fine gould, wherefore I am beguiled, for they appertain to the Emperor
Guymart, who holds this Empire, I have no right to keep them, because they
belong not to me: therefore I will render them to the Emperor, unto whom
they do appertain: then he came to the Emperor, and said. Sir, I have found
by ye way as I came to your Pallaice three Besans of gould, the which here I
deliver to you, for of right and reason they appertain unto you, because of
the right and title that you have to the Empire, but if they had been
silver, I might have kept them as mine own without blame.

When the right noble Emperor understood him, he beheld him, and sighing he
said. Friend, you are welcome, the bounty, nobleness, and wisdom that is in
you, shall aid you to come to the place whereof in reason you ought to be: for
ye goodness and troth that I have seen in you, I will give you my dear
Daughter in Marriage, whom I love entirely, and you shall take her to your
Wife, and therewith I shall yield you the Crown Imperial of the noble Empire
of Rome, the which of right appertains to you. When the noble Croissant had
well heard and understood the Emperor, he was right joyful, and kneeled down
to the earth in the presence of all the Lords that were there present, thanking
him of the honor that he offered him. The Emperor (who was a noble and a wise
Prince) took him up by the hand, and led him into a Chamber, wherein he caused
a bathing to be prepared, in the which the noble Croissant was bathed: and then
the Emperor brought him such apparel as was meet for him to have. When
Croissant was thus richly apparelled, a fairer nor a better fourmed man could
not be found in Eighteen Realms christened, whereof the Emperor Guymart had
great joy, and said, how that in all his life he never saw a more goodlyer
Prince, for he was great among other men, and well fournished of all his
members, he was big and large in the shoulders, and the skin white mingled
with red, his hair like golden wyre, and his face straight with a large
forehead, his eyes gray, and his nose well made, long arms and big hands,
his Legs fair and straight, and his feet well proportioned and made: the
Emperor Guymart could not be satisfied with the regarding of him: and then
he led him into the Pallaice where his Lords were, who greatly lauded and
praised him, and said each to other, how that they had never seen before so
goodly a Prince, nor better made nor fourmed of his members. Then the Emperor
sent for his Daughter by two great Lords, and they went to her Chamber for
her: then she came to the Pallaice to the Emperor her Father, richly
accompanied with Ladies and Damsels. Of their apparel I will make no long
rehearsal, for it was as rich as might be, and she was so fair, that God and
nature could not amend her, nor no Painter in the world though he were never so
skillful, could not paint ye fashion nor proportion of her beautiful body,
and all that were there present, both young and old said, that they never saw
nor heard report of so fair a couple of Creatures, as the noble Croissant and
this Lady were, for every man thought that they were made for nothing else,
but to cause men to behold them and their beauty.

Chap. CLXXXIII.
How the Emperor Guymart promised Croissant, that within three days he
should have his Daughter in marriage: And how the Emperor Guymart led Croissant
to the old Pallaice, and showed him the great Treasure that the two Knights
kept for him.

WHen the Emperor Guymart saw his Daughter come, he took her by the hand,
and said. My right dear Daughter, I have found for you a Husband, to whom I
have given you, and you may well say, that a fairer man, nor a hardyer Knight
you never saw before, and that is the noble Croissant, unto whom this Empire
appertains by rightful enheritance, and he is Son to the noble Emperor I Would,
who has given this Empire to his Son Croissant, but when he was of no great
age, he departed from this City with a small company, and went to serve in
strange countries, and when the Lords of this country saw that they were
without a Lord, they sent for me into Puille, and so they made me here
Emperor wrongfully and without reason: but now since that Croissant the
rightful Inheritour is returned: for to discharge my soul toward God, I
shall put into his hands al his Empire, without keeping from him any part
thereof, for as for me, I am rich and puissant enough: and therefore Croissant,
if it be your pleasure, you shall have my Daughter in marriage. Sir, (quoth
Croissant) if it be her pleasure I will not refuse her, for I never saw a
fairer, nor none that I had rather to have. When the fair Damsel understood
Croissant, she was right joyful, and she beheld Croissant, who seemed to her
so fair, that her love was enflamed upon him, for the more she beheld him, the
more she loved him, and she thought it long until the matter was made perfect:
then she said to the King her Father. Sir, then it is your will and pleasure,
that I shall have Croissant in marriage, you may command me as it please you,
it were a folly for me to make refuse, and Sir, I require you to let us be
married shortly, for if I have not him, I renounce all marriage for ever, for
there is none other that ever shall set the King on my finger but only
Croissant. When the King understood his Daughter, he laughed heartily and
said. Dear Daughter, think not the contrary, but that you shall have him to
your Husband: then the King sent for a Bishop, who assured them together,
whereof the Damsel was so joyful that she wist not what to do, and privily
she thanked our Lord God: and if she loved him well, Croissant loved her
as well, and both of them desired for the day that they might come together in
wedlock.

When Three days were passed, and that the provision was made ready for the
Wedding, then King Guymart made them to swear each to other, and especially he
made Croissant to promise, that on the Third day he should take his Daughter
in marriage, the which Croissant promised and swear so to do: then the King
took Croissant by the hand, and led him to the old Pallaice, to prove if
the Treasure that was there might be had away by Croissant, as the Two Knights
had showed him: and then they two alone came to the old Pallaice, when they
were come thither, the King said. Fair Son, I love you well, and also you
ought to bear me your love, since you shall have my Daughter in marriage, and
because I have great affiance in you, I shall show you what I think to say,
and that which lies in my heart: it is of troth, that about four days
passed, as I came from service, I stood and leaned out at a window of my
Pallaice, and I beheld this same place whereas we be now, and where I saw you
lie a sleep, repleat with famine and poverty, I took of you great pity, and
I brought to you bread and drink, and did set it by you, and I covered you
with a furred mantle, and so I let you lie still, for I would not awake you,
and as I returned from you, I saw a door open of this Chamber, the which you
see now closed, out of the which I saw a great light issue: then I went
thither and entered into the Chamber, and there I saw so great Treasure, yt I
never saw none such in all my life: there was a rich Image of gould, the which
I thought to have taken and borne with me, and as I had it in my hands, two
Knights well armed came forth, whereof I was afraid, then they said unto me,
that I should not be so hardy as to touch the Image, nor no part of the
Treasure that I saw there, for they said, that it did not appertain to me, and
if I did the contrary, I should repent it, and they said incontinent they
would slay me: then I demanded to whom that Treasure did belong. Then they
said, that it did belong unto Croissant, who lay here without a sleep, and
they commanded me to take three Besans of gould, to prove thereby to whom
the Treasure should appertain, and then they advised me to make a Dole to
poor men, and that I should cast down the Besans upon the earth whereas the
poor men should pass by, and he that found them and brought them to me, this
Treasure should appertain to him: wherefore I pray you let us go thither to
know the troth. Sir, (quoth Croissant) I pray you let us go thither.

When they came there, they found the door closed: and then Croissant knocked
thereat, and said. Ye Sirs that be within, I pray you in the name of God to
open this door, incontinent the door opened, and there they found the two
Knights with their swords in their hands. Then Guymart and Croissant entered
into the Chamber, and the two Knights came to Croissant, and made him great
cheer, and said. Croissant, your great Prowess and Noblenes is greatly to be
praised, we have been a long time here set to keep for you this Treasure
that you see here, for it is Five Hundred years since that we were set here
by King Oberon, to keep this Treasure for you, and he showed us that it
appertained to you, and never since it was touched by any man, but only by
King Guymart, whom (to the intent to aid and succor you) we bad him take
three Besans of gould, and showed him that this Treasure appertained neither to
King nor Emperor, but alonely to you, which is so great that no man living can
esteem it, you may take it and bear it away, or give it whereas it shall
please you, and whatsoever you take from it, all your life it shall not
diminish nor decrease. When Croissant understood them, he was joyful, and
thanked the Knights in that they had so long kept his Treasures then they
took leave of Croissant, and embraced him and said. Sir, we require you to be
courteous and liberal, and pitiful to the poor, and love well all noble and
wise men, and give to them largely, and be good and true to your Father in law
King Guymart, for he is a noble and a wise Prince, you ought to thank him, and
to love him above all other men living. When Croissant thanked them of their
good advertisement, and then they took their leave, and so departed suddenly,
that neither Croissant nor Guymart wist not where they were become, whereof
they were abashed, and made on them the sign of the cross: then they looked
about the Chamber, and saw the Treasure that was there, where of Croissant was
so abashed, that he will not what to say, for there was a great light in the
Chamber, as though there had been Thirty Torches lighted, by reason of the
bright stones that were there: to speak of the Treasure that was in that
Chamber, I cannot show it, for there (...) so much that they were thereof
abashed to behold it.

When Croissant saw this Treasure, it was no marvel though he was joyful,
and thought to himself, that he would not spa^e to give to them that were
worthy, and such as did serve him truly, and so he did, for he gave so
largely, that all the (...) praised him: and when they had been there a
certain space, Croissant said to King Guymart. Sir, of this Treasure, I will
that you have the one half, and you shall have the keys of that, and give
thereof at your pleasure. Fair Son, (quoth the King) I thank you, all that
I have is yours, and all that you have is mine, we will part nothing between
us as long as we live. Then they departed from thence, and Croissant took
certain of the jewels to give to his Spouse: and then they departed out of the
Chamber, and locked the door, and took the key with them, and so they returned
to the Pallaice right joyful. Then Croissant gave to his Lady the rich jewels,
who right humbly thanked him therefore.

Chap. CLXXXIIII.
Of the great Treasure that they had, and how Croissant wedded the noble
Damsel, daughter to King Guymart: and of the Feast that was there made.

AFter that King Guymart and Croissant were returned to the Palace, the Lady
was ready apparelled: and then the Two Lovers were wedded together in the
Chapel of the Pallaice. The great joy and mirth that was made in the Pallaice
and in the City, I make no mention thereof, they dyned: and of their service
and rich apparel I make no rehearsal, for it were too long to declare it.
After dinner the young Knights and Squiers Iusted in the City: of the joy
and sport that was there made no man can express it at length. Then they went
to supper, and if they were well served at dinner, it was as well at Supper. And
after supper, and that the dancing was done, Croissant and his Lady went to
bed together in a rich Chamber, where the same night they accomplished their
desires: so fair a couple was never seen, as were Croissant and the Lady
Katherine his Wife: and when the night was passed, they arose and came into the
Pallaice, whereas the feasting and joy began again the which (...) Fifteen
days. Great was the triumph that was there made: after that every man
departed from the Court, except all such as appertained to the Court. Of the
good life that they led, all such as loved them rejoiced thereat, and long
time they lived together, so that at last through age King Guymart ^ay sick in
his bed, and so the Fourth day he dyed: great sorrow the Lady Katherine his
Daughter made, and so did Cro^ssant who dearly loved him, and his body was
borne to the Church of Saint P^ter, and his obsequies done, and so laid in his
Sepulture with sore weepings, for in his time he was a good Prince and a true
Iusticer, he was greatly complained for both with poor and with rich. Then
after his death by the consent of all the Lords of the Empire, Croissant was
crowned Emperor, and the Lady Katherine Empress, at whose Coronation was
made great feasting and joy, a godly life they led as long as they lived.
Croissant amended and increased the Signiorie of Room, and conquered diverse
Realms, as Jerusalem and al Surrey, as more plainly you may know by the
Cronicle that is made of him and of his deeds, and now here of him I make no
more mention: they that will know more, let them search the Books of Cronicles
making mention of his deeds. Thus ends the Ancient, Honorable, Famous, and
delightful History of Huon of Bourdeaux one of the Peers of France, and
Duke of Guyenne: and of diverse Princes living in his time. Translated out of
French into English by Sir John Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, at the request
of the Lord Hastings Earl of Huntington, in the year of our Lord God one
Thousand, Five Hundred, Threescore and Ten: And now newly reuised and
corrected, this present year 1601.

FINIS.

