A Treatise OF THE Felicity, of the life to come.

UNSAVORY TO THE obstinate, alluring to such as are gone astray, and to the
faithful, full of consolation.

By A.H.

HEB. 12.22. But ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to the City of the
living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels.

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1594.
Cum Priuilegio Regali.

THE PREFACE TO the faithful Readers.
WITH great humility, and reverence (Brethren) and not without a warrant of
Gods Word, ought we to speak of heavenly things: and specially in treating of
the life to come, there is a singular discretion and modesty required, both in
the teacher, and the hearer: For the matter is so lofty, and transcends so far
the understanding of man, that as a godly Pastor has said, It is much more
easy to describe and understand the way to heaven and eternal life, nor to
describe the place, and life it self. Therefore, when we cannot utter the
dignity of the matter it self, which is above our capacity, we are forced to
speak by similitudes, and under shadows of natural things which we can
conceive, that thereby the things supernatural, may be better conceived. And
this is no wonder, seeing the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 12.4
that he was taken up into Paradise, and heard words which cannot be spoken,
which are not possible for man to utter. Yea, the very spirit of God speaking
of the glory of the Elect in the world to come he makes their dwelling place to
be made of gold, Esai. 25.6, Apoc. 22.
and of precious stones, their meat to be of fat things, and of twelve manner
of fruits, and their drink to be of clear springing waters, and of sweet
fined Wines. And why speaks he after this manner? Because we understand this
language, and by reason of our weakness and ignorance, can mount no higher, nor
conceive any farther. Now then, when I say, that in the world to come, we shall
be delighted with bodily and sensual pleasures: and that our senses of seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, and of feeling, shall be delighted with their own
objects, that are proper unto them: I speak so, for penuritie of language: For
how shall that spiritual matter be otherways expressed, seeing there is not an
other language for spiritual things, nor there is for things natural, but
that there is many attributio^s common to them both: We see, that in the
scriptures, mention is made of the mouth of God, and of the hand of God: when
notwithstanding the Lord is a spirit, and has neither mouth, nor hands, as man
has: but by the one is signified his word, and by the other his power, in
preserving or punishing. Likewise, the life is called, life, as well of the
soul, as of the body: Death, also is a word common both to the soul, and the
body: There is no other word for the joy of the soul, and the joy of the body,
but joy: and the nurishment of the soul, is called, Food, as well as the
nourishment of the body. Yet, there is no doubt, but our bodies shall arise at
the last day perfect in all the senses: If then, we have the senses of
necessity they must have their own objects: and consequently, that
delectation which results of the objects may be pertinently called, a bodily,
or sensual delectation: because it falls under the senses of the body.
Nevertheless, neither shall our bodies and our senses, nor yet their objects
be natural, mortal, or corruptible, as they are in this life: But they shall
be spiritual, immortal, and incorruptible: for as the Apostle says: 2. Cor.
15.44.50.
There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body: neither can flesh
and blood inherit the kingdom of God. That is, our natural bodies as they are
now, while they be made new and incorruptible by the spirit of Jesus Christ,
cannot inherit the kingdom of God. Farther, the substance, and form of this
little treatise, to declare it shortly, is this: Having laid this ground, that
the miseries of the righteous are many: There is hereupon two questions moved,
the one is, why the Lord does so hardly entreat his servants in this life, not
only in witholding his temporal benefits from the^: but also in sending them
great trobles? To the which bipartite question it is answered severally, that
he measures his gifts according unto our strength, and the pilgrimage which
we have to make, that his chief reward is not temporal, but everlasting: and
that he knows affliction to be good for us. The other question is, why the
godly suffers pacie^tly these wrongs, which they might resist? The answer is,
that the reverence which they bear to the Lords commandment, and the hope
which they have of the reward promised (which is eternal life) is the very
cause of it. And forasmuch, as that reward seems to the natural man, to be
far of, and the passage thereunto, to be fearful and difficill: It is
therefore shown, that neither the reward of the godly is far off, nor yet
death by the^ to be much feared. And to remove all doubtings of the
resurrection: It is prooved by diverse similitudes taken from things which we
see daily wrought by God in nature, to be nothing impossible. This done, unto
such as believe the resurrection of the bodies, and the everlasting life, is
described the felicity thereof: which is collected of the excellency of the
place, of the dignity of the indwellers, of the perfection of the pleasures,
and of the diuturnitie of the time. The excellency of the place is taken from
the situation, the fabric, and the beauty thereof, from the high styles that
are given unto it in the Scriptures, and from the worthiness of the architoure,
and inhabitants thereof, which is also aggreged by the lively description of a
bewtifull terrestrial place, and consideration of the beauty of the firmament,
the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, and argumentation from the less to the
more. The dignity of the indwellers is manifested by their righteousness, and
are the three persons of the Trinity, the holy Angels or ministering spirits,
and all the Saints or elect people of God: which is confirmed by the
scriptures. Thereafter to express the pleasures of the life to come,
comparion is made betwixt them, and the pleasures of this life, whereby the
perfection of the one, more evidently appears, by the consideration of the
other. The pleasures of this life are divided in the pleasures of the body, and
the pleasures of the mind: The bodily pleasures, are severally described by
giving an instance of the most pleasant objects that can fall under the outward
senses. And the pleasures of the mind (which exceeds the sensual in greatness)
are conceived under the rare gifts of the body, and of the spirit joined with
all kind of honor, and worldly promotion. This done, enumeration is made, by
an Epilogue, of the greatest pleasures which the wit of man can devise, and yet
are proved to be inferior to the joys of the life to come. But forasmuch as
such naked assertions upon conjectures and appearances without farther warrant
of Gods word, might seem inautentik, and to make no faith: Therefore, the
premises are authorized by diverse testimonies of the Scripture, whereby the
certitude of the joies of the life to come is confirmed. Thereafter, it is
declared how these eternal pleasures shall not only be extended to the soul
of man, but also to the body which shall rise again, perfect in all the members
and senses, and shall be delighted with the own objects: But the chief object
shall be the Majesty of God, containing the perfection of al things: wherewith
they shall be wholly repleat. So being clothed with the glory, and filled with
the perfection of the most high, the Son of man's perfection, is thereby
summarly collected: together with the manner how the elect shall be exercised
in the world to come. Last in order follows, the perpetuity of the time,
during the which, this unspeakable joy and glory shall endure: The which, in
respect it shall admit no period, but shall be comprehended under an infinite
eternity, the felicity appears the more admirable and great. Finally, by
reason of the exorbitant affliction of the godly, and raging insolency of the
enemies: The conclusion contains a brief prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ, to
shorten and accelerat his glorious coming, that thereby all these miseries may
take an end, and the eternal felicity hoped for, may begin. This briefly
is the sum, and deduction of all: which if we consider (Brethren) with
sanctified and well disposed hearts, I think it may serve to our singular
comfort in all seasons, and be as a buckler against al temptations: For in time
of prosperity, we may lift up our minds and be assured, that there is yet a
greater prosperity abiding us, which shall endure for ever, in the world to
come. And in the midst of troubles, we may settle our selves, and find relief
here, when we remember that our sorrows shall shortly take an end, and that we
are to receive a reward, even a perpetual glory of body and soul, whereof all
our sufferings cannot be worthy. Herefore, let us comfort our selves in these
things, Heb. 11.9.10.
and be content with faith. full Abraham, to abide here a while upon this
earth, as in a strange country: ever looking (as he did) for a City having a
foundation, whose builder and maker is God: Heb. 10.23
Let us keep the profession of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful
that promised. Let us have grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may
please him with reverence and fear: Heb. 12.28
for yet a very little while, Heb. 10.37
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. The love of God, and
grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all, Amen. At Polvvart the 8. day of
April, 1594. years.

A loving Brother of all Christ's little Flock. A. H.

OF THE FELICITY, OF THE Life to come.
We see, that according to the saying of the Psalmist; The miseries are many,
Psalm. 34.19
which righteous men do suffer in this life: As poverty, sickness, ignominy,
imprisoning, banishment, grief of mind, and death of the body. And these
miseries they not only suffer perforce, as sent by God (whose mighty hand no
flesh is able to resist) but voluntarily, they incur the miseries and trobles
which they might eschew* and all for professing of the name of Christ, and
embracing of his true worshipping and service: which if they would forsake and
deny, they might be free from the cruel torment of their bodies, they might
save their own lives, enjoy their own goods, and live at liberty in their
own cuntries. Likewise, we see that willingly they suffer wrong, injury, and
reproach, and receives great shame and loss of them whom they might recompense
and requite with the like offenses. Nevertheless, they avenge not themselves
although they might, but remits the revenge to God. Now then, there results
here two questions: The one is, why the Lord, seeing all things are at his gift
and disposition, does so hardly entreat his servants in this life? For all
the earth is the Lords: All beasts are mine (says the Lord) on the hills and
on the mountains: Psalm. 50.10
Gold, silver, and riches, he may give at his pleasure, and high honors: for
promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, Psalm. 75.6
but from above: To be short, he gives liberty, and makes the heart cheerful
and glad, he has power to conserve the body in health, and to prolong, or
abridge the days of man, as seems good in his eyes.

The other question is, Why righteous men do voluntarily suffer and vnderlie
those troubles which they might easily eschew; and takes up patiently the
reproaches and wrongs, which they might resist, and acquit? which is a thing
most hard of digestion to flesh and blood, and is plain repugnant to man's
own nature and inclination.

The first question contains two parts: The one is, why God gives not all kind
of temporal benefits to his servants according to their hearts desire? The
other part is: Why God does so miserably afflict his servants in this life? To
the first, it is answered, That the Lord is a wise and discreet stewart, and
dispensator of his benefits: and seeing he has created and made us, Psa. 103.14
he knows our strength and weakness, Mat. 6.8.
what is most meet for us, and how able we are to bear, and use his gifts
and benefits. Therefore we may lay this for a sure ground: That the Lord
bestows his temporal gifts on his servants, ever in such measure, and in so
far as he knows them to be needful for the pilgrimage of this life, and for
their eternal salvation. Let no man then, that fears God, think that the Lord
has bestowed less, or more of his benefits upon him, nor is expedient for the
making of his journey, and for his everlasting salvation: which I think should
move every man to settle himself, and to be heartily well content with the
worldly gifts which God has given him, whether they be much or little, in
great mesure, or in small An other reason there is, why the Lord gives not these
worldly gifts to his servants, according to their manly hearts desire;
because God rewards not his own according to their worthiness, but according to
his greatness: Which reward, by the self same reason, cannot be worldly nor
temporal, but eternal and everlasting, like unto the giver thereof: Thus much
concerning the disposition of temporal benefits to the righteous.

I come now to the other part of the first question: Why the Lord not only
denies prosperity to his servants, in such measure as they would wish: but
also, does visit them with great trouble and affliction in this life? The
causes are many and diverse, wherefore the Lord does afflict his own servants:
First, forasmuch as we have no permanent dwelling, or long residence here, he
visits us with troble, to the effect, that our mind and delectation be not
fixed on earthly things, but rather should be lifted up, to the place where
our everlasting residence should be: which if the Lord did not, the nature of
man is so corrupt, and the vanities of the world so agreeable to him, that
without all question, he would be more careful, and mindful of the earth,
and earthly things, which are daily present before his eyes; nor of the heaven
and of heavenly things which he sees not, and are only to come, and not
present. Secondly, by affliction the heart of man is stirred up to serve God,
and to be charitable toward his neighbor: For we see that in time of sickness,
of poverty, of sorrow, of apparent or imminent danger, we are very devout,
and loving one to another, and will both cry unto the Lord for help, and will
have compassion upon such as are in distress; which in time of prosperity we
regard but little: For when we have things flowing with us according to our
hearts desire, Incontinent, we fall in a careless security, and becomes cold
and slothful in religion, and froward one toward another, which thing,
adversity does remove and remeid. Thirdly, the Lord by trouble lets us know
when we are cast down, how unable we are to help our selves: And likewise,
he lets us know his great mercy, and power in raising us up again: which
makes us to draw near unto him in time of trouble, and to fear to offend,
and fall from him, when we have once apprehended him, and tasted of his mercy
and loving kindness. Fourthlie, the seed of sin, and of all vice which is
naturally sown in all our hearts, is snibbed and pressed down with trouble:
But in time of prosperity, it ever springs up, and brings forth the fruits of
iniquity. Fifthly, affliction brings forth great patience in us; for being
experimented with the discipline and correction of the Lord, that experience of
his justice and mercy, Romans 5.3.
and of his wonderful works, ingenders (as the Apostle says) Patience, and
Patience brings forth experience, and experience ingenders hope. Last of all,
the sharpnes of adversity which we suffer, makes us both to know the sweetness
of prosperity, and what our Savior Jesus Christ suffered for us: which should
inflame us with an exceeding great love, and thankfulness toward him. But it is
a small thing of any trouble, which can come to the righteous man; for as David
subjoynes to his saying which I cited in the beginning, The Lord delivers him
out of them all: Psalm. 39.19
Therefore, let us lay this for a ground infallible: That the Lord shall ever
send either an hasty delivera^ce to his servants in their trouble, or else
shall give them such strength and patience to abide the same, that they shall
have as great joye and contentment in time of adversity, as others have in
time of prosperity: And when it pleases the Lord to glorify himself by
their death, they are sure of the joy and life eternal: Take heed to the
hasty deliverance of 2. King. 20.4.
Hezekiah when he was sick, to the patience of Job, and to the long suffering
of Paul, which he did bear with joye and gladness. The other question, why
the righteous suffers willingly the troubles and wrongs, which they might
easily eschew, contrary to man's nature and natural reason; shall receive this
answer. This says our Savior Jesus Christ: If any man will come after me,
Luke 9.23.
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. To deny
our selves, is to quite and renounce all those things, which are agreeable to
our corrupted affections; and not to seek and haunt our own pleasures, our own
profit, our own praise, our own wit, and our own will: But to set them all
aside, in so far as they may be hinderful to the true service and worshipping
of God. To take up our cross daily, is to prepare us for daily affliction, and
to vnderlie one trouble after another, for the obedience that we owe to God,
and to follow the example of our Master and Savior Jesus Christ, in leading
an holy, pure, and sinceare life. Again he says: Whosoever shall forsake
houses, Mat. 19.29
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for
my names sake, he shall receive an hundredth fold more, and shall inherit
everlasting life. And again he says: He that loses his life for my sake,
Mat. 10.39
shall save it. Now, concerning suffering of injury and wrong, thus says the
Lord: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10.
for theirs is the kingdom of heven; whereby it is to be understood, that they
that suffers for their faults and offenses, are not partakers of this blessing,
but only such as innocently and patiently suffers injury and wrong: Herefore,
the Apostle Peter says: Let none of you suffer as a murderer, 1. Pet. 4.15
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters:
but if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God in this behalf. Again, our Master says to his Disciples: Mat.
5.11.
Blessed are ye when men reviles you, and persecutes you, and says al manner
of evil against you for my sake falsely: Rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in heaven. And again he says, Mat. 5.39.44.
Resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the other also: Item, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you and persecute you,
that ye may be the Children of your Father, that is in heaven: For he makes
the Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and
unjust. Farther, he says, Luke 6.38
do good, and lend, looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great,
and ye shall be the children of the most high: for he is kind to the unkind,
and to the evil. Now, of these sayings, I gather the conclusion of my answer:
That the righteous bears such reverence and obedience to these precepts and
commandments; and beleues these promises so consta^tly, having a sure hope of
the reward which is promised: That they despise the world, and the vanities
thereof, forsakes and renounceth their houses, riches, cuntries, wives,
children, friends, and possessions, and exposes and offers themselves willingly
to all kind of affliction and trouble, yea, to the very death it self:
knowing that their reward is prepared for them, and as the Apostle Paul says,
that all the troubles which they can suffer in this life, Romans 8.18
is not worthy of that glory which they shall receive.

It is here then to be marked, that the righteous receives not their chief
reward in this world, but in the world to come: For the reward promised, is an
everlasting reward, and in this world we see that nothing is everlasting, but
all temporal and momentine. This is a stumbling block to natural and worldly
men: To wit, that the reward of the godly (as appears to them) is long in
coming, and that they must die the death before they receive it. But o thou
natural man, thou speaks as a man, and what higher can dust and ashes go nor
the earth? neither is that reward far off, (as thou esteems it to be) neither
yet is that death which makes the separation betwixt the soul and the body,
much to be feared: For the time which David prescribes to the age and life of
man, Psalm. 90.10
is only 70. or 80. years, which time being expired, the righteous receives
their reward promised: If that reward then, be long delaied, in respect of the
time which is without end, let thy own conscience be judge. Neither is this
reward always continued for the space foresaid, but is granted sooner unto
some when it pleases the Lord: For we see the term of man's life is
uncertain, in respect that some are called home in their old age, some in
their midage, some in their youth, and some in their very infancy. But here
it may be demanded, why the Lord will have us first to die, and after to live
again, seeing it would appear to be more easy to continue this life for
ever, nor to put end to this life, and then make us to live again? I answer,
that sin is the occasion why we must die and depart this life, before we see
the Majesty of God, or receive the reward promised, which is everlasting life:
Romans 6.23
For as the Apostle Paul says, the wages of sin is death. But then thou may
reply and say, that Jesus Christ has already suffered for our sin, and has
overcome death and hell: How is it then that we must nevertheles underly death,
which is the reward of sin? I answer thee, that because Jesus Christ has
suffered for our sin, and has overcome death by his resurrection: therefore,
he shall raise us up again from death, and give us everlasting life: which
otherwise we would not have gotten, if he had not died for us, but would have
risen again to everlasting death and torment: Herefore, as the Apostle
subjoines to his saying above written; but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Notwithstanding of all this, the work of the
resurrection from the death, seems most hard and difficill to flesh and
blood: But o man, Where is thy faith? Seeing thou may by very natural reason,
as it were, comprehend the same, if thou would have respect to the rest of the
wonderful works of God, which thou see daily before thine eyes, and would
compare the same with the resurrection of the dead bodies. For what is he that
ever would think, that the seed which is sown on the ground, and lies roten
therein, should ever come to perfection, and become good and ripe corn,
unless he had the yearlie experience of it? What is he that ever would
think, that those herbs and plants which are withered and dead, so that
nothing remains but a cold rotten root within the earth, should ever reviue
and revert again, and bring forth a perfect stalk, a leaf, a flourish, and
seed, unless we saw it with our eyes? Or what is he that seeing the Sun
going down, and the whole earth overwhelmed with darkness, that ever would
think that the sun should rise and give light again, except he had the daily
experience of it? Who would think that a man which is fallen in a sound
sleep, whose senses are dead, without either sight, hearing, smelling, or
feeling, should ever awake again, and be a living man, unless we saw it a
thing customable, and natural to all men? I suppose likewise, that no man
would credit by report the wonderful manner of the conception, and birth of
mankind, except it were known by experience and proof. Certainly, it is no
more hard and difficill to the Lord to raise the dead bodies out of the grave,
nor to work these things: Neither is death more to be feared of the godly, nor
the going to bed to sleep; which is a perfect similitude of death: For as man
goes to bed in the evening, sleeps all the night, and wakens, and rises up
again in the morning: So does the body, in very deed, sleep and repose in
the grave, overshadowed with night and darkness; but in the morning when Christ
Jesus shall appear in the clouds, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 1. Cor. 15.52.
the body shall rise again at the blast of the trumpet, and shall enjoy the
perfect light of the day: during the which space man shall not think long, for
what langor can the body have which is a sleep? And as to the soul it can
have far less, which during the said space is joined with Christ Jesus: In
such sort, that the space betwixt the separation of the soul from the body,
and the coming of our Lord Jesus, is but the length (as it were) of a night.
But because thou, o worldly man, has not had the experience of the
resurrection, like as thou have had of the things above specified, which are no
less marvelous, thou can hardly believe it.

But unto such as constantly believes the same, and hopes for the reward of
everlasting life, I will briefly declare (by the grace of God) the joye and
felicity thereof, in so far as the Lord has revealed the same to us by his
word, and as the weak wit of man is able to conceive. In the first, the Apostle
Paul testifies, that the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, 1. Cor.
2.9.
neither has it entered in the heart of man, the joye and glory of the life to
come: which thing God has prepared for all them that love him. Therefore, let
man imagine, and descriue what he list, he shall never be able to attain unto
it, for it is above his understanding. Nevertheless, I collect the glory and
felicity of that life to come, to be extreme great and excellent, in respect
of these four circumstances: First in consideration of the situation, fabric,
and beauty of the dwelling place. Secondly, in respect of the company and
fellowship of them which we shall injoye. Thirdly, in consideration of the
pleasures, and delectation which we shall have there. And last, in respect of
the time and space which the dwelling, company, and pleasures shall endure.

A Description of the celestial dwelling place.
AS to the Name and Description of the dwelling place: It is called by the
spirit of God, the Heaven, an holy mountain, Isai. 57.13.
a high place, a great and holy city, holy and new Jerusalem, a celestial
and glorious Kingdom, Apoc. 21.2
the Tabernacle and dwelling place of the Lord. Psalm. 15.
These are high styles: Whereby we may gather, Isai. 57.15.
that the situation thereof is on high, above the circle of the Sun, and
circumference of the starrie firmament: I dwell in the high, and holy place
(says the Lord) and the Psalmist says: Psa. 148.1.
Praise ye him in the high places. The fabric and beauty thereof, may be
likewise understood to be most exquisit: For seeing it is the dwelling place of
the Lord, which is most perfect; yea, which is very perfection it self; no
question but his tabernacle, and dwelling place is accomplished with all
perfections. Therefore, the Evangelist John, whom our Savior Jesus Christ
loved, being about the description of that great City, holy Jerusalem; to
express the fabric, bewty, and perfection thereof, according to the capacity
of man, and as it was revealed unto him by the spirit of God: he says, That
the City is of pure gold, Rev. 21.10.
like unto clear glass, that it is four square, and is twelve thousand
furlongs, or fiftene hundredth miles of length, as much of breadth, and as much of
height: He makes it to have twelve gates, and every gate to be of a precious
Pearl; and he makes the streets of the city to be of pure gold, as shining
glass; The wall of the which city, he makes to be a hundredth forty and
four cubits of height, and says that it is made of a precious Jasper stone:
Such like, that the foundations of the wall of the City, are garnished with
all manner of precious stones; and there be numbers out twelve foundations,
garnished and set with twelve diverse sorts of most precious stones: In such
sort that he says, the shining of the City is like unto a stone most
precious, even as a Jasper stone (which is always green and flourishing)
clear as Cristal. This is spoken according to the capacity of the weak wit of
man: But because the sense is allegorick, and is rather referred unto the
Church of Christ, and number of the elect, nor unto the place it self, I will
not insist farther therein: Always to declare the extreme light, and beauty
thereof, he says, that the City has no need of the Sun, nor the Moon to
shine in it; for the Glory of God does make it light, and the Lamb of God
Jesus Christ is the light thereof, and there shall be no night there.

But forasmuch as the beauty and excellency of that place, shall be most lively
set down before our eyes, by making comparison of the same with bewtiful places
here upon earth, which we may see with our eyes, and conceive by our
understanding: Let us enter in the consideration and description of a bewtiful
place, which may be devised here upon Earth: For if there appear any
singularity or magnificence in the one, it may be easily considered that the
other is much more singular and magnifick.

I presuppose, that there is a fair Palace situat on a pleasant green field,
on the head of a devalling bank, which is devised by most skilful
Architectors, and is builded by most perfect and cunning artificers in
Geometry, in the Mecaniks and in all kind of handicrafts: having at their
will all kind of fine materials, requisite for building: as Marble, Porphyre,
Alabaster, timber, iron, brass, Ivorie, lead, glass, gold, and azor. The
which place is garnished within with all kind of precious movables and
plenishing. At the foot of the devalling bank, there is plain, green, and
fertile haughs, and a fair portatiue River running by, replenished with diverse
kinds of fishes: and not far from the Palace, there is a fair Forest,
wherein is great store of Heart, Hynde, Roe, and of fallow Dear, and of al
other sorts of four footed beasts, and of fouls which are either pleasant to
behold, or profitable for the use of man: There is store of fair Cedar, Fur,
oak, and of pyne trees. And near unto the Palace are planted fair and pleasant
Gardens, distinguished with valleys, and casten with knots, and laberinths, of
all sorts of odoriferant and savorie flowers: Wherein there is also clear
ponds, replenished with diverse sorts of rare and delicate Fishes: Volories
prepared for pleasant and well singing birds; and medalls of sattyres, and of
all kind of creeping things. There is abundance of Olives, Oranges, a bricois,
and all kind of fruit trees, which brings forth their delicius fruits in
their own seasons: and in the Summer season, while the weather is temperat and
calm, and the bright Sun-shining in the clear firmament, which to behold, the
birds and the fowls makes a loud noyce, and natural melody among the green
trees; who would not think but this place were pleasant and delectable to dwell
in? But if we think that there is any beauty or excellency into this place,
which may be devised by the wit of man: There is no doubt but that place where
the Majesty of God does remain and dwell, is much more bewtifull and
excellent: Considdering, that he is the chief Architector and artificer of all
others, and has both created all the world, and has given the Exo. 31.2.
spirit, and cunning unto all craftismen. Moreover, if this place may be
imagined and devised, and appears delectable and pleasant here upon earth,
which is not a place of pleasure but a little point, and center situate in the
midst of that ample circumference of the heaven, a vaill of misery, wherein we
are banished as strangers, to suffer pain, and to make our penitence for a
time, for our sins: How much more, shall the tabernacle of the almighty Lord be
delectable and pleasant, which is the place of perfect felicity, where both the
lord has placed his glorious throne where his holy Angels does remain, and
which he has promised as a most singular reward to his Elect and chosen
Children; where he has also promised to bring the glory of Kings of the
earth, and the glory of the Gentiles or Nations? Farthermore, the beauty of the
Sun, Moon, stars, and of the firmament is very singular, and pleasant to
behold: The Sun is so extreme bright that with great difficulty the eyes of
man are able to look upon it, and it gives light to all the world: The Moon
at her full is of great beauty and whitenes, and is appointed to govern the
night: The glistering stars innumerable for multitude, twinkels in the
firmament, like unto clear diamonds; The skies being purified from the clouds,
are blewe like unto a Saphyre stone, and are clear as the Cristal, which we
see at sometime party colloured, even damasked (as it were) with thin and
white clouds: and at the going down of the Sun, we see the west of times
overfret, and painted with rednes, more pleasant and bewtiful to behold, nor the
Rubie or the precious Charbukle. Notwithstanding of all this, the beauty of our
heavenly dwelling place shall be much more excellent, which may be proved by
these two reasons: Our eyes sees, and our understanding is able to conceive
their beauty foresaid; 1. Cor. 2.9.
but as to the excellency of the celestial tabernacle, which the Lord has
prepared for them that love him (according to the testimony of Paul before
alleged) Our wit is not able to conceive it in this life. The other reason is
this: The Prophet Esaias, the Apostle Peter, and the Evangelist John does plainly
testify, Isai. 51.6. and 65.17. and 66.22. 2. Pet. 3.13 Reve. 21.1
that the heavens and the earth which are now, and all that is therein, shall
be dissolved and pass away, and that the Lord shall creat a new heaven, and a
new earth: Which without all question shall be more bewtifull and excellent nor
the heavens, and the earth that are now: For otherwise it is to be
presupposed, that the lord would not destroy the more perfect, and creat others
more imperfect in their place and room. Finally, that dwelling shall be exceeding
large and spacious, for there shall be no separation betwixt the heaven and the
earth, betwixt the dwelling place of the Lord, and the dwelling place of Men,
but conform to his promise, he shall dwell with us, and we with him, as
Citizens of a City. And thus much concerning the Description of the dwelling
place.

A Declaration of the Company which we shall inioye in the World to come.
AS to the Company which we shall have in that heavenly habitation, it is
first to be marked, that we shall be quite of all evil company: For all wicked
men shall be perpetually banished from that fair cuntrie. Know ye not, says
the Apostle Paul, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?
1. Cor. 6.9.
Be not deceived, Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
wanton persons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor the covetous, nor drunkards,
nor raillers nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God; which is to
be understood, except they be washen, sanctified, and justified in the name of
Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of God, like as the Corinthians were, to whom
Paul wrote this Epistle, which did repent and amend their lives. The same is
affirmed by Saint John in his Revelation, Reve. 21.and 27.
saying: the fearful and vnbeleving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liers shall have their part
in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. And
again, speaking of that holy City, he says: There shall enter into it no
unclean thing, neither whatsoever works abomination or lies. The company
then which we shall enjoy, shall be all holy and righteous: Isai. 60.21.
Thy people shall be all righteous, (says the Lord, speaking to his Church)
they shall possess the land for ever. Psalm. 15.1.
Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? says the Psalmist, who shall rest in
thine holy mountain? He that walks vprightlie, and works righteousness, and
speaks the truth in his heart. In such sort, that we shall continually
converse with the Saints; that is to say, with men and women which served God
in spirit, and truth in this life; and that not only of the people of our
own cuntrie, or of the Jews, and Israelites, which are called Gods people:
But also of all cuntries and nations of the earth, and that of all estates and
degrees. Assemble your selves, and come, (says the Lord) draw near together
ye abject of the Gentiles: Isai. 45.20.
Look unto me, and ye shall be saved: All the ends of the earth shall be saved:
For I am God, and there is none other: I have sworn by my self, the word is
gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return: That every knee
shall bow unto me, and every tongue shall swear by me. And again, the Lord
says to his Son Christ Jesus, It is a small thing that thou should be my
servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, Isai. 49.6
and to restore the desolations of Israel: I will also give thee for a light
of the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the end of the world.
Likewise, the Apostle John says, that the glory and honor of the Gentiles
(that is to say of all Nations, Rev. 21.26
as well as of the Jews) shall be brought unto the holy City. And this shall
not only be of the faithful of one age, or of them which are living now, but
of all ages which has been from the beginning of the world, and shall be unto
the consumation thereof and latter coming of Jesus Christ. We shall then
frequent the society and fellowship of all the godly Martyrs, which constantly
has suffered for the name of Christ Jesus in this life: And likewise, of the
Disciples and Apostles of Christ Jesus, which has sounded his Gospel through
the whole world: Of the holy Priests, and true Prophets of the Lord; of the
godly Kings and Rulers of the Earth, which as the Lords lieftenants did
ministrate justice and judgment in their lives. We shall have for our familiar
brethren and companions our first progenitor Adam, Noe, Lot, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and the twelve Patriarks, the sons of Jacob: Likewise we shall see,
by familiar, and contract friendship and brotherhood which never shall be
dissolved, with Moses, Aaron, Joshua, and the just judges of Israel, with
Samuel, Elias, and Elisha, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiell, and Daniell, with David,
Ezechias, and Josias, with John the Baptist, Peter, Paul, and John, whom our
Savior loved: with whom we shall dwell as brethren and Citizens of a City.
Moreover, not only shall we be in company with faithful men and women, but
also with the whole army of the holy Angels of the Lord, whom he has
appointed to preserve and defend us in this life: The whole ordour of them
shall rejoice greitumlie of our coming and salvation, and shall be continually
conversant with us in perpetual society and friendship: Genesis 3 24. Col. 1.16.
There shall we enter in fellowshippe with the Cherubims, Seraphins, Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Archangels, Angels, and with the whole
number of the celestial Legions: Which receives those styles, to declare
their glory, power, and distinct ofices. These shall delight to magnify and
extol the Majesty of the lord together with us, insatiantlie, with unspeakable
joy and gladness. But the chief company wherein we should most rejoice, is: That
we shall have the full fruition of almighty God the Father, of his Son Christ
Jesus our Savior, and of the holy Ghost, which is the spirit of God: There we
shall see them face to face in their full majesty and glory, which none can
behold, nor apprehend in this life, but by faith only. The almighty God shall
behold, and bless us from his high and holy throne, as his own sons and
heirs whom he has adopted: The Lamb Christ Jesus shall embrace and kiss
us, as his brethren and sisters, he shall congratulate our coming, and present
us faultlesse unto his Father: And the Comforter, the spirit of truth, which
now does secreetly assist us, govern us, and work in our hearts by measure:
shall then be visiblie, and personally ever present among us; and really and
with effect shall possess both our souls and bodies, and replenish us with
full measure. Thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the Company which we
shall injoye, and with whom we shall live in the world to come.

A Rehearsal of the Pleasures which we shall enjoy in the world to come.
LET us now come to the pleasures, whereof we shall be made participant in the
life to come. Like as the Geographor by symmetrie and proportion, describes all
the Cuntries of the earth, into the bounds of a little globe, and is accostomed
to write throughout the parts thereof: This is a cuntrie, this is a famous
City, this is a river, these are mountains, this is an arm of the sea, and
this is a port or hauening place. Nevertheles, he is so far distant from the
likeness, and perfection of the things which he describes, that if it were
possible that the Geographor were transported unawares into any strange
Cuntrie, he should neither know the cuntrie, the cities, nor what way to go
betwixt them, for all his Geographie, while it were first shown and declared
unto him: Even so, although I be as far distant, in describing the joies of
the Life to come, from the perfection thereof, as a thing imperfect is from
that which is perfect; or the thing finite and bounded, from the thing infinite
and without bounds: Notwithstandng, I will point out as the Geographor does, a
certain similitude and likeness thereof by comparing the same unto joies
earthly, and pleasures which may be devised in this life: For if the one
appear notable and great, which is but temporal and imperfit of it self, the
other shall appear far greater, and shall be easily conceived to transcend
it by many degrees, seeing it is called by the spirit of God, an eternal and
perfect felicity, and therefore lacks nothing that is requisite to perfection.
The pleasures which man can receive in this life, they are either bodily and
sensual, whereby the outward senses are delighted: or else, they are inward
pleasures of the mind, whereby the heart and soul of man is rejoiced: But so
long as the body and the soul are joined together, there is such an union and
concord between the^, that that thing which delights the one, delights also the
other; and that which is displeasant to the one, is likewise displeasant to the
other: That which is delectable to the body and outward senses, is delectable
also to the spirit, and makes the heart to rejoice: And that which contents the
mind, and rejoiceth the heart, does likewise recreat and pleasure the body after
a marvelous manner. To return then to those pleasures, whereby the outward
senses and body are delighted: Is it not extreme pleasant to the eyes to
behold the face of a Princes Court, and the great assemblies of bewtifull and
great personages, both of men and women, apparelled with all kind of precious
and costly garments, and attyred with rich jewels, together with all the rest
of precious and glistering planessing, which is accustomed to be in the houses
of great Princes, at a solemn feast, or at their first entry in a potent and
opulent City? Or to behold from the top of an high mountain, in the time of
Summer, or of Harvest, while the air is clear and purified, the noble and
fair Cities adjacent about, the green hills and dales, the fair woods and
forests, the corns, wines, and fruits of the ground, the fresh Loches and
rivers, and the sapheir firmament, the bright Sun and Moon, and the
glistering stars arrayed in good order? Or to behold a great army of
horsemen, and of foot al in their clear armor, well arrayed and marching in
battle: To see their glauncing harnes, and armor both invasiue and defenciue,
their Plumages, standarts and displaied hand seignes, together with their
courageous bairded Horses, Elephants, and Drummodaries? Or to behold a fair
Navy of ships, of Galleys, and of Galliasses, all under saill on the smooth
Sea, with their streamers, flaggs, aires, and great artillery? Or to behold a
public Fair or Market place, wherein all kind of bewtiful and precious wares
are exposed and laid forth to be sold? To see the fair bords of diverse sorts
of viue and lively portrators, the fair rapestrie of silks, and cloth of
gold, all kind of colors of fine and well lustered stuffes for apparelling
of the body, the clear polist vessel of silver and of gold, the fine
varnished musical Instruments, with many other proper inventions, and vtensils
devised and wrought by subtle handie crafts for the use and ease of man? These
I say, and such like sights, are very pleasant and delectable to the eyes, and
consequently comfortable and recreatiue to the spirit. In like manner, it were
very delectable to the ears, to hear notable and good doctrine out of the
mouth of a cunning and eloquent teacher: To hear rehearsed pleasant and notable
histories, delectable novelties of rare and strange things, glad and good
tidings, and to hear thy self well reported off, and thy works rehearsed and
praised in thine own presence: To hear the merry interloquutors of facetious
Dialogues, pretty and quick conceits, and rancounters of Comediens, in their
comedies, and stage plays: To hear the singing and natural melody of the
sweet singing birds firdoning their notes after their kind, and on diverse
ways, in the time of summer, or of spring time: but most of all, early in the
morning as the day begins to dawne, when al is under great silence, and every
thing quiet and at rest, then to hear the pleasant harmony of Musical
Instruments cunningly handeled, as of Cornets, or fine Violls: Or to hear the
sweet and delicat voices of cunning singers, intermedled with the melodious
sound of Lutes, Cisters, Clairshoes, or of other quiet Instruments of that
kind: which I esteem worthy to be reckoned among the chiefest of earthly
pleasures. What thing can be more delectable to the taste and appetite of man,
nor to have a table at all times richly decked, with all manner of savoury and
delicate meats, finely prepared? as of fat and tender flesh, rare and
delicious fishes, al kind of fruits herbs, spices, of drogs wet and dry, and
other confections pertaining to the Apotecarie: And in like manner to have ready
at man's desire, all kind of delicious and delicate drinks and lickquors? as
Milk, meid, honey, sweet and sharp wines, hypocrise, and fined wines, with all
manner of fresh refreshing drinks, which may be either agreeable to the mouth,
or meat for the sustentation of man's body. As to the sense of smelling, it is
delighted with pleasant and sweet odours: as of sweet smelling flowers,
perfumes, precious ointments, goomes, and with fine odours mixed and prepared
by the Apotecars. And finally, is it not delectable and pleasant to the body of
man, when in time of cold he is fostered with warmnes, and in time of heat is
refreshed with temperat coldness? Likewise when his body is anointed and
refreshed with balm, and with oil, or when he is purged and purified in the
bathstoffs, or is eased and releeved of his natural infirmities, by such
volupteous pleasures as are natural unto him, and falls under the sense of
feeling? Al these above rehearsed are sensual and bodily pleasures, which man
would esteem a great happiness, to injoye always at his pleasure, being very
delectable first to the body, and then to the spirit, as unto that which has a
natural and perfect conjunction with the body: For if it were separated from
the body, it would not be delighted with no such sensual pleasures. But those
pleasures which do chiefly content the mind, and inwardly rejoiceth the heart
and soul of man, are much more excellent, and does far exceed the pleasures
of the flesh, in dignity and worthiness. Were it not a great contentment to
the mind, to have thy body als bewtiful, and of seemlie proportion as thy heart
would wish? And that thou were equal in strength, speed, and agilitie with
any other man? Likewise that thou were of such skill and dexterity at al games
and exercitions of the body, as well these that are natural unto man, as in
these which needs art and instruction, (as summing, balling, handeling of
thine armor, and others such like) that none were able to outmatch thee? and
therewithal to have thy beauty ever flourishing and never to fade, and thy body
never to decay, but ever to remain in perfect vigor and strength? Moreover,
would thou not think it a great felicity, to be so pregnant and quick of
spirit, that nothing could seem hard or difficil unto thee? But that thou
had the knowledge of all arts and sciences, of all tongues and languages,
and with thy knowledge to have a facund and ornate tongue to utter the
conceptions of thy mind? Farther, is it not very delectable to the heart of man
to have obtained a great victory, and to have defait the enemies of his native
cuntrie, and brought the same to liberty and freedom by his own deeds and
virtue (as the strong Sampson did in subduing the Philistims, David in slaying
of Goliath, Judith in killing of Olophernes, or as the valiant Roman Cockles
did) with great praise and commendation of all men? It is also no little
contentment to the spirit, to have found out a singular and subtle devise,
which may bring both great pleasure, and great commodity with it, not only to
the inventor thereof himself, but also to the whole estate of a common wealth.
We read that Pythagoras for finding out by his own ingyne and study, of a
proposition of Geometry, (which indeed is esteemed to be very excellent, and
of great use in the Mathematics) and is the 47. Proposition of the first book
of the Elements of Euclide: for very joy he came forth of his cabinet, running,
and crying with a loud voice, as though he had been transported: I have found
it! I have found it! and thereafter made a solemn sacrifice and oblation of an
hundredth Oxen. See we not also how great rejoicing it is to the heart of him
that has done a notable and noble act, pronounced a wise sentence, or made a
cunning and ornat harangue, to the great admiration and praise of the hearers
and beholders? And were it not a pleasant thing to be promoved by a great
Monarche, from the estate of a poor miserable cotter, to the estate of a
welthie and potent Lord, and to be received in great familiarity and credit
with the same monarche? To be short, I think the greatest joys which man can
wish or imagine, are these: To have all things that the heart does require,
and to lack nothing: To have knowledge of all things, and to be ignorant of
nothing: To be ever glad, and never sorrowful: To be ever careless, and without
fear, and never careful nor in dread: To be ever in pleasure, and never in
pain: To be always well content, and never miscontent nor displeased: To be
ever in security, and never in danger: To be ever in peace and at rest, and
never troubled nor disquieted: To be ever at liberty, and never in thraldom:
To be ever in health and in good disposition, and never sick nor diseased: To
be ever in a constant and stable estate, and never subject to change nor
alteration: To be free from all natural infirmities of the body, and all
passions and perturbations of the mind, but in special, from the thraldom of
sin, and to have an absolute power over all our affections and
concupiscenses: To be delighted with every thing, and never to see nor hear
that thing which is grievous or displeasant: To hate or envy no man, nor yet to
be hated or envied of any: But to love and like all, and to be loved and liked
of all men: To be honored and esteemed of all men: but in special to be in
the favor of God, and to be reciprocklie beloved of them whom we love most
entirely: and to be sure and certain never to die, but to live for ever. What
then of al these joies and pleasures? were they ever injoied by any man, or is
it possible that any man can enjoy them in this life? No certainly, they
cannot be fully enjoyed so long as we dwell here upon earth, and remains in
this tabernacle of flesh and blood: But these are heavenly joys, pertaining
to the life to come, which all the faithful shall undoubtedly injoye: yea,
and greater nor these also: For the wit and ingine of man is able to comprehend
and understand these joies before rehearsed: But the perfect joy and felicity
of the life to come, passes all understanding.

But now, let us see what warrant we have of the word of God against these
things, and how the spirit of God does certify us hereof. We are first
certified by the spirit of God, that in the life to come we shall be exeemed
from all grief and sorrow, so that our joy and pleasure shall not be mixed
with sorrows, as the pleasures of this life are: For the Evangelist John
says, Revel. 21.4
God shall wipe away al tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for
the first things are passed. The former trobles are forgotten (says the Lord
by the mouth of the Prophet) and shall surely hide themselves from mine eyes,
Isai. 65.16.
for Lo, I will create new heavens, and a new earth, and the former shall not
be remembered nor come into mind: But be ye glad and rejoice for ever, in the
things which I shall create: For behold, I will create Jerusalem, as a
rejoicing, and her people as a joy: and I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in
my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the
voice of crying: There shall be no more there a Child of years, nor an old man
that has not filled his days; for he that shall be an hundredth years old,
shall die as a young man. Farther, the spirit of God to express the joye of the
life to come, compares it to a day of marriage, into the which Jesus Christ is
the bridegroom, and his Church (that is to say, the number of his elect) is
called the bride. The Gentiles (says the Prophet, Isai. 62.2.
speaking of Christ's Church) shall see thy righteousness, and al kings thy
glory, and thou shall be called by a new name which the mouth of the Lord shall
name: Thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
diadem in the hand of thy God: It shall be no more said unto thee, Forsaken,
neither shall it be said any more to thy land, desolate: But thou shall be
called, HEPHZEBAH, (that is to say, My delight in her) and thy Land BEVLAH, or
Married: For the Lord delights in thee, and thy Land shall have an Husband: for
as a young man marieth a Virgin; so shall thy sons marry thee: And as a
bridegrom is glad of the bride: so shall thy God rejoice over thee. And in the
Apocalips, Apoc. 19.6
Christ's flock says, Halleluiah (that is by interpretation, praise ye God)
for our God Almighty has reigned: Let us be glad and rejoice, and give glory
to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self
reddy: And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed with pure fine linen
and shining, for the fine Linen is the righteousness of the Saints: Thereafter,
the Angel of God says unto John: Apoc. 21.9
I will show thee the bride the Lambs wife: and he showed me (says John) the
great City holy Jerusalem (which is the number of the Elect) descending out of
heaven from God, having the glory of God. This comparison, the spirit of God
makes between Christ and his Church, because, that like as the husband and
the wife are made one flesh: so are the faithful made one with Christ, by
participation of his body and blood through faith. And as the bridegroom does
procreate Children with his bride: So does Christ procreat Children in his
Church, by his holy spirit, and makes her to be plentiful in bringing forth
sons and daughters to inherit his kingdom. But to return to the pleasure of
the Elect in the life to come, it is also compared to a solemn banquet by the
spirit of God. Isai. 25.6.
And in this mountain (says the Prophet Esaias) shall the Lord of hosts make
unto all people a feast of fat things: Even a feast of fined wines, and of fat
things full of marrow, of wines fined and purified. And Saint John in his
Revelation says, Reu. 22.1.
that he saw a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out
of the throne of God, and of the Lamb, which is Jesus Christ: and on either
side of the River, was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits,
and gave fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree served to heal the
Nations with. It is also said in the Apocalips, Apoc. 19.9
Blessed are they that are called unto the Lambs supper. And our master
Christ says, Ioh. 4.14.
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never be more a
thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water,
springing up into everlasting life. Moreover, the Lord proposes to the
faithful, all the blessings which are contained in the Law, and so under
temporal things comprehends the spiritual promises. They shall feed in the
ways, Isai. 49.9.
says the Prophet, and their pastures shall be in all the tops of the hills,
they shall not be hungry, nether shall they be thirsty, neither shall the heat
smite them, nor the sun; for he that has compassion on them shall lead
them; even to the springs of waters shall he drive them. Isai. 55.1.
Lo, says the Lord, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and ye that
have no silver come buy and eat, come I say, buy wine and milk without silver:
Harken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul
delight in fatnes. Likewise, the Lord speaking to his afflicted members says,
Isai. 54.11.
O thou afflicted, and tossed with tempest, that has no comfort, behold, I
will lay thy stones with the Charbukle, and lay thy foundation with Saphires,
and I will make thy windows of Emeraudes, and thy gate shining stones, and all
thy bordours of pleasant stones. And for the farther comfort of his elect, he
proceeds and says: All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and much
peace shall be to thy Children: In righteousness shall thou be established, and
be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear it; and from fear, for it
shall not come near thee: Isai. 54.10.17.
For the montains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my mercy shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away, says
the Lord, that has compassion on thee: This is the heritage of the Lords
servants, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord. And insisting in the
consolation of his Church; this says the Lord to it: Whereas thou have been
forsaken and hated, Isai. 60.1^.
so that no man went by thee, I will make thee an eternal glory, and a joy from
generation to generation: Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and
suck the breasts of kings: and thou shall know, that I the Lord am thy Savior,
and thy redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob: For brass will I bring gold, and
for iron will I bring silver; and for wood, brass; and for stones, iron: I
will also make thy garment peace, and thy exactors righteousness: Violence shall
be no more heard off in thy land, neither desolation, nor destruction within
thy borders: But thou shall call salvation thy walls, and praise thy gates:
Thou shall have no more the Sun to shine by day, neither shall the brightness
of the Moon shine unto thee: For the Lord shall be thine everlasting light,
and thy God thy glory, thy Sun shall never go down, neither thy Moon be hid,
for the Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and the days of thy sorrows
shall be ended: Thy people also shall be al righteous, they shall possess the
land for ever: The graiffe of my planting shall be the work of my hands, that I
may be glorified. Moreover, the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet comforts his
Elect, and threatens the wicked, in these words: Behold my servants shall
eat, Isai. 65.13.
and ye shall be hungry: Behold, my servants shall drink, and ye shall be
thirsty: Behold, my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed: Behold, my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
and shall howl for vexation of mind, and ye shall leave your name as a curse
unto my chosen: For the Lord God shall slay you, and call his servants by
another name: He that shall bless in the earth, shall bless himself in the
true God, and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by the true God. These
are hevenly consolations and promises, which are partly begun in this life,
but shall not be fully accomplished while the life to come: Whereupon the
faithful flock of Christ takes occasion to rejoice, and is prophesied to burst
out in these words: Isai. 61.10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall be joyful in my God:
For he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, and covered me with the
robe of righteousness: He has decked me like a bridegroom, and as a bride
attyreth her self with her jewels: For as the earth brings forth her budde,
and as the Garden causes to grow that which is sown in it: So the Lord God
will cause righteousness to grow, and praise before the Heathen. But forasmuch,
as the pleasures of the soul, and contentment of the mind, might appear more
imaginary, nor substantial, where they fall not under the outward senses, and
where the body is not made participant thereof: For the soul is but a spirit,
and is delighted with spiritual things; neither can it be rejoiced, or yet
troubled with things sensual or corporal, being free from the bands of the
flesh. Therefore to the effect thou may the better conceive, and have a more
sensible feeling of the joys of the life to come; I will assure thee, that not
only the souls and spirits of the Elect shall rejoice and be delighted with
spiritual plesures; Job. 19.26
but also the bodies shall be delighted with bodily and sensual pleasures,
which falls under the senses: In respect, the body shall rise again from
death, 1. Cor. 15.52.
the soul or spirit shall enter again therein, and reallie and with effect,
both the soul and the senses shall be delighted: Mat. 25.46.
albeit not with such natural and corruptible things, (least any man should
dream such an imperfect delectation) as that where with our mortal bodies are
delighted in this life: but with heavenly and incorruptible things, like as our
bodies shall then be incorruptible and immortal. And let no man think, that at
the day of the resurrection, any of us shall resume a fantastical body, of an
other form and shape nor that which we have now: but a very corporal and
substantial body, which may be seen and felt, having all the senses in greater
quicknes, and perfection nor it has them in this life: but free always, from
such fragilitie and natural infirmities, whereunto the mortal body is
subject. For look in what manner and with what body our Savior Jesus Christ
rose again from death, John. 20* 17.27.
which after his resurrection (but before his ascension, and full
glorification) was seen and known by his Disciples, conversed with them, and
was griped by his Disciple Thomas: In like manner, and with the like bodies
shall he raise us up again at the latter day: And when we shall be glorified,
our bodies shall not be hinderfull unto the actions of the spirit, nor a
fasheous prison unto it, as the body is in this life: but it shall be a pleasant
tabernacle, and a necessary organe unto the spirit, reddy to yield and obey
it in all the offices and functions thereof: In such sort, that where the spirit
shall desire to be, the body shall be transported with it, as swift as the
thought, without any resistance: So that in all our actions, we shall be like
unto the Angels and celestial bodies. Our eyes then, I say, shall be
delighted with beholding of things bewtifull, our ears with hearing of
heavenly sounds and harmony, our taist with such celestial and Angellike food
as shall be agreeable thereunto; our nostrells with smelling of pleasant and
delectable odours; and our sense of feeling, with feeling of all kind of
volupteous and perfect pleasure: my reason is this, because we shall have a
perfect sight of the face of God, and the full fruition of his divine Majesty,
which is the consummation and perfection of al pleasures. For he that sees the
face of God, sees eminently, and after a most excellent manner, the beauty and
perfection of all his Creatures: because from him they receive all their beauty
and perfection. Therefore, by necessary consequence, in enjoying the majesty
of God the Creator, we shall also enjoy through him and in him, all the
pleasures which can be taken of any Creature which the Lord has made, either
living or without life. What thing upon earth is comparable to the majesty and
throne of God, which John saw by Revelation? Revel. 4.3.
He that sat upon the throne (says he) was to look upon, like unto a Jasper
stone, and a Sardine, and there was a Rainbowe round about the throne, in sight
like to an Emerande; and out of the throne proceeded lightenings, and
thunderings, and voices; and there were seen Lamps of fire burning before the
throane, which are the seven spirits of God. The rest of the description
thereof, for brevitie I omit, and remits the Reader to the place it self where
it is described. Exo. 19.16.
And did not the whole people of Israel see with their corporal eyes, and
hear with their ears, thunderings and lightenings, and a thick cloud upon
mount Sinay, and the sound of a trumpet exceeding loud, so that they were all
afraid? And did they not see mount Sinay al on a smoke, and the smoke thereof,
ascending as the smoke of a furnace, because the Lord came down upon it in
fire, and the mount trembling exceedingly? Likewise, Moses, Aaron, Nadab,
Exodus 24.^
and Abihu, and seventie of the Elders of Israel saw a part of the Majesty of
God, only in so far, as their infirmity and weakness was able to bear: And
under his feet they saw as it were, a work of a Sapphire stone, and as the
very heaven when it is clear. And did not the skin of the face of Moses
shine bright, after that God had talked with him, Exodus 34.29.
In such sort that the Israelites were affraide to come near him? How then
shall we shine that shall behold him face to face, and injoye his presence for
ever? Surely, in beholding the beauty of his glorious face, we shall be made
bewtifull: And in enjoying the presence of his Majesty, we shall also enjoy
all these joys and pleasures presently expressed, and besides them many other
greater, which as the Apostle says, It is not possible to the wit and tongue of
man to utter and declare. We shall be filled with all virtue and perfection, we
shall be healthie, we shall be strong, we shall be joyful and glad, we
shall have perfect contentment, we shall be assured and in perfect security, we
shall be wise, we shall be patient, we shall be constant, we shall be
charitable, we shall be holy, we shall be glorious. All our actions desires,
studies, and imaginations shall be good, and we shall not have so much as an
intention or inclination unto evil. To be short, Apoc. 21.7
as it is promised in the Apocalips, we shall inherit all things, the Lord shall
be our God, and we shall be his sons. And as the Prophet Daniel says, we shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament; Dan. 12.3
and they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. We shall receive a crown of righteousness (as saint Paul says)
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give at that day, 2. Tim. 4.8
to all them that loves his appearing. We shall sing these praises and new
songs, which John heard by Revelation: Revel. 4.8.11.
Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and which is, and which is to
come: Thou art worthy (O Lord) to receive glory and honor, and power: For
thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are, and have been
created. Item, worthy is the Lamb that was killed, Rev. 5.^^^
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and praise; Praise, and honor, and glory, and power be unto him that
sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever more. We shall also sing the
song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb, Rev. 15.3*
saying: Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true
are thy ways, King of Saints: Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify
thy Name? for thou only art holy, and al Nations shall come and worship before
thee: for thy judgments are made manifest. Apoc. 19.1
We shall sing Hallel-uiah, hallel-uiah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and
power be to the Lord our God: For true and righteous are his judgments. Thus
much concerning the plesures which we shall enjoy in the life to come.

Of the Permanence of the world to come.
IT rests now, that we speak somewhat concerning the time and space, how long
the heavenly dwelling place, the company, and the pleasures foresaid shall
endure. To augment our joy and felicity it is to be understood that, that
celestial dwelling, that blessed society, and those inestimable pleasures
shall never take an end: but shall endure eternally, without any limitation of
time: For it is called a blessed immortality, and an everlasting life. So that
ten thousand years, or thousand millions of years, has not so great a
proportion with the length thereof, as a moment of time has, with thousand
millions of years: For so much, as no prolixitie of time, can approach in any
wise to the bounds or end thereof: For the life everlasting, is without bounds
or end whatsoever. I suppose, that if any Prince or potent man upon earth,
which lives welthelie and well, could be certified that he should continue in
that estate, and should live and not see death unto the end of the world: I
suppose (I say) that albeit the pleasures and prosperity of this life be mixed
with innumerable sorrows and griefs: Nevertheles, he should rejoice therein
exceedingly, and count himself happy above al other men. How much more then
ought we to rejoice, which shall dwell in that celestial kingdom,
accompanied with the saints, with the holy Angels, and with the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost? And shall injoye all the pleasures above rehearsed, and more
nor the wit of man is able to devise, and shall live and continue in that
estate without diminishing, intermission, or alteration thereof for ever and
ever? O felicity above all felicities! the hope whereof, causes the faithful
to suffer great things, makes their extreme pains to appear but gentle and
small, and makes the heart to spring for joy with the very remembrance thereof.
O sweet Jesus Christ, when shall we be made partakers of that promised
felicity? When shall we see the glory which thou have with thy Father?
Doubtless, even at thy coming again, Lord, and at thy appearing in the
clouds: Come then, sweet Savior, for we look and long for thy coming, and
deliverance. Thy little members are grievouslie afflicted, they sigh and sob
daily under thy cross, and werieth of the yoke and burden of sin: Thine
enemies rejoice and persecutes thy little flock, they have taken a liberty, they
delight in wickedness, and follows the lusts and affections of their own
hearts: because they esteem the day of thy coming to be far off, they
attend it not, but esteems thee slow and slack, like unto themselves. Thou
beholdest these things, O Lord, Make have therefore, and put end to the
troubles of thy servants, and to the rage and insolency of Satan, and of all
his supposts, that we may dwell with thee in thy holy montaine, lauding and
praising thee, thy Father, and the holy spirit, in eternal unity, with all
kind of heavenly praise, for ever and ever, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

