A TREATISE CONCERNING the Properties and Offices of the true Church of Christ.
WRITTEN In Latin, by the Reverend Father James Gordon Huntley of Scotland,
Doctor of Divinity, of the Society of JESUS. And translated into English, by
I. L. of the same Society.

The first Part of the second Controversy.

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XIV.

THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Of the Properties and offices of the true Church of Christ.
IN the disputation of the Church, that first of all is to be observed, that
whereas our Adversaries have brought in, and do hold many erroneous opinions,
they do all proceed out of the ignorance of the true definition and Nature of
the Church. It is a true saying of the Apostle, 1. ad Tim ^ v. 6. and 7.
that they which err and wander from the true faith are converted into vain
talk, desirous to be Doctors of the ^aw, not understanding neither what
things they speak nor of what they affirm. For if our Adversaries did well
understand or could conceive, what is imported by the Name and Nature of the
Church, they would never affirm so many absurdities of the Church of Christ.
We will therefore first of all declare and explicate, what is to be understood
properly by the name of the Church.

2. But this best of all is declared by the Properties of the Church of Christ,
and by her Offices, commended unto us in the holy Scripture it self: and those
we call properties which do agree with the Church as she has relation unto
Christ her chief head and Pastor. But those we call her offices which the
Church exercises toward her Children. There are indeed many properties of the
Church assigned by holy Scripture, but it shall suffice us to allege and note
these five only.

3. The first is, that the Church is the spouse of Christ. Os^e ^. 19, and 20.
I will betroth thee unto me for ever says the Prophet Osee:) and again: I
will betroth thee unto me in faith: and Isaias: The bridegroom will rejoice in
his bride, Isaiae 62, v. 5.
and thy God she speaks unto the Church) shall rejoice in thee. Christ also
by the Prophet Solomon says, Cant. 4. v. 8.
Come o my spouse from Libanus. In the new Testament also, the Church is called
the spouse of Christ. He which has the bryde, Joan. 3. v. ^9.
says S. John Baptist, is the bridegroom. And the Apostle, I have despoused
you to one man to present you a chaste Virgin unto Christ. 2. ad Cor* 11. v. 2.
Lastly, S. John Evangelist in his Revelations says, Apoc. vlt. v. 17.
the brydegrome and bryde do say, Come.

4. The second is, ad Romans 12. v. 5.
that the Church is the mystical body of Christ. We being marry (says the
Apostle) are one body in Christ: 1. ad Cor. 1^ v. 27.
and again, you are the body of Christ and members of member: 1. ad Ephesians. 1.
v. 22. and 23^*
and in another place. And he has made him (to wit Christ) head over all the
Church, which is his body.

5. The third property is, that the Church is the Kingdom of Christ. Our Lord
shall reygne over them ( says the Prophet Micheas) in the mountain of Syon
from hence now and evermore. (...) 4^ v. 7.
And the Angel as witnesses S. Luke, Luc. 1. v. 33.
speaks thus of Christ. He shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever.
Lastly Christ himself says unto his Disciples, Luc. 17. v. 21.
the Kingdom of God is within you.

6. The fourth property is, that the Church is the Inheritance of Christ: Ask
of me (says God the Father unto his Son) and I will give thee all Nations
for thine Inheritance. Psalm. 2. v. 8.
And again the Prophet David says, Psalm. 27* vel 28. v. vlt.
Save thy people o Lord* and bless thine Inheritance* And Lastly, Psalm. 32.
vel 33. v. 1^
Blessed is that Nation whose Lord is God thereof, a people whom God has
chosen for his Inheritance.

7. The fifth property is, that the Church is the City of God, and Christ.
glorious things are spoken of the City of God, Psalm. 86. vel. 87. v 3.
says the Prophet David. And again, the main stream of the river does
comfort the City of God: Psalm. 45. ve^ 46. v. 5.
and Christ himself says, A City placed upon a mountain cannot be hid.
And hence it is, that the Church is called the heavenly Jerusalem and Syon,
Matthew. 5. v. 14.
as also the Temple and house of God. You are come, says the Apostle, ad Hebr.
12 v. 22.
to mount Syon, and the City of the living God heavenly Jerusalem. 2 ad Cor.
6. v. 16.
And in another place: You are the Temple of the living God. Lastly, that thou
may know how thou ought to converse in the house of God, 1. Tim. 3. v. 15.
which is the Church of the living God.

8. But now the offices of the Church are many the which may be reduced to five
heads. ad Gal. 4. v. 26.
For the Church as witnesses the Apostle is our Mother.

9. A Mother exercises five offices toward her Children. First she conceyueth
them. Secondly she brings them forth. Thirdly she nourishes them. Fourthly
she governs them. Fifthly she defe^deth and preserves them from all dangers
till they come to the use of reason: all these things the Church performs
unto us, until we meet all with Christ the spouse of the Church, ^d Ephesians. 4.
v. 13.
and our Father, into the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God into
a perfect man into the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, as the
Apostle speaks.

10. The first office therefore of the Church is to propound unto all the word
of God, and that fully (as concerning those things which are necessary to
salvation) sincerely clearly, and without any error. For the word of God is
the incorruptible seed whereby we are conceived and borne again, as Christ and
his Apostles do testify. But the Church performs this both by word and
writings whiles she conuerteth Gentiles, Mahumets* Heretics, Marc. vlt. v. 15.
and Atheists, and Christ enjoined this office unto the Church in those words,
preach you the Gospel unto every creature.

11. The second office of the Church, is lawfully to administer the Sacraments*
For by these also we are regenerated, Ad Titu^ vlt. v. 5. and Joan. 6. v. 57.
and 58.
and nourished, strenthened, governed, and defended. This office also Christ
enjoined unto his Church when he commanded her to Baptize, Matt. vlt. v. 19.
and administer the other Sacraments. Mart. vlt. ^. 16. ^


12. The third office of the Church is to feed those who are borne to Christ
not only by the Sacraments, Luc. 22* v. 1 ^*
but also by the word of God. 1. Cor. 3. v. 2. and ad Hebr. 5. ^ 12. and 14*
Feed, says S. Peter, the flock of God which is among you. Hebr. 5. (...) 12.
and 14.
But the Church feeds the weaker and ruder sort of people with milk and not
with stronger meats, as the Apostle speaks: hence it comes to pass that
the Catholic Cathechismes are taught so much in the Church. But she nourishes
those which are stronger in faith with sol^de meats, and not only, with milk.

13. The fourth office of the Church is, Act. 20. v. 28.
to govern according to those words of S. Paul. Take heed to your selves,
and to the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule
the Church of God. Hence it ensues, that there have been so many Assemblies and
Counsels called together, that heresies might be condemned, manners reformed,
and Ecclesiastical order well established in all things: also that for this
office there are chosen Preachers* Pastors, Administrators of the Sacraments,
and all other things are ordained which do concern the right government of
the Church.

14. The fifth office of the Church is, Matthew. 10. v. 32. and 33.
to defend her children. For this cause she opposes her self against the
Adversaries of Christ. Genes. 5. v. 15.
She professes publickely her faith, she fights continually with the serpent
and his seed, Isay 54. v. vlt.
she suffers much and yet always gets the victory: No weapon, says the
Propet Isay, that is made against thee, Matthew. 16* v. 18.
shall proceed, or leuel right. And Christ says: Upon this rock I will build my
Church and the gates of Hell soal not prevail against it. And in another p^ace,
Joan. 16. v. vlt.
You shall suffer trouble and pressure in this world, but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world. By these propert^es and offices of the Church if they
be well considered, all the errors of our Adversaries may easily be confuted,
as by that which follows will manifestly appear.

CHAP. II.
That out of the true Church of Christ there is no salvation.
THE first error is of certain Sectaries of this time, who promise men
salvation out of the Church: But this error is easily refuted by the Scripture.
For that is most clear and evident which Isaias the Prophet says, speaking
unto the Church in the person or name of God: Isai^ 6^* v. 12.
That Nati^n and Kingdom says he, which has not served thee, shall perish.

2. The same also to be an error, is convinced by the properties and offices
of the Church before alleged. Ad Ephesians. 5 v. 31. 32.
For first Christ has but one spouse and acknowledges no other. They shall be
two in one flesh, but I (says the Apostle) speak in Christ and in the Church.
Cant. 6. v. 8.
So also Christ speaks of the Church, my dove, and my perfect, is one; Christ
is not an adulterer, neither does he beget any children of an adulteress. For
this cause, says S. Cyprian, the spouse of Christ cannot be an adulteress, S.
Cypr. in tract. de vnitate Eccles.
she is not corrupted, and she is chaste. And a little after, whosoever being
separated from the Church is joined to an adulteress, he is separated from the
promises of the Church Nerthe^ shall he ever attain to the rewards of Christ
who tears the Church of Christ. S. Aug. Tom. 9. de Symbol. ad Cathec. lib. 4.
cap. vlt.
He is an aliene, he is profane, he is an enemy, he cannot now have God for
his Father, who has not the Church for his Mother. These he, which last words
S. Augustine repeateth out of him.

2. Secondly, he that is without the body of Christ, cannot receive the spirit
of Christ, Ad Romans 8. v. 9. S. Aug. Tom. 9. tract. 26. in Joan.
nor be partaker of the life and merits of Christ. But he who has not the
spirit of Christ, is not his, as witnesses the Apostle. S. Augustine declares
this very well by the example of a man's body. whose members cannot live unless
they be ioyn^d to the body. Another reason also S. Augustine alleges taken
from the foresaid property of the Church. None, says he, S. Aug. Tom. 7. de
vnitat* Eccles. c. 19
obtains salvation and everlasting life but he who has Christ to be his
head* But none can have Christ to be his head but he who is in his body, which
is the Church. So says S. Augustine.

4. Thirdly the Name only of a Mother does prove this sufficiently. For none
can be conceived nor borne without a mother, and the child which is borne if it
leave to suck the mothers breasts will perish for hunger. By which argument
even our wisest Adversaries are convinced. For both Calvin and Beza do:
confess this, Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 1. and Beza. cap. 5. sua conf^ss. Artic.
1.
that even the name only of a mother does convince that which we have said to
be true; yea also the Scripture does often testify that out of the boosome of
the Church we cannot hope for the remission of our sins, nor everlasting
salvation: and that the going out of the true Church was alwaies-hatefull. And
hence it comes to pass, that in the Creed of the Apostles, first we beliue
the holy Catholic Church, and then the remission of sins, and life
everlasting, because indeed without this Church none can obtain either
remission of their sins, or life everlasting.

CHAP. III.
That the Church of Christ is to continue for ever.
THE second error of our Adversaries is, that many of them affirm, that the
Church of Christ has not continually endured, but that it sometimes failed.
This error may also be easily refuted by the foresaid propertyes and offices of
the Church. For first the Church is the spouse of Christ, of which he speaks
by the Prophet, I will betroth thee unto me for ever. Osee 2. v. 19.
Christ therefore did not betroth his Church unto him for a few years only.

2. Secondly the Church is the Body of Christ, Ad Romans 12. v. 5.
but Christ cannot be without his body, and truly it were a monstrous thing to
see a living head without a body.

3. Thirdly the Church is the Kingdom of Christ, but the Scriptures do teach
in many places, that this Kingdom of Christ shall continue for ever, as
Micheae 4. v. 7. Psalm. 88. vel 89. v. 36.
Daniel. 2. v. 44. Ierem. 33. v. 20. and 21. Luc. 1. 22. and 33. Lastly Christ
sweateth in his Holy One, that is to say, by his Holiness, that the Kingdom of
Christ shall last for ever. Wherefore they endeavor to make Christ himself
perjured, who affirm, that the Kingdom of Christ sometimes perished.

4. Fourthly the Church is the house of Christ, Matthew. 17. v. 18.
the which he built upon a rock, against which the gates of hell shall never
prevail.

5. Fifthly this same is proved by the offices of the Church, 1. ad Cor. 11. v.
26.
The Church shall show the death of our Lord until he come. God also gave some
as Apostles and Doctors, who should teach and rule the Church until we meet
all in Christ in the end of the world. When Christ also sent his Disciples to
teach all Nations, ad Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
and to administer the Sacraments he added this promise, Behold I am with you
all days, even to the consu^mation of the world. By which words as S. Hierome
well notes, he shows that they are to live always, and that he is never
departed from the faithful belieuers. Matt. vlt ^ v. vlt.


6. Lastly our Adversaries themselves being co^uinced with the truth of this
matter, Calu. lib 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 17. in fine.
do acknowledge, that the holy Scriptures do testify this in many places. For
Calvin and Beza to omit many others, do acknowledge and prove this out of the
Scriptures. Seeing that (says Beza) the Kingdom of Jesus Christ is continual,
Beza. c. 5. suae confess. art. 1.
it necessarily follows that there have always bin some to be found who did
acknowledge him for their King.

CHAP. IIII.
That this Church which has always continued, has always been visible.
THE third error of our Adversaries is, that they deny the Church of Christ to
have been always visible. For seeing that they cannot deny, but that the Church
of Christ has always continued, as we have declared in in the precedent
Chapter: and when we demand of them where their Church was for the space of a
thousand years and more, they fly unto a certain invisible Church which they
say lay hidden for many years. But this error also is easily refuted by the
soresaid properties, and offices of the true Church.

2. For first the Church is the body of Christ: 1. ad Cor. ^2. Verse. 27
but this body of Christ was visible, for the Apostle spoke unto visible men
when he said, you are the body of Christ. Moreover we are made the body of
Christ by baptism and the receiving of the Eucharist, 1. ad Cor. 10. v 17. and
1. Cor. 12. v. 13. Ad Ephesians. 4. v. 11. 12.
as witnesses the Apostle. But these Sacraments are visible. Also in this body
of Christ, there are Doctors and Pastors until the consu^matio^ of Saints,
until we meet with Christ, but such persons are visible. The building also of
the Church is visible, this consu^mation of Saints is visible, that uorke of
ministry is visible, which the Apostle says shall continue until the coming
of Christ.

3. Secondly the Church is the Kingdom of Christ, but every Kingdom
co^prehendeth in it a visible company of me^ who all acknowledge one King.
Hence it is that God describing by the Prophet Jeremy. this Kingdom of Christ,
speaks in this sort of the multitude of men which shall be in the Kingdom of
Christ. Even as (says our Lord) the stars of Heaven cannot be numbered,
Ierem. 33. v. 32.
and the sands of the sea measured, so will I multiply the seed of my servant
David, and the Leuits my servants. But such and so great a multitude of men
cannot be invisible.

4. In like manner the Prophet Isay describing the said Kingdom of Christ and
the covenant of God with it* thus writes. Isaiae 61. v. 8. and ^.
I will make a perpetual league with them, and their seed shall be known in all
Nations* and their offspring in the midst of the people; all that shall see
them shall know them, because this is the seed that God has blessed: where it
is manifestly said that all Nations, even the Infidels, as soon as they shall
behold and see the Church they shall easily know her by the benefits of God
bestowed upon her. Calvin himself acknowledges this to be spoken of the
Church, Calu. in haec verba Isayae.
and he, adds that this has not only once been fullfilled, but is daily
fulfilled.

5. Lastly if this Kingdom of Christ were sometimes invisible, God himself
(which God forbid we should say) were perjured, who^ swears that the throne
of Christ, Psalm. 88. vel 89.
that is to say, his Kingdom shall be like the sun, and as a perfect moon,
and that for ever: but the sun, and the perfect, or full moon are very
visible planets, easily to be seen of all men, and not invisible.

6. Thirdly the Church of God is that City which is situated upon a most high
Mountain, Isayae. 2. v. 2. Micheae 4. v. 1. Psalm. 47. vel 48. v. 9.
yea upon a Mountain which is placed upon the top of mou^tayns, the which
our Lord will stre^gthen for ever, whereof Christ himself speaks. Daniel. 2.
v. 35. Mat. 5. v. 14. and 15.
A City placed upon a mountain cannot be hidden: And again. You are the
light of the world, neither do they light a candle and put it under abushell,
but upon a candelsticke that it may give light unto all which are in the house.
S. Aug. Tom. 9. in 1. Epist. S. Joan. Tract. 2.
Christ therefore has made his Church not to hyde it, but that it might be
perspicuous and manifest unto all: heerupon S. Augustine. What more (says he)
shall I say, but that they are blind who do not see so great a mountain, who
shut their eyes against a candle placed upon a candlestick. S. Aug. Tom. 7. de
vnitat. Eccles. c. 16.
And in another place (says he) that those who see not the Church, had rather
as it were blindfold offend against this mountain then climb up unto it.

7. Fourthly the same is proved by the foresaid offices of the Church, for that
Church must necessarily be visible, which conceyueth and brings forth
Infidells to Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel, for neither they which
do preach are invisible but visible, and the preaching also it is visible and
not invisible. That Church also is visible which nourishes Christians with her
public exhortations, instructions, and ministration of Sacraments, and good
examples; Luc. 10. v. 16.
which explicateth and keeps the Scriptures; who governs and orescribeth
Laws and precepts, Matthew. 1^ v. 17*
whom therefore we must obey. And she is visible, unto whom according to the
commaundment of Christ, all complaints and causes are to be brought. And Lastly
she is visible, of whom in our adversities we must demand help and comfort,
Supra c. 1.
of whom in our adversities we must demand help and comfort, who publicly
confesteth Christ, who fights with the serpent, and getting the victory
triumphs against him, and moreover she exercises all those offices which are
before alleged.

8. Fifthly, if the visible Church should once perish, that article of the
Greed were false, I believe in the Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.
For that* Church which is Catholic or universal, cannot be invisible; Psalm.
88. v. 38.
that Church which is dilated or spread abroad throughout the whole world
cannot be but very visible and conspicuous, and that not in one only place, but
in many. And hence it comes to pass, that the true Church is compared to the
Sun and the Moon the which are very visible plannets, and easily to be seen
of all. Neither can there be this believed communion of Saints, unless the
said Saints mutually be manifest and visible one unto another, ^. ad Cor. v.
12. 21. and 2^.
seeing that this communication (as the Apostle says) consists in the
continual help which one member affoardeth unto another, but none can affoard
any help to that which is invisible and unknown. Moreover this communication
of offices is very sensible and visible. S. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 170. ad (...).
That also is visible which is a corporal substance and generally in many
places. Wherefore S. Augustine says; Yt is an easy matter for thee to behold
and see that City which is situated upon a mountain, of whom our Lord in the
Gospel says, that it cannot be hidden. For she is the Catholic Church,
Matthew. 5. v. 14.
whereupon she is called in Greek (...) because she is published and spread
over all the whole world, of whom it is not lawful for any to be ignorant,
and therefore according to the saying of our Lord Jesus Christ, she cannot be
hidden. Hitherto S. Augustine.

9. Sixthly, Calu. l. 4. Institut c. 1. sect. 7,
that Church is visible which contains in it as well the good as the evil,
and as well the predestinate as the reprobate, as our Adversaries themselves
acknowledge, who will have the invisible Church to consist of those only which
are predestinate. Matt. 13. v. 38.
But that the Church which contains in it as well the evil as the good, Calu.
l. 4. Instit. ^. 1. sect 13. in fine. and Beza c. 5. suae conf. Art. 7.
shall continue unto the end of the world, those words of Christ, suffer both
to grow till harvest, do evidently demo^strate unto us. Yea eue^ out
Adversaries themselves do plainly confess that the holy Scripture does
declare this by many Parables. Yt may therefore be gathered out of holy
Scriptures even by the judgment of our Adversaries, that there is not only an
invisible, but also a visible Church, to wit, wherein the good are mixed with
the bad, which shall always continue till the end of the world.

10. Seauenthly, it is all one to affirm the Church to be invisible and to
affirm that it has wholly perished, and that there is no Church at all, Supra
cap. 3.
the which as we have declared before is most absurd. For this invisible Church
of our Adversaries, can affoard no help to any, seeing that she is not known
to any but only unto God: according to that saying of the Apostle, God knows
who are his. ^. ad Tim. ^. v. 29.
For our Adversaries will have the predestinate only to belong unto this their
invisible Church, as we have now declared, who are only known unto God, and
unknown unto all others.

11. Hither also it belongs, that those could not be Saints and predestined
who have been for these many ages past in that invisible Church of our
Adversaries. For these (if peradventure there were any) neither durst publicly
profess Christ, nor preach openly the Gospel, but terrified with humane
fear, have done all things by dissimulation and hypocrisy, ^east they might
be bewrayed and made known unto others (for otherwise they should have been
visible and not invisible.) Luc. 9. v. 26.
But Christ says, that he, that shall be ashamed of me, and that which I
teach, him the son of man will be ashamed of when he shall come in his Majesty.

12. Lastly our Adversaries being urged with so many and invincible reasons,
see well enough, especially the wiser sort of them, how absurd the doctrine of
their invisible Church is. And therefore many of them now adays acknowledge the
Church of Christ to have been always visible: and moreover that this visible
Church remained still in the Popedom, as they speak. For they cannot assign
any other visible and ever continuing Church, besides that of Rome, but least
they be convinced of falsehood by the authority of this visible Church, they
seek out some other evasion, for they say this visible Church may, yea has
often erred in matters of faith. Cap. 7. seq.
The which error we will confute a little after, as soon as we have answered
the arguments, objected by our Adversaries against this Chapter.

CHAP. V.
The arguments against the visible Church are confuted.
MANY of our Adversaries reasons do not so much prove that the visible Church
has perished and decayed, Infra hac ea^em controu. c. 7.
as that it has erred in faith; the which therefore shall be confuted afterward
when we declare that the Church cannot err in matters of faith. Tom. 2. Epist.
48. and Tom. 7. de unit. Eccles. c. 1,. and ad Donat. ^ost ^ol. c. 20. in fine.
3. Reg. 19. v. 10.
The rest of their arguments are almost all one with the old reasons of the
Donatists. For they in times past affirmed that the Church of Christ perished
throughout the whole world, but only in Africa. Unto whom S. Augustine
answers very well in many places. But we will only here briefly examine the
more probable arguments, and now a days more used by our Adversaries.

2. The first argument is taken out of those words of the Prophet Elias, (...).
in praf^t suarum ^nstit. Beza c. 5. (...) ^onfes. Art. 9.
I am left alone, and they seek my life. I answer that this argument is of no
moment, albeit our Adversaries Calvin and Beza do often use it. For Elias does
not speak of the whole Church, but only of the Kingdom of Israel, 3. Reg.
19. v. 18.
wherein the wicked King Achab then reigned, albeit in it also there were
seven thousand men who did not adore Baal, and who made a visible Church.
Moreover at that very time Iosaphat a very pious and goodly King reigned, and
there was also the temple of God, and Priests, and Sacrifices, as also public,
solemn, and daily service of God: yea out of the second book of Paralippomeno^
we gather that King Iosaphat labored very much to conserve and increase the
honor and worship of God: 2 Paral. 19. v. 4. and seq.
neither was the number of them little, who professed publicly the true
Religion. For in the same book are accounted and numbered more then eleauen
hundred thousand strong souldiars, besides women and others less fit for war;
2. Paral. 17. v. 14. and seq.
by which it appears that the Church of God was not invisible in Iosaphats
Kingdom, but rather very visible and co^spicuous. But Elias only complained of
the Kingdom of Israel: 3. Reg. 19. v. 10. and 14
they, to wit, the children of Israel, and not the children of Judah, have
forsaken thy Covenant. Neither do we deny but that in some one or other
Kingdom there might sometimes peradventure have by^ few or no Christians,
whils in far more places the Church of God was very manifest and visible. But
that the Church of Christ was no where to be found in the whole world, is most
absurd and expressly against the holy Scriptures.

3. The second argument is taken out of many places of Isay and Jeremy, wherein
those Prophets complain, that all the Jews did transgress the Covenant made
with God. Moreover they object the small number of those who were sometimes in
the ancient Church before Christ's time, or even in Christ's time before the
Gospel was promulgated, and here they make many disgressions to Noe and Adam
himself. The very same argument the Donatists also used, as the words of
Bishop Petilian ^estify related by S. Augustine. Vid^ S. August. Tom. 7. de
vnitate Eccles. c. 13.
But S. Augustine answers very well to those general complaints of the
Prophets, that the holy Scripture has a peculiar phrase or manner of speaking,
who so reprehendeth the evil as though every one of that company of people
were wicked men, S. Aug. Tom. 7. in lib. ad Donat. post collat. c. 20. in fine.
and so commends the good, as if they were all such: and this S. Augustine
proves in the same chapter out of diverse places of the holy Scripture.

4. Our Adversaries also who would seem skillfull and cunning in the Hebrew
and Greek language, should call to mind that as well the general particle
amongst the Hebrews called col, De vo^^ col, vid^ Galat. l. 5. c. 4*
as that other which answers unto it in the Greek (...), or (...), is often
used in holy Scripture, not generally for every thing without any exception,
Joan Fost. Luth. and Io. Mer. calm. in radice. Calu. in c. 2. ad Philip v. 12.
and Beza ibid. and in 1.
but for that which commonly is wont to be done; as also, non prosingulis
generum, sedpro generibus singulorum, the which not only the Hebrew Lexicons
written by our Adversaries themselves do plainly demo^strat, but also their
chief and principal ringleaders Calvin and Beza. The later whereof adds also
that we have observed, Tim. 2. v. 1. edit. Art. 1565. v. sed. in edit. an.
1598. v. 4. ibid.
that a general particle is almost in every leaf of holy Scripture used
indefinitely. It is therefore most true which S. Augustine says, that this word
(all) in these kind of places is taken for many, or for that which was common
every where, as Calvin and Beza say: Isaiae 1. v. ^. Ozeae 1. v. 1. Amos. 1. v.
1. Mich^. 1. v. 1.
for otherwise it is well enough known that in the time of the Prophet Isay
there were some holy Kings, as Ozias, and Ezechias in Jury, as also those
Prophets Ozeas, Amos, and Micheas: moreover in the time of Jeremy there lived
the good King Josias, Ieremiae 1. v. 1. Ezechiel. 1. v. 2. Daniel. 1. v. 2.
Sophon. 1. v. 1.
and the good Prophets Ezechiel, Daniel, and Sophonias. Therefore those things
which Isay and Hieremy do say, cannot be understood of all universally.

5. The other places which our Adversaries allege, S. August. Tom. 2. Epist
48. ad Vincentium.
do prove that there are at sometimes but a few in the Church, but, they do not
prove that the said Church was invisible. Yea (as S. Augustine disputing
against the Donatists well observes) when the Church of God is most vexed with
the persecutions of the wicked, and seems to be almost oppressed therewith,
then is she most divine in such her members as are renewed for courage and
constancy: for faith and obedience toward God was more eminent in one Noe or
Abraham, then in ten thousand others.

6. Lastly this our disputation is not properly of the ancient Church which
was before Christ's time, Mat. 16. v. 18.
but of that which ensued the promulgation of the Gospel till this our present
age, Eusebius in cronic. Orofius in suahistoria Geneb. in sua conogr Sand. de
visib. Monarch. l. 7. in princip. Coccius Tom. 1. lib. 8. Art. 2.
whereof Christ says, Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. For albeit the Church has been always
visible even from the beginning of the world till the coming of Christ, as
Paulus, Orosius, and Eusebius have, out of the holy Scriptures in every age,
declared. In this our age also Genebrard, Sanders, and Coccius have briefly
demonstrated the same. Yet notwithstanding before the coming of Christ the
whole Church of God was in a manner concluded into greater straits of persons
and place, Psalm. 75. v. 2. and Psalm. 147. v. vlt.
according to those words of the Prophet David, God was known in Jury, and
again, He has not done thus to every Nation, and he has not manifested, or
made known his judgment unto them. But amongst the Gentiles there were but a
few who acnowledged and rightly worshipped God. Wherefore the true Church was
often reduced unto a few persons in number, S. August. Tom. 2. Epist. 48. ad
Vince^t.
but notwithstanding ever visible and those very eminent in sanctity and
holiness, as is declared by S. Augustins words already alleged. But the state
and condition of the Church of Christ is far different after the promulgatio^
of the Gospel from that other: Genes. 22. v. 18.
for now that blessed seed of Abraham is come, wherein all the Nations of the
earth were to be Blessed. Now those prophecies of Christ's inheritance and
Kingdoms are fullfilled. Psalm. 2. v. 8.
Ask of me thee and I will give, all Nations for thy inheritance, Psalm. 71. v.
8.
and the bounds of the whole earth for thy possession. Also, He shall govern
and reign from sea to sea, and from the river to the end of the whole world.
And again, All the Kings of the earth shall adore him, and all Nations shall
serve him. Moreover, Ibid. v. 11. Isay. 52. v. 10.
our Lord has prepared his holy arm in the eyes of all Nations, and all the
limits of the earth shall see the salvation of our Lord and God. When S.
Angustine had alleged this place among others against the Donatists. admiring
their great madness and ignorance who affirm the Church to be either
invisible or to ly lurking in some od place only, brake forth into these most
true words worthy of so great a Doctor, who is says he, S. August. Tom. 7. de
unite Eccles. c. 7.
so deaf, who is so mad, and who is foolish to contradict these so clear and
evident testimonies, but he which knows not what he speaks? And truly that
the Church of God was far more known and spread over the whole world after
the promulgation of the Gospel even in the Apostles time then it ever was in
the time of the law, those words of the Apostle do sufficiently declare. But
Isay, have they not heard? And certes into all earth has the sound of them
gone forth, and unto the ends of the whole world the words of them. And again
speaking unto the Roman Church he says, Ad Romans 10. v. 18.
I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your
faith is renewed in the whole world.

7. Moreover from the Apostles time till this our present age, Ad Romans 1. v. 8.
the Church of Christ has been not only visible but also spread abroad, known
and most famous throughout diverse Kingdoms of the world, as many
historiographers, as well Ecclesiastical as profane do testify, and the
worthy Cardinal Caesar Boronius has evidently declared, and that not only
throughout all ages, S. August. Tom. 7, de unit. Eccles. cap. 7.
but also every year, in so much that those who do not consent and agree
heereunto, are not only to be accounted Insidels, but as S. Augustine speaks
very fitly and truly, men out of their wits.

CHAP. VI.
Other arguments of our Adversaries against the visible Church are confuted.
THE third argument of our Adversaries whereby they impugn the visible Church,
is this: the holy Scripture compares the Church to the moon, but the moon
does often times not appear, as it happens in the new moon, and in the
Ecclips. I answer that we must not seek for a similitude or likeness in all
thinge^ betwixt the Church and the moon, for otherwise the Church of Christ
should neither see, nor understand, nor believe, and it should be altogether
without life as the moon is. But in this matter that similitude or liknesse
betwixt the Church and the moon, is only to be sought out, in which the
Scripture compares the Church to the moon; but the Scripture does not compare
the Church to the moon as she is a mutable planet, but as she is beautiful in
her self. Cant. ^. v. 9.
Beautiful (says Solomon) as the moon, but in mutability the Scripture
compares a soole to the moon, but not the Church. Eccles. 27. v. 12.
A fool (says the Wisemen) is changed as the moon. Moreover the Church of
Christ is not compared to every moon, Isaiae 60. v. 20.
but only to the moon, when she is in her fullness and perfection, yea to the
moon which is never diminished nor fails: hence are those words of the
Prophet Isar, Calu. in eadem verba.
which Calvin acknowledges are to be understood of the Church, Thy sun shall
never more be set, and thy moon shall not be diminished (or as Calvin
translateth it) shall not be hidden. Lastly S. John says, that the moon is
under the feet of the Church, that thereby we may understand that the Church of
Christ by the virtue of the sun (to wit Christ himself, where withal she is
wholly invested and adorned) is free from all mutability in matters of faith.
Apoe. 12. v. 1.


2. The fourth argument. Those things which we believe by faith are invisible,
but by faith we believe there is a Catholic Church, as appears by the
Apostles Creed, therefore the Catholic Church is invisible and not visible. I
answer that this is a weak argument, Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 1. sect. 2. in
principio.
albeit Calvin also uses it. For if it were not it would prove that the holy
Scripture were also invisible, because we believe also the holy Scripture by
faith, yea it would also prove even our Adversaries Church to be as yet
invisible, for they as yet believe their Church by faith, and yet they confess
that their Church is now visible. And truly if their Church had remained still
invisible, they had never caused so many tumults in the Christian
Commonwealth. But certainly even as in the holy Scriptures we see one thing
and believe another, we see the letters and characters, the which the Infidels
also see, but we believe that the Scripture is most true in all things, the
which they do not believe: so we se that the Church of Christ is extant, the
which also the Infidels do see; for Turks and Jews do very well know that
there is a Pope, and that there are Bishops, Princes, and Christian Nations,
but we believe that this Church which we see is an holy Church, is governed and
directed by the holy Ghost, and that she cannot err in matters of faith, all
which the Infidels do not believe.

3. The fifth argument. None is in the Church but by faith, but faith is
invisible, therefore the Church also invisible. I answer that this is a very
weak consequence, for otherwise we might reason thus; None is a man but by a
reasonable soul, but the soul of man endued with the use of reason, is
invisible, therefore the whole man also is invisible. Also, no Scripture is to
be accounted holy but by the authority of God, but this authority is invisible,
therefore the Scripture also is invisible. For it is not necessary that a
thing may be called visible that the chief part or reason thereof be visible
but it suffices if any part thereof be visible, as manifestly appears in all
visible, substances, for their chief parts, to wit, their substantial matter
and form are things invisible.

4. Secondly I answer that the faith whereby a man is made a member of the
visible Church is not only an interior faith which is not to be seen, but
that which is evidently seen and declared by exterior signs; as for example
by confessing publicly the said faith, by receiving the Sacraments, and such
other exterior acts. The which is so true, that this exterior profession of
our faith only, without the interior faith, suffices that a man become a
member of the visible Church, Bell. l. 3. d^ militante Eccles. c. 10.
as Bellarmine well proves: seeing that otherwise none could be certain of his
Prelate or Pastor, because none can see the faith or mind of another.

5. Hence also it is, that not only the predestinate and just men are members
of the visible Church, but also such as be hypocrit^es and wicked men who
profess their faith, according to those words of Christ: Every branch in me,
not bearing fruit, he will take it away, And, if any abide not in me, he shal^e
cast forth: Joan. 15. v. 2.
by which words Christ shows that they also who do not remain in him, Ibid.
v. 6^
that is to say, those which are not predestinate, and those which do not bring
forth any fruit, that is to say, bad Christians, are in him, that is to say, in
his visible body which is the Church, the which also almost all our Adversaries
confess, as we have said before, and Bellarmine proves more at large.

6. The sixth argument our Adversaries deduce out of the Apocalypse, Apoc. 12. v.
6. and 14*
wherein it is said, that a woman invested with the sun which signifies the
true Church, fled into the desert, and remained there for the space of 1260.
days, that is to say, as our Adversaries interpret it, a thousand two hundred
and sixty years. Out of which they infer, that the Church remained invisible
as it were in the desert these thousand two hundred and sixty years last past.
I answer, that this is a vicious argument for many reasons. For first, it is
very absurd, to think that the Church of Christ did ly hidden and invisible
these thousand two hundred sixty years past. For thereupon it would ensue that
the Church of Christ was invisible then when it most flourished, and was spread
abroad over the whole world: as for example in the times of S. Augustine,
Ambrose, Hilary, Athanasius, Hierome, Chrysostom, Cyril etc. Yea in the time
also of all the ancient Councels, Confess. Rupellana Art. 6.
the which our Adversaries themselves do admit in their confession of faith.
For all these Fathers and ancient Counsels, have been within the space of the
forsaid thousand two hundred and sixty years, the which our Adversaries do
account from Pope Siluester till Luthers time, wherefore this place of the
Apocalypse is not to be understood of years, but literally of days only.

7. Moreover it is not certain that by this word (desert) is understood any
solitary place, or such as is deprived of all the society or comfort of men.
Primasius in cap. 12. Apocal.
For Primasius S. Augustines scholar says, that by the foresaid word is
signified the whole world, the which also that desert signified through the
which the Children of Israel passed before they came to the land of Promise:
Nu^^r. 14. v. 34.
Even as by the said land of Promise was also signified the everlasting life.
Some others will have the foresaid word (desert) to signify a departure or
forsaking of all sins and vices, and all other pleasures of this world,
according to that saying of the Prophet Osee. I will carry and lead her into
the desert, Osee. v. 14.
and I ^ill speak unto her heart. And that of David, Behold flying away,
Psalm, 1^ v. 8.
I went far off, and I remained in the desert.

8. Lastly albeit we should grant that this desert were some wyld or forsaken
place, yet nevertheless it could not be gathered thereby, that the Church of
Christ either was, or ever shall be invisible. For neither this woman which fled
into the wilderness, signifies the whole Church of Christ, but some one
famous Church the which Antichrist shall persecute most of all, because it will
strongly oppose it self against his impiety and wickedness. And in the end of
the forsaid vision S. John plainly affirms, Apoc. 12. v. 17.
that the Dragon after the delivery of that woman shall make war against the
rest of her seed who keep the commandme^ts of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ: therefore besides that woman there willbe some out of the desert
who will publicly profess the true faith of Christ, against whom for that
cause the Dragon will fight.

9. But that we may now conclude this controversy of the visible Church, seeing
that Christ our Lord came into this world that he might make open and known
the way to eternal sauation not to one Nation or age only, but inded to the
whole world and all posterity, it is a very absurd thing to think that this
one only way to eternal salvation which is the true Church of Christ, remained
hidden and unknown to all Nations for so many ages past.

CHAP. VII.
That this visible true Church of Christ cannot err in matters of faith.
NOTHING can be said more absurdly, the^ that the true Church of Christ can
err in matters of faith, and yet there is nothing which the Sectaries of this
time do hold and defend with greater pertinancy, not without just cause, for
they see very well that it cannot be denied, but that the true Church of Christ
has for these many years past remained still among Catholics only visible,
as afterward we shall more clearly declare: but if they should also grant that
this visible Church cannot err, they should ouerthow themselves by their own
confession, Wherefore to the end they may still have some corner or hole to
slip out at, they affirm, that the true Church of Christ both has erred, and
still does err in points of faith. Then the which nothig certainly is more
absurd, especially seeing that they affirm that it has erred not in things of
small moment, but in the principal and chiefest points of faith, which are
plainly necessary to eternal salvation; yea also that it has fallen into
manifest Idolatry. Moreover, that it has not only failed and staggered in
faith, and has publicly taught many errors against faith, but has also
compelled and forced by threats and torments all to Idolatry. And lastly that
it has done thus, not only for the space of one year, but for a thousand or
at least 900. years. All which how absurd they are, we will now declare.

2. But to the end that all which we are to say hereafter of this matter may be
the better understood, we must note here that when we affirm that the Church
cannot err in faith, that by this word (faith) we understand not only that
invisible faith which is in our mind, but also visible, that is to say, the
public doctrine of the whole Church, which is proposed or set down to be
believed of all. Wherefore when we affirm, that the Church cannot err in
matters of faith, we affirm also, that the doctrine or points of faith, the
which the Church of God sets down as the most certain and undoubted word
of God, cannot be false, but the very word of God it self, which I will
clearly declare by these arguments.

3. The first argument is deduced out of all those properties and offices of
the true Church before alleged out of Scripture. Supra (...) ipsa Controuers.
c. 1.
For the true faith being once taken away, all the foresaid properties of the
Church must needs perish, and all her offices must cease. For the Church ca^
neither be the spouse of Christ, nor the body, nor the Kingdom, nor the
inheritance, nor the temple of Christ without faith, but neither can the Church
without faith and the true doctrine thereof, either conceive, bring forth,
nourish, govern, or defend Christ^es flock. And in this manner the church of
Christ for so many ages had lost all her properties, Supra eado^ c. 1. huius
Controu.
and had intermitted all her proper offices, contrary to so many and so clear
promises of holy wit^ before alleged.

4. The second argument is deduced out of most clear testimonies of holy
Scripture, which teach, that the Church cannot err in faith. For first Christ
himself affirms, Matthew. 16. v. 18.
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church. But if the
Church could err in faith, the gates of hell for so many ages past had
prevailed against her.

5. Moreover God speaks thus by his Prophet Isay of the Covenant of the
Isaiae 59. v. vlt.
new Testament. This is my league with them says our Lord, my spirit which is
in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of the seeds
seed, says our Lord, from hence forth even to the worlds end. But in our
A^^^rsaries opinion the words which God has put into the mouth of the Church,
had departed many ages out of her mouth. 1. ad Tim. 3. v. 9.


6. Lastly the Apostle affirms, that the Church is the Pillar and stability
of truth. But if the Church could err in faith, and teach publicly against
the word of God, it should be the Pillar rather of falsehood then of truth. Some
of our Adversaries do a^swere unto this place, that the Church is called indeed
the Pillar of truth, because it does not err when it follows, and is
agreeable unto the word of God, yet nevertheless it erreth when it disagreeth
from the word of God. But this is a very frivolous answer. For according unto
this interpretation* every Church of Heretics, of Jews, Turks, yea of the
Devils themselves should be the Pillar of truth. For none of these erreth, when
it is agreeable to the word of God. But a Pillar is that which necessarily and
always vpholdeth that which it strenghtneth, and whose pillar it is: wherefore
the Church should not be the Pillar of truth, unless it always stick and be
joined with the truth and vphould it. Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 2. sect. 1. in fine.
Calvin therefore convinced by the euidency of the truth writes, that if true
Church be the Pillar of truth, it is most certain that the Kingdom where lies
and falsehood reygneth, cannot be the true Church. Thus Calvin.

7. The third argument is deduced out of diverse Absurdities which ensue out of
the doctrine of our Adversaries. The first adsurdity is, that the Apostles
Creed were false wherein we believe the holy Catholic Church. For that Church
cannot be holy which wants the true faith, which teaches falsities and
wickedness, which forces all men to Idolatry.

8. The second absurdity is, that Christ himself and the holy Ghost should
err and teach things both false and wicked. For the doctrine of the Church is
not so much the doctrine of the Church as it is of Christ and of the holy
Ghost, Luc. 10. v. 16.
Who hears, you (says Christ) hears me: Joan 14. v. 26.
and in another place; Act. 15. v. 28.
The Paraclete the holy Ghost whom my Father will send you in my name, he will
teach you all things. And the Apostles said, It seems good to the holy
Ghost, and to us. Lastly God himself by his Prophet speaking unto the Church
affirms, that his holy Spirit is in the Church, and that he has put his
words into the mouth of the Church, which shall never be taken out of her
mouth, from henceforth till the end of the world. Wherefore if the Church could
err in the doctrine of faith, Christ also, the holy Ghost, and God himself
should err.

9. The third absurdity is, that a building could consist and stand without a
foundation. For the says of Christ is the foundation of the Church, if yet,
says the Apostle, ad Collos. 1. v. 2^.
you continue in the says grounded and stable. And in another place he
teaches, that the Church is grounded upon the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets: ad Ephesians. 2. v. 20.
but the foundation being taken away, the building must needs fall. This
absurdity is so manifest, that it forced Calvin to confess this very truth
which now we teach to be evidently convinced out of S. Paul's words. Calu. l. 4.
Instit. c 2. sect. 1.
If, says he, the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets be the foundation of
the Church, take away that doctrine, and how can the building stand? Thus
Calvin.

10. The fourth absurdity is, that the true Church should consist and be
without her prop^r and essential form, no otherwise then if one should say,
that a true and living man might consist and be without his soul. For the true
faith and the true preaching thereof, are as it were the essential forms of
the Church. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 2. sect 11.
Calvin also acknowledges this absurdity when he writes, that the faith of
the Church being taken away, there must needs follow the utter overthrow of
religion, even as the life of man is overthrown and taken away, if he be
stabbed with a dagger, or deadly wounded at the heart.

11. The fourth argument is deduced out of the manifest contradictions which
follow of the contrary doctrine. For they who co^te^d that the true church of
Christ does err in faith, do not indeed know what they say: for that is the
only true Church of Christ which retayneth and keeps still the name, and the
sincere faith of Christ; but that is the fal^e Church of Christ which only
professes the name of Christ but erreth in faith. Wherefore to say that the
Church of Christ erreth in faith, is all one, as to say, that the true Church
is not the true Church, but the false, which implies a contradiction.

12. The fifth argument is deduced out of those things which our Adversaries do
grant unto us. Infra. ^. 18. huius Controu.
For the common doctrine of our Adversaries is, as we will show hereafter, that
the sincere preaching of the word of God, and lawful administration of
Sacraments, are the marks and signs of the true Church, without which it
cannot consist: therefore it necessarily follows, that they must also admit
that the true Church cannot err in faith, and in the true preaching of the
word of God. For that Church cannot sincerely preach the word of God who foully
erreth in points of faith, and in the true preaching thereof. Calu. l. 4. Inst.
cap. 2. sect. 1. and cap. 8. sect. 12. and 13.
Calvin also out of diverse places of Scripture does prove that it is a false
Church and not a true which erreth in the principal points of faith, and ^he
acknowledges, that the true Church cannot err therein, Beza in l. de Ec^les.
notis. volum. 3. Tract. Theolog.
they being necessary to salvation. Beza in like manner writes, that the true
Church cannot err in the chief points of faith, albeit he says that it
erreth in lesser matters, the which distinction of points of faith he has
taken out of Calvin. The Church therefore cannot err at the least in chief
points of faith, Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 1. sect. 12.
eue^ in our Adversaries judgments.

13. Our Adversaries heap together a great many of arguments, but they are
such as may easily be answered. For where as they know that their arguments are
but weak and almost nothing wor^h* they endeavor by the multitude thereof to
oppress the truth, or at the least to obscure and ^ide it. Many of them when
they manifestly see, that it is impossible that the true Church can consist or
be without faith, they craftily feygne that the Controversy betwixt us is not
of this matter, Calu. l. 4. Inst. cap. 2. sect. 1.
but of some other far different, that is to say, of that whereof none ever
doubts: so deals Calvin with us. For when he had confessed that to be the
false Church and not the true which erreth in principal points of faith, and
consequently that the true Church cannot err herein, as out of his own words
we have already declared, at the last he feigneth that the controversy in this
matter is not whether the Church can err or no, but whether she may err, if
she take not for her companion the word of God; Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 8. sect.
13. and 15.
and that we affirm, that whatsoever she shall decree either without or besides
the word of God, that the same is to be accounted as a most certain oracle of
God. But that he and his affirm, that therefore the Church cannot err because
it permits it self to be directed and governed by the said word of God, and
because it teaches nothing but out of the word of God. But this is a mere
slander. F^or there can no Catholic be found, who does not acknowledge that
the Church permits it self to be directed in all things by the word of God,
seeing that the sole word of God is the object of ^aith, Supra Controu. 1. c. 2.
as we have said before: wherefore the true Church proposes nothing else unto us
to be belie^ued with a Catholic faith, but the most sincere and true word of
God. But in this matter only is the controversy betwixt us and our Adversaries,
that they acknowledge only the written word of the holy Scripture to be the true
word of God: but we not only acknowledge the written word, Supra Controu. 1. c.
25. and sequent.
but also that which was preached and delivered unto us by Christ and his
Apostles: Whereof we have said enough in the precedent disputation.

14. Some others by frivolous distinctions endeavor to hyde this their error,
and to obscure and darken most clear and perspicuous matters: whereas
notwithstanding in very truth they can say nothing else but that which we have
already taught. For they invent and imagine a twofold Church, Philip. de Mornay
Tract. de Eccles. ^^p. 2.
the one pure, the other impure, wherein they place even Heretics themselves:
this which is impure, say they, erreth in faith, but not that which is pure.
But we acknowledge only one holy and Catholic Church of Christ with the Creed
of the Apostles, and that of the Council of Nice, and we willingly yield unto
them their impure Church, wherein the Heretics are. For none doubts but that
such a Church may err. But as this is a false and not the true Church of
Christ; so of it, is not this present Controversy, but only of the true and
pure Church of Christ.

15. Others distinguish the Church into visible and invisible, and they say,
that the invisible Church cannot err, but the visible may err. Supra h^^ i^sa
Cont. cap. 4.
But we have now already declared, that the true Church of Christ must needs
be visible. Wherefore this distinction is now sufficiently refuted. And truly it
imports but a little whether that their invisible Church can err or not
err, seeing that it cannot be seen or known of any, and consequently cannot
be profitable unto any.

16. There are also some of the later Sectaries who distinguish, and divide the
Church, Iunius (...) Dell^m. Contr 1. l. 4. c. 10. not^ 8.
into the Church of the Saints which are in Heaven, and into that which
remains fighting here upon earth. And they say, that the Church triumpha^t
of Saints cannot err in faith, or in the doctrine of faith: but the Church
militant may err. But this is a ridiculous distinction. Ad Habr. 21. v. 1.
First because the Saints have not faith but a clear vision of God, for as the
Apostle witnesses, Faith concerns things which do not appear: wherefore if
at any time faith perished upon earth, without al doubt it could not be ^ound
in heaven, neither must we expect the doctrine of faith from heaven, as the
Anabaptists do who seek for revelations from heauen^, but we must look to
receive it from the Church militant upon earth. Supra c. 1. bu^us controuersiae.
Moreover the properties and offices of the Church of Christ before alleged
out of holy Scripture do not agree, as is manifest, to the Church triumphant of
Saints, but to the Church milita^t upon earth. For neither is that Church of
the Saints betrothed unto Christ by faith, neither are the Saints those who
preach unto us the word of God, who administer the Sacraments unto us, and who
execute the other offices of the Church, but men living upon earth, wherefore
they run in vain to this heavenly Church whereof we do not here dispute.

17. Moreover that is also a very weak reason, Iunius ibid. nota ^.
whereby they think that they convince, that the Church militant upon earth may
err. This Church (says he) militant upon earth, is imperfect, and therefore
the may err even in explicating the doctrine of faith, 1. ad Corinth. 13.
pertotum caput.
for otherwise a perfect effect might proceed from an imperfect cause. So he.
As though forsooth, there could be no other imperfection in the Church besid^
infidelity or error in explicating the doctrine of faith, or as though the
whole perfection of the Church consisted in faith only, and in the doctrine
thereof, and not also in charity and other gifts of God, as the Apostle
declares at large. Or lastly, as though this perfection of the Church which
consists in a right faith, and a good explication of the doctrine thereof,
could proceed from the militant Church only, and not rather from a most
perfect cause, to wit, Ad Rom* 8. v. 2^.
from the holy Ghost who continually governs the Church, and as the Apostle
says, helps her infirmity and imperfection.

18. Lastly when our Adversaries can by no places of Scripture nor other
reasons prove, Ita Philip? Morn.
that the Church has erred they go about to persuade it by many examples.
Tract. de. Eccles. cap. 6.
And here they begin a discourse from our first Father Adam till these our
days. Genes. 3. v. ^.
For first they say, that Adam ^ost his faith, and so like wife his wife Eve,
when they both eat of the forbidden fruit, and consequently the whole Church
then erred in faith. Then they run through all the old testament till Christ's
time, and heap together many places which say, that those who lived in the
time of the Natural and Mosaycall Laws, forsook God. Lastly out of some
Historiographers who have written since Christ's time, they sc^^pe together all
such testimonies as seem to serve to this purpose in any sort.

19. But they labor in vain. For if these kinds of arguments were good they
would also prove that the Church it self also wholly perished; and was not to
be found in any place, as in times past the Donatists contended, the which even
our Adversaries themselves acknowledge to by very absurd, and against the holy
Scriptures as has been declared before. For if all have lost their faith,
then indeed the true* Church could no longer be, which without faith cannot
consist: and thus the whole Church had perished.

20. But that which they affirm of Ada^ and Eve, to wit, that they lost their
faith by sinning, is of no moment at all. For to omit that they do not so much
prove by that argument that they lost their faith, then that after their sin
there remained neither any faith, nor Church in the world, it is truly manifest
enough that this belongs nothing to this disputation we now handle. For
neither do we here disput of the Church of Angels, nor of that which was in
Paradise before the fall of our first parents: Genes. ^. ^. 15.
but of that only which ensued that promise made unto all mankind after the
sin of Adam* wherein God foretold that there should be perpetual enmity
betwixt the woman and the serpent, that is to say, betwixt the Church of Christ
and Satan. And wherein also God foretold, that the Church should always have
the victory over Satan, Supra. co^tro. 1. cap. 16, 17. and 18.
as we have declared more at larg before. Wherefore our Adversaries must needs
show this promise to be frustrate, if they desire to conclude any thing against
us.

21. But those examples which they allege out of the old Testament are the
very arguments of the Donatists and other ancient Heretics, who by them went
about to prove, that the true Church wholly decayed and perished, whereunto we
have also sufficiently answered out of S. Augustine. Supra cap. 5. in solut. 2.
argument.


22. And lastly those things which they have taken out of those Authors who
wrote after Christ's time, are either corrupted by our Adversaries, or taken out
of apochriphall Authors, Baron. in 12. Tom. Annal.
and such as are not worthy of credit: as the worthy Cardinal Baronius
declares manifestly in every age, in his Ecclesiastical histories: and the
same has Bellarmine done before him more briefly, (...). l. 3. de Eccles.
militante.
unto whom we refer the Reader, because they do not appertain to this present
question, but rather unto that which is of the continual duration of the
Church, the which now almost every one does acknowledge, Supra c. 3. and 4.
(...) Contr.
and which we have sufficiently declared before: wherefore these arguments are
of so small worth, that they need no longer a confutation.

CHAP. VIII.
That there is no lawful calling of Preachers, or Pastors of the Church, but
by the visible Church.
ONE of the offices of the true Church is to appoint lawful preachers of the
Gospel and true administers of the Sacraments. But because there is no small
Controversy now a days concerning this office, we will briefly dispatch it.
But to the end that which is in Controversy may the better be understood, here
are three things to be determined. First, that the calling of God is
necessarily required, to the end one may become a lawful preacher, or
administer the Sacraments. Ad Romans 10. v. 15. Ad Hebr. 3. v. 4. and 5.
For those words of the Apostle are very clear and manifest. How shall they
preach, unless they be sent? And again. Neither does any man take the honor
to himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron. So Christ also did not
glorify himself, that he might be made a high Priest but he that spoke to him,
Psalm. 2. v. 7.
My son art thou etc. Wherefore he who without this lawful calling and
mission dares presume to intrude himself to meddle with these divine offices,
prefers himself before Christ our Lord. For Christ came not to these
offices, but called and sent by his eternal Father. Lastly if in humane and
wordly matters none dare meddle with the affairs or busynes of a Prince
without his license and consent, much less must any deal with these
supernatural and divine offices, unless he be called and sent for that
purpose by God himself.

2. The second is, that there are two kinds of callings by God, the one
extraordinary, the other ordinary. The extraordinary calling is when God
immediately by himself calls any, and in this manner God called Moses, and
the other Prophets, and Christ called his Apostles. This is called
extraordinary, because it seldom happens. It is termed also an immediate
vocation, because it is done immediately by God himself. The ordinary vocation
is that which continues always in the Church and is done immediately by the
Pastors of the Church, and of God only by their means. Hereupon also this is
called a mediate vocation, to wit in respect of God. This division is taken out
of S. Paul, who writes himself to be an Apostle, not of men, neither by man,
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. ad Gal. 1. v. 1.
For by these words he shows that some which are in the Church are called to
the divine offices by me^, and some by God himself.

3. The third is, that those who are taken to Ecclesiastical offices by the
ordinary vocation they receive their calling and authority from the Church. For
this ordinary vocation is not done but by the ministers of the Church. But the
whole Controversy is of the extraordinary vocation. For those who in this age
have brought in new opinions, seeing themselves destitute of the ordinary
vocation, they fly unto the extraordinary, the which, say they, must not be
subject to the censure, and approbation of the Church, whereof they know
themselves to be destitute. But we of the other side affirm, that the
extraordinary vocation also must necessarily be confirmed and approved by such
as have ordinary vocation in the Church of God. And we know very well, that our
Adversaries have not truly this extraordinary vocation, as afterward we will
declare more at large. But suppose we grant them to have this extraordinary
calling, nevertheless by these ensuing arguments we will manifestly prove,
that it must needs be confirmed and approved by those who have their ordinary
vocation in the Church of God.

4. The first argument. Ad Galat. ^. v. 1.
S. Paul was immediately and extraordinarily called by God, as he writes
himself, and yet he was sent to Anainas who had the ordinary vocation, Act. 9.
v. 7.
that by him he might be instructed and baptized. And afterward together with
S. Barnabas he was ordained by the imposition of hands by those who were the
ordinary Pastors of the Church. Act. 13. v. ^.
Lastly he writes, that according to the revelation which he had, v. 1. and 2.
he went to Jerusalem, and conferred the Gospel which he preached, with the
visible Church and ordinary Pastors of the same, least he might seem to have
run, or labored in vain: they therefore who refuse the approbation of the
visible Church, albeit they be never so extraordinarily called thereunto, they
do but labor in vain.

5. The second argument* We m^st not easily believe every one who affirms
himself to be extraordinarily sent by God, v. Joan. 4. ^. 1.
according to that admonition of S. John. Believe not every spirit, but prove
the spirits whether they be of God* because many false Prophets are gone out
into the world. But this proof or trial cannot be better done then by Christ's
Church, which, is as S. Paul writes, ^. ad Tim. 3. v. 15.
the pillar, and ground of truth. The which also S. John clearly shows by the
words following, when he says, he that knows God hears us, he that is not
of God, 1. Joan. 4. v. ^.
hears us not: in this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
It is therefore a most certain rule whereby this extraordinary vocation is
examined, to demand, whether it will submit it self to the approbation of the
visible Church, and will hear her or no? For he who hears the Church, has
the spirit of truth, and the true extraordinary vocation, but he who will not
hear the Church, has the spirit of error and the false extraordinary vocation.

6. The third argument. The holy Ghost never contradicts himself, for
otherwise (which God forbid) he should not be the spirit of truth, but of
falsehood for truth is never repugnant to truth but to falsehood: seeing that
therefore it is manifest that the ordinary vocation is from the holy Ghost, that
extraordinary cannot be opposite unto it which is truly from the holy Ghost. For
otherwise God should be opposite unto himself, which were impiety to think;
wherefore it necessarily follows, that the extraordinary vocation must agree
with the ordidinary, and be subject unto it, as also it must establish and
confirm, but not impugn it. 1. ad Cor. 14. v. 32.
Hereupon says the Apostle, the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets: if they be subject to the Prophets, much more to the whole Church of
Christ.

7. The fourth argument. There would arise a great confusion in the Church of
God, if every one were permitted to preach and administer the Sacraments, that
should affirm himself to be extraordinarily called without any other examine
or approbation of the Church. For so every fantastical fellow might freely
brag and affirm himself to be extraordinarily called by God. And under that
pretense and title might preach, administer the Sacraments and exercise all
other Ecclesiastical offices. Calu. l. 4. Inst. cap. 3. sect. 14. Beza c. 5.
suae confess.


8. By these arguments some more learned amongst our Adversaries being
convinced, do acknowledge, that all extraordinary vocation should be examined
and approved by the ordinary Pastors of Christ's Church. Artic. 28. Bulling.
decad. 5. Sermon. 4.
But they add moreover that this is true when the Church it self follows
the word of God, and as long as the ordinary vocation remains in her. But in
vain do they add these conditions, Supra^c. prcedent* ad Ephesians. 4. v. 12. and
13.
because we have already proved that the true Church always follows the word
of God, nor can depart or decline in any sort from it. For otherwise she were
not the true Church of God, but the Sinagogue of Satan. And the Apostle also
expressly says, that the ordinary vocation of Pastors and their continual
succession shall remain always in the Church of God until we meet all with
Christ in the end of the world. Calu. and Beza in (...) verba ad Ephesians. Item
Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 3. sect. 4. in Art. 25.
By which words of the Apostle Calvin also and Beza being convinced do
confess, that there must always be Pastors and Doctors in the Church of God,
and that the said Church cannot consist without them. The same also their
confession made at Rochell acknowledges in the 25. article.

9. Some of our Adversaries do here object unto us the example of Christ and
his Apostles, for, say they, their doctrine was never approved by the ancient
Church of the Jews, whereas notwithstanding it was extraordinary. But this is
a very frivolous and odious comparion of Christ and his Apostles with their
ministers. For it was expressly foretold by the Prophets that Christ was to
abr^gate the old Law, and the carnal vocation and succession thereof, Ierem.
31. v. 31. and 3^. Isaiae ^. v. ^. 10. Malach. 2. v. 10. 11. Pal 109. v. 4. ad
Heb. 7. v. 18. and cap. 8. v. 8. 23.
and that he was to ordain another more excellent and spiritual, the which he
effected indeed. Wherefore seeing that now the Apostles had another far more
excellent vocation instituted by Christ, there was no reason they should ask
any vocation from Moses. But we read no where that the vocation ordained by
Christ was to be abrogated by any other whosoever* but contrariwise the holy
Scriptures do plainly teach that the vocation ordained by Christ should endure
till the end of the world: Matthew. 28. v. vlt. Ad Ephesians. 4. v. 2. and ^3.
wherefore our Adversaries can prove nothing by this argument, unless they
will bring in, and establish another Messiah, and a new Lawmakers, who has
authority to abrogate and change the law and vocation of Christ, which is the
blasphemy of both Turks and Jews.

FINIS.

