A TREATISE OF THE UNWRITTEN WORD OF GOD, commonly called TRADITIONS. Written
in Latin by the R. Father James Gordon Huntley of Scotland, Doctor of
Divinity, of the Society of Jesus. And translated into English by I. L. of the
same Society.

The second Part of the first Controversy.

Permissu Superiorum, M. DC. XIV.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the true state of the Question.
HAVING already in the precedent Treatise spoken of the written Word of God,
and of all other things thereunto belonging, now it remains we speak a little
of the unwritten word commonly called Traditions. But to the end that the state
of this controversy may more easily be understood, I will here set down four
things diligently to be considered in this matter we treat of. The first is,
that by the unwritten Word we only understand that which is not written in the
old or new Testament, for of the unwritten word of God in this sense is our
whole Controversy in this place. Wherefore that objection of our Adversaries is
both frivolous and nothing worth, to wit, that the word of God which we call
the unwritten word, may be found extant either among the holy Fathers, or in
the books of the Counsels, or other Canons of the Church. But this nothing
belongs unto this purpose: for it is sufficient for us that this word of God
is not written in any book, either of the old or new Testament.

2. The second is that a thing may be contained in the holy Scripture 2. ways.
The one way is implicit, that is to say, in some general principle from
whence this other may be certainly deduced, and in this sense we acknowledge
that the whole word of God is contained in holy writ, and not only in
Scripture, but also in the Apostles Creed, yea even in that one article, I
believe the Catholic Church, so that it be diligently examined and well
understood, as S. Augustine S. Aug. in the 140. quest. upon Exodus. Tom: 4.
Matt. 22. v. 40.
very well notes. For so, says Christ* the whole Law and Prophets do depend
upon two precepts of charity, as in the same place S. Augustine notes. For
seeing that the holy Scripture teaches that we are bound to believe the Church
in all things, and that it can neither deceive us nor be deceived, as we will
evidently prove in the next Controversy in the (...). Chapter, it consequently
also teaches the whole and entire word of God, seeing that all that which is
not expressed in the holy Scripture, is contained expressly in the doctrine of
the Church, the which the Scripture commends unto us as infallible, as S.
Augustine very well says, and declares S. August: Tom. 7. contra Crescon.
Grammat. c. 33. and de vnie. Eccles. c. 22. in fine. Matt. 17. v. 5. Matt. 18.
v. 17. Luc. 10. v. 16.
in many places. For even as God the Father comprehended in these few words (
This is my wellbeloued Son, hear him) the whole word of God, so Christ
proposed unto us the whole word of God, when he commanded us to hear the
Church.

3. And in this sense do the holy Fathers oftentimes say, that all the points
of faith are contained in the holy Scriptures, to wit, in that general
principle in the which they admonish us to believe the Church: but many of the
holy Fathers sayings are falsified and corrupted by Martinus Ke^nitius. and
some Caluinists, as may be seen in Iudocus Ruesten in his first tome defending
the Council of Trent against Kemnitius.

4. Secondly a thing may be contained in express words in the holy Scriptures,
as that Christ is borne, suffered, and risen again etc. And in this sense we
deny that the whole word of God is contained in the Scriptures. That objection
of our Adversaries by this may easily be answered, when they say that we
affirm, that Traditions are the unwritten word of God, and yet we go about to
prove the^ by Scriptures. For we do not prove every particular Tradition by
express words of Scripture, but we only deduce and gather them out of it, and
convince in general, that there are Traditions.

5. The third thing which is to be considered, is, that our Adversaries being
convinced by truth, do acknowledge that many things were delivered unto us by
the Apostles, besides those which are written. But, say they, those were only
external rites and ceremonies, serving only for the ornament or discipline of
the Church, but nothing concerning doctrine of faith was delivered by the
Apostles, which they have not set down in writing. So Calvin and Calvin co^t.
4. sess. Con. Tride^t. in suo ^ntid. Be^a de notis Eccles. tom. 3. Tract.
Theol. p. 137. edit. An. 158^.
some others which follow his opinion. Wherefore it remains for us to prove
that not only external ceremonies, but also those which belong unto the
doctrine of faith were delivered unto us by the Apostles, and that they were
never expressly set down in writing.

6. The fourth thing is, that seeing our Adversaries cannot deny that which was
objected unto them by Catholics, to wit, that the Scripture in many places
makes express mention of the word of God preached, delivered, and diuulged
over the whole world (as we have already declared even out of the holy
Scriptures) they are wont to answer, that long since in the Apostles time this
word of God was delivered, preached, and not written, but the Apostles
afterward set down in writing all the preached word of God, or at the least
as much thereof as was necessary unto salvation. The which solutio^ albeit it be
very weak and frivolous, seeing that it relyeth upon no sure ground, yet
notwithstanding that it may more fully be confuted we will declare hereafter,
that many of the chiefest points of faith were not expressly set down in
writing by the Apostles. And thus much of the state of this Question.

CHAP. II. Out of the first and chiefest principles of faith, it is clearly
convinced, that there are Traditions.
THE first argument whereby we prove Traditions, is taken out of some of the
chiefest principles of faith. For there are three chief and most necessary
points of faith, yea the thief grounds of our whole faith which are not to he
found expressly in Scriptures.

2. The first, that there must needs be some Catalogue or Canon of the sacred
Books as well of the old as of the new Testament, the which all Christians with
an assured faith should embrace as a most certain and an undoubted truth, and
this is a very necessary point of faith, yea of it depends the authority of
all the books of holy Scripture, because by this Canon the sacred and true
books of Scriptures are discerned and made known from all those which be
Apochriphall; especially because as well in times past as in these our days
there has been so many, and so great Controuersyes about the Canonical and
Apochriphall books of Scripture; and such a Canon was altogether necessary
as well in the ancient Church before Christ, as in our present Church after
Christ's time; the which also our Adversaries themselves have learned by
experience. For they have also placed their new Canon of the books of holy
Scripture in their Confession made at Confess. Rupellana. Act. 3.
Rochell, and in the later end of some of their Bibles, and yet neither in the
time of the old Testament, nor in the time of the new Law, was this Cano^ ever
written down in the Bibles themselves.

2. I know our Adversaries, that they may escape this argument, do run to the
inward instinct of the holy Ghost, whereby say they, we know what book is
Canonical, and what is not. But this answer is refuted and rejected before,
where we have showed that the holy Ghost does not move us to believe any thing
with the Catholic faith, which is not the word of God. If Supra c. 5.
therefore the holy Ghost move us to believe that some books are Canonical,
and some are not, it is necessary that this be the word of God. We ask
therefore of them, whether this is the written word of God or the vnwritte^, if
it be the written word, in what Book or Chapter is it to be found? if it be no
where to be found, our Adversaries must needs confess, that by the instinct
of the holy Ghost they also believe the unwritten word of God, or Traditions.

3. The second principle of faith is, that we must necessarily, with an assured
and firm faith believe, that all those Books either of the old or of the new
Testament which we now retain, are safely delivered unto us entyre and
uncorrupted through so many hands, so many ages, so many vexations and
persecutions of the Christians, for otherwise the whole credit and authority of
those books will decay and perish. But this is no where extant or written, for
neither the Prophets or Apostles have ever written, that their books should
never be falsified or corrupted by any, yea it appears sufficiently Supra c.
9. 10. 12. and 13
by that which has been already said that they were falsified and corrupted in
many books by the Jews and Heretics. Let our Adversaries therefore tell us
where it is written, that this holy Scripture which we have now, is not
corrupted or falsified.

4. The third principle of faith is the true sense of the letter. For the true
word of God consists rather in the true sense or meaning of the words then in
the words themselves as we have declared before. Suprae. 3.
But the true sense of the words, that is to say, in what sense or meaning the
words are to be understood, either properly or figuratively, cannot be had from
the holy Scripture alone, but also from the doctrine and Traditions of the
Church, as we have said before in the fourth Chapter: whereby it also follows,
that the written word of God conteyneth in it the least part of the word of
God, to wit, the bare letter only: but the word of God preached and delivered
keeps and professes unto us the chief part of the word of God, that is to
say, the true and native sense of the same.

5. And this is that which S. Basil S. Basil. l. de Spiritu^ sanct. c. 27.
Brent. contra Petru^ a Soto in suis prol^gomenis. Kemnitius contra 4. sess.
Council. Trid. cum agit de 2. genere Tradi^.
says, that those who reject the unwritten points of faith, as indiscreet
persons, do wrong and damnify the chief parts of the Gospel, yea they even as
it were contract or bring the whole preaching of the Gospel, to the bare name
thereof.

6. Many of our Adversaries who deal more sincerely with us, convinced by
these arguments, do acknowledge, that these grounds or principles of our faith
are only to be had by Traditions, without any written word of God, as Ioannes
Brentius, and Martin Kemnitius, who add also, that those Traditions which do
not repugne to the written word of God are to be admitted and received of all,
and those only are to be rejected which are opposite unto the holy Scriptures.

7. But whatsoever our Adversaries do answer, it is altogether necessary that
they confess these three principles of our faith do belong indeed to the very
word of God it self. They must also needs confess these are not extant in
plain and express terms in any book either of the old or new Testament;
out of which necessarily follows that the whole and entire word of God is not
contained expressly in the holy Scripture.

CHAP. III. Wherein it is proved out of other particular points of faith, that
there are Traditions.
THE second argument whereby we prove Apostolical Traditions, is taken out of
other particular points of faith, the which almost all our Adversaries believe
with us, albeit they be no where expressly contained in the Scriptures. There
are many points of faith of this sort, whereof for example sake we will allege
some few. But to the end, we may use our accustomed breuity, we will rehearse
only those which do also manifestly show out of this opinion of our Adversaries
(that nothing appertains to the doctrine of faith, which is not expressly
contained in holy Scripture) there are many grievous errors and heresies in
this our age arisen.

2. The first point is, that in God there are three persons really distinct
among themselves, and one only substance, for this is no where extant in holy
Scripture, yea in it nothing is to be found expressly written either of the
substance or of the person in that signifycation wherein these words are used,
when we speak of the Blessed Trinity.

3. This indeed the Caluinists to their great loss and damage have
sufficiently learned by experience forty years ago in Transiluania. For when
one John Huniades whom they called John the second King of Hu^gary was then
Governor in Tra^siluania, a Coutry or Province of Hungary, had ordained a
public dispuratio^ betwixt the Cal^inists and the Antitrinitarians, that is to
say those who oppugned the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, and that according
to the common doctrine on both syds, they should dispute only out of the holy
Scriptures, the Caluinists could never prove out of the Scriptures alone, that
there is either a substance or person in God, neither could they by the
Scriptures only declare what is a person, or what is a substance.

4. Wherefore at the last this was the end of the disputation, that almost all
those which were present judged, that the Antitrinitarians got the victory, and
that the Caluinists were shamefully overcome: whereupon it came to pass that
the said Prince of Transiluania, of a Caluinist became an Antitrinitarian, yea
one of their chief friends; in so much that he took some public Churches
from the Caluinists, and gave them to the Antitrinitarians, and he continued
miserably in that wicked heresy even till death, which happened in the year
1571. the 14. of March.

5. All which things are abounda^tly declared by one Ioannes Sommerus Pirnensis
in the funeral Oration which he made at his death, wherein among other things
he affirms, that the chief cause why this Prince left the Caluinists, and
became an Antitrinitarian, was this, because for sooth in the Scriptures he
could find nothing of the Blessed Trinity, and for that the Caluinists were
forced to confess, that the words whereby the mystery of the Blessed Trinity is
explicated are not exta^t in the holy Scripture: but because this funeral.
Oration is scarce any where to be found and least some should think that I
falsely coined these things my self, I will hear set down his own words.
For after he had most blasphemously spoken, as the Antitrinitarians are wont to
do, against the Blessed Trinity, the which he calls here and there the
Roman Idolatry, these things he adds of his Prince.

6. But this our Prince (says he) This funeral Orat* of John Summer was
printed at Claudiopoli an. Domini 1571.
being instructed by God, easily understood what was the truth, and with
earnest desire embraced it, and with no less pleasure of mind defended it: for
being accustomed even from his childhood to read the holy Scriptures, he made
them very familiar unto him, and presently he found that such things which were
contrary to the phrase of Christ and his Apostles, were in the ensuing ages by
a wicked curiosity brought into the Church; and that they are not at all to be
numbered amongst those things which add any firmity or strength to the Author of
our salvation, especially seeing that the Adversaries themselves acknowledge,
that the words whereby these subtilties of this new opinion are explicated if
not rather (as I may well say) more obscured, are not to be found in the
writings of the Apostles.

7. And a little after. Wherefore little regarding either the multitude of
wranglers, or the torments and paints which others He means Seruetus who was
burnt at Geneua. an. 1553. as Beza writ^th in vi^a Caluini.
had endured, who first endeauored to break this ice, he manifestly condemned
the falsity of the Trinity, freely professing his own opinon therein. And
after a few words. For what has he not done? what assemblies and disputations
has he not ordained and caused to be had about this matter, both in Hangary,
and in Transiluania, that the sense or meaning of the Scripture might the
better be explicated by conferring those things together which were then said
or spoken of, where he would not only be present himself, but also taking the
place or office of the Judge and vmpyre in the said disputations, he very
wisely and gravely confuted the great absurdities of that superstition, warning
often the Adversaries, that rejecting the fancies or fond expositions of men,
they should less impudenily and more sincerly carry themselves in the
explication of the heavenly doctrine. Thus far Sommerus of the great care and
diligence of the Prince of Transiluania in defending the heresy of the
Antitrinitarians.

8. Moreover it is also manifest that out of this opinion of our Adversaries,
to wit, that we must not believe any thing Seruetus l. 1. de erroribus
Trinitatis fol. 32. page 1. Edit. an. 1531.
which is not expressed in Scriptures, this wicked heresy of the
Antitrinitaria^s in these our days had her beginning. For that Michael
Seruetus who in our age was the first of them that by printed books presumed
to oppugn the mystery of the Blessed Trinity, does plainly testify, writing
in this manner: For the solution, says he, of all things which may here be
alleged L. Item apud.. Ai^ Praetor. f^. de iniurijs.
by the Philosophers (for thus he calls the Catholics) thou must observe
this rule, which is an axiom among lawiers, that those things which do not
deserve any special note or mark, are understood and esteemed as things
neglected, unless they be specially noted. But I pray thee judge, whether this
article of the Trinity deserve any special note or no, seeing that it is the
chiefest and first ground of all our faith, whereof the whole knowledge of God
and Christ depends. And whether it be expressly noted or no, may be seen by
reading over the Scriptures, seeing that there is not one word to be found of
the Trinity in the whole Bible, nor of the persons thereof, nor of the essence
or unity of the supposition, nor of the unity of nature in many distinct
things, and such like. Thus far Seruetus. By these it evidently appears
that all these monstrous and strange opinions of latter Arrians, who are also
called Antitrinitarians do proceed from this one principle of our Adversaries,
to wit, that we must only believe Scriptures, and by this they are increased.
But let us now see other matters.

9. The second point of faith is, that Infants are to be baptized. For our
Adversaries will never show this in the holy Scriptures. For that one place
which does Joan. 3. v. 1.
clearly convince this, to wit, unless he be borne again of water and the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, they wrest and expound it in
another sense. For they will Calu. in c. ^. Joan. v. 5.
not have this word ( water) to signify the element of water, but the holy
Ghost: so Calvin: hence arose that wicked sect of the Anabaptists, who affirm
now adays that it is an unlawful and profane thing, to baptize Infants,
seeing that there is no solid reason hereof extant in the Scriptures.

10. For that whereunto Calvin, and his followers do fly for refuge, to wit,
that in the old Law Infantes were circumcised, Genes. 17. v. 10.
the Anabaptists do easily confute both, because concerning that, there was an
express precept of God, but there was none of the baptism of Infants; and the
similitude also betwixt circumcision and baptism S. Aug. Tom. ^. de haeres.
cap. 84. S. Hieron. co^tra Heluidium Author de Eccles. dogmatib. cap. 69. S.
Ambr. in Epist. 7. ad Siriciu^ Papam. Epiphan. haeres. 78. ^nnius co^tra
Bellar. Controu. 1. lib. 4. cap. 9. not^ 5.
does not hold in all things, for otherwise women should not be baptized but
only men.

11. The third point of faith is, that the Blessed Virgin Mary the mother of
God remained always a Virgin even after her childbyrth. For this is extant no
where in Scripture, and yet Heluidius was condemned as an Heretic by the whole
ancient Church, because he presumed to deny this.

12. When Bellarmine had alleged this vnwritte^ point of faith, to prove that
all such points of faith were not expressly set down in holy writ, Franciscus
Innius to answer unto this difficulty was forced to take and approve the
condemned heresy of Heluidius. For he denies that we ought to believe as a
point of faith the perpetual Virginity of our B. Lady. But the ancient Fathers
had never condemned Heluidius as an Heretic unless he had denied a point of
faith. But in this manner are our Adversaries forced to renew the old heresies
of times past, to the end they may defend this their paradoxe, that we must
only believe Scriptures.

CHAP. IIII. Whether there are any points of faith to be alleged, which are
no where extant in the Bible.
THE fourth point that our Adversaries also believe, but without express
Scripture for it, is that Christians cannot lawfully have more wives at once:
for the Council Council. Trident. sess. 24. c. 2.
of Trent has very well defined this to be a point of faith against the heresy
of these times, whereof we will speak more presently. But yet our Adversaries
can never prove this out of Scriptures only, abstracting from the authority of
the Church, albeit they also agree with us in the belief heerof. Yea the
examples of holy Scripture do rather persuade the contrary. For those most holy
men Abraham, Jacob, David, and many others had more wives at once, yet never
did God reprehend this in them, albeit he often spoke unto them.

2. When Bernardine Ochine one of Caluins scholars did consider this, he was
not afraid to persuade both by word and writing, that Polygamy was yet lawful,
of whom and of his most wicked life Beza Beza Epist. 1. ad Andream Duditium.
writes at large.

But Ochinus grounded only this his heresy in that principle of our Adversaries
before alleged, to wit, that we must believe nothing which is not expressly in
Scriptures. And whereupon Beza himself in his book which he wrote against the
same Ochinus does testify, that Ochinus used this argument: where Beza also
manifestly acknowledges that Polygamy is not forbidden in holy Scriptures by
any express Law. The other argument (says Beza) of Ochinus, Beza in lib. de
Poligamia. extat. in initio voluminis ^. suarum Tract. Theol.
is that Polygamy is not forbidden by any express law to the contrary: but I
answer, that there are not laws written of all things. Thus Beza.

3. But afterward indeed Beza goes about to prove that Poligamy is contrary to
the Law of Nature, but the same difficulty still remains. For according to
our Adversaries doctrine all things necessary to salvation are expressed in
holy Scriptures: but the observation of all things belonging to the Law of
Nature, is altogether necessary to salvation, therefore the observation of
these things is expressed in Scriptures, or else truly many things necessary
to salvation must be sought for out of the Scriptures. Moreover that Polygamy
is unlawful, is a point of faith, but this as Beza confesses is not
expressly contained in Scriptures, therefore all the points of faith are not
expressly contained in Scriptures.

4. The first point of faith is, that the Sacrament of Baptism may only be
given in water. For this point is also very necessary for the Church, least so
great and worthy a Sacrament be profaned, contrary to the institution of
Christ: and yet our Adversaries will never be able to prove this out of the
Scriptures only, who deny that the forsaid place of S. John is to be understood
of true water, as we have said before in the second point. For the examples of
holy Scripture do prove indeed that water is the fit matter of Baptism,. ^.
cap. praeced. Beza Epist. ^. ad Tom. Tilium Fratrem and Symmistam suam.
but they do not prove that there can be no other matter.

5. When Beza did consider this well, least that his foresaid principle that we
must believe nothing but Scripture might seem to be called in question, he was
not ashamed to write that Baptism might be given in any liquour, and by this
means it will be true and lawful Baptism, though it be given in milk, wine,
yea in Ink or any other filthy liquour. Thus are our Adversaries forced to
admit these absurdityes, least they might be forced to depart from that their
principle of believing only Scripture.

6. Furthermore to the end that Beza might more easily persuade the ignorant
common people to admit this his strange paradoxe, adds presently a very
grievous slander against the Catholic Doctors. Let water be wanting, says,
Beza, and yet the Baptism of any cannot be deserred with edification, nor must
not be, I Beza ^ade^ Epist. 2.
truly would as well and as lawfully baptize in any other liquour as in water:
neither are the most superstitious Deuines of any other opinion in these
matters. Thus far Beza. But these things which he writes are most false. For
there is no Catholic nor Scholasticall Doctor Council. Trid. sess. 7. can. 2.
de baptism.
who has ever either thought or written so, yea the plain contrary is defined
by the Catholic Church as a point of Faith.

7. The sixth point of faith, is that bread and wine is only the necessary
matter of the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist. This point of faith is also
very necessary for the Church, least so great and so excellent a Sacrament
should be profaned; yet our Adversaries will never be able to prove it
effectually out of Scripture only. For by this word ( Bread) any kind of meat
is oftentimes signified in Scripture; of wine it is far more doubtful. For
the Scripture makes only mention of the Chalice, and not of the liquor which
was in the Chalice; and Calvin himself acknowledges that Luc. 22. v. 18.
Calu. ibid. insua harmonia. Beza Epist. 2. citata.
those words ( of the fruit of the vine) were spoken before the institution of
this Sacrament.

8. The which when Beza easily preceaued, here also he went about to bring in
another error, least indeed he should be forced to forsake his former principle
of believing only Scriptures. For he was not afraid to write that he erred
nothing from the institution of Christ, who in the consecration of the
Eucharist should use instead of the bread appointed for that purpose, any other
usual meat; and instead of the wine any other ordinary kind of drink, and by
this means one may consecrate the Eucharist either in cheese, flesh, fish, or
eggs, as also in milk, water, bear, or vinegar, or any other liquor which
hitherto was never heard of in Gods Church. And yet for all this Beza is not
ashamed to attribute this most absurd error of his to all the Scholasticall
Doctors. For of both these errors he treats in the words before alleged,
because when he says the Scholasticall Doctors were of no other opinion, he
speaks as well concerning the matter of the Eucharist, as of the matter of
Baptism. After this manner our Adversaries do force so many and so great
errors out of that their principle of believing only Scriptures, whereof more
might be alleged, which for breuities sake we omit.

9. But there is one thing I cannot let pass, because thereby we clearly
convince that the Traditions of the Church do not only contain unwritten
points of faith, but (that which is more) even in our Adversaries judgment they
change and abolish such things as are expressly commanded in Scriptures: for
even in the Table of the Law of God, which is said to be written by Gods own
hand, in Exodus 34. v. 1. Exodus 20. v. 8, 9, 10, 11.
many and manifest words the keeping of the Sabbath day is commanded, the which
notwithstanding, now all, except a few Anabaptists, do confess to be abrogated
by Ecclesiastical Tradition only, without any express testimony of Scripture.
The Anabaptists I say being also deceived by that Common principle of our
Adversaries of blieuing only Scriptures, they go about to bring the observation
of the Sabbath day into use and custom again, and for this cause they are
called Sabatharians, but not Vide Prateolum V. Sabatharij:
so much the heresy as the madness of these men is condemned of all, and
namely of Luther in his book against the Sabbatarians, in the seventh Tome.

CHAP. V. Wherein it is proved, that there are Traditions by the testimonies of
the holy Fathers.
THE third argument whereby we prove, that all the points of our faith are not
set down in writing by the Apostles, is the authority Coccius Tom. 1. l. ^.
Antic. vltimo. Bellarm. Tom. 1. l. 41. de verbo Dei c. 7.
of the ancient Fathers, who affirm and teach this in many places. The which
places of the holy Fathers, as well the Greeks as the Latins Iodocus Coccius
has very diligently gathered together in his book, entitled Thesaurus
Catholicus, and before him Bellarmine did the same. But least we be longer then
the order of Epitomes does permit, especially in a thing so manifest, it shall
suffice us to alledg one chief Doctor of the Greek, and another of the Latin
Church.

2. Among the Grecians S. Chrysostom is the most famous, who does not only
affirm it but also manifestly proves it out of holy Scripture. For when he
expounds those words of the later Epistle 2. ad These. c. 1. v. 14.
to the Thessalonians: Therefore brethren stand and hold the Traditions which
you have learned, whether it be by word or by our Epistle, he writes thus:
Hence it appears, says S. Chrysostom, that he did not deliver all things
unto them by his Epistle but many things also without his letters, but as well
these, as those other, worthily deserve S. Chrisost. Hom. 4. in. 2. ad Thessal.
to be believed; therefore we esteem the Tradition also of the Church to be
worthy of credit. It is a Tradition, seek no further. Thus S. Chrysostom. But
it is most certain that the Apostle and consequently S. Chrysostom also,
Calvin l. 4. Instit c. 14. sect. vlt. S. August. Tom. 7. de baptismo. contra
Donatist. l. 2. cap. 7.
who expounds him, does not only speak of ceremonies and customs, but also
of points of Faith.

3. S. Augustine whom Calvin acknowledges to be the best and most faithful
witness of antiquity, writes in this manner. Many things are not to be found
in the Apostles writings, nor in the ensewing Counsels, and yet
notwithstanding, because they are generally kept through out the whole
Catholic Church, they are iuged to have been delivered and commended by none,
but by them. Thus S. Augustine. Neither can it be said, that S. Augustine
speaks of ceremonies and not of points of fayah. For in that place he proves
against the Donatists that those which were baptized in the accustomed form
and matter by heretics were not to be baptized again, but none unless he be
an Anabaptist, will deny that this is a point of faith.

CHAP. VI. Wherein even by the doctrine of our Adversaries it is proved, that
there are Traditions.
THE fourth argument whereby we prove Traditions, is taken out of the doctrine
of our Adversaries. For all those things which our Adversaries do affirm to be
points of faith against the Catholic doctrine, they teach and believe them
without any express Scripture. For it cannot be found expressly in Scripture,
that faith only iustifyeh, that there are only two Sacraments of the new law,
that none should pray for the dead etc. for all these things and many others
which they teach against us, they gather only out of Scriptures, and that by
some false and very weak consequence; but it is no where expressly written,
that faith only justifies, that there are only two Sacraments, that we must
not pray to Saints or for the dead etc.

2. Moreover there can no Catholic be found who does not receive and assuredly
believe the whole authentical text of the holy Scripture, why do they therefore
condemn us, when they affirm that nothing is to be believed besides the text
of Scripture, whereas the whole Controversy betwixt them and us, is of the
unwritten points of faith which, we affirm, and they deny?

3. Our Adversaries being convinced by this argument, do now at the last
confess, that not only that is to be admitted and believed as the pure word of
God Beza de notis Eccl. page 137. volum. 2. Theol. Tract. edit. an^. 1581.
which is expressly written in holy Scripture, but all that also which by a
necessary consequence may be gathered out of it.

4. But when they answer thus, they are forced to depart and forsake that
their first principle, whereby they affirmed that all the points of faith are
expressly contained in Scriptures, and that they were set down in writing by
the Apostles.

5. Furhermore not perceauing so much, they join in opinion with us, so that
they must needs indeed confess that the Traditions of the Church are
altogether necessary. For such things as are gathered out of Scriptures do
rather belong to Traditions then to express Scripture. For that which only,
consequently, and by reasoning and discoursing is gathered out of Scripture
albeit it very well and necessarily may be deduced from thence, is not
expressly in Scripture, but only obscurly, secretly, or virtually is contained
therein. For no man can truly say, that the conclusion which is only inferred
out of the premises is expressly contained in the same premises, for otherwise
our discourse and arguing were vain and to no purpose. But therefore do we
reason and discourse to the end, that, that which lies hidden virtually in the
premises may be expressly manyfested in the conclusion.

6. And that we may allege an example out of the Scriptures themselves, when
God the Father said, This is my well-beloved Matt. 17. v. 5.
Son, hear him. Out of these words we may very well gather, and by a
necessary consequence, that the whole doctrine of Christ our Lord is to be
heard and received of all: yet none will say, that all the doctrine of Christ
is contained expressly in those few words. And truly the holy Scripture is so
fertile and plentiful that many points of faith do as yet lie hidden and
unknown therein, which hitherto has never been gathered together by any, but
these things are contained virtually and not expressly in it.

7. Moreover after so many debates and contentions, after so many books set
forth against us, after so many slanders whereby our Adversaries charge us, as
though we taught that the Scriptures are imperfect, they at the last return to
our opinion. For we do not deny, yea we willingly acknowledge, that all those
things which rightly and without error are deduced or gathered out of the
express words of the holy Scriptures, do belong unto the written word of God,
and are contained in holy writ obscurely, not expressly, virtually, and not
plainly. For in that God does reveal any thing in express words,
consequently, and virtually he reuealeth all things which necessarily and
without any error may be deduced from thence.

8. We grant also that the Scripture consequently, mediatly, and virtually, as
in a general principle conteyneth all things necessary to salvation, yea in
that one only article of the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church; in
those few words also of Christ, Luc. 10. v. 16.
he who hears you, hears me, if the collection be rightly framed, as we
have also said before in the 25. Chapter. But when these things are gathered
together which are not expressly in Scripture, there is scarce any of them
which is not uncertain and doubtful without the authority and Traditions of
the Church. Wherefore these collections do manifestly convince the necessity
and authority of Traditions.

9. But that these collections may be uncertain and deceytfull, both
experience and reason teaches us: experience, because almost all Heresies have
had their beginning not from the Scripture alone in it self, but from these
collections badly framed and made. For there is not almost any one heresy which
is only grounded on the express words of Scripture without some other
collection, seeing that almost all Heretics both in times past as now also go
about to prove and gather their heresies from the Scripture by certain
deceytfull and sophistical arguments. Arius for example, out of those words
of Christ, the Father is greater then I, did gather Joan. 14. v. ^. 28.
but badly, that Christ even according to his divine Nature was interior to
his Father. The new Arians out of those words of the ten co^mau^deme^ts, thou
shall not have strange Exodus 20. v. 3.
Gods before me, do gather but foolishly that the Son is not God, the holy
Ghost is not God. So the Devil himself against Christ Matthew. 4. v. 6.
used this reason, It is written, God has given his Angels charge of thee,
therefore cast thy self down headlong. Lastly all the arguments indeed which
our Adversaries at this time allege against us out of Scriptures, and all the
errors which they have inverted, do take their beginning and strength from
their new illations and reasons, and not out of the bare and plain words of
Scripture, as will manifestly appear in every one of the Controversies.

10. The reason also is manifest why these their collections and reasons are
uncertain and doubtful. For in nothing can one more easily or more often
err, then in these illations. The which may proceed of many causes; either
because the illation it self is bad and Sophistical, or because the place of
Scripture from whence it is gathered is falsified by some false exposition
thereof, or because the proposition which is assumed and adjoined to the words
of Scripture is false and ambiguous, or because one or more words in that
collection are used doubtfully, that is to say, in one sense in the premises,
and in another in the conclusion; or lastly because there happens some error
to be in the collection which makes it weak, Sophistical, and erroneous.

11. Besides that, there are so many and so contrary illations of diverse men,
that the authority of the Church is altogether necessary in matters of faith,
that there may arise a certain and an undoubted faith of these matters, of
which sort Traditions are, that is to say, the doctrine of the whole Church.

12. But when one belieueth such an illation with a divine or Catholic faith,
he must needs know two things, the one is, that the express place of
Scripture from whence this conclusion is deduced must certainly be well
understood by him which disputes: the other is, that he who makes such a
deduction and collection can neither deceive others not be deceived himself.
But none can know either of these without the Traditions of the Church, seeing
that otherwise there is none which may not be deceived sometimes: All
collections therefore which produce or breed faith in us, do most clearly
convince and show the authority and necessity of Traditions.

CHAP. VII. Wherein it is proved, that there are Traditions, by the absurdities
which otherwise would follow.
THE fifth argument whereby we prove, that many things are to be believed which
are not expressed in holy Scriptures, is taken out of the absurdities which do
ensue of the contrary doctrine. For having once admitted, that nothing is to be
believed which is not expressed in Scripture, all old heresies are renewed, and
a great uncertainty and confusion of all things is brought into the Church of
God, yea even the way to Atheism is laid open, because having once rejected
and despised the Tradition of the Church, all the points of faith from the
Apostles time till now explicated and proved by the ancient Fathers against
heretics, all those things also which were decreed and determined by all the
general Counsels in times past against the said heretics, leese their
chiefest strength and authority; the which notwithstanding our Adversaries do
acknowledge themselves to receive and believe.

2. Neither do we know by an assured Catholic faith, whether there were ever
any Fathers or Counsels but by the Traditions of the Church But neither do we
know any other way but by faith, whether since the Apostles time till now there
were any Catholics or not? because of those things which were done since the
time and death of the Apostles, there is nothing extant in holy Scripture,
seeing that all the books thereof were written before the death of the
Apostles. But such things as have been done since till now, cannot otherwise be
known but by the Tradition of the Church.

3. Neither is it sufficient to say, that we know these things by the
Ecclesiastical histories. For that faith which proceeds of histories without
the authority or Traditions of the Catholic Church, is but an human faith
which oftentimes deceaueth others, and may be deceived it self, and therefore
these kind of histories cannot produce a divine faith in us: this experience it
self does clearly teach us. For our Adversaries do somtymes doubt whether S.
Peter was ever at Rome, or no, because forsooth this is not to be found
expressly in holy Scriptures, whereas notwithstanding it is most assuredly proved
and testified in many books both of the ancient Historiographers and holy
Fathers: Why may they not as lawfully call other matters in question which are
notwithstanding expressly set down in other ancient writers. Our Adversaries
therefore do make all things very doubtful and uncertain, whiles they will
only believe and admit the Scripture: but now let us answer their arguments.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein the arguments of our Adversaries, taken out of the old
Testament, are confuted.
THE first argument whereby our Adversaries oppugn Traditions, and which they
use very often, the which also as invincible they have added to the confession
of their Rupellana confessio Artic. 5. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2. Deuteronomy. 12. v. vltimo.
faith, they take out of those words of Deuteronomy, Thou shall not add any
thing to the word which I speak unto you; nor shall you take any thing from
it. And again, that which I command thee do that only; neither add or
diminish any thing from it. By these places of Scriptures our Adversaries do
infer, that nothing is to be received as a point of faith, which is not
expressly set down in Scriptures.

2. But this argument is erroneous and the weakness thereof is very great for
many causes. First because in those words there is no mention made of the
Scripture nor of the written word of God, but only of the word preached and
delivered viua voce. Thou shall not add (says the Scripture) to the word that
I speak unto you, he does not say, that I write unto you. Again, Do only
says he, that which I command thee, he does not say, that which I write unto
thee.

3. Moreover in these words the holy Scripture does not only speak of matters
of says to be believed, but also of ceremonies and customs to be done and
observed: but our Adversaries themselves confess, that these customs may be
added by the authority of the Church, yea they have ordained themselves very
many, the which they chang even yet when they Calvin co^tra 4. sess. Council.
^rident.
please. Calvin also acknowledges that many unwritten customs were delivered
unto us by the Apostles.

4. That also according to the phrase of Scripture is said to be added to the
word of God which is contrary and opposite unit. For Iosue did not transgress
this commandment of Deuteronomy, when he added his book to the books of
Moses. Nor did others transgress it who added the books of the Judges, Ruth,
and of the Kings, which were not written by Moses, and which are also to be
believed as containing points of faith. But in these books there is nothing
contrary to that which Moses wrote. And the Hebrew text agrees very well to
this answer, for in both places of Deuteronomy this word ( Ghal) is used,
which signifies oftentines contrary, or against, so that the sense is, do not
add any thing contrary to the word which I command: and again, ye shall not
add any thing contrary to the word which I say unto you. For so is that
particle ( Ghal) taken in the 40. Psalm (or according to the Hebrews 41. in
the 2. Psalm also, the second verse. And in the 14. of Numbers the 2. verse,
and else where very often. Even as also in the new Testament (...), which
answers to the Hebrew Ghal, signifies also contrary, or against; when the
Apostle writes to the Corinthians, that in us you may learn one not ^. ad
Cor. 4. v. 6.
to be puffed up against another above that is writie^. that is to say, against
the Scripture, the which says, we must not be puffed up in pride as S.
Chrysostom, and after him Theophilactus and others do note upon that place.
The which place some bodliy allege against Traditions, whereas the Apostle in
that place does not speak of the whole Calvin. in illa verba 1. ad Corin. 4.
v. 6.
word of God, but of this one point, that we must not be puffed up in pride, as
even Calvin himself acknowledges.

5. But to omit all such things as other Catholic Doctors have very well, and
learnedly written of the proper and literal sense of these words, yea that we
may also grant to our Adversaries that this which they allege is the true
sense, they err very much in that they think that these words of Moses
belong unto us, and that we are no less now bound and obliged by them, then
the Jews were in times past. For these words do no more appertain unto us
then those of the Deuteron. 27. v. vlt.
same book of Deuteronomy. Cursed be he that abides not in the words of this
Law, and fulfilleth them not in work. From which words S. Ad Galat. 3. v. 10.
and 13.
Paul manifestly teaches that we are delivered and freed, by the grace of
Christ Jesus. But seeing that in these words which they do here allege Moses
commands that the Children of Israel should observe and fulfill every word
which he had commanded them, for so it is expressly set down Deuteronomy ^2.
the last verse, in the Hebrew text, and in all the Bibles of our Adversaries,
and he presently adds that nothing is to be added or detracted from all
these, he manifestly commands the keeping of the whole Moysaicall Law, and
of all the Sacraments, Sacrifices, and Ceremonies of the old Testament. For he
does not only command, that nothing should be added but also that nothing is
to be detracted of all those things by him commanded. Wherefore if our
Adversaries object against us that we add any thing against this precept, we
may more justly object unto them, that they detract far more then we add,
seeing that they neither observe the Circumcision, nor the legal Sacrifices,
nor other Ceremonies which are so often and so straitely commanded in
Deuteronomy. It cannot truly be denied, but that this is to detract somewhat
from those things which Moses commanded; and therefore our Adversaries must
needs confess that these are the words of the old Law, and consequently to
appertain nothing unto us. Out of this which has been said, it follows, that
our Adversaries do very indiscretly and foolishly boast and brag of those
words of Moses. For in the exposition, thereof they err far from the
truth, and a great deal more in the application, when they go about to prove
that we are also bound and obliged by them.

6. Our Adversaries take their second argument out of these words of Salomons
proverbs: Every word of God is fiery, it is a shyeld Proverb. 30. v. 5. and ^.
of defense to those which hope in it: do not add any thing to the words
thereof, and thou shall be found and reprehended as a liar. I answer that this
place makes nothing against us: for in that place there is no mention made of
Scripture only, but of all the word of God. And it is most true that nothing
should be added to all the whole word of God, the which is to be believed with
a Catholic faith as the true word of God. For as we have said before, our
faith relyeth only of the word of God, but the Scripture only is not all the
word of God, because all Traditions also which contain points of faith belong
thereunto, as we have sufficiently Supra. c. 2.
proved already. But they add to the word of God, and are liars who affirm
that God said this, or that, which indeed he never spoke. And of this sort are
those false Prophets, of whom God by the Prophet Jeremy conplayneth, saying,
They speak the vision of their hearts, not from the mouth Hier. 23. v. 16. and
21.
of our Lord: and again, I did not speak unto them, and they did prophesy.
This place also may very well be understood, of those who add any thing
contrary to the word of God. For in the Hebrew text, there is set down that
particle ( Ghal) which oftentimes signifies contrary, or against, as we have
already declared in our answer to the first argument.

CHAP. IX. Wherein is examined that place of S. Paul's Epistle to the Galathians,
the which our Adversaries do object against Traditions.
THE third argument our Adversaries take out of the first Confess. Rupell. Art.
3.
Chapter to the Galathians, the which they have also added to their confession
of faith as invincible. For they have omitted their second argument as not
strong enough for their purpose. But thus they frame their argument: The
Apostle says twice an Anathema to those Gal. 1. v. 8. and 9.
who teach any thing besides that which he has taught: therefore nothing is to
be received or believed but Scripture. Our Adversaries have this place of the
Apostle often in their mouths, wherefore it shall be examined more exactly. We
answer therefore that our Adversaries do err here for two reasons, first
because our whole controversy is of the written word of God, but in these words
there is no mention made of the written word, or of Scripture, but only of the
word preached and delivered viua voce to the Galathians by S. Paul. And hence
it is that S. Augustine far otherwise S. August. Tom. 7. de unit. Eccles. c.
24.
then our Adversaries, disputing against the Donatists proves by these words
of the Apostle, that we are bound to admit and believe the Traditions of the
Church: as for example, that those who are once orderly and lawfully christened
by Heretics, are not to be baptized again. And well truly; for that which is
viua voce delivered, is a Tradition, and not Scripture. Moreover if the
Scripture only contained expressly all the points of faith, the Apostle would
rather have proposed the Scripture as the rule of faith then his own
preaching, seeing that the Scripture is manifestly well known to all Nations,
but his own preaching to the Galathians only. But our Adversaries urge again
and say, that all that which the Apostle preached to the Galathians was written
either before that time or afterward by S. Paul and the other Apostles: they
say this, but they prove it not. For this is no where written in holy
Scripture, and so whiles they go about to persuade us, that all points of
faith are written, they coin and invent a new point, which is no where extant
in Scripture, that is to say, that all such things as S. Paul viua voce taught
the Galathians, are written. But we following herein S. Augustine, do S. Aug.
Tom. 9. Tract. 96. in loan and Tom. 7. de v^itat, Eccles. c. 21. in fine.
gather much better by these words, and infer thus against them. If there must
be nothing believed, but that which S. Paul preached to the Galathians, and
that none knows certainly what are those things which he preached, but by the
Traditions and doctrine of the Church, it follows manifestly that besides the
Scripture we must also believe the Traditions and doctrine of the Church; seeing
that without them we cannot certainly and without error know what were those
things which the Apostle taught the Galathians.

2. Secondly our Adversaries do err in that they do not rightly expound that
particle in the words of S. Paul ( praeter) ( besides) but rather contrary to
the Apostles meaning. For the Latin word praeter, as also the Greek word
(...), and the Hebrew ( Ghal) have two significations. In the former it
signifies all that which is not the self same thing whereof we do speak: in
the later sense it signifies that only which is contrary to that we speak of.
In which sense praeter signifies the same that contra does, to wit ( against:)
the former sense is manifest enough, the later is proved by these places of
Scripture, Act. 18. v. 13. where all do translate these Greek words, Calu,
super acta A post. ann. 1560. Beza edit. an* 1560. and 1565. and 1598. Henric.
Steph. in thesauro linguae Graecae Tom. (...) in dictione (...).
(...), to be against the Law: so has not only the vulgar edition, but also
Calvin and Beza, and all the French Bibles of Geneua. Likewise in the first to
the Romans the 26. verse. (...) signifies against Nature: so has the vu^gar
edition and all the french Bibles of Genena, yea Cicero, as witnesses Henricus
Stephanus does thus translate this phrase out of Greek. Again in the 4. to
the Romans the 18. verse, (...) signifies against, as the vulgar edition, and
Beza has in all editions. Moreover in the 11. to the Romans the 24. verse,
(...) signifies against, as the vulgar edition and all the Bibles of Geneua
have: finally in the last to the Romans the 17. verse* as well the Greek word
(...), as the Latin word ( praeter) in our interpretor signifies the same
thing that contra does, as manifestly appears by the precedent words, for
dissensions and scandals are contrary or against the doctrine of Christ, and
not only besides his doctrine. (...)
Wherefore Calvin in his Commentaries set forth in the year 1557. upon the
Epistle to the Romans, and Sebasti^n Castalio, and all the French Bibles of
Geneua have contrary or against the doctrine: and albeit Beza translateth it
besides the doctrine, yet in his last edition set forth in the year 159^. he
translateth it contrary to the doctrine and in his Annotations he warns that
it is rather so to be translated. It is not therefore strange or absurd that the
Greek word (...), or the Latyne praeter should signify the same that contra
does.

3. But now that this word may not only be thus used, but that also it must
necessarily be so understood and taken in this place, we have showed by the
absurdities which would otherwise follow* The first is that S. Paul would have
said Anathema to S. John Evangelist, who many years after the preaching of S.
Paul to the Galathians, yea after his death, wrote his Apocalypse, wherein there
are many new revelations which S. Paul had not preached to the Galathia^s,
because they were not the^ revealed by God.

4. The second absurdity, that S. Paul had pronounced an Anathema upon all
those who in his time by a prophetical spirit did daily prophesy new things.
For in 1. ad Cor. 14. v. 2. 4. 26. and 30.
the Apostles time there were many such as appears by the first epistle to
the Corinthians. And S. Paul could not preach to the Galathians, which God had
not yet revealed.

5. The third absurdity, the Apostle for the same reason had pronounced
Anathema against S. Luke who in the Acts of the Apostles relates many things
which happened long after S. Paul left Galatia.

6. The fourth absurdity, the Apostle for the same cause also had condemned
himself with the said Anathema. For he wrote many Epistles after he had left
Galatia, wherein he relates many things which happened afterward unto him
either at Rome, or in other places.

7. Lastly it is an absurd thing to think either God after those words of S.
Paul to the Galathians could reveal to men nothing more by an Angel sent from
heaven, or that the said Angel who by the commandment of God should reveal
any new thing, but not contrary to faith, should incur that* Anathema by S.
Paul, seeing that this were to wrest the Anathema upon God himself, who
commanded the Angel to do so. This place therefore cannot be understood of
diverse and distinct things from those which S. Paul taught the Galathians, but
only of contrary and opposite things unto them. But according to this sense of
the word ( praeter) all the foresaid Absurdities do cease. For neither S. John
in his Apocalypse, nor S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, nor any other which
did prophecy, nor S. Paul himself, ever wrote or taught any thing contrary to
that which S. Paul taught the Galathians. But even God himself cannot Ad Hebr.
16. v. 18.
reveal the contrary by an Angel, because according to the Apostle, It is
impossible for God to lie.

8. Neither is it sufficient for me to say that those things which were
afterward revealed and written, were not necessary points of faith to
salvation. For S. Paul did not say, if any shall Euangelize unto you any point
necessary to salvation: but absolutely, if any shall Euangelize any thing
contrary to that which you have recevued. Moreover all these things which were
afterward set down in holy Scripture were true points of faith, the which
every Christian is necessarily bound to believe, if not expressly, yet at the
least virtually and generally every one is bound to believe with an assured
faith all those things which are in holy Writ to be most certain and true.

9. Finally even our Adversaries confession does convince this to be most true*
for now they acknowledge that all those things which by a necessary
consequence are deduced out of the Scriptures do belong unto the word of God
and are points of faith, and therefore they may be lawfully Suprac. 3^
preached unto the people as we have said before. But al these are distinct
things from those which are expressly written in holy Scriptures. For the
antecedent whereby some other thing may be inferred, is distinct from that which
is inferred. For it were a ridiculous illation if one and the same thing should
be inferred from it self. But that which is inferred in a good collection is
never contrary to the antecedent. The Apostle therefore speaks of doctrine
contrary to his, and not absolutely of any other distinct doctrine.

10. And in this sense the Fathers do often say that S. Paul affirmed in this
place S. August. Tom. 7* o^tra literas Petil Donatist. lib 3* cap. 6. S August.
Tom* 9. Tract. 98. in Euang. Joan. sub. finem.
that nothing was to be taught besides that which is in the holy Scripture. For
so S. Augustine speaks in one place. But in another he clearly explicateth
himself by this word ( praeter) to understand ( contra) because we must preach
nothing contrary to the holy Scripture. That this is the true sense and meaning
of S. Augustine, it is manifest by the words themselves, whereby also he proves
that the word ( praeter) in those words of the Apostle, does signify diverse,
but not contrary things. For in this manner he writes when he warns his
scholars to take heed of the opinions of the Manichaeans and other heretics,
because these are not only distinct but also Ad Gal. 1. v. 9.
contrary to those which the Apostles taught. Let the admonition, says he, of
the holy Apostle never depart from your heart. If any shall Euangelize unto you
besides that which you have received, let him be an Anathema. He does not say 1.
ad These. 3. v. 10.
more then you have received, but besides that which you have received. For if
he should say that, he should be prejudicial to himself who coueteth to come
to the Thessalonians, that he might supply that which was wanting to their
faith. Now he which supplieth adds that which is lacking, takes not away
that which was. But he which ouerpasseth Joan. 1^. v. ^.
the rule of faith does not go on in the way, but departs from the way. That
therefore which our Lord says, I have yet many things to say unto you, but you
cannot bear them now, were to be added to those things which they knew, and
not to be overthrown by those they had already learned. Hitherto S. Augustine.

CHAP. X. Wherein other objections of our Adversaries against Traditions are
resuted.
THE fourth argument is deduced Apoc. vlt v. 18. confess. Rupell. Artic. 5.
out of those words of the Apocalypse which they also cite and allege in their
confession at Rochell. If any man shall add to these things, God shall add
upon him the plagues written in this book. But who does not see that S. John
speaks expressly of the book of the Apocalypse only, and not of the whole
Scripture, for he says, I testify to every one hearing the words of the
Prophesy of this book, if any man sall add to these things etc. and in the
19. verse following. If any man shall diminish of the words of the book of
this prophecy etc. he speaks therefore only of the prophetical words of the
Apocalypse. For it is manifest otherwise out of Ecclesiastical histories, that
S. John wrote his Gospel after the Apocalypse, and consequently that he added
many things S. Hier. de script. Eccles. in Ioa^. Apost.
besides the Apocalypse. But let our Adversaries take heed least they incur
those pains which S. John threatens to those which add or detract any thing
from the Apocalypse; seeing that they so often and so bouldly wrest the
prophesies of the Apocalypse to many strange senses against the Pope and the
Catholic Church.

2. Our Adversaries allege many other things, but their arguments which be of
less moment are taken out of those places of Scripture which commend unto us
the great excellency of holy Scripture. But all these are very easily confuted
by that Supra c. 25.
one ground, which as we have declared before even our Adversaries do admit, to
wit, that to the end the holy Scripture be perfect in it self and sufficient
to everlasting salvation, it is not necessary that it should expressly co^teyne
al points of faith, but it is sufficient, that all such points may be deduced
by a good consequence out of it. But all the Traditions of the Church which
belong unto faith may be gathered Supra c. 25.
as we have said out of Scripture, the which also we declare more at large in
every one of these controversies. Our Adversaries therefore have not reason to
say that we teach the Scripture to be imperfect or insufficient. For as
concerning this sufficiency and perfection of Scripture they are forced at
least to yield and subscribe unto our opinion herein: but these their
arguments, whereof they make great account, we have therefore alleged, to the
end all may know how badly they interpret the holy Scriptures, and by how
frivolous reason they are persuaded to forsake the Catholic faith.

3. But even this sufficiency of Scripture which they pretend, they prove very
foolishly by those words of the Apostle, wherein he teaches, that the
Scripture Ad Tim. 3. v. penul^.
is very profitable; as though forsooth every thing which is profitable for
obtaining some particular end or purpose, were also absolutely sufficient then
the which nothing can be spoken more absurdly. The head truly is not only
profitable, but also necessary, that a man may live, but who I pray you will
say that the head only without the rest of the body is sufficient for the life
of man. But to our late Adversaries to the end they may make this their
discourse or reason the stronger, say, that in humane things not every thing
which is profitable is also sufficient, but in divine matters whatsoever is
profitable, is also sufficient, whereunto Iunius co^tra Bell. controu. 1. lib.
4. c. 10. nota 44.
Iunius like a fine young stripling adds, that this can be overthrown by no
sophistry. But who does not see that the Eucharist by the divine virtue thereof
is profitable to the obtaining of eternal salvation, and yet notwithstanding
without Baptism it is not sufficient, as also without faith and penance: the
same may be said of Baptism and of every book of Scripture. Yea even the
Apostle does not speak of the whole Scripture, as our Adversaries think he
does, when he says, that every Scripture is profitable, but of every
particular part thereof. For how S. Hier. de Script. Eccles. in Joan Apost. 2.
ad Tim. ^. v. penult.
could he speak of a thing which was not then extant. But as then the Gospel
of S. John was not yet written nor the Apocalypse. For these were after S. Paul's
death written by S. John: hence it is that the Apostle S. Paul does not say the
whole Scripture* but even Scripture inspired by God is profitable. For there is
not one part of Scripture which is not profitable unto us if it be well
understood. Yea for all that notwithstanding every one part precisely in it
self abstracting from the rest of the Scripture (as all do very well know) is
not sufficient.

4* Finally it is also to be considered that all those places wherein the
integrity, perfection and vtility of the Scripture is commended unto us, must
needs be understood not of the bare words only, but Supra c. 3.
of the same well and rightly understood. But this true understanding of the
words cannot otherwise be had then by Tradition Supra c. 4
and the unwritten doctrine of the Church it self, as we have already
declared. Wherefore all those places which do commend unto us the holy
Scriptures, do also consequently commend unto us Traditions and the unwritten
Word of God, seeing that therein consists the principal part of holy
Scripture, to wit, the true sense of the words.

CHAP. XI. Wherein is declared how we may know the Apostolical Traditions.
AMONG the other arguments of our Adversaries this is one that we cannot know
certainly which are the Traditions of the Apostles, seeing that many Heretics
in times past pretented also that their heresies were agreing to Apostolical
Traditions. Moreover they object that Traditions may easily be corrupted and
changed, and for this cause, Scripture was ordained that the doctrine delivered
by word of mouth might continue the longer without any falsification* or
corruption. But we answer to this their reason: that the ancient Heretics
also by supposed and false Scriptures which they attributed falsely to the
Apostles, did confirm and prove their heresies. Many things, says S.
Augustine, 8 Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. c. and (...). sub finem.
were alleged by heretics as though they were the sayings of the Prophets
and Apostles. But yet for all that they were not judged to be the most certain
and Canonical Scriptures.

2. But the Traditions of the Apostles may so certainly and easily be known
from supposed and false Traditions, as the Canonical Scriptures may be known
from the Apocriphall, for they are both known by the same means and
authority, that is to say, by the authority, doctrine, and testimony of the
Catholic Church, which neither can deceive any nor be deceived her self.

3. And albeit speaking of humane matters the Scripture is more certain the^
Tradition alone, yet it happens otherwise in matters concerning God, because in
these there is the authority of God, and the continual assistance of the holy
Ghost has place, which does not suffer the Church to err, and hence it is,
that the Tradition only of the Church which is not so much written in paper as
is printed in the hearts of Christians, is a most certain, and faithful
keeper of all the 2. ad Cor. 3. V. 3. 4.
points of our divine ^aith.

4. Moreover, if even Christ himself had with his own hand written in brass
all the points of our faith, they should notwithstanding not have had so great
certainty, as now Ecclesiastical Traditions have, unless the same keeper of
the divine doctrine had been also present. For that which is imprinted in
brass, may be rased and blotted out, and the brass it self may be consumed
by fire. But those things which are imprinted in the hearts of Christians by
the holy Ghost, can never perish, or be any way changed.

5. And what we have said of knowing the Apostolical Traditions, is to be
understood whether the Church assembled in a general Council declared it so,
or it became known and manifest by the continual and general custom of the
whole Church. Also, whether the question be of Tradition belonging to faith, or
only belonging to rites and Ceremon^es* For of the Tradition belonging to faith
(that is to say, of not baptizing again those which are baptized once before
by heretics) are these words of St. Augustine. Albeit indeed of this thing,
says he, S. Aug. Tom. 7. contra Crescon. Grammat. l. 1. cap. penult.
there can no example be alleged out of Canonical Scriptures, yet
notwithstanding we hold the truth of the same holy Scriptures in this matter,
when we do that which generally the whole Catholic Church holds, the which
even the authority of the Scriptures themselves commend unto us: so as, because
the holy Scripture cannot err, whosoever fears to be deceived by the
difficulty or obscurity of this question, let him go to the same Church for
counsel, the S. Aug. Tom. 7. de baptismo contra Donatist. l. 4. cap. 24.
which the holy Scripture very clearly shows and demonstrateth unto us.
Hitherto S. Augustine. And disputing in another place against the Donatists,
concerning the baptism of Infants. That, says he, which the whole Catholic
Church holds, nor was ordained by general Counsels, but yet always kept
and observed by all, is most truly to be believed to have been delivered unto us
by Apostolical authority.

6. But of the Ecclesiastical rites and S. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 118. ad Ianuar.
c. 5. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 4. sect. vltima sub finem. and l. 3. c. 3. sect.
10. in medio.
Ceremonies, the same S. Augustine speaks in this manner. Is the Catholic
Church through the whole world hold and practice any thing, it is a sign of
great madness to dispute, whether it is to be done so or not. By which words
of S. Augustine it may easily be understood what was the opinion and uniform
doctrine of the whole ancient Church concerning this point. For our
Adversaries themselves do say, that S. Augustine was a most faithful witness
of antiquity, unto whom I refer the Readers, if they desire to know
certainly any more of the sense of Antiquity,

The end of the second Part of the first Controversy.
FINIS.

