THE DESCENT OF AVTHORITIE: OR, THE MAGISTRATES PATENT FROM HEAVEN. Manifested
in a Sermon preached at Lincolnes Assizes, March 13. 1636.

By THOMAS HVRSTE Dr. of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

Romans 13.1. There is no power but of God.

LONDON, Printed for John Clark, and are to be sold at his Shop under Saint
Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1637.

TO MY VERY NOBLE FRIEND AND WORTHY Patron, Sir WILLIAM SAVILE, Baronet.
SIR,
BEing persuaded to make this Sermon legible, I presently resolved to use your
name for the Dedication. As it is a favor from you, I make bold to borrow it:
and as it is a testimony of due respect from me, you deserve it. Go on still in
manifesting your unfeigned love to God and his Church, your Prince and Country.
And that you may long continue to be (as you are) an ornament to your Family,
and a support to your friends, shall be the prayer of him that is

Yours in all hearty affection,
Lednam June 1. 1637.
Perlegi Concionem hanc, cui titulus est (The Descent of Authority etc.) nec in
ea quicquam reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

Sa: Baker.
Ex aedibus Londin. Iunij 14. 1637.
THE DESCENT OF AVTHORITIE.
Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.


A Divine may speak of such Texts of Scripture, that it may be said as it was
to hin that spoke of Hercules his praises, Quis eum vituperat? Plutar. Apoph.
^ac.
as if that were to light a candle in the Sunshine. So when we Preachers
speak of death, mortality, Gods mercy, man's pronenesse to sin, etc. Some may
say or think, Who doubts of this?

But for this Discourse that I am to speak of, the just power of one man over
another, it may seem to be Apocryphal, or an Exchecker-chamber case. Some
(especially inferiors) think that one should be as good as another: that as
we were at our births, and shall be at our deaths; so in our lives we should
be equal. Being Christian brethren in Divinity, and partaking of the same
Sacraments: so (Anabap^istically) we should be in Politics; and the pearching
of one man above another is but humane invention and commanding policy.
Whereupon some inferiors are willing to obey principally for fear of
punishment, little for conscience sake.

To satisfy us all then, that the superiority of one man over another is no
humane usurpation, but a divine institution; not upheld only by the shores, or
underlaid with the bolsters of man's device, but has the foundation of Gods
appointment: take notice how that God who has made in Heaven Angels and
Archangels, in the Firmament the King the Sun, the Queen the Moon, and the
common people the Stars; in the Air the Eagle and the Fly; in the Sea the
Whale and the Herring; upon Earth the Lion and the Grassehopper, hills and
vallie, leas and furrows: the same God has appointed amongst men, some like
the Centurion, to command; Matthew. 8.9.
and others as the Centurions servant, diligently to obey: as in stature some
higher like the Anakims, and some lower as Zacheus. Thus God has ordered, that
Whosoever sheds man's blood, must not be reprieved till the day of Judgment, or be
punished miraculously, Acts 12.23. Isa. 37 36.
as Herod was, by an Angel sent from Heaven; or as in Sennacheribs Host, where
an Angel came and slew the Host, but by man, and not by Angels shall a
malefactors blood be shed.

Here then is Magna Charta, or High Commission under the great Seal of Heaven
directed to Magistrates. Here is DEVS REGI: for so he acknowledges, DIEV ET
MON DROIT. And then (give me leave to say a piece of your Commission before you
go to the Hall) from hence it follows, CAROLVS (but DEI GRATIA) DILECTO ET
FIDELI.

So then, if any shall enquire in point of conscience, as they did, Luke 20.2.
By what authority you do these things (I mean divine:) Why you, my Lords,
examine and give sentence, the Justices herein concur, the Jurers find
guilty, the Jaylors keep sure, the Plaintifs prosecute, and the Executioners
put to death: here is prima lex societatis, and nervus Imperiorum, Carions
Chron.
the divine Patent or grant, Whosoever sheds, etc.

In which words we have Authoritatis prosapiam, the progeny or pedigree, the
race or lineage, or, if you will, the Descent of Authority set out by Moses, the
ancient King of Heralds, who has informed us in all the ancient genealogies. A
discourse not unusefull to us all, that Superiors may know how their tenure is
but in capite, God by a License of alienation has assigned them, and that
inferiors may know why they owe suit service and homage to their superiors:
because their power stands not only upon the crutches or stilts of humane
power, but upon the firm basis of divine institution that some should ride on
horseback, while others walk on foot.

For the evidencing hereof, observe the Commission. The first and more general
part of it is laid down, Genesis 1.26. and 28. and likewise in the second verse of
this ninth chapter: Sciatis quod assignavimus vos and quemlibet vestrum
conjunctim and divisim to rule over fowls, beasts, fishes. Thus far all
mankind has power. And now in this verse read, we have Assignavimus etiam vos:
we see who are of the Quorum, even the Magistrates, who have power over men.
The like we may read, Wisdom the ninth, from the beginning to the seventh
verse. As the Emperor of Germany is styled Rex Regum: so is a Magistrate over
men, who are petty Princes over the other creatures. All mankind are like
Senators, all Kings, but the Magistrate is perpetuus Dictator.

But it will be whispered by the Temporal power, Trouble not your self for
our Patent further than from our gracious King: we have Jaylers and fetters,
halters and gibbets, axes and scaffolds, fire and faggots; we will either
find, or force obedience.

Abundans cautela non nocet. The more ties, the stronger. Men's Laws may be
snapped asunder more easily. Secular laws and power are but the materials, the
hemp or hair: Religion is that which entwines and makes it strong. Men may
hope that man's laws may balke Agag, and the fattest of the people: but Gods
Laws say Quicunque, they punish universally. True, the laws of men are
strong, but behold a greater force, a twofold cable. Gods word prevails more
strongly. Where there is either religious devotion, or any melancholy jealous
fearfulness or suspicion by nature, there is a more serious apprehension of
Gods displeasure than man's. Saint Paul (a wise Teacher) knew what he did, when
he used the double two-edged argument, Romans 13.5. We must needs obey, not only
for fear of punishment, but also for conscience sake. Observe among the
Romists: if they can but untie the double knot of conscience, they care the
less for the single tie of corporal punishment. Assure but Ravaillac that it
is lawful to lay his bloody hands upon the Lords Anointed, and then he will
fear but little hot burning pincers, or the pulling in pieces with wild
horses. When those moles, the the Gunpowder pioners (following their blind
guides) were conceited that it was not unlawful to fire that house wherein
(said they) bloody laws were made against them, they then cared neither for
Tyburn nor beheading. And that bloody Assasine, who not many years since slew
a great Peer, no doubt but that his bloody misled mind thought it lawful. If
Divines do but once file off the fetters of divine laws, men will as fast snap
asunder men's laws, as Samson did his coards. James Clement, whom the Leaguers
hired to kill Henry the third; and John Chastell, who intended to kill Henry
the fourth, were both taught by the Jesuits that the King was not to be
obeyed, if not allowed by the Pope. Goodwins Annals, page 23
Insurrection or rebellion never proves loud or dangerous till it pretend
Religion. The first noise is for the liberty or privileges of the people,
that is but like the outworkes: but when the soul is pretended, that is like
the maine fort. They begin thus, The freeborn Communaltie is oppressed with a
small number: though the calamities of this present life may with a constant
patience be endured, yet the soul is to be redeemed even with a thousand
deaths: new forms of Religion are obtruded (the constant pretense of all
discontented giddy people.)

Thus we see that the cause of Religion, or the tie of conscience does move the
wheels of all actions most forcibly. Though it ill becomes them, it is usually
in the mouth of all seditious rebels, and then in nomine Domini they are most
violent. The holy league, and holy pilgrims, and the brethren are usually the
nicknames of rebels.

Let it not then be tedious for them who have their Patents sealed at
Westminster, to hear that they are also sealed with a test meipso in Heaven.
The tie of conscience looking at Gods ordinance does help to guard Authority,
as well as the Sheriff with the posse Comitatus.

Seeing then you please to usher, Preface and auspicate your weighty affairs
with prayers and praises here in this sacred House, after the example of all
good Christians, holy men in the old Testament; Yea and the devout Heathen
also, who did usually begin a Deo Optimo Maximo: So you come hither to do him
service, to acknowledge your dependence upon him; As a labourer or workman
comes to know his pleasure that sets him on work, so you here to be directed
by Gods Word. We of our Tribe can do no less but give you your due, namely,
that your power stands not only upon the supporters of man's policy, but the
strength of the divine Grant.

Therefore, as it is Psalm 45.4. Good luck have you with your honor: ride on
with the word of truth and righteousness. Your Commission is both from God and
the King. It is appointed that Who so sheds man's blood, by man, etc. as may
appear by the meaning of the words, which come now to be opened unto us.

Herein is laid down the just power and authority of the sword: not excluding
Ecclesiastical or Oeconomicall, that of parents or masters; but the public
temporal power is here more principally intended, because it speaks of
bloodshed.

This verse is set like Bifrons Ianus, or like Noah, who had reference to both
Worlds: so this verse is a reason both of the former and latter verses.

1. God is careful to prevent the eating of blood, verse the 4. that man
should have no taste thereof, and by that abstinence so much the more abhor
murder and cruelty. The reason, whosoever sheds, etc.

2. It is a reason of the 7. verse. Men may be encouraged to bring forth fruit
and multiply, because God has taken such a course for our safety and
preservation, by pinioning and swaddling the hands of murderers. A man may
plant, set, and sow in a garden with hope and cheerfulness, when it is well
fenced, hedged, walled, or empaled. The fortification must be answerable to
the danger. Murder began betimes, even with Cain. God bids be fruitful, for
he has taken a course with murderers, be they high or low, rich or poor:
for it is said Quicunque, general and indefinite, as Peter said Acts 10.34. I
perceive there is no respect of persons with God: as he sends his rain to
fall, and his Sun to shine; so he would have justice administerd
impartially. Musculus observes allegorically (but it is som-what farfetched) Of
every Beast, ordinary inferior men that are kept under: or of man, that is,
be he noble, learned, wise, or any ways excellent.

Sheddeth man's blood, that is, mortally and wilfully. And here observe 3.
things.

1. That any kind of death is here forbidden as well as the effusion of blood,
be it by poisoning, strangling, or otherwise. A man may shed blood and not
kill, as Chirurgions: and a man may kill and not shed blood, as poysoners and
stranglers.

2. Phlebotomy is not here forbidden, the opening or cutting of a vein which
is not mortal: but the taking away of life is here meant which lies in the
blood, as it is in the fourth verse. The heart-blood is the shop or seat of
life. Hence it is said, that though the brain be of greater dignity, yet the
heart is of greater necessity, because it is the fountain of life.

No shedding of blood (though mortally) is here meant, if it be done by the
Magistrate agreeably to the laws of God and men, no more than the plaintifs,
Iurers, Executioners are guilty: for it is said, Romans 13.4. The Magistrate
bears not the sword in vain. But private men upon private quarrels are here
restrained.

3. Observe, that bloodshed is here put for it self and other sins: for
this power of the Magistrate is not restrained only to murder and other
causes capital, yea and to criminal, but to civil also. Else, there would be
no use of any Bench, but that which is for life and death. Here then other
causes are to be understood, although denominatio fit a principaliori part.
This maine offense is branded by name, as being inconsistent with society. So
that this is a principal, not the only sin, for Magistrates to punish: as
usually the oath at large is given to the foreman, and all the rest are
implied. Although God be a patient God, Romans 15.5.
yea the God of patience; and when we make bold to express him by borrowed
speeches, we say he has leaden feet, he came sostly, and convented Adam
deliberately: yet he will not suffer the murderer to stay till the great
Assizes at Doomes-day, but he must be punished here by his Lieutenant, man.
This hateful sin is is named here (we see) for all the rest. When Saint Paul
had a Viper upon his hand, Acts 28.4.
the Barbarians cried, No doubt this man is a murderer. They thought murder to
be the non-such of sins. As Moses here sets down the pedigree of Authority:
so our Savior sets down the descent of murder, John 8.44. He goes higher
than Caine, Yea are of your Father the Devil: he was homicida, a manslayer
from the beginning. Let those then who are as prodigal of their own and
others blood as dogs and cocks, consider how murder is here branded by name:
and so it may well be, for it is injurious to five.

1. To God, whose institution is violated, and his image cancelled and defaced.

2. To the Magistrate, whose sword is taken out of his hand, and he made like
the sign of Saint George. If a man be injured, are there not Courts of
justice, both for our profit and for our honor? What nonsense then is it, for
a man in rage or passion, which is a short madness, when he is not his own
man, that he should wrest the sword out of the hands of the sober, just,
deliberate Magistrate, and revenge his quarrel himself?

3. A murcherer is injurious incomparably to that man whom he slayes, so as he
cannot give him satisfaction If he take away his goods, he might restore: if
his good name, he might recant: but who can fetchbacke a departed soul? he
only can give life that first infused it.

4. A murderer is injurious to himself. 1. To his body, making it liable to a
violent death: or his life afterward (if his conscience be not asleep) is a
continual Purgatory, as we may observe in some who have been heirs to
Cain's murder, they have been likewise inheritors of his despicable woeful
wandering. 2 For his soul, he cannot say at his death with our Savior, Epist.
154. ad Publicol.
Consummatum est: for without bitter repentance he leapes out of the pan into
the fire. Saint Augustine does so dislike manslaughter, that he says non
sibiprobari illud consilium, ut quispiam alium interficiat, ne ab illo
occidatur.

5. A blood-shedder mortally and wilfully is injurious to his wife and
children, by forfaiting his estate, and depriving them of that which should be
for their comfortable livelihood and maintenance. Thomas Aquinas of every beast
expounds it of beastly men, intimating that murderers are metaphorically like
beasts, rash, violent, furious, inconsiderate, cruel, unreasonable, and
unprovident as they.

Seeing then that Gods Spirit by Moses has stigmatized this hateful vice, let
not rash anger begin, malice and revenge prosecute, and a vain conceit of
honor occasion the committing of this desperate sin, which God will not have
stay till the day of Doom, but be punished by his Deputy, Man: which word now
follows.

By man. We must not straiten these words as confined to Noah and his
immediate successors; but as the privileges and jurisdiction in general of
mankind over other creatures, so likewise the power of man one over another
does still continue.

Again, we must not think that by man, Providet ne interficiant iussu non
expectato publico. Aug. in Exodus
the Magistrate is to be so understood, as if they were to be the Executioners,
and so condemn underofficers; for they are the Magistrates hands.

These words, by man, are rarely left out, usually put in, always understood.

By man, the Magistrate; so the Chaldee Paraphrase, per sententiam Iudicum, and
so Cornelius a Lapide upon these words quotes it, and expounds it.

Calvin acknowledges the Magistrates authority to be hence derived, sed
verba plus complecti dicit. By man, the Magistrate disjunctively, or some other
way by man. For it is said, Psalm 55.23. Bloodthirsty men shall not live out
half their days. So that if the murderer escape by flight, or that the
Magistrate be too remiss or indulgent, yet either in war or quarrel, duel or
other casualtie the murderers life is taken away.

Thus Iunius expounds these words by man in his Analysis of this chapter. He
says there are laws, 1. natural, of the creatures subjection, verse the
second 2. ceremonial, verse the fourth, forbidding blood-eating 3. civil and
political, verse the sixth, quum Deus manum sui Magistratus instruit ad
ulciscendum.

Musculus gives an unanswerable reason, why by man we are to understand the
Magistrate. If a private man kill the murderer, and another private man him,
and so in infinitum, what will become of the species of mankind? God therefore
deputes the Magistrate to do it, and there is an end. Neither (says the same
Author) is this a fault in the Magistrate, to use a sword either defensive or
offensive to malefactors. It is not said Quicunque effuderit sanguinem
homicidae, latronis, venefici, etc. for these putrified members must either be
taken away, or they endanger the whole.

Mercer says, not by private men, ne nisi mature and causa diligenter excussa
occidatur. If it were left to private men, in their choler they would put to
death without just cause, as in chance-medly or misadventure, which the
Magistrate does not punish with death.

Peter Martyr here understands the Magistrate, and makes the later words a
comment or reason. Quia illum fecit (scilicet Magistratum) ad imaginem Dei; and
non HOMINES, sed ELOHIM appellantur. God borrowes the word King, stiling
himself King of Kings, and for an abundant requital lends Kings the title of
Gods. Though all men are created after Gods image: yet those that are in
authority have a more special resemblance of the Deity. All men of
understanding, learning, wealth, and other abilities, are as bullion: but the
Magistrate has the very current stamp of Gods power.

Piscator also herein concurres, QVI EFFVNDIT, nempe privato affectu, ex odio
aut ira: PER HOMINEM, idest, Magistratum.

I have endeavored (you hear) to lay the foundation strong, because we are to
build much hereupon, Gods Patent to his Deputies, or the Descent of Authority.

It follows, shall his blood be shed. God proportions his punishments. Blood
for blood, as it is Exodus 21.23. or, Life for life, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, etc.

Thus We see the divine justice paying murderers in their own coin: Occidit
and occidatur. Oleafter says upon these words, A principio Mundi occisio
occisione vindicatur. This retaliation of blood for blood Christ told Saint
Peter of, Matthew. 26.52. Whose kills with the sword, shall perish by the
sword. The same words are used Revel. 13.10. here is Lex talionis. They that
account the life of another cheap, do make the market and price for their own.

From these words, thus opened, these divine truths present themselves to our
consideration.

1. Whosoever, that God is impartial.

2. Sheds man's blood, The heinousness of murder here named.

3. By man, The Descent of Authority.

4. Shall his blood be shed, The proportioning of Gods punishments to man's
sins.

But as I made choice of these words for this time and place: so I will insist
only in the third and most useful to us, the terminus a quo of Authority, or
the Descent of it.

Master Harding, to set the Crown the faster upon the Popes head, is content
that it should stand but totteringly upon the heads of temporal Princes, as if
no hand could set it on fast, but that of the Bishop of Rome. And therefore he
says most injuriously, that they can have no more power than the people had
over whom they exercise their jurisdiction: as if they had no other right, but
by composition from their subjects; forgetting these places, Prove. 8.15, 16. By
me Kings reign. And again repeating it twice, By me Princes rule. And Dan.
2.21. He removes and sets up Kings, without the Pope his intervening. His
usurpation was not heard of till many years after. To the like effect spoke
our Savior to Pilate, John 19.11. Thou could have no power at al, except it
were given thee from above Thus S. Paul Romans 13.1. There is no power but of
God. Which made him recant, as it were, Acts 23.5. I wist not that it was the
high Priest: For it is written, (namely Exodus 22.28.) Thou shall not revile the
Gods, (for so it is rendered in the last Translation) this phrase being given to
Magistrates: and perhaps from hence the Heathen worshipped mortal Gods. Cyrus
is said to be Gods anointed, Isaiah 4 5.1. In the first part of the Homily
against wilful rebellion it is said, since Lucifer the Arch-rebel, and our
first parents in Paradise broke the bonds of duty, God has established
authority, first in families, then in Cities, Towns, and Kingdoms. Even
subordinate Authority is from God, though like cosen-germane it be once removed
from God and the King. Yea Magistrates in little Corporations and
Jurisdictions, they are the younger brothers of Authority: there is the same
blood, though not the same splendor or revenue. The varnish or gilt of power
is the same, though the walls or materials be finer or courser. Caesar's
image, or the Kings stamp makes silver as current as gold.

And this Descent may appear or be vouched,

1. From the excellency, use, and benefit of it, as it is said, James 1.17.
Every good and perfect gift comes down from above. Now this is the very sine
qua non of society and outward blessings; not only for the been esse, but for
the very esse of a Commonwealth: without this people are like a riotous rout
in war without leaders in order, as sheep without a Shepherd, or a body
without an head.

2. This Descent appears by Gods admirable upholding and continuing it, maugre
man's reluctations; God preserves still the ceremony and the substance. First,
those additions of ceremony, which makes it have the more due valuation from
the people, as Crowns, Thrones, Scepters, Attenders, great Officers, for the
supreme; and Gowns, Tippets, Hoods, Maces, Swords, White staves, caps of
maintenance, for the subordinate Magistrates.

And as the ceremony, so the substance of it is upheld: and this God does 4.
ways.

1. By his Word, as you have heard out of S. Paul, the Prophet Daniel, and
other testimonies of Scripture.

2. By his Spirit to Godly men, and by the instinct and dictate of nature to
Heathen and ungodly men; not to hurt Authority though they have opportunity. 1 Samuel 24. observe David's excellent speech, and more excellent carriage to Saul,
when he was in the cave in his power, although Saul did prosecute him
causelessly, implacably, and infinitely. And although some men quarrel sometimes
at Magistatum the person; yet not at Magistratum, the government: their desires
are not to dull or break the sword, but only to change the hand, as usually
restless giddy people do, like them in Israel, 1. Sam. 8.19. Nay, but we will
have a King to reign over us, as they would exchange their Judges for Kings.
Ketts and Flammocks, with such other viperous rebels, their projects are not to
extinguish government, but to exchange Governors, putting themselves or their
leaders in place. And still our mutterers and rash discontented people, their
quarrel is not so much against Authority it self: but if they be inferiors,
it is because they have none themselves, they will give no applause to the
actors, because they bear no part themselves. And if they be of an higher
strain, it is because they may not rule their Rulers. So that as a coy dame or
amorous woer, they must have clothes, but no taylour can fit them: either the
garment of Authority is too long or short, too straight or wide. As a sick man
must drink, yet all is insipid; no chamber nor bed gives him content: yet the
fault is not in the things themselves, but in his indisposition. Usually they
that are discontented at Governors, it is because themselves or some of their
friends are not in higher place. As all mankind acknowledge a Deity, yet go
several ways in their devotions: So all by nature and the Spirit of God are
taught the admirable use of Authority, although they be affected diverse ways
for Governors and government, according as their own ends lead them.

3. God upholds and preserves Authority by his wife, faithful, godly
Ministers. Even our poor Tribe helps to carry the Canopy over Authority:
else, what need our Declarations sometimes at S. Paul's Cross, or other solemn
places, to justify the proceedings of State in matters of conscience? Thus you
shall find wise S. Paul to Titus Bishop of the Cretians, Tit. 3.1.
Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Poners, to obey
Magistrates. And thus our prudent Bishops and their Commissioners do inquire
in the Articles at their Visitations; Does your Minister exhort the people to
obedience to his Majesty, and all Magistrates in authority under him? Dr. Boys
in his (...), page 458.
Even statizing worldlings that account but slightly of us, yet think that we
serve as posts at least upon which the Injunctions and Mandates of the
Magistrates are to be fixed.

4. God preserves Authority by his admirable discovery and prevention of wicked
plots against Governors and Government. As Murders have been strangely
revealed by Birds, and Dogs; so even wicked intendments against Magistrates
have been wonderfully disclosed, not only miraculously punished, as it is set
down, Number. 16.29, 30. If these men die a common death, etc. But if the Lord
make a new thing, ye shall understand that these men have provoked the Lord;
Intimating, that God will miraculously punish rebellion. The very patient
Earth, the hackney of all injurious trampling, will open her mouth and swallow
them up.

As God miraculously punishes, so he also discloseth rebellions and
treacheries. Ecclesiastes 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: for
the birds of the Air will reveal it. Thus careful is God to preserve his
offspring, both the person and the power. Now as Gamaliel said, Acts 5.39. If
it be of God, it will continue: if not, it will come to naught. If Authority
were only humane pride, or invention, it would long before now have had a
fall. It is worth our remembrance, Theater of Gods judgments.
that by conspiracies Magistrates are seldom hurt, and as seldom the
conspiratours escape: as is observed in Corah and his company, Number. 16. of
Absalom, 2 Samuel 16. and many others. In the time of that wise King who
conjoined the Roses, insurrection was (if not a quotidian) an anniversary
fever: yet as he was ever molested, so he was ever aloft and prevailed. The
like was in the time of our late gracious Queen, and peaceable King, by the
powder-plotters and others.

And when it pleases God rarely to let the Magistrates suffer for the
punishment of the people, yet those rebels are so hateful to God and all good
men, as makes the like courses abhorred for the future, and so Authority to be
preserved and continued. Augustus Caesar used to say, Proditionem amo,
proditores non item. Charles the fourth, Emperor of Germany, prevailed with
three or four of his enemies Captains to be perfidious to their Master, upon
hopes of great sums of money: and when he sped, he paid them with counterfeit
coin, affirming it to be good enough for counterfeit service.

When the city of Rhodes was besieged by the Turk, a Noble man, upon hopes to
have one of Solymans daughters, did many secret services for the Turk
perfidiously against his own City: which when Solomon won, he caused the
treacherous man to be flayed alive, saying it was not lawful for a Christian
to marry a Turk, except he put off his old skin. And that Banister, who
treacherously betrayed his Lord and Master; when he expected his thousand
pounds, King Richard gave him not a farthing, saying, that he who would be
untrue to so good a Master, must needs be false to all others. In our Law
crimen laesae Majestatis is accounted so grievous an offense, to conspire
against the breath of him who is the breath of our nostrills, as that it is no
plea for him that is non compos mentis, although it be for ordinary homicide.
And in the state oeconomicall, murder committed by one that is in subjection,
is accounted petty treason: so hateful by the laws of God and man is
disobedience.

Quest. 1. Why does the omnipotent God depute frail men to be his Lieutenants?
why not an Angel, or a legion of his powerful heavenly attendants or pages?

Answ. That the excellency of the success may be ascribed to God, where it is
due, and not to men, as Saint Paul says, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in
earthen vessels. When we daily see strong sins pulled down by the preaching
of weak men, we justly conclude, that it is the power of God accompanying his
ordinance. And when we observe that men Magistrates, and not Angels, do sway
the world, quelling and captivating daring vices, we acknowledge it to be Gods
power. If Magistrates were like Angels, of miraculous power; like Argus, one of
them to have an hundred eyes, or, as Briareus, an hundred hands; which they
have indeed virtually, not formally; if every one of them were as rich and wise
as Solomon, or strong as Sampson, or that they could destroy mankind, as the
Angel did seventie thousand amongst the Israelites, we might think it was
their own power. But now we see it is a secret virtue in the divine ordinance.
An horse has strength enough to cast his rider, and run away from him, but
does not usually. And as strong oxen are guided by little children, in regard
of the image of God in mankind: thus are a multitude of strong and violent
people ruled by Magistracy; not only for fear of punishment, but even for
conscience sake.

This reason is given by God himself, Judges 7.2. The people are too many:
lest Israel vaunt, saying, mine own hand has saved me. So if Angels ruled, it
would be judged to be by their own power. But God for his own glory has
appointed men of the same mold, of the same stuff by nature, borne and dye
alike, usually better qualified with experience, learning, wisdom, and
integrity: yet they are but men, and in the judgment of rash self-conceited
bystanders, not better qualified than others; for in their simple judgment
they think they see more than the gamesters. God, I say, for his own glory
does hang great plummets upon weak lines, as in the Ministry, so in the
Magistracy, that God working such strong effects by weak causes, we may say,
as it is Psalm 115.1. Not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy name, etc.

2. God deputes mankind, not Angels, ex gratia, it being a great favor,
first, to the party injured. Secondly, to the party injuring. Thirdly, to the
Magistrate, the party punishing.

First, to the party injured, for the propinquity. As the Scripture says, ye
need not go to Heaven, Deuteronomy 30.18.
nor to the deep, but the word is near thee: So may we say of government,
(especially in these itinerary circuits) Justice is administered even at our
doors.

Secondly, to the party to be punished, as the people said to Moses, Exodus
20.19. Speak thou with us, but let not God speak, lest we die. If God should
punish by extraordinary judgments, as the Egyptians; or with miraculous
plagues, as he did to Corah and the like, it would be most terrible to
malefactors: whereas now being by men, they may parley for their lives, they
must be cast or acquitted by their Peers or equals.

Thirdly, to the Magistrate. As he has made him his Deputy, so he puts
valuation upon him by employing him. And thereby he does quicken in men
industry, pains, and care, that they may come to be Magistrates, that is,
sublimated manhood. God as the Sun, does irradiate Magistracy as the Moon,
with his brightness. As Christ was himself baptized, but never baptized any,
and gave the Eucharist but once, to put a valuation upon his ordinance in the
hands of the Ministers. So in the Magistracy he graces his Deputy, Man, putting
the honor and employment upon him. It is said, Matthew. 9.8. The multitudes saw
it, and glorified God which had given such power unto men. As there for
miracles, so here for authority. If David did break out so pathetically, O
Lord, Psalm. 8.4.
what is man! Thou have made him Lord, etc. How much more may we say, Lord,
what is a Magistrate, that thou do thus advance him, even over men!

Quest. 2. Does not God challenge authority to be his Domaine? which he will
not let out, but keep in his own hands, saying, as it is, Deuter. 32.35. which
is quoted by Saint Paul, Rom 12.9. Vengeance is mine, I will repay. Whereupon
Saint Paul makes his appeal, 2 Timothy 4.14. Alexander did me much evil, the
Lord reward him, etc.

Answ. By these places it is meant that private men must not usurp: for else,
what God does by his Deputies, he does it as it were by himself. As the Lord
Keeper writes test meipso; and the Judges of other Courts, and the Justices
may write Carolus Dei, etc. noting in whose right and power they do it. Saint
Paul disclaimes it only as being a private man. God will hereafter avenge,
Nisi prius Iustitiarii venerint, etc. and in the mean time he does it by them
as his Substitutes.

Quest. 3. But is not this old Grant out of date? Are not Christian Magistrates
put out of Commission by Christ's coming.

Answ. Thus think the Anabaptists, whose objections Zanchius well answers,
urging Christ's subjection to Pilate, Saint Paul's appealing to Caesar, and the
other Apostles clearing themselves, but yet submitting to the Magistrates,
acknowledging the power to be of God.

This Descent of Authority may teach us:

First, To take notice of that Jesuiticall doctrine and practice to lay violent
hands upon Gods Deputies upon a pretense of Religion. Murder, as you have
heard, is a most wicked sin, and disobedience is as the sin of witchcraft.
Now treason is the committing or putting together both these sins. The old
warrantable doctrine and practice of the Church in the primitive times was,
prayers unto, and supplications for the Governors. This was the Churches
force, both defensive and offensive: and still with all godly learned
Christians it is concluded, Vide Epise. Daven. Determine.
that Renuente Principe populus non debet moliri Reformationem.

Like unto these, but not so ill, are those that offer violence with their
tongues, though not with their hands: such as are disrespective to them that
are in authority, not speaking of them, or to them, publicly or privately, as
to Gods Vicegerents, but with quips and girds, to please themselves, and to
stroke the people. This is rather like unto Satyricall Poets, than answerable
to Saint Paul's advice, 1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a
father. And like his doctrine was his practice to Agrippa and Festus: and thus
was the Prophet Daniels to the Assyrian and Persian Kings.

Contrary to these holy men are those monsters in a Kingdom, who endeavor by
all means possible to enervate and weaken Authority, thereby to make it
contemptible. God casts his divine luster upon them, as Moses was when he had
been talking with God: Epiphanius of Heretics.
And these; as Moles, are always vexing and disturbing firm ground, blind
without knowledge, and despicable when their plots are discovered.

Let none then in Pulpits or Parlours deprave Governors and government: if
they do, those words, Number. 16.7. may be truly applied to them, Ye take too
much upon you. Authority is Gods ordinance, and must not be made unsavory by
finding and creating faults in Governors. It is strange, that they who would
be accounted the children of God, do not digest the Deputies of God: for they
have been, are, and (it is to be feared) ever will be opsite and Antipodes to
all Governors, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

They will say, Our quarrel is not against government, but the faults of
Governors: and they think with Absalom, Oh if they were in place, etc.

This is the common hackney pretense or color. Cham? Though the father be
guilty, shall a son talk of nothing but his fathers faults, discovering his
fathers nakedness, especially when this son himself is idle and
disobedient? Will some men, like children, nothing but eat, drink, sleep,
play, (indeed there is little else expected of them) and yet like fell, ill
conditioned children, will they cry, exclaim, and disturb others? Let these
sons of Belial, who cannot bear the yoke of Governors, be examined in
their private vocations, how lazy, how oppressing, and how unprofitable to the
Christian World. These people are like Chorus upon the Stage: being private
men, and their wings too big for their nests, and their feet for their shoes,
they desire still to roll and enlarge themselves as snow-balls, and like the
Babel-builders, will make themselves a turret or pillar by popularity Tell me,
vain disturber, how would thou like a servant thus qualified, to say, my
master is unfit for his place: he is silly, ignorant, negligent, or the like:
he does not as a master should do. True indeed, he does not, if he suffer
without punishment such a saucy servant.

2. This Descent of Authority may teach us how near of Kindred Magistrates and
Ministers are: the one is Dei gratia, and the other is providentia divina:
sometimes they are inherent in the same person. Our blessed Savior was both a
King and a Priest, Moses and David were both victorious Magistrates and divine
Prophets. And if they be not jointly in one person, yet we see they are
brethren, as Abraham said to Lot, proceeding from the same springhead:
celestial, God; terrestrial, the King. And this the later end of an Act of
Parliament intimates for the uniformity of Common prayer: If the Ordinary have
punished, then not the temporal power: and if not that, then the Ordinary. If
either punish, it is sufficient, because both come from the same fountain.

For us in our Pulpits, to slight this high ordinance, were as great
indiscretion, as for the Magistrates upon their Benches to disparage our
Profession. Without doubt Magistrates may be capable of the just reproof of
the Clergy, and the Clergy of the just censure of the Magistracy. But all must
take heed, so much as they can, that neither of their excellent Callings suffer
by it. The people will neglect both, if they do not protect us from injuries:
and we teach the people conscionably to obey them.

Magistrates are Gods Deputies, and Ministers his Ambassadors, 2. Cor. 5.20. As
it is said in another case, Ruth 4.11. these two like Rachel and Leah do build
up the house of Israel, Panermitan. Sir John Doderidge.
conjunctim better than divisim. Theologia and Ius must fraternizare. They both
look at the same end, namely rectifying of the manners. Both Moses his hands
must be held up, that vicious Amaleck may be pulled down. If the sinews of
government be slackned by inconsiderate Teachers, and that they do not uphold
one another, as the Elm the Vine, sin and vice will more easily thrust in.

But when Magistrates, Christ's Substitutes in his Kingly Office; and the
Ministers, Christ's Substitutes in his Priestly Office; stay one another, as
buttresses below or spars above: then the temporal sword cuts deep in the
outward man, and the spiritual in the conscience.

We are all Ministers of God, both Magistrates and Priests. So Saint Paul
intimates, Romans 13.4. (...), speaking of the Magistrate: which word (...) is
commonly used for our Tribe, as Philp. 1.1. With the Bishops and Deaecons: and
1 Timothy 3.12. Deacons must be the husbands of one wife. This is a part of the
Epistle when Deacons are admitted into Orders.

If the word (...) then be used for them both, because they are employed to do
service for one Master, let them not counter-worke one against another: but as
the walls uphold the roof, and the roof keeps dry the walls; so should
these ordinances assist one another; that the temporal power may regulate the
outward man, words and actions; and the spiritual sword the inuer man, thoughts
and conscience. Those that would occasion any civil war or breach betwixt
these two, endeavor to disable those shores that bear them up. It is great
rashness for some unadvised Teachers, and discontented people, like
themselves, who love to dance after their ill tuned pipes, to be always
throwing dirt into the faces of Governors and government: being private men
they hate and envy all those that have power.

An eminent Prelate of our Church said in his Sermon to the Parliament, The
Church cannot dwell but in the State, nor the Commonwealth flourish without
the Church. When the Church, the house of grace, is a welcome inmate to the
State, which is a wise fabric of policy, not only humane, but a divine
ordinance. In a word, let these ordinances, like husband and wife, live with
harmony and love together. The soul cannot act (quoad nos) but by the body,
nor the body live without the soul: so these ordinances.

Lastly, and in brief, lest I be injurious to your employments whilst I
plead for them, this may be useful both to Superiors and inferiors.

First, to Magistrates and Superiors. My Lords and others, give me leave only
to put you in mind of the pedigree or Descent of your Authority. It is from
above, from God, of the blood Royal, both from another, and for another. As a
Nobleman does or should endeavor to imitate the virtues of him that raised his
house: so let Magistrates carriage not be bitter or insipid, but sweet, pure,
clean, like the fountain from whence it came. They must not be like old
courtiers or rich citizens, forgetting from whence they had their beginning. A
man in authority is not genus generalissimum, quo nihil superius: as he is
genus hujus, so he is species illius, like the Moon, borrowing light from the
Sun; they must not, as butchers or graziers, then, judge by the feeling only,
but all their proceedings must resemble that image and superscription which it
has from the great Caesar, the Lord chief Justice of Heaven and Earth. They
must like rivers return tribute and homage to that Ocean whence their power
comes. They must do better than private men for example sake, more good and
less evil, considering their high descent and Ancestors, whom they must
labor to resemble so far as humane infirmity will permit, by endeavoring
to be holy, just, merciful, impartial, wise, deliberate, as he is from whom
they derive their power. I might easily be large in showing that God is so, and
that his Deputies should be so.

Yea further, Let all, even inferior Officers, and Jurors, and whosoever bear
any part in the punishing of sin; let them labor to be just and free from
any sharking or oppression. We find that Authority is of an excellent race,
nobly descended; and therefore it should be generous, not making the vigor and
power of Authority to be only a modus acquirendi, like the Publicans. It was
lawful to pay tribute to Caesar: our Savior did not gainsay it, but bid
Render unto Caesar. And he told Saint Peter, Matthew 22.21 Matthew. 17.27.
Lest we should give offense, though the children be free, yet take twenty
pence for thee and me. But then the Publicans made that bitter or harsh, which
would otherwise have been better digested: because they did not only take for
their masters, like tame hawks, but like wild hawks snatched also for
themselves Such were the toll-gatherers or receivers of the public revenue for
the Romans amongst the Jews: who, because they gathered public payments, were
termed Publicans. Although their calling was good, Matthew. 9.10. Luke 18.10.
and some of their persons good (witness our Saviors conversing with them,
and the Publican praying with the Pharisee, and Zacheus who was Princip^
Publicanorum: Luke 19.2. Matthew. 9.9.
Matthew the Publicane was afterward an Apostle) yet their employment was not
very acceptable. People were then slow in paying public money: and ^hen the
gatherers oppressions, and private exactions over and above their masters dues,
made them more hard of digestion. Suetonius reports of one Sabinus, that had a
monument for him with this inscription, (...), for a faichfull Publicane: as if
that were a great commendation, considering that occasiones faciunt latrones.
But let men in authority, from the highest to the lowest prove the descent of
their power by its justice and generosity.

2. Let people learn from hence to acknowledge this Descent of Authority, and
that therefore they must neither usurp it, nor slight it, nor disobey it.

First, not usurp it. They must stay for a lawful calling: private men and
women must only act in their own spheres and circuits, as Masters over
servants, and parents over children. Saint Paul's spirit was troubled in him at
the idolatry of the Athenians; ^cts 17.16.
but being a private man he only exhorted, but did nothing.

Secondly, People must not slight it, because it is so nobly borne, as appears
by this Heraldry book of Moses, where we find, as it is Act. 19.35. that this
goddess Magistracy is that image of power which is come down from Heaven.
Being so highly descended, it is scandalum Magnatum to speak slightly of it.
And it is highly employed also: for either of these ways may this fault be
committed. Magistracy has the privileges both ways; being highly born, as
Nobles; and highly employed, as great Officers.

Thirdly, We must obey and submit to this ordinance, even for conscience sake.
Take Saint Peter's advice, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14 which is a part of the Epistle
appointed to be read the twenty seventh day of this month, the day of our
gracious King his entry to the Kingdom, Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake: whether it be to the King, as supreme; or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. For the Lords sake, the Founder
of it; and for its own sake, being so incomparably beneficial for people. Not
to esteem of these and obey them, as Gods Deputies, is a kind of civil
Atheism. For we may say justly as the people to Herod unjustly, The ordinance
of God and not of man.

And that we may the better submit, Acts 12.22.
take these helps following.

1. Make it not our employment to find and make faults in Governors. For then
out of envy we shall think them faulty without cause. Moses said, Numb.
16.15. I have been no ways injurious to them. Indeed he had meekely, justly,
and miraculously brought them out of the land of Egypt: yet observe in the
third verse Corah and his company quarrelled, Why lift ye your selves above the
congregation of the Lord? And though the patient Earth miraculously punished
them, yet in the 41. verse all the multitude murmured, saying, Ye have killed,
etc. And then God slew more of them. Magistrates and Ministers are like cities
upon hills, all eyes are fixed and observing them. They cannot possibly avoid
this dilemma, fork, or crotch from peevish, censorious bystanders. If they be
quick and active, then they are busy and cruel: if merciful and gentle, then
they are dull, lazy, and remiss in their places. John Baptist came neither
eating nor drinking, Mat. 11.18, 19.
and they said he had a Devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and
they said, Behold a glutton and a wine-bibber. If a Governor be like Solomon
taking care for the building of a Temple, the fruits of peace and devotion: yet
the people will say, 2. Sam. 16.7.
as it is 2. Chron. 10 4. The yoke is grievous. And David being an active man,
conquering the Jebusites, he is accounted Vir sanguinum. For as the Sea,
though of it self indifferently quiet, yet there are ever and anon some
whistling winds to make it troublesome: So there are always some like
Jeroboam, who stroke the people with cavils against Governors, thereby to
sour and leaven them. From which censorious conceits proceed daring speeches;
M^ Lord Ver^lam in Hen. 7.
And liberty of speech, it is the female of Sedition, and in time the
Grandmother of treason. Take heed of the bewitching arguments; Romists on the
one side; and the miscalled Sions Plea, and the like, on the other: by which
under a cloak of Religion they labor to make the people disaffected to their
Governors and government.

2. Remember whence Magistrates come. Look upon them, not personally, but
relatively. When an Ambassador comes, we do not presently inquire or pry
how learned, rich, wise, or nobly borne he is, but from what a great Master
he comes and does represent. Alexander would be accounted the son of a God,
thereby to keep his people in obedience.

3. Do as ye would be done by. How would ye have your children and servants
carry themselves in your private families? Not usurp, nor slight, nor disobey
you. And if ye come to any public employment, would ye have them that are
under you observe nothing but your warpings and failings, yea worse, creating
jealousies and suspicions without cause? Lycurgus being asked why the
government was not popular, answered, Tu prius in domo tua efficito principatum
popularem.

4. Consider that the worst kind of Governors or Government is better than an
Anarchy: And therefore that Magistracy is a great blessing, being the very life
of society. No marvel then that Saint Jude reckons speaking ill of dignities
among great faults.

5. Forget not Gods command, Honor thy father, etc. not only Natural, but
Political; thy father in the kingdom, as well as in the family: that thy
days may be long; being peaceable subjects here, and glorious citizens
hereafter: the Magistrate is parens patriae.

6. Pray to God, who does dispose the hearts of Rulers and people; that the one
may govern, and the other obey conscionably, using these and the like prayers,
with which I will conclude.

Almighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant
Charles, our King and Governor, and the hearts of all that are in authority
under him, that they knowing whose Ministers they are, may above all things
seek thy honor and glory: and that we duly considering whose authority they
have (as we have been taught) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey
them, in thee and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance through
Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

