THE ART OF CHRISTIAN SAYLINGE. OR A comfortable treatis written on these
words of the Prophet David in the 55. Psalm. 22. 23. verses.

Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall nourish thee, he will not suffer
the righteous, to fall for ever, and thou O God shall throw them down into the
pit of corruption. LONDON, Printed for John Harison dwelling in paternoster row
at the sign of the gilden Unicorn and Bible and are there to be sold. 1602.

To the right worshipful Master Oliver Cromwell Esquire health honor and
happiness.
THe Poets hane prognosticated of an age, which they epithet, marmorum, durum:
steely, stony, hard, and rockie. Math. 24. Tim. 2.3.
The scriptures have prophicied of a time, where in Charity, should wax cold,
men should be covetous, and lovers of themselves. And experience has proved
these to be the days of usury, Simonie, deceit, oppression, theft, and want
of charity, yet Genes. 18.
Abraham was full of hospitality: Genes. 1^.
Lot received strangers: Cleomenes and Polomaeus had the surnames, of
benefactors. Alex. a^.
The Barbarians had pity on the seabeaten trauilers. Alex. 1.
And Job would not let the stranger lodge in the street, but set open his
doors to him, that went by the way. Acts. 28.
Yea says he, if I restrained the poor of their desire, caused the eyes of
the widow to fail, eat my morsels alone, and not feed the fatherless. Job.
31.
If I with held the hirelings wages, got goods by oppression, or let the naked
perish for want of clothing. then let thistles grow in stead of wheat, cockle
instead of barley, my arm fall from my shoulder, and be broken from the bone.
But the Mimicke could tell, that bona comparat praesidia miserecordia, the
merciful shall find mercy. Esaias. 58.
The liberal shall have plenty, and the waterer rain Martianus said that
true riches were sua indigen tibus largiri, to feed the hungry, lodge the
wanderer. and cloth the naked. Oze. 6.
God desired, Christ blessed, and the Saints practiced, mercy. Ma^h. 5.
John's sermons were all for love: Peter's co^mendations for hospitality:
Timothes charge for good works: Eccles. 44.
Moses cowncels for pity: and Paul's exhortations for love and charity. Ier.
com. in
Now the^ (right worshipful) this small treatis of christian sailing pressed
forth to try the surges of censuring seas, Gal. 3.
has presumed upon your patronage (the true supporter of poverty) to protect
it against the prating assalts of the peuish pirat. Peter 1.4.
Being imboldened thereunto by your love to learning, hospicality to strangers,
Tim. 1.6.
benefice^ce to neighbors, piety to kindred, pity to the pore and bounty unto
al, Dentron. 10 Romans 1.2. Co. 3.
whose beginnings it blesses whose proceedings it praises, and whose
continuance it confirms unto the day of your arrival in the heavenly haven
of eternal happiness.

Your worships to command JOHN HVLL.

The preface unto the Christian Reader.
MAn in this life may not vnfuly be resembled unto a ship upon the sea, for
her swiftnes in sailing: facility in breaking: easiness in hindering
similitude in bearing: hazard in loosing; and joy in arriving. Cor. 9.24.
For it passes swiftly, compared to a race called stadium (...) Lucian in
Caronte.
because it lasted but the holding of Hercules. To a bubble (...) August.
because as some bubbles no sooner rise but fall, others stay a little longer,
so does man. To a mist: to a cloud: to a post, for nil aliud est presetis
vitoe te^pus, quem cursus ad morte^: Seneca. Epist. 59.
the time of this life is nothing else but a continual posting unto death tunc
cu crescimus, vita decresdit, even then, when our bodies are increasing, our
life is decreasing: not unlike Ionas^ g^ard quickly cume and quickly gone.
Thee-phrastus complained os the brevity of man's life. The Indians could not
show an old man Quintilian made it but a day, the Psalmist but a watch in the
night. Pindarus but a dream. Sophocles but a breath Demetrius but the very
prick of time, let us then remember our selves and consider, vita qua^ sit
puncto minus hostis, quam sit malus antiquius, qua^ falsae voluptates. How this
life is most short, the Devil most cruel, pleasure most vain, honor most
deceit full, and riches most pestilent: but for those that sail for heaven the
promises, are most comfortable performances, most admirable, and all good
without compaire, whose King is divinity, whose law is charity, and whose end
is eternitis. Acts. 5.
Wherefore let us have unto our haven. Secondly it is brittell, and soon
broken: Varanius.
like flame soon kindled, like a spark soon quenched and like a reed soon
broosed. Val. Max. lib. 9.12^
Ananias and Saphira died suddenly being rebuked. Galcion while he was barbing.
Philemon while he was laughing. Plin. 7.53.
Sophocles ioying. Hely sorrowing. Domitius after eating, Anacreo^ drinking.
Laertius.
Cleanthes fasting, Attila bleeding: Perseus watching and Bithon sleeping.
Verily the earth bears not any thing more frail then feel man, not a miss
compared unto a ship, qui dum prospero vento, velis plenis pla cido maricursum
peragit, saepe insperato ac repent frangitur: that while the wind blows
fairly, and she sails merrily is overtaken by mischance and broken suddenly.
Let us therefore be alwayse in a reddines: it is Christ's commandment the Poets
cownsell: and reasons rule, watch says Christ: Math. 27.
viue memor mortis says the Poet live mindful of death: for says reason.
Make. 25.


Fata mane^t o^n^s, o^nes expectat auarus,
portitor vt turbae vix satis vna ratis mus Persiuis.

Tendimus huc o^nes, meta^ propera ad vna^
omnia sub legesmors vocat atra suas Chilo.

Vid ad liuium.
All men must dye were they as strong as Sampson, rich as Dives, fair as
Absolon, wise as Solomon, zelus as Elias, godly as David and old as Adam. But
when, where, or how, to day or to morrow, by sea or by land, by fire or by
sword, who can tell?

Mill modis lethi miseros mors vna fatigat.
Death has a thousand ways to seize upon. By sudden death as upon Pindarus:
by poison as upon Socrates, Leuit. 10.
by strange fire as upon Hadab and Abing, Exodus 14.
by water as upon Pharoh and his host, by earth as upon Chorah and his company.
Numb. 17.
By the halter as Achitophell, by the sword as Saul, Luke. 2.17.
and therefore let us be ready.

Luke. 1.31.
Thirdly as the ship is hindered by contrary winds, overmuch loading, and
unskillful aiming from arriving at the wished haven: so is man by vain pride,
inordinate love, foolish fear: heavy sin: blind ignorance, and an unbelieving
heart stayed from attaining his desired haven. For pride and vain glory blew
the Angels from heaven, made shipwreck of Adam: Acts. 12.
ouerthrowed Herod: Dan. 4.
and threw Nabuchadonasar from the stern. Genesis 11.
It confounded Babell: Math. 11.
condemned Capernaum, Mark. 9.33
and made Senacharib an example, for all that behold him to be godly. These. 2.
4.
It infected Christ's disciples: it distroyed Corach: Aman: Absolon, Adoniah. It
is the mark of Antichrist and it hindered the scribes and Pharisees from heaven
because they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. John. 12.43.
It unjustified the Pharisees: descrieth false Apostles: and vnmasketh
Hyppocrites. Luke 11.
It is like a rock that will break our ship: a wind, that blasteth our
fruit: and a thief, that will steal our goods, compared by Seneca to a
whirlewind: by Plutarch to a bladder: and by Austine to smoke. Cor. 2.10:
The scripture says, there glory, is there shame, yea that of all things it
is most miserable. For sequitur superbos Victor a tergo deus: God resists the
proud, conquers the hauty: and will one day bring there stinking bodies, magno
faetore from there nastie sepulchers. Psalm. 62.
Let not therefore the wise man glory in his wisdom: the strong man in his
strength, nor the rich man in his riches. Ier. 17
But let him that glories glory in the Lord, before who^e David would not be
examined. Job. 15.
Job was cast down, Elias hid his face, and Abraham called, himself dust and
ashes, yea man is vanity: the heart wicked. and the heavens unclean: strike
therefore sail, least this wind do catch thee,

The second contrary wind is iuordinat love of riches, pleasure kindred, and
friends The first hindered the bidden guests sloed Achan, killed Ahab, And
hanged Judas: it is birdlime, a net, and strong wine, covetousness is compared
to a thirsty dropsy: vgle monster, ravening harpy, drowning fire and a violent
flood, called by the Poets the mother of mischefe, the head of all evil matter
scelerum and what not? Phosilid.
By the Philosopher: elementum malorum, the chief city of sin, the element of
evil. Apollod.
Riches are compared to a runnagate servant to an Egle, Cland. 2.
to nothing Fortuna vitrea est dumsplendet frangitur fortune for time is like
glass beautiful but brickle. Timon.


The merchant bragging of his wealth is puffed up: when as oftentimes the wind
will make claim unto his good, and be lord of his trafique, Antiphanes.
Set not therefore thy heart upon riches, love not the world, and beware of
covetousness, for the covetous man is like fire, the grave, an hell that never
have enough, like the wolf, the hog, and the dog. that following two men
leaves the stranger, and cleaues unto his master: so the worldling for sakes
Christ and follows mammon, as Gehezi, that to get the money lost his master:
and what shall it profitte thee to win the world and loose thy soul.

The second hindered Esaias: Dives, the Epicure. Sam. 2.11.
It led David to wantonness, Solomon to idolatry, Sampson to vanity: Kings.
1.11.
Herod to cruelty, Not to reckon up Sardanapalus: Antonie: Mecenas: Caligula:
Nero: Judge. 16.
Heliogabalus, it hindered Ulysses companions from sailing toward there
country. Mark. 9.
It is Hesiodes Pandora, the Devils bait, and the souls enemy Inde adspice
late florentes quondam luxus quas verteret vrbes: quippe nec ira deum tantum,
nec tela, nec hosts: quantum sola noces animis illapsa voluptas. Silius. 15.
It changed Rome: burned sodom: vanquished Babylon, and destroyed Israel It
turns men into beasts, women into swine and makes all worse, asino vel cane,
then the dog, or the ass.

The third hindered the Pagan from baptism the Papist from verity: Christos.
Ely from piety It is aries quo murus Euangilij quatitur: Hom. 5.18.
the Ra^me that shakes the walls of the Gospel. Hieron. ad Heliad.
These are our goods, our treasury, our selves. Jonathan will hazard him elfe
for David, Hercules go to hell for Theseus: Damon dye for Pithias and among
the Egyptians, there was a kind of friendship of those that would die together,
yet our christian viage must break al licet parvulusex collo pendeat nepos,
licet sparfo crine et scissis vestibus vbera, qui bus te nutriat, matter
ostendat, licet in limine pater iaceat: percultatum perge patrem, siccis oculis
ad vexillum crucis euola. Neither father nor mother. son nor daugher, kinsman
nor friend must keep us from Christ. Abraham will loose Isaac for God. Math.
10.
Math. 9.
The mother the seven children in the Machabes, the disciples leave all for
Christ, Acts. 21.
and Paul will die for the name of Jesus. But Tamerus for bis brothers love
will chang his religion, Iulians treasurer for his masters sake abandon his
profession, ye Pilate for the love of men will condemn even Christ himself.
Howbeit it shall not alwaise refl unpunished. Hely broke his neck: Pilate
killed himself, Tamorus was his own hangman, and Iulia^s Treasurer died
suddenly vomiting out his blood, Yet all this is nothing to that fearful
repulse Christ shall give them at heaven gates, saying, I know you not, for he
that denies him before men, his will Christ deny before his Father that is in
heaven.

The third contrary wind is fear of poverty: persecutions: punishments:
reviving: railing: scorning: whipping: Imprisoling: banishing: killing, all
which are incident to christian sailors. Math. 10.
For the Church is Noe and it must be tossed her poesy facere bonum et habere
malu^ to do well but to have ill, and her coulor shall be black, and cannot
be changed. A godmans life is no life but calamity, Jacobs days were few and
evil. Heb. 11.
Abraham was tossed from post to pillar: the saints suffered all kind of
misery: yea Chirst himselfelfe, Greg.
non exiit sine flagello, qui venit sine peccato, he must not depart without
whipping, that came and lived without sinning. This hindered many from sailing
after Christ, as Ciprian reports. The Theater relates, and the Tripartite
records, Jews, and Gentles, Grecians, and Barbarians. Liberius Spiera,
Nichomachus This made Aaron to make the Idolatrous calfe. Nichodemus to come by
night unto Christ, Peter to deny his master, Origin to offer to an Idol, and
Damascet to worship Mahomet, howbeit Christ must enter by the cross into
glory, his followers by afflictions in to heaven, and they which endeavor
shall be blessed and receive the croune of life.

The second hinderer is the greatness of the Lord: and of all the burdens that
ever man did bear, sin is the heauiest, like a millstone about our necks, a
mass of lead about our feet, a rock of stone upon our heads, and a mighty
mountain on our backs. Decles. 22
So heavy as heaven could not hold it: Paradise not bear it: nor earth
sustain it, but hell must receive Corath, Dathan and Abiram. The sinner is
like a filthy stone, that cannot roll, a blindfold mowle, that cannot see and
a laden ass, that cannot go, and therefore must needs be hindered. Sam. 1.^7.
Purge the^ this filth, cast away this veil, and disburde^ thy ship. The
ancient gamesters would wrestle naked: David would not fight in Saules
harness: and he; that uses masteries, abstaineth from all things, that may
hinder him. Cor. 1.9.25.
Behold Christ came to bear thy burden, unload thy vessel, and ease thy
ship, He was made the son of man, that thou might be the child of God, he
was laid in swaddling bands, that thou might be loosed from the bonds of sin.
He was wrapped in ragged clowts, that that thou might be clothed with his
righteousness innocence He was poor that thou might he rich: A stranger
that thou mighst be sure of an heavenly city. He paid tribute that thou
mighst he free from the trihute of hell. He was debased, that thou might be
exalted, accursed, that thou might be justified: condemned, that thou might
be saved: Died, that thou might live: and calls for every one tbat is weary
and heavy laden to come unto him, and he will ease them.

The third hinderer is unskillfulness in the card, ignorance in aiming, and
rudeness in guiding: Math. 11.28.
for by this means, he may roaue at random, miss the haven, and hinder his
iourny: Judge. 16.
Blind Sampson cannot find the Pillars unless he be guided Acts. 9.
nor Saul Damascus unless he be directed but if the blind lead the blind,
both fall into to the ditch, and may be drowned. Not unlike unto this temporal
blindness is the spiritual darkness of ignorance and infidilitie. For the
ignorant go they know not whether, they walk in darkness, they are very
fools, they are like the blind Sirians: they row among there enemies, and
there voyage is destruction. John. 12
Seek then for knowledge, Christ is the light: Prou.
be skillful in the card, his word is the lanther: Job. 4.
walk not in darkness, Christ is the way, drown not in error, his word is
the truth. John. 8,
To know God is life everlasting Ignoratio scripturarum est ignoratio Christ^:
John. 12.
to be unskillful in the scriptures, is to be ignorant of Christ. These are
Jacobs ladder: David's key, and will lead thee into all truth, without these
thou art like the Sodomites looking for Lots house, the Jews see king for
Christ, the Pilot rouing at the haven but cannot hitte it. John 17.
For the scriptures are our sword, balla^ce, rule, square and door that opens
to us the knowledge of God and conducts us to everlasting happiness. John. 14.
Notwithstanding albeit the scripture be a candle that burns most brightly
and the sun that shines most clearly yet they are not so unto the blind, the
hid, the dead, but only unto him, whose darkness is enlightened, whose ears are
unstopped, and whose eyes are opened, to hear, to see, to believe the word of
truth. The Isralites hard the thunder but saw not God, the two disciples hard
and saw Christ but knew not Jesus, before their eyes were opened. Infidility is
a sto^e that must be removed, a cloud that must be dispersed, and a death that
must be quickened, He that is troubled with this disease has hands without
feeling, ears without hearing, and eyes without seeing. Aug.
O then let us ask, seek, and knock for faith. John. 1.5.9.
For faith is the inlightning of the mind: the victory over the world: and the
gate whereby God enters into our hearts it is the star that leads the wiseme^ to
Christ the woman to her groat: and the Prodigal child to his father. Math. 2.
It is the light: by which we walk: Luke. 15.
the life, by which we live, the shield be which we are defended, and the
Cinosura be which we sail, without this we shoot besides the butte: Cor. 2.5.
run beside the goal, and row beside the haven.

Forthly as Noah's Ark received al kind of creatures: Gennes. 7.
the ship bears al sorts of burdens: so does man all manner of misery. Eurip.
For what is life but violence and grief: the body but a sepulcher, the figure
but fetters, birth but earth, and to live but to die, Homer calls man unhappy,
Antiphanes death. stipendary Nazinanze^ a race, of vnstabilitie, borne to
labor, and brought up to misery, even pleasure breeds pain, wealth woe and
singing sighing, so that Menander prefers all creatures before man for
happiness, whose joy is but sorrow, whose mirth is but grief and whose whole
life but wretched misery: our comfort is in God our goodness Christ our
captain and heaven our happy haven.

Fifthly, as the ship is in continual danger of waves, winds, gulfes, or
rocks, so is ma^s life of sin, sickness misery, and misfortune, both sea and
land water, and earth, all are full of mischefe, pain, trouble, ill, harm and
hurt: in such sorts as the poets add these Epithits to the sea and say;ling,
te^pestuous, boistrus, froward, dangerous, as they that sail the sea can well
recount the dangers of the same. Colas. 3. Gal. 5. Acts. 27.
But tent ines more strange titles give the scriptures unto man, as inordinate
unclean, couitous, wrathful, angry, malicious cursed, proud, seditious,
drunken, hating, murderous, yea what not? So that as a ship in danger of
drowning must be helped, by unloading, stopping, pumping or anchoring so must
man in this perilous world. When Paul's sbip was in hazard by tempest, they
lightened the burden, eased the vessel and cast out the very tackling. And
when thy ship is in danger and laden with the cares of the world, fear of
death and pleasure of sin, thy remedy is to ease it by faith, repentance and
good works which Abraham David, Peter, and the rest did.

Secondly the leaking shipe must be mended, and thy sinful soul amended. The
water will drown the ship, and sin will smite thy soul, water must be kept out
by stopping and sin by risisting. for every assent the soul gives to Satan,
sin, the world and the flesh is like a fearful rift in a crased vessel:
Sins resemble great waves and close rifts: some being great and manifest,
others close and secret. The first like mighty waves will swallow us up
quickly the second like hidden rifts will sink us suddenly, Satan suggested,
Eve delighted, Adam consented and all were drowned, Tecum prius ergo voluta
haec anime, ante tubas, galeatum sero duelli paenitet. Genes. 3. Iuuen. 8.


When the stead is stolen it will be to late to shut the door, when the house
is burnt to pour on water, and when the battle is done to put on harness.
Stop sin in the thought refist it in the entrance, it is a serpent, bruise it on
the head; a cocatrise, kill it in the egg: and a wolf, distroy it in the
litter. Sin is thy enemy look unto thy ways, a thief look unto the doors:
a Dalila look unto thy soul: thy senses are thy porters, beware they be not
beguiled. Be thy sins secret yet a secret stab will take away thy life: be
they hidden, yet hidden poison will rob thee of thy self: be they small, de
guttis minitis implentur flumina yet small drops makes great floods and drown
much ground and therefore stop it out betimes. Aug.


Thirdly he must pumpe to ease the ship of water: and man repent to ease his
soul of sin. Esa. 38.
Hezechias plague sore must have a plaster of figs to draw the poison from
his heart: Luke. 3.9.
and thy pestilent sin a plaster of Gods word, to keep the infections from
thy soul. Tim. 1.4.
The dropsy body requires a sweat to purge out humors, and man's dropsy soul
the fear of God to drive out sin. Naaman must be washed seven times in Jordan
to cleanse his body and we be bathed seven times in repentance to scour our
souls. The surfeiting stomach must have a vomit to help his body: and man
true confession to ease his soul, The sickely body must keep a diet to
preserve his health and the penitent man must abstain from sin to save his
soul, unto which if he add exercise of good works he shall be happy. Heb.
6.18.19.


Fourthly in danger the mariner will ly at Anchor for his saftie: so must man
in the sea of this world for his security. His Ankers must be faith, hope, and
prayer: the ground must be the Trinity: then will the Anchor hold, and the
ground never fail: For we have Gods promise and his oath that by two things,
wherein it is impossible that God should lie we might have strong consolation,
which have our refuge to hold fast the hope, that is set before us, which we
have as an Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast. And if God be with us,
let winds, waves, rocks, sin, Satan, and the world, fret, fume, blow, all
shall not hurt us.

Sixthly, and lastly: as the tossed seafearing man wearied with waves, withered
with wind rushed with rocks, and greened with gulfes will make mirth and
melody at his safe arriual in the earthly haue^: so much more the christian
sayler, whose ship is him self, Heb. 11.
whose winds, waves, gulfes, and rocks are his prosperous, sinister, troubles,
temptations, trangressions, Psalm. 42.
and whose haven is heaven, which he vewes a far of, salutes out of the sea,
sighs after with heavy groans, and praise for daily with watered eyes, will
receive with joy, embrace with hymmes, and retain with everlasting praise his
blessed entrance in the happy heavens. Apoc. 22.
How willing where the Saints to die: Paul to be dissolved, and David to be
with God? This makes the good man die singing like the swan live praying with
the saints: and cry running dravve me, draw me with the Church, Ocurramus,
sequamur says Ambros: Curramus non passibus sed afflictionibus says Barnard
let us run, follow, fly, here is not happiness: let us have, post, sail with
hearts, with hands, with groans, sobs, and sighs, there is felicity, where
when thou arriuest, thou shall have Father Son, and spirit to receive thee,
Angels, saints, and all the heavenly p^ier, to embrace thee, The blessed
Trinity for Christ his promise to reward thee, with a crown, kingdom, thro^e
happy, heavenly and eternal where pain is never felt, groaning never heard,
sadness never seen and evil never feared: but there shall be youth without
age: life without death, health without sickness, and true felicity for ever
without end: the which we pray for, we labor for, and we sail for.

The way and method, I have opened in this short treatis for a confirmation of
the rich, comfort of the poor, and consolation unto all.

THE ART OF CHRISTIan Sailing. Or, A comfortable Treatise, written on these
words of the Prophet David, in the 55. Psalm. 22, 23. Verses.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: He will not suffer
the righteous to fall for ever. And thou, O God, shall bring them down into
the pit of corruption, etc.
PLus mouent exempla quam verba. Gregory.
Examples do move more the^ precepts, and a good life, then a good lesson.
For, Homines facilius ad benefaciendu^, exemplis, quam verbis, inuitantur.
Origin.
Men are incited sooner by works, then by words: and by lives, then by laws
to do well. Wherefore David, inte^ding to prefer a precept, first propounds
his practice, because, haec iustitia est, vt quod alterum facere velles, tute
prius ipse incipias. This is the law of justice, to practice that we would
have others perform, and to begin that our selves wherein we would have others
to go forwards: And happy shall thou be, if David's hazard be thy happiness, his
practice, thy president, and his cure in extremity, thy care in adversity, to
cast upon the Lord. For being persecuted by Saul, he wishes wings like a
Dove, in the 6. verse. But hac via non succedente, preuayling not this ways,
he betakes him unto his prayers, and cries unto the Lord in the 17. verse;
there is his practice: and his soul was delivered in peace, in the 19. verse;
there is thy warrant. Now for thy instruction, this Psalm is by the Greeks
entitled, (...). A Psalm of David, to give instruction. Or, ode didascalica,
Tremeli.
wherein David, or God by David, plays the master, and thou (if thou fear
God) must be the scholar. Or lastly Maskille David, according to the Hebrews,
as who should say, In this Psalm is contained, Doctrina situ dignissima:
Sadel. in Psalm. 32.
A doctrine worth thy knowledge for thy understanding: and we may add a
practice worthy imitation for thy living. For when prosperity on thy right
hand, shall vpbraid thee with, Quis tu es? alas thou art grass, and thy glory
as the flower of the field: Esai. 40.6.
then may thou cast this burden on the Lord, and say with David: How ever it
be, yet God is good. Psalm. 73.1.
And when adversity shall demand, Vnde es? Genesis 3.9.
thou art of the earth, and to the earth thou must return. Job. 17.14.
Corruption was thy mother, and worms are thy sisters. Thy days are swifter
then the weauers shittle, Job. 7.6.
and for thy abiding, thou have not whereon to lay thy head: Math. 8.20.
The^ cast this burden, etc. and make it known with holy Job, that naked
came thou out of thy mothers womb, and naked shall thou return. Job. 1.20.
For dant superi cuncta vel auferunt. Pindarus
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. And yet say with David, Psalm. 127 3.
The Lord has done great things, yea great things for us already. Though
virtue reject thee with this question, Qua semita huc accedes? it is a hard
matter to clime the tree of virtue, especially for thee that art borne in
sin, and conceived in iniquity: Psalm. 51.5
whose righteousness is like a filthy clout, Esai. 64.6.
and all the cogitations of thy heart are prone to evil evermore: Genesis 6.5.
Yet cast this burden likewise upon the Lord, and say with David, Misericordia
Domini plena est terra. The earth is full of the goodness and loving kindness of
the Lord: and with Augustine, Plus vult ille misereri, quam nos a miseria
liberari: The Lord is more willing to show mercy, then we are to receive it.
And when vice shall invade thee, with Qua cautela huc recedes? thou art now in
the custody of sin, and fettered with the bonds of iniquity: if thou
would break prison, or unloose thy fetters, thou must first bind the
strong man. Mat. 12.14.
But alas, thou art weak, Phil. 2.30.
and not able so much as to will, thou art dead in thy sins, Ephe. 2.1
and how will thou deliver thy self? then cast this burden also upon the Lord,
and say with Nehemias, Nehemi. 4.20.
The Lord shall fight for us. And with Paul, To. 8.31
If God be with us, who can be against us? And with David, Psalm. 3.6
The Lord is my salvation, therefore I will not be afraid for ten thousand that
beset me round about. Though that heaven denies thee with Quo titulo introitum
vindicas? Alas, thou art flesh: for what is of the flesh, is flesh: John. 3.6
but flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven: 1. Cor. 15
Yet may thou cast this burden upon the Lord, and say with Bernard: Puto iam
spernere me non poterit Christus, os de ossibus meis, and caro de carne mea. I
know that Christ my redeemer will not now reject me, that so dearly bought
me: who for this cause became bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, that he
might bring me unto his heavenly Paradise. And though hell and sin do make
challenge to thee, with Quo iure exitum aduocas? descend to hell, for he that
commits sin, is of the devil: 1. Ioh. 3.8.
but thou art altogether sinful, take therefore the broad way that leads unto
hell: Mat. 7.13.
behold, the Angels defy thee, heaven denies thee, virtue reiects thee, vice
retains thee, and the devil will have thee: yet cast this burden likewise
upon the Lord, and say, Nihil odisti eorum quae fecisti? Wisd. 11
thou hate nothing that thou have made. But behold (says God) all souls are
mine: and therefore take me, that am the work of thy own hands. And thus we
are led by the title of this Psalm, to tune David's Harp unto Christ's music,
being like unto the loade-star, that in the dark night co^ducts the wandering
traveler to his wished haven: so this, the wearied Christian, unto the haven
of his sure deliverance. For albeit the brown devil penury oppress thee, and
the black devil of persecution pursue thee; though the world be encamped
about thee, and the heavens be banded against thee: yet this will lead thee
unto the true deliverer, which is the Lord thy God, thy true salvation.

Basil upon this text compares man unto a true penitentiary, clothed in
sackcloth, and apparelled with a garment of hair, going into Gods house
weeping, but returning from his presence laughing; going heavily burdened, but
returning altogether eased. Yet Augustine^ coming more nigh the letter,
compares man in this world, to a loade^ ship sailing upon the boistrous seas,
drawing the warrant of his comparison, first from the word hashlecke, which
signifies cast, as the Mariner that casts his anchor. Secondly, from mote of
mute, fluctuatio, a fluctibus. The Septuagints translate it (...) of (...),
which signifies procella, a storm by sea: from whence comes salum, which
Ennius makes salus, and signifies the sea. Thirdly, from Beer, whereof comes
the Greek (...) puteus, a well with water. And thus compared, the text
affords us these three parts: First, a casting or lying at anchor, from
(...), racta sicut anchoram in mari, Lyrain Peter. 1.5
cast as an anchor is cast in the sea. The second thing, is, his arriving in the
haven, from (...). He will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever: videris
fluctuari in mari isto, sed excipit te portus: Aug.
Thou seem to be da^gerously tossed in this sea, but, the haven that
receives thee, yea portus tranquillissimus, Cassidori.
the most calm, and blessed haven, that will never deceive thee. Thirdly, the
shipwreck from veattah Elohim. Thou, O God, shall bring them in puteum
submersionis: Aug.
into the pit of drowning or destruction, to teach us that sail here in this
world of calamity, to cast sure upon the ground of Gods providence, that we
may arrive in the world to come, in the haven of happiness, lest we perish
with the wicked for neglectance. Because this world est vallis media inter
coelum, et infernum, quasi inter montem vitae, and monte^ mortis. A valley
placed in the midst between heaven and hell, as between the mountain of
life, and the mountain of death. And because this world is via peccati, and
vmbra mortis, in qua pyrata diabolus recte gradientibus retia deceptionis
expandit. Aug. vol 1. sermon. 13.
It is the way of sin, and the shadow of death, wherein the devil the
arch-pyrate, sets his nets of murdering deceites, to entrap them that would
walk in the ways of Gods commandments. And thus much of the introduction
and interpretation of this scripture. Now to the parts as they lie in order:
And first of our ankering, contained in these words: Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and he shall nourish thee.

This clause affords unto us these three things; First, the ankers that we must
cast, and they are two: prayer and affiance. The second is the ship that must
be stayed by these ankers, and that is lehabhka, thy burden, thy burdened and
wearied life. The third is the ground whereunto these ankers must be fastened,
or whereupon they must be cast: and that is twofold. First, a general
ground, and that is God. Secondly, a more particular, and that is his
providence: Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee.

Now to the first, which is our ankering. Selucus being expelled out of
Babylon, and returning by the help of Ptolomy with a band of soldiers, as he
made haste unto the City, stumbled, and stumbling, hurt his foot: whereat his
friends somewhat agrieued, reauing up the stone, found a ring that was hidden
under it, in which ring was engraven the similitude, and form of an Anchor:
which they interpreting, supposed it to portend captivity. But he being of
another spirit, cried out unto them with a loud voice, Bono animo estote omnes,
nam qua^ terram calcamus, and retenturi sumus, and possessuri: Be of good
cheer, my friends, and fellows; for this ground, whereon we now tread, as
aliants and exiles, we shall assuredly possess, as heirs and owners. And
thus, that Anchor, which they construed to signify captivity, he interpreted
to pretend conquest, and security. In which sense Plutarch uses (...), for an
anchor, signifying security, making it with Lucian, the very rescue of defense.
And the Egyptian Hieroglyphickes, when they would describe unto us, true
safety, or safeguard, they painted a ship and an anchor; noting unto us, that if
adversity beset us in this world, as a tempest sets upon a ship in the sea,
yet there was an Anchor, a ready refuge, to stay us from drowning.

Now then, seeing man with his burden, is compared unto a ship with his load,
and we must assure our selves, that here we shall find a sea; therefore let
us provide for our selves, a steady Anchor, lest we be suddenly invaded with a
storm of boisterous calamity, and so perish in our slothful security: for
nauigamus in hac vita, quasi per quoddam mar^, vbi and ventus est, and procell^
non desunt tentationum: Aug. tract. in John. 14.
We sail in this life, as it were through a sea, wherein there are both winds
of adversity, and storms of temptations: Here being but two seas to pass,
mortuum and rubrum: the dead sea, and the red sea. The first is mare
pacaetum, a sea calm, without surges, and the sailors herein, are worldlings:
therefore called calm, because dead: and therefore dead, because the sailors
herein are already smitten with death, being slain by sin, and murdered by
iniquity: for sin is gladius, serpens, venenum, a sword that wounds the soul;
a serpent, that stings the conscience, and poison, that kills Christ the true
life of the soul.

The second, is turbidum, a rough and troublesome sea, and the mariners
herein, are the lovers of God, red with the blood of the Saints. For here
funditur ater vbique cruor, crudelis, vbique luctus, vbique pauor, and plurima
mortis imago. Cor. Tac. in Ner. persecut.
Here is shed every where the blood of Christians; here is heard in all places,
the lamentation of Saints; here is fear, and the image of death seen, and
seazing upon the lives of holy men, and Gods servants. These are the two ways
whereby the devil assaults and sets upon men in this world, persuasione, vt
molliat; persecutione, vt frangat: Greg.
by persuasion to win, and vanquish man by fair means, as he set upon
Christ, Mat. 4.8,9.
offering him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, if he would
worship him: Job. 2.7.
or by persecution, to break and bend him with foul means, as he invaded Job,
smiting him with sore boyles, from the sole of his foot, to the crown of his
head, to co^pel him to blaspheme God, and forsake his Creator. Quid igitur
facies? Excita Iefum, and dic, Magister, perimus: Aug. 49 tract. upon John.
What is now to be done in this case? Even that which the Disciples did when
the tempest arose in the sea, and the ship was covered with waves: They came
unto Christ, Mat. 8.25.
and awoke him, saying, Master, save us, we perish.

This is that anchor, which the Emblemists paint tied unto a strong rope, with
this title or mot, Tutum te littore sistam, Claudius Paradin.
I will place thee safe upon the shore. Signifying unto us, that our hope of
salvation, being fastened upon our Savior Christ Jesus, who is our surest
safeguard, and saving refuge, whereunto we must continually fly in all our
troubles and adversities, it will bring us unto the haven of safe deliverance,
and quiet happiness.

This anchor we are put in mind to have in continual readiness, if by no
other name, yet by this, that we are called sailors, whose condition is so
perilous, and estate so dangerous, as Anacarsis could not tell whether he
should account them inter viuos, vel mortuos: among the living, or the dead.
And if we will needs have the^ to be numbered amongst the living, yet the
farthest they are from death, is but spissitudo tabularum nauticarum, the
thickness of a three inched board: a most brickle and lamentable case: yet
were we happy, if our vessel wherein we fail in this world, were thus
strong, as is the mariners boat. But alas, it is much more frail and fickle:
being compared sometimes unto a flower, Job. 14.
vita in carne, flos in foeno: Greg. Am. upon Luke.
as the flower in the grass, so is this life in the flesh: sometimes to a
shadow, sometimes to a reed, yea, sometimes to vanity it self. Psa. 144.
Notwithstanding, the enemies that daily assault our vessel, are much more
mighty, and envious, then those things, which are obnoxious to the sailers ship:
albeit they be ignis aqua, and hosts: Bernard.
fire, water, and enemies: then the which, in their fury, there is no earthly
thing more dangerous: for here is concupiscentia, cogitatio, and opera:
concupisce^ce, and thoughts, words, and wicked works, like fire to burn it,
water to drown it, and enemies to destroy it. Fire, but it is the wild fire of
concupiscence, which Saint Paul calls for the trouble, Romans 7.
(...) and for the hurt it brings with it (...) flat sin: and Saint James
compares it, Ia. 1.14.
for the subtilnesse of it, unto a te^pter, and for the cruelnesse of it, unto
a fowler, because (...) it tempts and draws us from that which is good, and
then, (...), it snares and ouertakes us before we be aware. And Saint John
makes a threefold kind thereof. 1. Ioh. 2.16.
First, (...), (...), and (...). The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life: yea this fire is so much more dangerous then the
elementary fire, by how much it is more secret, and unknown. Wherefore David
calls it a hidden fire, crying out, Who understands his faults? and costing
the anchor of prayer for his deliverance, calls upon God, Psalm. 19.13.
saying, O cleanse me from my secret faults. To second this, there comes the
water of actual sin, sometimes like unto a boystrous sea, wherein one wave
ouertakes another: so is the sin of thought, sometimes followed by the sin of
words, and sometimes both thoughts and words are accompanied with wicked works:
otherwhiles this water of actual sin enters our ship by drops, and makes a
great flood within our souls: for Aug.
de guttis minutis flumina implentur: and humor per rimas influens nauem
confundit: great floods arise of little drops: and, water issuing in by small
riftes, drownes and sinkes the ship. O therefore (says the wise man) Ecclesi.
add not sin unto sin, for this is but to add fire unto fire, when we would
have the first fire to be quenched; and water unto water, when we would have
the first water dried. If we would know how this water of sin sokes in by
little and little into our rifty souls, Isidore makes it manifest unto thee:
Suggestio parit cogitationem: cogitatio, delectationem: delectatio, consensum:
consensus, actionem: actio, consuetudinem: consuetudo, necesiitate^:
necessitas, malam mortem: mala mors, da^nationem: damnatio, poenam aeternam in
Gehenna.

First, there is offered a suggestion: a suggestion ingenders a thought or
cogitation: cogitation breeds delight: delight begets consent: and consent
brings forth the action: one action must have another: and many actions turn
unto custom: custom cannot be left; and so it produces necessity: necessity
that must not be repented of; and so it brings us to an evil death: an evil
death, that draws us to damnation: and damnation, to the eternal pains of
hell. And thus sin entering in by a little hole, yet stings to death: and what
does it advantage thee, whether thou be smitten with a broad sword that makes
an apparent wound, or stabbed with a small poinyard that makes but a small
breach; seeing thou art assured to die as well by the one as the other?
Wherefore let this be a caveat for us to take heed of all sins: for if they
be great, the world will condemn us: if small, either the poison thereof will
kill us, or the number of them will destroy us. But least the fire should loose
her nature, and so not consume this ship; and the water should forget her
moisture, and so not drown it: the enemy will set his hand to destroy it;
even the enemy which is called the Devil, with his great army of Angels, and
powers, under whose banner do fight, men and spirits, the flesh and the world.
For there is a never ending war between him and us. The Herald whereof was
God himself, who sowed this dissension, and proclaimed this war saying:
veepah Ashith benecah. Genesis 3.15,
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed. 1. Pet. 5.8.
Hence he is called our adversary, and that no small one, but that great red
Dragon, even that Dragon that fought in heaven: Apocal. 12.
the old Serpent and Satan which deceives all the world; who set upon God in
heaven, Adam in paradise, and Christ in the wilderness, and will never leave
us, which alas have neither force to resist him, nor wit to discern him.
Bernard. 7 sermon. de aduent. domini.
Si discernere volumus inter bonum and malum decipimur, si tentamus facere
bonum deficimur, si conamur resistere malo deijcimur. If we would discern
between good and evil, we are deceived: If we go about to do good, we quickly
faint: and if we endeavor to resist sin, we are easily overcome. A fight most
unfit, and war most unequal: he strong, we weak: he full of experience, we
altogether inexpert: he subtle, we simple: he valiant, and we full of
cowardnesse. Only this remains to keep us from destroying in this dangerous
battle: namely, (...): to let down and cast this holy anchor, fall to prayer,
and call upon our God. For vt nauem ancora: sic oration vitam firmam reddit. As
the anchor stays the ship, and keeps it steadie against wind and weather:
so does prayer maintain the Christian from perishing by the temptations of
Satan, and invasions of the wicked world. For the Devil is compared by Saint
Peter, unto a Lion: and says Gaudentius Merula: As a Lion is discomfited at
the sight of a Cock, and at his crowing betakes him unto his heels: so does
Satan that murdering Lion, both stand in fear when the godly man appears,
and flies away when he betakes him unto his prayers. The Devil is a venomous
Serpent, and says Isidore: Mustela bellatura cum Serpente: primo rutam
comedit, cuius virtute and odore contra venenum se munit: and sic ad bellum
secura procedit. The Weafell going to fight with the Serpent; first eats Rue,
the smell and virtue whereof, arms, and defendes her against the force of the
poison, and then she goes boldly unto the battle. So must we, who are
continually environed, and daily besieged by Satan, and his army; first arm
our selves with prayer, which will defend us against Satan's temptations, and
then may we be bold to encounter the enemy, according to Christ his precept,
and practice; who prayed himself, saying: O my Father: Mat. 26.41
and likewise commanded the same unto his Disciples, saying: Watch and pray,
least ye enter into temptation. For a prayer is sacrificium Deo, demonibus
flagellum; and oranti subsidium: a sacrifice to God, a scourge for the Devils,
and a refuge, and a rescue for him that prays. First a sacrifice unto God,
which Saint Paul calls the sacrifice of praise; Heb. 13.15
that is, the fruit of their lips, which confess Gods name. This is that
munus, that gift which Christ commanded the Leper to offer unto the Priest:
Tertul. aduers. Mars. lib. 4.
namely, orationem and gratiarum actiones (says Tertullian) prayer, and giving
of thanks. For sicut Thimiama been confectum delectat hominem odorantem: sic
oration iusti suauis est ante Deum. Chrysto.
As sweet perfume much delights the smell; so is the prayer of the righteous
man, much pleasing in the nostrels of God. The altar whereon we offer this
sacrifice, is Altar coeleste: our faith, which Ambrose calls an heavenly
altar, whereon our prayers being offered, Christ (says Chrysostom) receives
them, and purifying them, commends them unto his father, unto whom for Christ
his sake they are acceptable. Wherefore he that offers unto God sacrificium
orationis, must diligently observe three things: Bernard. Epist. ad frat. de
mont. Dei.
Quis, Cui, Quid. First, who is he that offers, and he must be pauper
spiritu, the poor in spirit. Secondly, to whom, and that is to God, unto whom
he must sursum cor, lift up his heart. Thirdly, what he must offer, and that is
a right qualified prayer, proceeding from true says, and fervent love: and
then God will receive thy sacrifice, and the Devils will be much tormented with
it, which is the second benefit which follows hearty and earnest prayer.
Bernard.
For per orationem vincuntur demonia, the Devils are cast out, and subdued by
prayer. By this was the Lunaticke person delivered from that tormenting Devil,
which oftentimes cast him into the fire, and oftentimes into the water, because
this kind goes not out but by prayer and fasting. Mat. 17.21
Neither is this all that we receive by prayer, but we are defended also by it
from all assaults, and temptations. Ambrose.
For it is bonum scutum, quo omnia spicula aduersarij repelluntur: that good
shield whereby all the darts of the adversary are repelled. It is (...), the
Christian man's physic, against all spiritual diseases. Theodoret
If we be in medijs aquis: in the midst of the waters, this is our safest
deliverance, and as it was unto Jonas, Jonas. 3.2.
who being in the bottom of the sea, and the belly of the Whale, cried unto
the Lord, and he heard him. If we be in igne, in the fire, by this we shall be
delivered: Dan. 3.
as were the three children in the midst of the fiery furnace, who cried unto
the Lord, and he delivered them. If we be inter medios Leones: among the
midst of the Lions, Dan. 6.
as was Daniel in the midst of the Lions den, who cried unto the Lord, and
he delivered him. This is Gods precept, and David's practice. For the first
says God: Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. And for the
second, says David: out of the deepes have I called unto thee O Lord, and thou
deliueredst me. Psalm. 130.
If we be besieged by our enemies, by this we shall have deliverance, as was
Elisha, 2. Kings. 6.18.
who prayed unto the Lord, and was delivered.* vertit se eo, vbi omnes verum
auxilium inuenerunt, scilicet, ad orationem, quae vnica desper atorum ancora
est. And lastly, if a whole army be set against us, by this we shall overcome
them; Numb. 17
as did Moses the Amalekites, who prayed unto the Lord, and was delivered.
Glossa.
For, plus valet vnus sanctus orando, quam innumeri peccatores praeliando, one
good man will do more good by praying, then an innumerable number of sinners by
fighting. Thus in the army of Marcus Antonius the Philosopher, at the prayers
of a band of Christians, God sent water, and things necessary for the army,
Xiphilinus
together with a mighty tempest, to the destruction of the enemy. And thus the
kingly Prophet David praying against his persecuting enemies, says: That the
Lord thundered from heaven, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and
increased his lightnings, and destroyed them. Psalm. 18.13,14.
God has called our army abroad, the enemy is encamped about us, and has
shaken his sword against us: and who can tell, whether the Lord will likewise
show mercy upon our prayers? The Heathens could give this report of the
Christians: Capitolin. in Marco.
nihil esse, quod ij qui Christiani nominantur, precibus a Deo impetrare non
possent. That there is nothing, which the Christian man by his prayers, may not
obtain at Gods hand. This was it that so troubled the cruel persecutors in
the primitive Church: as Plinius Junior, writing to Traian, about the
professors of Christianity, acquites them of all faults and offenses, both
against Prince and people, excepting this one: quod ante Lucanos hymnos in
cuinsdam hominis laudem, qui (...) Palaestina crucifixus erat decantarent. That
they sung hymns and psalms before break of day, touching thanksgiving and
praise, for Christ which was crucified in Palestina. O has Pliny lived in
these days, he would never have found this fault with Christians: among whom
the name of God, and his son Christ, is more abused to his dishonor, then
rightly used for his praise and honor. Notwithstanding, never was there more
need of prayer, then in these days, wherein faith is almost forgotten, and
charity waxes too cold: wherein the world is turned vpsidowne, and Christ
begins to summon us to our account: and wherein God and Satan, have this long
time bent their bows against us. God has bent his bow, but it is the bow of
long suffering; the wood whereof is iustitia, justice; the string misericordia,
mercy; and the arrowe vindicta, revenge: and if we still abuse his patience by
our sins, as we have begun, and despise his long suffering by our iniquities,
as we go forwards: then must needs his justice forget his mercy, and send the
arrowe of revenge against us. Happy therefore shall they be that can cast this
anchor of faith and prayer upon Christ: Psalm. 2.12.
For when his wrath shall suddenly burn, then blessed are all they that put
their trust in him. The Devil likewise has bent his bow, but it is the bow
of eternal death and destruction; the wood whereof is malitia, the Devils
malice: the string experientia, his experience: and the shafte temptatio,
alluring and deceitful temptation, which he often lets fly round about us,
wou^ding some, and killing others. This man with pride; that with gluttony;
another with covetousness; and a fourth with perjury. Filling the world full
with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, maliciousness, envy,
murder, deceit, debate, and what not, to bring us all unto confusion. O
beloved, never more shooting, and never less praying: never more darts, and
yet few or none applies his shield. For who now moisteneth his prayers, with
the tears of true repentance; thereby to quench the fiery darts of Satan? O
lacrymae quo fugistis? redite obsecro redite lacrymae, flete me coelum and
terra. Lugete me omnes creaturae, and me plorate omnia elementa. peccaui enim
crudeliter; lapsus sum grauiter; cecidi mirabiliter, Nullus est morbus
vitiorum, a quo non contraxi contagium. Isiodore Dial* hominis deflentis, lib.
1. cap. 41.
High time it is, to cry with the penitent person: O tears, whither are you
fled? o sighs, whither are you gone? Come again ye tears, and return o ye
sobs. Come heaven, come earth and bewail me. O ye creatures lament over me.
For I have sinned cruelly: I have fallen grievously: there is no sin
wherewith I am not fowly bespotted. Did not the heavens rain at Elias prayer?
1. King. 18
and the rock send forth floods at Moses stroke? Exodus 17.6
and shall God smite, Satan wound, and yet we be without prayers of
repentance? The Poets report of Hector, that so long as he lived, Troy could
not be destroyed: calling him (...), the immovable, and inexpugnable pillar of
Troy. But much more may it be spoken of the believing man, whose prayer binds
God to do good unto the country. As was Lot unto the Sodomites, of whom God
witnesses that he could do nothing against them, so long as Lot lived amongst
them. Genesis 19.22
In what a lamentable case then, is that country and place, wherein there is
no Moses, Eze. 22.30
no man of prayer to stand in the gappe before God for the land? A token that
God intends a present punishment to fall upon that country: and on the
contrary, where God bestows the spirit of prayer, he will likewise give a
blessing of mercy. For this cause David ioynes prayer and mercy together,
saying: Psalm. 66.20.
Praised be God, which has not put back my prayer, nor hid his mercy from
me, noting prayer to be the especial means, whereby God will confer a
benefit upon a people. Because, Aug.
quamdiu Deus non tollit a te orationem tuam, non amouebit a te miserecordiam
suam: so long as God depriues thee not of the spirit of prayer, he will not
deny thee his merciful kindness. Seeing therefore that by prayer Cassianus.
Ira Dei suspenditur, venia procuratur, poena refugitur, and proemiorum
largitas impetratur: we have access unto God; the prisoner to entreat the
Judge; the Judge is moved to mercy, and his mercy indueth him with all kind
of blessings. O therefore provide in time while it is to day for this happy
anchor, if not to stay thy tottering self in this miserable world; yet to
defend thy tossed country, from the boistrous invasion of the open foe, and
the deceitful practice of thy traitorous friend. But because this sea is very
boisterous, wave following wave, and tempest running after tempest. It is not
amiss to follow Pyndarus his counsel, especially (...), in this winters night
to loose two anchors. The time was indeed, wherein man quasi dies in gratia
claruit: Greg. morale. 35.18.
was as bright as the day, and as clear as the sun, walking in the day light
of blessed grace. But being enwrapped in sin, and fallen into the dungeon of
iniquity, is now in nocte erroris; constrained to wander, and roaue in the
darkesome night of misleading error. So that if we will (...), Pindarus.
cast anchor for our true safety and felicity, we must let down one in the
head, and another in the stern of the ship: that so here relying upon two
anchors in this heaven, we may there arrive with all joy in that blessed heaven.

Wherefore unto this anchor of prayer, let us join the anchor of steadfast
faith, and affiance. For this is that which the Apostle calls (...), a shield
against all the fiery darts of the Devil. This is that true Solsequium
Marygold, Ephesians. 6.16.
that goes and turns with the sun of righteousness Christ Jesus. It is the
right Salamander, that will live, and continue in the fire without co^suming.
And as if a man do make him napkins and clothes of the Salamanders hair,
although they be thrown into the fire, they will not be burned and consumed,
but purged and purified: so will not this perish in the fire of persecution,
but rather with the Salamander quench the fire, then be destroyed by the flame.
Whereof we have a cloud of witnesses in the second of the Hebrews: Yea, this
is anchora animam seruans, the anchor of the soul, that keeps it sure and
steadfast, from ouerwhelming and drowning in the boistrous storms of craggie
temptations, and grievous afflictions. Wherefore blessed is he that trusts in
the Lord: Prou. 16.
for he shall be like the mount Sion that cannot be removed, but remains for
ever. And as the mountains are about Jerusalem, so will the Lord be about him
for evermore. Psalm. 125.
Aura tonet, sonet vnda, maris fremat orbis and orcus.

Tu tamen insertos nos tibi Christ teges. Let the wind thunder, and the waves
make a noise: yea earth and hell fret and fume, yet thou o blessed Christ wilt
be a wall of brass for their defense, and a shield of proof to keep them
safe that trust in thee. He that thus casts anchor, shall be as a man that is
provided of two houses, whereof if one should fail, yet the other would
receive, and keep him. This was David's practice, to cast both anchors for his
assurance. For praying unto God, he calls God his God, saying: Hearken unto
the voice of my prayer, (...), Psalm. 5.2.
my king, and my God. Hearken King, there is the first* and my God, there is
the second. And in the thirteenth Psalm wherein he sings (...), a Psalm of
triumph, yet he begins the same with sorrow, saying: Gnathana, Gnathana,
Gnathana: How long, how long, repeating it four times in two verses: but he
stays his grief with the anchor of prayer, saying: Behold, hear me. But his
prayer is mingled with faith: for he says; Behold, and hear me, O Lord my
God. Hear me, there is his prayer: but hear me Jehovah Elohai, O my God;
there is his faith. And this confidence, he sets down with the cause thereof,
saying: Psalm. 13.1.2.3.4.
But I trust in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation, and I will
sing unto the Lord. Thus he that began with sorrowing, ends with singing,
because he did cast this twofold anchor, faith, and prayer. The Cananitish
woman, whose daughter was troubled with a devil, came unto Christ by prayer,
saying: (...): Have mercy upon me O Lord, thou son of David. And the text
says, Matt. 15.22.28.
that Christ heard her: and why? because great was her faith, therefore it must
be unto her, as she desired. For God is cordis inspector, the beholder, and
searcher of the heart. Wherefore he says not unto her, O canis magna est fides
tua, but O mulier, mutauit vocabulum quia mutatum vidit affectum. Aug. de fide
and operibus, c. 16.
O dog, great is thy faith; but O woman: changing the word, because she had
changed her faith. eudiant haec audiant, qui constanter orant, necrecedant.
flexi inquis genua, curuasti quidem, sed men's tua for as vagabatur, corpus
intus, sensus for as, os loquitur, men's vsuras cogitat, O, Diabolus astutus:
imitare imitare igitur Cananaeam. Christ. homil. 17. in Matthew.
Hear this, O hear this, ye that pray with unconstant minds, being weary of
your work, if you have not too soon your reward, and continue steadfast. Thou
say I bend my knees: it is true; but thy mind, that runs aroauing: thy
body indeed is in the Church, but thy understanding in the streets: thy mouth
mutters, but thy mind, that runs after thy usury. O, the Devil is crafty,
that seeks thus to delude thee. Imitare, imitare therefore the Cananitish
woman; endure, and thou shall be heard: add faith unto thy words, and thou
shall be blessed. Ad orationem assisto, non orarem si non crederem, sed si vere
crederem, illud cor, quo Deus videtur, mundarem, genas lacrymis rigarem:
iacerem ad domini mei pedes, eosque fletu perfunderem, crine tergerem, haererem
certo trunco crucis, nec prius amitterem quam miserecordiam impetrarem. Hieron.
in Dialog aduersus Luciferi anos.
Mark what a learned father speaks in thy person. I come (says he) and set
my self unto prayer. I would not pray unless I did believe I should be heard.
But if my faith were true, then would I cleanse my heart which God so nearly
marks: then would I moisten my cheeks with my tears: then would I hang about
my Masters feet, and all to bewash them with the moisture of mine eyes, and
wipe them with the cleanest of my hair: then would I cleave unto the Cross,
and never leave it, before I had obtained mercy. But now I walk while I pray,
sometimes reckening my accounts with my mind, sometimes having lustful
desires in my thoughts; seldom goes my mind with my lips: oh where is faith?
Thus did not Jonas pray: thus did not the three children call upon God. Daniel
believed, when he prayed in the den; and the thief, when he prayed on the
Cross, he was crucified with Christ, and prayed in belief. But we crucify
Christ, when we pray without belief: presenting our selves before the king,
without his son; before the angry judge, without the princes pardon, and
before God, without his Christ. Like unto a subject, that having murdered his
princes only and dear son, (...): with hands al besmeared with the blood
that issued from the tender wounds, shall present himself before the childs
angry Sire, holding up those bloody hands, requiring friendship of the
father: will nor his sons blood, which still presents it self before his
tender eyes, incite and move him rather unto fury and revenge, against that
murderer and slaier of his son, then procure friendship and appeasement for
his fault? Such is the case of all those that remain still in infidelity, and
hardness of heart, and yet will offer up their prayers unto God the Father.
For they hold up defiled hands, bespotted, and besprinkled with the blood of
Christ, his dear and only son; because, who so thus remains in his sin,
is partaker with the Jews in the crucifying of Christ, and shedding of his
blood, (...) Basil.
. O therefore you that have souls to save, have some care to bring them to
heaven, and deliver them from hell. Be sorry with Peter, and repent with Marie
Magdalen, for the folly of your lives, and the iniquity of your days, which
you have forespent in sin and transgression. Tunc enim incipit medicina vitae
proficere, vbi in animo contribulato men's maerorem exercet: For then begins the
Physic of grace to amend our sick souls, when the mind of man draws
forth sorrow and grief from a troubled spirit in detestation of his sins,
that have so highly dishonored his merciful God. David in remembrance of his
sins washed his bed with the drops of his eyes, and says: that his tears
were his bread, both day and night. And God set the letter Tau, Ezec. 9.4.
as a mark of salvation, upon the foreheads of them that did mourn for the
abominations of Jerusalem. And Augustine writes thus of himself. Probaui
animam meam, and impatientem portari a me, at vbi eam ponerem non inueniebam:
non in amaenis nemoribus, non in ludis atque canticis, non in locis suaue
olentibus. Aug. 4. lib. of his conf.
I tried and searched my soul, and found it to be heavy, and full of
impatience; but where I should ease me of this load, or find release for my
burden, I could not tell. I went to the pleasant woods, but there I found it
not. I sought for music, and sport, but there it was not. I had recourse to
the sweet smelling gardens, but here I found no ease. I feasted, and delighted
my self in dainties: sometimes I betook me to my chamber for wantonness,
sometimes to my Library for wearisomnesse: but neither in meats, nor
drinckes, in books, nor beds, did my soul take rest or comfort. It detested
all things, that were not that thing which it self desired, and that was God.
Each thing was odious unto it, if it were not a sob for sinning, wherein alone
it found some rest. As in a healthful bath, that washed it of uncleanness,
and made it fresh for the journey of salvation. O remember the country
Metaphore of the Psalmist: He that sowes in tears, shall reap in joy* (...).
Basil.
This world is the repenting, that the repaying world: this for work, that for
payment: this for trial, that for comfort. And if thou shall with patience
undergo the fire of trial in this world; thou shall with comfort, receive the
joy of perfection in the world to come. If in this world, thou shall work out
thy salvation with fear, and trembling; thou shall receive Gods blessed
payment (a crown of eternal happiness) in the world to come. If in this
world, thou shall cleanse thy paths, and moisten thy soul with the tears of
repentance; thou shall receive a paradise of joys in the world to come. For
then God will hear our prayers; when words and works, hands and hearts,
faith and repentance shall kiss each other. Wherefore, when the tempest of
persecution shall invade us, and the storms of temptations shall rise against
us, and we cast the anchor of prayer, either in this house, or in any other:
let us take heed that we come in fear and faith; and not in toying and
tatling, least we make (...): the house of prayer, a place of prating. For
(...): the Angels stand by us to take our words, and God is present to know
our hearts. But if our prayers be made in faith, we shall no sooner ask, but
God will answer. (...): behold, I am present to grant thy request. Out of this
that has been spoken, there arises especially two conclusions. First, that
prayer is a necessary anchor for this ship. The second, that prayer without
faith, is not a sufficient anchor to stay so heavy a ship, in so troublesome
a sea. Against the necessity of the first, the Epicures, Stoickes, and
Egyptian Philosophers dispute, after this manner. If this be so necessary an
anchor, for so burdensome a ship; then it must serve either vt intimemus ei
a quo petimus illud quo indigemus: or vt per orationem flectatur animus eius
qui oratur: Th Aquin. lib. contra ge^tes, c. 96.
either that we might signify unto him of whom we desire a thing, what we do
want: or else that we might move, or by our prayers bend his mind to grant our
requests. But neither of these is needful. For the first: God stands not in
need of our instructions, neither does he want us to admonish him of our
necessities: but knows (...), Basil.
what we have need of before we ask. Mat. 6.32.
As Christ speaks unto his disciples, saying; that your heavenly father
knows that ye want all these things. And for the second Ain Jehovah lo
shanithi, Malach. 3.
I am the Lord, I change not: with whom there is no variableness, nor
shaddowe of turning. Iam. 1.17.
But vt immutabilis natura sic voluntas, Greg. 5. moral. not. 18.
as his nature is unchangeable, so his will cannot be altered. Unto the first
we may give this manifold answer. First, with Hierome, nos non sumus
narratores, sed oratores: we are not tellers, but suitors. For it is one thing
to declare a thing to him that knows it not, and another thing to require a
thing of him that already knows it. Secondly, we answer with Augustine, that
it is elenchus causae, a false cause; and therefore deny the argument. For
albeit God knows how to give good things unto his children, yet he commands
us to ask, seek, and knock, that by this means, exerceri in orationibus
desiderium nostru^, Aug. Epist. 121.
our desires might be exercised in our prayers, whereby we may receive those
things, which he has prepared to give us. And lastly, the necessity of
praying consists not, in that we should open to God our wants; but that we
might be put in mind, whither to have recourse in our extremities. And for the
second, we may answer, that it is the felfesame fallacion. For albeit God be
said to change; yet that is but by a Metaphore (...): because it is not mutat^o
Dei, but rei: not consilij, but operis: not affectus, but effectus: not God,
but the thing is changed: not Gods council, but Gods work: not his affect,
but effect. Yet this is not the end of our prayers to make God changeable, but
that by praying we might obtain those things in time, which God has decreed
to bestow upon us from all eternity. For prayer is not ad immutandam
prouidentiam sed ad insplendam: not to alter Gods mind, but to fulfill his
providence: seeing that those things quae sancti viri orando efficient, ita
praedestinata sunt vt precibus illa obtineant, Greg. moral. 16.18.
which holy men have accomplished by praying, were so ordained, as they should
obtain them by their prayers. As when God had promised Abraham, Genesis 22.
that in Isaac his seed should be blessed; yet God gave unto Isaac a barren
wife, wherefore Isaac prayed for his wife Rebeccha, Genesis 25.
and the text says; that the Lord was entreated of him, and his wife Rebeccha
conceived. This then remains a firm anchor for this ship, contrary to the
opinion of the ancient Philosophers, and the followers of Pelagian: yea
contrary to the common Christian, who though he profess christianity in
word; yet he practices Pelagianisme in his works. For do not our lives
practice that which Pelagian professed: namely, that we think prayer is but
needless? Yea, was not this an especial heresy of the Pelagian, quod
destrueret orationes ecclesiae, Aug. Epist. 106.
that he went about to destroy the prayers of the Church? And is not this our
profession by our practice, who so seldom frequent the Church, and seek
indeed by covert means to overthrow religion?

Against the second conclusion, the adversary obiecteth after this order: If
faith be so necessary a companion for prayer, as without it, prayer cannot
anchor this heavy ship: then how comes it to pass, that the unfaithful
man's prayers, are oftentimes heard, and fulfilled; but the godly and faithful
man's requests, are often denied, and rejected.

Touching the first, learned writers sufficiently resolve thee after this sort:
First, God hears our prayers, vel ad iustitiam, vel ad miserecordiam: Aug.
tract. 37. in Ioh.
either for justice, or for mercy. And for both these ends, he oftentimes
receives the prayers of the wicked. First according to his mercy, vt eos
beneficijs ad amorem suam alliciat, Bellar. li. 1. cap. 4. de bonis oper.
that he might win them unto him by his benefits: and thus he heard the prayers
of the Ninevites, not according to his justice, but according to his mercy.
Secondly, according to his justice; and thus he heard the Israelites, requiring
flesh in the desert. But while the meat was in their mouths, Numb. 11.
the wrath of the Lord came upon them and destroyed them: Metuendum ergo est
(says Saint Augustine) ne id hoc posset non dare propitius, det iratus. O
therefore let us take heed, least that which God cannot bestow upon us as a
merciful God, he repayeth as an angry Judge.

A second cause why God hears the prayers of the wicked, is populi sui causa:
Sadel in vera peccati remissione.
for the more comfort of his beloved people. Seeing that God is so merciful
unto those which are wicked, and his enemies; how must they but needs be
persuaded, that he will be much more favorable unto the godly and his friends?

Thirdly, the wicked are not heard, ex speciali gratia, sed ex communi
miserecordia: Calvin. lib. 3. confess. ca. 20. sect. 15.
not that God is well pleased at their prayers, but to set out his mercy by
this circumstance: For that even unto unbelievers their prayers are not denied,
the more to prick forward those which serve God, to be careful at all times
to pray unto him, seeing that the very wicked and profane, oftentimes obtain
their petitions.

And as concerning the second part of their objection; It is true, that the
Lord at all times grants not the prayers of the godly. For Paul himself prayed
against the messenger of Satan, 2. Cor. 12.2
yea he besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from him; but he was
not heard. And the reason was (as says Saint Augustine) quia non expediebat:
Aug. Epist. 121.
First, least that he should be exalted out of measure: and secondly, that Gods
power might be made manifest through weakness. And yet he was heard; and not
heard, because there is a double kind of hearing; one ad voluntatem, another
ad salutem: Aug. in Epist. John.
one to answer our wills, and another for our good. So likewise there is a
twofolde kind of deliverance: one ex presentibus periculis: one for present
dangers, and calamities; as he delivered David from Saul, Daniel from the
Princes, the Israelites from Pharaoh that his Church might have some outward
testimonies of his love and favor. And this is called a corporal deliverance.
There is another deliverance, which is called a spiritual deliverance: When
God so strengthens the hearts of his servants, as they patiently abide the
afflictions of their foes. And thus God delivers them, (...) Basil.
* not so much by freeing them from their persecutors, as by strengthening them
against persecutions. Psalm. 34.17.
For the righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of
all their troubles. He hears them for their good, though not for their
delight; and delivers them spiritually, albeit not corporally. Yet the time
will come, when they likewise shall be delivered: namely, when he shall take
them from this miserable life, to everlasting joys. Wherefore, ask (says
Christ) John, 16.
in my name, and ye shall receive, but ye shall receive quando debetis
accipere, quaedam enim non negantur, sed vt congruo dentur tempore differuntur:
Aug. tract. 102.
when ye should receive them. For some things are not simply denied, but
conditionally deferred, to their proper time and place. Let us therefore ask
(says Saint James) James, 1.
in faith, nothing doubting: and then (says Christ) Matt. 21.
whatsoever ye shall ask, ye shall receive. For prayer thus apparelled; Est
Dei columba quae ramum oliuae apportat, dum pacem hominibus impetrat: Is Gods
Dove, which carries the Olive branche in token of peace between God and man.
Yea the holy Ghost the true Dove, that first persuaded us to pray, shall assure
us of our requests, because God is well pleased with us. But that this may
please God, and profit us; we must understand, that there is a threefolde kind
of prayer: mentalis, vocalis, vitalis. The first is, when we pray with
understanding: the second with our lips; and the last with our lives. All
which, if conjoined in brotherhood, they make a strong cord to bind Gods
blessings unto us: but if disioined in hatred, they separate Gods favor from
us. For he that says well, but lives ill; non inuocat Deum patrem, sed
diabolum: Greg. Nicen. 2. orat. de dominica orat.
makes not God his Father, but calls on the Devil, when he prays our
Father. And says the wise man: He that stops his ears least he should
hear the law, shall be abominable. Wherefore (says the prophet) If thou loose
the bands of wickedness, let the oppressed go free, break thy bread unto the
hungry, lodge the wanderer, and cover the naked: Esaias, 58.6.7.8.9.
then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and he
shall say, here I am. And thus much for the first part, which are the anchors
that we must cast; and they are two: Prayer, and Affiance.

Now solloweth the second, and that is the ship that must be stayed by these
anchors: namely, a laden ship, called here Iehabcha, thy burden. For man,
miserable man, is in this world (...), a ba^lus, a laden and burdened porter:
yea (...), very heavy laden; Mat. 11.29
having one load, (...)
(...) Nazinzenus.

Sickness, poverty, children, oppression, death, hatred, men, beasts, sea,
land, griefs, and troubles, all miseries for this life, and burdens for this
load. For vita est poena, yea totae poena, I poena and miseria: Aug. ciuitat.
21.
life is a punishment, yea altogether pain and punishment, I nothing but pain
and misery. Greg. moral. 11.
Being sometimes (...), other times (...): 1. Cor. 11.23.24. etc.
now in labor, then in punishment: now in prison, then in whipping: sometimes
stoned, and sometimes suffering shipwreck: sometimes in perils by waters, and
sometimes in perils by thieves: otherwhiles in danger by our nation, and
otherwhiles in danger by strangers. Now in the city, and then again in the
wilderness: sometimes subject to weariness, and sometimes to painfulnesse: very
often subject to hunger, to thirst, to watching, to fasting, to cold, to
nakedness, to death, etc. Rightly compared unto the sea, yea to Mare Aegaeum,
where the venti, augustiae, Caribdis, stagna, Syrtes: Chrysosto.
winds, waves, rocks, and sands, very hard to be sailed. And by Job called a
warfare, where is nothing but hazard, and trouble; fear, and distress. For in
this life there is timor, tremor, fames, sitis, calor, frigor, languor, dolor:
Aug.
fear, trembling, hunger, thirst, heat, cold, faintness, and sorrow.

(...) Menander.

O miserable mortals, how are ye turned, and tossed, torn, and tormoiled with
mischiefs and miseries? your life is short of continuance, yet full of
misery. Job. 14.1.
A wonderful thing, breuem appellat vitam; but miserias, quibus in hac vita
afficimur multas. Gregory.
The holy man calls life short, yet the miseries of this life he terms
many: but seem it never so strange, true it is that our life is short, and
our miseries very many. Wisdom. 5.
For man is compared to the passing of a ship, to the flying of an arrow to
erreg: the little ship that runs through the weauers shittle. Job. 7.2.
And very well said to be swifter. For tela torditatem profectus habet, but
vita moram defectus non habet. Gregory.
The shittle has some slownes in going forwards, but man's life has neither
slacknesse nor delay, in going unto death. (...) Anacreon.

Being compared (by the Poet) unto a whirligig, and proved by his own
experience. For being now merry drinking of wine, he was suddenly choked with
the grape, and died. Cron. 1.29.
Yea it is compared unto a shadow, Job. 14.2.
and phrased by Job, yibrach catzel: it flies or vanishes like a shaddowe:
fugit, non mouetur, to note breuitatem: but sicut vmbra, to note inconstantiam.
Eucherius.
It flies not softly moves, to note the shortness: but it flies as a shadow,
and not as a body, to note the instablenesse. For there is nothing more vain,
more inconstant, more swift, and more frail, then man's life, howbeit full of
misery. For here, (...)
Grief, and life, are like Hypocrites, twins, kinsfolk, and brethren. Here
febres necant, dolores opprimunt, Aug. solil. 2
sickness kills, sorrow oppresses, hunger famisheth, thirst dispatcheth,
water choaketh, the halter strangleth, the fire consumes, the beast deuoureth,
the sword slaieth, and poison corrupts. Thus is life a frail life, a
flitting life: a life, the more it lengtheneth, the shorter it waxes; the more
it increases, the nigher it draws unto death. A life transitory,
deceitful, miserable, and replenished with change and mutabilitie: so that
(...): Atheneus.
it is the best not at all to be borne, and if a man be borne, it is the safest
to die soon. This makes him begin his days with tears. Innoce^tius
Masculus recenter natus clamat A, fomina E, dicentes E vel A, quotquot
nascuntur ab Euah. The man child comes into the world crying A, and the
female E, all sounding out E or A, whosoever come of the loins of Adam and
Euah. A condition exceeding in misery, the estate of all other creatures;
because no creature else begins his days with woe and weeping but only man,
as the Naturalists could well observe. Plin. lib. 7. Tertul. August.
For man is augur in commodorum, and propheta suae calamitatis: a Prophet and
foreteller of his own calamity, and discommoditie: who no sooner borne, but
falls to shed his tears, as witnesses of his ensuing misery. O generatio
flebilis, O infoelix, etc. Bernard. de spec. poenit.
O lamentable, woeful, and unhappy generation, whose father is care, whose
mother is shame, whose sister is uncleanness, whose nurse is folly, and
misguiding falsehood; whose wife is pleasure, and besotting sin; whose child
and heir, is pain, and bitter punishment: called by the wise man, miserable
earth; and by the Apostle, vessel of dishonor, begotten in uncleanness, living
in wretchedness, and dying in distress. Eccles. 17. Romans 9. Psalm. 51.5. Job.
14.
A rotten carcass, meat for worms, and matter for euerburning fire. Esaias.
14. Esaias. 51. Matthew. 25.
O memento homo quis es, vbi es, and vbi non es: call call O man unto thy
remembrance, what thou art, where thou art, and where thou art not: Thou art
the image of vanity, not by creation, but by default; thou art in the veil of
misery, and valley of destruction. Beda: exhortat. cap. 119.
O view and consider thy self instantly, and bewail thy lamentable case
incessantly.

This search consists in these three things. First, why man is thus
burdened. Secondly, what brought this burden upon man. Thirdly, what is the
ease, or sovereign remedy for this burden.

First, why is man thus burdened? Gregory answers: ne viam pro patria
diligamus: Greg. mor^l. 23. c. 22
least delighting too much in the way, we prefer it before our heavenly
country. For this life is but the way, wherein we walk unto our country,
which is heaven. Now it is the custom of many travelers, when they behold
some fair and pleasant places, objected unto them in their journey, to slack
their pace, and walk out of their way; the rather to delight, and besot
themselves with this object. So might it happen unto the Christian traveler,
were not this burden heavy upon his back; the weight whereof, weans him from
the delight of this world. For the world is like unto Salomons harlot, that
lays open her breasts to intise travelers and strangers. The two dugges
whereof, are profit and pleasure. With the first, she deals like Hypomanes to
Atalanta; who being to run a race for a kingdom and victory, Hypomanes
casting a ball of gold on this side, and another on that side; so besotted
Atalanta with the desire of them, as she running out of the way to enjoy the
gold, lost the goal, the victory, and the prise. So does the world misleade
the greedy, the covetous, and the gold-desiring Merchant. With the second,
she deals like Cyrces; who alluring Gryllus to taste of her drugges, made him
so drunken with the pleasure thereof, as he neither remembered the dignity of
his nature, nor desired the sight of his country. So deals the world with the
delicious, drunken, and pleasurable worldling. Being sometimes compared unto
birdlime: the Devil the fowler, who wrappes the worldling, as the bird is
wrapped in the lime. And sometimes unto a Net: profit, and pleasure are the
bait; unto which, the unworthy worldling no sooner stoupes, but he is taken in
the net. Or he may be compared unto a man, that running apace, falls ere he
be aware into a pit; and as he is falling, catches hold on a shrubbe; whereby
getting a little hold for his feet, begins to look about him; Damascenus,
where behind him, he sees two Mice gnawing at the root of the shrub: beneath
in the bottom, he beholds a fiery Dragon gaping to devour him: at his
feet, he perceives four Aspes peeping out to sting him: above him, he
descrieth some few drops of alluring honey sprinkled upon the shrubbe,
wherewith he being enamoured and besotted, not minding the rest of his
miseries, loses his hold, to take and taste the honey; but falls down, and
is destroyed. The pit here signifies the world, whereinto man is entered: the
shrub represents this life, which man awhile enjoys: the two Mice are the
night and the day, which catech and gnaweth upon the life: the four Aspes note
our four humors, which molest and consume us: the fiery Dragon is the Devil,
which gapeth to destroy us: the honey is the delight and pleasure of this world,
which sinful man beholding, is enamoured with it, and being enamoured,
catches to enjoy it, and catching, forsakes his hold, and falls into the
pit of destruction, there for ever devoured of the Devil. Yea iter vitae
nostrae, is vt si stagnum esset transiundum* cui pons impositus esset ita
angustus, vt vix harere illi pes posset. Isiodorus.
Man in this life's journey, has to pass (as it were) a great lake, or poole,
whereouer a very narrow bridge was placed for his passage, yea so narrow, as
he can scarcely find any footing on it; under which bridge, there be firi^
Serpents, venomous Crocadiles, and devouring beasts, who are ready to receive
him, and receiving to destroy him, if he chance to ^lippe, and fall off from
the bridge* And yet on both sides of the poole, there are pleasant fields,
delightful gardens, and most artificial buildings, which might bring great
delight, and admiration to the beholders. What now do we think is best for
this man? Dare he cast his eyes upon this pleasure? Wisdom teaches us, no:
for by that means, enjoying a mind of pleasure with his eyes, he might
perhaps fall, and sustain loss and destruction for ever, and ever. And shall
wisdom teach us this policy for our bodies, and shall not the heavenly
wisdom persuade us, to be more careful for soul and body? He will not cast
his eyes on those pleasures, least he sustain a temporal punishment; and
shall we set our affections upon wordly delights, for ever after to endure
eternal destruction? O rather, let us make a league with our eyes, least we
behold vanity, and watch our ways, least we be overtaken with folly; and so
forget the straight bridge which here we are to pass, and slipping with our
burdens upon our backs, be pressed down to the bottom of hell. Basil
tells us, that there be but two ways for every man to walk in, in this
life: the one whereof he must needs choose. The first is (...): the second
(...): the first is the way that leads unto virtue; and the second, the way
that leads unto vice. In the first way walks the good and godly man: in the
second, the sinner and unjust. The first way (...): the second (...): Basil.
the first way shows all the good we must expect to be performed unto us in
the life to come. The second shows all the benefit we can hope for, to be
performed in this present world. The first, as it promises much good for to
come, so it assures us of much labor to be undergone. But mundus iste multa
delectabilia ostendit hominibus, sed ad seducendum. Chrysosto.
The second, which is the way of the world, it shows and promises many
pleasures, and delights together with much ease, but all to seduce the
careless worldling. Even as a cousening fellow, vnderstranding a child an
orphane to be possessed of his patrimony, and substance; inuiteth him now to
this feast, and then again to that banquet (as the harlots dealt with the
prodigal child) while he bereaues, and deceiues him of all his goods and
substance: So deals the devil with man, he offers him pleasure, but to
destroy his soul: earthly profit, but to bereave him of his heavenly treasure.
For fructus mundi ruina est, ad hoc floret, vt cadat, ad hoc blanditur vt
decipiat, ad hoc germinat, vt quodcunque germinauerit cladibus consumatur.
Greg. mor. 7. cap. 21.
For the fruit which the world can give, is but downfals, and the end for
which it bestows his fruit, and goods upon us, is but to flatter, beguile,
deceive, and destroy us. (...). Basilius.
Blessed therefore is that man which is not taken with the bait of worldly
pleasure, nor turned into the way of destruction. Blessed is he that has not
walked in the way of sinners, Psalm. 1.5.
yea ten times blessed is he, whose burden is borne here with patience, and so
tied unto the anchor of faith, as it weanes him from this present world, and
winnes him to breath only for the world to come. Then medicina est, non poena:
then is this burden physic to salve our souls, and not continual pain to
torment them. Aug. in psalm. 103.
Chrysosto.
Then is this burden pedagogus a schoolmaster, to train us in true doctrine,
and teach us in the way of life. Which who so wants, may rightly suspect
himself, seeing the Lord (speaking to the Angel of Laodicea) says: Reu. 3.19.
Whom I love, I rebuke. Christ must pass by the cross, unto glory: and all
that will live godly, must endure crosses. Wherefore (says Solomon the wise)
Prou. 3.1.
My son, refuse not the chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved at his
correction: for the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father the
child in whom he delights. Is God a Father then when he corrects? and
shows he most love when he beats? Aug. in psalm. 91.
Quid si te flagellat, modo propterea, quia tibi non seruat ignem sempeternum?
Quid si illum dimittit quia auditurus est, Ite in ignem. What if God thy Father
whippeth, and scourges thee in this life; is it not because he prepares thee
for a better inheritance, and not preserues thee for everlasting fire? And what
if he lets him or another man go scotfree, and escape; is it not because he
gives him his portion of pleasure, and profit in this life, and shall therefore
hear that fearful sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire? O then
blessed is he (...), Basil
which shakes off the world, and the pleasure thereof: neither puts any
confidence in the things of this life; but places all his hope, trust, and
affiance upon God alone, his maker, Savior, and redeemer. And so much for the
first point: why man is thus burdened.

The second is, what brought this burden upon man: and that is in a word:
Sin. For Adam sinning, caused the earth to be cursed, lost his dignity over
the creatures, became subject to sickness and death, and made himself, and
his posterity, obnoxious unto destruction. For this cause, says our Savior
Christ unto the man that had lien sick eight and thirty years; Behold thou
art made whole, sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee: noting
unto us, that sickness is laid upon us for our sin. For this cause labor
and pain was laid upon Adam and his posterity, and most grievous pains in
childbirth upon the woman. Genesis 3.
For this cause has God added to this burden, fearfulness, consumption,
burning agues, enemies: yea (says God) if ye will not obey me, then will I
punish you seven times more, according to your sins; Leuit. 26.16.17.18.
namely, with weakness, drought, barrenness, and famine. And if ye will not
yet obey me (says God) I will bring seven times more plagues upon you
according to your sins; as the sword, plagues, wild beasts. And if ye will
not yet obey me, then will I chastise you seven times more, according to your
sins; you shall eat the flesh of your sons and daughters, your places
shall be destroyed, and your carcasses shall be burnt, your Cities shall be
desolate, your sanctuary brought to naught, and your land turned into a
wilderness. I will scatter you among the Heathen, and draw a sword after you:
I will send a faintness into your hearts, and the sound of a leaf shaken,
shall chase you: you shall fall, and no man shall pursue you: ye shall perish,
and your enemies shall eat you up. Thus the Lord arises in that Chapter, from
seven times to seven times, threatening most fearful punishments, and that
by a thundering gradation, and all for sin. Genesis 4.14.
For this cause is added unto this burden, horror of conscience, madness,
blindness, and astonishment of heart: yea what is not added to this burden,
and all for sin? If thou will not keep my commandments (says God) then all
these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: Cursed shall thou be in
the town, and cursed also in the field; cursed shall thy basket be, and thy
dough cursed: cursed shall be the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine,
and the flocks of thy sheep: cursed shall thou be, when thou come in, and
cursed when thou go out. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing trouble, and
shame, in all which thou set thy hand unto, until thou be destroyed; and
perishest quickly because of the wickedness of thy works. And if for all this
thou will not keep his law, then will he make thy plagues wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed. He will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, and
every sickness, and every plague will he heap upon thee: with many other
fearful threatninges forespoken in the book of the scriptures. Thesialonians
1.1. cap. 8.9.
Yea for this cause does he add to this burden everlasting destruction when
the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, rendering vengance unto them that do not know God, and will obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with
everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. Dam infelix homo a domino recedit, a carne molestias, a monte
augustias, vndique premitur anxietatibus, vrgetur infirmitatibus, polluitur
passionibus, grave pondus seipsum portat. Greg. 8. mora. Cap. 21.
while man unhappy man, recoyles from the service of his God, he is molested
by the flesh, vexed by the spirit: yea both body and soul are nothing but a
burden to heavy, too heavy to be borne, yet foolish man hoped by disobeying
God, to have bettered himself. But anima versa and reuersa in tergum, ventrem,
latera sentit, quodomnia sunt dura. Aug. Confess. 6.
Turning and returning from back to belly, searching the heart; the sides, the
intrales, found all out of quiet and nothing to his expectation. And why?
Basilius.
As smoke drives away the Be from the hiue, so surfeiting, drunkenness and
other sins, chase away Gods spirit, and all other spiritual graces, which
are the only comfortes of the soul.

Josephus reporterh that a little before that Jerusalem was beseiged by Titus,
the doors of the sanctuary suddenly opened, and a great noise was heard
saying: migremus hinc: Josephus. lib. 7.12.
let us go hence. To note unto us that neither God nor his Angels will make
abode, where sin has once obtained dominion, and prehemine^ce. For anima
peccatoris magis fet at cor am deo, quam putridum carnis cadauer. The sinful
soul smells more filthily in the nostrels of God, then the rankest carrion
in the nose of man. O therefore beware of the inticements of Satan, the
allurements of sin, and stoop neither to their lure nor offer to taste upon
their bait, porris ac coepis simile est peccatum: Greg moral. 11. cap. 16.
sin is like unto garlic and onions that breeds loathing unto the smeller and
weeping unto the eater. I am (says the penitent soul) in the tavern of
vanity, and I tasted the cup of iniquity: haustum felicitatis obtulit: but
poculum mortis propinauit. there was mel in ore, but it fell in ventre, appa^uit
in palato vinum, but in stomacho experientiae absinthium, and vera mors in
olla. Beda exhor. 13.5.
There was offered me a cup of felicity, but sin began unto me in a cup of
mortality, it seemed in my mouth to be as sweet as honey, but I felt it in my
belly as bitter as gall: I hoped to have taken a cup of delight, but behold in
the bottom there were drugges of loathsome confusion. It seemed in my palate
to be pleasant wine: But I proved it in my stomach to bebitter wormwood, and to
say the truth there was eue^ death it self in the cup. Neither are we to
expect any thing else of sin, then death seeing the greatest reward that sin
can afforde us is death and destruction. Romans 6.21.
vAnd thus much for the second point.

Now follows the third, which is the remedy against this burden, and that is
twofold the one to give a remove unto sin, and the other, to cast they burden
upon the Lord. For the first. Sin is like a leaven, that will leaven the
whole lump, like a poison that will corrupt the whole body: like a plague that
will infect the whole house, yea it is ignis ardens, a burning fire that will
consume the whole City. Now if we would not have the whole lump to be
leauened, we must take away the leaue^, nor the body to be corrupted, we must
send away the poison, nor the house to be infected, we must chase away the
plague, nor the City to be burned we must quench out the fire, nor the man to
be destroyed we mustremoue the sin. For quantum peccandi materiam sustuleris,
tantum extinguetur: quantum adieceris, tantum accendetur. Man Heremita.
The more thou shall detract from the matter of sin, the more thou shall
diminish it. seeing the cause being taken away the effect likewise will decay.
For as Theotimus, if he had obeyed the Phisicians counsel in abstaining from
vnclea^nes, he had saved his eyes: Ambrosius in Luke.
so man had saved both body and soul, had he abstained from sin and iniquity.
Sin is like unto a flegmaticke stomach: si euomuerit, releuatur: If it vomites
it is eased, because it disgorgeth that which most heavily did molest it. The
vomit of our sinful souls is confession of our sins unto God, and the best
way to keep our souls from corrupting, is to use, the diet of abstinene from
sin and iniquity. Thus much was insinuated by John Baptist unto the Jews, and
by Christ unto his disciples, willing them to preach repentance, for the
kingdom of God is at hand. Now then seeing thou have found the way to remove
thy sin, and obtained of thy Phisician a purgation, to purge thy iniquity,
which is repentance: cur cessas aggredi quod scias mederi tibi? cervus sagitta
transfixus scit sibi Dictamno mederi, Tertulliaus lib depaenitent.
why do thou delay to assay that which will be thy cure? The Heart no sooner
peirced with the dart, but presently runs to heal her self with Dittinie:
The swallow if her young ones chance to have their sight put out by any
mischance flies, presently for swallowort to redeem their sight. The Lord
counsels thee, to seek for him while he may be found. For it may be qui
tempus senectutis expectat ad poenitendum, dum speret miserecordiam inveniet
iudicium* Gregorius
That he who boasts of his repentance until the time of age, or the day of
death, instead of mercy, may find judgment wherefore Chrysostom.
seminemus dum est tempus, vt metamus, nauigemus dum mare nauigari potest,
antequam sit hyemps, quando magnus ille, and tremendus dies aduenerit non
licebit nauigare: let us sow our seed while it is seed time, and set forward
to sail, while the sea will serve. For it may be it will be too late to begin
our journey when the sun setts; Numb. 25.
to hoyst up sail, when the tempest arises, to sow our seed, when we should
reap our corn to repent when we lie a dying, and to do good when we are dead.
Remember that Zimry and Gozby were apprehenhed in the very act of their
iniquity, and suddenly were destroyed. Acts. 5.
And Ananias and Saphyra, were taken in the very moment of their sin, and
without repentance perished, yea says Augustine; spiritus reprobus repent in
morte rapietur a corpore. The reprobate and sinful soul shall be suddenly
taken, from the body in the moment of death, and carried with unspeakable
fear before the tribunal of the great judge of heaven and earth. Then shall
the soul in the remembrance of her sins seek of fly away from them, and
request but truce and respite of one hour to be separated from their sight and
company, but shall not obtain it. For they will answer opera tua sumus, et
tec^m ibimus, we are thy sins, and the work of that hands and heart, and we
will go with thee even to the judgment seat of God, there to accuse, and for
ever to condemn thee. Luke. 16.2
Thus happened it unto the rich man in the Gospel, who being even now in
pleasure and delight, and not regarding repentance was not long after smitten
dead, and carried to hell fire for ever to be burned. This made that holy father
Gregory Nazinzin to say.

One thing I lament and I fear an other; the first is my sins, and the second
is gods judgment seat, with hell fire. Basil.
O therefore says Basil bewail ever thy sins, and lament for thy
iniquity. Aug.
Fly fly those destroying torments vbi nec tortores desiciunt, nec torti
misere morientur: where the tormenters are never weary, nor the tormented
shall ever die. Where is death with outextinction, and burning without
co^sumption. Wherefore while it is to day harden not thy heart but cast off thy
sin and remove thy iniquity, by true repentance for thy transgression.

Thus much for the first remedy, and that is to give a remove unto thy sin. Now
follows the second, which is to cast thy burden upon the Lord, which is to
lay it down in the bosom and lap of God and that must be done by prayer, and
affiance. Thus did David. Psalm. 6.
First he cried my soul is soar troubled, the^ he prays, return O Lord:
which prayer being grounded upon true faith he says: the Lord has heared the
voice of my petition, and therefore he triumphs all my enemies shall be
confounded. Mark the burden which was the trouble of his soul, and the
remedy, which was prayer and affiance. Wherefore being well practiced in this
divine art, he sets up a school for all christian scholars saying: come, and I
will teach you. And what (I pray you) is his method? First decline from evil
and then do good, there is the remedy of repentance, and the Lords ears
shall be open to your cry and he will deliver you there is the remedy of faith,
and prayer; This was Augustines practice; Romans 6.24 Ho^eah. 14.10.
First he cries with.S. Paul O wretched man that I am, when shall my
crookedness, be made even to thy straightness? and then he falls to
confession, which he acknowledges to be the very way, whereby he may go again
into the way out of the which he has gone astray. Now his confession is that
God is truth, and he vanity, God is purity but he filthiness, God is good,
but he evil, God is righteous, but he sinful, God is life but he dead. Then
he falls unto prayer, saying: Aug solit. 16,
Audi o Creator, creatura tua sum iam perij, creatura tua sum, iam morior.
Hearken then O Creator, I am thy creature, and am now cast away, I am thy
creature, and now do I die: thy workmanship (O Lord) I am, despise not the
works of thy hands, respect the wounds of thy own hands (I beseech thee) lo
thou have written me upon the palm of they hands: lege scripturam hanc and
salua me: read that writing and save me: which prayer being grounded upon
faith, he calls God his fortitude by whom he is vpholden, his help by whom
he is assisted, his strength by whom he is sustained, his glory, in whom he
rejoices, and his life wherein he lives.

This method Basilius in his book de Peccato commends unto us as the
especial remedy for this burden saying; there is one thing that thou must shun
and eschew, and that is sin, insinuating repentance, and there is one refuge
for all thy miseries and that is God, intimating faith and true prayer. Let us
therefore take up the parable of Gregory Nazianzen and pray after this manner

Thou O God have had mercy upon three famous Publicans, which are remembered in
thy holy book: Math. 9.
Matthew at the custom. Luke. 18.
The Publican in the Temple. Luke. 19.
Zacheus on the tree: O let me be the fourth and save me. Thou have had mercy
upon three, that were strongly bound and could nor stir. The lame of the
palsy on the bed, the Math. 9.
sick lying by the poole, and the bound by the spirit eightene years; Mark.
9.
O Lord I am bound with the chain of my sins, unloose this chain, let me be
the fourth and save me. John. 5.
Thou have had mercy upon three that were dead, and saw no light. Math. 9.
The Rulers daughter. Luke. 7
The widows son. John. 11.
And Lazarus whom thou love. O Lord I am dead in my sins, let me be the
fourth and save me, For thy great mercy sake.

And now give me corasiues, that then I may have comfortatiues. If in this
life thou sendest me vanity, there I shall have immutabilitie. If in this life
thou layest burdens upon me, grant that in that life I may enjoy eternal ease
and quietness. And thus much for the third point, which is the remedy for this
burden.

Now follows the third thing considered in the first part, which is the
ground whereunto this anchor must be fastened: and that is two fold, God, and
the promise to the providence.

The first expressed in these words cast thy burden upon the Lord. And the
second signified by these: He shall nourish thee.

The first is gnal Ichouah: upon Jehovah showing unto us by this name that God
is he of whom all things have their being, are governed, and preserved For
Jehovah is a name of effence coming of houah, or hxiah, which is a verb
substantive, and signifies to be. From whence arises ehte: the name of
sempeternitie, and signifies which is, which was, and ever shall be. Wherefore
God calls himself, Exodus us. 3.14.
(and none but himself) I am, as who should say: I am of my self, and others
of me, and therefore cast upon me. I am all sufficient, having no need of
others, but all other things have need of me. Sciebat enim se solum esse,
alias creatures a se accepisse vt essent. Origin.
For he knew well when he said I am: that he only had being of himself, and
all the being that the creatures have, they receive it from him. Which indeed
is no more to be called being (in respect of Gods being) the^ the shadow may be
said to be, in respect of the body, or the smoke, in comparison of the fire.
Seeing then God is, and all sufficient, we note from this word Jehovah these
two things. (...): and (...): Gods self existencie, and Gods self
sufficiency.

First Gods self existencie, whence he is called (Alpha) and (Omega) the
beginning and the ending which is, which was, and which is to come. Apocall. 8.
For Attahel: before the mountains were made, and before the earth, world were
formed, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art our God (says the
kingly Prophet) Psalm. 90.2.
being the uncreated maker of all things yea the very author of life. Damacen.
Orthodox cap.2.
For of him we live, we move, and have our being. Acts. 2.15.
Ezekias dying life, he prolonged at his pleasure, Acts. 17.
For he has power both of life, and death: other Gods cannot save thee, for
they cannot save themselves. Esaias. 38.
Being like unto Dagon the God of the Philistines, Wisdom 16.13.
who fell upon his face on the ground before the Ark of the Lord, and not
being able to help himself, Barauch. 6.
lost both his head. and his hands. But Jehovah is he, that did answer Elias
prayer by fire from heaven. Kings. 1.18.
For the Lord himself is God, therefore call upon him.

The second is Gods self sufficiency. For God calls himself el shadday God
all sufficient, being most worthy of that praise and commendation, which the
Poet ascribes unto nature: Genes. 17.1.
saying. Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri.
He is rich enough of himself and wants none of our riches to help him. And
thus much he acknowledges of himself saying. Hear O my people and I will
speak: Hear O Israel, and I will testify unto thee. Psalm. 50.7.8.9.
For I am God even thy God. I will take no Bullock out of thy house, nor
goats out of thy foldes. For all the beasts of the Forest are mine* and the
beasts on a thousand mountains. I know all the fowls on the mountianes, and
the wild beasts of the field are mine: If I be hungry I will not tell thee. For
the world is mine and all that there in is. And thus much the word God
imports unto us. Euripides,
For if he be God indeed he neither wants, nor stands in need of any other
but our God is almighty. Job. 5.17.
He made heaven and earth, and all that is therein And this is the law of
reason, that omnis qui aliquid facit, eorum quae facit habeat potestatem; that
every man who makes of effects any thing, should have power and dominion over
the works of his own hands. Cassiodorus in Psalm. 94.


But what should I spend my time in proving of Gods sufficiency: seeing he is
not only (...): but also (...): yea and likewise (...) sufficient for
himself, but also for others yea and sufficient for all be they never so many.
Zenephon.
For of him be all, (...): nothing can be without God: Arist. de. Mundo.
who As Aristotle in his book ae Mundo says, that he is as the governor in
the ship: the wagoner in the wagon, the Chanter in the Quire, the law in the
City, the General in the army; the same and much more is God in the world.
Now the ship cannot long endure without the Pilote, nor the City without the
law, nor the army without the Captain, nor the world without God. For God is
unto the world, as the Sun unto the Moon: quo recedente deficit lumen Lunae.
A quinas in Collos.
But if the Sun pull back his light from the Mooneshe must likewise loose her
light, and if God withdraw his hand from upholding the world, the world must
needs decay. And therefore cast upon him, for he only has being of him self,
and is sufficient for himself and thee And thus much for the first ground.

The second is the promise of Gods providence: noted in these words: He shall
nourish thee: wherefore he may be called (...): of (...): because God by his
providence, does as it were forerunne and provide nourishment for all things.
Greg. Nicen de prouid.
And good reason, For (...) must be (...): he that made all things must
provide for all things, otherwise there would fall out some lack or want,
either in the maker, or in the prouider. For if one should make the world, and
another keep, and conserve it: the one would be weary of working misdowbting
the care of the prouider, and the other careless in keeping, fearing the
goodness of the worker, wherefore (...) and (...) the generation conservation
and government of all things are not amiss alleged by the Fathers to proceed,
and come from one and the self same power.

The first nothing his creating faculty the second, is conseruing, and the
third his ruling an guiding power. And this is acknowledged by the word of God,
and practiced by the creatures. For the eyes of all things look upon thee
(says the Psalmist) speaking of the Lord) Psalm. 145.15 16.
and thou give them their meat in due season, thou openest thy hands, and
fillest all things living, of thy good pleasure. Psalm. 104.4.
This the ravening Lion confesses by his practice. For the Lions roaring after
their pray, do seek their meat at God. And natural Philosophy relating the
nature of the creatures does warrant as much unto us. For they ripping up the
nature of the crow, do find in her (...): a certain unnatural affection
toward her young ones, who beholding the tallowy couller of her birds when
they are young, falls into a loathing, and misliking of them. Wherefore for
certain days she leaves and forsakes them, whom God taking into his
custody in mean time sustaines and releiues by worms, that breed in the doung
and filth of their nest, until such time as the old ones return unto them
again. Job. 39.3.
For he prepares meat for the Raven, when his birds cry unto him wandering
for lack of meat.

This is further showed by Gods miraculouse preservation of the Kings Fisher a
sea bird. (...). Basil, de^ precat.
Who makes her nest upon the water of the sea, and that in the midst of
winter, even then, when the winds are most strong, and the water most
boisterous. Yet by Gods providence the winds wax quiet, and the waters calm,
so long as the Halcio^ sits upon her eggs and produces her young ones: yea for
so long as the young ones have need of their damnes nourishment and are not
fit to provide for themselves: And these days the sailors call the Halcionian
days. Thus God shows himself a Father unto his creatures, being (as the
psalmist speaks) like unto a father that has compassion upon his children.
And good reason that the Lord should be thus unto us, if we trust in him. For
do we not see the plants give life, and nourishment, unto the spigges, and
twigges, that arise and issue of them. The beasts cherrish and nowrish their
young, and man brings up his Children that be borne of his loins. Plato.
And do we think that God can be without natural affection, that is the
Creator and maker, of all fatherly love in others? yea and is the cause of all
the good in nature and he himself be without goodness unto his creature? yes
verily, cogita de Deo quicquid melius potest and de te quicquid deterius, and
de illo amplius credere debes, quam cogitare possis. Bernardus. Meditat. 5.
Think the best that thou can of God, and the worst thou can of thy self,
notwithstanding thou may believe much more touching his goodness, then thou
can possibly think our image in For he is bonum, sine quo nihil est bonum:
Aug. solil. 1.
he is goodness it self without whom nothing is good: yea indeed none is
good but one, and that is God himself And therefore cast thy burden upon him;
for he is thy sheaphard that will keep thee so that thou shall not want: and
thy shepherd that will seek thee so that thou can not be lost. Psalm.
He is like unto a eagle that defe^ds her young ones against the heat of the
sun, and the rigor of the cold. Luke 15.
Like unto an hen that keeps her young ones against the fury of the vulture:
Deuteronomy. 32.
and may be well compared to the wings of the Cherubin, Math. 23.
which are alwaise spread abroad to receive thee at thy coming. O therefore
praise the name of the Lord, for he is good, the earth is full of his goodness.
Psalm. 106.
Thus does saints give thanks unto God Psalm. 106 for his goodness. Pindarus.
But alas and not only but also old favor and friendship is now a sleep, for
men at these days are too forgetful and not only old favor but new likewise,
yea all the graces and loving kindnesses of the Lord are put out of mind, and
forgotten wherein men are like unto the Israelites that forgot God their
Savior, which had done greeat things in Egypt, and wondrous things in the
land of Ham, and fearful things at the read Sea: yet incontinently they
forgot his works. Psalm. 106.13.21.
Thus are men lead from God, and therefore woe and destruction shall be upon
them, (says the Prophet) Ier. 2.12.
yea, be astonished oye heavens, be afraid and utterly confounded (says the
Lord) For my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, to dig them pits that will hold no water. For they
have forsaken God the rock, the foundation and the sure ground, to cast upon
the creature, a sandy vnsteadfast and deceitful grownd. And this grownd is
especially of three sorts, whereupon men especially cast their confidence, and
fasten their ankers, and they are men, the world, and the devil. Chro. 2.16 12.
The first grownde whereupon men commonly cast, is man himself. As sometimes
upon the Phisician; thus did Asa, who being sick and diseased, sought not to
the Lord in his disease, but to the Physicians: but death ouertooke him for it.
Not that physic is to be discommended, for the Phisician is honorable, but
he must be put in the second or third place. Sometime upon policy, as did
Nero and Absolon: the first whereof that he might establish his kingdom the
better to him, and win the hearts of the people, under the pretense of
clemency when there was brought a bill unto him, whereunto he should
subscribe, touching the condemnation and punishment of offenders, he would say
Vtinam non scissem ^itteras, I would I could not wright, as though (forsooth)
he desired so much the welfare and life of the people, that wished afterward
that all Room were but one head, that he might cut it off at one blow. Sam.
2.15.
The second that he might with more ease obtain the kingdom, 2.3.5.5.6.
he would get up early and stand by the entering in of the gate, and every man
that had any matter, and came to the king for judgment, him did Absolon call
unto him, and said of what city art thou? and he answered, thy servant is of
one of the tribes of Israel: then Absolon said unto him: see thy matters are
good and righteous, but there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee.
Absolon said moreover, O that I were made judge in the land, that every man
which has any matter or controversy might come to me, that I might do him
justice. And when any man came near unto him, and did him obeisance, he put
forth his hand and took him and kissed him. And on this manner did Absolon to
all Israel that came to the King for Judgment. So Absolon stale the hearts of
the people of Israel. See the nature of the pollitician; without a saint;
within an hypocrite, deceiuer, murderer and traitor. And yet this is the
practice of the world by policy, hypocrisy, and deceit, to advance, an
maintain their house and their estate* Sam. 2.17.
but how God likes the pollician (when policy has not his warrant from him)
appears by the confusion of Achitophel whose counsel and pollice being
refused and overthrown, he went and hanged himself:

Thirdly upon strength, as upon kings and princes, soldiers, holds, muni^o^s
and such like. Sam. 1.17.17.
Thus did Goliath trust in his strength, and therefore desied the host of
Israel, but little David ouerca^e him with a sling, and a stone. For the
battle is the Lords. Chro. 2.16.2.
Thus did Asa trust upon Benhadas the King of Aram, but the Lord told him by
the Prophet Haanaus, that he had done foolishly, and therefore henceforth he
should have wars. For the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth to show
himself strong with them that are of perfect heart toward him. Dan.
4.27.25.29.
Thus did Nabuchadonezer cast his confidence upon the strength of his Babell,
saying. Is not this great Babell that I have built for the house of my
kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? But
while the word was in his mouth, a voice came down from heaven, saying: O King
Nabuchadonezer, to thee be it spoken, thy kingdom is departed from thee, and
they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of
the field, they shall make thee eat grass as the oxen, and seven times shall
pass over thee, until thou know, that the most high bears rule over the
kingdoms of men, and gives it unto whomesoeuer he will. And the very same
hour was this thing fulfilled. Thus did Dionisius that said his kingdom was
Adamantinis vinculis firmatum. Strenghtened with chains of Adamant, and that
in despite of God, but the blasphemous wretch found the contrary, when he was
dispossessed of it. And Ajax in Sophocles trusting unto his strength, said,
ignauis opus esse consilio diuino, se sine deo vincere posse, it is enough for
cowardes to crave aid and counsel at Gods hands, he was able of himself to
get the conquest. But he spoke as a man without a mind, as afterward it
proved, when he fought with ra^es in stead of men. Wherefore for all their
brags these men must know, that there is neither conquest, battle or victory
without God, Psalm. 33.16.
and that the king is not saved by the multitude of an host, Judges. 7.
nor the mighty by much strength Gedeo^s army consisting but of three hundred
men overthrew a mighty host of the Madianites. Chro. 14.9.
For the Lord can save as well with a few as with many. Sam. 1.14.
Jonathan and his harness bearer, being but two, discomfited a mighty army
of the Philistines. Psalm. 14.10.
For the Lord has no pleasure in any man's legs, but in them that fear him.
Judge. 5.20.
Sicera had 700 chariots of iron, and a mighty army, yet was slain by 200
men, for they fought from heaven against him. Aug. deciuit. 5. cap. 23.
The Goths coming against Rome in the reign of Honorius, were in one day
discomfited and there King Radagisus with his sons taken captive, yet not one
of the Romans killed, no not so much as wounded. Ier. 17.5.
For cursed is the man, that hops in man and makes flesh his arm. Psalm.
116.11
Because all men are liares and meare vanity, being like unto running water,
yea to a very swift stream that is here now and suddenly in an other place, or
like to the falling of Epictetus
Homer.
Sophortes.
Pindarus.
leaves, yea to the shadow of smoke: nay man is the very dream of a shadow.
Chrysostom. 27. ad populi.
Compared by on to houses of dirt built by little children, which a man may
break with every fillip. This made Xerxes to weep, beholding his great army
of 200000 men, because after a few years not one of them should remain, or be
alive. O si possemus in tale ascendere speculum, de quo vniuersam terram sub
nostris pedibus cerneremus, iam tibi ostenderem totius orbis ^uinam. Hieron: ad
Heliodor.
O that we might ascend to such a hill, from whence we might behold all the
whole world under our feet, then would I quickly show unto thee, the ruins
of the same. Then would I show unto thee nations against nations, wars,
imprisome^ts, tortures, banishments, and not only the ruin of Xerxes army, but
the death and destruction of all the men in the world not long after to come to
pass. Esaias. 40.
For all flesh is grass.

Flos apparuimus, qui non eramus quasi flos ariscimus qui temporaliter
apparebamus. Gregory
We seemed to be what we were not, as a flower we wither which are here but
for a time* now may we think ourselves to be jolly fellows, but by and by we
shall be turned unto dust, and then is the peasant equal with the prince.
Nazinauz.
Therefore let us in England (enpironed now with enemies) make God alone our
shield with David, Psalm. 91.2.
yea our rock and defense. Psalm. 18.
Let us pray unto him he is our King, and he must hear us. Psalm. 5.3.
For if the woman could answer Adrian the Emperor, when her suite was put
off with, non est mihi Otium, I am not at leisure: Ergo imperare noli. King.
2.6.
therefore be no longer King then says she, whereat he turning unto her, gave
her audience: Psalm. 91.12
How much more will God (that comma^deth us to pray unto him) be willing and
ready to here our prayers? Elizeus prayed and saw the army of God pitched
round about him. And Jacob had the host of God to meet him for his protection.
For the Angel of the Lord shall pitch his tents about thee, and carry thee
in their hands least thou be hurt, if thou will put thy trust in him. And
therefore cast upon the Lord.

And thus much for the first ground whereupon the most part do cast their
anchor. Psalm, 94.6.
The second is the world, where on the covetous, luxurious, idle and shifting
man does put his trust. For the covetous boasts of his riches, and trusts
in them, saying unto his soul, take thy rest, For thou have many goods laid
up. Bernard:
These sail mare rubrum, the red sea, and fetch about to the river Ganges,
which compasses the land of Eu^la, where are bred the carbuncle, the Smaragde,
and the golden mountains, whereunto by reason of griffens, and dragons and
mighty monsters, it is almost impossible to attain. Psalm. 4.
Yet man adventures for it, quarit vt acquirat, acquirit vt perdat, perdat vt
doleat. Basil.
He seeks by all means to get, he gets to loose, and he leeseth to vex and
torment himself. O ye sons of men how long will ye seek after vanity? How
long will ye hu^t after gold, a net to catch our souls, the hook of death and
the bait of sin? How long will ye seek after riches, the cause of wars, the
discord of brethren that makes kinsmen forget nature, citizens maintain
sicophantes, and the high way thieves? Who is the father of lies, the coyner of
false accusations, and the author of perjury? Are they not riches and the
desire of gold? what made Ahab to slay his subject? Achan to steal forbidden
goods? and Judas to betray his Master, was it not the desire of gold and
riches? O remember that covetousness is carrid upon a chariot, the four wheels
whereof are pusillanimitas, in humanitas, contemptus dei, and obliuio mortis,
Barnard.
faint heartedness, inhumanitie, contempt of God, and forgetfulness of death.
The coach horses that draw the chariot are tenacitas: and rapacitas, holdfast
and ravening. The waggoner is desire of having, and the whippes that scourdge
forwards these horses are, desire to get, and fear to loosse. And yet what
have thou got by all this pains, but a City of paper, a runnagate servant,
a sword to pierce thy soul, and everlasting destruction (as did Dives) that
for his riches was carried in to hell. But thou that by evil means thus
castest after the world, forgettest that God is the giver of all riches, who is
the giver of all things: in City in field in cattle and corn, and what not.
Wherefore least this be added unto the heap of thy offenses, forsake the world
and cast upon the Lord, and he will provide for thee.

But here steps in the idle and delicious man obiecting for himself, and his
ease saying: What then need we for to labor if God be the giver of all
things? But this man must know, that when the scriptures speak (acknowledging
to Gods praise) that he gives all things, yet they debar not from him the
means which God appointed. Thus when the psalmist speaks, Psalm. 103.9.
that the faithful man who trusts in God, shall have riches and treasure, he
uses the word Hoon which properly signifith goods and riches which are gotten
by great endeavor to admonish us, that riches are be stowed upon us by those
means which God has ordained from above, of which sort are labor, pains,
care, and such like For man is borne to labor. He goes out unto his work and
to his labor until the evening, and without labor nothing can prosper.
Howbeit both labor, thirst, sleep, and all must be done according to the
Physicians rule, name-in a mean. But here the idle man will take up Christ
his speech for his warant saying. Take no thought for thy life what to eat,
nor for your body what you shall put on. The Ravens neither sow nor reap, yet
God feeds them, and how much is man better then fowls? But we must know that
Christ forbids not here labor and ordinary means for provision, Luke.
12.15.
but gives us in charge, not to give over our selves to a coueteous care of
this life, nor labor, sed men's suffoca, ta cura, damnatur: Chrysosto:
not labor but a mind choked with care is condemned. Labor est exercendus,
but sollicitudo est tollenda: Hieron.
labor is to be used, but over much care to be refused, For labor is
commanded. Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face, thou shall eat thy bread; until thou return unto
the earth. Whereby we find condemned the idle beggar; unto who^e God has,
afforded parts fit for labor. The robber, and the theife, the belly God, and
the Friar, the cousiner, the shifter, and all that live by their wits without
calling. For these live upon other men's labor, and not upon the sweat of
their own brows, solliciti esse vetamur, laborare autem iubemur. Chrysostom.
For labor est naturae: sollicitudo est culpae, wear forbidden indeed to be
two careful, but we are commanded to labor. Tho: Aqui.
For labor is of nature, but care of sin, yet neither is all care forbidden.
For there is a faithful and a sinful care. The first labors in his
calling, escam in manum domini committit, but he leaves the issue and event of
all his labor, unto the hands and providence of God, building upon him by a
strong faith. The second labors but dispaires of the issue, quasi quineminem
habet gubernantem, Chrysostom.
as though all must come by his care and travel; and there were no God to
provide for him and send a blessing to his labor. Nazenze^s.
Whereas, If the Lord give a blessing carking care will not prevail: and if God
do not give a blessing, all our labor will do no good. For as the Rabbines
could well note God has four keys which he will not lend to any other. The
key of the grave: the key of dearth an barrenes. The key of rain, and plenty.
And the key of food and nourishment: yea except the Lord build the house, they
labor but in vain that build it: and except the Lord keep the City, the
keeper watches but in vain. It is in vain for you to rise early, and to lie
down late, and eat the bread of sorrow, unless the lord be with you to
bless you Psalm. 127.1. and. 2.
But if God lay to his helping hand, unto our lawful calling and diligent
endeavor then may we be assured all things shall prosper, and succeed for our
good So then, if we will not tempt God we must use the means, but such means
as God allows of, and has ordained. Wherefore craft, usury, Simony,
counterfeiting of wares, and such like, as means by God both forbidden and
condemned, are to be eschewed and avoided. And here may the poor man that
faithfully labors in his calling be comforted. For he shall not always be
forgotten, because if God provides for the fowls, man is better the^ they.
Math. 6.
If he cloatheth the Lillies of the field, which to day are in your field, and
to morrow cast into the oven: how much more will he cloth and feed us, if we
will put our trust in him? This David found by experience, and provoke
others by his example to trust in God. Psalm. 34.4.6.8.
I sought the Lord (says he) and he heard me, the poor cries, and the Lord
hears him: O do but taste, and see how gracious the Lord is, and you shall
find that man to be greatly blessed that puts his trust in him. And this
Christ makes us to be most sure of, when he tells us that God is our
farther. For if pater, vult; If omnipotens potest, non est ergo timendum quin
prouideat nobis. Aug.
If he be our father, then how can we doubt of his good will unto us his
children: and if he be omnipotent how can we fear his ability to persorme his
will: wherefore if he be both willing and able, let us assure our selves that
he, and he alone will assuredly provide for us, and therefore let us cast upon
the Lord. And thus much for the second false ground which is the world.

Now follows the third, and that is the Devil. A ground whereon Magicians,
coniurers, witches, an whosoever follow any such unlawful, and forbidden
craft, do cast their hope and rely. Men mightily mislead, and be witched with
blockish Atheism, and un godliness, yea with sottish forgetfulness, of their
own estate and welfare. Per. 1.5.8.
For can a man look for any benefit, or help at the hands of his mortal
enemy and professed foe? yet the Devil, and his angels are our deadly
enemies, seeking to devour us, and our professed foes by open proclamation
from the beginning. Genesis 3.
Neither is this all; but God himself will turn against them. Leuitic. 20 6.
For If any turn after such as work with spirits, and southsayers, to ^o a
whoring after them, then will I set my face against that person, and will cut
him of from among my people. Sam. 28.
Thus happened it to Saul for leaving God, to seek unto a witch: he was
destroyed. Exodus 7.
Pharaoh runs unto the wi^ardes, but he, and all his army perished for it.
Kings. 2.1.3.4.
Ahaziah falling sick sent to inquire of Baalze bub the God of Ekron, touching
the ^ecouery of his disease, but the angel of the Lord said unto Eliah. Arise,
and go up to meet the messingers, and say unto them: Is not there a God in
Istraell? wherefore thus says the Lord: Thou shall not come down from the
bed, on which thou art gone up, but shall die the death, Domitian forsooth must
needs hane his wizards to tell him of his fortune; But presently thereupon he
grew suspicious of all his people, that he caused the wall of his gallery to be
besette with the stone Phengiles, which is a very bright and shining stone,
that by that means he might see, and behold, what was done behind him.
Suetonius. cap. 14.15.
For these fortune tellers, and casters of natiuties either they tell us
aduersa, or prospera: some good and prosperity which shall happen unto us, or
else some ill and adversity, that shall betide us. If they tell unto us some
happy thing to come and do deceive us, they make us unhappy by expecting that
which shall never be fulfilled. And if they tell unto us adverse, and evil
things to betide us, and lie unto us, yet they make us miserable by fearing
that which shall not be effected, Howbeit, if they learn this knowledge of the
Devil, can we think that he will tell us any good that wishes nothing but
our hurt? or if it be else where to be found, were ^t lawful? would God then
forbid it to be practiced? saying* Deutrie. 18.10.11 12.
Let none be found amongst you that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of times,
or a marker of the flying of fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a charmer, or that
counsels with spirits, or a south-sayer, or that asks counsel at the dead
For all that do such things are an abomination unto the Lord. Judges. 9.
As for the Devil he is an evil spirit, the spirit of hatered, a lying
spirit, and the father of lies, himself like lightening was thrown down from
heaven. And what stay then can they hope for or expect, that put their trust in
him? Kings. 1.22
But if thou have said with David, the Lord is my hope, and my fortress, he
is my God, in him will I trust. John. 10.
Luke. 13.
Then shall thou be delivered from the snare of the hunter, and from the noy
some pestilence from the fear of the night and the arrow that flies by day:
Psalm. 91.
Thou shale walk upon the Lion; and the Adder, the young Lion, or the Dragon
shall thou tread under thy feet. For God will give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: As for the Devil, what power and
ability has he to prevail against thee, unless God give him leave, Gregorius
Qui etsam in porcos tra^sire non potu^, nisi permissus. Math. 8.
which could not enter into the heard of swine until he had received leave and
license from Christ our Savior. Job. 1.
Nor prevail against Job, no further then the Lord saw it, convenient, for
Jobs trial, and the Lords glory. Wherefore defy Satan, and abandon all
users of wicked crafts, and say with Augustine: Aug.
Vna confidentia, vna ^irma promissio Deus miserecordia tua. This is one only
confidence, and firm promise, and that is thy mercy O God. Si insurgant
aduersiis me praelia: Bernardus.
Though wars and troubles rise against me. Though the world rage, and the
Devil fret. Though the flesh lust against the spirit, yet in te domine
speraebo: I will trust in thee: In thee O Lord alone, my God, and my redeemer.
Psalm. 3.
And with David though my adversaries be increased, and say unto my soul,
there is no help for him in his God, yet will I not be afraid for ten
thousand. For thou O God art my buckler, and salvation belongs only unto
thee. O Christ my king thou art my country, my strength my riches, my
happiness, yea thou art all things what tongue can speak, or heart can wish
here here is the sure ground whereon, to cast our anchor, other grounds will
but deceive Gregory.
us. Quid coelo securius, paradiso iucundus? Angeli tumen de caelo, de pariaiso
homines c^ciderunt. What is more secure then heaven, or more pleasant then
paridise? yet the Angels fell from heaven and ^e lost paradise: why then will thou cast upon man, which is so frail, the world which is so vain, and the
Devil which is so deceitful. Aug.
Proijce te in illum qui semper stat: O no but cast thy self only upon him,
which is neither frail, or vain, subtle, nor deceitful but firm, constant
and permanent, willing to receive thee, and able for to help thee, even the
Lord thy God and he will nourish thee: and thus much for the first part of this
text, which is the christian man's laying at anchor in the sea of this world
contained in these words, cast thy burden upon the Lord and he will nourish
thee.

Now follows the second and the third parts which for the time is past, I
will contract and finish in a word.

The second part is the arriving of the godly man in the haven of happpinesse:
Contained in these words, He will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever,
insinuating unto us, that the godly man shall be tossed in this world with the
waves of aflictions, and the winds of persecutions, but for all this he shall
be delivered from drowning, and at the last arrive in the blessed haven of
happiness, where in we are to consider these two things. First the necessity
of afflictions, and secondly the assurance of his arriving in the haven.

The first insinuated from the comparison of his sailing and the second assured
from the promise. Who will not suffer him to fall for ever; for the first.

Man's life is compared unto a ship sailing on the sea, and therefore he must
look for waves and winds to toss and assault him. To a warrefare: the
christian man is the soldier, and he must expect weapons, and men, and all
store of warlike strategemes to oppress him. Timothy. 2.2.3.
Thus is Timothy called the soldier of Christ, and therefore persuaded by the
Apostle to arm himself to suffer affliction as a good soldier. The Chtistian
man is compared to a vessel, afflictions are the tools, and the vessel must
look to be cut and squared fit for the use of that house, for which it is
provided. The Christian man is compared unto a scholar, the world is the
schoolehouse, afflictions are the rod and the scholar must look now and then
to taste of the rod, and under go correction. Psalm. 66:10.
The Christian man is compared unto gould, the world is the for^e, afflictions
are the fire, and the gould and metal must look to be tried in the fire,
that it may be purified. The Christian is compared to a runner and tryer of
masteries, and the wrestler must look for foiles and for falls. Cor. 1.9.24.
The Christian is compared to come and he must look to be sifted and threshed
with the flayle of afflictions. The christian man is compared unto the grape,
that must be pressed, strayned and stamped with tribulation. Thus God deals
with his children as a father with the son, whom he most loves: Luke. 15.
as a Physician with the patient whom he most affects, specified by the
loving father unto the prodigal son, by Christ unto the theife upon the
cross. Heb. 11.
This was the way for all the god unto walk into heaven, as appears by the
patriarchs, the Prophets the Apostles, Christ and his saints wherefore we must
accept of afflictions, as the Lords most fatherly corrections, first because
God is the sender of them, and being our father he will send nothing unto his
children, but that which shall be for their good and profit. Luke. 15.
How merciful was he unto the wounded man that fell among theiues, Math. 9.
How careful was he of the sheep that was lost in the wilderness? Mat.
11.29.
and how pitiful over the dis^sed, that were sick, blind, doumb, and deaf,
for unto whom faith God shall I have respect, but unto him that is miserable,
poor, brought low, troubled in spirit, and stands in awe of my words. Esaias.
66.2.
Secondly because God that sendes them is almighty, and able to deliver us:
Our father will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength. Cor. 1.10.
Thirdly because afflictions are short, yet a little and he comes. Though
mourning be at even yet joy comes in the morning. Thus was Joseph now a
prisoner, by and by a Prince. Psalm. 30.5.
David erewhile a banished man, and despised, by and by a King and much
respected; Job a man even now afflicted and contemned; by and by again in much
prosperity and of all regarded. Fourthly because we are sick, God is the
Physician, affliction the physic, and we will suffer the phisician to give us
bitter potions, and the surgeon to cut and to lance our bodies. And why not
much more God, who though he kill yet will make alive, and though he wound,
yet will make us whole: In a word because afflictions bring us to know God and
our selves, to awake us from sin, and conform us to the image of Christ his
son, because in trouble betimes shall they arise unto me says the Lord, and
while we are punished, we are corrected of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned in the world Let us cry with Austine, hic seca, hic ure, ne pere am
in eternum, here cut, here lance, here box, here burn least I perish with
Dives and the rest of the wicked in the fire of hell which shall never have an
end, Acts. 3.
yea let us rejoice in aflictions as did the Apostles, let us receive them with
thanks, seeing we suffer no more for our sins, then Christ sot us, which had
no sin. Mat. 10.
And seeing the desciple is not above his master but by this way Christ our
master entered into his glory: let us humble our selves in afffictions for he
that will follow Christ, must deny himself: Luke 24.
And afflictions are Gods cogniscance to show us who is our Lord and master.
Esaias. 33.
Let us repent us of our sin, for God is very ready to forgive otherwise the
Lord will visit sins with scourges, And let us continually call upon the
Lord, for so he commands saying: call upon me in time of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, Kings. 2.
Thus did Hezekias in his sickness Act. 12.20.
and Peter in the Prison, and the one was healed, and the other delivered; the
pains of hell (says David) Psalm. 18.
came about me, and the snare of death ouertooke me, but in my trouble I called
upon the Lord, and he heard me, for whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord
shall be preserved. And thus much for the first point which is the necessity
of afflictions Romans 10.
Now follows the second which is the certainty of deliverance, and arriving
in the haven of happiness noted out of these words. He will not suffer the
righteous to fall for ever. This is warranted from these arguments. First from
the fore knowledge of God, who sees all things before they come to pass, and
therefore sees the afflictions of his people, as he beheld the Isralites,
afflictions, and will deliver the godly now as he delivered his people then.
Exodus 3.78
For I have surely seen the trouble of my people (says God) which are in
Aegipt and have heard their cry, and therefore am come down to deliver them,
and to bring them into a land that flows with milk and honey. See, they shall
be delivered because God foreseeth their calamities, neither is his sight more
dim or his love less now to them that fear him. All things are naked and
open in his eyes, he behouldeth the ends of the world, and sees all that is
under heaven. Heb. 4.13.
He sees all things, he hears all things and rewards all things.
Orpheus:


Secondly from Gods goodness and love that is unchangeable toward his
servantes, Luke. 10.28
for God has written their names in heaven, and has them in his book of
accounts. Luke 15.50
He will not lose the lost sheep that is gone astray. They are in Corporated
into his City, and he knows them by their names.

Thirdly from his promise, who has promised when they cry unto him, he will
deliver them: the certainty hereof depends upon his truth, which cannot lie,
and upon his omnipotency which cannot fail.

Fourthly from his justice which will give to every one according to their
deserts and therefore if not in this world yet in the world to come he will
give a worthy blessinge unto the godly.

Fifthly from his mercy, which makes his son to shine both on good and
badde, and will not alwaise forget his mercy unto his servants that call upon
him. This is Christ his banner, under which the servants of Christ espetially
do march. This is their tower whereunto they fly in all their assaults, yea
this was that which brake hell gates to let out the servants of God, and it
will open the doors of heaven to let in all those, that with true faith cast
upon Christ their true ground and foundation.

Lastly this is warranted from the examples of all the Saints in holy writ,
whom God preserved in the time of trouble. Noah was saved when the world was
drowned, for he trusted in God. Lot was preserved when Sodom was burned for he
served God. The Israelites were delivered, when Pharaoh perished because they
where the people of the Lord what should I rippe up a volumne of examples? when
Dines perished in hell for his wickedness, Lazarus was carried into heaven for
his godliness, a kingdom, a throane, and paradise of bliss, not like earthly
kingdoms full of troubles (as was David's) nor momentary as was Salomons, but a
kingdom more pure then the sun which nothing can corrupt, more rich then
precious stone which nothing can valu; a kingdom which neithr eye has seen;
nor the glory thereof can any tongue relate. What soldier would not endure any
hard ship for his kingdom what wrestler would nor suffer any soiles for his
wager? What runner any labor for this prise? what prisoner any fetters for
this liberty? what glutto^ any abstience? what Dives any poverty? what
Abraham any pilgrimage? what David any banishment? and what Saint all
calamity, and affliction for this paradise? only cast and trust upon him and
he will provide it for thee: for he will not suffer the righteous to fall for
ever. But the ungodly shall be thrown into the pit of corruption. And this is
the last part of this text: which contains in it the shipwreck of the wicked
man: who all be it he sail top and top gallant in the sea of this world, and
flourish for a while, in the vanity of the same, yet shall the waves of an
evil conscience toss him, and the winds of Gods judgments utterly over throw
him.

Quid Crassos, and Pompeios euertit?
Summus nempe locus nulla non art petitus.
Magnaque numinibus vota exaudita malignis. Satyr.

The stock of Crassus, and the house of Pompey flourished in Rome for a space,
but being erected and set up by ill means, and subtlety: was ouerthrown,
and came to nothing. This the scripture abundantly proves unto us. Sometimes
telling us of the prosperity of the wicked, and sometime showing us again the
destruction of the sinner. Thus when Job had declared unto us, the flourishing
estate of the wicked, upon the neck thereof he infers the lamentable fall
of the ungodly. Now he says: Job. 21.71.
they live, wax old, and grow in wealth their houses are peaceable, and their
bullock falls not, they send forth children and rejoice in the sound of the
harp, and Organes, they spend their days in wealth, and the rod of God is not
upon them, yet he concludes; Let the counsel of the wicked be far from me;
for their candle shall be put out, and destruction shall come upon them; they
shall be as stubble before the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries
away, yea God will lay up sorrow for him, and when he rewards him, he shall
know it. Psalm. 73.
So when David had well nie slipped, beholding the prosperity of the wicked yet
entering into the sanctuary of God he understood the slippery end of the
ungodly: who are suddenly destroyed as a dream when one waketh. Psalm. 1.6.
For the way of the sinner shall perish Geminae sub terra viae ad manes sunt,
Vna est piorum, sed malorum est altera. Te nullus error habeat, est ius
inferis. Exodus 14.18
There be two ways: the one leads to heaven, the other to hell, the one is
for the good the other for the bad, and we may be assured that God is just, who
will reward them both according to their works. The first shall prosper, for
the Lord will bless them, but the second shall perish for the face of the Lord
is against them that do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth.
Pharaoh sailed in prosperity for a while, but at the last he suffered
shipwreck, and was drowned. Ester. 9.
Haman sailed a loft for a while, but at the last, fell into his own pit, and
was hanged: Antiochus, prospered for a while, but at the last was slain by
Tryphon, and perished. Thus shall the tra^sgressors be destroyed, and the end
of the wicked shall be cut off. What should I here reckon up the temporary
flowrish of Herod, Nero, Domitian, Traian, Hadrian, Valerian, Aurelian,
Dioclesian, Maximinus, Maximianus, and infinite others? Were not some of them
devoured with worms, others spat out their lunges: some killed themselves,
others were murdered by their servants: some died of dropsy; others of an
apoplexy some were taken captive by the foe, and others destroyed by the
enemy? Kings. 1.11.
For God will raise up adversaries to Solomon for his sins, and muster all
the host of heaven against the wicked for their offenses. Ierimiah. 5.6.
A Lion out of the Forest shall sley them a wolphe out of the wilderness
shall destroy them a Leopard shall watch over their City, Acts. 1.18.
and every one that goes out shall be torn in pieces, because of their
trangressions, Judas came to perdition by the halter, Lubian was devoured with
dogs; Acts. 13.
Elimas was stricken blind: Manes was flead alive. Arrius died of a flux.
Nestorius was swallowed up of the earth, Benedict the 9. was strangled by
Satan and Zoroastes burned by the Devil. The blasphemer was stoned: and the
child that learned betimes to swear was possessed of the devil* the man that
gather^d sticks on the saboth was sto^ned: Leuit. 24.
and Nicanor that regarded not the sabbath was destroyed, Greg. lib. 4. Dial.
18.
Absolon was hanged by the hair: and the posterity of disobedient Cham was
abolished: Numb. 15.
verily the ungodly may make a show for a while, but they are set in slippery
places, Sam. 2.16.
For they shall be consumed. Deutri. 7.
Cain must be a runnagate for his murder, Psalm. 73.
and Sodom burned for uncleanness: Genes. 4.
Achan was stoned for taking a forbidden garment; Leo, Corponimus was smitten
from heaven for sacrilege* Amos. 7.
Amasiaz must die in a polluted land for false witness: Darius Princes wear
into the Lions den for accusing Daniell. Daniell.
Thus will the Lord rain upon the wicked, snares fire and brimstone. Psalm. 11.
His hand shall find out all his enemies, and his right hand them that hate
him* yea the Lord shall distroy the^ in his wrath and the fire shall devour
them. Psalm. 21.9
Wherefore let us be wise like the children of this generation, and learn one
lesson from the men of Tire, and Sidon, and that is, as they that feared the
anger of H^rod the Prince, came to Blastus the chamberlain to desire peace:
Acts. 12.
so we fearing the anger of God the Father, let us go unto Christ the son,
To make atonement for us; The way must be: First by prayer to labor for faith.
Secondly by faith to a^ttaine repentance. And Thirdly by repentance to bring
forth a new life, forsaking old Adam the man of sin, and putting one the new
Christ the man of righteousness. Psalm. 33.
For then God shall be our father by adoption, and blessed is the people,
whose God is the Lord: even the people that he has chosen for his
inheritance. Psalm. 27.
And then though Father, and Mother forsake thee, afflictions and all the world
do band against thee yet will the Lord gather thee up, and with his mighty
arm deliver thee. And therefore cast (with David) upon the Lord and he will
nourish thee. For he will not see the righteous perish for ever, but the wicked
shall be thrown into the pit of destruction. Whereby thou may know how to
withstand the assaults of Satan, who taking advantage upon thy homebred
Atheism, stirs up thy impatient nature to wage war against thy Creature,
and say with the wicked in Malachie. Malach. 3.14.
It is in vain to serve God, for they that work wickedness are exalted: as who
should say. To serve God is neither good for God nor profitable for man. First
it is not good for God, for if thou be righteous, what give thou unto him,
Or what receives he at thy hand? Job. 35.7.
Secondly it is not beneficial unto man, for then it should be in one of these
respects, either that God would bless us for our service, or not punish us for
our sins: but neither are the good men rewarded for there well doing, nor the
bad punished for there wicked working, and therefore it is in vain to serve
God: ye on the contrary it is good to be bad and best to be the worst. For are
not the humble debased, and the proud exalted the wicked man rich and the good
man poor? does not oppression, and injury deceit and cosinage, dising and
swearing bring in wealth and iolitie, but true dealing makes woe and poverty.

Criminibus debent hortos pretoria mesas, was not Nabuchadonasar mighty, yet
proud, Pompie great, O yet sacrelegious, Rapsakie rich yet a blasphemer;
Alexander a Monarch, yet full of sin.

Aude aliquidbreuibus gyaris, et carcexe di^nu^, siuis esse aliquis; victus
laudatur et alget Malac. 8.2.17.
verily he that would be rich let him be coteous, and he it would be pore let
him be righteous: Psalm. 10.11.13.
he it would be great let him be vicious, and he that would be little and of no
este^e, let him be virtuous. Prou. 5.2^.
For God either delights in the^ that do evil: or beholds not our actions: or
else hides away his face and will not regard; Orpheus.
al which thou have hard even now answered by practis, and proved false by
woeful experience for God is no idle spectator of our actions nor vain
beholder of our works: he will be favorable unto the good, and most severe
against the bad The waise of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he
po^dereth all his paths, he beholds al things hears all things and rewards all
according to there works. If thou do well (says God unto Caine) Genes. 4.7.
shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well sin lies at thy door:
and says the heathen man.

Si genus humanum et mortalia temitis a^ ma, at sperate deos memores fandi
atque nefa^di. Vira. Acnad. 6.
Albeit mortal man is not able to offend thee, nor his weak arm sufficient to
command thee, yet the immortal God that keeps a register of our ways will one
day set a due desert upon our works.

But thou will say this punishment which God reserues for an other day is very
late: And yet thou must know when it shall come it will be two bitter.

Lento garduira deidrocedit, sed traditate^ penae grauetate supplicij
compensat. Valor. Maxi.
God is slow indeed unto anger, and very loath to come unto revenge, but when
he comes he will recompense his slacknes with the greatness of his punishments.
Thus he dealt with the old world, with Sodom, with the Jews, day by day, year
by year, age after age expecting there repentance, being called more properly
pater miserordiaru^ then indiciorum the father of mercies, then of judgments,
because the first proceeds from himself the second from our sins.

Howbeit thou will say again: if God did so mislike sin or were able to punish
it he would show some token of his power and justice in this life. Truly so he
does remember the fall of the Angels, the banishment of Ada^, the confusion of
Babell: the drowning of the old world, the burning of Sodom: the overthrow of
Pharaoh: Saul: Absolon: Herod: Judas: the sword, the famine, the plague
instruments of his power and justice. And if thou will learn to distingush of
Gods punishments, which are two fold, open, and secret besides his open
punishments which are common thou shall sinde his secret punishments to be
continual, namely the sting of conscience which like a never wearied fury will
pursue the night and day unto judgment. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
The heathen man could call a guilty conscience occultum flagellu^ dei Gods
hidden whip: Caine felt the sinart thereof: and thou can not avoid it.

Notwithstanding thou see the wicked flowrish in this world: which still
increases thy infidility and diffide^ce; o let it not do so, for they have
their portion in this life: Luke 16.15
thus did Dives receive in this world profit, and pleasure, but Lazarus penury
and pain: but now is Lazarus comforted and Dines tormented. Psalm. 73.
Besides this there prosperity is but momentary: Job. ^1.
as a dream, as the ice: as the cha^e before the wind; verily vanity of
vanities all is but vanity, Psalm. 37.
compared by the Psalmist to the grass, to the herb: to the fat of the
lambs, to the smoke, to a cloud that vanishes away in a moment, whereas the
godly shall possess the land, for the Lord vpholdeth them: Psalm. 37.
the godly shall be preserved for ever, for the Lord is there strength and
there salvation, wherefore there end shall be peace for ever more. Esaias. 1.16.
O the^ ye that fear the Lord harken unto his precept published by the prophet
Esaias saying, cease to do evil, learn to do well; and give ear unto his
promise proclaimed by the prophet David, saying, fly from evil and do good
and dwell for ever, For ever: Psalm. 37.27
how can that be, seeing our selves momentarie our abiding temporary, and our
dwelling transitory. Aug. 36.
But, alia terra erit, vbi inhabitabimus in secalu^ seculi: there shall be an
other land, and kingdom wherein we shall abide for evermore: an heavenly
kingdom: an eternal kingdom: a most blessed kingdom: Mathe. 25.
a Paradise: a place of pleasure: Tim. 2.4.
a building of God, an house that is eternal in the heaven. Luke. 14.
To which place he bring us that has so dearly bought it for us, Math. 26.
Jesus Christ the righteous.

Amen.

FINIS.

