A TREATISE CONCERNING THE CHVRCH. WHEREIN It is showed, by the Signs, Offices,
and Properties thereof, that the Church of Rome (and consequently such
particular Churches as live in her Communion) is the only true Church of CHRIST.

WRITTEN In Latin, by the Reverend Father James Gordon Huntley of Scotland,
Doctor of Divinity, of the Society of JESUS.

And translated into English, by I. L. of the same Society.

The third Part of the second Controversy*

Permissu Superiorum, M. DC. XIV.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the false and true Signs, or Marks of the Church in
general.
HAVING in the precedent Co^trouersyes declared, that Christ and all that good
is, can only be found in the true Church, and that out of it there is nothing
but everlasting damnation: now it remains that we enquire which is that true
Church; where it may be found, and how it is described and set forth in holy
Scripture; for all the sects of heresies go about to challenge her unto
themselves, yea even those who otherwise have a very bad conceyt and opinion of
her. For they see very well that out of her they can expect or hope for no
salvation. But to the end we may not err in matter of so great moment, we will
seek out the true Marks and Signs, whereby the true Church may be certainly
known and discerned from every fail and counterfeit Church.

2. Our Adversaries do commonly set down two signs or marks of the true
Church, Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 7. sect. 9. and 10.
to wit, the sincere preaching of the word of God, and the lawful
administration of the Sacraments. Beza in sua confess c. 5. Artic. 7.
Cent^riatores Luther. ^. Centur. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 2. cap* 4.
B^za adds a third sign to wit, the Ecclesiastical discipline practiced
agreeable to the word of God. The Lutherans annexed unto these a fourth sign,
to wit, an Obedience toward ministers O^ this fourth sign we will speak a
little after, for it is reduced to the unity of the Church. But the three
signs set down by the Caluinists are altogether foolish and frivolous, the
which we prove thus.

3. First by the very nature of a sign. For every sign of it own nature is a
sensible thing, S. Aug. Tom. 3. l. 2 de doctrina Christiana cap. 1. and 3.
Calu. l. 4. Inst. cap. 17. sect. 11.
as all teach, following therein S. Augustine; and our Adversaries confess
this to be true when they treat of the Sacraments: Yea Calvin writes, that
this was always as it were a matter of faith in the Church. And so do all
teach now who are of understanding. Truly non^ will say, that which is only
believed in the Sacrament, is a sign, but that which is seen. But these
signs of the Church prescribed by our Adversaries can neither be seen nor
perceived by any sense. Yea not even by our understanding, unless it be
illuminated by faith. For by faith only are they perceived: because none can
know which is the sincere preaching, lawful administration of the Sacraments
or Ecclesiastical discipline prescribed by Christ, but by faith: wherefore they
who say that these are the signs and marks of the Church do not indeed know
what they say; even as if one should affirm, that in the Sacrament of baptism
the ablution and the words are not signs, but the effect of baptism which is
not seen, which every man sees how absurd it is.

4. The second reason. Every sign of anything must be more manifest and better
known then the thing it self whose sign it is, because it is put for that
end that it may be a sign or token whereby that other thing may be known, but
these signs of the Church alleged by our Adversaries, are more obscure and
uncertain then the Church it self. For the Church is at the least often times
visible as they themselves confess, but these their signs be never visible
but always inuisib^e, for they can only be known by fait^, (...) we have
already declared, but that which is by faith believed is necessarily obscure,
Heb. 11. v. 1.
because faith as witnesses the Apostle, is the arg^ment of things not
appearing, and hence it is, that all sects do brag and boast that they have
these signs, because indeed they cannot be clearly seen of any.

5. The third reason, our Adversaries do ^lledge in va^ne these signs, for
therefore do we enquire for signs and Marks of the Church that they which are
ignorant of ^er, may thereby come to know her, for they who already know any
thing do not need any signs, as for example, he who already knows very well
this City needs no marks or sign thereof whereby he may know it. But he
stands in need of signs who never saw this City. So in like manner they w^o
are out of the Church and know her not, do most of all need some sign and
marks whereby to know her, but these which our Adversaries assign, can be
known by none but by those who are already within the Church and know her very
well, having the true faith (...) thereof, but they cannot be understood by
those who know not the true Church, to the end they may seek and find her,
because they are only perceived and known by faith, they are therefore
alleged in vain by our Adversaries.

6. But neither can these signs be known of all those who are in the Church,
but only of the more learned in the Church. For every one of the common people
cannot discern which is the sincere preaching of the word of God, or the
lawful administration of the Sacraments, and the Ecclesiastical discipline
prescribed by the word of God, for it is necessary that he who knows all
these things well, should also understand almost all the holy Scripture.
Moreover there is as yet a very great controversy among ou^ Adversaries
themselves concerning these three signs, whiles that some of them do contend,
and strive, that this is the sincere preaching of the word of God, others that
some do say that this is the lawful administration of the Sacraments, others
that some do say, this is the discipline prescribed by the word of God, others
assign another quite different from this.

7. But our Adversaries do in very truth confound the offices of the Church
with the signs thereof. For to preach sincerely to administer the Sacraments
lawfully, and to appoint the discipline of the Church rightly, Supra c. 1.
huius con. 9. and seq*
are the offices of the Church, as we have declared before, and not the signs
thereof: these signs therefore being rejected which our Adversaries do assign,
it remains that we enquire out the true signs of the Church.

8. But this is first to be presupposed as it were the ground of all that we
are to speak of this matter. That even natural reason it self does clearly
demo^strat, that there is some true Church of God here upon earth. For this is
one of those first principles of faith, (...) Hebr. ^. c.
which are as evidently proved by natural reason as that there is a God.
Wherefore the Apostle places these two, amongst the first grounds of our faith
he that cou^ueth to God, says he must believe that he is, and is a rewarder to
the^ that seek him. But they which so seek after God, that they may be
rewarded by him, are without all doubt in the true Church.

9. Moreover natural reason it self does euide^^l^ teach us, that it is an
absurd thing to think that there is no way left by God, for men to obtain
their eternal salvation, seeing that this is quite opposite to the prou^de^ce
of God, and to his infinite goodness: but there is no other way besides the
Church as we have declared before; Cap ^2. huius controuersiae.
but because there are so many and so diverse opinions of men concerning this so
necessary a way to salvation, there are also certain signs and marks thereof
set down, that we may the better understand which is indeed the certain and
most true way.

10. Out of these which we have now said, follows first, that that which we
have insinuated before is most true, to wit, that it is more certain and
evident that there is the holy Scripture, Supra c. 14 huius. controu.. 5. in
fine.
seeing that it is manifest by natural reason that there must needs be some
Church of God here upon earth, the which is not so evident of the holy
Scriptures.

11. The second thing which ensues is, that to these signs of the true Church
these two conditions are altogether necessary. The first is, that they must be
such as that they may not only be perceived by faith, and our understanding,
but even by sense it self, for otherwise they cannot be true signs, as we
have already proved. The other is, that they be known and manifest to all men,
even unto Insidells, seeing that otherwise they cannot help them, or convince
and bring them to the true Church. Isai. 3.5. v. 8.
For the Church of Christ, as the Prophet testifies, is a direct way, Bellarm.
pertotum l. 4. de Eccles. m^lita^te. Bozius in duobus volum. de signis
Ecclesiae. Coc^ius Tom. 1. per totum, l. 8.
so that sooles, that is to say Infidells, cannot err by it.

12. Of these signs of the true Church Bellarmine, Coccius, and Thomas Bozius
Eugubinus discourse at large, who has gathered twenty four signs in all of
the true Church, all which he manifestly proves to agree to the Roman Church,
out of these Authors more signs may be required.

13. But we regarding our intended breuity, will only allege four, which are
set down in the Nicene and Constantinopolitan Creed, that is to say, that this
true Church is One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolical. For these four signs
are so certain that they cannot be rejected even by our Adversaries. First
because they are expressly set down in holy Scripture, as we will show in the
next Chapter. Moreover our Adversaries do profess that they admit and receive
three Creeds to wit, the Apostles Creed, the Niceene, and that of S Athanasius.
Rupell. Co^fess. Artic. ^. in fine.
But in that which we call the Nicen Creed, these four signs of the Church
are expressly set down, whereof we will now speak more particulerly.

CHAP. II. That the true Church of Christ is One, Holy, Catholic and
Apostolical.
S. Augustine very well admonishes us, S. August. Tom. 7. de unit. Eccles.
cap. 3.
that when we dispute against heretics which do admit the holy Scriptures, we
should ^roue the true Church of Christ and the signs thereof out of the said
holy writ. For as the same holy Father notes in another place, the Prophets
had spoken more obscurely of Christ then they did of the Church, S. August.
Tom. 8. co^. 2. in Psalm. 30. super ^averba v. 12. qui vide^ant me for as
fugerunt ^ me.
because by their Prophetical spirit they did see that there would arise
greater strife and deb^te about the Church the^ of Christ himself. We will
therefore here prove these four signs of the Church. First out of the
Scriptures, and secondly by natural reasons, seeing that these signs must be
such as may convince those which do not admit the Scriptures, as we have
declared in the precedent Chapter.

2. The first sig^^ of the true Church of Christ is Unity. For there is a
threefold unity, necessarily preached in the Church of Christ. The first is, of
all the members with Christ, which is the supreme head of the Church, the which
is effected by faith; wherefore it necessarily follows, that there must be
but one faith of all the members of the Church. One Lord and God, says the
Apostle, and one says, and again, until we all meet in the unity of faith.

3. The second Unity is of all the members among themseues: Ephesians. 4. v. 5.
Ephesians. 4. v. ^3.
for as he who dissolueth the first unity is an heretic: so he, which
violateth this is a schismatike, wherefore Christ says in this all men shall
know that you are my disciples, if you have love on to another. And the
Apostle. That there might be no schism in the body but the members together
might be careful one for another. Joan. 13. v. 35.
Finally, God is not the God of dissension, but of peace: as also in all the
Churches of the Saints I teach, 1. Corinthians. 1^. v. 25. II. Corinth. 14. v. 33.
says the same Apostle.

4. The third unity is betwixt the faithful people and their Pastors by
obedience, the which whosoever dissolve are also to be accounted schismatikes:
of this the same Apostle writteth thus: Hebr. vlt. v. 17.
Obey your Prelates and be subject to them, and this is that fourth mark of the
Church assigned by the Lutheranes, Cap. praece^ent.. 2.
as we have said in the precedent Chapter the second.

5. This threefold unity is very sensible, the which may easily be perceived
even by any Infidel. For the disagreement of doctrine concerning matters of
faith may easily be heard, the distentions of the people among themselves or
with their Pastors may manifestly be perceived.

6. Finally even natural reason it self proves this to be one of the most
certain signs of the true Church. For God cannot teach contrary and oppofit
doctrine, because he then should be a liar, Hebr. 6. ^ 18.
which according to the Apostle is impossible. In like manner natural reason
shows that God, which is goodness it self cannot be the author of schisms,
and dissentions, but of concord, peace and unity.

7. The second sign is Holiness: the holy Scripture is full of testimonies
and authorities whereby this sign is most evidently proved and declared. For
S. Paul in the beginning of almost all his Epistles calls the Churches unto
whom he writes, Holy, as is to be seen in the beginning of the Epistles to
the Romans, to the Corinthians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, and to
the Colossians, 2. Petr. ^0. v. 9.
and S. Peter called the the true Church, an holy Nation. So also Christ
himself says. For then I do sanctify my self, Joan. 17. v. 1^.
that they also may be sanctified in truth* Lastly that sentence is often
repeated in the holy Scripture the which S. Peter cites also out of the old
testament, 1. Petr. 1. v. 16.
be ye holy, because I am holy.

8. The sign also is visible unto all, first because this sanctity is to be
seen by good works, Matt. 5. v. 16.
that they may see, says Christ, your good works, and may glorify your Father
which is in heaven. Secondly this sanctity may be seen by their pious and holy
doctrine. Ad Titu^ ^, v. 1. and 8.
For it is necessary that the true doctrine of God, be holy, sound and
i^reprehensible. Thirdly, this sanctity is seen by the miracles, whereby God
himself t^stifieth and confirms the sanctity of his Church. Marc. vlt. ^..7.
And them that believe, says Christ, these signs shall follow: in my name
they shall cast out Devils.

9. This sign also of Sanctity is evident to all even by natural reason. For
a good tree brings forth good fruit. Matt 7. v. ^8.
And contrariwise a bad tree brings forth ill fruit. Moreover wicked
doctrine which is either against the Law of Nature or good manners cannot be of
God: of the other si^e the doctrine which is agreeable to the ^aw of nature and
good manners is of God, Finally true miracles do convince that there is the
true Church of Christ where such miracles are done, seeing that true miracles
can only be done by the power of God, for even as God alone has made and
ordained all things: so God only can change at his pleasure the Natures of
things and the natural order thereof, according to that saying of the Prophet
David, Psalm. 71. v. 18.
Blessed be our Lord God of Israel, who can only work miracles. But God who
is goodness it self cannot testify or approve any false doctrine by miracles.

10. The third sign of the true Church is, that it is Catholic, or
Universal, Supra c. 3. huius Controuers. S. Aug. Tom. 7. per totum lib. de
vnitate Eccles. Gens. 12. v. 3. Gens. 22. v. 8. Psalm. 2. v. 8. Psalm. 1. v. 8.
and 11. Act. 1. v. 8. Romans 10. v. 18. Colos. 1. v. ^.
and that two ways. First because it continues always as we have proved
already. Secondly it is also Catholic or universal, because since the coming
of Christ it is dilated and propagated over all the whole world.

11. S. Augustine uses this argument most of all against the Donatists to show
the true Church. For first God promised Abraham, that all Nations should be
blessed in his seed, and afterward he confirmed the same with an Oath. So God
the Father said unto Christ: Ask of me, and I will give thee Nations for thy
inheritance and the limits of the earth for thy possession. Many such like
places are in the Psalms, and in the new Testament.

12. And this sign is also visible, because that which is every where, and at
all times, may be seen of all men, when it is a thing that can be seen as
this is.

13. Moreover this sign is very certain even by the light of nature. For
natural reason teaches us, that the providence of God extends it self very
carefully over all those which are his: and that falsity cannot always
continue but must needs be overcome by truth, and that God is of greater power
and able to do more then the Devil. Yea the beginning and progress of all
false religions as Bellarmine well notes, B^ll^rm. l. 4. de Eccles. milit. c.
5. and 6. Act. 5. v. 38. and 39*
are certainly known. Finally the work and counsel of men, but not of God is
quickly dissolved, as Gamaliel says in S. Luke.

14. The fourth sign of the true Church of Christ is, that it is Apostolical,
to wit, founded by the Apostles of Christ: and that she has continued ever
since their time till these our days by a continual succession. For this
sign as also the former is the proper mark of the Church of the new
Testament, for of it is all our Controversy. But that the Church of Christ was
founded by the Apostles, Ephesians. 2. v. 20.
appears e^idently by those words of S. Paul: built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets. And we have already proved the continual succession
of the Church by many testimonies of Scripture. Cap. 3.4. and 8. huius controu.
^saiae 59. v. vlt. Ierem. 33. v. 17. and 18.
^he same also the Prophets do testify in many places.

15. Moreover seeing that there are as the Apostle says, always Pastors and
Doctors in the Church, without whom she cannot consist and continue, as our
Aduer^aries confes^e, it necessarily follows as we have declared before, that
there has always been a conti^^all succession of these Pastors and Doctors
in the true Church of God.

16. But that which many do say is both foolish and frivolous, to wit that
there has been always a con^inuall succ^ssion of doctrine in the Church, but
not of persons. For seeing that true doctrine must needs proceed from some
persons, and those of men (for not Angels but men do teach now adays) if the
true doctrine continues, it is also necessary that the men which teach this
doctrine continue still, Supra c. 8. huius controuersiae*
and such also as are lawfully called to this office, as we have proved before.

17. This continual sucession is also a visible sig^e, because in some parts
or persons thereof it may be seen at all times, as suc^ssiue and transistory
things are wont to be seen: for in this manner only can a river for example
sake and time it self be seen.

18. Finally this sign is also certain and evidently well known among the
Infidells: for unless this sucession be continual the true Church of God
shall altogether perish and decay, all honor and worship of the true God will be
overthrown, and there will remain no way for men to their eternal salvation.
But of the other side where there is a continual succession, and a never
interrupted continuance of the same Religion, there appears sufficiently a
great providence and a singular assistance of Almighty God toward men.

19. Furthermore that which we have hitherto said of these sower signs might
suffice, but that the pertinacy and inconstancy of our Adversaries is so very
admirable and great. For albeit in one place they acknowledge themselves to
receive the Nicen Creed wherein these four signs of the Church are expressly
contained, Rupell. co^f^ss Art. ^. in fine.
yet notwithstanding elsewhere when they see themselves manifestly convinced by
these signs of perfidious dealing, Extat hi^ liber in 3. volum. Tract. Theo^.
Bezae Tract. 6.
they do utterly reject the^. For Beza in his book of the true and visible
signs of true Catholic Church (wherein notwithstanding he goes about nothing
else but to establish those his invisible marks of the Church) albeit he
affirms that his followers do acknowledge all those Creedes which have been
always approved by the common consent of the whole Church, Habentu^ haec p.
138. subtinem edit. Geneu. An. 1582.
to wit that of the Apostles, the Nicene, that of S. Athan^sius, the
Constantinopolitane, and the Calcedon, yet for all this he impugneth these
marks of the Church, of which he knows that he and his are altogether
destitute, and especially the fourth which is deduced from the Apostolical
succession.

20. He therefore obiecteth these signs that they are not proper unto the
Church quarto modo, as Po^phyrius, Ita Bezae. p. 137 in principio vbi supra*
and other Logicians define proprium quarto modo, because they do not agree to
the true Church only. For unity and succession may also be found amongst wicked
men as appears by the Jews and Mahomets. But these are easily answered. For
these signs are not alleged as properties quarto modo, as Beza thinks, but
rather as it were accidents by the collection, whereof Indiuidua are
distinguished one from another, Porph. c. de speci^ in sine*
as the same Porphyrius teaches: for those accidents, whereby Indiuidua are
distinguished may be found separated one from another in diverse substances, but
not all gathered together in one.

21. Wherefore seeing that the Church is one, singular, and indivisible, we must
not only allege the properties thereof, but also other signs, as it were
qualities and accidents, whereby this true Church may be distinguished from all
others. For albeit some one or other of these signs may be found in some other
things, yet they cannot all four together be found any where, but in the true
Church.

22. Therefore any one of these signs considered by it self separateth the
true Church from the false, as for example, the unity of doctrine, and
continual succession does separate and distinguish her from any heretical
Church: but all these signs or marks joined and united together do
distinguish the Church of Christ altogether from every false Church: and this
is sufficient that they may be calmost true signs in their kind. Supra c. 1.
huius con^rouers.


23. We surely have already in the beginning of the precedent controuer^y
spoken of the true properties of the Church, to wit, when we declared that she
is the spouse, body, Kingdom, inheritance, and city of Christ, for these are
propria quarto modo, and in this manner they all, always, and only agree to
the true Church of Christ.

24. Moreover seeing that these properties are so invisible, as that they
cannot be perceived by any sense, but only by faith, they are not sufficient to
convince Infidels, Heretics, and others which want true faith: and for this
cause other visible signs are also necessary which may be perceived by all, as
also convince them, of which sort are these four signs which we have now
alleged.

25. That in the mean time we may omit, that the l^te and new vpstart Churches
of our Adversaries are so much worse then the Churches of Jews and Infidels,
because sometimes in these some one or other of the aforesaid signs may be
found. But in our Aduersa^ies Church as we will show herafter, Infra cap. 22.
huius Controu*
not one of them can be found.

CHAP. III. That the Roman Church only is the true Church of Christ, is proved
by the properties of the true Church.
HITHERTO we have described out of holy Scripture the true Church of Christ,
and that by the properties, offices, and peculiar signs thereof. Now it
remains that we by the same enquire and examine in what part or place of the
world this true Church of Christ may be found, the which will easily be done,
if we declare that all these propertyes, offices, and signs must needs agree
to some one. We therefore do affirm that all the offices, properties, and
signs of the true Church do only agree to the Roman Church.

2. It is here notwithstanding to be considered, least some perchance by the
ambiguity or equivocation of the word be deceived, that we do not understand
by the Roman Church, that which is only at Rome, as our Adversaries go about to
persuade the ignorant, but plainly every Church which agrees in the unity of
the same faith with the Roman, and which obeys the Bishop of Rome, whersoeuer
that Church be, whether at Rome, or elsewhere, yea even the furtthest part of
the Indyes. Moreover that this Roman Church thus understood is the only true
Church of Christ, and consequently that out of her we cannot hope for eternal
salvation (seeing that out of the true Church as we have sufficiently declared
before, Cap. 1. huius Controuers.
we cannot be saved) we will evidently demonstrate by all the properties,
offices, and signs before alleged of the true Church. And first we will
speak of the properties, to wit, of those which agree unto her* quarto modo.
For all these do very well agree to the Roman Church and to no other. The which
we declare in this manner.

3. First the Roman Church is the espouse of Christ. For that she was betrothed
and despoused unto Christ by true faith, those words of the holy Scripture do
plainly testify: Your faith, Romans 1. v. 8.
says the Apostle writing to the Romans, is renowned in the whole world. And a
little after S. Paul professes himself to agree in the unity of faith with
the Roman Church, that is to profess the Roman Faith, and not that of
VVittemberge, as Lu^her, or that of Geneua, as Calvin ^i^. Whe^^ore with good
rigot we profess our selves not only to b^ the children of the Catholic, but
also o^ the Catholic Roman Church, and faith, the which S. Paul also
manifestly professes himsel^e to be.

4. But our Adversaries object, that the Church of Rome in the Apostles time
had the true faith, but a^terward she forsoo^e and lost it. So in times past
those Heretics which were called Dona^ists, when they were urged by the
arguments of Catholics, were wont to say, that indeed the Church of Rome was
famous over all the world in the Apostles time, but in their time she perished
in all the other parts of the world and remained only among the Donatists in
Afric, S. Aug. Tom. 7. d^ vnitate Ecc^esi^e cap. 12.
whom S. Augustine refuteth very well, and we imitating him herein will use
this kind of argument: That the faith of the Roman Church was once the true and
sincere faith, the holy Scripture does expressly testify: but that the same
Church afterward forsook or lost her former faith, is no where extant in holy
writ: therefore we must not believe that which is so expressly against the
Scripture.

5. And this argument indeed urges much more our Adversaries then the
Donatists, seeing that they teach that we must believe nothing which is not
expressly in Scripture, but this is no where to be found expressly therein, to
wit, that the Roman Church forsook or lost her faith which she had received
from the Apostles. And truly there can be no greater sign of the want of
learning and judgment then to think that, that Church forsook and lost her
faith, whose faith even the express word of God does so greatly commend unto
us, unless this her forsaking and loosing of her former true faith can be
proved out of the same word of God.

6. Our Adversaries indeed say, that they will prove it in some particular
points of faith, but they will never be able to perform their promise, as in
every particular Controversy will appear.

7. Moreover God promises to this espouse of Christ, by the Prophet Isay, the
which he also confirmed with an Oath, that she should be invested and adorned
with diverse Nations and people. For so speaks God to the Church: Lift up thy
eyes and look round about thee, and see, all these are gathered together,
Isaiae 49. v. 18.
they are come unto thee. As I live, says our Lord, thou shall be invested
with all these, as with an ornament, and thou shall compass them about unto
thy self as a spouse. So the Roman Church has always had and still has many
Nations and people subject unto her, wherewith she is invested and adorned, the
which even our Adversaries cannot deny.

8. Secondly the Church is the visible and mystical body of Christ, but in the
Roman Church there has always been, and now also there is the visible body of
Christ consisting of diverse members and states: as also of Doctors and
Pastors, whereof S. Paul speaks writing to the Ephesians and Corinthians,

9. Thirdly the Church is the Kingdom of Christ, but in the Roman Church
there has always and now also there is the visible Kingdom of Christ, Ephesians.
4. v. 11. and 12. 1. Cor. 12. v. 12.
and that such an one as the Prophet Isay describes when he says, that Kings
and Queens shall be thy nourses. For there has ever been since the conversion
of Nations, Isaiae 49. v. 23.
many Kings and Monarkes who have agreed in unity of faith, with the Roman
Church, and have acknowledged always the Bishop of Rome to be the chief head
and Pastor of all the whole militant Church, Coccius Tom. 1. l. 7. Art. 8.
as may appear by that which Coccius has set down in his Catalogue to this
purpose.

10. Furthermore the Prophet Jeremy thus describes the future Kingdom of
Christ. This says our Lord, Ierem. 33. v. 20.21. and 22.
If my covenant can be broken and made void with the day, and my covenant with
the night, so that there be neither day nor night in their due times; then my
covenant can be broken with my servant David that there shall not be a son of
his reigning in his throne, and the Leuits and Priests my ministers: as the
stars of the heavens cannot be numbered, nor the sands of the sea measured; so
will I multiply the seed of my servant David, and the Leuits my Ministers.
Thus says God by his Prophet of the Kingdom of Christ his son, and of the
Leuits, and Priests ministering unto our Lord, and of the infinite number of
them, which is manifest to have byne fullfilled hitherto in the Roman Church.

11. Fourthly, the Church is the Inheritance of Christ, Psalm. 2. v. ^ Psalm. 71
v. 8.
to wit that which according to the oracles of the Prophets extends herself
to the very bounds and limits of the whole earth, which is in the eyes of all
Nations, Isaiae 51. v. 10.
the which all the corners of the earth shall see, and lastly which is exte^ded
from the east to the west. But in the Roman Church there has always been such
an inheritance of Christ. Macab. 1. v. 12.


12. Hereupon are those famous words of S. Leo to the City of Rome: These are
they who have exalted thee to this glory, that being a holy Nation, S. Leo Sermon
1. in natal. Apost. Petri and Pauli.
a chosen people, a priestly and and princely City, by the holy seat of S.
Peter made the head of the world, should have a more large command by the
means of divine Religion, then ever thou had by foreign domination. For
albeit thou being ^amous, renowned for many victories have extended the limits
of thy Empire both by sea and land, yet notwith^tanding it is less which thy
warlike labor has subdued, then that which the Religion of Christ has made
subject unto thee. Hitherto S. Leo.

13. Moreou^r S. Prosper the great glory of Aquitania, and dearly beloved
friend of S. Augustine, and who defended egregiously his doctrine against the
Pelagians, in a certain book written in verse against the same Pelagians,
speaking of their heresies writes thus: When this infectious pestilence arose,
Rome Peter's seat first gave it deadly blows,
S. Prosper in libro de Ingratis contra Pelagian. c. 2.
Which made the head os pastoral dignity,
VVhereto the whole world should obedient be*
Houlde more, now subject by Religions law,
then her fierce armies erst could keep in awe.
Thus wrote he a 1200. years ago.

14. But in this our age the faith of the Roman Church is prop^gated, and
preached in the most remote countries of the East and West. Yea even unto the
furthest parts of the world, in so much that the children of the Church of Rome
come often times from the East to the West, according to that of the Prophet
Malachy: to wit, sro^ the East Indies to the West, and they co^pas the whole
globe of the earth to the end they may preach the faith of the Roman Church
every where. Malac. 1. v. 12.
Wherefore the faith of the Roman Church is preached and received in this our
age in many and more remote places of the world, the^ ever it was in the
Apostles time, the which is most assuredly testified by the letters and books
even of them, who write what themselves have seen.

15. Fifthly, the Church is the City of Christ placed upon a mountain which
cannot be hidden; Matt. 5. ^* 14.
so the Church of Rome has always byne visible ever since the Apostles time:
neither can it ever be hidden. By these it appears that all the true
properties of the Church of Christ agree to the Church of Rome.

16. But that they cannot agree with any other it appears sufficiently by
that our Adversaries can no church assign which can have these properties.
Wherefore it is necessary that they confess the Church of Rome to be the true
Church of Christ, or truly, which is most absurd, that Christ has wanted and
been deprived of his spouse now for the space of a thousand years and more,
as also to have wanted his body, City, Kingdom, and Inheritance.

CHAP. IIII. That the Church of Rome is the true Church of Christ, is proved by
the offices of the true Church.
IN the precedent Chapter we have proved, Suprac* ^8. huius Controuers. 3.4.
and
that the Roman Church is the true Church of Christ by the properties of the
same: now it remains that we prove it by the peculiar offices and functions
of the true Church: many reasons may by deduced out of these, but we will
briefly touch only the chiefest.

2. The first reason is taken from those very signs which our Adversaries
assign, that is to say, the true and sincere preaching of the word of God, and
the lawful administration of the Sacraments, which are indeed offices and not
signs of the Church, as we have said before; but whether they be signs or
offices, by them it is evidently proved that the Roman Church and no other is
the true Church of Christ. But for the space of a thousand years last past the
Sacraments were no^ where lawfully administered, nor the word of God sincerely
preached, but in the Church of Rome. For our Aduer^aries cannot name any
Church, wherein these things have been done. therefore eyth^r the Roman is
the true Church or else Christ has had no Church for the space o^ a thousand
years and more.

Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 2. sect. 11. and 1^. Beza and notis Eccl^s. p. 145. in
fine iux^a Geneu. editionem anno 1582.
3. Neither must our Adversaries answer us with Calvin and Beza, that their
Church indeed remained in the Popedom (for they cannot find it any where else)
yet half destroyed and filthely corrup^ed and defaced with many errors. For
here we inquire after the true Church of Christ, and not such a profane and
filthy Church which Calvin describes, wherein Christ as it were lies half
dead and bur^e^, Calu. sect. 32. citat.
the Ghospel overthrown, and piety banished, the worship of God almost quite
abolished, for ^uch a Church is not indeed the true Church of Christ, but a
d^nne of Devils.

4. Moreover they must not here run to any invisible Church altogether
unknown both to themselves and us. the which our Adversaries seem to
establish. For we have sufficiently declared before that the true Church of
Christ has been always visible. Supra c. 4. huius cont.
Wherefore it is necessary they show us some other visible besides the Roman
Church, wherein for a thou^and years past the Gospel has been publicly
preached in the same manner they preach it now, and the Sacraments publikly
administered as they are now, and that continually also without interruption: Or
truly they mu^^ confess that the Roman Church is the true Church of Christ.
For in this the old and new testament has always been publikly preached
without any inte^^ission, and all the Sacraments publicly admini^^red, and
that sincer^ly and lawfully according to the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, as we will herafter d^clare in the Controuersyes concerning the
Sacraments.

5. The Eutherans, that they might avoid this argument, Vide censur
a^^rien^olis Eccl^si^e ^ Stanislao Socolonio Polono ex Graeco in La^mu^ conuers.
fled to the Grecian Church, where they affirmed the true Church of Christ
remained. But they were presently rejected and condemn^d by them, as may be
s^ene in the answer of Jeremy the Patriarch of Constan^i^ople to the Germans
written in Greek in the year 1576. Neither do the Grecians disagree from the
Roman Church in those points which are now adays in Controversy, but in that
one article of faith wherein they affirm, that the holy Ghost does only proceed
from the Father, and not the Son. Rupell. Con^^ss. A^t. 6.
The which error even all our Adversaries which follow Luther and Calvin do
condemn as well as we.

6. The which when the l^ter Sectaries well perceived, they were forced at
length to fly to those Heretics which were in times past condemned by the
whole Church, amongst whom they seek for their Church. Where we are to
consider three things against the great boldness of these men.

7. The first is, that the true Church has always continued, as we have
declared before out of the Scriptures. Cap. 3. huius Contr. Geneb. in sua
chron. Coccius Tom. x. l. 8. Art. 2. Histor. Magdeb. Lutheran.
But these men can never show a continual succession of Heretics of what
religion soever they were, but only an interrupted continuance, and that
sometimes for a great space together. The which may easily be understood by
Genebrard, Coccius, and all other Ecclesiastical writers of what religion
soever they be.

8. The second. Our Adversaries cannot prove all their points out of any one
ancient heretic, but they borrow one heresy condemned in times past of one,
Lyndanus in suis tabulis. Coccius Tom. ^. lib. 8. Art. ^.
and another of some other, as Lindanus, and Coccius very well declare at large.

9. The third is, that our Adversaries must needs con^esse, that those of
whom they have begged and borrowed their doctrine, Sanderus lib 7. d^
vifi^^ili Monarch. Eccl. Prateolus in Elench. Haeret. Coc^ius Tom. 1. l. 8.
Art. 3. and 4.
did err foully in many points of faith, and therefore there could be no true
Church among them. Yea even those ancient heretics have firmly and constantly
believed many points with us, against our Adversaries, as Doctor Sanders,
Gabriel Prateolus, and Coccius do mani^estly declare.

10. The second reason. The office of the true Church is to bring forth
children to God, that is to say, to convert Infidels and Gentills from their
Idolatry to the Catholic faith. This the Roman Church has performed not only
in the first five or six hundred years after Christ, as our Adversaries
confess, but in every age afterward she has done the same. For since the fixed
hundred year all these Nations were converted to the faith of Christ by the
children of the Roman Church, the Germans, the Francones* Baronius Tom.
^.10.11. and 1^ Vlagdeb. C^nt. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13. vbique cap. 2.
Bauarians, VVandalls, Bulgarians, Slauonians, Polonians, Danes, Morauians,
Hungarians, Noruegians, Frisones, Normans, Sueutans, VVisigothes, Lituania^s,
as not only Catholic writers do testify which Baronius alleges, but even
our Adversaries also in their Ecclesiastical histories* And in this our age
how many have been converted from Idolatry to the faith of Christ in the East
and West Indies by the preachers of the Roman Church only, none is ignorant.

11. This office of the Church in times past Tertullian observed, Tertull. de
praescript. adue^s. Haereticos ^. 42.
VVhat^ shall I speak of the preaching and administration of the word of God,
seeing that this office and business belongs not unto them (he speaks of
heretics) who do not convert Infidells, but overthrow and pervert Christians?

12. And S. Augustine for the same cause says, S. Aug. Tom. 8. l. 13. contra
Faustum Mamch. c. 12. Ierem. 7. v. 1^.
that Heretics are compared to a Partridge by the Prophet Jeremy, where it is
said, That a Partridge nourishes and gathers together those which she has
not brought forth. For S. Augustine affirms, that Heretics go about to
seduce and deceive Christians whom they see borne again to God by the
Ghospelll of Christ.

13. The third reason. The proper office of the Church is to prevail against
all persecutors. The gates of hell (says our Lord) shall not prevail against
my Church; hereupon says S. Hilary, Matt. 1^. v. 18. S. Hilar. l. 7. de
Trinit. circa principium.
This is the property of the Church, that she then prevails most when she is
persecuted, then she is understood when she is reprehended, then she gets
the victory when she is as it were forsaken. But the Roman Church has
sustained hitherto many persecutions, contradictions, assaults, and false
slanders, but she has ever gotten the victory both of the Gentills,
Heretics, and bad Christians persecuting the Church of God, as all
Ecclesiastical histories and experience also does testify. For even to this
day for the space of almost a thousand and six hundred years she is still
constant, immovable, and invincible in despite of all her Adversaries.

14. Our Adversaries indeed in diverse books published against the Pope of Rome
heap up together many in diverse ages who have opposed themselves against him,
but they can find none who have at any time quite overthrown the Roman Church.
We know very well that wicked men are never wanting, who vehemently oppose
themselves against the devout servants of God, Balaeus and Magdeb. Centuriat.
but at the last they are all overcome by the Church, and they shall never get
the victory against her. For Christ did not say that the gates of hell should
not oppugn his Church, but that they should never prevail against her.

15. Finally look how many oppugners and persecutors of the Roman Church our
Adversaries heap Matt. 16. v. 18.
together so many famous monumets unawares do they erect, by which the
triumphs of the Roman Church are commended to posterity, against their wills.
But there cannot be ^^amous victory, unless some conflict went before, and so
we see truly fullfilled in the Church of Rome that which long before was
foretold by the Prophet David in the person of the true Church of G^d. They
have often oppugned me, even from my youth, but they could not prevail, the
which is better expressed in the Hebrew text, Psalm. 12^. vel. iuxta Heb. 129.
v. 2.
as may be seen in the Latin Edition.

16. This continual victory of the Roman Church against her enemies S. Paul
foretold very clearly when he wrote in this manner to the same Church: the God
of peace will crush Satan under your feet quickly. Romans vlt. v. 20 S. Hieron.
in apolog. aduers.
To this very place appertains that which S. Hierome writes, to wit, that
the Roman faith being confirmed by the authority of S. Paul, Ruffinum. S.
Cyprian. E^ist 55. ad Cornel. seu l. 1, Epist. 3.
cannot be changed, albeit an Angel should teach the contrary to that which
was once preached. And before him S. Cyprian when he says, that the Romans are
those unto whom falsehood or infidelity can have noe access.

17. The fourth reason. The osfice of the true Church is to keep, and preserve
alwayse faith sound and without any stayne of heresy, which then she
performs, when she discovers and condemns all heretical and erroneous
opinions, and when she explicateth and declares all doubtful and obscure
points of faith. Moreover she commands obstinate and wilful persons to
hold their peace. Fnally she ce^sureth all erroneous and dangerous books, lest
Catholics be indomaged thereby either in faith or in good manners. All these
things the Roman Church and no other, as appears by all historiographers,
has always ever since the Apostles time performed, ^ea there are many
heresies the which even our Adversaries do condemn, which were in times past
not by any genera^l Council, but only by the Church of Rome suppressed, as
that of the Pelagians, Donatists, Priscillianistes etc.

18. The fi^th reason. S. Ambr. in orat. de obitu f^at^is sui Satyri.
The office of the true Church is by her name and communion to distinguish true
Catholics from false and counterfaite, but by the name and Communion of the
Roman Church Catholics were always distinguished from heretics. S. Victor l.
1. and 2. de wandalica persecutione.
He asked the Bishop (says S. Ambrose speaking of his brother) whether he
agreed with the Catholic Bishops, that is to saywith the Roman Church. So also
S. Ambrose and S. Victor Vticensis who lived in S. Augustines time do testi^y,
S. Greg. Turon. l. ^. de gloria Ma^ryu^ c 25.79. and 80.
that the Arians were wont to call Catholics Romans, or Romanists: the same
w^iteth S. Gregory Turonensis of the Arrian Goths which were in Spain. The
Bishops also of Spain being converted from Arianisme to the Catholic faith,
Vide Council. 3. To etanu^ inprinci^to and Baron. Tom. 7. an. ^84. n. 35. in
fine.
among other things they condemned a certain book set for^h by the Arians
with this title, The passage o^ the Romans to the Arrian Church. So the
heretics called Paulitians called Catholics Romanists, Euthimius 2 pa. pano.
(...) 21.
as Euthimius testi^ieth. So finally now adays Chatholikes are by our
Adversaries called Papists, and Romists of the Pope and Bishop of the Roman
Church.

19. The sixth reason: the office of the true Church is to keep and mayntaine
the holy Scripture faithfully and continually. But our Adversaries can assign
noe other Church as keepers of the holy Scrip^ures besides the Roman Church.
Therefore it is only the true Church of God. For our A^uersar^es cannot say,
that they received the holy Scripture from heaven, ^or from any i^uisible and
unknown Church, Calu l. ^. Inst c 8. sect. 9. in fine.
but from the visible Roman Church. Wherefore says Calvin, It is most
certain, that all the writings os the Prophets and Apostles came no otherwise
to all posterity, but as it were from hand to hand delivered unto us by the
ancient Fathers continually from year to year. Thus he. But none has
delivered the Bibles from hand to hand but the Roman Church. Wherefore it is as
certain that the Roman Church is the true Church of Christ, as that the holy
Scripture is true Scripture, seeing we do not know this which we have to be
true Scripture, but by the authority, tradition, and testimony of the Roman
Church.

20. Unto this, that also belongs which we have proved before, Supra c. 15.
huius controuers.
to wit that the true Church does not only give a bare testimony, but also
sufficient authority to the holy Scriptures. for this the only Roman Church
and no other abounda^tly performs.

21. The seventh reason. The office of the true Church is to judge of all
controversies which do arise among Christians either in points of faith, or
other Ecclesiastical affairs. But to the Roman Church only, and to no other
besides, all controversies were brought which arose in the Church either in
faith or other Ecclesiastical matters. For unto this as to the seat of S.
Peter, Supra c. 77* huius cont*
and the supreme Church all had recourse who had any injury or wrong done them.
So S. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, so Peter his successor, so S. John
Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople, Baron. To^. 3.4.5.6. and 7
and many others did, of whom Bellarmine and Baronius more at large, the which
Calvin also cannot deny. Cal^. l. 4. Instit. c. 8. sect. 16.


22. Heereunto also it belongs that the Roman Church has confirmed all
general Councels lawfully assembled, as Bellarmine declares, Bellarm. l. 1.
d^ E^^les. mi^t. c. 1^. B^^on. locis ^itatis.
and Baronius more at large in every age.

23. The eight reason. The office of the true Church is to ordain and appoint
lawful Pastors and Ministers of the Sacraments, and to conserve always the
ordinary vocation as we also proved before. But our Adversaries can assign no
other Church but the Roman, which has always had this ordinary vocation, and
co^^inuall succession of Pastors, and the ordinary authority to send and
institute Pastors in the Church of God.

24. The ninth reason. The office of the true Church is to teach a true faith
without any error, so that in no one point of doctrine necessary to salvation
she may err, Cap. 8. hucontrou.
as we have already proved out of holy Scriptures. But our Adversaries can show
no other Church besides the Roman, Cap. 7. huius cont.
which has not often erred in faith. Neither dare our Adversaries affirm that
there is as yet among them any visible Church which cannot err in faith.
Sanders do vis^^^^ Monarch. Ec^les. per to^um l. 7. Bel^ in quinque lib. de
Romano Po^tif*
But Doctor Sanders, Bellarmine, Coccius, and L^ro^ius do most evidently
demostrate that the Roman Church never erred hitherto in doctrine concerning
matters of faith.

15. And here it is to be considered that in all other Churches found^d by the
Apostles, Co^cius Tom. 1. l 1. Artic. 11. and seq baron. per on^nes 12. Tomos
yea in the Patriarks seats themselves, there have not b^n only heresies but
also many Archbishops heretics: but only the Roman Church among them all has
always been free and vnsteined with any heresy. The which Calvin does plainly
acknowledge when he writes, that the Roman Church in the time of old heresies
was not so troublesome as other Churches were, Calu. l. 4. Ins^it. c. 6. s^ct.
16. sub finem.
and that it kept more exactly then the rest, the doctrine once delivered unto
her by the Apostles. But he badly ascribes this to the power and strength of
nature, or to the generous disposition of the Romans, and not to the providence
and grace of God.

26. Much better did the ancient Bishops of Rome refer it to the singular
providence of God, and to the prayer of Christ of the which Christ himself
speaks when he says. Luc. 22. v. 32.
But I have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith fail not. Bell. l. 4. de Romans
Pontif. c. 3.
And indeed Bellarmine alleges seven ancient Bishops of Rome which
attribute this to the prayer of Christ.

27. The tenth reason. The proper and chiefest office of the true Church is to
bring men to their eternal salvation, so that without her help, or without
her we cannot hope to be saved, as we proved before by our Adversaries
doctrine. Supra c. 2. buius cont.
We ask therefore of them whether our predecessors who lived under the Bishops
of Rome these thousand years past were all damned or no? they dare not affirm
they were damned: but out of the true Church of God we cannot hope for
salvation: the Roman Church therefore wherein they lived and obtained their
salvation is the true Church of Christ.

CHAP. V. By the signs of the true Church it is declared, that the Roman is
the true Church of Christ.
WE have declared out of the holy Scriptures that there are four most certain
signs of the true Church of Christ, Cap. 19. huius Controu.
all which do prove the Roman to be the same Church we speak of,

2. First, as concerning the unity of faith and doctrine; the Church of Rome
has the same faith in all and every particular point thereof with the primitive
Church, as also with that Church which has continued now for the space of
almost a thousand six hundred years, as Coccius clearly declares out of the
writings of all both ancient and late Historiographers, Coccius i^ duobus Tom.
sui thesaur*
and that through every article now in Controversy. And we will hereafter show
in every one of them the consent and harmony of the Roman Church with the
Scriptures and ancient Church. But on the other side among our Adversaries
there are many iarres and dissensions in points of Faith every one of them
condemning another of heresy; as the fors^id Coccius manifestly shows even by
our Adversaries own writings: Coccius Tom. 1. l. 3 Art. 7.8.9 and 10.
wherefore it is most manifest, that there is perfect unity and agreement in the
Roman Church concerning all matters of faith, and that our Adversaries do
differ and disagree almost in every article thereof.

3. And here it is diligently to be considered that this does not happen unto
our Adversaries by a mere chance only, or by the malice of some few of them
as they say it does, but even necessarily out of the nature and condition of
their doctrine. For they teach, that there should be no superior unto whom all
should be obedient and submit themselves: no judge of Controuersyes, whose
iu^gment and definition in those matters all should embrace or follow; besides
that every one teaches what he lists, and every one of them disdayneth to be
reprehended or corrected by another, whereby there must needs arise many iarres
and contentions among them.

4. But in the Roman Church it is far otherwise. For if there arise any
question or Controversy which can be defined and determined by the word of God,
presently the Church of Rome ends this Controversy, and forbids under
pain of excommunication any to teach the contrary; and by this means every
Controversy in matters of faith amongst Catholics is forthwith ended. But if
the matter be obscure and cannot easily be gathered out of the word of God, nor
be very necessary to salvation, then the Roman Church commands both parties
that one of them do not condemn the others opinion, as we see practiced
concerning the Conception of the B. Virgin Mary. And in this manner all matters
of Controversy are ended and taken away. Vide Conc. Trid. sect. 5. ^ost Canon.
5.
The Lutherans being convinced by this argument do acknowledge that the Popes
supremacy is very profitable and necessary for the Church for the preservation
of this unity and good agreement in all things, Infra cap. 24. 4. and sequent.
as a little after we will evidently demonstrate out of their own writings.

5. Secondly, as concerning the sanctity and holiness of the Church, Cocci^ l.
^. (...) Ar^. 1^. (...) lib. (...) 13.14.
Coccius declares very well and brieftly, that even from the very first
beginning till now there have always been some holy and godly persons in the
Church of Rome. Yea that also there never wanted some who did very strange and
miraculous things. Calu. conc. 10. Gall. in Epist. ad Ephesians. co^c. 30* in cap.
11. Epist. 1. ad cor. and conc. 9. sub finem in 1. ad Timoth.
Moreover in the same place he proves manifestly the great impiety and
wickedness of our Adversaries, and that there were never any true miracles
wrought by any of them. Yea Calvin himself does often confess and acknowledge
the dishonesty and wickedness of his followers to be very great.

6. That it cannot most certainly be the true Church of Christ which
altogether is destitute of the gift of miracles, sufficiently appears by
those words of Christ, These signs shall follow those that believe, Marc. vlt.
c. 17. and 18
in my name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues,
serpents shall they take away, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall
not hurt them: they shall impose hands upon the sick, and they shall be whole.
And that this promise of Christ is not only to be restrained to the Apostles
time we must needs confess, unless we will say that the authority to preach
the Gospel, and to administer the Sacrament of Baptism (the which are
contained in the same promise) did only appertain to the Apostles time. But
that the Saints of God which lived in the Roman Church have done all those
miracles which Christ recounteth in the foresaid place is manifest by that which
Coccius relates of them. Cocc. ar^. 13. citat*


7. But here it is diligently to be considered, that the impiety or lack of
all holiness in our Adversaries is not casual, or acci^entary unto them, as
it is with us, that is flowing from the malice of man, but it proceeds out of
the very doctrine of our Adversaries. For they teach, that none can truly have
their sins forgiven them, that none can have any true holiness before God,
that none can have any free will to do good works, that noe work of a just
man ca^ be perf^ct or meritorious before God; that all things as well the bad as
the good are done by a certain necessary predestination of God, that noe
satisfaction for our sins is necessary, that we need not confess our sins,
that good works are not necessary to salvation and life everlasting, that Gods
commandments are impossible, and such other paradoxes, whereof we will speak
more hereafter. All which do vehemently incite and stir up men to all sin
and iniquity. But on the other side the whole doctrine of the Roman Church
inflameth continually the hearts of men with the love of virtue and the exercise
of good works.

8. Thirdly the Roman Church may truly be called Catholic, and that it is noe
less Catholic now, then it was in the time of the ancient holy Fathers, both
we have sufficiently declared before, and Thomas Boz^us prou^th at large. For
albeit the Roman faith may seem to have failed in some p^ace of Europe* ^upra
c. 20. h^ui^ cont.. 14. Boziu^ de signis Eccles.
yet notwith^^a^ding it has meruailously increased and still daily increases
in Asia, Africa and those wide countries of the East and West Indies. But it
is certain that our Aduer^^ries C^urches are wholly destitute of this mark and
sig^e.

9. Finally that the Roman Church may truly be called Apostolical, it
appears su^ficie^tly by the continual succession o^ Pa^tours* ever since S.
Peter's time to Paul the (...), who is now the supreme Pastor of the Roman
Church. The which succession is bri^^ly related by Coccius, Co^^l 8. citat.
^rt. 2.
but our Adversaries can never show the like.

10. And Calvin cannot deny, but tha^ those holy Fathers Irenaeus, Calu. l. 4.
in (...) c. ^. Sect. 3. sub fihem*
Augustine, Optatus, and many others dis^uting with old heretics used this
argument, the which is deduced from the continual succession of the Popes of
Rome. But says he, they did so because till their time there was nothing of
the doctrine delivered unto them by the Apostles, changed at Rome. Neither as
yet is there any of that doctrine changed which was at Rome in S. Augustines
time, Calu (...)
and besides the same succession continues still. For we do not say, as they
falsely slander us, that the succession only of persnos without true doctrine
is sufficient, but we vrg^ a continual succession, as well of persons, as of
doctrine, seeing that no doctrine can consist or remain without those persons
which teach it.

CHAP. VI. That the Church of the City of Rome is the chiefest of all the
visible Churches of Christ, is clearly convinced by the holy Scriptures.
BESIDES those arguments hitherto alleged out of the properties, offices, and
signs of the true Church, whereby we have proved the Roman Church to be the
true Church of Christ, there are some other reasons which may be deduced out of
holy Scriptures, Bell. and Sa^derus locis citatis supra cap. 21.. 27. in fine.
whereof see Bellarmine and Sanders: we according to our accustomed breuity
will only bring two principal places for this purpose, whereby it is manifestly
declared, that the Roman Church is not only the true Church, but that also,
that which is now in Rome is more eminent and famous then all other Churches of
Christ, as the successor of S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles is there
resident and governs the same, as the supreme head thereof.

2. The first place is taken out of S. Matthew. Mat. 16. v. 18. and 19.
For he relates the words which Christ spoke to S. Peter, which are these: And
I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; and I will give to
thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. And whatsoever thou shall bind upon
earth, it shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, it
shall be loose in heaven.

3. First that Christ spoke to S. Peter and not to the other Apostles,
appears evidently by the very words of the text. For first of all Christ
sets down S. Peter's old name, Simon, ^ayth he, thou art blessed, Io. 1. v.
42. and Joan 22. v. 15.
and then afterward he sets down the name of his father Bariona, that is to
say, the son of Jonas, or of John, as also the Evangelist S. John testifyeth.
He shows afterward that the revelation was only made to S. Peter. My father,
says he, has revealed unto thee: he does not say, unto you, as he is went to
say when he speaks unto them all. He adds moreover, because thou art Peter,
which certainly agrees only to S. Peter: for upon him only was this Name
imposed, Joan. 1. v. 42.

4. Moreover Christ adds, And upon this rock I will build my Church, in
which words that particle ( And) is a conjunction causall and not a copulative,
and it signifies because: an^ in this sense it is used oftentimes in holy
Scripture, as our Adueriaries cannot deny, as for example in that place of
Genesis: Genes. 20. v. 3. Psalm. 59. vel. 60. v. 13. and Psalm. 107. vel. 108. v.
13. Isaiae 46. v. vlt.
Lo thou shall dye for the woman that thou have taken, and has a husband, that
is, because she has a husband. So also David in his Psalms: Give us thy help
from our tribulation, and vain is the salvation of men, that is to say,
because the salvation of men is but vain. In like manner the Prophet I say
says, Behold thou art angry, and we have sinned, that is to say, because we
have sinned. In the same sense it is used in the new Testament: Luc 1. v. 42.
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, that is
to say, because it is blessed, as Calvin and Beza do acknowledge: all which
places Calvin con^esseth to be so understood after Theophilact. Also, and none
gave him any thing, that is to say, because none gave him. See more examples of
this in the latin edition.

5. This therefore is the true sense of that place, Joan 1. v. 42.
As thou have said unto me, thou art Christ the Son of the living God, so, I
say unto thee, that I have worthily called t^ee Peter, because upon this rock,
which thou art, I will build my Church. For to what end should Christ have said
unto him, thou art Peter, seeing that all knew well enough before that Peter
was ^eter, but that he would thereby declare that he was not called Peter
without great cause, that is to say, because upon him, as upon a sure and
strong foundation and rock, Christ intended to build his Church. Joan. 1. v.
42.
God therefore would have S. Peter to remember the name which of late was given
him, and afterward he assigns the reason and cause why he called him so, to
wit, S. Hieron, in c. 16. Matt. sup. ea verba Q^ia tu es Petrus.
because upon him, as upon a most strong rock he would build his Church.
According to the metaphore of a rock, says S. Hierome, it was rightly said
unto him: I will build my Church upon thee*

6. For the holy Scripture is accustomed when it speaks of a name given unto
any by the interpretation of the word, Genes. 17. v. 5. Genes. 22. v. 23.
Gen^s. 4. v. 25.
to adioyne also the rea^^n and cause of the name: so said our lord unto Abram:
Neither shall thy name be ca^^ed any more Abram, but thou shall be called
Abraham, and then he presently gives a reason taken from the etimology of the
word, because a Father of many Nations I have made thee. So also he did when
Jacob was called Israel. Se more of this in the Latin edition. page 280.

7. Lastly not without great reason Christ gave unto S. Peter this new name,
but no other cause is assigned in the holy Scripture but this, In c. 16. Matt.
Because upon this rock I will build my Church. This therefore and no other
was the cause of giving him this new name. Hereupon says S. Hilary very well.
O happy foundation of Christ's Church, says he, in the imposition of a new
name! and o worthy rock of that building the which should dissolve and break
the infernal Laws, the gates of hell, and all the strong bars of death! So
S. Hilary.

8. Moreover Christ said to S. Peter, I will give the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven unto thee, Matt: 16. v. 19.
he does not say, unto you: in like manner he said in the singular number*
whatsoever thou have bound upon earth etc, Matt. 18. v. 18.
that thou shall loose etc. He spoke therefore to S. Peter only, and not to many.

9. And albeit he promised this last authority of bynding or loosing men from
their sins to the other Apostles also, yet first of all in this place he
promised this to S. Peter alone, and then afterward to the rest, to the end
we might thereby know, that he made S. Peter the head of all the rest, and that
all their power and authority was subordinate to that of his. For at this day
all Catholic Bishops have authority to bynd and loose, but subordinate to the
Popes authority.

10. All which things that holy martyr S. Cyprian declares very well in these
words, Cypr. de unit. Eccl. circa principium.
whereby it may easily be understood what was the opinion and judgment of the
primitive Church concerning this matter, Matthew. 16. v. 18. and 19.
God speaks unto S. Peter, says S. Cyprian, I say unto thee, because thou
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church etc. Joan. 20. v. 20*
21.22. and 23.
And again after his resurrection he said, feed my sheep: upon him alone be
buyldeth his Church, and he commits unto him to feed his sheep; and albeit
he gave the like authority to all the other Apostles, saying: As my Father sent
me, so etc. whose sins ye forgive etc. yet to the end he might show and
declare an unity, he ordained but one chair, and he confirmed by his authority
the beginning of that unity proceeding from one. The same indeed or equal in
all other things were the other Apostles with S. Peter, endued with the same
power and authority (to wit, before those words of Christ to S. Peter, feed
my sheep) but the beginning proceeded from unity. The primacy was given to S.
Peter, to the end that one Church of Christ, and one chair might be made
manifest and known. Hitherto S. Cyprian.

11. But now that these promises of Christ did not only belong to the person of
S. Peter, but also to all those who were to succeed him in the same office till
the end of the world, we do thus clearly prove and demonstrate. First because
S. Peter is here made the foundation of the Church, and the rock whereupon it
is builded: but the Church of Christ always remains, therefore the foundation
thereof must always remain, seeing that nothing can continue, and be without it
foundation.

12. Moreover those keys which were given to S. Peter do remain always in
the Church as all our Adversaries confess, Ergo, he also remains to whom
these keys were given. For that authority, or those keys were not given for
S. Peter alone, but for the Church which is always extant. It therefore always
retayneth those keys, and that authority of bynding or loosing men from their
sins in S. Peter and his successors, till the end of the world.

13. And this is that which S. Leo says when he writes, S. Leo Sermon. 2. in
a^niuers. assumpt. suae ad Pontif.
that S. Peter even to this day governs the Church of God, that is to say, by
his successors: insomuch that his dignity never fails even in an unworthy
successor. But hitherto there was never any successor of S. Peter acknowledged
in the Church of Christ, besides the Bishop of Rome. He therefore is the only
successor of S Peter and the supreme Bishop of the Church. And the Roman is not
only the true Church of Christ, but also preferred before all others even by
Christ himself.

14. The second place is, Feed my la^bes, Joan. 21. v. 15.16. and 17.
feed my sheep. In which words God commended to S. Peter not only his
lambs, which signifies the common sort of people, but also his sheep, to
wit, the Pastors and Fathers of his Church, First, says Eusebius Emissenus,
Eusebius Emissenus Sermon. in natiuit. S. Joan Evangelist.
he committed to S. Peter his lambs, and then his sheep* because he made him
not only a Pastor, but the Pastor of Pastors. Peter therefore feeds the
lambs, and also the sheep. He fe^deth children and their mothers, he rules
the people and their Prelates. Bern. de considerat. ad Eugen. l. 2. cap. 8. S.
Leo Sermon. 3. de assumpt. suae ad Po^tif.
He is ther^ore the Pastor o^ all, because besides lambs and sheep there is
nothing in the Church. Hitherto Eusebius. And S. Bernard: My sheep, says
Christ: Unto whom is it not plain and manifest that he did not assi^n^ some
but all? nothing is excepted where there is no distinction made. Thus S.
Bernard. And S. Leo: Peter does properly govern all, whom principally Christ
also governs. Joan. 21. v. 15.


15. Furthermore it is manifest that these words were spoken to S. Peter and
not to the other Apostles, seeing that Christ asked him thrice: Do thou love
me? And moreover he added more then these that he might make a manifest
distinction betwixt S. Peter, and the other Apostles.

16. Finally it is most certain, that this promise of Christ does not only
appertain to the person of S. Peter. but also to his successors which are to
remain in the Church till the end of the world. Ephesians. 4. v. 11. Calvin and
Beza ibid. Confess. Rupell. Art. 25.
For both the Apostle does plainly testify and our Adversaries do also confess
that the office of a Pastor is ordinary, and shall always continue, and be in
the Church of God.

17. And the chiefest reason hereof is, because we stand in no less need now
of a supreme Pastor, then they which were in the primitive Church, whiles yet
the Apostles were alive, yea we have much more need thereof: besides that there
are still and always shall be some sheep of Christ, therefore there shall also
still continue their chief Pastor. The Roman Church therefore is not only the
true Church of Christ, but also that wherein S. Peter's successor, and the
supreme Pastor of the whole Church of Christ remains.

18. But these two places are so manifest, that they cannot be confuted or
wrested to any other sense, unless we will reduce all words to a
metaphorical signification, or other figurative speeches, the which is a
common trick of our Adversaries when they are urged with plain words of the
holy scripture. But against all these falsifications of our Adversaries we must
always observe that rule of the Catholic Church taken out of S. Augustine: to
wit, S. August* Tom. 3. de* doctrina Christiana l. 3. cap. 16.
that we must never depart from the proper signification of the words of holy
Scripture, unless we be forced by the authority of some more evident point of
faith, whereunto the proper signification of the words do manifestly repugne.
For otherwise if we might, as often as we would, refuse and leave the proper
signification of the words, there will be nothing less certain in all the
holy Scripture.

19. Moreover it will be an easy matter for every one to fly to metaphors and
improper significatio^s when he is pressed with the plain words of holy
Scripture, but there is nothing here that should force us to depart from the
true and proper sense of the words. None therefore but desperate and careless
of their own salvation will give credit and believe these foolish toys and
dreams of our Adversaries, invented only by them in hatred and con^empt of the
Bishop of Rome.

20. Yea he will rather embrace and follow the uniform consent and
understanding of the aunci^nt Fathers and of all the whole Church. For the holy
Fathers in many places do affirm that ^h^se two laces of the holy Scripture
are to be understood literally of S. Peter; the which Bellarmine and Coccius
have diligently gathered together, Bellarm. l. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 10. and 14.
Coccius Tom. 1. l. 7. Art. 4.
as many other Catholic Authors have done before them. But because this matter
is so clear and manifest that even our Aduersarsaries cannot deny it, as we
will plainly show in the next Chapter, we will not now spend any more time in
alleging of Authors.

21. But our Adversaries do here cry out, and object against us, that the
holy Fathers do sometimes affirm, that the Church was built upon the faith of
S. Peter, and sometimes upon his confession. As though (forsooth) there were
any among us so foolish as to think that the Church was built upon S. Peter's
back or shoulders, or upon S. Peter as he was an Infidel, or dumme, and not
rather upon S. Peter as endued and replenished with the gift of faith,
confessing and professing openly the mysteries thereof. Wherefore it is all one,
whether we say, that the Church is built upon S. Peter, or upon his faith and
confession, for we do not separate S. Peter from his faith, or from the public
pro^ession thereof, but we only affirm that the Church of Christ was b^ilt upon
the faith and confession of S. Peter alone, and of no other.

22. And hence it is that the same holy Fathers who in some places affirm that
the Church was built upon the faith and confession of S. Peter, S. Epiph*
contra H^^^es. 59. qua est C^tharoru^. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Matthew. S.
August. Tom. 1. l. retractat. cap. 22.
do else where plainly testify that it was built upon S. Peter himself. Yea
even in the same place they sometimes say, that it was built upon the faith or
confession of S. Peter, and sometimes upon S. Peter himself, as appears by
S. Epiphanius, and S. Chrysostom.

23. We know also very well that S. Augustine in some places understood by this
word ( rock) Christ himself, but he does not reject the common exposition of
other holy Fathers: y^a he confirms the same by the authority of S. Ambrose,
and he testifies himself that he held that opinion in other places. For they
are not to be reprehended but rather to be greatly commended, who attribute
many litterall senses to the same words of the holy Scripture, so that they do
not reject and condemn the common and approved ^ense of the whole Church, as we
have already declared out of S. Augustine. Controu. 1. c. 15.. 7. and seq*


24. Truly even our Adversaries themselves confess, that the foresaid
exposition of S. Augustine is both forced and harsh in it self. For seeing
that neither in the words of Christ which go before, nor in the confession it
self of S. Peter, there is any mention made of a rock, the particle ( this)
cannot demonstrate that which is not in the whole sentence, Calu. ad baec verba
S. Matt. in sua harmonia Beza in c. 16. Matt. ad v. 18.
but violently. Wherefore our Adversaries leaving this exposition of S.
Augustine, they understand by the rock, either the faith of S. Peter, as Calvin
does, or with Beza his confession. And they both confess, that the word Cepha
in the Siriacke tongue is the same in both places, when Christ says, thou art
Peter, and upon this rock, and the Greek word also (...), and (...) do only
differ in their terminations, and not in substance.

Calu. loco ^itato 1
25. But albeit Calvin commends that deriuatio^ of the word Peter which S.
Augustine sets down, to wit, that Petrus is named of Petra, Beza loco ^itato*
as Christanus of Christo: yet Beza writes more truly, that Christ speaking
in the Siriacke tongue used no deriuation of names, but said Cepha in both
places. Our Adversaries therefore do not well to object S. Augustines
exposition against us, the which they themselves acknowledge not to be the
litterall sense of the words.

CHAP. VII. That the Church of Rome is the chiefes^ and head of all other, is
proved out of the ancient Fathers and even by the confession of our
Adversaries themselves.
THE ancient holy Fathers do no^ only wi^h v^iforme consent affirm the Roman
to be the true Church of Christ, but also that it is the chiefest and most
principal Church of all: in so much that they affirm it to be the head of the
whole visible Church of Christ: and many other things they do write in the
praise and commendation of the Roman Church, and of the Pope the supreme Pastor
thereof, as may euident^y be ^eene in Catholic writer^ which are related by
Bellarmine and Coccius. Bell l. 2. de Ro^ ^ont. c. 1^ and s^q. Coc^ Tom 1 l 7.
a^t. ^. 6. and 7.
We for breuity sake will only all^dge two of the holy Fathers, by whom it may
e^si^y be gathered what was the iudg^ent and ^pinion of the ^e^^ concerning
this matter.

2. The first is that most ancient holy S. Ir^naeus who lived even in the
Apos^les tym^, S. Iren l. 3. a^^ers haeres. ca^. 3.
because says (...), it would be to long to re^ount in (...) vol^me the
succession of al Churches, w^ pro^osing the tradition, and ^ay^hos the
greatest, most anci^^t and left known Church, founded by the two glorious
Apos^les Peter and Paul, which by preaching and succession of Bishops has
descended even f^^m the Apostles to us, do con^ound all those who by any means
gat^er any thing contrary to that they should eyt^er by their own ^oolish
fancies or by vain glory, or by the great blindness of their vnders^anding,
or ^ol^owing any badde opinion. For all other Churches that is to say, all
faythful^ true belieuers th^oughout the whole world must needs come unto this
Church by reason of the most potent principality thereof. Hitherto are the
words of S. I^enaeus. And afterward he recounteth the succession of all the
Popes of Rome till his time. S. August. T^m. 9. tract. 5^. in Euang S. Io^n.


3. The other is S. Augustine whom our Adversaries also esteem very much, who
knows not, says he, that blessed S. Peter was the chiefest and head of all
the Apostles? S. August. Tom. 2. Epist. 162. a^ Episcop. Donatista^um.
thus S. Augustine of S. Peter. But speaking of the Church of Rome, ^e says:
In the Roman Church has always flourished the chief power an^ ^^^^^^ity of
the Ap^st^licall chair. If we believe S. Augustine, nothing is more clea^e an^
mani^^^.

4. But it is not necessary to cite any ^ore places of the holy Fathers. For
even our Adu^rsari^s conf^ss^ that this was the common opinion of a^l the
ancient Father concerning this matter. Bucerus in prapa^ator. ad Council.
Thus w^iteth Martin Bu^^r ^^m^ty^es ^aluins mais^er and chief Pa^^^n, not
only in his own name, but also of all (...) Lutheranes: we confess^ plai^ly
with all our hearts, says he, that among the ancient Fathers of the Church,
the C^u^ch of ^ome has always obtained the chiefest aut^o^ity and s^pr^macy
above all others, because it has the c^ayre of S. Peter, and whose Bishops
have always been acc^u^^ed the successors of S. Peter. thus Bucer.

5. And Calvin albeit he inueigheth bitterly against the Church of Rome, Calu.
l. 4. Instit. c. 6. sect. 16.
yet constreined to speak truth, writes in this manner: I will first say this
aforehand, that I deny not but that the old writers do every where give great
honor to the Church of Rome, and do speak reverently of it. And a little
after he says thus. For that same opinion which I wo^e not how was grown in
force, that it was founded and ordained by the ministry of Peter, much auail^d
to procure savor and estimation unto it. Therefore in the west parts it was
for honors sake called the Sea Apost^l^ke. Calu. l. 4. (...) c. 7. s^ct. 11.
And in another place. I grant, says he, that there remayn^ al^o true
Epis^les of the old Bishops, wherein they set ^orth the honor of their sea
with glorious titles, of which sort are some Epistles of Leo. Ve^ba isto^^m
a^^or. (...) 1. ^^retur in ^ afacult. VVitte^b. edito co^tra Gasp. Peucerum an.
1^^7 l. in principio c. 6. e^^sae^ l. ^ol. 60. p. 1.


6. But the Lutherans in their Synodicall acts do acknowledge that eue^ in the
time o^ the first Council of Nice, and in the days of Cyprian, S. Hierome,
and S. Augustine the Pope o^ Rome had the chief supremacy, the which say they,
we willingly admit and embrace to increase the good agreement in faith, piety,
and Ecclesias^icall policy, for they very well perceived that this supremacy of
the Pope of Rome did avail much to keep unity and concord in doctrine and
Ecclesiastical policy.

7. And hence it is, that the said Lutheranes in their articles agreed upon at
Smalcalde, the which they made in the year 1537. to be exhibited to the
general Council which was reported to be holden at Mantua, among other
articles they appr^ued t^is of the Popes authority, and unto these Philip
Melancthon also subscribed. Who also afterward in the year 1548. far more
evidently approved the Popes authority, writing thus in his Epistle to the Lord
Ambassador Theopulus: Besides these, says he, Habenturista eodem c. 6. fol. 7.
Page 1.
we reverently honor and worship the authority of the Roman Bishop and all
Ecclesiastical policy, so that the Bishop of Rome do not reject us. Thus
Philip in that place.

8. But what was the most true opinion of Melancthon concerning this matter
appears more evidently by a certain epistle he wrote in the year 1535. of
the Ecclesiastical iarres, and the agreement which was made concerning the
articles in controversy, Extat integra ista Epist. Philip. in cent. Epist.
Theol. ad lo. Schunebelium ministrum Biponti^u^ estque ista Epist. inter
caeteras ordine 74. iuxta edit, Bipont. Anno 1597.
wherein he alleges some reasons for the Popes Supremacy. These are Philippes
words speaking of some of his who did hinder and resist the agreement which
was to be made with Catholics: Some of them, says he, do think that nothing
else is demanded, but that having shaken of the Popes Monarchy, and rejecting
all the old Ecclesiastical ordinances, a certain Barbarous liberty should be
established. And a little after. Ours do grant that the Ecclesiastical policy
is a thing very lawful in it self, that is to say, even as there are some
Bishops who have charge, or rule diverse Churches: so also the Pope of Rome
exceeds all other Byshopes in authority. This Canonical policy, as I think,
no wise man either can or should reject, if he desire to keep himself within
his own limits. And again. As concerning the riches and revenues they are
the liberal and magnifice^t gifts of Kings and Princes. Wherefore as
concerning this article of the Popes supremacy, and the authority of other
Byshopes, there is no Controversy among us. For both the Pope of Rome may
easily retain his authority and the other Bishops may also keep theirs. And
there must needs be some governors in the Church of God who may ordain those
which are called to Ecclesiastical offices, and may exercise the authority of
the said church in all ^udiciall and difficulte matters, as also may examine
the doctrine of the Priests thereof. And that if there were no such Bishops,
yet there should be such ordained for that purpose. And a little after. That
Monarchy of the Pope is very good in my judgment and necessary, to the end that
the vni^orme good agreement in doctrine may be kept in many Nations. Wherefore
a perfect good agreement in this one article concerning the Popes supremacy may
easily be established, if they could once agree about other articles. Hitherto
Philip.

9. Much like unto these wrote Martin Bucer by the consent of Capito, Hedio,
and Niger his confederates of the Church of Argentine, Beza in vita Calu. An.
15^8. sub finem.
who were as Beza says, great fauorits of Calvin. For in the same Century of
Epistles there is one extant with this title: Martin Bucer does testify his
agreement in all things with Philip Mela^cthon both in his own name, and of
the whole Church of Argentine. Centuria Epist. Sch^neb* Epist. 75.
And this Epistle of Bucer is next unto the fore said Epistle of Philip
Melancthon.

10. Moreover in this very Epistle when Bucer treats of this Ecclesiastical
Monarchy (the which he calls Policy) he writes thus. But we desire nothing
less then that the Kingdom of Christ should want her policy or authority to
command. No where should things be done in better and more certain order, no
where should the obedience be greater, the subi^ction more perfect, the
reverent respect of authority more religiously observed. But now the outward
power whatsoever it be, is of God, and he resists Gods ordination, who is not
obedient unto this. Fin^lly toward the end of the same Epistle, thus he
concludes. We will therefore in no sort hinder the small and per^ect
agreement of Churches. The Pope of Rome and all the other Bishops may lawfully
keep their authority, yea and their dominions also; let them use their
aut^ority only to the edification and not to the destruction of the Church:
seeing that there is no authority at all the which we do not account holy, and
we teach the same unto them. We seek for nothing so diligently as for the
discipline of the Church. Hitherto Bucer with his companions, who did evidently
foresee, that neither any good agreement in doctrine nor Ecclesiastical
discipline can continue any long time without one supreme head and Monarch of
the visible Church.

11. Finally, now also as many of our Adversaries as have any experience in
matters of Policy, and are well affected toward the monarchy of Kings and
Princes do willingly acknowledge that there must needs be one supreme Bishop
in the Church of God, and that this is to be justly granted to the Pope of
Rome, if we could once agree among our selves about other matters in
Controversy. For they see very well, that all those arguments whereby the
monarchy of secular Kings and Princes is established do prove in the same
manner also the Ecclesiastical Monarchy. And of the other side all those
arguments which do impugn the Ecclesiastical Monarcy do no less overthrow the
temporal Monarchy of ^ll Christian Kings and Princes.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein the arguments of our Adversaries against the Church of
Rome are confuted.
THese are the chiefest arguments which our Adversaries do object against us
out of holy Scripture. The first. Christ is the head of the Church, the rock
and foundation, besides which no man can lay any other. Cor. 11. v. 3
I answer that of one and the same thing there may be many heads, so that one
be subject to another. For the head of the woman is the man, the head of every
man is Christ, and the head of Christ is God, as the Apostle testifies. And so
the woman has three heads, her Husband, Christ, and God; but each one of them
is subject unto another. So S. Peter or the Pope of Rome is the head of the
Church, but under Christ and subject unto him. Ad Ephe^* 1. v. 22.
Because Christ is the head of S. Peter, and of the Bishop of Rome. Moreover
Christ is the head of the whole Church as well present as to come, as well of the
old Testament as of the new* But S. Peter or his successor is only head of the
Church in this world and of the new Testament only. Hereupon said Christ,
Matthew. 15. v. 18.
upon this rock I will build my Church, that is to say, the Church of the new
Testament which was then to be built.

2. Yea even by the nature of a head we may gather very well that besides
Christ, who is the head of al Churches as well visible as invisible, as the
Apostle says, there is also another visible head of the visible Church, Ad
Ephesians. 1. v. 22.
for otherwise it were a monster, because it should be a visible body without a
visible head. Yt is necessary therefore, that besides an invisible head which
is Christ, there be also a visible head in the visible Church, to wit S.
Peter's successor.

3. Furthermore the actions which Christ exercises in his Church are of two
kinds, some are invisible as our vocation, justification and sanctification
etc. and these Christ exercises and does by himself. Some other actions are
visible, as to preach, administer Sacraments, and to govern visibly the Church
etc. These Christ does not exercise by himself alone, but also by visible men
which represent his person. Wherefore even as Christ should not be said truly to
baptize any unless there were some visible man who in the person of Christ
should visibly baptize: neither can he be said truly to govern visibly every
particular Church unless in each of them some particular person do visibly
govern in Christ's steed: so also neither should Christ be said truly to
govern visibly the whole Church, unless there were some one who in his person
might visibly govern the whole Church. But this person can be no other but the
Bishop of Rome.

4. And that which has been said before of the head, 1. Cor. 3. v. 11.
is also to be understood of the rock and foundation. For Christ is indeed the
chiefest foundation of all true belieuers: E^hes. 1. v. 20.
but the secondary and subordinate foundation unto Christ is also the doctrine
of the Apostles and Prophets, as the Apostle expressly says to the Ephesians:
and Calvin also acknowledges it to be most true. Calu. ibi^. and l^. Inst.
cap. 7. s^ct. 2.
But if the doctrine of all the Apostles be also the foundation of the Church,
why should not also S. Petres doctrine be the same. For when we say that S.
Peter is the foundation of the Church, by S. Peter we do understand not his
person only but also his doctrine preached in the Church of Rome.

5. Moreover seeing that S. John in his Apocalypse says, ^pocal. ^1. v. 14.
that the City of God has twelve foundations, and in them twelve names of the
twelve Apostles of the lamb. What marvel is it, if S. Peter the first of
the Apostles be called a rock or foundation of the City of God.

6. And here it is to be considered, that when the Apostle says that there is
no other foundation besides Christ, this word ( besides) has the same
signification that contrary or against has, ^ Cor. 3. v. ^1.
as appears by many other places of holy Scripture. For otherwise all the
Apostles are called the foundations of the Church, as we have said before: but
they are not contrary or against Christ, Supra cap. 35.. 2. Contr. 1.
but under Christ and subject unto him.

7. Finally if we examine more exactely the true sense of those words of S.
Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3. v. ^^.
yt will appear manifestly that our adversaries wrest the said words of the
Apostle to a contrary sense and meaning. For the Apostle does not speak of the
foundation of the whole buylding of the Church of Christ whereof only is our
present Co^trouersy: ^. Cor. 3. v. ^^.
but of the foundation of particular and private actions of every true
belieuer. For S. Paul manifestely writes, that he laid that foundation whereof
he speaks, and that every one buyldeth his own proper work upon this
foundation. But there is a great difference among these foundations: because
here Christ himself is he who made and ordained S. Peter to be a foun^ation.
Matthew. 1^ v. 18.
I say unto thee, says Christ to S. Peter, that thou art Cephas: there S. Paul
is he who long after laid that ^oundation whereof he speaks, as a wise
worke-mayster, says he, have I laid the foundation. 1. Cor. 3* v. 10.
Here Christ himself is he who builds, Upon this rock, says our lord, I
will buyld. There every private man is he who buyldeth, but let every one look
says the Apostle, ^ow he builds thereon; here the Church is that which is
built thereon, Matthew. 1^. v. 18.
I will build, says our Lord, my Church. There the work of every private man
is that which is built thereon. If any man's work abide, says the Apostle, that
which he built thereupon shall receive reward. 1. Cor. 3.^.14.
S. Paul therefore speaks of the foundation of good works which belong unto
justice and life everlasting whereof as we have said Christ is the only
foundation.. 3. hui^^ cap.
We treat here of the foundation of the outward and visible government of the
Church and doctrine of sound faith. Now S. Peter and his successors were such a
foundation. Wher^ore that which our Adversaries allege out of S. Paul, does
nothing concern this our present ^i^putation.

8. The second argument. S. Peter denied Christ th^ice, Joan. ^8. v. 25.
ther^ore he could not be the re^ke, against whom the gates of hell should
never prevail. I answer that when S. Peter denied Christ, he was not as then
the foundation of the Church. For promise was made unto him only, Matthew. 16. I
will build etc. I will gi^e thee etc. speaking always in the future tense: but
afterward Joan 21. the authority was actually given which was b^f^re promised
unto him, Joan. 21. v. 15.
and that after that denial of S. Peter as also after the resurrection of
Christ, feed my lambs, says Christ, f^ede my she^pe.

9. The third argument. After that the foresaid authority was given Joan. 21.
S. Peter was reprehended by S. Paul Gal. 2. I answer that as witnesses
Tertullian the Marcionists objected this very same place against Catholics,
Tertull. l. 5. contra. Marci. c. 7.
unto whom Tertullian answers in these words, Indeed, says he, it was a
vice or fault of his conversation, and not of his preaching. Tertull. de prase.
aduersus Haret. c. ^j. in fine.
And he answered very well; for S. Peter might peradventure the^ have sinned,
but he could not err in faith, because he knew very well that the Moysaicall
Law was not necessary to salvation for the Gentills, neither did he ever teach
the same to be necessary. Yea when there arose any controversy about this
matter, he manifestly taught that the Gentills were not obliged by it, as may
be seen in the Acts of the Apostles. Wherefore if S. Peter offended in any
thing, it was a sin of his conversation and not of his preaching and
doctrine, whereof we now only dispute, Act. 15. v. 10. and 11.
albeit there are many who think that S. Peter did not offend at all in any
respect, of whom see Bellarmine, Bell. l. 1. de Romans Pont. c. vl^^^in fine.
and Baronius.

10. The fourth argument. S. Paul reprehended those that said they belonged to
S. Peter. Bar^n* Tom. 1. an. 51. and 52. and seq. 1. Cor. 1. v. 13*
I answer that those men divided Christ from S. Peter and S. Paul, and they
opposed them against Christ as equals unto him, making them as it were so many
Christ's: 1 Cor. 1. v. 13.
The which S. Paul declares in these words, Is Christ divided? Moreover they
attributed to S. Peter and S. Paul the internal and invisible gifts of the
holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 1. v. 13*
and the effect of the Sacrament, yea and our redemption also, no otherwise
then they did unto Christ. Hence are those words of S. Paul in the same place,
why? was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized in the name of Paul?

11* But we teach that the Pope of Rome is inferior and not equal unto Christ:
whereupon he is also called the Vicar of Christ, as subject unto him, and not
divided from him. Moreover we teach that the Pope does not give the inward and
spiritual gifts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, but he is only the ^icar of
Christ in the doctrine of faith and exterior government of the Church.

12. The f^rst argument. The Apostle to the Corinthians and Ephesians does
recount diverse offices of the Church, 2. Cor. 1. v. 18.
and yet he says nothing of S. Peter. I answer, first, Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
that it is not necessary that the Apostle make any mention of S. Peter in
every place, for it is sufficient that in some one place or other he has
evidently declared that S. Peter was a chief member of the Church the which he
did when he said, that he came to Jerusalem to see S. Peter, Gal. 1. v. ^^.
and tarryed with him fifteen days.

13. Furthermore in these very places he manifestly makes mention of S. Peter.
For every where he puts the Apostles in the first place, and all Christians
knew well enough, that S. Peter was chief of all the Apostles, according to
that of S. Matthew, the first Simon who was called Peter. Heerupon says S.
Augustine: who knows not tha^ S. Peter was the chief of the Apostles?

14. Finally the Apostle himself does not indeed speak in these places of the
ordinary Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, but of those extraordinary gifts which
were given to the members of the primitive Church. For the recounteth there
also the Evangelists, Prophets, the grace of doing cures or helps, kinds of
tongues etc. which are certaynely extrordinary gifts: as S. Chrysostom,
Theophilactus, Oecumemus, and others expounding these words of the Apostle,
have well noted.

15. The sixth argument. Many of the Bishops of Rome were wicked bad men, and
given to many kinds of sins, as all even Catholic writers do testify. As
therefore they have grievously erred in manners, so they might also err in
faith and doctrine. S. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 165. ad Gener. and Tom 7. contra
lite^ as Peril. Donatist. lib. 2. c. 5. 6 and 53*
I answer that this was in times past the argument of the Donatists against
Catholics, whereunto S. Augustine has often answered. For there is a great
difference betwixt their conversation and doctrine, because an error committed
in our manner of conversation only hurts him which erreth, but an error in
doctrine is also hurtful to many others, yea even to the whole Church of God.
Hence proceeded that admonition of Christ: all things therefore, whatsoever
they shall say to you, observe ye, and do ye: but according to their works
do ye not. Calvin also refuteth this argument of our Adversaries more at length
as the foolish invention or dream of the Anabaptists: for he knew very well
that among his Ministers there were many most wicked ungodly men. Wherefore it
is very strange that his followers will repeat and inculcate this argument so
often.

16. Our Adversaries have many other arguments besides these which need no
confutation: for they are not taken out of the word of God, but all do rely and
are grounded upon lies and mere fables forged by ancient Heretics, or
Schismatickes, or at the least by such as were no fauourits nor welwillers to
the Church of Rome, Sander. l. 7. ^itato. Baron. in omnibus 12. Tom. 2. Tim. 4.
v. 4.
the which Doctor Sa^ders and Cardinal Baronius prosecute particulerly
throughout all ages. Wherefore that saying of the Apostle does very well agree
to our Adversaries. And from the truth certes they will auerse their hearing,
and to fables they will be converted.

17. We will here allege one most certain example of those Slanders the
which our Adversaries cast against the Church of Rome. Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 7.
sect. 18.
And that we may also omit that Calvin in few words has no less then five
manifest lies of one only Bishop of Rome, John 22. as Bellarmine clearly
proves; the same Calvin truly has forged three most famous and markable lies
against the whole Church of Rome: for he says, Bellarm. l. 4. de Romans Pont.
cap. 14. ^um aagit de 36. Papa. Calvin lib. 4. Inst. c. 7 sect. 27. S. Aug.
Tom. 7. de vnitate Eccles. c. 2. and 3*
that these are the three principle articles of that Divinity which is taught
by the Bishops and Cardinals of Rome. First, that there is no God. The second,
that all things which are written and taught concerning Christ, are lies and
fables. The third, that there is no lyse after this.

18. But that one answer which S. Augustine gave the Donatists slaundering
wrongfully Catholics in times past, may suffice to confute all these
reproachful and injurious lies of our present Adversaries. Let us not hear,
says he, what this or that man says, but what our Lord says: let us not
here, this say I, thus say thou, but thus says our Lord, and what the holy
Scriptures say unto us concerning the Church.

19. Moreover that which in general the same holy Father in another place says
against the lies of the Donatists, S. Aug. Tom. 7. d^ vnitate Eccles. c* 12.
may now very well be applied in this manner to the Roman Church. I know, says
he, what is written in the holy and Canonical Scriptures concerning the Church
of Rome and the says thereof, I know not what you say of her Apostasy or
falling from her faith. Truly as we do read in books, the which you also do
honor and reverence, of the Roman Church and faith thereof, so also read you
unto us out of books the which we also do honor and reverence, how she
forsook and lost her faith. Does it please you that we should believe every
slanderous reproach of men upon what occasion soever it was uttered and
objected against the Roman Church, the which the holy Ghost has both delivered
and co^me^ded unto us by his holy Scriptures, this indeed is pleasing to you,
but whom also it should more justly please, you see well enough; but you being
overcome by obstinacy will not yield to the truth. And a little after. Lo h^ere
the Roman Church, with whom I communicate, Romans 1. v. 17.
where I read thee her name, there find thou me her faults, if thou can,
Romans 1. v. 8.
but if thou cryest, and rehearsest them from some other place, we following
the voice of our Pastor evidently declared unto us by the mouth of the Apostle
S. Paul, do not admit, believe, or hear your words. Joan. 10. v. 7.
My sheep, says our heavenly Pastor, hear my voice and follow me. His
testimony of the Roman Church is not obscure, but very clear and manifest.
Whosoever will not go a stray or wander from his flock, Romans 1. v. 7. and 8.
let him hear him, let him follow him. Hitherto S. Augustine.

20. Finally it is here diligently to be noted, that our Adversaries never
durst be so bold as to affirm so strange and absurd things of the Church of
Rome, so ancient in it self, and so commended by all the ancient holy
Fathers, yea and by the Apostle S. Paul himself, but that they falsely
persuade themselves that she has lost and forsaken the true doctrine of
Christ. Romans 1. v. 7. and 8.
Heerupon they say that Rome is Babylon, and they are not ashamed to affirm
the Pope to be Antichrist. But if it were once proved manifestly, that the
Roman Church teaches nothing which is not very agreeable to the word of God,
all our Adversaries weapons against the Church of Rome will easily be blunted
and overthrown, and also they will be forced to confess with Calvin, Calu. l.
4* Inst. cap. ^. sect. 10. in fine.
that the breach from this Church, is the denial of God and Christ, or that
there cannot be imagined any fault more heinous. But this God willing shall be
more evidently hereafter declared in every Controversy.

CHAP. IX. Of the Adoration of the Pope of Rome, and of the kissing of his
feet.
AMongst other Crimes wherewith the Roman Church is charged by our Adversaries,
one at which many take offense, is the adoration of the Pope, and the kissing
of his feet. We will therefore in this Chapter say somewhat in justification
thereof, for if it shall appear that nothing is done therein which is not
warranted by the written word, it will appear how little reason they have to
term that impious Idolatry, which is nothing else indeed but Religious piety.

2. Howbeit we are first to forwarne the Reader, to the end he be not deceived
by the name of Adoration, that Adoration in the holy Scripture has two
significations: in the one it appertains to God alone, 1. Paral. use. v. 28.
Genesis 2. v. 7. Genesis 27. v. 28.
in the other it may without any sin at all, yea with great merit be given to
men. And of adoration in both senses, are verified those words of the
Scripture; Genesis 49. v. 8.
they adored first God, and then the King. Many other places of Scripture there
are which approve this adoration of men, of which only we now treat. For this
adoration only is exhibited to the Pope, and not that other which belongs
only to God: and it is exhibited unto him as the Vicar of Christ, whereas the
other cannot be exhibited but to the true God himself. Now there are four
testimonies of holy Scripture which evidently prove, that the adoration of the
Pope, is not only lawful, but also dutiful.

3. The first testimony is, that which the Prophet Isay records in these
words: Isaiae 45. v. 14.
Thus says our Lord, the labor of Egypt, and the mercha^dize of Ethiopia, and
the eminent men of the Sabeans shall come unto thee, and they shall be thine,
they shall follow thee, they shall go with their hands manacled, or bound in
chains, and they shall adore thee, and make supplication unto thee. It is
manistest that the Prophet in this place speaks not to Christ, but to the
Church: for all the verbes and pronownes in the Hebrew text are of the feminine
gender, and not of the masculine: besides, it appears evidently by all that
goes before these words, and all that follows, that this promise was made
to the Church of Christ. The Prophet therefore says, that the labor and
negotiatio^ (that is the riches gotten together by labor and negotiation) of
Egypt, and Ethiopia, and the eminent persons of the Sabeans (by whom are
understood the Princes of the Gentiles) shall pass over to the Church, and they
shall be the Churches, and they shall walk after the Church in manicles (by
which are signified Ecclesiastical laws) and that they shall adore the
Church, and make supplication to her.

4. And it is to be observed, that the Hebrew word in the last co^iugation, as
it is used here, and in a manner every where el^, signifies to prostrate ones
self before another, not howsoever, but by way of adoration* as all that are
skillful in the Hebrew tongue know, in so much as the adoration done only to
God is often expressed by this word. This therefore is the true sense and
meaning of this place, they shall prostrate themselves before thee, thereby to
exhibit adoration unto thee: we have therefore out of the Scripture that the
Church, and consequently the Ministerial head thereof, not only may, Calu.
comme^t. in Isa 45. v. 14. edit. ann. 1559. Genesis apud loan Crispinu^.
but must be adored, unless we will make God to falsify his promise. But the
craft^ dealing of Calvin here is to be detected, who to abuse the Reader
leaves out in his latin translation twice the Pronowne Te, that this adoration
may not seem to be referred to the Church, but either to God, or to Christ;
for he translateth not, adorabunt te, and obsecrabunt te: but thus, adorabunt
atque obsecrabunt: whereas in the Hebrew, the particle (te) is twice put in the
feminine gender, so as this adoration and obsecration must needs be referred
to the Church, and therefore those of Geneua durst not omit the same, neither
in their French Bibles, nor in their corrupt translation: which they call
Vatablus, no nor Calvin himself in the former edition of his Commentaries upon
Isayas, Calu. in epist. ad Reg. Augl. ante comme^t in Isaiam edit. illius anni
155^.
which was set forth in French in the year 1552. but in his latter latin
edition in the year 1559. (which he will needs have accounted a new work)
being now become more wary, he twice omitteth that particle, and that not
unadvisedly, but of set purpose, as is manifest by his former edition.

5. The second testimony is also in the same Prophet Isayas, in which much more
clearly is declared the exceeding great honor which the Kings and Princes of
the earth shall do unto the Church: for thus God speaks to the Church of
Christ. Kings shall be th^^ nursing Fathers, Isa. 49. v. 23.
and Queenesshalbe thy nurses: they shall adore thee with their faces bowed
down to the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet: Where not only is
expressed that humble adoration, by which one prostrateth himself before
another bowing down his face eue^ to the earth, but there is further added a
new Metafor of embracing and kissing of feet, put in practice by Christian
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, thereby to honor the vicar of Christ, and in
him the Church, or rather Christ himself: for whosoever with gredines and
fervor, hasten to the embracing and kissing of the feet of any man, seem as
it were to lick, and thereby to wipe away the dust of his feet, for the
Hebrew word signifies to wipe away in what manner soever, as may be seen in
the book of Numbers the 22. Chap. and the 4. v. and the 3. of Kings Chap. 18.
v. 38.

6. The Prophet Isay then in these words fortold that Kings and Queens, that
is Princes, men and women, should prostrat themselves down to the earth at the
feet of the Church, so as by embracing and kissing thereof they should seem to
wipe away the very dust of the Churches feet: which prophecy has been
fullfilled of old, and as we see, is still fulfilled in the Roman Church by the
humble and Religious submission expressed by Christian Catholic Princes in the
embracing and kissing of the Bishop of Romes feet, the supreme head of the
Church on earth, which kind of Religious worship seeing it was so many ages
ago foretold by the Prophet, our Adversaries had small reason to think the
same so absurd a thing, or so much estranged from Christian piety.

7. The third testimony is taken from the same Prophet, which no less
manifestly does show unto us, that such an adoration and kissing of the
Churches feet was to be practiced as has been said; for amongst many other
things which he foretells, appertayning to the Majesty and powerful
authority of the Kingdom of Christ to come, Isa. ^0. v. 14.
he sets down this promise made by God to the Church, The sons of them
that humbled and afflicted thee, shall come and bow unto thee, and all they
that detracted from thee shall adore thy footsteeps, which in the Hebrew is
much more clear, where it is thus, they shall adore the bendings of thy feet,
then the which nothing could be said more manifestly for the adoration of the
Churches feet in her visible head; for the be^dings of the feet by the figure
Synecdoche signify the feet themselves, as may be seen in the third of Iosue
and the 1^. v. For the bindings of the feet in that place are in the 15. v.
following called feet, so the bendings of the hands themselves 1. Reg: 5. v. 4.
and 4. Reg. 9. c. v. 35. which words of the Prophet convince Calvin, as shall be
said. We see then how the Prophet Isayas, not in one place only, but in many,
fortelleth this adoration as a thing very remarkable, and which greatly sets
forth the honor and excellency of the Church of Christ.

8. The fourth testimony is to be seen in the Apocalypse, where S. John
testifies in express terms, that God made such a promise to the Angel, that
is, to the Bishop of the Church of Philadelphia; Behold, I will make them come
and adore before thy feet, Apocal. ^. v. 9.
and they shall know that I have loved thee, which is all one, as if he had
said, I will make them come and adore they feet, for in the Scripture
according to the Hebrew phrase, to adore before any thing* is to adore the
thing, 1. Reg. 1. v. 1^.
so Elcana and Anna his wife are said to have adored before our Lord, when they
adored our Lord himself, so S. John in his Apocalypse writes, that all Nations
shall come and adore before God, Apoc: 15. ^. 4.
that is, they shall adore God himself: lastly that which by S. Luke is
expressed in these words, Luc. 4. v. 7.
if thou shall adore before me, S. Matthew expresses thus, if falling down
thou shall adore me. Matthew. 4. ^. ^.
It is all one therefore in the Scripture, to adore before a thing, and to adore
the thing. Moreover if God was willing and pleased that men should adore the
feet of the Bishop of Philadelphia, much more grateful and acceptable will it
be to him, that Christians with a godly affection should prostrate themselves
at his feet who is the supreme Bishop of the whole Church, and by kissing of
the^ exhibit unto him not only a Civil, but also a Religious adoration,
adoring him in God, and for God, Apoc. ^. v. 9.
which is well expressed by God himself when he says, they shall know that I
have loved thee, so as this adoration must be admitted, or express Scriptures
denied.

9. Neither is this any whit differing from the custom of the ancient Church,
as our Adversaries object, but rather very conformable and agreeable thereunto:
for it is manifest that kissing of feet was exhibited of old, Hier. epi^t. 61.
ad Pama^h. ^. 25. iuxt^ editione^^ Maria^^ Victori^. Chrysostom* Hom. 14. in 1.
Epist. ad Ti^^*
not only to the Bishop of Rome, but also to other holy personages. For thus
writes S. Hierome of blessed Epiphanius; Men and women of all ages did flock
unto him in great troops, offering their little ones, kissing his ^eete etc.
And S. Chrysostom vehemently exhorts the people, to prostrate themselves at
the feet of all Monks in sign of honor and reverence, Come, says he, and
touch the holy feet* for it is much more honorable to touch their feet, then to
touch the head of others.

10. And that it was an ancient custom in the Roman Church, that such as came
to salute the supreme Bishop should prostrate themselves and kiss his feere,
is sufficiently proved by the hystory of S. Susanna recited by Baronius: and
Tertullian who lived a hundred years before Susanna, ^aron. Tom. ^. ^n 294.
11. vl^.
makes also not ob^cure mention hereof: for describing the manner after which
in his time penitents were wont to be received in the Roman Church, amongst
other things, he says, that penitents were wont to fall down to the Priests,
Tertul. de paenitent. c. 9.
and to kneel to the dearly beloved of God: which is nothing else but kneeling
down to adore: and the same Tertullian else where says, Tertul. de pudicit. c.
13.
that they were wont to lick up the footesteps of every one that past: where
he seems to allude to those words of the Prophet Isay, cited a little above,
Isaias 49. v. 23.
they shall lick up the dust of thy feet, Isaias 60. v. 4.
and adore the steps of thy feet. Now if it be so that they licked the
footestepes of all Christians, much more doubtless the footestepes of the
supreme Bishop, who received them into the Church, and who at that time was
called the blessed Pope, as the same Tertullian witnesses.

11. Neither does this adoration derogate any thing from the honor of God or
Christ, but rather much more illustrate and set it forth, for this honor is
exhibited to the Bishop of Rome, not for his own holiness or any other quality
with which he is adorned as a private person, but only for that authority and
spiritual power which he received from Christ, and which indeed properly
appertains to God, and to Christ: and therefore in him, and by him, Christ,
whose person he represents is honored and adored, according to those words of
Tertullian. Tertul. d^ paenitent. c. 10.
When therefore, says he, thou stretchest thy self forth to the knees of thy
brethren, thou layest hold on Christ and make thy supplication to Christ. And
this Calvin himself by the force of truth confesses, when he speaks of the
Adoration of the Church: for expounding those words of the Prophet Isay, they
shall ador^ the stepes of thy seete, or as he translateth, they shall bow
themselves down to the plants of thy feet, thus he writes: Calu. in (...)
60. Matthew. v. 14.
Here some man will ask whether this honor of which the Prophet speaks, be
not too much and greater then is to be exhibited to the Church? ^or to bow our
selves down and prostrate our selves are signs of that honor which no man
ought to admit. I answer, this honor is not exhibited to the members, but to
the head, to wit Christ, who is adored in the Church, so Calvin: which also
those words of God in the Apocalypse manifestly ^eclare to be true: I will make
them adore thee before thy feet, and they shall know that I have loved thee,
for therefore is this honor exhibited to the supreme Bishop, because God has
so exalted the Roman Sea, and been so liberal toward it, which is a sign of
exceeding great love. And here hence it is, that the same veneration is
exhibited to all Bishops of Rome, as well to the bad as to the good, for they
are not honored, for their own goodness, but for the office which Christ
bestowed upon them. As also they are called holy, Act. 28, v. 25.
and most holy, not for their own personal holiness, but for the holiness of
Christ, whose person and place they sustain upon earth, and for the holiness of
the office which they received from God, even as S. Paul called Feftus
President of Jury; very good, not for any goodness of his own, Baron. To^. 1.
anno 58. ^^im^ 13.
for h^ was an Infidel and a wicked man, but in regard of his office, for so
the Presidents of Provinces were wont to be styled, as well notes Baronius.

12. Moreover whereas in the Scripture feet signify, divine mission, and
vocation, which is most ample in the Bishop of Rome, Romans 10. v. 15*
no marvel if greater veneration be exhibited to his ^eet: and it is to be
observed that the^ is a Cross upon his shoe, which all kiss, to give us to
understand that the honor is not ex^ibited to him but to Christ crucified, whom
he represents.

13. To conclude, here hence is easily solued that which our Adversaries
object of S. Peter's refusing to be adored by Cornelius the Centurion, Act. 10.
v. 25. and 26.
for Cornelius adored not S. Peter in respect of Christ whose Vicar he was, but
in respect of himself whom he took to be some God, Act. 10. v. 10.
as did the Licaonians think of Paul and Barnabas: so S. Hierome: or surely,
they thought Peter to be more the^ a man, Hieron. aduers. Vigil. ep. 53. n. 12.
iuxta edit. Mariani victorij.
as manifestly appears by S. Peter's answer, Arise, for I also am a man, and
therefore Cornelius was to be admonished and corrected: for adoration is either
good or bad, according to the cause or reason for which it is exhibited. Now
the cause for which Catholics exhibit the same to the Bishop of Rome is very
good; to wit, the excellent power of Christ, or rather Christ himself
governing and ruling his Church in his Vicar, Act. 16. v. 26.
and therefore this adoration is good and grateful to God, but the cause of
Cornelius adoration was fond and false, and therefore his adoration was naught
and worthily reprehended.

14. I know our Adversaries often object th^^ Pope Alexander the third did
insole^tly ^rample under his feet Frederike the Empe^o^r: ^ut ^his foolish
fable is soundly and copiou^ly refuted by Baronius citing the testimonies of
such as were present and have committed to writing all that p^ssed, in which
there was nothing vnusu^ll, but the Pope admitted from Frederike the accustomed
adoration. He that desires more concerning the kissing of the Popes feet, may
read Joseph Stephanus who has written a whole book thereof: it is sufficient
for us to have briefly proved the same by many evident testimonies of holy
Scripture.

CHAP. X. Of general Counsels.
GENERAL Counsels do represent the whole body of the Catholic Church;
wherefore we will now speak a little of them: for seeing that we have already
spoken of the head of the Church, it remains we treat of the body thereof. But
this we will do briefly. For our Adversaries now adays grant many things
concerning this matter which in times past they denied. To the end therefore
tha^ the true state of this Controversy may the better be understood, three
things are to be considered which our Adversaries having now learned by
experience to be true, do willingly grant unto us.

2. The first is, that these Counsels ^re very profitable, and that the
authority thereof is not to be despised. Hebr. vl^^ verse. 17*
For seeing that the Apostle warns us, to obey every true Pastor, much more
are we bound to obey many assembled together. For which cause our Adversaries
would also that we should all obey their synodicall assemblies: Calu. l. 4.
Inst. c. 9. sect. 13.
Hereupon says Calvin, Truly we do willingly grant, that if there happen
debate about any doctrine, there is no better nor surer remedy, then if a Synod
of true Bishops assemble together, where the doctrine in controversy may be
discussed. Thus he. And even natural reason it self conuinceth this to be
true, as Calvin also confesses. Calu. eadem sect. 13.
For it is an easier matter for many assembled together to discern the truth
from falsehood, then if any one should attempt it at home.

3. The second thing which our Adversaries grant, is, that General Counsels
when they are assembled together in the name of Christ do not err in matters
of faith, Matt. 18. v. 20. Calu. c. 9. citato. sect. 2.
for they confess that Christ promised this to two or three assembled
together in his name. Thus Calvin, and he adds,. 9. seque^t. Beza 3. volu^.
Tract. Theol. Tract. ^ d^ Eccles. notis. page 138. edit anno 1582.
that they may err when they are not called together in the name of Christ,
the which no Catholic did ever deny, as will appear hereafter.

4. The third thing which they admit, is, that the first General Counsels
were lawfully assembled, and that they did err in points of faith. Thus Beza
expressly, who admits also the fifth and sixth general Council, and he says
that all th^se of his Religion are of this opinion. Calu. l. 4. Inst. cap. ^.
sect. 1.
Calvin also of the ancient Counsels writes thus: Calu. eade^ c. 9. sect. 8.
I re^^rence them from my heart, and wish them to be had in their due honor
with all men. And a little after, when he treats of the ancient Cou^cells, he
says, that besides those f^ure first general Counsels, to wit, Nicaenum,
Co^stantinopolitanu^ the 1. Ephesine and Chalcedonense, he admits also such
other ancient Counsels the which cannot be understood but of the fifth and
sixth. Eoden^. ^. ^ sect. 9.
For a little after he plainly rejects the seaue^th.

5. Here it is also to be noted that Luther in the beginning rejected wholly
all general Counsels: Luther in l. contra Reg^m Angliae ^
but the Caluinists afterward by reason of Seruetus and other Anti trinitarians
^ere forced to admit the first four Counsels. ^oreouer by reason of the
Vbiquitarian Lutherans who confounded the properties of the two natures of
Christ they were co^treined to admit also the fifth and sixth. And these things
even the Caluinists themselves do grant unto us.

6. But Catholics te^ch these five things of the general Counsels. The first
is, that a general Council cannot without the word of God m^ke any new
articles of faith, but her office is to explicate clearly and propose the word
of God to be believed of all, the which the Church has received from Christ
and his Apostles. For a lawful general Council defines nothing in matters
of faith, which either is not extant in the holy Scripture, or may not be
gathered by the Traditions of the Apostles, Council. Trident. sess. 4.
or ^astly may evidently be deduced out of both. The which the Council of
Trent does manifestly profes^e, for now we must not expect new revelations from
heaven. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c 8. sect. 10. in ^ine.
Wherefore it is a mere ^launder that Cal^in says, that Catholics teach, that
the Church has authority ^o make new articles of ^a^th, and that Catholics
despising the word of God do co^ne at their own pleasure new points of faith.

7. S. Aug. Tom 7. de Baptismo cont. Do^at. l. 2. c. 3.
The second is, that we acknowledge that General ^ouncel^s may err in
matters, which do not belong unto our faith, and in this sense say^^ S.
Augustine, One full and perfect Council may be ^orrected by another. Not in
says, the which is never changed, but in Ecclesiastical Constitutions, the
which according to the diversity of times, both are and should often be
changed. Whereupon in the same place he writes, that things ordained before
may be changed by those which come after; when we see by experience that is
opened and made known which before was hidden and secret. For the experience
of new matters which happen may change or correct the Ecclesiastical laiues
and Constitutions, but it cannon alter and change matters of ^ayth.

8. Wherefore Calvin wrongfully obiecteth against us, Calvin l. 4. Inst. c. 9.
sect. 11.
that S. Leo* the Pope reprehended the Council of Chalcedon, seeing that
Calvin him^el^e acknowledges in the same place, that to appertain nothing to
f^^th which S. Leo reprehended. And he also confesses that Catholics teach,
that Counsels may err in those things which nothing concern faith. And no
less foolishly Calvin reprehendeth the first Council of Nice, Calu eod^ c. 9.
sect. 17.
about matters which do not belong unto faith.

9. The third is, that we acknowledge those Counsels may err, which either
are not lawfully assembled, or do not proceed lawfully in their business they
have in hand. For such Counsels indeed are not assembled together in the name
of Christ: and of this sort was the Council of the Arians holden at Ariminum,
that of the Eutichians at Ephesus, the seventh Constantinopolitane Council of
the Image-breakers, the which therefore our Adversaries do in vain object
against us.

10. The fourth is, that albeit a Council be lawfully assembled and seem to
proceed orderly, the definitions notwithstanding thereof will not be
altogether certain, according to the opinion of many Catholics, unless they
have their approbation from the Bishop of Rome. Vide Bell. l. 2. de Eccles.
milit. cap. 11.
if he be not present at the Council. The reason is, because before that the
Council be approved and allowed of by the Pope, it is as yet an imperfect body
of Christ without any visible head, Council. Trid. sess. vlt. in fine Conc.
Nicaenum 1. de quo Baron Tom. 3. Anno. 325. n, 111. Ch^l. Act. 1. in fine in
epl^i ad Leonem Papam* Sext^ Synod. in ep. ad Agathonem. ^apam,
and such a body may stumble and fall.

11. And hence it is, that the Council of Trent demanded her confirmation from
Pius 4. who solemnly afterward confirmed it. The which also the other ancient
Counsels demanded, yea even those which our Adversaries do admit, as for
example the first Nicene Council, that of Calcedon, the sixth Synod, to omit
other later Counsels.

12. The first is, that we affirm a General Council approved by the Pope,
cannot err in faith. The reason is, because it is altogether necessary, that
there be some supreme judgment in the Church of God whereunto all should submit
themselves and believe assuredly in all matters in Co^trouersy, as we have
proved before: Supra c. 17. huiu^ Controupunc;
but there can be no other supreme judgment but this.

13. Moreover we see, that even from the beginning of the Church till now all
heresies and controversies concerning matters of faith, have been still ended
and taken away by the general Councels. Wherefore they who deny this do open
and make way for all old Heresies. The which when our Adversaries had learned
by experience in the Anti-trinitarians; Anabaptists, Vbiquitarians, and such
other sects,. 4. huiu^ cap.
they were forced to admit those six more ancient Councels, as we said before,
but the authority of all General Counsels is alike and equal.

14. Finally our Adversaries themselves acknowledge, Calu. l. 4* Inst. cap. ^.
sect. 13.
that there is no better or surer remedy to root out and take away all
her^sies: therefore either this is a certain remedy, or else there is none at
all, the which to affirm were to deny the providence of God, and his love of
his Church.

15. Moreover that which our Adversaries say, to wit, that the later Councels
are not lawful Assemblies, because they have not observed due manner and
form, is a false lie: first because it does not become every private man, to
be judge in this matter, but it belongs to the whole Church, who having
received for so many ye^res all these as lawful Counsels, we must not call
them any more in question.

16. And seeing that our Adversaries do embrace and approve the six first
Councels, the lawful form to be observed in Counsels is to be fetched from
them; the which is exactly observed in the later Counsels, as Baronius shows
evidently in every one of the first six Counsels. But Calvin acknowledges no
lawful manner of any synodicall assembly, Calvin c. 9. citato sect. 2.
nor any such to be gathered together in the name of Christ, but where all
things are proved by Scripture only, rejecting all Ecclesiastical traditions:
but we have already proved that the Traditions of the Church of God are as a
principal and chiefest part of the word of God. Cont. 1. c. ^^* and seq.


17. Yea even this was the only cause why S. Cyprian and so many other holy
Bishops erred in the African Counsels, when they determined that all those who
were christened by Heretics should be baptized again, for they confirmed this
their opinion very probably by many places of holy Scripture: but they rejected
the ancient tradition of the Church, Lyrin. in lib. contr^ Heraes. c. 9. and
10.
the which they knew very well was opposite to this error, as though it had been
contrary to the holy Scriptures, S. Aug. Tom. 7. de baptism* co^tra Donatist.
l. ^. c. 7. in fine. and cap. 8. and 9.
as S. Vincentius Lyrinensis declares very well, and before him S. Augustine
in many places.

18. And that which is more, S. Augustine manifestly writes, that he had been
of S. Cyprians opinion by reason of those probable reasons which were deduced
out of holy Scripture, S. Aug. Tom. 7. l. 2. de bapt. co^tra Donatist. c. 4. S.
Aug. l. ^. citato ^. 2.5.6.7.8. and 9.
but that the whole Catholic Church had defined the contrary. And as the same
holy Father teaches at large, they most of all oppugn the custom of the
Church, which were in the same error with S. Cyprian, obiecting among other
things that place of the holy Scripture, the which our Adversaries now adays
object against us. Joan 14. ^. 6*
God says, I am the truth, he does not say, I am the custom: Unto whom S.
Augustine answers very well, that the custom of the Church is not opposite
to truth, but it is even truth it self.

19. Our Adversaries arguments are of small account or moment. Calvin brings
in the example of Caiphas and of the Jewish Council wherein Christ wa^
condemned; Calvin c. 9. ^itato sect. 7 Joan. 11. v. 47.
the same argument Beza also alleges. But who does not know that this was
neither a general Council, Beza in 1. Tim. 2. v. ^^.
whereunto Christ was not called nor any other true belieuer, nor lawful in it
self, seeing that it was not assembled in the name and authority of Christ who
was then the supreme head of the visible and militant Church* as also because
it was called together against the true Church of God, by the wicked and
cursed Synagogue of the Jews. For that was the true Church which adhered unto
Christ and believed in him, but that other which was altogether deprived and
had lost the true faith of Christ was rather a fit Church for Sa^han and other
infernal spirits. And I marvel truly that Calvin and Bez^ do allege that
Council as true and lawful which was assembled against Christ himself, as
also by those who were not true belieuers in Christ, Joan 1^. ^^ 22.
Psalm. 117. ^ 21.
yea who were filthily stained with the most heinous sin of infidelity, as
Christ himself witnesses, Isa. 6. v. 91 and 10.
but we willingly leave such a Church and Council to our Adversaries. Isa. 8.
v. 14 Dan. 9. v. 2^.


20. It was also manifestly foretold by the Prophet, Matt. vlt. v. vlt. Joan
14. v. 16.
that Christ should not be received by the Jews, and that the Synagogue of the
Jews should then fall from her faith. But the holy Scriptures teach the plain
contrary of the true Church of Christ, to wit, Calu. c. ^. citato sect. 8.
that Christ and his spirit shall remain with her for ever. S. Aug. Tom. 6, l.
3. contra Maxim. Aria^. Episc c. 14 Beza volum 2. Tract. Theol. Tract. 3. d^
pace Christianorum* Eccles. constable. circ^ finem page 118. iuxt^ ^dit. G^^ ^ A^.
(...)


21. But neither is, that other argument which Calvin and Beza use any better,
to wit, that S. Augustine would not urge the authority of the Council of Nice
against Maximinus the Arian. For neither can we urge the authority of the new
testament against the Jews, not because we have any doubt thereof, but because
the Jews do not admit the new Testament. In the same manner when that Arian
would not admit the Council of Nice, but did plainly rei^ct it, S. Augustine
should in vain have urged the authority thereof: for otherwise it is well
known that S. Augustine never had any doubt of the faith explicated in the
Council of Nice; the which even our Adversaries embrace as the most true word
of God. Calu. sect. citato Rupel. Confess. Ar^. ^. in fin^.


22. Such as desire to see any more concerning this controversy of the General
Counsels, let them read Bellarmine in his first and second book of the Church
militant, and Coccius in his first Tome, the seventh book, the 21. and 22.
article.

CHAP. XI. Of the Authority of the ancient Holy Fathers.
Now it remains we say somewhat of the ancient holy Fathers, and of their
writings, both because they were in times past the chiefest members of the
true Church of Christ, even by the confession of our Adversaries, as also
because in the particular controversies we shall often use the testimonies and
authorities of the holy Fathers.

2. We know indeed well enough that they were men, and that they might have
erred (but neither are they Gods nor Angels, who accuse them of their errors).
We know also that one or more of the said holy Fathers have sometimes erred,
when they left the more common opinion of others.

3. But we affirm this constantly* that the ancient holy Fathers received by
the Church of God, have never written any thing with a common and vnanime
consent, that is either contrary to the holy Scripture, or to any point of
faith.

4. Moreover out of the writings of the holy Fathers in four diverse manners
some forcible and conuincing arguments may be taken.

5. First, out of the common consent of all, or at the least of the most part
without any contradiction at all. For if they had all erred in a necessary
point of salvation, the whole ancient Church should also have erred, Cap. 7.
huius cont.
the which even our Adversaries acknowledge to be false as we have declared
before.

6. Secondly, that promise of Christ whereby he assecured us that he would be
always present with his Church was properly made to the Pastors and Doctors of
the same; Matthew. vlt. v. penul^. and ^lt.
for he promised that he would be present with those whom he sent to baptize
and preach, to wit, the Pastors of the Church.

7. Thirdly, Pastors and Doctors were ordained by God in his Church, Ad Ephesians.
4. v. 11.12. and 13. and 14.
as the Apostle witnesses, to the end that we be not carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, but that we may continue in the unity of faith till we all
meet with Christ in the l^st day. But if all the Pastors and Doctors of the
Church could err, we might easily be carried away with many blastes of strange
doctrines, neither could the v^i^y of faith always continue: and in this
manner God should have provided very badly for his Church, that it should never
err.

8. Finally, if all the Pastors and Doctors of the Church should teach any
doctrine contrary to faith, there should no sincere and true preaching of the
word of God remain in the Church, seeing that only Pastors and Doctors are
lawfully called to the preaching of the true faith of God. But without the
sincere preaching of the word of God it is impossible, Supra c. 8^ huiu
con^rou.. 15.
that the Church of Christ should consist, as even our Adversaries confess,
and as we have declared before.

9. Secondly, we take arguments out of the auncientholy fathers, as out of most
faithful and true witnesses of that faith which in their times was preached in
the Catholic Church. For our Adversaries acknowledge, that in their time the
true and sincere faith of Christ was preached. We therefore allege them as
witnesses of that faith: for if we do not believe them who lived at that time,
who^ will we believe? but they were both eye witnesses, and nothing suspected
of falsehood, as S. Augustine declares very well disputing against the
Pelagians.

10. Thirdly, we take arguments out of the holy Fathers, S. Aug. Tom. 7. cont.
Iulianu^ Pelag. l. 2. cap. vlt.
as out of those Doctors whose writings have been received and approved by the
ancient Church of God. For it was wont to impugn and co^de^ne those writ^rs
who wrote any thing contrary to the true faith, least their writings might be
hurtful to the future Church: and on the other side it approved their writings
who taught the true faith, there is yet extant a Decree of the Roman Council,
Vide Tom. 2. Council. inter Decre^a S. Gelasij Papae.
set forth almost a thousand two hundred years ago concerning these writings.
They therefore who have been app^oued by the ancient Church are most worthily
to be believed, because the primitive Church as our Adversaries confess, has
never erred in judgment concerning matters of faith.

11. Fourthly, we take arguments out of the holy Fathers, as out of the most
holy and learned men, and Blessed Saints of God. For either they had the
sincere true faith, and if it be so we should embrace the same; or they had it
not, and if it be so they were not Saints of God, nor could they be acceptable
unto him, Ad Hebr ^ ^1. v. 6.
as the Apostle testifyeth.

12. By this very argument the Catholics in times past overcame the Arians,
Socrat. l. 5 c. 10. Sozo^. l. 7. c. 12. historiae Eccles.
for they urged them to receive the holy Fathers who wrote before Arius his
time, or they should excommunicate them, as Socrates and Sozomenus do testify.

13. And to this purpose serve very fitly those words of S. Augustine wherein
he declares what was the judgment of the primitive Church concerning this
matter. S. Aug. Tom. 7. contra Iulianum Pelagianu^. l. 2. c. vlt.
For thus speaks S. Augustine to the heretics of his time, whiles he urges
them with the testimony and authority of the ancient Fathers who were before
him. They had (says he) no regard either to our friendship, or to yours,
neither were they enemies to either of us, they are neither angry with you nor
with us, they were not moved with pity and compassion on either side, what
they found in the Church that they held, what they had learned that they
taught, they delivered to their Children that which they had received from
their own Fathers: we pleaded in our cause against you before these judges,
and yet by them our cause was ended long since: neither we nor you were so much
known to them, and yet we bring forth their sentences given in our savor
against you. We had not as yet begun any combat with you, and yet so long
ago they proclaimed our victory. So far S. Augustine.

14. Finally S. Vincentius Lyrinensis a French man, who lived at the same time
with S. Augustine proves the same very well, by many reasons and examples,
throughout all that most learned book the which he wrote against the profane
Novelties of all heresies. And we will conc^ude and end this Chapter of the
authority of holy Fathers, Vide praesertim c. 4. and 40. ^iusdem libelli.
and this our whole disputation of the Church of God, with the same words
wherewith he ended that his golden book. For thus he writes in the end of it.
If neither the Apostolical definitions nor ecclesiastical decree^ be to be
violated, w^^rby according to the most holy and vnisorme consent of all
antiquity, all heretics, and lastly Pelagius, Celesi^us, and Nestorius (for
these were the last Heretics that lived in S. Vincentius his time) have been
always most justly condemned; it is necessary in much, that all these
Catholics who will hereafter prove and show themselves to be the true and
lawful children of our holy mother the Catholic Church, should adhere and
unite themselves stedfastely, as also die in the prosession of that sacred faith
of those holy Fathers: and lastly that they should abhor, detest, banish, and
persecute all the profane novelties of all most wicked Heretics. Hitherto S.
Vincentius.

FINIS.

