News From Rome concerning the blasphemous sacrifice of the papisticall Mass
/ with diverse other treatises very Godly and profitable.

Come away from Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
least ye receive of her plages, for her syns are gone up to heaven, and the
Lord has remembered her wyckednes, Apoca. 18. To my right honorable lord
and master my lord Thomas Hawarte / Randoll Hurleston wyssheth health in the
Lord.
AS often as I consider (right honorable lord) the wrack that ye church
suffered before time I am compelled whether I will or no to lame^te greatly the
blindness and ignorance wherein they were noseled all their life time. And where
as it was the ministers duties, to have won, and brought them to Christ,
from their blyndnes they took a contrary way, beatenge in to their heads a
sort of beggarly ceremonies fet ched out of the bottom of hell / howebeit
there was many which for asmoche as they knew the the light, in no manner
would retain the^. Then they perceyuinge that their doctrine would not root in
all men's hearts, called to remembrance how blody Julian emperor of Rome
handled the christians, and as he when he perceived that by tyranny he could
not overcome the Christians, made a decre whereby the Galileans books were
forbidden to be towched, for so they cauled the folowers of Christ. Even so
our spiritual perceyuenge that by fire, sword, and roope, the unlearned
professors of the gospel could not be vanquesshed, set such laues, and
statutes wherein they for hade men to look upon their books which were sincere
professors of the gospel. Could any thing have been invented more deuyllyshe
then this to destroy the Christen religion? for they knew well enough that
after that men were shut up from their books which were published for the
edifieng of other, they should become as it were unarmed, and naked in every
side so that they should not be able to withstand their gloses, commentaries,
and scole points, wherein the zeal that they bare to the christen religion
aperith manifestlye. And all though they came to us in sheep skynnes, yet
inwardly they were rauenynge wolves not sparynge the flock, as apereth most
euyde^tly by their fruits. How be it many of them now do repent and forsake
their accustomed naughtines, and submit them selves to the scriptures, and to
the kings injunctions grounded upon the scripture, in so much that they know
the night from the day, of the which benefit a great sort more had been
partakers of at this present had not the devil withstode the godly endeavors
of our young Josias. And although hitherto the religion have not gone so
prosperously forward, as some faith full would, yet it becomes not the^ that
profess the true religiou to ceasce at any time from exhorting other to ensue
godliness, and utterly to forsake their acustomed deuyllishnes. The which thing
must be done both with out fear and shame, for the wordliges will never ceasce
from hurting them with her stinge, howbeit caull to remembrance how
wonderfully god delivered his servants in the old time, as Daniel from the
den of lyones, the three children from the fyry furnace, and in the new
testament leest the faithful should leave their service says Christ in
Mathewe in the tenth chapter fear you not them that kill the bodies, and cannot
kill the soul, and to the intent they might ye more desierously serve out to ye
end he promised that if they continued until the last breath they should be
saved, wherefore leat fear wythdrawe no man from the setting forth of Christ's
religion. And although the gospel semith mere folishnes in the wordly wise
men's eyes, yet be thou of an other mind nothing esteming the glory of this
world, which stinketh before the face of god and auelith nothing at all, but
rather be minded to suffer with our master Christ and his faithful
Apostoles, bloues, checkes, tau^tes, and death, for the gospels sake, and never
of all this gear be one whit ashamed but say with Paul, I am not ashamed of
the gospel, for it is the power of god from whose profession be thou by no
means brought away, and be as feante in defendinge thy religion as the
Ethnykes were in defending of theyrs. we read that the men of Athens woe were
wonderfully given to supersticion as appears in the Acts, used at certain
times to be sworn, whose oath was this, I will fight for the religion both my
self alone and with other. Then seeing they which had no knowledge of god but
by nature, were so earnest in defendi^g their religion, how much more ernest
ought Christians to be in defendinge their religion which was taught the
congregation by God him self? But of these words let no man gather, that I
would the people which have received the light to make an insurreccio^, for I
take God to witness I mean nothing less, but that only the temporal fear
and shame should not withdraw any man from the living God. Then let the
example of the heathen move us, and make us more earnest in delating of our
religion then we have been in times paste. And suffer it not now, if it be Gods
pleasure, as it is, to be trodden under foot, but let us thanks God for this we
have receyuyd and desyer him to increase in us the knowledge of his will, that
we may convert the stubburne, and strengthen the weak. For this cause have I
taken in hand to set forth in english this little book, wherein sundry matters
whereby the people have been long seduced be well opened, the which book I am so
bold as to set forth in your lordshyppes name / for as much as it becomes
all men to declare them selves thankful to them of whom they have received
sundry commodities, and not for that cause only but that your lordshyppes
chyldrens children, and your hole posterity may know what religion your
lordshyp followed: forsakynge thoroughly the Romisshe ydoll, with all his toys
and inuencions contrary to gods holy words. Wherefore I pray God keep your
lordshyppe in the light of his word, which you received being but a child,
and increase in you all Godlynes, that you may contynewe his servant for ever.

To the reader.
THe truth when it has been hydden a long time, comes out at the length, the
which has aproued true in these our days as concerning things yt belong
to relegion. For how the pope blinded our fathers eyes it is not unknowen /
and how many have been blinded in our days by winchesters gospels it nedith no
probacyon. The which cast such a mist before men's eyes that they were not
able to discern chalk from chese. For when the lively word of God was taken
from men, there was nothing left whereby their feats might be tried whether
they were of God or no. And to thentent that their dreams might more
commodiously crepe into men's conscience and not be utterly rejected, they
threatened the people with sic volo, sit iubeo, and the authority of the
church. But now (thanks be to God, which has delivered us from their
thraldom) their authorities, without the scripture is nothing worth. For we
have now free passage to the scryptures, that we may try whether it be
chafe or corn, that ye pope with his noynted shauelynges have taught us. And
where as God commanded them to speak nothing of their own brain, the most
part that they taught is deuylyshnes, and nothing but deuylyshnes, in somoch
that that saying of Christ in Mathewe is verefied of them. ye break the
ordinances of God to keep your own tradicions. God ordained that Christ
should be a full and alonly sacrifice for man's sins, but they say no. God
says in Esaye, I alone have trodden the wine press, but they say no. And in
Exodus, I am, I am, he my self which takes away thine iniquities and sins
for mine own selves sake, but they say no. The Apostles teaches there is
none other way to be saved then by Christ, but they say no. And why? mary
(say they) our mother the holy church which can not err, teaches us that
our masses are a full sacrifice ex opere operato for ye quick and the dead. Our
mother the holy church teaches that men by gyuinge of vestmentes, copes,
alterstones, platers, crosses chalyces, cruettes, and such other beggerie,
deserve forgyuenes of sins, and worship God. Our mother the holy church
teaches that the true worshypynge of saints is to call upon the^, to paynte
their images, to set candels before the^, to bow down to the^, and make them
mediators betwixt God and man / although the scripture be manifestly against
it, as apeteth in the first epistle unto Timothe in the second chapter.
Therefore as often (good christen reader) as the authority of ye church is
laid against the, mark whether it be grounded upon the scripture or no, if
it be grounded upon the scripture receyueit, for Christ says my sheep hear
my voice. But if it be not, remember what saint Paul says. if we or an angel
from heaven preached you a gospel besides that we have preached you, let him
be acursed, as we said before. So I now say again, if any man preach you a
gospel besides that ye have received let him be acursed. Then if he that
teaches an other gospel be acursed, why shall not he be acursed that receive
it? Relynqueshed therefore and forsake such toys as have been inverted by man
contrary to gods will and testament. And to thintente thou may forsake them
the sooner I have translated these treatises ensuenge. Of whom the first
teaches plainly that the papisticall Mass is no sacrifice, but rather a
blasphemy of Christ's passion inverted by man. The next techeth how God must
be worshypped aryght. The third how saints ought to be worship ped. The last
what is Christianly bextie. And although their be many other things contained
in the^, yet these be the chief and pryncipall matters which the aucthor took in
hand purposely to teach, whom read thou with desire of the truth. And I
doubt not but God will call the by them from many gross errors, and increase
in the knowledge of his will, that and may be partaker of the toys prepared
for the by christ. So be it.

Mithobius / Polilogus.
WHat Polilogues, when came you out of Italy? I thought you would scarsely have
come again within three years, namely because you going from hence to learn
said, as the end of my way is a great way hence, so it shall be a great while
or that I come again.

Poli. It is true I was so determined when I went hence, but you must remember
that in such viages many things do chance whereof it is lawefull to say I wist
not.


Mith. Then bring you no dingnite upon your shulders from Italy the fautour of
learning.


Pol. Yes a wonderful dignite, as bare as may be, never a penye in my purse,
and concerning learning I bring not one whit more the^ I carried forth with
me.


Mith. Molde God that you came not hoome without all godlynes also^ as they do
for the most part which come from thence hither.


Poli. I might have done so, if I would have left the godliness that I learned
in Germany and played the Roman but if you know not, the belly gods
deuyllyshnes caused me to tarry no longer for although the Italians be well
learned in humanity, yet they so abhorte true religion that among the^ there
is nothing more despised.


Mith. You remember then what I said unto you a little before you went, the
Italians be learned, but not godly.


Poli. When I chanced to talk somewhat of godliness sometimes among them, it
came to pass that they then confirmed that name which you gave me in times
past cauling me a great talker, where as by mine own judgment I am scarce
worthy to be rekened among them which speak least.


Mith. Among them that speak least whom I know if need require is fuller of
tongue then any in all the hole world.


Poli. You flater me now as you were wont to do, but I nevertheless spoke freely
against the Italians when need required not caring thus much whether they were
offeded or no, so that I spoke the truth.


Mith. but as it is not safest to speak ye truth always among the Italians,
so it is not best. But what if you had been rewarded of the same forte for your
talking as Theocritus Chius was of Antigamus., Calisthenes of Alexa^dre, and
Antipho of Dionisius. I meruell greatly that your fre talking proved so well.


Poli. all things proved very well,


Mith. Whom thank you for good fortune? your own folishnes, or as the
Germans use to say, god of fools,


Poli. Forsooth god, for he favored me so much either laboring by the way, or
tarienge for some space in the cities that I in deed plainly percepued that he
pruided for me. Howbeit leest you should be ignorant in all places, and among
all me^ I pleyed not Polilogus.


Mith. I would have believed yt although you never had sworn, for I know how
necessary such wisdom is in Italy.


Poli. I marked the time, I marked the place, I marked such as were present.


Mith. Uery well.


Poli. if I met with good me^ and such as favored the truth me thought it a
great fault to leave the truth, howbeit I brideled my tongue so, that I touched
not them which are evil spoken of in Germany for their hipocrise, and when I
came in company with obstinate euel men, there I spoke nothing or very
little.


Mith. Brake you never these bo^des, as long as you were abroad?


Poli. I broke them twyse except my remembrance fail me, as we were typplyng
by ouersyght, and that at Rome. The first for asmoche as it was tolerable and
made not greatly against the estimacion of sacrificers, was ascribed to
dronkenes. The other because it seemed to turn to the slander and reproach of
the most holy, and of them which worship this their beast for an ydoll,
deserved pardon after that sort, that if certain of my frindes had not
conveyed me away I had fed fisshes in Tiber.


Mith. What had you done I pray you?.


Poli. I will tell you. Upon a certain day that same highest bishop which
fearith all heaven with his lokes did sacrifice, but with such pomp, such
pride, such gorgeousnes, that nothing passed, now I thynkyng with my self
that except I saw with my eyes the religion used in the city, al my labor
was lost I got me in to the church and marked all things very curiously.


Mith. It is meruel if al things were not full of hypocrisy.


Poli. I pray god I dye Mithobius if ever I saw any thing more folysh or
superstitious, for saving the proud vestime^tes asses brayenges, the noise of
musicians, a few childishe ceremonies, nothing apeared in all that sacrifice
worthy to be looked upon the which be no part of religion.


Mith. Luther then and other good men note them not with out a cause as the
destroyers of true godliness.


Poli. I grant that Luter is free in notyng them of hypocrisy and knavery,
but my judgment is that they are worthy for their deuyllyshnes to be
described of some behementer man, even by some such as were in old time, as
Eupolis, or Cratinus, or Aristophanes, for as Horacesaith.

If any man for knauerie were worthy to be painted.
For theft or horedom, if any were attaynied
If any for robbery had gotten an evil name
In paiting of such their to^ges were not lame.

Mith. I trust there will be ever more which will paynte their knavery
acordynglye, for asmoch as it is known by the gospel. I am now very desirous
to know how you behaved your self, when you saw ye sacrifice, held you your
tongue, or declared you your self to be angry?


Poli. I went out of the church, and had much ado to hold my tongue, but
afterward I went to diner in mine Inn with a sort of sacrificers which
wonderfully praised this pompeus service as that day in the church, whereby it
came to pass that Luther was noted as one that unworthily reprouith the
solemnity of the Mass, and other godly honors. Many of them cursed the good
man. Many of them said his heresy would not contine we long. Many of them
sayede he was more deuylish and hurteful then any heretic which vexed the
church in the fathets time, wherefore Germany is worthy seeing it kepith this
monster, to be compelled by sword and fire to obaye again, the Apostles seat.


Mith. But threats will not overcome the Germans, for as much as they have
cast of the servile yocke, and have recovered there former liberty, but made
not these folyssh words you to be angry? or mocked you those knaves by holdi^g
your peace? I although I be no scolder must needs have a^ swered them as
bitterly.


Poli. I was somewhat heated with wine the which also made me to be bold, for
when they would not ceace from reprouyng, and had hurt my charity, at the
length I set upon them with words in like manner, but with such, that I made
every man, to look upon me and to harken to me, very anger lead me so far,
that I said not only the Pope dissentith not from Antichriste both in tyra^nie
and in knauerie but also that all the table, of sacrificers and monks which
cleave to him are unworthy who^ the earth should carry, to a certain man
asking why so? said I, because they crucify Christ every day, whom the
Jews were conte^te once only for to crucify, with this every one was mad,
and to be short made such a tumulte, being ready out of hand to compain
of me unto the officers, yt except certain of my friends had conueyghed me
preuely unto Tiber, and there had taken ship which as chance was, had her
sails spread ready to go, I had been trymmed.


Mith. if you had spoken this in this place it had been well, but to say so at
Rome can not be suffered of these children of darkness.


Poli. And yet it can not be denied but that to sacrifice as the papists do,
is to crucify Christ a new / and have you no business but that we may talk
of this matter a few words? for I know that you be asmoche given to the
scriptures as to phisike.


Mith. The cure of the body, Eccle. 38.
and confyrmacion of health be no things to be despised, namely seeing the
holy scripture commands men to worship the physician, but the cure of the
soul passith this far as Christ teaches in the gospel, who will then deny
that a christian ought especially to know the medicines for the souls.


Poli. Then I pray you tell me, how the Mass ought to be cauled a sacrifice?


Mith. They be greatly deceived in my judgment, which took the sacrifice of
the Mass, for I will use the comin word, for a satisfieng work, which both
satisfies for other men's sins, and pacifieth gods wrath, that is when the
sacrificer, says that he offreth up to god the father. Christis body and
Christis blood, for the sins of the quick and dead, for who will ve so
mad to believe that a sacrificer, ca^ a new offce up, Christ contrary to
the scriptures which once was offered Hebre. 9.
upon the cross for our sins, he once died, he once was offered. Then as
Paul says death has no more power over him, so he being once offered cold be
offered no more.


Poli. I am of the same, mind, for I see yt confirmed every where in the holy
scripture, but chiefly in the epistle to the Hebrews, Hebre. 10.
for on this manet it is there, with one offering has he made parfeit for ever
them that be sanctified. Also in an other place, Hebre. 9.
Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many.


Mith. And yet liturgia may by a certain manner be cauled a sacrifice, if we
will use to speak, of this thing as the old me^ used.


Poli. I am ready to hear how certain of ye old me^ used to speak.


Mith. Although Augustine foloing other men's manners caulieth the Mass a
sacrifice, yet we may gather of the words which he wrote concerning faith to
Peter the deacon, how this manner of speaking ought to be understood and taken,
for thus he says. In those carnal sacrifices was a figure of Christ's
flesh which even he that was without sin, was determined to offer for our
sins, and of his blood, the which he was determined to shede for the
forgyuenes of our sins, but in this sacrifice is a thankys gyuynge, and the
remenbraunce of Chrstes flesh the which he offered for us, and of his blood
the which the same god shed for us. Cauleth he not here the sacrifice of the
supper a thanks gyuynge and remenbraunce of Christ's flessh?


Poli. As far as I can gather of Augustines words, if a man take this word
sacrifice for the remenbrauns of the sacryfice done ones upon the cross, he
shall not be much deceived.


Mith. It is true, for after the same sort Chrysostom says plannely upon the
epistle to the Hebrews that this sacrifice is the reme^brau^s of ye sacrifice
once done. And if ye offering of Christ done once upon the cross might be done
again by the sacrificer, without doubt he would not have said there, if
therefore he has forgyuen our sins by one sacrifice we now as yet have no
need of the second.


Poli. I will remember this place of Chrysostom well and truly, that I may
have somewhat, to lay against them which in every place brag of the
doctors authority.


Mith. Bet narde, although he was a monk and somewhat supersticious affirms
the same with Chrysostom in these words. Christ was ones made a healthful
sacrifice for the health of the world, which is a general reconciliacion of
the gyltie. Christ's death is a work without example, humility without
measure, a gift without price, favor without deseruynge, and Christ would
that that always should be cauled to remembrance by a mystery which ones
was offered by for a ransom, and that that everlasting sacrifice should be in
mind, and always be present with us in grace. What can be more hardly spoken
against our sacrificers? he says yt Christ became a healthful sacrifice for
the health of the world but ones, and that this sacrifice is an everlasting
sacrifice, and ought always to be in our minds. But if this sacrifice be ones
offered for our sins, why is the same sacrifice done-agayne contrary to
Christ's commandment by the sacrificers


Poli. Paraduenture this shall be more plain if you declare somewhat at large
this word sacrifice. Wherewith you shall do me both a pleasure and a profit,
if you will execute the office of a faithful scolemayster seeing you shall have
me an attent hearer.


Mith. To speak ingenerally of this word sacrifice the time suffiseth not,
and it is not worth the labor I will speak therefore of the cleansinge
sacrifice and the sacrifice of thanks giuyng for these chiefly pertene to the
new testament seeing the old is abrogated,


Poli. Verywell.


Mith. It is manifest that there is one kind of sacrifice which purgith our
sins, reconcyleth us with god, and pacifieth his wrath. They caul yt
propiciatorie, for with out this sacrifice we should never have the father which
is in heaven merciful to vswarde.


Poli. Me thinkyth I perceive right well what sacrifice you mean, even that
which was ones offered to god the father by the hie priest Christ upon the
cross for our sins, as we said before.


Mith. you say true. There was certain offeringes and sacrifices of whom as
god was the author, so was moses the setterfurth as types, and fygures of this
sacrifice, for that which the hie priest was among the Jews, for whom only to
enter in to the holy place, yt was lice^ced but a certain time, Christ now
with us is the self same for as much as the law is abrogated, as the which
alone and that ones, has done sacrifice for our sines not by the blood of
goats, or calves, but by the offringe of his own body,


Poli. These be most true and in my judgment they be more blinder the^ moules
which make an other purgi^g the^ Christ him self, not without the most
heinous reproach of Christ's merits, but why way they not rather here what
is in the Epistle to the Hebrews concerning that matter? Hebre. 9.
Christ says he being an hie priest of good things to come entered in ones
for all in to the holy place, not by the blod of goats and caulues, and found
eternal redemption.


Mith. The place which you have syted a greith well to this matter, but mark
whether these also ve not manifest, Hebre. 9.
but now a little before the end of the world has he apeared ones to put
sin to flight, by the offering up of him self. Hebre. 10.
Also every priest that is of the old law, standieth daily doing sacrifice,
and for the most part offerith one manner of offeri^g which ca^ never take
away sins, but this man after that he had offered one sacrifice for sins,
sat him down for ever on the rigth hand of god, and so forth. These places
diligently marked, and well po^dered take forgiveness of sins, even from those
sacrifices which were commanded the Jews by god, as in whom was only the
righteousness of the law, and outward justice in Moses common wealth, now if that
in the old law sacrifices commanded by god obtained not the forgyuenes of
si^nes, who dare believe that our sacrificers shall obtain the same both for
them selves and for other by a rite to sacrifice invented by man


Poli. I will never think that they be able, what? mary as the sacrifices
among the gentyles were of no valewe as when they offered a goat and an Ass
to bacchus, to Ceres a sow, to Diana a heart, to Neptune a bulle, to the night
a cockrel, to Maia a sow with pigges, even so I think that the sacrifices of
our sacrificers be with out strength, seeing they nether have the commandment
nor word of god, but hang all together upon man's traditions.


Mith. I allow your stedfastnes for truly these Massemongers can offer no such
sacrefice nether for them selves nor other. This honor most be given to the
one, and only Christ, for asmoch as he has given his soul a sacrefice for
our sins, Esa. 3.
as Esaye witnesses i^ the liii. chapter. Who will not believe with all his
heart that this sente^ ce must be always steadfast in the christianite? Take
out of ye world the saccifice of this high priest and all things shall be full
of unfaithfulness and incredulity, on the contrary, let this same be
establesshed, and all things shall be full of spiritual goodness.


Poli. I most constantly believe (thanks be to God) that me^nes sins are
forgeuen and blotted out by this only sacrifice, that men's consciences which
believe are purged from the works of death, that they are sanctified in deed
which doubt not concerning that matter, brefely that the gate of the kingdom
of heaven is opened for such as hang of the merits and worthynes of this
sacrifice.


Mith. To believe on that manner is to be justified, as all the scripture
witnesses. Christ dyed (says Paul to the Romans) for our sins and rose
again to justify us. Romans 4.
If faith lay hands on these things and determine with her self that they
be certain, as they be most certain, without doubt, she shall obtain
forgyuenes of sins, ryghtuousnes, and life euerlastyuge, although she never
be at no papisticall Mass. We have hear the word, and ceremony of the
supper, whereby such treasure is accustomed to be given. And therefore we have
no need of this maskynge sacrifice of the Mass.


Poli. yet I think the sacrifice of thanks geuynge may be admytted in to the
administracion of the supper.


Mith. Why not? but if the papists when they speak of the sacrifice of the
Mass, meaned the sacrifice of thanks giuinge there would be less contencion.
But be cause they prate most folyshly defynynge the Mass to be a purgynge
sacrifice, which being daily offered for the quick and the deed, takes and
puts away not only all venial but also mortal sins and so forth.
Luther not without a cause defends the dignity of the merciful sacrifice
against these asses, and the sacrifice of thanks gyuynge is admitted only in
to the supper of the lord, the which by us may be offered up to God.


Poli. This treasure which is given in the supper to them that believe, is
such and so great that there is nothing in the world so precious, which
may in any wise be conferred with it, for it is no small thing to be delivered
from sin, to be accounted just before God, yea and to be rewarded with
eternal life, and that freely for Christ's sake. Then seeing it is so, in my
judgment it is naughtely done if we likewise do declare no kyndnes toward so
merciful a God in praysynge, honorynge, and gyuynge him thanks continually for
so great benefits, for this the sacrifice of thanks gyuynge (as I think)
means.


Mith. Who will deny that, saying we have in that thing the manifest
command mente of God. And even the holy ghost also uses to move such as
believe to the same. Psalm. 49.
Offer up to God (says the psalm) a sacrifice of prayce, and perform thy
vows to the highest. And in the third chapter of Malachie it is said, he will
purge the sons of Leui, and will purify them as gold or silver, and they
shall offer unto the lord sacrifices in tyghtuousnes, and the sacrifice of
Judah shall please the lord, and so forth. There is no doubt but that these
must be understood of Messiah time, wherefore this place contains both the
sacrifices of the new testamente. It must be taken of the purgynge sacrifice
wherein he gives him self to us, which says he shall purge the children of
Leui, and so forth. For as we can not be purged from our sins but by
Christ, likewise by the same man we are become the sons of Leut, that is
priests, whom he will try as gold or silver. But that must be taken of the
sacrifice of thanks gyuynge, which says they shall offer unto the lord in
ryghtuousnes, for seeing we that believe are become now a kyngly preesthod, it
is mete that we offer incessauntly unto the same the sacrifice of thankfulness,
for such a benefit,


Poli. you play the phisician now in deed, not for the body but for the
wou^des of the soul for who would ever have looked for such exactues in
diuiuitie of a phisitiane I hear verily and believe the same yt these sacrefices
of thanks geuynge perteyne equally to all Christians, and for all this I
think they be not all of one sort.


Mith. They that profess divinity no we adays make two kinds of works of
such as believe, which may be taken out of the two tables of the.x.
commandments. The^ what lets that in thanks gyuynge we may not make two
kinds of sacrifices.


Poli. No thing at all.


Mith. Then let the sacrifices of the first sort be where in we declare the
kyndnes of our mind toward God, as trust of mercy, fear of God,
mortyfyenge of the flesh, caulynge upon God, confessing of the truth, praise
of God, and co^tynuall thanks gyuynge for all our benefits either spiritual
or corporal. For this kind of sacrifices must needs be a most pleasant
savor to God, seeing it pertayneth to the true worship of God as well inwardly
as outwardly.


Poli. It is marvel if that continual sacrifice which the prophets
prophesied should be in the church conteyne not all these.


Mith. It is so, you must remember also that the works of the second table be
as certain sacrifices which partayne to the other part of the sacrifice of
thanks gyuynge. Is it not a most sure token of a thanckeful mind to obey thy
pare^tes, and magistrates for his cause which commanded the same? to abstain
from adultrie, from theft, from robbery, from all sorts of false swearyng,
from false witnessyng, and brefely from all such whereby our neighbor may be
hurt.


Poli. They that be thus minded toward their neighbor by the sterynge up of
the holy ghost, me thinks do a thing most acceptable unto God, so much
lacks it that I account not such works for signs of a thanckefull mind.


Mith. And unfaithful me can speak very well outwardlye of such things, the
which thing even Tullie alone approves sufficiently, and do some thing in
deed, as being taught by the law of nature that we must hurt no man, but
because what soever they do, they do it with out faith, they can by this kind
of sacrifice please God no more than they which in times past invented Hecatom
be, Lupcalia, Meditrinalia, Nouendialia, Fontanalia, Penetralia, Consualia, and
a thousand such other.


Poli. Hither I think perteyneth that by faith Abell offered un to God a more
plentuous sacrifice then Cyin, Hebre. 11.
by which he obtained wytnes that he was ryghtuous, God testifienge of his
gifts, by which also he being deed, yet speaks.


Mith. After the same sort our sacrifices shall not please God onles they be
seasoned with faith, but why do I let you with many words? These things
be taught every day in the pulpet, and you by your selves may read inoughe
concerning this matter in books which be abroad, that I need not to teach you,


Poli. The^ this is the sum of those things that you have spoken of
hitherto. This word sacrifice agrees not to the supper of the iorde, onles it
be taken for the remembrance of the sacrifice ones done, or for a thanks
gyuynge.


Mith. The sacrifice which purges us was ones fynysshed by Christ's death
upon the cross, in somoch that as many as cleave to him by faith shall
certaynely obtain forgyuenes of sins and everlasting life. Therefore it can
not be done again by a sacrificer, but the sacrifice of thanks gyuynge
pertayneth as well unto all Christians as that we know that God has given us
innumerable benefits for whom we must thancke him. Therefore we must needs
continually use this sacrifice.


Poli. I perceive you, entendynge not from hence forth to follow lightly a
contrary judgment,


Mith. Then farewell and after such time as you apply your mind to
divinity, se that of agreate talker you become a great praecher.


Poli. It shall be done.


The true worship of God. Curio / Alutarius.
FRom whence come you with this your Rosarie?

Aluta. Out of S. Blases church.


Curi. What made you there?


Aluta. As though you know not what men do there.


Curi. I ask not that with out a cause, for I marvel how it chances that
you had rather be in the church which you have hated always as poysone, tha^
in the tavern.


Aluta. Well what soever I have done is mine own harm and not yours. No the
Lutherians have been only the cause, that I have gone so seldom to the
church.


Curi. What Lutherians? how so?


Aluta. I never come in to any church where as they be governors, but that I
find some man preaching, or the people singing psalms in the mother tongue,
which things I can not abide, and I think they be not well done, for who can
abide him that in his sermon always runs about one stringe, and the people
synging one song, but chefely the preachers here be so hot, yt they always
inueygh against sin, they always beat in to men's heads repentance, they
always preach Christ, they always move men to faith, they have charity
always in their mouths, and I can not tell what cross. How much better
were it for them to please the people, and caul them to the fear of God by
change of ceremonies, as our fathers did.


Curi. I can not se how that sermones of repentance, of Christ, of faith,
and of the cross, can be odious to any man seeing in them is the foundation of
christen religion. And verily whom sermons of the gospel move not I can not
tell what ceremony will move them. What is the chiefest cause why the people be
called together? that the word may be preached and hard, and that then we may
cause to God to give the increase, for I perceive not how he can be called a
christian man which desires not most fervently the truth and the word, as
Christ says, Ioh. 8.
he that is of God hears the words of God, ye therefore hear not the words
of God because ye are not of God, verily I grant that it seems vain lyp
labor, to the and such as thou art, if Christ be often spoken of, if such
things be earnestly preached as perteyne to the christians, But we know with
the apostle which reioyseth that he had preached nothing to the Corinthia^s
but Christ, 1. Cor. 1.
that these preachynges of the gospel are the virtue and power of God, Romans 1.
and that to salvation to all that believe. Then seeing that holy preaching be
things so necessary to salvation, me think they do well and semely the
which prefer no ceremonies although it be never so comendable, before the
preaching of the word, not that I condemn all ceremonies in like, but that
I think Gods word must not be robbed of his due honor.


Aluta. here the common proverb pleases me well. Nothing to much. for in this
thing there must be a measure.


Curi. There is no thing in the hole world but causes loath somnes, oneles
there be measure. Only desire to hear the word of God except, neither
knows fulness, or feels lothsomnes, as it apeareth in Magdalene which Luc.
10.
would not leave Christ as he was teaching, no not by the co^playntes of
Martha.


Aluta. I can be well contented you think so, so that I may also have mine
own mind. But now sir what evil spirit brought first these songs in the
mother tongue, in to the church? had not the fathers brought in enough before
time?


Curi. No what wytche has bewytched thy head that thou dare reprove a thing
which is good of his own nature, and take it for a naughty thing. Art not
thou content to speak scornefully of the word, whose authorite ought to be
most holy amouge all men, except thou also imprude^tly despise David's psalms
and other spiritual songs. But why ponder you not diligently whom you
despise, for the lutheranes diuysed not first to sing psalms, and spiritual
son ges on this manner in the congregation, Ephesians. 5:
it was taught the church by S. Paul, as profitable and necessary for a
semely order, whom seeing you dispyse, beware yt you dispyse not Christ
himself, to your great danger. Except paraduenture you think it was spoken
in sport, and as they were in quassynge. Luc. 10. Mat 25.
He that dispiseth you dispiseth me. And what soever you have done to one of
the least of mine, you have done it to me. But now what is in the hole stews,
church I would have said, that ca^ delight much a good mind, and that loves
Christ?


Aluta. Mary I will tell you. The walls be excellently painted, the altares be
excellently trymmed, the role of ye church is gallantly furnyshed with gifts
offered to saints, what should I speak of those holy and many colored
vestmentes? of vessels, and of all the gear whereby the sacrifice of the Mass
has been accustomed to be furnysshed, hither belongs the synginge used in the
church, the agreynge of the synginge men, a wonderful order in all things,
which be of such strength that they can mollyfie even a stony heart, and
draw him to the contemplacion of heavenly things. I will speak nothing of
the sacrifice of the Mass, where at to be in my judgment is the greatest
felicity in the world, namely if you tarry the end, and take a blessing of
the priest. Behold you now the rytes of those churches which you be wont to
call the deuyls counsel houses, behold the worship whereby they endeavor to win Gods favor.


Curi. As far as I can perceive you lack no tongue in rehersynge of the
worship that your sacrificers use, if the tavern could forbear you, you
could play the Ape among these Asses. And although in manner you have
rekened all kinds of ornaments which they customably use itheyr churches, yet
you have left out one special thing.


Aluta. Have I so? then I would be glad to know what it is,


Curi. The apparel of their concubynes, which they feed at home, for as they
have them, now only to look upon their pagines, even so they trim the^, and
have them in no less estimacion the^ their aulters, for I dare not say they
take the^ for saints.


Aluta. You bad me to speak of the vsages in the church, and not of their
co^cubynes, although it greueth me very sore that they conueygh no more
cleanly.


Curi. Cake you then this abundance of apparel, vessels, and songs, for the
worship which God commanded and would to be frequented in the church.


Aluta. Why not.


Curi. Hear then whether you be of the same mind with the fathers in this
matter, which always have the fathers in thy mouth. Hiero^ speaks on this
manner of this matter. Let other buyld churches, cloth walls, make great
pyllers, and dress the tops of the^ with gold, put a dyfference betwyxte
gylded aulters by precious clothes and stones, but have you an other thing
before your eyes that is to clothe Christ in the poor, to feed him in the
hungery, to vyset him in the sick, to give hymlog ynge in such as lack
loginge. With whom agrees Barnarde saying, Oh vanity of vanities, but not
more vain than folyshe. The church walls glyster, and the poor need, it
covers her stones with gold, and leaves her children naked, the rich
men's eyes be served by the poor men's purses. Hear you now what the fathers
set by this folishe worship ynge of God.


Aluta. I think they condemn not the moderate use of such things, but they
moderate superfluity.


Curi. No they affirm that God is worshyped nothing at all by such things.
What? will you hear the true worship of God out of the gospel. Iho. 4.
The owre shall com (says Christ) when you shall worship the father neither in
the mountain, nor at Jerusalem, you worship you cannot tell what, we worship,
for salvation comyth from the Jews, but the hour shall come and is now when
the true worshipers shall worship in spirit and truth, would god this thing
chanced not both to the, and thy sacrificers that Christ speakyth hear of
the Jews, that is they wot not what they worship, for seeing they bind the
worshipping of god as they did to places, times, and set hours, I am afraied
yt may be aplied against them, the which Christ aplied unto the Jews.


Aluta. But the Jews, and the Christeanes be not a like, and that which is
spoken of the Jews can not be aplied unto the Christia^es.


Curi. But what if they place the Jews? yt is if for inward worshipe, they
follow carnal worship as the Jews did, must they not be here reproved, and it
is true that you say the Jews and the Christianes be not a like, for the
Jewish worshipping of God for the most part was carnal, whereas on the
contrary Christians must pray and worship God in spryte and truth. The sprite
for the most part in the scriptures is contrary to the flessh, hypocrisy to
truth. Now seeing Christ takith from the Jews spirit, and truth, and giuith
them to his Christianes, it aperith that in that people was nothing but carnal
worshipping and if you except a few, even were hypocrisy, or elis he would
have said as the Jews have prayed hitherto in spirit and truth, so my
disciples shall pray here after, wherefore wete you now that they worship god
aright, which fear him as the child the father, trust upon him, caul upon
him, cast on him all the care of this wreched lif, the which worship
afterward foloith almost in deed to the poor


Aluta. As thoug god liked carnal things not the Iewissh seremonies for the
word knit with them and the commandment.


Curi. Yes they pleased god, but then only when faith was with them, for what so
ever she does must needs be acceptable unto god, because she always eyeth his
word and co^ma^dme^t, but if there were no faith it is manifest that those
sacrifices were hated of god, so much they were from pleasing of him, have not
all the prophets in manner confessed this same? Psalm. 50.
David's saying is, if thou would have had sacrifice I had given the it, for
you wylt not be delited with hole brent offe rings. The sacrifice to God is a
lowely spirit, thou will not despise (oh God) a contryte and an humble heart.
Moreover add hither that of Esaye. Esa. 1.
Wherefore bring you to me the multitude of sacrifices, I am filled with the
hole burnt offrynges of your ra^mes, and with the fat of your fatlynges, and
desired not the blood of your oxen, lambs and goats, when you came to se my
face who required this of you to tread mine aultares. You se how boldly the
prophets reiecte the carnal worship commanded by the law. What think you
they would say if they lived now, of our worship ynges, which have not the
words on their sides, and are men's mere dreams.


Aluta. what worship then aloweth he?


Curi. Although this thing were showed before, and as it were by a lanise, in
few words, yet out of the self same prophets, whom we said before set
naught by this carnal worship, it shall be manifestly declared you. The psalm
writer being about to show the true worshipinge of God says that he shall
dwell in his tabernacle, Psalm. 14.
which walks without spotte, and works justice.


Aluta. What calls the prophet there to walk with out spot.


Curi. Who soever has gotten a contrite spirit, and believes suerly upon
Christ, walks without spotte, for she as Peter witnesses in the acts,
purifieth our hearts on that sort that we may be ryghtfully nombred among
those, of whom it is spoken in an other place of the foresaid psalms, Psalm. 112
blessed are the undefiled in the way, which walk in the law of the lord,
for he fears God trewly, trewly trusts God, finally trewly worshypeth God.


Aluta. What calls he to work righteousness for I think the prophet
discenteth not from himself, as which alytle before ascribed (as you say)
ryghtuousnes to faith, no says the same consists by works. Hear I kill you
with your own darte.


Curi. I said that to walk without spot is the same that to believe, because
that faith only obtayneth the cleanes of the heart for Christ's sake, that
cleanes I mean which is most frutfull of good works, he therefore workyth
righteousness which by the outward innoce^cie of life, and by doi^g good
always to his nighbour declarith his faith openly, for that trust can not be
true if it work not, and aplie her self holy to her brethernes profits.
Moreover seeing the scripture, requirith not only the righteousness of the
heart, but also outward righteousness as a witness of faith, it is necessary
that with inward cleanes we couple outward, that is the works of love, and
after this manner to walk with out spotte must be aplied to faith, to work
righteousness to the outward comendation of love, Esa. 2,
what say you that Esaye says these things be so, be ye washed says he, be
ye clean, take ye away the naughtines of your endeavors from my sight, give
over troublyng, learn to do well, seek for judgment amend the troubled,
judge the fatherles, help ye wydowe, First of all the prophet commands
that we become clean from the fylth of our sins, and from all uncleanness.
Then that we hyn der no man, oppress no man, brefely that we be well and trewly
mine deo toward all men. The first parteineth to faith, for we can not be
washed from the acustomed fylth of sin but by faith. The other to love, that
the sense may be. This is the very and true worship of God, if a man fear
God, trust of God, confess that Christ is verily in the father, and the
father in Christ, call on God aright, thank god aright, and finally love his
neighbor as him self,


Aluta. Why then do ye Lutheranes, condemn all ceremonies, all outward
worshipyng of god?


Curi. Nothing less, so that they be taken only for an introduccio^, and
fight not with the gospel. This is my mind that nothing ought to be in more
estimacion among us, then fear, faith, and love. After that ones we have
obtained these things we may give our judgment of the ceremonies not
leaving the word, an ynch besides this I disalowe not in the church a decent
use of clothes, vessels, and such other things so that we be not persuaded
that we get gods favor by those things, if moreover there be some measure,
for the aparell among the Canons is so tragical that when they come to
sacrifice, a man would think they come to a stage. And although they be so
far from faith, love, innocence of life, knolege of the scriptures, as the
North is from the South, yet they trustyng upon these their ceremonies, so
despise, so conte^pne so excomunicate them that do other wise that no thing
passith it.


Aluta. They use to excomunicate heretics, sowers of disse^sion, and
Lutheranes else none. And why be you moved with this so greatly, seeing that all
bisshopes, the Pope, and the Emperor, strike you with the same thondre bolt,
if you will not be condemned, if you will not be excomunicated, if you will not
be evil spoken of agree with the fathers, with the church, and hereafter
vndouptedly no ma^shall hiss at you.


Curi. Well this dispising of other, this pride, this sickness of co^demning
other prove sufficiently what manner of worshipinge this of yours is, for
hypocrisy makes such dispysers, such slaunderers, as with whom is always
pride, whereby she is proud, and looks at her neighbor as crepynge as it were
on the ground in comparison of her self, that to be so, even that one
Pharesey in the gospel the father of thy Canons, is able to prove, Luke 15.
which was not content with full chekes to vaunte his works, his goodness, his
fastes, except he had dispysed with most deuyllyshe judgment, the sinner
standing a far of. But true godlynes does far otherwise / she, as she
dispay ryth of her own works, and measures the worship of God only by faith
/ so she has always the works of love, but chefely modesty, whereby she
submits her self to all men / remembrynge that no work is acceptable unto
god, if it be not seasoned with this as a sauce, acordinge to that, I will
mercy and not sacrifice. Math. 9.
Go thy ways now and brag of thy sacrificers ceremonies.


Aluta. I know that they be good men whom you in mockage call sacrificers /
wherefore I will not be separated from them neither here nor in ye world to com.


Curi. what hear I? a good man in deed / will not you leave so holy a company
of good men? Then trewly you do them a pleasure in so doing especially if
your wife be of the same mind / but in earnest hither to I sought your
health / but because you resysted my warning stubburnely / and as yet wyllest
not come into the way I can be well contented that like company with like,
fare well.


Of the honouringe and calling upon saints. Sanderus. Glandorpius.
How now Glandorpius?

Glan. Men can be at no rest.


S. As though I knew not that / but I ask how you do.


G. As they which miserably spend all their time in the scole.


S. yet you be lusty.


G. So so.


S. Chanced there any news here in mine absence?


G. Nothing which can delight you.


S. But I hard a late a very merry jest.


G. So it is commonly seen that they which goo in to stran^ge contrees, come
home again laden either with tales, or some pleasant histories. But what news
hard you?


S. You will laugh when you hear them.


G. Then tell them.


S. A certain citezen of Gotinga supped with me eight days ago / a wyttie man
as far as I could co^lecture of one metyng, and worthy to be trusted, for he
had a sobre look, he, after that we were set to our supper told us that saint
Nicolas chapel which was not far from Gotinga was broken in the night time
not many months ago: and all the gold and silver that the supersticious
people had brought thither before Luthers time / was vnchested and taken away.


G. you tell me the robbynge of a church.


S. There when a certain cobbler heard that the thieves had taken their heels,
and escaped luckely after they had worked their fact / says, why should I
seek for help of this saint? we have believed hitherto that many by prayenge
to Nicolas broke the prisons, and escaped the punishementes that they deserved
/ the which thing if it were not wrought by satan's subteltie to destroy us
with all / how chances it that he which has delivered many out of
stynkynge prysons, and from punyshmentes that they should have suffered could
not look to him self. This man's saying (as the say enge of an unlearned
cobbler) was cetayned with laughter.


G. I know well enough you remembered the^ the common proverb / many times a
gardener speaks true thi^gis.


S. I deny it not, but there was a certain other man present not known to
this, a very pleasant tester. This man as though he would correct the other
says / it is the gospel that he can not be Christ's disciple which forsakes
not all he has and follows him naked. Now seeing riches have been hitherto
the let that this wodden Nicolas could not follow Christ it is very like that
he is not greatly offended that he being delivered of this unlucky burden may
now freely and somewhat more redely follow Christ.


G. A merry man.


S. The third fellow this said evil gotten evil lost, was that substance /
said I then evil gotten / beware you speak nothing folyshly against the
saints / which answered again I laughe not at saint Nicholas which
paraduenture was a good man / and reasteth in Abraham's bosom with the chosen /
but at disceiptfull Satan which has deceived us so diuersely. For I am not
ignorant what resort of people was there before time / and how foully that same
disceypfull spirit brought them from the true trust on Christ, to a most false
opinion concerning the help of saints, which here lost not only their
money, but also their souls. Howbeit I allow not the robbynge of churches, for
those goods might have been turned to good uses, but I abhor the fraud,
gyle, and deceypte whereby they were gotten.


G. When you hard these things said you nothing?


S. After that I had spoken a few words I held my tongue / for when I
perceived that they were not greatly wise which began that pastyme I thought
it better to take pleasure of their talkinge by hearing, then to seem wise in a
matter which every man thoroughly knew.


G. You did wisely, but yet these men spoke true, for I will speak as I
think, this carnal worship ynge of saynctes as I think is a thing very
evil.


S. I deny it not / for if a man will seek more earnestly the cause of this
thing, he shall perceive that this supersticion came and took his beginning
of profane fables / for as every country in times past had several Gods,
have not so among us every city, every castle, every town, feigned them
selves peculiar patrones? Christ in the mean time despised, or naught set by.
And how imprudently, reverently I would have said, have our sacrificers
tryfled in their sermons of saint Antone, to whom also they have committed the
defense of our city, peradventure because they would not trouble Christ with
over much care, I will say nothing that our fathers erected and consecrated
to every saint several churches.


G. These churches might have been suffered well enough, for asmoch as men now
come together to hear the word in them, if there had been no false doctrine
annyxed with them for remission of sins, ryghtuousnes, and life everlasting,
were promised to them that bestowed any cost of them, and that with the great
injury of Christ's merits.


S. As though these sumptuous buyldynges have any peculyar thing which the
Gentyles before time performed not with more liberality. Knew not the
Emperors of Rome in times past in their temples if that either a soldier
should be called home after that he had run away, or if their enemy should
turn his back, or else if their enemies army were holy destroyed?


G. But this is so^what more intolerable, that to every saint they have
attributed a several office / as Roche to heal the pestilence, Barbara to
mittigate the toth ache / George to defend a man in the wars / Erasmus to
give riches / and this our Nicholas to deliver men out of prison, I will speak
nothing of that great Poliphemus whom they made captain of laughter,
wytnessynge in verses very folyshe that the inuencion of that figure is more
then folyshe. How chanced it that we vouch saulued the virgin Mary Gods
mother greatter honor then Christ him self.


S. These in deed be intolerable, because they be not far from the manners of
the Getiles, for the gentyles also assygned every god a several office. As to
Jupiter lyghtnynge, to Juno mydwyfeship, to Venus love, to Mars battle, to
Neptune the seas, to Aesculapius phisike, to Saturn, and Ceres husbandry, to
vulcane the Frogge / and who can reken all? But as yet there is an other thige
behind, then which could nothing be iuuented more dangerous, that is they
have given the saints the honor of mediacio^, of mediacion no, outward
worship also / for this error being ones received destroys Christ's
preesthod, and office for ever.


G. I know that so great praises of saints are co^tugued with the great
sclaunder of Christ. For what is more unseemly then the servant to be set
before the master, the creature to be preferred before the creator, and the
scholar to be more esteemed then the master, but partly the contempt of
scripture, and partly our sins brought this blindness in to the world, for
after that the study of the holy scripture be ganne to be despised it could
not be but that many errors and those most pernicious should be sowed in the
church, but thanks be to god which has given us the light of the truth
again, taking away the darkness of so great errors, for now nether these
which read the gospel, or hear it, take these sanctes for mediators, but
Christ him self. As to whom perteynith properly the honor of mediation, and
to none else, 1. Tim. 2.
whereof Paul says on this manner, there is one mediator of god and man, they
mean Christ Jesus, which gave him self a redemption for all men.


S. Paul makyth well our mediator between god and us. That is Jesus Christ,
for when the law was taken away, the dignity of preesthode came to this one,
it is meet, that we both acknowelege, and defend his office. The office I
say of intercession, and pacifieng god for us with his own blood. The priests
which were in the old law were appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices both
for them selves and for the people, whose preesthode death suffered not to be
perpetual / but Christ as he had no need of any sacrifices for him self,
even so he offered to God the father for the people, not those sacrifices
commanded in the law and shadows of things to come but his own blood /
being made a priest not for a time but an everlasting priest after the order
of Melchisedech. Then why should we acknowlage any other mediator?


G. I know not whether I read these things handled more connyngly in any
place then in the epistle dedicated to the Hebrews / for compares not the
aucthor of that epistle with a most Godly collacyon Christ's preesthod with
the benefits / wherefore I can not refrain but that I must cite much of it
for the confirmacion of those things which you now have said, for on this
manner we read there in the seventh chapter. And they were made many priests
because by death they were not suffered to continewe / but this because he
continues for ever, has an everlasting preesthod, wherefore he can save for
ever, them that come to God by him, always being to make intercession for us
/ for it was meet that we should have such a holy bishop, harmeles
undefiled, separated from sinners, and higher then heaven, whithe neadeth not
daily as yonder high priests to offer first for his own sins and then for
the people / for that he did when he offered up him self ones for all. I pray
you what could be said more plainly both of Christ's office and his preesthod.
First he makes the preesthod of the law for a time, but Christ's preesthod
for ever. Then he says that we be so saved by Christ if by him we go unto
God, finally he describes us an high priest holy and harmeles, and which
offered not to God the father for him self, but for us, not a sacrifice
commanded by the law but his own self. I think verily that they which hear
or read these things, and are not feared from the calling upon saints
shall scarsely have any part in the kingdom of God.


S. I think that that in Iohans gospel belongs hither. Ioh. 14.
Christ calls hiselfe a way whereby it is gone unto the father. Also that as
often as Paul says the way to the father is open for us by Christ only.


G. So it is, and therefore before all things we have need that Christ's glory
here be co^fyrmed, moreover when that it is confirmed, the^ we must se that the
saints be not deprived of their praises. And truly for my part I know that
Christ only forgeueth sins, gives righteousness, and gives euerlasti^ge
life. For that cause he only is to be called upon in all necessities / for so
it shall come to pass that seeing he is given us of the father in the stead of
a patron, mediator and an atoneme^tmaker, he will help us so much the more
diligently, these (I say) I know, And this notwithstanding I can not abide
the unwise comunication of certain, which when they hear that holy me^ or
saints are deed, and reast in Abraham's bobosome dispyse the^ straight wayse
so speaking of them that if they were ruffians, they could speak no more
irreuerently of the^.


S. Plainly you be of my judgment, for although they must neither be
worshyped nor called upon neither taken for mediators yet we must speak
reuere^tly of them, and god must most honorably be praised in them the which
thing as I heard a late of a certain preacher is two manner of ways.


G. I look what you will say of that thing.


S. First of all the examples of gods goodness and clementie are to be known,
and marked in them said he, because that all before the pardonig of sin and
imputing of righteousness, lacked grace, as Paul said, god shut al me^ under
sin that he might take petie of al men for to have marked this well, is to
have learned the way of justifying. No says he here we be warned how they
were saved by the free goodness of the lord, and are freely received in to
everlasting blessedness by Christ, so we also if we acknowelege our sins, and
trust on Christ, in all poinctes shall be saved. As for an example. When I
heard the heinous faule of Peter, and his fre receiuyng of him again conceive I
not hear a certain trust, that he will save me as well as Peter, after yt I
am faulen, and come in to the way again, and when I consider the hatred, that
Paul had agayneste the christianes, and again his turnyng what else am I
taught then that I, when I am warned if I repent shall be partaker of the same
grace. Moreover there is no fault so heinous, but if it be acknouleged shall be
pardoned, whereof Paul speakyth on this manner. (...).
A sure saying and worthy whom by all means we may embrace, that Christ came
in to the world to save sinners. Of whom I am the chief, but I therefore have
gotten mercy, yt in me first Christ Jesus might show all gentylnes, to give an
example unto them which should believe on eueclastynge life in him. It is
manifest (says he) by the words of Paul, that to have marked on this manner,
is a worship most attemptable unto saints, which would that the beast part
of this praise should not redounde unto them but unto God the aucthor of their
health.


G. Peradventure this the psalm writer meaned when he said, praise ye the
lord in his saints. Also when Paul reioysed that God was glorified in hi.


G. there is (says he) an other worshypynge of saints as worthy to be known
and marked / that is when we set before our eyes their faith, love, hope,
life, manners, and co^uersacion, and follow the same / for although they both
lived in the flesh and committed some times by the weakness of the flesh
such as ought not to have been done, yet it can not be denied but that they
did many things well which a man may safely follow. We read that they were
full of many good works, that is the exercise of charity, the which when we
hear let us remember that by those examples we also are provoked to love. We
read they prayed incessauntly / they tamed their flesh by much watchinge
and prayenge, took adversity patiently, and dispysed at no time that which
perteyned to Gods glory and the wealth of their brethren. Although which
things when we read them or hear the^ read let us also persuade our selves
that they belong unto us. And the diligent keeping and following of these
works is worship so acceptable unto saints, that Paul also said be ye the
folowers of me, 1. Cor. 1.
as I am of Christ Saints know not nor require any other worshypers, any
other worshypynge, any other inuocacions in their honor.


G. I remember an excellent sentence of Chrysostom concerning that matter, and
when al they ought to know perfectely which set more by saints then by
Christ, the words be these, let him that meruayleth at the saints by a
religious love, let him that prayseth often the gloryes of the rightuous follow
their holy manners and righteousness, because whom the merit of any saint
does delight, like diligens ought to delight him concerning the worshipinge of
God, wherefore either he ought to follow them if he praise them, or ought not to
praise them if he refuse to follow them, that he which merueyleth at saints
merits, may him self become meruaylous in holiness of life. What could have
been spoken more Godly of the worshypynge of saints, and more meet for the
confirmate of the saying of that preacher, he makes no mention of calling
upon the^, of worshypenge them, of making intercession unto them, being
content to call the^ to the desire of a purer life as was in the saint. And
what mean certain unlearned men to teach so ernestly the calling upon
saints seeing John^ refused the honor dew to Messiah? Peter would not abide
to be worshyped of Cornelius. Barnabas and Paul would that in no case Godly
honor should be given them at Listra. And is it like that the saints are
otherwise minded now being deed then they were in their lives time.


S. No Gregory some what a far from good learning caulith the lif of
saints a lively lesson, meanig in mine opinion that what so ever good the
saints have done is to be followed, good I say for that which dissentith
from the word of god can not be caulede good, what need we many words, we
shall honor saints so aright if as they e^deuored to please god by their
faith, and their brethren by love, so if we trust in Christ and goo about to
please every man by charity.


G. God grant that we may do that lustely. But what shall we do now? George
Curio Bartram Danus, and Henry winckell with many other dyne this day with our
friend Garolicius, we will come to ye feast vnbydden.


S. I am content.


Christen fredome. Philostatius. Vegetius.
IN Terence one is angry rightfully, that it is unjustly provided that the
poor must always give some what unto the rich. For what could have been
spoken more truly of me, and such as I am, I speak nothing of the tithes, I
speak nothing of the annual revenues, I speak nothing of the payme^tes, I
speak nothing of the tributes, and all the common burdens, for these although
they be more heavy then reason requirith, yet if no other burden were laid on
our necks it were tolerable. But the pensions yt we pay yearly to the knave
monckes and priests, I am in doubt whether they may be suffered any longer.

V. What is the matter that he murmurith on that manner with him self? with
whom is he angry? I will go and speak unto him, god save you Philostatius.


P. And god save you also Vegetius, you come in good time, and I would that
none else should have come.


V. Why so.?


P. That I may cast mine anger upon you wherewith I have been chaffed.


V. On me? wherefore? what have I done? what have I desserued?


P I think you know well enough how many busshels of words you have spent in
your sermones concerning christin liberty.


V. I grant that I taugth Christian liberty / but what then?


P. And yet nevertheless the priests and braynelesse compaignie of
shauelinges suck up our goods. Eue^ this day has tyra^nously that same
gross steward of S, benets required I can not tell what revenues of my father.


V. If you will be free from such bordens, cover your pate with a coule.


P. What? in an earneste matter mock you your old scholar, and friend? My
question to you is of liberty.


V. Of liberty? then what has liberty to do with those revenues, that you
pay to munckes? it is more precious, then which ought to be mingled with those
things which are brickel, and endure but for a time.


P. Then if I be not frewhie teach and preach you liberty on that manner, must
we so be deceived?


V. You take liberty other wise then it is taught by us / for they that be
free are not fre on ye sort in the Christentie, that every thing is laufull
that they will, but a christian rather takith liberty so that he being
delivered from sin and the curse of the law, remembrith now that he is
become every man's seruante.


P. What may I be a servant both and a free man? it is not like, in so m^e
that the word meanith some other thing far from that.


V. We use not to speak of that liberty, whereby ye people think it is lawful
to do euel, and to be disobedient, it is an other manner of thing as I said
before to be free in the christian pael.


P. Then how used the old men this word liberty? Were not the cities of
Grecia called free because they were free from kings exactions?.


V. Be it they were as free as could be from kings exactions, yet they lived
after their own laws, as at this present many cities are caused so, not be
cause it is lawefull to do in them what every man will, but because they live
under there own laws / now to whom I pray you do the laws permit to do
every thing? but go to, let us se how Tully used this word, what is liberty
says he / power to live as thou will. Then who lives as he will, but he that
follows good things, which is glad to do his duty, which has considered
and provided how to live, which obeys the laws not for fear, but
fulfylleth and keeps them because he judges that to be most profitable. Add
hither that of Socrates, who being asked whether he had gotten any profit of
the study of Philosophy, answered that I may know how to be free, menynge
from evil de syers, who^ a good mind must not serve.


P. Your saying comith to this end to make me bond, and free, although there be
not so great distaunce between heaven and earth as there is betwenene fredom
and bondage.


V. I know yt emonge the Romans the state, of a fre man and a bond man were
diverse, but we speak of these things christenly, with whom they be so
conjoined that they can not be separated.


P. you plainly make me to doubt, how these can be true / and first of all
declare wherein Christian liberty consistith.


V. Liberty among christian men is nothing else, then to be delivered from
sin, from the curse of the law from death, from Satan, and from hell, and
that trely for christis sake.


P. Here is not one word concerneng exactions?


V. Not one, for this fredom is ye fredo^ of the sprite, and conscience, and
can not be wrested to civil exactions / in so much that if it be wrested
thither it can not be called liberty. And think you it but a trifle to be fre
from the accusement of sin, and co^demneme^t of the law? I verily can not
tell whether a greater liberty, can come to any man, as the which makes us
lords of all things for Christis sake. Nowhat should it profit us to be free
from certain burdens for a time if we should co^tinuewe ye servants of
unrighteous. Nether the common sayeinge is folishe altogether, he is
noughtily made fre on whom, the (...) has power.


P. yet I heard a certain man affirminge in a pul^^^ as well the outward
liberty, as the liberty of the conscience, and (...), that I may say
nothing of that which I have hard in the open lectours.


V. That division well handeled and understood aright has no danger. But here
you must take heed lest whiles we teach a certain outward kind of liberty,
you give occasion for the flesh to sin / (...)
for the Apostle said not without acause brethren you be cauled to liberty /
so that you give not your liberty an occasion unto the flesh.


P. Why then put you not a difference between both the kinds of liberty?


V. We touched eue^ now the inward and spiritual and the scripture for the
most part, speakith of that / as often as it makith mention of liberty /
hither perteinith that in John / if the sone shall deliver you, John. 8.
ye be free in deed, and the truth shall deliver you / there was a contention
between Christ and the Jews, the Jews dreaming of a certain corporal
liberty, and Christ caulyng them by all ways to an inward and a spiritual as
the which consistith in the forgyuenes of sins, in the giuyng of the holy
ghost, in the exchange of living, finally in the fulfilling of the
co^mandmentes willyngly. Upon this Paul says also, where the spirit of the
lord is, there is liberty / the Apostle grantith that there is a certain
liberty, but of the spirit of the heart of the conscience, and which can be
taken by no means for ye deliueryng from civil burdens.


P. And yet you confessed a certain kind of outward liberty.


V. I deny it not.


P. where in co^sistith that same?


V. That we may know that we are delivered from ye part of the law, which
co^teineth the Iewesh ceremonies and judgments / for so we be fre that there
it is permitted us to use other ceremonies, especially such as be not against
the gospel, also other laws after that god allowed the Gentiles sword.


P. What? are we not delivered from all the law? Gala. 4.
why says Paul, after that the fulness of the time came, god sent his sone
made of a woman, made under the law, yt he might redeem them, wihch were under
the law. I think he speakith here ingenerally of all the law.


V. Concerning our justification we be delivered from all the law, even from
the.x. commaundeme^ts as which threate^ most of al damnation onles they be
kept / for justification comith not by fulfillyng of the.x. commaundmentes but
of gods mere ientlenes, which he gave to the world by Christ. And as far
as we lay hold by faith upon that goodness, so far we be justified / but
concerning obedience, we be so delivered from the.x. commandments, that if
they be not kept we can not be cauled christians, Mat. 19.
as Christ says also if thou will goo to life keep the commandments / yet
here there is one affection of the good man, an other of the hipocrite / they
which are good men in deed do willyngly, freely merely and finally for no fear
of punishment, that which the law prescribith and apoyntith, taking these
works for nothing else then the fruits of faith, but hipocrites what so ever
they do of the law, do it for aface, ascribinge these works notwithstanding
to there justification.


P. These paraduenture be true, but if it be lauful to use other seremonies,
that is invented by man, now again a new, you will make us subject to man's
traditions and that against the mind of saint Paul / whose words be these
/ ye be bought with a price, Cor. 7.
be ye not made the servants of men.


V. There be certain rude feloes which when they hear mention of liberty in
sermones, straightwayes with out judgment despise all manners, laws, and
honesty. As though men's life could be without laws / but these defylers of
the Israelites tents must not in this matter be borne with, wherefore we have
need here in these things of great wisdom, great judgment, finally of great
caution, that we do nothing otherwise then it becomes christians / for what
do these laws hurt the church if they be not against the word / verily there
be some constitucions both fighting manyfestly with the word of God, layenge
snares for our consciences / as priests synglenes, monkyshe vows, selling
of masses, and a thousand such other / from these we be fre because they
fight with the word of God. And here the aucthorite of them which wylseme
heads of the church bind no man, in so much that it is boldly to be
despised, if they will remytte nothing of their tyranny, as in the acts when
the apostles were forbidden to preach, not only despised their commandment
but also co^tynued to preach most boldly the death and resurrection of
Christ, whereby health came to the world, in so much that by whippes they could
not be dreuen from their will.


P. I commend this contempt.


V. There be other constitucions co^maundynge of things indyfferent / those
may be despised, and kept partly for charities sake, and partly for the
common peace.


P. Hear I look whether you will say any thing that shall please me / but
hoo, when must such traditions be broken or kept?


V. if they shall neither be taken for the worship of God, nor have nothing a
do with justification, they must be kept both for the common ease and also
for a good order, whereunto the youth from their cradels must be used /
according to that, 1. Cor. 14. Gal. 3.
Among you let all things be done in a good order, also that the law is a
scole master to Christ. Add hither the way of offension, which we must
regard by all means possible / for although these indyfferent things have
liberty adjoined with them / yet must we to the uttermost of our power
endeavor that that which we do be not done to the offense of our weak
brother. As Paul suffered Timothe to be circumcided for certain weak men's
causes, whereas he would not suffer Titus to be circumcided, of whom many
required circumcision as necessary for salvation. And who knows not that
comune saying of Paul. 1. Cor. 1^
All things be laufull for me, but all things be not profitable, but if they
shall be nombred among them which are both necessary for salvation, and
perteyne to the worship of God they must then be despised, and the liberty
which Christ has given us must be defended / for the lord spoke not with out a
cause by the prophet / they worship me in vain, Eze. 20. Mat. 16.
by men's commandments.


P. Extends our liberty any further? I have hitherto thought that they
which were taken in to liberty by Christ, were delivered from pensions, and
paymentes.


V. In this matter you were amysse, for be it that the children of the kingdom
be most free, yet for love, and for escheuynge of offension they submytte them
selves to common burdens and that by Christ's example, whom we read with Peter
gave a grote to them that were receivers among the Caphernaites, and this love
although I be free makes me all men's servant, for faith makes a man
free, but love vonde, fredome pertayneth to the soul, bondage to the body.
They be free whose sins are pardoned for Christ's sake, they are bond which
for Christ's sake are equally in all men's danger. So Paul although he was
free, yet acknowledged him self to be all men's servant. When as love can
not be separated from says, nor heat from fire, so can not bondage be severed
from christian liberty, bondage I mean which always serves her brothers
comoditie. But Philostatius why hunt you after so carefully this outward, no
rather this carnal liberty, seeing the holy scripture neither teaches it,
neither any man proved luckely which at any time stumbled in this matter. This
I am able to prove by many examples of the old men if we had not late examples
/ for as yet Muntzers endeavors be not forgoten / he also was of ye mind that
he thought the holy scripture did teach the liberty of the flesh, wherein when
he was a preacher to much diligent it came to pass that he destroyed not him
self only but also a great nombre of vplandyshmen with him. Had it not been
better for him here to have been content with the liberty of the soul, then
by seeking the fleshly to cast him into so great dangers both of body and
soul / worked he not here him self a displesure? Add hither the example of
the monasteria^as very unserable, but where in the fury of soldiers
committed nothing otherwise then was deserved / by sedicion they put the
aldermen out of their places, they cast many good men out of the city, they
took away other men's goods, finally occupied the sword neither commanded,
nor called of God, wherein when they were warned of certain princes, and
confederated cities in vain, neither any man by such admonitions was moved to
repentance, at the lyngthe were thie punished for there nough tines.


P. But I hear say yt Monasterians were destroyed not for the denieng of
pensions, but because they were Anabaptists.


V. You err nothing at all, so that you know ye sect of Anabaptists has
sedition joined with it / for what sought these mad men else, but the
destruction of al things, and the ruin of be things. They caul it a
restoryuge they truly will restore al things which be decayed but
peradventure on the same sort as Mu^tzer made the vplandish men free / ye which
when he craked that he would shake of our necks ye noble men's yocke, not only
loost his labor in a thing seditious and nothing godly, but also doublid the
self same yocke.


P. What then shall I do seeing ye matter is so.


V. Meddle not with these destroyers of churches, and troublers of the common
weal. And seeing that in this life we can not be with out these como^burdens,
nether we ought for god has not with out acause allowed officers and the civil
way to live, we must endeuore that we obaye those things that perteine to the
common tranquillity and that not only for necessity, but also for conscience.
Thou shall pay thy tithes of thine own acorde, thy yearly pensious of thine
own acorde, thy tribute of thine own acorde, and that to whom the magistrates
comaunde the. What need you to care what they be that receive them, so you do
the duty of a christian, and of a good man, for this above al things
endeyuore, that for as much as by nature we are desirous of liberty, thou
may atteyne that liberty, which is in danger of no faults no desiers, no
noughtie affections, and which may remember that for this cause she is
delivered from sin, to the intent she may live only to righteousness and to her
neighbor / which kind of liberty Angustine speakith on this manner / whom true
liberty delitith, leat him desire to be free from the love of things mutable
/ and whom it delitith to reign leat him be subject to the only god the
raigner over al / by loving him more then him self / for so it shall come to
pass that which you would have done before against your will and unwillingly,
ye shall do it willyngly and merely.


P. Go to, if it be so I will vainquish my self and diligently do that you
exhort me. Look that you tell me of it if I do any thyuge contrary to my
outie.


V. if you will be taught and follow me when I teach you, I will easily bring
it about that you go not out of the way, for I know what is my duty in that
matter. On the contrary party you must also remember your duty, will you any
thing else.


P. No forsooth, but yt you never do any worser, the^ I would my self to do.


Prynted at Cantorbury by I Mychell. For E. Campion.


