THE UNMASKING OF THE POLLITIQVE ATHEIST.

By I. H. Batcheler of Divinity.

AT LONDON Printed for Ralph Howell, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard near the
great North door, at the Sign of the White Horse. 1602.

To the Reader.
TO render thee a reason (Christian reader) of publishing this short Treatise:
It is in a word the contrary to Isocrates answer unto a question out of time,
saying; Quae ego noui, temporis huius non sunt, quae vero exigit tempus hoc,
ego nescio: Those things which J know, belong not unto this time, and those
which appertain unto this time, I know not. But we say, the things which
belong unto this time, woeful experience has made us for to know, and the
things which we know, the misery of this time commands us to report. For are
not these the days whereof our Savior Christ, and his Apostles so long ago
foreprophecied, wherein charity should wax cold, Math. 24. 2. These. 2. 2. Tim.
3.
and faith should so ^^^appeare, wherein men should be slide backs from Christ,
and Apostates from his true religion, wherein they should be lovers of
themselves, covetous, cursed speakers, disobedient, vntha^keful, unholy,
true-breakers, false accusers, despisers of them that are good, traitors,
headdy, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of good, having a show
of godliness, but have denied the power thereof: yea wherein men are become,
Users, Newters, Temporisers, Athists. And the principal cause hereof must
needs be the corrupt nature of man bending too too much unto Papistry. For
compare these times with the days of yore, when Papistry swayed the scepter,
and you shall see the effects of both times to be alike. About the year 363.
at what time the world began to decline; Anthony saw in a dream, as it were
Hogs, which trod under the feet their altars: and waking said, that the
Church shall be once again spoiled and dispersed by whoremongers, adulterers,
and monstrous men, which prophecy Melancthon notes to be against the
leacherous and voluptuous life of Priests and Monks. This prophecy began to
take effect about the year 604. when papistry did prevail, the Popedom
flourish, and true doctrine lost her purity. For about the year 688. Theodore
Archbishop of Rauenna was greatly hated of the Clergy, because he sough to
keep^ them in good manners. But to come unto the time wherein Papistry did rage
and show her full forces, Anno. 1126. Anno. 1140. Hugo C^rdinal. postil. in S.
lohan.
which was about 100. years after Christ, and then shall you find Hugo of
Saxon mightily complaining against disorders. Barnard calling the Prelates,
Pilates, and the Church men ministers of Antichrist: yea that all the
university of Christians did conspire against Christ. Anno. 1157.
Now was John of Saresburie Bishop of Chartres constrained to write a book
entitled Obiurgatorium, pertaining to chiding, rebuking, and finding fault, so
greatly was he moved with the wickedness of those times: wherein the Popes
did succeed rather Romulus in murders and Parricides, Speculum.
then S. Peter in feeding the flock: as Pope Adrian the fourth oftentimes
confessed. Now began Peter de Blois to call the Popes officials hellish
Harpies, and the clergy Syria, Edom, Anno. 1240.
Calves of Bethel, Idols of Egypt, the fat of Samaria, Priests of Baal, and
earnestly exhorts to depart out of Babylon. Then complained Peter de Vinea of
the insaciable covetousness of the Pope, and the filthiness of the Clergy.
Guillame le Orfeince proved the Pope to be Antichrist, Rome Babylon, Anno.
1260.
and the Prelates the members of Antichrist. Now was there a book found De
pericu'is made of the dangers of the world. Now stood up Peter Casiodorus
vexing his soul for the wickedness of those times. So did Mathias
Parisiensis, John Wicleffe, John Hus, Anno. 1306. Anno. 1370.1405, etc.
Bridenbachius.
and many others, to behold the uniquitie of those days, wherein recessit lex
a sacerdotibus, a principibus iustitia, consilium a senioribus, a populo fides,
etc. The Law departed from the Priest, Justice from the Prince, counsel from
the Senator, faith from the people^ love from parents, reverence from subjects,
charity from Prelates, religion from Monks, honesty from young men, piety
from teachers study from scholars, equity from Judges, concord from Citizens,
fear from servants, and fellowship from the country, truth from the Merchant,
virtue from the Noble, chastity from the Virgin, humility from the widow,
loyalty from the married, and patience from the poor. Were these then and such
like the effects of Papistry in former ages, and shall we behold them again to
enter upon the world, and not labor to remove the cause? God forbid. The
consideration therefore of these lamentable times has wroong from me this
brief Treatise. Wherein thou may behold the very map of Papistrie: a
doctrine turning the truth of God into a lie, and religion into superstition:
persuading men to all ungodliness, and yet ouershadowing all with the show of
religion: Arming the subject against the Prince, See the Spanish Proclamation
in Ireland.
and yet defend it by the beastly Bull of Popish excommunication. Sowing
sedition and treasons in the land, yet dare appear unto the Lords of the
council as men blameless and religious, as did that Machieuillian Turkish
practiser (as the Priests of his own profession do term him) Parsons that
Iugling Jesuit: whereas they mean nothing else, but the utter subversion of
religion and the state, as plainly appears by the works of Sir Francis
Hastings and D. Sutliue. Thus are they well practiced in Machieuel, Lip^^us de
duplici conco^dia.
turning religion into policy: Imitating seditious Clodius, Qui cum esset
religionis non hostis solum, sed etiam contemptor, tame^ sceleribus, quae in
tribunatu patrauit, religionem et auspicia fuit ausus praetexere: who, albeit
he were not only an enemy to religion, but also a despiser and contemner of the
same, yet he pretended religion in behalf of all the villainies he committed
in his Tribuneship. Way then the end of this short Treatise, and let us be
more thankful unto God for the riches of his revealed truth. First it
vnmaskes the Politicians, that suit religion after the fashion of their
policy. Secondly it forewarnes and so forearmes thee against these popish
charms that now fly about the land, least unwittingly thou be enchanted with
them. Thirdly it gives thee a taste what benefits thou shall receive by
entertaining Papistry, namely heresy, policy, supersti^ion, Atheism, and
all ungodliness. Fourthly it desciphers unto thee the envious, murdering, and
cruel nature of a right Papist, that hangs his whole religion upon the Popes
sleeue, Lipsiusvbi prius.
namely to be such, qui adiiciunt culos saepe ad hanc patriam, qua^ e faucibus
ereptam dolent, qui vexillum purpuratae Romanae belluae (O Deus immortalis
auerte quaeso hoc omen) in media defixuros se minitantur, qui non praedam sed
vitam, non seruitutem, sed sanguinem concupiscunt: quibus nullus ludus
iucundior est, quam cruor, quam caedes, quam ante oculos trucidatio
innocentium. Which often cast their eyes upon this our country, which they
greatly sorrow is by Gods aid delivered from their swallow, in the midst
whereof (which God forbid) they threaten one day to display the banner, and set
up the Ensign of the purple Romish beast, who desire not our good, but our
blood, neither thirst after our livings only, but also our lives: in whose eyes
there is no play so pleasant, as to behold massacres, hear of murders, and
see the slaughters of silly innocents. Lastly, it arms thee with truth by
unfolding of the contrary, which truth God grant us to embrace to his glory,
our health, and the countries good, which God no doubt begins to visit for the
sins thereof, but especially for the sin of Apostasy, backsliding, and
forsaking the ture religion, Note the Eclipse of the moon, Noue^b. 29. 1601.
and of the sun December. 14. Yea two other Eclipses of the moon are to happen
this year. Thunder and lightning very common this Christmas. Socrat. hist. 3.
to uphold the kingdom of Satan, and maintain the doctrine of Antichrist:
which grievous sin (especially after so long sun shine of the Gospel) the
Sun blusheth to look upon, and the Moon is ashamed to behold. The heavens
roar and thunder to consider, and the air sindeth forth his arrows and
threatens with his lightning to wound from heaven all such as with the
Apostate Julian revolt from their profession, and undermine the faith of
Christ. Yea the Earth, An earthquake 1601. December. 24.
the stable earth begins now to quauer, and to shake, as being ouerburdned with
our sins, and too weak to bear the weight of our iniquities, especially to
support this sin, Histor. Tripart. lib. 4. cap. 10.
this heavy sin of Apostacy and irreligion, giving us warning before it
open, as sometime it did Antioche ready to receive the heresy of Arius, that
if we leave not off betimes to welcome Antichrist, and to entertain his armio
of heresy and Atheism, it will one day swallow us up quick for conspiring
with the enemies of Christ, Number. 16.
as sometimes it did Corath, Dathan, and Abiram. God grant that other men's
harms may teach us to beware.

I. H.

The unmasking of the politic Atheist.
BLindfolded Gentilisme could epsy Atheism in Diagoras, Cicero de not. deor.
lib. 1. Damas. lib. 1. orthodox fid. cap. 3.
and Theodorus, because they denied there was a God, the knowledge of whom is
(...) ingrafted and bred in us by nature. Rescius Wright etc.
But quick-sighted Papisme, can discrie Atheism in the true Christian, because
he defies the Popes whom Christ and his Apostles have taught us to be
Antichrist. O that the Papist could as well discern his Lady Envy, that
quickens his sight, and his Lord Satan that lends him light, then would he
blame the Jews sight, and his own eyes, 7. John. 20.
the one for seeing a devil in Christ the head, and the other for beholding
devilish Atheism in the Christian his member. Yea then would they see that
Satan is the master builder of their Church, Tuscul. quaest. 1. Cicero et de
Not. deor. lib. 1. 1. Romans Act. 14 Acts. 17. Ioh. 5. Ephesians. 2.
and Atheism the chief foundation of their kingdom. For what is Papisme? a
denying there is a God? No, seeing no Barbarian (excepting some few) was so
barbarous, howbeit, not exempted from Atheism. What then does Papisme
acknowledge a Godhead, but deny the persons? Not so neither, for they confess
Moses and the Prophets, and cry templum domini, templum domini, we, and none
but we are the Church. How then can they confess God, and yet deny God? Yea,
why not, as well as Antichrist, 2. Thessal. 2. Aug. Ciu. 23, and 19.
that sits in the Temple and Church of God, and yet the greatest enemy of his
Christ? For the profession of the Church serves him but for a veil to cover
his papisme, and for a visard to color his Atheism: seeing he both denies and
defies Christ, his Gospel, and the Godhead, by his doctrine, worship, and
living, so erroneous, supersticious, and ungodly: for what is the kingdom of
Popery, but heresy, seeing heretics are armies of Antichrist? And what is
the sea of Rome, Chrysostom. hom. 49. in Math.
but an huge Ocean of heresies? wherein Simon, and all heretics do take
their pleasure and repast. Here is Monkish popery in imitation of Simonian
Idolatry, worshipping the Images of Francis and Clara. Here in domo Dei
presbyteri et Episcopi vendentes sunt. Roiard hom. Ser. 2. post dom. Latare.
Both Priests and Praelates make the house of God an house of Marchandies.
Here are Cardinals buying the Popedom, and Popes selling Christ and
Christendom. Gyrolan Catena.
Yea, here are the pains of Purgatory to be bought off for money, and the
pleasures of Paradise to be purchased for coin. Howbeit the Pope challenges
place authoritate Dei, by Gods authority. Fie fowlemouthd Florinian to vsu^pe
the kingdom of the son, Bulla ^^i quinti in Eliz.
and yet to challenge it as from the Father. Here may ye see Midwiues
baptizing, Aug. haeres. 66.
and a woman executing the office of the Popedom, and are not they most
fearful foes to the Pepucians? Romans char. part 2. s^ct. 18.
But will you know their wars against Nouatius? They debar Ministers from
honorable marriages, Bellar. de bapt. lib 1. cap. 7.
and compel them to perish in dishonorable lust: which was one among the
greeuances that the Germans exhibited to Cardinal Campeius, Epiphan haeres. 79.
that their Bishops and Officials did not only suffer Priests for their money
to have concubines, Theod. fab. haeres. lib. 3.
but compelled chaste Priests to pay their tribute, that so it might be lawful
for them to live as they list. Rhem. Acts. 21. sect. 1.
O say not so, this is a chaste generation. For those that were their wives
before orders, Aug. haeres. 87.
shall be their wives still, but their husbands shall not have access unto
them: a crew of faithful Abellians. Oecolamp. Fox page 861.
And call you this a chaste generation that condemn men for marriage? witness
Petrus Sponglerus in the year 1525. Rhen. Anor. 1. Cor. 7. sect. 8.
that call marriage the worst sort of incontinencie: that say Priesthood is
profaned by it: that dare affirm that those that are in carne, Greg. mar.
discou^ ^. sect 1
deo placere non possunt: that married persons cannot please God, Siricius.
Epist. ad Him: Tarac.
that forbid priests marriages, least they should defile the sacrament: and
because it is written sancti estote: be ye holy. Aqui. add 3. part. q. 53.
art. 3
As if that were no holy thing, that was instituted by an holy author,
Innocent. did. 81. cap. propos.
blessed by an holy God, ordained at an holy time, celebrated in an holy place,
and performed unto holy persons, as were Adam and Euah before their fall. 2.
Genesis 74. 13 Heb. 4.
which the holy scripture calls honorable unto all men: and the sacred
Paphnutius, Zozem. lib. 1. c. 23. Enemies 10 marriage were Tatian, Martionists,
Eustachians, Montanists, Priscilia^s^s, Justin, Peneus, Eusebius, Epiphanius,
Alphonsus de castro, etc. Ang. haeres. 25.
with all the Nicen council in the year 315. confessed and acknowledged
concubitum cum propria vxore caslitatem esse, Copulation with a man's own wife
to be chastity. Why then O you Tatian Papists and Eucratites exclude you
coniugio vtentem married persons from your order? why embrase you Cainisme
forbidding him to be consecrated Bishop, Hierom ad Oceanurr.
that marries another after his first wife be dead? quam haeresin sequitur
Romana ecclesia. Erasmus.
Why then ye sacred Friars, and chaste Carthusians, do you contemn that
honorable calling? as if a married woman do come within your cloister, it must
be washed and cleansed after her with holy water. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 18. Alex.
pope. 3. ad Epis Exon. de spont. c. Com.
And why clap you hands rather with Montanus teaching the dissolution of
marriage: then with God, that forbids to separate that, which he has
conjoined? yea and with the Nicolaitans, 2. Apoc. 6.
had rather use promiscua venere, vagis libidinibus, Sodomia, quam legitima
vxore: whoredom, Epiphan. romans 7. lib. 1. haere. 25.
fornication, Sodomie, then lawful wedlock, 1. Timot. 4
albeit the one be commanded, and the other forbidden: but that ye prefer
the doctrine of devils, before the word of God, Antichrist before Christ, and
false Atheism before true religion. For did not Christ make marriage the Image
of his holy conjunction with his church, and gave Peter the primacie of order
among the Apostles that was a married man? Aug. quaesli. 27. ex vtreque mixtu.
Bellar. lib. 1. de cler. c. 18.
And Bellarmine confesses there is no scripture that forbids Ministers
marriage. Epist. ad Philadelph.
Yea reverend Ignatius wished to be found worthy to walk in the steps of the
saints, namely of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Isaias, Peter, Paul and others
(...) that lived in holy marriage. And protests that if any professor do call
lawful wedlock and procreation of children (...): a defiling distaining or
filthiness, Can. 12. and 13. did. 3. quoni^m.
that he has dwelling in him the dragon that foul Apostate. Vliricus Epis.
Aeneas. Siluius in sua Germania.
The lawfulness of which calling was proved out of the word of God in the
council of Nice, and confirmed by the Synod of Constantinople. Yea Gregory
himself, 1. Romans 23. 1. Ioh. 5.25.
beholding more then 600. childrens heads drawn out of a Fishpond, with
blubbered cheeks condemned his decree of single life, Aug. doct. Christ. 3.
cap. 7. Hierom ad Ripar. presbyt.
saying: melius est nubere quam vrere: and melius est nubere, quam mortis
occasionem praebere: It is better to marry then to buine, yea it is better to
marry then to give occasion of murder and destruction.

Go now ye Papists to school unto the Prophets, where having learden to
discern between the spirit of Christ and the Dragon, tell me how far you
are from Atheism. Do you not pray unto relics, and say unto the cross
salve sancta crux: all hail holy cross, and unto the Napkin Sancte sudari or
apro nobis, et sudarium Christi libert nos a pesti et morte tristi, o holy
Napkin pray for us, deliver us from the pestilence and evil death. If Atheism
had not possessed you, Sutliu us de eccl. Cath. Their silken garments kept at
Rome are of the Italian fashion.
how dare you call your cousning trash, sacred and holy relics? Else must
Peter and the sanits be mo^sters, Iosepth and Mary be Italians, and Christ
borne out of Bethleem. Howbeit the Valentinians were heretics that worshipped
the cross: and do not the papists so? the Carpocratians were heretics,
Irenaeus lib. 1 Aug. here is. 7.
etc. so was Marceline too, they for worshipping the Images of Jesus, and she of
Jesus and Paul: and do not the Papists so? Bell^r. lib. 1. c. 13. de sanct.
beat.
The Collyridians were heretics for worshipping the Virgin Mary: and do not
the papists so? yea must not every country, city, town, Epiphan. li. 3.
haerel. 79. Lactant. de vero cult. cap. 17.
village, company, trade, occupation, and person, have their Saint to worship
by popish institution? And were not the Angelici heretics, because they
worshipped the Angels? Iraeneus lib. 2 c. 59. Aug. haer. 39 Rhe^. Annot. Apoc. 3
yet the papists defend and maintain the self same adoration against the
scripture. Would you know where to find Pelagianisme? then have recourse to
popery. That will teach you a man may be perfect in this life, Aug. haer. 88.
and keep all the commandments, as was Franciscus that kept the Gospel at an
inch, Rhem. 5. Ioh. 5 sect. 1. lib. Co^^ormitat.
non transgressus vna^ apicem aut iotam: and failed not in any title: in whom
were all the virtues of all the Saints in all the Bible unitive et coniunctiue,
Con. Trid. ses. 6. cap. 18. Conc. Trid. ses. 5. cap. 1. de pecc. orig.
gathered together and abiding. That will tell you there remains no original
sin in the faithful, Rhe^. Annot. Romans 6.8.12 Sixius 4.ccc. Trid. cateches.
Romans
that concupiscence in the regenerate is no sin, nor against the
commandment. Rhe^. Annot. Luke 5.1. 2. Cor. 5.10.
That the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin; that righteousness may be
obtained by the law. And that some are so just in this life, Lyranns li. 3 cap.
19. Hiero^. adueri. Pelag. lib. 2. Ephesians. 2.3.
as they need no repentance: let Hierom, Augustine, yea Christ and his Apostles
affirm, and prove the contrary never so soundly. But it may be that these
Catharists will lend some ear unto their popish pillars. 4. Heb. 3. Galat.
Aug. haeres. 38.
If so, who accused the scholemen your famous founders of Pellagianisme, as men
opposite to the constant current of the Fathers? even your faithful Roffensis,
who convicted Pighius your gallant Champion of Pellagianisme? even your valiant
Dominicus Soto: yet Ruardus Tapperu^ leaning upon that broken staff the
Tridentine council, ^. Romans Soto de nar. and great. lib. 1. cap. 9. Tom. 2.
art. 8. Con^. Trid. sess. 5. c 7. Lusitan Liriens. de quad. just. lib. 1. c. 7.
et cap. 25. Protoc. Fran^. art. ^. Conc. Trid sess. 5. ^^ct. 5.
does all besmeare and mudde himself in this heresy: But for all his Louinian
Deaneship, Lirensis, a man of his own stamp, is bold to brand both him, and
confessor Soto with Pellagianisme. Which infectio^ has so festred in the
intrals of papistry, as sometime it breaths out Anabaptisme, Aug. haer. 69. and
cont. lit. Petil.
sometimes leslenning the crime of original sin, and sometimes denying it to
be sin at all. Now including the Church within the bounds of papistry; Theod.
hist. lib. 1. cap. 19.
and then excluding all that follow not the Pope. Sometimes flying, 6. Math. 1.
Tim. 4. Aug. haer. 46 Euscb. hist. 15. cap. 16. and 17. etc.
and resisting the authority of the Magistrate, and sometimes denying him any
meddling or dealing with Church affairs: yea sometimes having their stabbers,
poysoners, and privy murderers: as they had of the Prince of Condy, the Duke
of Saxony, Ioanna of Navarre, and many other. O return ye Prince murdering,
and people killing Atheists, consider your teaching, which Christ calls
hypocrisy, and Saint Paul the doctrine of devils. You think to merit heaven
by abstaining with the Manichie from flesh, milk, Blondus. Plotina. Eckius.
Aug. cont. Faust. Man. lib. 19. ca. 22.
cheese and eggs, and fear you not to merit hell by soothing men in murder
and adultery? If Montanus made laws in compelling men to fast, you will
maintain with fire Theolesphorus Lent, Calixtus Embring days, Leos Friday,
and Gregory's Saturday. Philip Cominaeus.
Let the Maniches swear never so fast per creatur as by the creatures: you
will not be wanting to the Saints. Yea no oath must be so dear and holy as
that, which is used by the bones and re^liques of the dead. Notwithstanding if
you in very truth defy that masked Atheism, Aug. haer. 50. Rhem. Anot. Acies.
17.29. Theo. baeret. fab. lib. 4.
why defend you the heresy of the Anthropomorphites, painting God in your
churches like an aged man? But indeed Nestorius his practice is your best
Apology, Qui magis christianus videbatur quam erat: you will make show of that
you never mean. Aug. haeres. 68.
Even your Jesuits that carry the name of Jesus, will sildome practice the
works of Christ. It may be you affect with Nestorius a kind of gravity, and
dissemble continency with a wan countenance, and a pale look, but the more
closely to insinuate your selves into Ladies companies, and women's clossets.
For you are devoted men: barefoote ^lagellants and Franciscants, your ^^ownes
shaven, cowles graye, Biel. sup. 4. did. 16. q. 4. prop. 1. Aug. haeres. 57.
and girdels must be full of knots: you will observe your canonical hours but
not labor in any case, least you should transgress the precepts of the
Euchites. To eat flesh and be married an horrible thing among Carthusians: to
touch money were to defile the Minorits: and to have possessions were to
transgress the constitutions of Benedictus and Dominicus: yea and not to
follow the Apostate Julian, Oreg. Nazin. orat. 1. cor. Agrip. de van. scient.
albeit they carry the bag with Judas. If they vow, Epiphan. haeres. 61.
it must not be broken be it never so ungodly, and unlawful: put case they
vow virginity, Thom. 1. quod liber. q. 15. Isid^r. Holco^. ^n sap. cap. 2.
lcct. 24. Rhem. Amot. 1. Cor. 7.28.
and cannot keep it, to marry were to dissent from the Apostolic heretic,
without a dispensation from the Pope, for he only may dispense with marriage.
M^yr. in. cron. Fland.
It is no sin to make stews of their Nunneries, and dens for Sodomie of
their Monasteries. Sabell. volater Polydor.
And although they reveal it in confession, yet iura periura secretum prodere
noli: they have learnde a trick or two of Priscilianisme, Arno^d. Bri^iens.
Grunth. lib. 3. Stibilius.
be it murder or treason, yea against the Pope himself, they must not disclose
it. But if it come to pass, Aug. haeres. 70. Caictam tom. 1. ^^act. 2.
we confute these Atheistical conceits from the word of God, they can appeal
to counterfeite traditions, Aug. haeres. 70.
and call them unwritten verities, Rhem. Annot. 1 chef. 2. ^cct. 2.
and with the Prisclianist equal Apocrypha with scripture: and for a shift
make more words of God then the Bible. For if the Pastors teach it, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
and 1^.32. Prou. 30.6. Apoc. 22.18.
be it ^euer so beside the scripture, yet it is to be taken for the word of
God, and if Christ the son of God his Prophets and Apostles interdict and
forbid such scripture coining, and seal it with a searefull curese: then can
the Pope create a new Christ, saying: qui creauit me dedit mihi creare se: and
he that made me without my self, Gal. Biel. lcct. 4. in expol. can. missae.
is made of me be my self. Wherefore if they destroy his natural body, 6. John.
borne of the Virgin Mary, they can make him another body created by the
Priest, else you might esteem them as blockish as the gross Capernaites, that
supposed the flesh, bone, and blood of Christ, as he was borne of the Virgin
should be torn in pieces with their teeth. And why not (says their Angelical
Master) is not hoc, Aquin. part. 3. q. 75. art. 5.
quod conficimus, corpus ex virgin: which is made in the consecration the body
that was borne of the virgin Mary? No says Harding, it is no visible and
mortal body, but a glorified, immortal, impassible, and spiritual body. It
is Corpus (says Biell) tale non tantum, Biel. lib. 4. did. 11. q. 1.
quia non est in sacrament quantum: a body but without quantity: Not so
(says Gardener) the parts be distinct one from another. Guard. lib. 3.
Yea says Bellarmine, Bellar. lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 7.
the body of Christ is in the sacrament, with all his parts and dimensions.
Alex. Halespert. 4. q. 25. me^b. 1 Glost. can. qui been non custodiunt de
concep. did. 2. Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 24.
For (says Hales) if a Dog or Hog chance to eat it, traijcitur in ventrem, it
passes into their belly. Not so says Bellarmine, but if a Mouse do chance to
eat it, it cease to be Christ his body. And good reason says Caietan,
Caiet. tom. 2. tract. 2. cap. 3.
for spiritualiter, et non percipiendo, sed credendo sumitur corpus Christi:
Christ his body is eaten spiritually by faith, not carnally with the mouth.
What then is it which nourishes he body? Harding. apoll.
The accidents says Harling. For the accidents says Bellarmine, are eaten
with the teeth: But where then is Christ his body? In heaven says Bellarmine,
Bellar. 3. de Euchar. cap. 22.
and at the same time on earth. Fie, fie, what a stir is here contradictions,
impossibilities, vntrothes, Bellar. lib. 3. cap. 4.
against reason, religion, and the scripture, without any smacke of Atheism.
Very like that Atheism must be packing from Rome, where Antichrist swayes the
scepter, being opposite to Christ, an enemy to the Gospel and an adversary to
true religion. What? Apoc. 17. Aug. ciuit. 18. cap. 22
is the kingdom of Antichrist without a God? why, is the son without the
father, the wife without an husband, a lining body without an head, 2. Thessal.
2.
and christianity without Christ? but is Popery the kingdom of Antichrist,
Rome the Metropolis or chief city of his kingdom, and the Pope the captain
general of this army? 2. Thessal. 2.
yea if this be that Apostate kingdom, whose Prince is without controulement
exalting himself above all that is God, and not regarding the God of his
fathers. 11. Dan.
But the Pope makes laws to bind the conscience, and executes with more
severity the breaking of his popish precepts, Did. 40. si papa.
then the transgression of the Lords commandment: He can make new gods: set up
Idols, and deny Jesus to be Christ. He can counterfeit the Lamb, yet speak
like the Dragon: set in the temple, but to undermine Christ: profess religion,
but to ^uerthrow the gospel compute the time, describe the place, note the
workmen, mark the building, and consider the whole proceeding of his
kingdom, and you will say the Pope is Antichrist. 17. Apoc.
The place which John calls Babylon, Tertul. ant. Iudae Hieror. Esa. 47. Aug.
ciuit. 18. Orol. lib. 18. 3. Blondus.
is by the Fathers construed to be Rome, for her situation, her go^erment, her
type, her resort, her behavior, and her citizens: who say, they are the
ministers of Christ out serve Antichrist, even the subjects of Romish Babylon,
that purple coulo^ed whore. The time: when the imped^ments are removed, Hieron
Esa. 21. Decret. 6. Bar. ^omil. 33. in cant.
the Emperors ^eate translated, and the R^maine Empire overthrown: at what
time the Pope must sit in the Emperors place, Hieron. prolog. de spiritu. sanct.
free from subi^ctio^, vniues fall Bishop, Christ his vicar, ^ruling with two
swords, Apoc. 13. can. nemini. 17. q. 3. can. ne^. 0. q. ^. Greg. Epist.
7.3.8.78.79. Council. Carthag. sess. 1. did. 21. Gratian. can. si^mperator
did. 96.
commanding Emperors to kiss his feet, boasting himself to be God,
worshipped of men; subiecting powers, disposing kingdoms, superior to general
councels, and free governor of all Christ his church. And now he may dispense
with the laws of Christ, alter the Sacraments, and supplant all religion: for
neminis est de sedis Apostolicae iudicio iudicare: his word must go before the
Gospel. Dam. 4.2. c. extrau. de mayor. and obed.
His workmen, Massemongers, Can. cunct. 9. q. 3. Can. sunt quidam. 25. Q. can.
si papa. did. 4.
Iuglers, making wonders, faining miracles, seducers, Jesuits, Friars, Monks,
Dominicks, Franciscans, Benedictans, etc. whom thou may know says Hierom,
Can. n^minis ^^ Q. ^. Math. 24.2. Thessal. 2.2. Timo^. ^.
by their names and titles non ecclesiam Christi sed Antichristi esse
synagogam: to be the servants of Antichrist. And for their calling (says
Procopius) si neque Moses, Hieron. aduers. Lu^^^^^an.
neque ante eum Patriarchae, neque post eum prophetae, neque in noua lege
Christus, Abba^. vrsper. in paral^^. of Procopiu. that thus s^^ke to luli^n the
popes legate in Bohemia.
neque Apostol^ mendic antium ordinem instituerint, quis dubitet opus esse
tenebrarune (...) Diaboli? If neither Moses, the Patriarchs, the Prophets in
the old law, Epist. ad Justin coad. Justin. in Nouel. antent. 131. de quaruor
^anct. council.
neither Christ nor his Apostles in the new, ordained and appointed these
orders of begging Friars: who can doubt but it is the work of darkness, and
of the devil. Yea indeed the whole building is nothing else but the work of
Satan: begun by heresy, continued by discord, finished by superstition, and
maintained by pol^icie, as false apparitions of saints, Angels, and devils:
wonders, relics, motions of Images, and infinite other forgeries whereof their
legend makes mention. Where now is Antichrist, if this be not his kingdom? In
the year 1074. Nauclerus.
when Hildebrand was Pope, the Priests pronounced him to be Antichrist: qui
titulo Christi ageret negotium Antichristi in Babylone: who under the title of
Christ wrought the works of Antichrist in Babylon: At this time terrible
commotions, schisms, lightnings, tempests, earthquakes, etc. and among the
rest was seen a fearful Comet, Naucl. Genesis 36 ex Johan. Capgrauo Anglo.
whereof Elmerius a Monk of Malmesbury gave this judgments art thou come, art
thou come? unto many mothers have thou brought woe and sorrow. Jacob. Mayor in
Chron.
I saw thee long before, but now I behold thee more terrible, even the very
ruin of this land. And about this time was news brought from Turway to the
Emperor at Coleine, of a woman prophesing that Antichrist was then in his full
course: which woman suddenly vanished away, and was no more seen. Munster
applies the Prophecy of Saint Paul concerning Antichrist unto Rome: Greg. lib.
16. Epist. 30. lib. 4. Epist. 36. and 38. and li. 11. Epist. 3. Barnard. Cant.
sermon. 33.
Petrarch resembles Rome unto Babylon: and Gregory's notes of Antichrist are
verified of the Pope. Bernard called the Prelates Pilates: the Ministers the
servants of Antichrist: and Archbishop Euerard decyphering by the scripture
this man of sin, concludes at the last, the Pope to be that Antichrist: to
omit the council of Worms, Sanonarola, Auentine annal. Boior lib. 7.
and others. And shall Antichrist bring Apostacy into the church, oppose
himself to Christ, Arnoldus Haybalus. Wesselus.
boast himself to be God, counterfeit the Lamb, but speak like the Dragon,
and yet remain without Atheism? Tell me then what is Atheism. O sir, to be a
protestant is to be an Atheist: for he defies the Pope, preferres Christ before
Antichrist, truth above falsehood, the word before traditions, and God before
Satan. Thus you make Atheists as you make heretics: If a man resist the
vanity, idolatry, and superstition of your church, Platina in Paulo; 2.
presently he is an heretic: to eat flesh on fasting days is heresy: yea
to say there be Antipodes, or to speak the word Academia: vel serio,
Auentine vbi prius.
vel ioco: in sadness or in jest, is heresy.

But if thou will a very little open thine eyes, Rhem. Annot. Acts. 4. sect. 2.
and not be obstinate with the wicked, qui impie agent, nec intelligent: that
will do wicked-lie, and will not understand, Aug. de corrup. and great. cap. 14.
thou shall plainly perceive who is both the heretic and the Atheist. Hieron.
in Habuc. 2.
The Atheist denies Gods providence: and the Papist denies him to have a
stroke in all our actions: both against scripture, Lumb. lib. 1. did. 35.
sect. 1. Specul. Pontif.
Fathers, and their master Lumbard. The Atheist denics God, heaven, hell, and
the immortality of the soul: so did not Paulus the third, who being greedy to
depart to is world, P. Acsquillu^. Popes. Atheist^. Lco 10 Alexan^. 6.
Siltrest. ^. Paul. 3. Benedict. 9. John. 13. Clemens. 8. Greg. 7. Specula.
pontif.
said: se iam tria, de quibus in omni vita multum dubitasset experiundo
cogniturum: primo an esset Deus; deinde an essent inferni aliqua supplicia, et
denique an animae essent immortales: that he should now be assured of three
things by experience, of which in all his life he stood in doubt: First whether
there were a God: then whether there were any torments in hell: and lastly
whether the souls were immortal. Neither was John the 23. an Atheist, whom
the Synod of Constance deprived of his Popedom, for denying the immortality
of the soul: yet both these were Bishops of Rome. Christoph. Marcel. Council.
Later. sect. 4.
The Atheist sets up other Gods besides the maker of heaven and earth: and the
Papists will have the saints to hear our prayers, and know our thoughts.
Extrau. John. 22. cum inter in Gloss.
But the Pope must be alter Deus: yea Dominus noster Deus. our Lord God. He may
judge the scriptures, make Saints, forgive sins. He has all power given him
both in heaven and earth: He cannot err, Lib. ceren. pontif. lib. 1. fol. 735.
Luitprand,
albeit he calls for aid unto the devil when he plays at Dice, as did Pope
John the 13. Baleus.
The Atheist makes Christ an Impostor: and Pope Leo the tenth called the
Gospel Fabulam Christi: Trid. council. sess. 4. c. 8. Flosc. bear. Franc.
conform. vinea. etc. Bern. in Rosar.
a tale, and a fable. Yea the Papists make him but a Christ for fashion, when
as they set up other mediators, and human merits. Garat de inuoc. sanct.
For wherefore came Clara with Francis into the world, but to save all those,
Quae eam inuocaturae essent: that should pray unto her? do they not call the
virgin Mary Commune propitiatorium: the common propitiatory for the whole
world, and wrest the scripture from Christ unto the Virgin saying: In te
domina sper aui: miserere mei domina: dixit dominus dominae meae: I have hoped
in thee O Lady: have mercy upon me O Lady: the Lord said unto my Lady set thou
on my right hand? Ladies psalter.
etc. And no meruell, for when the devil in a certain maid would not be
moved with prayers made unto the Father, I^engrious.
Son, and holy Ghost, Bonauentura Ladies psalter. Psalm. 41.10.
Canisius laying the image of Mary upon the head of the possessed, forthwith
the devil cried out: O mulier quid me calcas, and caput meum conteris; o woman
why do thou spurn me and break my head? Wherefore they sing unto her Aue
maris stella, Him. Eccles. post psalmos Dauidis a G. Genebrardo exornatos.
and so forth as follows in that blasphemous himne. These are they that ca^
show us a new way to heaven without Christ, and yet be void of Atheism: as by
Nicolas, Horae. ad vsum Sarum. In pontifical. lib. 1. sect. 7.
Vincentius, Gregory, Petronella, Thomas Becket, Agnus dei, Angels, Images,
works and indulgences. Who affirmed the Philosophers might be saved without
Christ? Andrat. lib. 3.
Papists. Scotus prolog. sent. c. vnum extr. de mayor and obed.
Who depriues Christ of his manhood? papists. Yea who disgrades him of all his
offices? papists. Who makes new articles of salvation? C. 1. de consuetudi.
Gloss. in c. sect. did. 34. and. c. pres^yt. did. 82.16. Q. 1. quocunque in
gloss.
papists. Who can dispense against the Apostles, the new testament, the law of
nature, and the law of God? Papists. Yea who denies Christ, his Church, and the
Church her Christ? Papists.

The Atheist will play of all sides: with Elias worship Jehovah, 1. Kings. 18.
and and with Iezabel offer sacrifice to Baal: with Sidrac, 3. Dan.
Meshach, and Abednego honor the God of heaven, and with Nabuchadnezar worship
the golden Image. 2. Math.
Seek Christ with the wise men, go to worship the child with Herod. In show
a Protestant, but in truth a Papist. For who indeauor to reconcile religions,
to be mediators between God and Mammon, truth and falsehoods, protestants and
papists? false surnamed Catholics. Philast, Brir. Episc. in cant. haeres.
Who are those that with Rhetorius affirm all heretics recte ambulare, et
recte dicere: walk aright, and speak the truth? The treatise made in Paris
tending to pacification.
That make treatises tending to Pacification, and say, the Popish religion is
true as they take the word: and the Hugonites true as they understand the
scripture? even professed members of the Roman Church. Is not this to make a
fellowship of righteousness, with unrighteousness: a communion of light and
darkness; 1. Cor. 6.14.
a concord between Christ and Beliall: and religion a composition of
heresies? whereas Clemens reports thus of heretics, that Magis impij sunt
quam Indaei, Clemens in Constitution.
et magis sine Deo quam Gentiles: more wicked then the Jews, and more without
God then the Gentiles. And God speaks thus of the La^dicean Church; because
thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, it will come to pass that I
shall spew thee out of my mouth. 3. Apoc 16.
Take heed then of Themistius the Philosopher, that would persuade Valens the
Emperor Deo gratam esse sectarum varietatem, vt it a pluribus modis colatur:
that God was well pleased with varieties of sects, because by that means he
may have more sundry and diverse ways of his worship and service. Homer Odyss.
And beware of those changelings, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 30. Aristo^. hist. 9.6
and Camelions: that can (...) dissemble very profoundly: use the shepherds
voice with the Hiena, but to destroy the dog, and cast forth sweet sauoures
with the Panther, but to devour the beasts. For they are like the Remora
hindering the course of religion; and like those (...) false brethren, ^.
Galat.
that entered the church of Galatia: yea rather do as the Lord your God
commanded you, 5. Deuteronomy. 32.
and turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the lest.

The Atheist to destroy religion, Apolog. c. 1. sect. 3.
will maintain and establish all religions: and the Pope for money will
dispense with all religions: yea many religions must be professed in one
commonwealth, that conscience may be free, and English catholics may have
liberty; 32. Exodus 3. King. 18.
yet Moses could not suffer the golden Calfe in Israel, nor Elias Baal, and God
to be worshipped in one commonwealth; 16. Psalm.
David would not offer the offerings of blood; 2. Macab. 6.24
nor Eleazarus dissemble to eat Swines flesh against the law; The Israelites
must have continual war with the Amalekites; 25. Numb.
and Phinees was highly commended for killing the Israelite, 21. Genes.
that was coupled with a woman of Madian: For there is but one faith, 1. Sam.
5.10. Leu^t.
one baptism, one God, one Christ, one Church, Tertul. de caro^ militis.
and she no strumpet to receive all comers: the Lion and the Lamb cannot
hoorde in one fowlde: Isaac and Ismael in one house; 1. Cor. 10.2. Chron.
16.2. Chron. 18.1. Cor. 1.13.2. Timot. 4.5
the Arc, and Dagon, in one church; holy and profane fire in one censer;
Christ and Antichrist in one temple. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 62. Socrat. lib. 5.
cap. 2.
Non been connenit signo Christi et signo diaboli, castris lucis, et castris
tenebrarum: non potest vna anima duobus deberi: and ye cannot drink the cup
of Christ and of Devils. What provoked Gods anger against Solomon, Asa, Amasia,
and Iohosaphat? the permission of more religions in one kingdom: Christ must
not be divided, and Timothy must beware of Alexander: Constantine overthrew the
temples of the heretics; and Iouinian denied to be their Emperor, that were
disciples unto Julian. 3. Kings. 21. Amb. Epist. 5. Orat. cont. Auxent.
Naboth defended his Vine with his blood; and Ambrose chose rather to dye, then
to yield one of his churches to the Arrians. But to set up more religions in a
kingdom, is to bring peace unto the country? very like, such peace as Simons
Horse brought unto Troy: Aeneas sword unto Dido, and Deianira her shirt unto
Hercu^s. Brought not the suffering of ^he Arrian great peace unto the world,
that had almost euerted Christ and christendom? Hiero. Epist. 62
Nihil ^rande est pacem voce pretendere, et ^pere desiruere, verbis somniare
con^ordiam, Eusebius. hist. 4. cap. 14.
re exigere seruitutem: John ^he Apostle fled from Cerinthus, Ne balneae ipsae
corruant: supposing the place could not long endure, that contained an enemy
unto the truth; And Polycarpus would not company with Marrian that was
^rimogenitum diaboli, the child of Satan. May a man carry fire in his ^osome,
and not burn his clothes? and walk upon hot coals, and not scorch his
feet? may a man suffer the plague in his house, and not infect his family? a
Woolfe among his Lambs; and not hurt his fowld? and a serpent in the cradle,
and not spoil his child? But such is heresy, Cyprian. Epist. 20.
and false religion to the church and common^ wealth: even a plague that
pierce^ the heart: an ague that brings deat^^ eternal: a fire that burns to
destruction: and a serpent that sting^ to perdition: and do not these men
deserve better of religion then the Atheist, Tertul. depraescript.
that wish suc^ loss unto Christ, Hieron. Osc 2.7.
and hurt unto the Church? Ambrose. Epist. 80.


The Atheist pretends religion^ but for policy: sometimes with Herod the
more easily to destroye^ the infant, he also will go and worship Christ:
sometimes with Simon Magus, 2. Math.
the better to win credit and profit, ^. Acts.
he also must be the great^ power of God: sometimes ^with^ Ananias and Saphyra
to conceak^ his hypocrisy: and in a word. 5. Acts.
with this vizard to cover rebellions, murders, adulteries, and all sorts of
villainies. And does this also ^ouch the Papists? witness their Spanish
Inquisition, their holy ^eague; the Parliament of Province; ^he court in
France, Acts and Monuments.
called the bur^ing chamber; and the blood of holy Martyrs, with the which
om^is sere orbis infectus est: almost the whole world has been lately
bestained and besmeared. Here might you see dead men's bones brought to the
bar, and there condemned to the fire for heresy; here might you see the
mother burning at the stake, the child from her womb flying the fiery flames,
At the massacre in Antwerpe.
yet thrown again into the midst thereof for an heretic. Now might you
hear a hideous noyce crying occide, trucida, occide trucida, viuat missa,
viuat missa, murder, kill, slay, let the Mass live, Faelix Earl o^^ Wattenbr.
and let all slide. And now might you hear men swear, that they would ride up
to the spurs in the blood of the Lutherans. Illyricus.
If this be not sufficient to open unto thee their Satanicall natures, Apoe. 12.
in persecuting the seed of the woman: then attend a little, and tho^ shall
apparently behold their wol^uish corpse masking in sheepe^ clothing:
persuading falsehood for christian truth, Math. ^. Math. 19. Math. 10.
and prescribing deadly poison, in lewe of wholesome potions to the slaughter
o^ many a silly soul. For whereunto belongs the withholding of the facred
scripture from the hungry people, which are the blessed food and nourishments
of their souls, commanded and practiced by Christ, the Apostles, and the
Primitive church? 5. John.
because for sooth the people being kept in ignorance (which they say is the
mother of Piety) should not espy their works, Christ. ^om. 9. Epist. ad
colloss.
thereby to detest their knaueries: whereunto appertains their service in an
vnknowne-toung, Council. Trid. fect. 22. cap. 8.
and hiding from the people the only way unto salvation, Bellar. lib. 2. de
verb. c. 16.
which is by Christ? but to show their Jewish minds unto Christ, 1. Cor. 14.
and their Atheistical conceits unto Christianity. When a Jew of Ratisbone
converted to the says, was demanded, why the Jews thirsted after the blood of
Christians, answered, it was a mystery only known unto the Rabbis, and men
of highest place ^^ notwithstanding this was their custom, if any of them were
ready to make an end of this present life. a Rabbin anointed him with blood,
using these or such like words unto him, saying: If he that was promised in
the law, and in the Prophets has truly appeared, Fincelius. lib. 3. de mirac.
and if this Jesus crucified be the very Messiah, then let the blood of that
innocent man that died, cleanse thee from thy sins, and help thee to
eternal life. And Epiphanius reports thus of the Jews of Tiberias, that they
would whisper after this sort in a dying man's ear: Believe in Jesus of
Nazareth, whom ou^ Princes crucified, for he shall come to judge thee in the
latter day: were the Jews adu^rsaries to Christ, and enemies to their
conscience, and do not our Papists second them in their Atheism? who teach a
man must put his confidence in good works, for they merit eternal life. Acts
and Monuments, of the Bishop of Winchester.
Howbeit when Stephen Gardener lying on his death bed heard the Bishop of
Chichester telling him of Gods promises and free justification by the blood of
Christ, he said: what my Lord will ye open that gap now? then farewell
altogether: to me and such other in my case you may speak it, but open this
window to the people, and then farewell altogether. And sir Christopher Blunt
had these words at the time of his execution: Bear witness I dye a
Catholic, Anno. 1600. March. 18.
yet so as I hope to be saved only by the death and passion of Christ, and by
his merits, not ascribing any thing to my own works: yea and Bellarmine their
great Goliath after much withstanding of the truth, at the last gives up his
verdit, Bellar. lib. 5. de iustifi^at. c. 7.
saying: propter periculum maius gloriae tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola
Dei misericordia et benignitate reponere: for the more assurance of future
glory, it is the safest way to put our whole trust and confidence, in the
mercy and loving kindness of Almighty God. 17. Luke. 9. Dan.
For when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants,
wherefore we pray not in our own righteousness, but in thy manifold mercies.

Now let the Papist then speak whether he be that blood desiring or
soule-deuouring Atheist: Pope Hildebrand, Benno Cardinal. in vita. and gest.
Hildebrand.
quia diebus per paganos Christum public persequi non poterat, per falsum
Monachum sub habitu Monastico, sub habitu religionis nomen Christi fradulenter
subuertere disponebat: because he could not in public conveniently persecute
Christ, he sought in secret vnde^ the pretense of religion, deceitfullie to
subvert the name of the anointed. Seneca.
The old Romans professed religion magis admorem, quam adrem: rather for
fashion then for truth: and more to satissie the law, then to be pleasing unto
God. Wherefore Pontifex Sheuola said, expedit falli in religione civitates,
Ang. ciuitat. 6. c. 10. and lib. 4. cap. 26.
quia non nisi homines in metu quodam et officio continendos eandem proponi
censendum est: It is expedient that cities should be deceived concerning
religion, because it serves to ^o other end, but to keep them in fear, and in
their duty. And to what other end belongs the Romish Indulgences and Popish
Purgatory, but to keep men in fear, and pick their purses? For who do they
place in Purgatory but the rich and wealthy men, by whom they may have
proffit and advantage by helping them out of prison, Bellar. de purg. lib. 2.
cap. 15. and 18.
and praying for them that they might have ease? Platina.
Yet Harding sometimes called it purgatorij pictas flammas: and Papyraceos
parietes: painted flames and paper walls. And Platina recorded, that Pope
Bone-face and 8. populis et regibus terrorem potius quam religionem incutere
conabatur: indeauoured rather to fear, and terrify kings and people, then to
instruct them in religion. Ioh. Dubrau. hist. Bohem. lib. 13.1.
Did not the Popes Indulgences to the Bohemians, promise plenam condonationem
delictorum: full pardon of all their sins, which made John Hussius depart
from the sea o^ Rome? Huss.
And Tetzelius that impudent publisher of that trash, persuaded the people
animam in coelum euolare quam primum iactu^ nummulus in cista tinuerit: the
soul should fly to heaven, so soon as the money gingled in the box, which
made Luther forsake the Pope. And good reason, for what is his religion, but
the high way to Atheism, seeing no man will fear to sin, that can buy it
off with a little money? Taxa cancel. Apost. printed at Paris. 1520.
Has not perjury, fratricide, theft, whoredom, murder, sacrilege, patricide,
and every sin his price to be sold in the Popes shop? Lib. Tax. published at
Rome 1475.
An absolution for them that carnally know their mother, sister, kinswoman:
tantu^ quinque 13. Romans Barnard Epist. 42.
grossis est taxata: yea any sin may have his pardon for his price. Thus may
the Pope not only break the laws of God himself, Chrysest. in Romans hom. 23.
but likewise dispense with others for the same. He will not be subject to
Kings and Princes, nor permit his Priests, Theod. Theoph. Oecumen in Romans lib.
4. sent. did. 34.
and Monks to obey the word. Yea illa praecepta quaein ^ege Dei de gradibus
matrimonialibus lata sunt, Papa iure positiuo sieve ecclesiastico immutare
potest. He may change the law of God, touching degrees of matrimony: and now
Emanuell king of Portugal may marry two sisters: and if the king of Naples
marry his fathers sister, C. acsi Clerici. deiudiei^s. Vu^sleius Gronninges.
^^act. de indulgent.
Alexander the sixth can grant a dispensation: if the Priest and clergy men be
adulterers Episcopis datur a pontifice dispensandi facultas: the Pope will give
the Bishops power to grant them dispensations: yea Sixtus the 4. gave the whole
family of the Cardinal of Saint Luce a dispensation to use Sodomie in June,
July, and August. It may be you behold a piece of their Atheistical
physnomie, but will you see it wholely unmasked? Matchiauell that politic
Atheist sets it down for a principle: that Princeps, Match. de princip. cap. 17.
quum morte adficere aliquem cup^t, speciosum aliquem pra^ textum adhibere
debet: The Prince must have always some probable pretense sor his practice,
and then he may proceed unto his murders. Dion. in Nerone. Dion. in Caracalla.
As had Nero, when he put his Mother to death, and Caracalla, when he killed
his brother Seta: The Jews making stirs and commotions in Indea and Samaria,
Josephus lib. 4. de bello Iudaic.
about the time of Neroes Empery pretended religio, and ins^^uta maiorum,
religion and statutes of their auncienters to be the cause of their rebellion,
whereas indeed they cared for nothing less then for religion. Templum enim,
pro cuius gloria pugnarese dicebant, igne consumpserunt, et pertinacia sua
vrbem et ecclesiam extrema clade deuastarunt: for they burned the temple for
which they said they took up arms, and by their obstinacy utterly destroyed
the city, and the temple. And is not the Popes pretense religion, when he
would achieue any matter, or perform any mischife? for who so fulfils not the
Popes mind, must by and by be an heretic. Volatcran.
What translated the Empire of Constantinople? heresy, as the Popes did please
to call it. Philip. haeret. Auno. 713.
And why was Philip the Emperor denounced to be an heretic? quod ex mandato
Dei Idola ex templis sustulisset: because he took Idols out of the Temples,
and from the Churches, according to Gods commandment. Why was Frederick the
second an heretic? for holding the wrong stirrup of the Pope; why was Philip
of France an heretic? 4. Philip.
because he would not take v^ arms against foreign nations, Betrand. hist.
Thol. Guido. Perpin. lib. de haeres.
a^ the commandment of Pope B^niface the eight. How was Raim^^ handled by his
holiness, Egiliard.
for n^^ burning the Albigenses? And w^^ not religion his pretense, Palmerius.
when ^^ exiled Desiderius king of Italy, with wife and children into Lions,
there to end his days in misery, and his kingdom made S. Peter's patrim^^ny?
Yet it was cuident Guisies non religionem sed regionem affectare.
Was not religion the pretense of that infamous Masacre of France, of the
poisoning of John king of England by a Monk, albeit the king had farmed his
crown of the Pope? And is it not a Popish action haeriticis non esse fidem
seruandam a man may break his oath, troath, and faith, that is plighted to an
heretic? Religion was the pretense, wherefore Henry the third of France was
killed by a dissembling Monk Religion was the pretense why an hypocritical
Papist shot the Prince of Auris with a Gunne, after he had humbly saluted his
^^aiestie. And is not this a Popish Theorem, principi protestanti qui si^em non
seruat, qui prodit, qui perdit, ^^m non delinquere? It is no sin to
forswear, deceive, betray, and murder, a Prince, that is a protestant. Under
this pretense two Ia^^bins, with a cross in their hands procured the
murdering of more then 4000. Christians in Lisbon, but were publickely burned
for it in Ebora, Anno. 1600.
at the commandment of Emanuell the king. Under this pretense a Gray Friar
named brother Ferdinand dela place persuaded the king of Castile, to put sundry
Christians to death calling them Apostates.

Under this pretense of religion did Phocas kill Mauritius the Emperor and his
children, and was absolved both from murder and treason by Pope Boniface, upon
this condition, that as Phocas should be Emperor, Platina in vi^^ Bonifac. ^.
so the Pope should be Episcoporum princeps and caput ecclesiae: the prince of
the Bishops, and head of the Church: and can a Church whose head is the Pope,
and not Christ, be without Atheism, Specul. Pontis.
A church that has many heads at one time? Yea and under this pretense did
Boniface the eight Dart regna et auferre bestow and take away kingdoms,
Platina.
and gather, aurum plusquam dici potest, gold without measure: under this
pretense the Pope sent Parry, January 3. 1584.
to kill our blessed Queen Elizabeth, promising him for his labor pardon of
all his sins: and calls it an holy act. Yea under this pretense they sent
forth excommunications both against Prince and subject, debarring the one from
his dignity, and the other from his duty. Thus Sixtus the 5. excommunicated
Henry of Burbon king of France, the fourth of that name, calling him the
pretenced king of Navarre: and Henry Prince of Condy, saying: Nos illos illorun
que posteros priuamus in perpetuum, etc. We deprive them, Datum Romae apud 5.
Marcu^. Anno. 1584. 5. idus September. Anno primo nostri pontificatus.
and offices etc, and then absolues all their nobles, vassailes and subjects of
their oaths, allegiance, and duties in pain of excommunication: And siquis
hoc attenuare praesumpserit, indignatiouem omnipotentis Dei, et beatorum Petri,
ac Pauli Apostolorum eius se nouerit incursurum: If any shall presume to
diminish any whit hereof, he undergoes the wrath and indignation of almighty
God, and of his blessed Apostles Peter and Paul. Yet Pope Clemens the 5.
abrogated the decree of Boniface the eight, and freed Phil^ king of France from
the curs^ thereof. And S. Augustine was o^ the contrary mind, in his Epistl^
to Auxilium, Lib. 5. cap. 7. Ernan. con. c. 7. Aug. Epist. 75.
how be it not subject to his Popish penalty. Thus Boniface the 8. Martin the
5. Julius the 2. sent many thundering excommunications into France, but the^
were all disabled by the Counse^ and court of Paris in France. Gratian. c.
sihabes 24. q. 3.
Thu^ dealt Gregory the 9. with Frederick^ sending three Bulls to tormen^ him:
In the first accusing him of sacrilege, perjury, lying, cruelty, patricide,
and all ungodliness. In the second freeing all people, Cities, Extat. apud
Auentinum. in Anal. cont. brid. 2. Imperat.
Towns iure iurandi religione from their oaths, and commandes it to be
preached unto the people. In the third, he calls him heretic, beast, with
other vilde terms, commanding all Christian people, if they will have God ^o
tender them, and to have mercy upon their souls, not to favor the Emperor, in
deed, word, or thought. Yet says God, thou shall not speak evil of the
ruler of the people. 2. Leuit. 22. Exodus
Thus dealt Gregory the 7. with Henry the 4. most miserably ^yranizing over the
silly Emperor, stirring up traiterous Rodolph against his Lord and Master,
Antoninus part. 2.
and sending him a golden crown with this inscription. Petra dedit Petro,
Benno Cardinal.
Petrus Diadama Rodolpho the rock gave the diadem to Peter, and Peter bestowed
it upon Rodolph: but it was the overthrow both of the Pope and Rodolph For
Zedechias perjury shall not go unpunished, Ezechi. 17.17.18.
because he despised the oath. Thus dealt Paulus the 3. with Henry the 8. king
of England a prince of happy memory. And his Popish Poole persuaded with
Charles the 5. transported his army prepared against the Turk into England
against Henry the 8. because the Pope being banished from hence, Cardiral Poole
lib. 3. ad Hen. 8.
here wa^ sparsum semen Turcicum. Turcism^ was sowed in the land. Thus de^^
Clemens the 5. with Franciscus De^dalus Duke of Venice: But it were a world to
rip up all their Bulle^ and cruel treasons. Religiosulos, peregrinationum et
votorum praetext^ obambulantes prouincias, Cornel. Agrip. de vanit scient.
explorae^ secreta, ad omnium proditionum genera extractos esse: their Friars,
and walking mates, under pretense of vows and pilgrimages, are fit
companions for all treacheries and treasons. And no marvel seeing it is a
principle of Papistry: that every oathe and vow must be holy unto the Pope;
but neither vow, nor oath unto the Prince, but what shall please his Popedom.
Neither are these Bulls and Bullmen hurtful only unto Princes, ^ut also full
of blasphemies against almighty God: as is evident in the Bull of Pius Sixtus
upon the celebration of the Iubily, Ex promonstre^ Ioh. Bal. H. Bulling.
Cornel. Agrip.
and in the Bull of Gregory the 9. directed to Albert Beham of Bath.
Notwithstanding least I seem to dwell o^uer-long upon this demonstration: I
come unto the thundering Bull of Pius Quintus, roaring and breathing out his
beastly threats against our gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, thus popishly
inscribed. Sententiam declaratoriam contra serenissimam Reginam Anglia ^es ei
adhaerentes haereticos. Qua etiam declar antur absoluti omnes sabditi a
^iuramento fidelitatis, Datum. Romae a pud sanctum Potium 5. kale^d Mart. Anno.
1569.
et quocunque alio ^debito, et deinceps obedientes anathemate illaqueantur. A
sentence declaratory against the most renowned Queen of England, and all her
heretical adherents, absoluing all her subjects from their oath of trustiness
^loyaltie, and whatsoever other duty, accursing with a fearful execration all
those, that shall yield unto her any service or obedience. Behold the fruits
of Romish religion, perjury, treason, disobedience, and vilde reuiling of the
Lords anointed, calling her serua vitiorum: the woman servant of vice and
wickedness. And why? because she yoaked not her self unto his Popeship: held
not his stirrup with Ludouicke. yielded not her neck with Frederick: nor gave
him homage paying a hundred marks a year with Richard: therefore she is a
prete^ced Queen, Anno. 1569.
and must be excommunicated, cursed, disherited, and what not. Now must D.
Morton stir up the English Catholics to rebellion, and raise co^motions in the
Noth now must auriculer confession cast the anchor of conspiracy: and the
traterous Jesuits lay their bloody hands upon the Lords anointed a faithful
progeny issuing from a murdering spanish soldier Ignatius de Laiola. Council.
Chalceden. Niceph. 13. c. 34.
Yet thus dealt not the primitive Church with Constantius, and Anastasius,
albeit both atached of heresy, the one with Eutichisme, and the other with
Arrianisme. But what think our modern Papists, of this Antichristian Bull?
First they demand An catholici non teneantur virtute Bullae contra eam arma
sumere, These and many more Articles of the same sort were found and taken in
the search for David Engle field in York eshire^ and recorded there in the
memories of the cou^^ cell: entitled Ad consolationem and instructionem
Angloru^ catholicorum and confessariorum.
eam deponere, incarcerare, vel occidere data opertun^^ate et victoriae
consequendae probabilitate, etc. Whether the Catholics are not bound by the
ver^ue of that Bull to take up arms against her Majesty, to depose, imprison
or kilher, if opportunity serve, or if there be any probability of the victory:
unto which is answered: non teneri nisi, etc. They are not simply bound
thereunto by the virtue of the Bull, except the matter be so handled, as they
may be assured of the victory: and in that case, all are bound to do their
uttermost for the common good of faith and religion. Secondly they demand An
stante Bulla in virtute priuatus possit eam^ occidere: whether it be lawful
for a private man to kill her by the virtue of the Bull: To which it is
answered: It is lawful out of doubt, Papists are no traitors.
if he be sure by that means to deliver the kingdom from oppression. Thirdly
An Catholici, etc. whether the Catholic may take an oath that Elizabeth is
the true Queen of England. To this after some demurre is answered, albei^ they
must not swear falsely: yet they may hide, and cover the truth with any kind
of aequiuocation or doubling, especially if the demandes be not according to
law, Bulla quatenus spectat ad fauorem religionis and catholicorum efficax and
integrum man^^.
or before a lawful Judge: As if it be demanded whether she be the true
Queen, it is enough for their oath if they understand it, that so indeed the
common people take her, or her adherents or after any other sort. Fourthly An
Catholici, etc. Whether the Catholics for all their oath may by the virtue of
the Bull take up arms against her Majesty upon any opportunity: whereunto
they answer, Basil. Yet God accepts of the oath according to his meaning that
gives the oath, or as he understands it to whom we swear.
they may do it in the case of religion: yea although there were no Bull, yet
it is lawful to overthrow and thrust a tyrant from the throne. Lastly (to omit
the rest) An princeps ant regina ipsa excommunicata, etc. Whether the Queen
being excommunicated and denounced an heretic, she be also deprived of the
right and title of the kingdom, and the people freed from their oath and
allegiance^ To which is answered affirmatively, Yet all the Papists in the
world are not able to convince her Grace of any heresy or tyranny.
adding moreover, that the Queen of England not only because she is a
heretic and a tyrant, but also because she rules with the hurt, loss,
damage, and disturbance of the whole Church of England, may be lawfully thrown
from her kingdom, had there bin no bull published against her. Behold how
they make the laws of God of none effect: Periurare, fallere, dissimulare: to
forswear, Match. com. 2. cap. 13.
dissemble, and deceive is a commandment of their good Lord Machiauell: If
they be summoned before heretics, sophistice iurare et sophistice respondere:
to swear deceitfully and to answer Sophistically is authorized by their
Canons. Int. qu^^st. ad tribunal. iudicis pertinentes Q. 2. quomodo respond. in
tribunali haeret.
Indeed the heretics called Henriciani and Apostolici, Iuramenta nec licita
probarunt, nec peier are dubitarunt, neither allowed bathes as lawful, nor
made any question to break them, or to be forsworn. 2. Luke.
Christ bids us endure with patience: the Pope co^mandes to resist with
violence. 1. pet. 3.2. 3. Colo^. 2. Titus. Jude.
S. Peter says honor the king: be subject says S. Paul, and speak not evil
of those that are in authority is the concord of the scripture: curse not the
king says the wiseman: pray for kings says the Apostle, 10. Eccles. 1.
Timoth. 1. 1. Tim. 2. 2. Math.
and give to Caesar that which is Caesar's says Christ. Colimus imperatorem vt
hominem a Deo secundum, we reverence the Emperor as one next unto God says
Tertullian. Tertul. ad Scap. Tertul. Apol.
Christians prayed for the Emperor in the primitive Church, and were no
rebels: yea it was the poesy of the Elder Church malumus occidi quam
occidere, we had rather be killed, then kill. Aug. de morib. eccles. catho. lib.
1. c. 30.
Catholica ecclesia docet populos vt se subda^t regibus: the catholic Church
teaches the people to be subject unto Kings: and (...). Can. Apost. 83.
If any revile the King, or dishonor the Maiestrate, if he be a Clergyman, he
must be deposed, or if a lay man, excommunicated. Constantinus, Valens,
Valentinian the younger, Anastasius, Justinian, Her aclius, Justinian the
fourth were heretical Princes, and Julian was an Apostate, yet the church of
Christ endured, Aug. in Psalm. 124.
served and obeyed them: milites Christiani, seruierunt Imper atori infideli.
David would neither kill Saul, nor suffer any of his soldiers to lay their
hands upon the Lords anointed. 1 Samuel 16. 1. Sam. 22. 1. Sam. 24. 1. Sam. 26.
Aug. cont. lit. Perili. lib. 2. cap. 48.
Ecce Saul non habebat innocentiam, et tamen habebat sanctitatem non vitae fed
vnctionis: Yet David was a man of God. At^^naricus king of Goths, when he came
to visit Theodosius the Emperor said: sine dubio Deus terrenus est Imperator,
Baul us Diacon de gest. Romans lib. 1.
contra quem quicunque manus leuare missus fuerit ipse sui sanguinis reus
extitit: out of doubt the Emperor is another God on earth, against whom who so
shall seem to list up his hands, is guilty of his own blood and destruction.
Yet Athanaricus was an heathen. D. Allen lib. of the defense of Catholics 8.
John. Walden Cont. Wicleu^stas lib. 2. 5. Prou. 17. Deuteronomy. 1. Sam. 9. 1. King.
12. 1. King. 17.
But the Jesuits both against the scripture, nature, religion, and all
antiquity allow the murdering of Princes: an evident sign who is their father.
The Papists say kings reign by the Pope: but the scripture says they rule by
God. And he that resistes the king withsta^des the ordinance of God. Ieroboham
was an Idolater, yet none of the Prophe^^ persuaded any of the people to kill
him. Ahab was an Idolater, yet Elias seeks no insurrection. Jeremy under
Zedechias, Daniel under Nabuchodonoser, Christ under Pilate, John under Herod,
Paul under Faelix, and Peter under Nero line, yet move not the people to
rebellion. But the Papists have been the authors almost of all the wars
euersions, and dissentions, that have happened for the space of 700. years in
disturbed Christendom. Gregory the second, Gregory the third, and Leo the third
made Italy decline from their sovereign Emperor. Adrian the first set the
Frenchmen against the Lombardes, and maintained Pippins rebellions against king
Childerick. Were they not Popes that set the French and Germans at odds, that
held war themselves against Henry the 4. and the 5. Frederick the first, and
the second Ludouick Bauarus: and suggested others to do the like? Were they not
Popes that disturbed Naples and Aragon? sowed discord between France and
Spain, the Greeks and Normans: England and France: France and Germany: Prince
and people? Hist. Flor. lib. 1. Guiccard. lib. 1. Machi. hist. Flor. lib. 1.
Insomuch as Machauell could note the Roman Church to be the cause of all
the calamities of Italy. What should I here relate the hurliburlies raised and
increased by Julius the second? the slaughters caused by Innocentius the third,
Of Nice, and Go^stantinopl. Synod. Carthag. can. 6.2 q. 2. c. placuit. c. 36.
Gratian. ^^st. 22. ^^renouintes. Tonstal burned English testaments at Paul's
cross.
and Nicholas the third? these may give us a taste, that their whole religion is
but politic Atheism. It were worth the noting to mark how they corrupt the
scriptures: suppress the truth, deprave the ancient counsels: falsify
Synods, change the Canons, set up fictions, displace antiquities; forge
novelties; falsify laws; feign authors; pervert tables; burn bills; set some
of the fathers upon the rack, and thrust the rest into purgatory. Witness one
for many: Bellarmine their chief champion, whose policy is sometime to change
the state of the cause at his pleasure: sometime to trouble the whole order
with new distinctions on the words: Now to give one and the same author yea
one and the same book both the liking and the lie, Index expurgatorius.
as it shall be for him, or against him: then to turn the affirmative
sentences of the fathers into Negatiues, Abraham. Sculteti. Epist. nucupator.
and their negatiues into affirmatiues: otherwhiles to quote half a speech and
period for the whole: and then again to bring in counterfeites among the
fathers coin: yea and to prefer the barbarous translations of the Latins (if
they serve his turn) before the purity of the Grecian coppies, that make not
for him. And it is no policy to keep their nouices from reading the book of
protestants? Council. Trid.
or was it not foxlike cruelty to condemn William Tolwin for an heretic,
being master of arts, because he had books of Frith, and Ridley, Melanthon,
and the confession of the Germans, Anno. 1541.
compelling him to recant it at Paul's cross? Bellar. lib. de Romans pontific.
2. and 3.
And now men must build their faith upon the Popes mouth, for he cannot err.
Yet Liberius was an Arrian: Acasias 2 Nouatian: Honorius 2 Monothelite.
Siluester the 2. John the 18. Gratian. 2. did. 19. Platina. Luitprand.
John the 19. John the 20. Bennet the 8. Bennet the 9. Gregory the 7. were
Negromancers. John the 13. maintained open stews. Boniface the 8. was found
guilty of heresy, murder, Fascie. tempo Theod. a Nieen lib 3. cap. 9. Abbas
Vrsperg.
Simony: and John the 14. was convicted of heresy by the counsel of
Constance. Howbeit the Papists would not believe the scriptures, no not
Christum natum, passum etc. Benno Cardinal.
that Chrst was borne, suffered, rose, neither the resurrection, life
everlasting, the trinity, no nor that there was a God, Nisipropter ecclesiae
authoritatem, but for the authority of their Church: and yet the church depends
upon the Pope, Stapleton lib. 1. 10. sect. 3. etc. 2 sect. 6. etc 2.13. sect.
12.
qui pleru^que tantu^ in se fidei habet, quantum Turcarum imperator, who for
the most part has as much faith and religion in him, Whittach. cont. Staplet.
oc author. sact. script. lib. 1. cap. 2.
as their great Turk. And I pray you what more high way can there be unto
Atheism, then to build faith scriptures, church, and all upon the Pope, in
whom is nothing but a mass of heresy, and infidelity? No marvel now, if the
canon of the scripture be so uncertain among the Papists, seeing the Pope may
detract, and add unto it what he list. If the third council of Carthage
decree upon a canon, Trid. council. sess. 4. cap. 2.
yet may the council of Trident add unto it Baruch and Ecclesiasticus: by the
privilege of his Popeship Rhenatus Bcnedictus upon commission may add the 3.
Lib. 1. cap. 8. stromar.
and 4. books of Esdras to the Canon. And his papacy may put in more into the
canon, then either the Fathers, Council. Laod. c. 84. Origin. Gelasius. Nazianz.
Hieron in prolog. Galiato. Athanas. in synops. sacr. script.
or the Laodicean council: and for the interpretations of the scriptures, if
the Romists interpret it, it must stand for the word of God, be it meuer so
false and ridiculous. But can the Papists deride their religion? How think
you? what did Hildebrand the Pope when he asked council of the devil? Hosius
de expres. verbo Dei.
or the Bishops and the sacrifising Priests, demanding Satan's judgment and
policy touching the ruin of the Florentines, signo dato hostiam, Benno
Cardinal.
id est deum suum igni inijciunt: when they received a disco^tented sign,
Volater. lib. 5. Georg.
they threw their host, that is their God into the fire. Boniface the 8.
because Procherus took part with the Gibellines, Harding. Confut. Apol. Anglic.
which were his adversaries, said unto him upon Ashwednesday the solemn day of
ashes: memento homo quod Gibellinus es, Council. Later sess. 10. sub. Leone. 10.
et cu^ Gibellinis in terra^ reuerteris. Remember man (not that thou art ashes)
but that thou art of the stock, and faction of the Gibellines, Nauclerus Ann.
677 Agathon in the first general Council at Constantinople.
and that with the Gibellines thou shall return unto the earth, and forthwith
he threw ashes in his face. Do they not defend whoredom, taking tribute a
meretricibus of stews and harlots? do they not defend usury, and call them
montes pietatis rocks and mountains of piety and devotion? And was not
Johannes de Casa an arche Prelate, that wrote a Book in the commendation of
Sodomy? Sinon cast tamen caute.
To omit their baptizing of Bells, and their other fopperies: are not these
sufficient to show, what house they come of? Agrippa^duers. Louani^ns.
did not Ecchius call marriage beastliness, and yet himself had three
bastards, the same year he disputed thereof at Lipsia? But these chaste
patrons do not forswear fornication, adultery and uncleanness, but only
lawful wedlock, and honest marriage. Ross. lib. de ^ust. reip Christ. Imp. eap
5.
If I should tell you what small conscience these Papists make of railing,
slaundering, Hard. in defens. Apol.
lying and blaspheming, their Atheism would be over plain and palpable. Who
so shall read Alanus: Bristow: Stapleton: Rishton: Hamilton, Bellar. praefat.
2^ controu. de Christ.
Bozius, Vlenberge, Verstergan, Ecchius, Cocleus: Stapilus: Bolsecus:
Bellarmine, Rhe^mist. vbiq^.
Harding, and the Rhemish testament: where they call the protestants, Turks,
Pagans, Monsters, miracles, Gerions, Briareans, Minotaurs, Centaures, liars,
impudent, foolish, shameless, ignorant, witles, jewish, Staple. in Whittak. and
de Iewello ^u^e. 9.
heathenish, blasphemous, villains, harlots, madmen, thieves, cobblers,
cananites, apostates, heretics, devils, letchers, tinkers, tapsters,
fiddlers, pipers, that they make no account of the articles of their faith,
Bellar. denotis Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 8.
and such like, may easily discern in them the spirit of the dragon and of
Atheism. They make no bones to belly religious and good men (so they might
color their religion) as you may see by these two examples in steed of many.

They write that Calvin calling upon the devil, blaspheming and swearing gave
up the ghost, cursing the day when he began to apply himself to study and
writing: yea that in his life time he had forsaken the Church of God, Cyprian.
and betaken himself to papisme: but mendacia di^ non fallunt: lies last not
long: For Calvin answering for himself says: fallitur Diabolus cum tota su^
caterua, Calu. in Epist. instit. Christi^.
si me putidis suis mendacijs obruendo, hacindignitate fractiorem ve^ magis
lentum fore putat: quia Deum prosua immensa bonitate daturum mthico^sido, vt in
cursu sanctae suae vocationis aequabili tolerantia perseuerem: the devil is
deceived with all his army, if ouercharging me with their stinking lies he
thinks by this indignity to weaken and discourage me: because I trust that God
of his goodness will so enable me as I shall persevere in the course of his holy
calling, with the same pains, and patience. And of Beza they set out many
copies in print, that himself at his death did turn Papist and with him the
whole church of Geneua in this sort. Theod Reza. a ^^oan Gui^. Stuck^u^^ Sac.
The^log. in ^ccles. Tiguri^. profess. Epist. and pastorum ac profess. Geneuens
responsioon put^diss. and impudentiss. Commentum Monachorum sacr. nomen Jesus
ementium de The^dori Bez^^ obi^u ci^^dem ac totius Ecclesi^ Genauen^ad p^o ^uum
defectionem.
Theodorus Beza vt semortivicinu^ sensit, cora^ pleno senatu Geneuensi
palinodiam cecinit, hortans et per dei amore^ eunde^ senatu^ totumque populu^
Gen^uensem rogans, vt si cohaeredes Christi in aeterna vita esse velint relicto
errore Caluinismi, ad catholicae s^dis obseruanti^m et religionem toto pectore
sese conuerterent, etc. which Beza himself suruiuing convicted of falsehood,
and the whole Church of Geneua writing in their own and his behalf proved to
be a detestable slander and sham^les lying fictio^. And are they less liberal
of their blasphemies that say we are able to do more the^ we ought, yea
plusqua^ reuer a facere teneamur, Bellar. lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 13
more then we are bound to do by the law of God. And if we cannot keep the
law of God Deus esset omni tyranno ini quior et crudelior: then were God more
cruel and unjust then any tyrant. Naziacez.
Notwithstanding (...): not to sin is above the reach of man. Rhe^. 1. Tim.
^. Aquin. supple. 25. q. art. 1.
And what Papist ca^ love the Lord with all his heart, mind, soul, and
strength, that make the Pope equal to God and his Christ? Papa et Christus
faciunt vnu^ consistorium the Pope and Christ make one consistory. That say
Francis did as much as Christ imo plura fecit quam Christus: yea he did more
then Christ. Pomormitan. lib. confirmitat.
That call the scriptures dumb, Defens. Apol. Jewel.
dead, and Inckhorne divinity, yea and deny there is any jot of divinity in
them, que nos ad crede^dum: that can bind us by religion to believe them. Pigh.
3. de eccl. Eckius.
Is not this the very top of Atheism, to deny the scriptures to be the word of
God? Andrad. lib. 3. defens. council. Trid.
For this cause they have printed books of the insufficiency of the
scriptures, and the uncertainty of the same. Ecchius. Enchir. de author. eccle.
resp. 3. de object. haeret.
And now they must not be Authenticke nisi ecclesiae authoritate unless the
Church authorize the^. For omnis quae nunc est scripturarum authoritas, ab
ecclesiae authoritate dependet necessario: all the authority, which now the
scripture has, depends necessarily upon the authority of the church. Pighsus
lib. 1. de H^ rarch. Eccles. cap. 2.
No neither should they be cannonicall, nor be of any force among the Papists
nisi nos ecclesiae doceret authoritas: but for the authority of their Church:
yea tantum valent, Hossius. lib. 3. de author. scrip.
quantum Aesopi fabulae: but for the testimony of their Church, they would
esteem no more of the scriptures, the^ they do of Aesops fables. Hossius.
lib. 2. cont. Bren^^n.
No marvel then if they make David a Ballad maker, and equal fables, Canons,
Epistles, Extrauagants, Constitutions, and traditions with the scripture or if
they make new scriptures as Nouum Euangelium, Hosius lib. de verbo Le^.
the new gospel, Andrad lib. 2. Lindan lib. 1. c. 4. and 5. did. 15. Sancta
Roma.
our Ladies Psalter, the legends of Martirs: new sacraments, prefer traditions
above the scripture and make traditions the foundation of the scriptures.
Scripturae authoritas euanescit penitus, nisieam traditio in sundamentu^
stabiliat, whereas no Turk, Ioh. Cuspian de Saracenis.
or Sarace^ dare change one jot of Mahomets law: the Papists dare change the
law of God: take the cup from the people, decreed by Pope John the 23,
Baptista. Pane. c^us.
in the counsel of Consta^ce: mingle water with wine, and ad salt, spittle,
oil, exorcismes, and what not unto baptism. Yet the scripture permits none to
know above that which is written, Bellar. lib. 1. de baptism. c. 2. and 27. 1. Corinthians. 4. 1. Galathians. 3. Romans.
no not an Angel from heaven: for every man is a liar, but God is true. And so
is the Pope (says the Papist) for he is a God. What now remains, if God sent
us the scriptures for a rule for our salvation, but to bel^eue they be both
true and sufficient for us, or else to imagine that God in the^ either could
not, would not o^ durst not reveal the truth unto us, which is gross Atheism
once to suppose. Indeed the old heretics indeuouring to deface woma^kinde, and
condemn wedlock, Clemens. Alex. lib. 3. strom.
alleged testimonies ex quoda^ euangelio Apocripho secundu^ Aegiptios: out of
a certain Apocriphal gospel, according to the Aegiptians: and from the gospel
of S. James. The Manickes held the scriptures to be corrupt: Heluidius was
persuaded that the Greek copies were false, Aug. lib. 1. de mor. cap. 29.
yea the heretics, not daring to stand to the Canonical scriptures, used
Apocrypha as the gospel of the Hebrews: the gospel of Euah: the gospel of
Philip, the gospel of Nicodemus; the gospel of perfection: the questions of
our Lady the more and the less: the revelation of Adam and so forth: many of
these had the disciples of Marrion: And Tatian from the four Evangelists
compounded a diatesseron as a ouitessse^ce for his followers. Council. Trid.
sess. 4. decr. 2. Bellar. lib. 2. descript. cap. 2. and de verbo De lib. 2.
cap. 10.
The Papists not behind with any, hold the hebrew text to be corrupt, and
therefore a athorize only the latin: how be it Isodorus Clarius says: that in
the latin, Isid. Epist. ad lector ante ver fione^ biblioru^.
and common interpretation there be inumerable faults, whereof he amended 8
thousand in his translation: notwithstanding for all his pains, his
translation was condemned by the Spanish inquisition. For Apocrypha they have
proteuangelium Iacobi^ the Gospel of James, the lyturgy of James: the Gospel
of Nicodemus Prochorus his history of John the Evangelist: the Epistles of
Martialis: Abdias of the lives of the Apostles, and (to omit all the rest)
nouum euangeliu^ Cyrilli cuiusdam monachi Carmelitae a new gospel of a certain
Camelite Monk named Cyrillus, the sum whereof is deum patrem sub lege, etc.
Lib. de Poe^ir. cap. 8. Math.
God the ^ather reigned in the time of the law: God the son in the time of
grace, but now the 4. begging orders being erected, the holy Ghost is
authorized in his kingdom, Parisiens. Thom. Crantiprat.
and shall so continue to the end of the world, and who so will be ^^ued, must
of necessity believe this gospel and yet many withstood as Gulielme de sa^cto
amore: Guide. Bonatus who writ a book against it: But Ma^fred king of Cicily
was excommunicated by the Pope, Fasci^. tempor^^. Ioh. Hu^^. tom. 2.
because he detested this gospel: Gerardus Saragellus was burned at Parma for
refusing it. Thus they disable the word of God to set up their own inventions:
which how it may be without Atheism I rest to be instructed by the pollitick
Papist. Greg. Epist. 3. lib. 11. Seculius 2. Tuessal. 2.
Gregory and Sedulius pointing out unto us Antichrist, affirm Antichristum
Iudacias ceremonias reuocaturu^ that antichrist should call again the Jewish
ceremonies. But the Papists have replenished the church both with Iudaisme and
Gentilisme, Euscb. lib. 5. cap. 14.15.19. etc.
yet Blastus was counted an heretic, quod late^ter vult Iudaismum introducere:
because he labored underhand to bring Iudaisme into the Church of Rome.
Tertul. lib. de praescript. haeret.
And says Thomas of Aquin, Gentilitatis ritus repudiabatur tanqua^ omnino
illicitus, et a Deo se^per prohibitus. Ritus aute^ legis cessabat tanqua^
impletus per Christi passionem, Tho. Aqui. 1.2. Q. 103. Art. 4.
vtpote a Deo in figur am Christi constitutus: the rites and ceremonies of the
Gentiles were rejected and refused, as altogether unlawful, Boemus. Aubanus de
gent. mor.
and for ever forbidden of God: but the ceremonies of the law did cease, as
being fulfilled by the passion of Christ, Guicciard. funeral 1. Blondus ^^ium.
Mantuan. fast. Belethus. Aug. de confess. Euang. 1.^^.1^.
being ordained of God to be a figure of Christ. Notwithstanding the Papists
have borrowed of both, worshipping God after another manner then he had
prescribed: and not serving Christ according to the knowledge of the truth.
Lactan. lib. 5. cap.10. 1. Sam. 5. 22. Numb. 1. King. 11. 1. King. 13. 2. King.
5. 5. John. 23.15. Math. 9.
The Aegiptians served God under the shapes of beasts: the Philistines under the
shape of Dagon a Fish; the Graecians of a man; the Caldeans had their Baal; the
Sidonians had their Ashteroth; Amonites, Moloch; Syrians, Rimnon, and so forth:
yea thus did the Jews, Arrians, Mahometists worship God otherwise then he had
revealed in his word. For they honored not the Son, as they did the Father;
but served him, Lactan. de fall. relig. lib. 2. c. 20
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Yet the Papist serves and
represents God in an Idol, and many ways like the Jews and Heathens does
dishonor him. Aug. in Psa. 113. 1. Romans. Pla^o m^haed. Virgil. Aeneid. 1
For the Gentile could say, no^ipsa timemus, sed eos ad quoru^ imagine^ ficta,
et quoru^ nominibus consecrata sunt: we neither fear nor worship the Image,
Plu^arch. de s^ra viudict.
but the thing represented by the Image: And yet S. Paul says, that the
Gentile turned the truth of God into a lie: namely the glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of a corruptible man. Boemus de Gent.
mor. lib. 1.^.5.
The Heathens prayed to the dead, as Aeneas to Anchises: so do the Papists. The
heathe^s made a Purgatory so do the Papists. Bellar. de cleria. lib. 1. cap.
19. did. 82.
The Heathens had shaven crowns, turnings in the altars, sacrifisings, pompous
solemnities, adorations, musical measures, Pol. Virg. lib. 5. cap. 4.
etc. and so have the Papists: their Priests must be single because the legal
Priests did separate themselves from their wives in their course of sacrifice:
wherefore Siricius will forbid Priests marriages: and Gregory the 9. will take
it clean away. Clemens. Alex. lib. 3. strom.
Howbeit (says Clemens) the heretics took occasion to forbid priests
marriages ex Ethnicorum exemplis, from the example of the Heathens. Thus they
took examples ab Hieraophntis Atheniensibus from the Athenian expounders,
Hi^^on. lib. 2. cont. Iouiman.
who lost their strength with drinking Hemlock: and under pretense of purity,
excluded lawful wedlock from their idolatrous sacrifices, saying: absistat a
sacris Eusch. de praep.

Cui tulis hesterna gaudia nocte Venus. Euang. 18.

Of this heresy were sometime the Essens, borrowing their kind of life from
Pythagoras rules, the first chapter whereof was (...), Adamites.
the contemot of marriage. Some think their prohibitions came from the gospel
of S. James, others from the example of Adam, Guido per^iu^. lib. de Haeresib.
that knew not his wife before his fall: other from Abdias the Babylonia^
writing of the Acts of the Apostles: but howsoever Mantua^ sets this brand upon
the^.

Romulidu^ leges quaesunt conubia contra.
Esse malas vere prohibent, etc.
That those Romish laws are full of impiety and ungodliness. Belsar. de
Monach. lib. 1. c. 5.
If the Nazurites and Rechabites had their vows, the Papists will run in
debt unto them for their Monks, and votaries: If Moses and Elias fast forty
days, Rhem. in Math. 4. sect. 2.
they must needs afford the Papists the time of Lent from their examples:
Paul the first will lend unto it a lenten service: and Gregory upon his Popish
liberality will ad 4. days unto it: yet he will take away Milk, Polyd. Virg.
lib. 6. cap. 6. 5. Numb. 19. Numb.
Cheese, Butter, Eggs; And if the papists have need of consecrated oil,
Bellar. de cultu. sanct. 3. lib. ca. ^.
salt, water, ashes, they must come a begging to the Jews. Sigebert. Volater.
Polyd. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Innocentius, and Foelix the fourth will bestow it kindly upon the sick. But
Siluester will have the Bishops anointed after the manner of the Leuiticall
Priests. Bellar. de sacra. confir. lib. 2. c. 8.
And if the law prescribe anoyntings, the Papists will be bold to borrow it.
Leuit. 4.
and Damasus will have the crossing with Chrisme upon the brow at baptism: yea
if the Jews had their sacrifices for sin, the Popes will have their Mass,
Bellar. de missa lib. 2. cap. 2. Platina. lib. 8. and 9.
or else they will run upon the score: yea here the Pope will show his
liberality: Gregory will give unto it the Antiphonae and 9. times Kyrieleison.
Yea if needs be, whatsoever Celestine, Sixtus, Innocentius the first, Sergius
the first, Gelasius, Leo and others have begun, he will alter, and change,
saying: sancti Patres no^ statim omnia ad decorum officij pertinentia videre
potuerunt, H^st. Lornbard, de tribus varie^ tatibus missa.
sed diuersi diuersa ordinauerunt: the holy fathers could not see all that was
needful for so high a service as the Mass, whence grew a controversy,
whether the Ambrosian, or the Gregorian service were to be preferred. But down
went the Ambrosian in the time of Charles the great, with fire and faggot both
for it, and the vpholders thereof. And the first Lattin Mass was sung at the
sixth Synod of Constantinople in the year 656. the true number of antichrist.
Sanguine miss^. Cr^uit. Bale in Centuar. cap. 8 ^. Apo^. 1.
Sergius bestowed upon it agnus dei ^ others the worshipping of the host at
Eleuatio^ as also the carriage of it with lights and other superstitions unto
the sick others borrowed massing garments from the attrying of the priests in
the old law: Stephanus ordained altars after the manner of the Jews: Siluester
bestowed both linne^ Albes and corporals, Rellar. de Missa lib. 2. cap. 15.
Poly. lib. 6. c. 12 Platina.
yet Sixtus will not have the Priest to wear his robes but in an holy place.
If Salomons Temple be all gorgious, they will adorn their Churches, with
images, Bellar. de missa. lib. 2 cap. 6. Polyd. li. 6. c. 13.
Crosses, Gold etc, because of his example. If Constantine in the year 707.
give leave for Images to be painted in S. Peter's porch at Rome: Gregory the
third in the year 731. will have the^ to be worshipped. Lenit. 13.
And because the Leuiticall Priests had the discerning of the leprous persons:
the Popish Priests must have auricular confession, Bellar. de paeni^. lib. 3.
c. 3.
yea it must be a sacrament, et sine hac non patere viam ad caelum and without
this, Lombard lib. 4 did. 17.
there must be no way whereby to enter into heaven: yet Gratia^ doubted of it:
Augustine wrought against it: and in the church (...), Innocent. 3. in com.
lat. c. 21.
defending the unity of essence, it was altogether abrogated. Gratian. did 1.
de paenit.
But least the Papist should be less superstitious, the^ either Jew or
Gentile: Leo the third appointed the burning of Frankincense, Aug. confess. 10
cap. 3.
after the manner both of Jews and Gentiles: Siluester ordained the feast of
Petri ad Vincula; Hist. Tripart. lib. 9. cap. 35. Polyd. li. 5. c. 10 Poly.
lib. 6. c. 8. Sigebert volat. Extrau^gan.
Vigilius the feast of Candlemas: Honorius the feast of the exaltation of the
cross: Vrbanus the 4. Corpus Christi day. Sixtus the fourth the days of the
presentation, Poly. de In. lib. 6. cap. 8. Platina. Sabell.
and conception of our Lady, of Saint Anne, and of Joseph. John the eighteenth
the feast of all souls. And Gregory the 4. the feast of all Saints, Boniface
bestowed upon the Saints fasting euens. Polydor. 6. c. 4.
Sergius shrines. Gregory veneration. Leo hymns, Jacob. Bergo. men's.
John the 22. a saints bell to be tolled thrice every day, Platina. Naucler.
whereat the hearers should straight ways crowch down and say the Auae Maria.
Polyd. 6. ca. 12. Platina. Polyd. li. 6. c. 11 Gratian. Isidor. Volat. Platina.
Sauel. Sigebret. Polyd. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Foelix consecrated altars, and Boniface bestowed both church and altars on
thieves for sanctuaries. Innocentius must have the Pax carried about on
festival days to be kissed: Vrbanus the communion cup to be of gold. Zozimus
the Pascall taper on Easter eeuen to be hallowed Vitellian organs, and
instruments in the church. Celestine the Psalms to be sung after the order of
Antiphones. Leo Mass for the dead. Pelagius and Vrbanus canonical hours.
Gregory large processions: Leo petty processions; Greg. 4. Epist. cap. 88.
and Agapetus must have those processions to go round about the church every
Sunday. Polyd. li. 6. c. 11. Greg. 4. Epist. cap. ^8. Polyd. 6. cap. 11. Volat.
Platina. Martin. Carsu. Ian. Hugo. Floria cens. Ptolom Luce^s. Godfrid.
Behold how they worship God after their own fantacies, putting thereunto
canonical hours, Mattins, Mass, Procession, Sensing, Saints, holidays,
compleine, Litanies, Inuocations, Images, Dirges for the dead, Ladies Psalters,
Baptized Bells, Beads, Altars, Viterbius. Anronius Plor^t John Ru^us. Guliel.
Durand. in rat. diuino^.
Organs, Songs, Wax, lights, Banners, relics, crosses, holy water, and
foreign toungs. Yea oil, cream, spittle, unctions, shauings, ashes,
watchings, pageants, vows, pilgrimages, fastings, and a world of fencelesse
ceremonies. Is not this to change the worship of God into idolatry,
superstition, human inventions, men's commandments, and utterly to abolish
it? Bethen enim quae prius vocabatur domus Dei, Hieron in Osea lib. 1. cap. 4.
postquam vittuli in ea positi sunt, Bethauen er at, id est domus inutilis, et
domus Idoli: For Bethel that before was called the house of God, after the
Calves were placed in it, was Bethauen the house of Idols; then what can the
church of Rome be, but Bethauen, that sets up the worshipping of Angels;
Invocation of the dead, adoration of the cross, of Images, of relics, of the
bread in the sacrament, with all those superstitious ceremonies, Guliel. Whita.
aduers. Staplet. praefat. ad lectorem.
and many more before recounted. But let the whole religion of Papistry be a
profession of a colored Atheism, a good life will mend all: modo habeant bonos
motus rationi nature ali conuenientes, Scotus prolog. sent. q. 12.
caueantque eaquae ratio nature alis mala et fugienda esse docet: If they
neither be baptized, not have any Church, or teaching, yet they may be saved,
if they carry a good mind, have an honest intent, and walk according to the
laws of nature, and reason, as the Papists do. For they, Barnard de. consid.
ad Euge^. lib. 4. Barnard. in sermon. 33.
ante omnia sapientes sunt vt faciant mala, bonum autem facere nesciunt,
blandissimi asimplicissimi dissimulatores, et maligdulatores, mordacissimi
detractores, nissimi proditores: are wise to do evil, but know not how to do
good, most fawning flatterers, biting sla^derers, Holcot. in Sap. Lect. 183.
deep dissemblers, and malicious traitors: Priests of Baal, Dagon, Priapus,
Hieron. praefat. Didym. de spiri. tu sancto. Bernard. in cant. 33. and in
conuer^. sancti Paul. sermon. 1.
Angels of hell. Senatus pharisaeorum, Coloni purpuratae meretricis:
Babylonians, Pharisees, inhabitants of the purple colored whore, servants of
Antichrist: persecutors of Christ and his Church: sick from the soale of the
foot, to the crown of the head: roaring Lions, and devouring Wolves. Many go
unto Rome some what good, but return very bad. Eugenius ascendit Jericho,
incidit in latrones: Eugenius was fetched to Rome to be Pope, Hieron. in Soph. 5.
he went up to Jericho, but he fell among thieves. Grego. hom. 17 in Ezechi.
Hieron. in Ier. 2.


Proh pudor hos toler are potest ecclesia porcos,
Duntaxat ventri, veneri, somnoque vacantes:
O shame, can any Church still suffer Papistry, Bernard. Epist. 147.


That naught regardes but belly, sleep and venery?

When Nertarius began to set abroach auricular confession at Constantinople,
Palinge^. lib. 9. in Sagittario.
a certain Gentlewoma^ being confessed of a Priest, and enjoined to fast,
Zoz^n. hist. trip. lib. 9.c^.35
pray in the Church, was in the time of her penance ravished by an holy Deacon,
which took great pains in the sanctuary to observe the vow of chastity:
whereupon at the peoples exclamations it was there again dissolved. Cyprian.
Epist. 11.
Pope John the 13. was begotten by John the 12. of an arrant stru^pet;
Luitprand. lib. 2 cap. 13.
and John the 10. was borne of fornication, begotten by Pope Sergius, Johan.
Textot. Henricus Agrip.
upon an whore called Marozia: yea Peter Lombard Master of sentences: Peter
Comester Master of histories and the Monk Gratian compiler o^ the laws,
Volate.
were borne betwixt an holy Nun and a Priest. Johan Textor in offic.
Philip the holy Abbot of Vallisolet, and archbishop of His^alis in Spain,
kept Christian his brother Alphonsus wife himself: still living. Petrus Mendosa
Cardinal of Valens had two bastards by Elizabeth wife to Ferdinand. Boccace.
Pogghius.
Some one ghostly father has corrupted in his time a 100. Nuns and Maidens:
some 200. some more, some less. Agrippa reports of a Bishop, Agrip. de
incertitud. scient. cap. 64.
that boasted at his table, that he had in his diocese eleauen thousand
priests, which paind yearly a French crown for whores keeping, besides
occupying with other men's wives. Hildebrand, that withstrained the marriage of
Priests, was himself a Necromancer, a murderer, a suppresser of princes, and
kept Maude the Duches of Lothary both in the days of her husband Gozilon,
Lambard Shaffan. in Cronicis
and also after his death, leading her about with him in his Coach. Ranulph in
polycron. lib. 7. cap. 13.
At what time Johannes de Cremona the Popes Legate a latere came from Rome unto
England to forbid priests wives, Guliel. Maulmesbuty. Flo^. hist.
he was taken himself with a whore the night following.

Benno Cardinalis says, that the finishing of the thousand years, Henry
Huntington. lib. 7. Benno Card. in vita Hildebrand.
when the Dragon should be loosed, was in Pontificatu Sergij secundi in the
Popedom of Sergius the second, whom a devil strangled upon a compact between
him, and the Pope, as he was saying Mass in the open sight of all men.
Au^ntinc. page 584.
Neither was it without cause, that the Germans called Hildebrand Hellebr and a
fire brand of hell. But why do I insist in these petty matters? Agripp. de
Lenocin. and crat. ad Louaniens.
did not Pope Sixtus build a stews at Rome, which bring in yearly twenty
thousand Duckates? yea what should Boniface the 7. Syluester the 2. Bennet the
9. Gregory the 7. Gregory the 9. Innocentius the eight? Luitprand. li. 6. cap.
6. and. 7.
did not Sixtus the fourth make a stews at Rome, appointing it both for
Masculine and Faeminine: and John the twelfe made a stews of his palace,
Platina in vita Marcel.
and drank a carouse to the devil. He that will know more let him search
Platina, Mantuan and others, Mantuan Eclog. 5. Fastor. 2. Sil^. 1.
and he shall find enough to make his ears to tingle. Budaeus speaking of the
French Bishops says, Budaeus Annot. prior. i^lege^. de leg. page 121.
they were more like hogs then men prae morum turpitudine et inscitia: Petrarch
calls the church of Rome scholam errorum: the temple of heresies, deflecting
from the worship of God, Petrach. cant. 106.107.108.
unto the worship of Bacchus and Venus: yea he calls it Babylonia, and
impudent harlot where verit as is dementia, abstinentia rusticitas, pudicitia
probru^, bonorum hostis, malorum hospes: truth is madenes, abstinence clownery,
shamefastnes dishonesty, it is an host for the wicked, an enemy to the godly.
And from thence comes all the mischief in the world. Vinon. Labyt. tract. 5.
cap. 3^.
Theodorus a Niem recording the Schism between Urban the 6. and Clement,
relates of nothing but wars, seditions, murders, contentions, lusts and
ambitions: and speaking of the Nuns and Monks from the testimony fo Gregory
the 12. he calls them ebrios, concubinarios, homicidas, Gualter Mapefius in
Rhythnius.
drunkardes, letchers, murderers, with many other terms befitting rather
devils then men. Some call their prelates Haeredes Luciferi, heirs of
Lucifer: others say their monasteries praeter Penelopes sponsos, Nebulones,
Stiblinus in Cornupedia.
Alcinoosque neminem h^die educunt: nourish none but wantons, Briden brach. in
^uae peregr. histor.
knaves, whores, and ribbaldes. Some compare their officers to Pilates sleeping
on the sea: to dogs that cannot bark, to watchmen without their trumpets. O
tempor a, O mores: Gaude matter Roma et quia per malitiam hominum, non per tuam
religionem orbem vicisti: rejoice O Rome, Abbas Vrspergens. de Innocens. 3. and
Bonifac. 8.
because thou have vanquished the world, not by thy religion, but by the
wickedness of thy people. Brigit Anno. 1370.
Thy Priests have turned Gods ten commaun^ements into one precept, dap^cuniam
give, Onuphrlus.
give, Paulus the 4. set up vs^ry: lulius the 3. was an extortioner, and Pius
the 4. prayed upon the church, Fascic. tempot Luitprand. Flatina.
Vigilius, John the 11. Constantius the 2. John the 12. Benedict the 5. John
the 19. Benedict the 9. Siluester the 3. Gregory the 6. John the 18. Damasus
the 2. Gregory the 7. Boniface the eight, Guicciard. lib. 1
and who not either by the devil, deceit, favor, force, or money attained
the Popedom. Here bawaes, cooks, horskeepers, children, and all for money,
were preferred to Eccle^iasticall dignities. Aureum spccul. in Antilogia.
Here Paradise and Purgatory, Justice, and judgment, and all for money. Theod.
a Nien, lib. 1. cap. 68.^ lib. 2. cap. 3.
Boniface the 9. in a short time got for pardons out of one kingdom an 100.
thousand Florens. O Roma, laetare super iniquitates filiorum hominum: o Rome
rejoice over iniquity, Abbas Vrsperges. Th. Beck. epist. ad Archi^p. Mogunt.
for it is thy harvest. Yea their holy Saint and servant Becket could thus
report of Rome, factam essem meretricem et prostituta^ esse pro mercede, that
she made her self a common harlot for money. How long might I dwell upon their
surfeiting and drunkenness. Guicciard. lib. 1. and lib. 5.
Innocentius the 8. totum se voluptatibus et otio tradidit, betook himself to
pleasure and idleness. But Alexander the 6. was much more brutish: for nullum
habuit religionis sensum: he had no sense of religion. Onuphrius. Sanazarius.
Author are all to bepestered with the gluttony, Guicciard lib. 7. and lib.
14. Platina.
lechery, Sodomie, and incest of Julius the 2. Leo the 10. Paulus the 3.
Sixtus the 4. Paulus the 2. Pius the 4. John the 12. Gregory the 7. Sergius
the 3. and other: in such sort as Luiprand calls the Lateran palace
prostibulum meretricum, Agrip. de Lenocin, and de vanit. scient.
a common stews: famous are the murders and discordes of Gregory the 7. John
the 11. in poisoning their predecessors, Onuphrius Epi. Otho^. imperat. ad
Johan. papa^ Luitprand. lib. 6. cap. 6.
Stephaous, Formosus, Romanus, Sergius and the rest. Not to rip up their
cruelty even unto the dead: as to Wickleffe, Bucer, Paulus Phagius, Henry the
fourth, the Admiral of France, Benno Cardin. Cornel. Agrip. Platina.
Popes unto Popes, and many others. The whole world is witness of their pride,
in their triple crown, Ganimedes, Musicians, Bernard. lib. 4. de consid. and
in cant. sermon. 33.
stately Palaces, purple, gold, scarlet, scepters, coronations and pomp,
Rings, Bracelets, Chains, Jewels, Smaragdes, Adamantes, Sapphires, Lib. 1.
ceremo^. ponufic. sect. 3. c. p. 3.
Chrysolites, Iaspers, and Unions, toes kissed, stirrops held by Empetors, yea
and if they list, they must ride upon the shoulders of the Emperors: O tempus
pessimum in quo defecit sanctus, Vita Clement. 9.
et diminuta sunt veritates, a filijs hominum: o time, Guicciard. li. 11.
Platina in Paul. 2.
the worst of all times, wherein the good man is perished, Paseis. temporu^ I^
Mar. 2. Adrian 3. Stephan. 5. Platina in vita Dyonisii primi.
and truth is departed from the sons of men's unto which times nil vel
superbiae Luxuriae, pompae addi potest: neither pride, pomp, or riotousnesse,
can more be added. (Begin says one of the Fathers Tidentine) a sanctu^ ario
Dei si vllus iam pudor, etc. at the sanctuary of God, if there be any shame,
honesty, In Svnod. Trid. sess. ^.
or virtue to be found: vt merito possit mundus spelunca latronum dicior: so
that the world may be well called a den of thieves, Palingen. lib. 6.
wherein men with brazen faces, and impure mouths say, non est Deus, In Synod.
Trid. fess. 1.
there is no God. Whose beastly manners are so ill, and conversation so brutish,
as they have forsaken God, Apoc. 18.
and betaken themselves unto the Epicuir; o then come out of her my people
viuere qui recte cupitis discedite Roma omnia cu^ licet non licet esse bonum;
(...). Silu. 1.
for blessed is the man that delights in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.1.^.
and walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor leads his life like he
sinners and ungodly. Wherefore seeing that papistry is a religion co^mixed and
compounded of error and heresies: seeing it is an Apostate church, and the
kingdom of Antichrist: seeing it refuses Christ to be the head thereof, and
accepts the Pope in his place and room: seeing it is a monster having
sometimes 2. sometimes 3. sometimes 4. heads at once: seeing it denies the
ancient and true God, and sets up new and false god, in his stead: seeing it
diuesteth Chirst of all his offices, and bestows them upon fancies, and
usurping flatteries; seeing it remooues Christ the true foundation, and builds
it self upon Sodomits, Magitians, Atheists and the devils servants: seeing it
is an using, a Newter, and a temporising church; seeing it is corrupt and too
too rotten in the groundworke of religion: seeing it makes religion an art of
subtle policy: seeing it makes Christ a deep deceiuer, and impostor: seeing
it undermines the simple; and condemns the soul: seeing it makes a jest and
play of her Papisticall profession and religion: seeing it denies the holy
seriptures to be the word of God, and coins new scriptures to her popish
fancy and devise: seeing it teaches villainy and all ungodliness: seeing it
is an enemy to the good and monstrous murderer of the Saints: seeing it sets
up Iudaisme, Ethnicisme, and foul Idolatry: seeing it makes no account of God
himself, nor of his worship, and holy ^eruice: seeing both heads and members
are unsound, vnsanorie, and most impure, both in doctrine, manners, and in all
good living, we conclude that Papisme is a masked Atheism.

FINIS.

